Tyros Roaring Megge.

Planted against the walls of Melancholy.

One Book cut into two Decads.

Vno die consenui.

At London Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1598.

To the worshipful and true Gentleman Master John Lucas, Eternity.
DEigne (gentle Sir) to cast a willing eye
Upon the issue of an idle brain:
Once (though an Eagle) stoop unto a Fly,
Then scorn such preis, and soar aloft again.
Great odds between the Mowse and Lion be,
And yet the Mowse as much a beast as he.
Hope lifts me up upon her snowie wings,
Chearing my thoughts with fortunate event:
Fear pulles me down, and whispers out such things,
As curb my joys, and make me mal-content:
Saying, the bird that seems a Swanne by night,
Will prove a wild-goose set against the light.
Naithlesse, pricked on with foolish hardiment,
I put into those gracious hands of thine
These looser numbers: fitter to be rent,
Or swept away, like deft Arachnes twine,
Than to be read: yet (dearest) list a while
Unto thy Tyros Democriticke style.
To the courteous Reader.
QVocunque aspicio, nihil est nisi Pontus, and aer.
I turn round about, and can see nothing but grief.
Coelum vndique, and vndique Pontus.
Here, and there, and every where, Dowlands Lachrymae.
I wa^ altogether terrestrial, or rather melancholicke, o^ rather sadness it
self in the Abstract. A friend of mine perceived it, and told me I was in my
winding sheet, unless I drove out one contra^y by another. Resolved to be the
grater that should chafe the sad humor to crumbs, I became Sub-sizer, to
Democritus, being well content to be no longer mal-content. The light-hearted
guardian sent me such Adsums, that on a sudden I began to look like a
Queene-apple, and my wit was so le^ger, that I could no sooner call for a
conceit, but incontinent it would answer like a Knaue-tapster, anon, anon. In
this vein I composed these Epigrammes, which I request may be taken in good
gree, and read when thou art lazy. Blame me not too bitterly, for mispending a
little time: and consider that learned Poets have, for recreation, wrought upon
worse subjects. I say nothing of Misacmos, who descended from Ela to the Base
Keys that open the Privy door. Well: be as good to us as you may, and farewell.

Thin^ while he has any radical moisture, T. Tyro.

In Zoilistam.
HE makes each mote a mount, and keeps in store
A brazen pen to dash at this and that:
Yet does this currish censor see no more,
Than the mashapen Owl, or doubtful Bat.
O let the man that carpes without a cause,
Be caught himself in Momus griping Claws,
Recentibus Salem, and Salutem Recentibus Plurimum. and Salutem

ABsurd. Let Heraclyte do naught but cry,
And put his raw-bond finger in his eye.
Laugh ye: let earthie melancholy part:
It Is Aqua fortis to a merry heart.
Can all your Logic prove that matter good,
That fills the mother-veyn with sickly blood?
Salt not so much your tender bosoms frets,
As do the humors thrilling grief begets.
What is the reason why your faces been
So near a kin to Wakefield on the green?
Is It not, for that you do so seldom smile,
Ne with blithe matters winter nights beguile?
Is It not, because you sit in darkesome nookes,
And read such Vengeable and puling books?
Go then, my rimes, with dimples in your cheeks,
And chide them that they are so green as leekes.
Be ye as working pills to purge their pain,
And make them clear complectiond once again.
Say for their sakes your master took in hond,
(Being tied their friend with Adamantin bond)
With sunshine jest t'expell their ro^ten fogges,
And make them dapper like pale-yellow frogs.
O ye no Tyrants, but of Tyros crew,
Beat not my crouching meeters black and blew.
O let your Substances be well content
For to support this feeble Accident.
So shall I pray with voice articulate,
That the dry Barrel may you ever hate.
Each day I Will perbreake wishes more or less,
That ye may often be seniors of your mess.
If not: and if my chickens fare not well,
Which are but newly crept forth of the shell:
By the five praedicables I protest,
That who writes naught at all, does write the best.
Your matriculated cozen and fast friend Winter and Summer. T. Tyro.

Decad 1.
Epig. 1.
THe Suns proud coursers, having rest their fill,
Curuetted stately up the Eastern hill.
The flowring fields each creature did content,
With motly coat, and goodly blandishment.
The cheerful lark sang prick-song in the air^,
And younger sheep skipt on the face of care.
Well m^ught I walk, for why me thought it sin,
Not to pe^ke forth my head, but keep it in.
Strange thing: scarce had I well a furlong gone,
Whenas, me seemd, I heard a pitteous moan:
Ay me, it was one wrapped in a bead man's gown,
Whose gesture showed him freshely come to town.
Small labor lost, quoth I, to l^st a while
To this poor gowne-mans lamentable style.
He spoke: I listened* Lucklesse lad, said he,
That am inforst this dismal day to see:
Shall I that wont to make my belly crack,
Stay here and loose the flesh from of my back?
Rather then Tyro such a change will brook,
Out at the Ropers window will he look.
I ^nly gree^de to hear him plain his harms,
When he infolded Dawes-crosse in his arms:
And, the warm humor drizling down his face.
Bade it adieu and forthwith trudged apace.
I like a thief that had in ambush line,
Did bid him Stand, and go with me and dine.
Such dinner was less easy to digest,
Then greafie brew is swimming in the breast.
He thought, poor soul, no harm: I, like a king,
Strait led him to his Tutor in a string:
VVhe^e the grave Agent did his part so play,
That since his Patient never ran away.
Had he escapte, he had felt mickle loss.
For Tumbling stone nere gathe^s c^eauing moss.
He is a friend, albe he seem a so,
That serves all nimble-footed fresh-men so.
Epig. 2.
LO, he the boy, whose mouth whilom did lug
The slauered milk from out his mothers dug:
Is now exalt to undeserved hap,
And walks in Garment mild, and circled Cap.
And strouting it along the unknown street,
With some fantastic Ramist does he meet:
Who can him greet and welcome him full fair
All lowting low: and nodding like a mare
That ore her bridle wagges her wanton head,
Pincht with the hungry flies thereon bespread,
He thus can say.
VVelcome to Athens, gentle younger brother:
Thou may, ere long, be comfort to thy mother,
And to thy dad, and to thy grandsire too,
It thou attend the words I shall thee show.
Be wist, and wary of that prating sect
Which strives against Ramus, lest it thee infect.
For tidy Peter like a pretty primmer,
May well be learned ere thou go to dinner.
He Is pithie, deep, succinct, methodicall,
A Cornucope, a volume all in all.
But Aristotle is a ridling Sphinx,
A river poisonous to him that drinks.
He Is blunt, unpolished, tedious, harsh, obscure,
Fraught with vile stuff, and sentences impure:
The child is tourn'd, and claps him on the back,
And swears, that Ramus foes shall go to rack:
Making (forsooth) a sad and solemn vow,
Tha^ he will reverence the golden Bough.
When Boys in age, or wit have said their fill,
Old Organon must be best Logike still.
Epig. 3.
WHat though Albertus be a merry man,
May I not take the flower, and leave the bran?
Let him be baudie (as he is indeed)
May I not choose the flower, and scorn the weed?
What though unseemly secrets he disclose,
May I not hide mine eyes, and stop my nose?
Great All-beard, rough with thy luxurious hide,
I Will be thy scholar whatsoever betide.
I Will be Acute, and Grave, and Circumflex
In the deep dealings of the female sex.
And yet I will not. What? shall Tyro be
A Prentice to the trade of midwiferie?
Hence bold bad Albert, pleasing bait of sin*
Bellows of lust to him that reads therein.
I would not for a pecke of Tagus sand,
My Tutour had espied thee in my hand.
I rest thy foe, deferring thy damnation,
But till I make a Theme or Declamation.
Epig. 4
O gross! O monstrous! fie, Tom Tiro, fie:
Give thy king Edwards shilling for a pie,
And then transport it to thy den alone,
And chop it up, and give thy fellows none?
What? spoil a Neats-foote, and a marrow-bon,
And never call thy next Vcalegon?
Fie that thy greedy-wormed tongue is such;
Fie that thy chopping knives can mince so much.
Art thou a Milo, or Philoxenus,
That art so sturdie and delicious?
The Harpyae would not snatch so greedily,
Whose ^alons were of great capacity.
How can thy noddle choose but be so dull*
When capon-like thy maw is cramd so full?
Right well I wot thou may have lighter heart;
If this thou leave, and learn to size a part.
Epig. 5.
WHat is he under heavens inammeld vault,
That lives spotless, and deuoide of fault?
Where is the soul contained in brickle wall
That stands so firmly that she cannot fall?
Venus was debonaire, and beauties grace,
And yet a mole lay sleeping on her face.
Fair are the spears wherein the Planets bin,
And yet cold Saturn claims a place therein.
No marvel then though Tyro have some blot,
Since perfect virtue falls to no man's lot.
Tyro can strike the sitterns silver string,
And to the lute full many a dittie sing.
Tyro can act and if he like the Stage,
Hop like a Bull-finch in a Ba^bers cage.
Yet when he sold his Aelian at the stall,
Had not the villain almost shamed us al?
Would not the drowsy dormouse have bin hanged,
That slept till ten a clock and then was Stang'd?
O faults! no faults, but tricks of gentle kind,
And Proper adjuncts to a youthful mind.
Epig. 6
HO: weep rose water, spit ta^t viniger:
Tyro is waxt a ruffling Caualiere.
Mount up ye mil-sto^es: heavens come kiss your center:
Tyro can strike a die stark dead, and enter.
Ye toothlesse sheep, go tear your howling foes:
Tyro is ietting in his Bag-pipe hose.
Xanthus, good Xanthus, turn thy posting stream:
Tyro annoynts his nose with clowted cream,
The drunken color thence away to wipe,
Bred with the fumes of the Tobacco pipe.
Natures whole workmanship, forsake thy kind:
Tyros round breeches have a cliffe behind:
And that same perking Longitude before,
Which for a pin-case antique plowmen wore,
Nor has he silver faces in his purse,
On this superfluous trumpry to disburse:
Nor has he skill in Magickes damned spell,
To raise some golden devil out of hell.
But who the man that treades on licourd shoe,
Or could believe, or dream that this was true?
Tyro was wont to lead so staid a life,
That sage Sobriety was thought his wife.
The graceless gallant with the crisped locks.
Was worse to him than any nine-hold stocks.
The painted paper, and the swearing die,
Were ghastly Night-crowes to his single eye.
The witherd leaf that is in such request
He would not ken, but did the name detest.
His Slops were spruce, and stuck so near the skin.
That one might hardly part them with a pin.
Tyro decays in good, but thriues in ill:
Prowdr as a Beacon on a Forest hill.
Epig. 7.
Look how a Horseleech, or backbiting flea,
Sticks to the skin, ne can be got away,
Until her panch be tympanized so,
That she must either burst, or else cry who:
So bookish Tyro cleaues unto his tun,
Until his houre-glasse be twelve times run,
And till his Common sense, and Fantasy,
And Understanding part yg^utted be:
Two yoke of Oxen and a mare before,
Can hardly draw him to his study door.
I da^e auerre he felt no sweete-breatht air,
Since the Red Bull drew weights at Sturbridge fair.
Lo what it is that makes him languish still,
Like a crow-troden hen that makes her will.
Lo here the proper cause as I suppose,
Why worms dig parsnips in his dunged nose.
Faith, Tyro, you and I must pluck a crow,
If you go on to spoil your carcass so.
Epig. 8.
TYro by chance did read, that Generation
Was the sole final cause of Augmentation.
Eftsoo^es he shook the hand with single life,
And set his wit on re^ters for a wife.
He took his quill, and pend this kindly plaint,
Unto a mincing minion fine, and daint.
O thou Eclipticke line, wherein the sun
Of my felicity does daily run:
Eye-pleasing object, h^nnie-succle sweet.
Tyro thy vassal tumbles at thy fee^e:
He a Leander, ready for thy sake,
To pass an Hellespont of pain and ache.
Be thou a Hero standing on the shore
With open arms, and claspe him more and more.
Thou shall perceive, 'so be thy love be won,
I am not Snow to melt against the sun.
My bleered eyes shall steep themselves in tears,
Till some mild answer ventilate my fears.
Ah, dearest Nymph, some light-foote lackie send
With white, and black, to give me life, or end.
Roses are in thy lips, O hellish smart,
If angry nettles grow upon thy heart.
Farewell thou pretty Mop, and me remember,
Written in haste the twentieth of December,
About the dinner hour of Eleven,
1597
Tyro, thy Delphicke sword til Crows be old,
Til Ister be lukewarm, and Ganges cold.
Epig. 9.
She read and writ, I did my self much wrong,
To view the weeping accents of thy song.
Thy lines the foes that sought my Fort to win,
Mine eyes the traitors that have let them in.
Tyro, my all in all: alack, how can
Seely weak virgin choose but love a man?
Nor can dry tinder stony fire withstand,
Nor straw the ieat, nor I thy fair demand.
But, bonny Boy, the pillar of my joy,
How can thou shun thy imminent annoy?
All were thou Homer, famous Poets pride,
And the Heliconian Ladies by thy side:
Yet, since thou want the worlds pale-colour'd Queen,
I may not have my kind affection seen.
Add wealth to wit, for, if thou fail in this,
We must not bathe our selves in Salmacis:
That I am forced to ring this heavy knell,
I can but grieve, and so I shall. Farewell.
Epig. 10.
THe lad replide: Were I an Alcumist,
Earths yellow excrement should fill thy fist.
Base-minded thing, shall asses trapt in gold
Have free access, while I the candle hold?
O tree! O block! O stone, if still I stand,
And see my nosegay worn in clownish hand.
What Jack? Anon sir. Saddle me my nag,
New Market heath affoords a man a bag:
My Atalanta will run on too fast,
Unless some Golden Apples I her cast.
No, maiden, no, my liuer's not so hot,
As to compel me love, if you love not.
And yet (regardlesse of thy self and me,)
How dare thou mar so sweet a symphonie?
Say truly, am I a Sardanapale?
Thou know thy seeming virtues were my stale.
No Night-flie I, to dally in the flame,
Til I be scorcht, and shamefully fall lame.
The more thy sin to show thy self unjust
To him, whose kindness was no kin to lust.
In vain I champe the bit: no Ouids art,
No Nestors tongue can riue thy flintie heart.
Then sink thou, swim thou, live, or die all is one,
Who would be yokt, when he may live alone?
Be wed to home-spunne russet coat, or blew,
To both, to neither, what care I? Adieu.
Decad 2.
Epig. 1.
A Threed-bare proverb, Youth must have a swing,
For greener age flies with a wanton wing.
It was the sober season of the year,
When Pisces and Aquarius dominiere,
It Is cleaped Lent. Tom Tyros itching legs
Aduertisde him to take his leave of eggs,
And get him flesh. The rake-hell strained his wit,
To compass roast meat for the naked spit.
He gat him gone unto a neighbor town,
To see what pullen stragled up and down:
He went a thousand paces long and tall,
Ere he could spy one bird Domestical:
At last he cast his eye upon a gander,
That from his fellows new began to wander:
He threw, and hat, and made a deadly hole,
In the true keeper of the Capitole.
An old old Beldame plodded there along,
Whose teeth did waggle faster then her tongue:
He ran, she followed with a yelling sound,
And tucked up her dirtie sauegard round.
But Tyro floated on the beaten way,
Like a swift vessel on the yielding sea:
She fair and softly walked in pausing mood,
And tract the felon by the Ganders blood.
The ruddi^e sun forsook our Hemispheare,
When she the wily f^x approached near.
The new-faln drops led this old bloud-hound hie,
To an out-chamber, where she did epsy etc.
The heavy accidents that then befell
My merry Muse may not abide to tell.
Yet thus much: Tyro stamped, and fret, and swore,
Never to prey on foolish goose-flesh more.
Epig. 2.
TYro the dastard needs would learn to swim.
Yet durst he not come nie the rivers brim.
He saw the tempting gravel through the clear,
And yet he trembled like the heartles dear.
Pleasure a spur, and Danger was a reyne.
That pricked him forward, this did him deteyne.
But goodly well anon he can devise
To check himself for shameful cowardice.
Crauen, he says, pluck up thy fainting heart:
Albe thou want renowned Digbies art,
Or swift Palaemons matchles faculty,
Yet may thou wade withouten ieopardie.
O mind degenerate, what needst thou fear?
Proud Thamis dashing sourges are not here.
False-harted lad, go cut the cristall wave,
Fortune is with them that stout courage have.
He laid him down, and began to be so bold,
As feel the water whether hot, or cold:
Whether his head went first, the truth to tell,
I ween not certainly, but in he fel^.
Let not the foot my tender shin-bon punch,
Whose daily burden gave so l^ude a lunch.
Was never living eye saw finer tree,
His head the root, his legs the branches be.
But the mild stream was loath to let him die,
And set him on his ten toes by and by.
He hid his chilling bare, and home he went,
And lay bed-ridden till six weeks were spent,
Since when he wished the reason might be found,
How chance diue-dappers live so long vndrownd.
Epig. 3.
But ah, what meant I to forbear this while.
To tell of Tyros Steeple-climing style?
Had sweete-lipt Tully slaunting Tyro seen,
Cratippus had not his sons Tutor been:
Had mighty Philip known this witty elfe,
Platos great scholar might have hanged himself.
The greater bear, and the still-standing light
He can demonstrate in a winter night.
And yet (I blush) three loaves of horses bread
Set bolt-vpright, are level with his head.
Time was when he that did the credit win.
Had store of excrement upon his chin.
Now he that looks with a visage grave,
Is hight a block, a stock, a knave, a slave.
Time was, (and then it was the time of joys,)
When men were men, and prating lads were boys.
Epig. 4
ALl white, all white: It Was uoisde amidst the streets,
That lechers two stood up in sinful sheets.
When Tyro knew the tidings to be stale,
He up and told this pretty Poets tale.
Iunos lewd Husband sleeping in the night,
Be got a devil that Ag^istis hight.
This beastly barn was an Hermaphrodite,
And not his fellow-diuelles favorite.
Wherefore the hel-hounds menaced amain,
To prune the worthier member of the twain.
The deed made good the word: without delay
They cut it off, and threw it quite away.
The needelesse part (forsooth) was presently
Transmewd into a fruitful Almon-tree.
Here Is all. If leachers might such harvest reap,
Then Almon-butter would be better cheap.
Epig. 5.
THe Lap-wing, when her nest is nothing near,
Deludes the boy, and cries, Its here, its here:
So Tyro. Deest fortasse quippiam.
Epig. 6.
MErry it was, when Tyro in a throng,
Thus praised Cherilus for skill in song.
Well sang the Bird^ that never sings amiss,
The Vocal music most delightful is.
When Cherils throat is swild with butterd bear,
He Syren-like inchaunts the tune-full ear.
Nay furthe^ hee^s the Nightingale alone,
That sings a Triple, or a three to one.
At large or long he will not come behind,
So he may rest, for fear he loose his wind.
He can be brief, ne thinks he it a crime
To sing a common song in minym time.
Cherils estate has been at, ha now, ha,
Ere since he used vt, re, mi fa, sol, la.
Epig. 7.
WHen Tyro saw fair pictured in a book
The gilt-hornd heart that swift Alcides took,
He told the standers by, he would not rest,
Until he caught a Swallow (in her nest.)
Epig. 8.
THe wilful Papist could not Syllogize,
Yet, in his own conceit, he only wise.
A very verbal youth, yet, like a man,
He magnified his father Campian.
Then Tyro thus.
Not Bellarmine the prim-rose of your sect,
With all his Sophistry can me infect.
Nor Stapleton, that goodly branch of thyme
Whereon the Roman bees delight to clime.
Sir boy: know that my gall does grate for teen,
That thy poor shankes with Ringes molested been.
Rings with a vengeance, for they cry clinke, clincke,
Yet when they come toth' brook, they will not drink.
Now by Saint Tan thy tortled rings do show
That olden Poets sober sawes be true.
For why, beneath thy knees cast but an eye,
And there our Iron Age thou shall epsy.
Blamst thou thy rings? thou do them wrong I wis:
A Circle the most perfect figure is.
If by a right line thou do downward slide,
And the Tyburnian Triangle divide,
The Maxim will prove sound. Well, sirrah, mend.
And save your self from such a doggish end.
Epig. 9.
A noble Student had a ha^ke at mew,
And Robin Falc'ner for a week or two
Must needs be absent: so the bird must die.
I^ Tyro look not to her carefully.
The wagge was loath, yet daring not say no,
He said, good Robin, tell me, ere thou go,
What diet she does use: now welaway,
Whether worms, or curdes be best I cannot say.
The Faulc'ner smiled, and asked him if he iested,
And giving Cut the rowell, him requested
To give each meal a pigeon all but bones.
And pepper her, and see she want no stones.
He gone, Tom Tyro looked all about,
And seeing naught but trees, these words burst out.
Stones? pepper? pigeons? pigeons? pepper? stones?
Faulcones six dishes, and I live with bones?
Study, books, papers, burn you al in one:
Who buys all Tully? take it: I Will be gone.
Yet ere I iourni^ I Will go see the Kyte:
Come, come bird, come: pox on you, can you mute?
I now conuaie my self incontinent
To The shamble^ for this vermins nourishment.
Butcher, and friend: I pray thee let me see
A Bull, or Tup, or Oxe-calfe presently,
And cut his hangers off: pepper and ^hese
The only fare that will a Faulcon please.
Woe* ho: fall too: no pigeons can be go^,
But I have bought thee better meat I wot.
Eat lesser bittes, for, if your haukeship choke,
My gown and twelve pence for an honest cloak.
Epig. 10
MOunting Elpenor had a simple fall,
His brains were only dashed against a wall
And Icarus that hie aspiring slave,
Had but his corpse sowst in a water grave.
Tyro, a word: lift not thy chinne so hie:
It Is shame that thy pen-featherd Muse should fly.
Were I as dumb as a Seryphian frogge,
My signs should tell what does my stomach clogge.
Rather than at thy foolerie I Will wink,
My nose shall be my pen, the droppings ink.
Finis.
Sunt, o sunt iurgia tanti?
To the Reader.
Misshapen does misshapen stand,
And craves Correction at thy hand.
In the Inuectiue against the Daw
That makes a mil-post of a straw,
At the fourth line, is to be seen
The Beast: and so, God save the Queen.
Tyronis Epistolae: Sieve Mus rampant in agro aureo.

Liber vnus in duas Decades partitus.

Capilli curis semicani.

Londini, Ex Officina Valentini Sims. 1598.

Expectato ad amplissimam dignitatem adolescenti, Iohanni Lucas, Aeternitatem.
REgia ales defessa (generosissime adolescens) erecta stat: and caepe augescit,
decrescente solis sorore. Ego, tametsi nomine duntaxat faelix, curam expuo. Non
sum Vranoscopus vt sine cord viuere possim. En tibi meras nugas, testem
huiusce rei locupletem. Maximo te oro opere vt illas dextra manu accipias. Quid
nisi vota supersunt? Deus det quae velis.

T. T.

Moroso Lectori.
HAbes a nobis Epistolas (vir candidissime, idemque doctissime) mea quidem
sententia, calamistratas satis, atque elegantes. Pol, tu non minima in part
apud me haerebis, si talibus sententijs, apothegmatibusque laetabere. Valeto,
mementoque veteris verbi, Legendis authoribus proficis.

Decad 1.
Epistola prima. Patri Salutem.
INtelligo ex tuis literis (mi genitor) esse quae ex me solo scitari vis. Nihil
autem ardentius concupiscis, quam vt Athaenarum nostrarum mores quasi viuido
penicillo depingerem. Difficile quidem est, and arduum quod petis, cum noudum
sex septimanae abierint, ex quibus earum factus sum inquilinus (absit
arrogantiae nota) inutilis. Et tamen in spem certissimam venio, me aliqua ex
part^ tibi satisfacturum. Academiam nostram putaui stultus ego oppido vestro
similem. Atqui non satis illam noui qualis fuit. Scin crucem in caemiterio?
Illam pagum vestrum: templum, nostram Mu^arum sedem putato. Hactenus de
externis: nunc de ijs quae ad ventris victum conducunt. Nec cygnus, quamuis
albus sine nigredine: nec Collegium nostrum, quamuis clarum, sine nubecula.
Nam, proh deorum fidem! quenquamne hominem posse sine nutrimento vitam
tolerare? Campana euocat ad prandium: quantum possum, festino: sto, sedeo:
singulis momentis in praedam inhio. Oculos conijcio in famis alumnos,
Subsizatores, venientes, and abientes. Rogito, eho, tu: Amicis opitulare: atque
ille respondet, Alienis abstine. Colligo me quoad possum; spe sola viuo.
Affertur tandem patina. Ecce autem (tremisco referens) macilenti aguelli
minutissimam morsiunculam. Sp^rans montes Hogmagoggicos, inuenio colles
So^hist^co. Extemplo pallesco, dentibus frendo, caput scalpo, mussito. Obseruat
sophista quidam, accurrit, and obturbat ineptus disputator: ait Ventrem esse
capitis sepulchrum. Scilicet: n^nignorat versipelli^ mihi tantum esse logicam
naturalem. Triumphat, salem inspergit in nos recentes fungos: arundineum
argumentum iactitut. Tunc ego, homo minime malus, hoc vnum dico, quod nihil
dico. Confero me ad musaeolum, singultio, lamentor. Senate tertia: itur ad
merend^m; per obstantem turbam erumpitur. Promus panem porrigit miseris modis
truncum. Ego impendio ad iram procliuior, statim expono quam largam possideo
conuiciorum supellectilem. Mox, subeun^e animum miserecordia, hominem appello
in haec fere verba. Crudelis seruole, siccine innocentem vulneras? vbi (inquam)
excelsa, and humilis crusta? Frustra Quod ego te per Deum oro (mi parens) vt
mittas Per^am? Illam tuus musculus pulchre inuadet. Furiose mehercule in illam
inuolabo, cibabo me opipare, atque oppleb^ largiter. Polliceor, mea fide, me
contubernales meos non accersiturum: (nihil enim opus est: vltro accurrent, and
respondebunt non vocati.) Quod si Suillae nimia caritas apud vos sit, te vnum
hoc rogatum velim m^ximopere, vt magna vis Butyri ad me deferatur. Etenim, me
iudice, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit oua butyro. Sed, vt sensi, extra gyrum
nostra diuertit oration: lora igitur attraho. Quaeso a te, vt tum fratres, tum
sorores meo nomine, ac verbis, salutes. Auiam vero praeter caeteras, q^am ego
in foci fumoso angulo in scamno sedentem videre videor. Pergratu^ etiam
feceris, si Monoculum meum Tabellarium humanissime tractaueris. Diu te tueatur
is, qui est Totum quod vides, and quod non vides, totum.

Epistola secunda. Eidem.
EVge o mi pater, vt tuas literas dissuaniabar cupide. Argenti aduentus multo
omnium mihi est gratissimus. Ruere pecunia mea non potest, vt non ipse etiam
labefactatus, concidam. Mi pater: a me omnia summa in te officia profectura
expecta, neque fallam opinionem tuam. Ingentes ago gratias pro Capone: tutori
medius-fidius leuidense munusculum non videbitur. Facile tamen probatu est,
cacaphagum illam esse, and imperfectum animal. Mi pater: non dubium est quin
tibi ornamento sim futurus, and mihimet, and natis, Et natis natorum, and qui
nascentur ab illis.

Ego logicam scientiam supra quam dici potest celeriter arripui. Quae, Ca, vel
Hyp, intellextin? Omnis West X, Omnis Y est W: Ergo omnis Y est X. Quid? an
nondum etiam ne hoc quidem? Incumbo sane toto pectore ad laudem, ac gloriam, a
summo mane, vsque ad multam noctem. Neque vero ^e fugere volo, me, cum Rhetorem
ago, auditorum animos Syrenum suanitate demulcere. Non verborum audacia exulto:
non proclamo diducto rictu, atque ore hiulco: ita loquor ipse, vt ambrosia
alendus videar. Huc accedit quod poesis mea tygrides facit consistere. Cuius
rei exemplum habe tibi versus hos, quos nuper, diuino spiritu afflatus, in
laudem compesui Tittlemanni.

Artem si Logicam disce^, lege Tittlemannum*
Ille sophistarum crimina pandere vult.
Gnauus si vis tales libros voluere nunc, ^unc
Tu pauper pueros rite docere queas.
Exrostro aquilam. Cum aetatis huius ornamentum Spenserus morte erit extinctus,
Regina nostra vult mittere pro me, forsitan. Si istiusmodi epistolas
consolatorias rarius acceperis, puta id esse causae, quod sim grauibus negocijs
implicatus. Deus tibi semper omnia optata adferat.

Epistola tertia. Matri Salutem.
SI tu (mea genitrix) vales, been e^t: ego quidem aegroto. Ille ego, qui non
i^a pridem flos ipse fui, en, nunc contractus, deflorui prorsus, atque emarcui.
Grauiter hoc dixit qui multa leuiter, Forma bonum fragile est. Caput meum grave
est: nasus tineosus: labra prominentia: manus scabrosae: totum corpus
languidum, effotum, and, quasi laterna Punica, pellucidum. Heu, quid agam, (mea
causa procrea^s and conseruans?) Vtrum chyragra, vel podagra, vel spasmo, vel
apoplexia laborem, non est facile statuere. Vrinam nuper reseruabam: ad Galenum
nostrum veniebam, consilium expetens. Ille tristis, and difficilis, rogitat,
Cur? quare? vnde? quorsum? number? nunquid? Vbi illum audio tonantem voce
terribili, censen' vllum verbum me posse proloqui? Ille instat, ego mutio. E
vestigio me extrudit, clamitat, Amolire hinc te ^cyus, aselle, trunce, dedecus
tui collegij. Quid iam primum (mea parens) exequar? Atat: non curo ego medicum,
quando ille non me: sperno pharmaca, calco catapotia. Sola tuos, quae fi^io hac
in re adiutrix esse queas. Est locus in terri^ quae Lancastria appellatur: hem!
illic est morbi caput, ac z^rigo. Nosti Annam, bellatulam illam? Deos quaeso vt
sit superstes. Aut ego falsus sum, aut formae laud Venerem superat ipsam.
Nullus sum, nullus sum, nifacias, and efficias qui detur mihi. Virginitatem
dilando: caeterum, De du^bus bonis, maius est eligendum. Vxor iuuentutem alit,
senectutem non diminuit, pernoctat nobiscum, ac peregrinatur. Fac me, oro,
scientem continuo, quid hac in re faciendum censes. Atque audin'? Verbum vnum
cave patri de amore, ne ad morbum hoc etiam.

Sit tibi cura mei: sit tibi cura tui. Epistola quarta. Fratri Salutem.
PRaeposterum habeo tabellarium: cum a me discedit solidum flagitat: cum redit
autem, ne denarium quidem affert: sed non vrgeo. Nomen ego commutaui meum, and
Sophista sio ex Recentiore. Pluuia non cadit e coel^ (sicut vicarius vester
affirmabat) guttatim distillat e media aeris regione. Vin describam animam?
Anima est idipsum quod amasia mea: nimirum, Tota in toto me, and tota in
qualibet part mei Etquid me ama^ de subtilitate ^stac? O frater* frater, vin'
explicem com^ediam? Comoedia est multitudi igneorum meteororum, in infima aeris
regione apparere solitorum. Alias. Comoedia est cater^a iuuenum magnanimorum,
fust^m dextra, facem altera manu tenentiam, quorum vestes color sunt
Thaumantis filiae, quae

Mill tra^it ^arios, aduerso sole, ^olores. Ne multa, Comoedia est semita
quaedam compendiaria ad Pronunciationem partem Rhetoricae artis laudatissimam.
Babae! quis credere p^sset? Sardanapalus, and H^^logabalus fuerunt homines:
(quorum ill^ libidinosus, hic gulosus: ille laborauit ad conseruandam Speciem,
hic ad conseruandum Indiuiduum: vtrique fuit magna Vis expulsiua) O te foelicem
ter, and amplius, qui germanum habeas subtilem sic, vt vel Dunsum ipsum possit
laqueo sophistico irretitum tenere. Non vacat pluribus tecum agere, cui precor
omnem foelicitatem.

Epistola quinta. Eidem Salutem.
OZonam torridam! o ambos tropicos o praeclarum Ptolomaeum. Ego lector
Mathematicus, (nam non desunt mihi sedula turba recentes) orbs coelestes adeo
lucide de lineabo, vt, si non perceperis quid velim, absque omni sensu
insanies. Procurre ad horreum: vbi limen praeterieris, ito ad laeuam: albos
at^olle oculos: aspicies Araneam vel in centro sedentem, vel orbiculari operi
manibus, pedibusque incumbentem. En figuram.

SATVRNE
IVPITER
MARS
SOL
VENUS
MERCVRIVS
LVNA


Potin' tu fidem adhibere? Quaeuis harum stellarum vagabundarum terrae vincit
magnitudinem. Sed, vt omnia medio illo Planeta clariora fiant, animaduersione
dignum erit, Omnem Circulum esse infinitum. Ergo si tibi in mentem venerit
annulu^ amicae tuae donare, inscriptionem hanc (me authore) addas, Amor meus
circularis. Sum quidem Iuuenis labor indefesso. Nam, quem dies videt veniens
stertentem, hunc dies videt fugiens legentem. Adoritur nuper me quidam odiose
argutus Sophista, in hunc modum: Pallescis, Tyro, Ergo vel amas, vel studes.
Subridens dixi, Amo studium. Been vale.

Epstola sexta. Amicae salutem.
Anna ^oror, soror Anna, quid est quod spernis amante^? Deamaui te (ita me tu)
iamdiu perdite.

Et, si quid facio nunc quoque quaeris, amo. Tu mea rosa, tu rosmaris: tu mea
Venus limpidissima. Parturijt m^ter tua, et nata est corusca flamma, qua ego
infoelix Ilium incendor. Sic ego vertor in cineres, te homine interea sospite.
O crudelis Anna, nihil Tyronem tuum curas? Pergin' mulier esse? Nil miserere
moribundi? Per nitidos illos ocellos tuos, per labella purpurea, per marmoream
capitis columnam, per teretes denique digitos obtestor, duram tuam mentem
exuas: neu committas vt suspiria mea sensus tuos praetervolent. O Cytharea,
tuque, puerque tuus spectatissimu^ iuuenem spoliastis, vulnerastis,
trucidastis. Eheu, vbi sum? vbi? vbi? nescio. Amor ingenium mihi omne ex animo
expectorat. Ah Anna mollis, and tamen rigida: calida, and tamen frigida: tu
homo Adamantina me hominem Ferreum ad te attraxisti. Ne nega: conuincam enim si
inficiabere. Abi in rem malam, Naso, cum istoc tuo versiculo, Vix erit e multis
quae neget vna t^bi.

Quam diu ego speraui miser? and iam nil habeo nisi spem meram. Aedepol nae,
nos Narcissi egregijs faciebus, aeque sumus omnes inuisi puellis propter
pauculos fuscos, and deformes. Fallor? an animula mea me Microcosmum vocat?
Incertus animum huc illuc voluo. Annuis? Semideus sum: si non, Epitaphium hoc
sepulchro meo incidi volo.

Quis iacet hic? Tyro. Cur ille? Necatus ab Anna,
Anna, cuius amor f^cile reuocaret ab Orco.
Vtcunque mecum erit, been sit (mi ignis) tibi.
Epistola septima. Anna Tyroni.
A Deon' ex mei amore demens es factus, Tyro? Siccine efflictim togatam togate
deperis? Putaram Palladem esse innubam, and Pierides virgins. Site fortunatus
ille, Vxor^m nunquam habui. Vir meus es? nascentur filij: tuque in quaerundo
vitam conteres. Interim (bone vir) studebis probe. Eia age (floscule mi) amor
tuus mihi est cordi: cordi? Audi nun^ iam: tecum praesens absens sum.
Miperfector, vale.

Epistola octaua. Tyro Annae.
INfronte epistolij tui December es: in calce Aprilis. Leo, vt Martius,
ingrederis: placida ouis egrederis. Merit igitur amor meus alitur, crescit, ac
corroboratur. Libuit sic praefari: iam argumenta tua discutio.

Minerua and Musae vtrum Cupido albus, an ater sic nesciunt,

Ergo
Occidunt se togati qui animos ad amorem appellunt.

Muliebris hercle ratiuncula, cuius ego cerebrum vnae, ^ademque leuicul^
distinctione dispergam. Quilibet homo informatur ab Anima rationali, quae
quidem vim Sensitiuam in se includit. Respectu illius diuinae facultatis,
togati semper sunt inter libros: respectu vero huius, ingenue fateor
coniunctionem illos appetere. Nec iniuria. Nam, ne minutissimum animalculum
sine tactu consistere potest. Pergis. Site fortunatus ille, Vxorem nunquam
habui. O callidam mortalem! o ingenium metuendum! sed respondeo. Habuit vxorem,
and non habuit* Anno enim quinto, and sexagesimo, anum decrepita^ duxit. Viden'
quam infirmis fundamentis inniteris? Quamoborem prorsus ab hac haeresi
opinionem tuam esse amotam vole. Sunt quae in aurem tuam, die Veneris
insusurrabo. Pullastra mea, Vale.

Epistola nona. Ruffioni Salutem.
HEus tu, qui Vulcanum naso inclusum geris: quanti tibi Tobacco stetit? Equidem
pro necessitudine, quam tecum habui a puero, non possum quin cupiam in viam vt
redeas. Quid? An foelicitatem ponis in Euaporatione? Quasi vero nunquam viderim
sonipedem fumum e naribus efflantem. Ignes ex ore (tanquam Aetna) ^iacularis:
concedo. Generosus igitur: nego, and pernego. Pressius agam. Dicito, sodes,
quid sibi vult prolixa illa caesaries? Iuro tibi nos abundare tonsoribus.
Quilibet est in habitu. Elige qui te leuet ill^ onere (si onus id est
appellandum, quod cum voluptate feras.) An clam te est Crinitas stellas fere
aliquid mali praedicere? Nisi vere tuus essem, te tam audacter non monuissem.
Da operam vt ipse valeas animo, si me vis valere.

Epistola decima. Philomacho sanam mentem.
PRoh Manors armi^er! proh Bellona bellicosa. Mean timid^m, and fugacem vocari?
Sino, atque fero, atque patior. Siquidem, quae regio in terris tuae non plena
fortitudinis? An quisquam Antipodum ignorant quantum tu Mart feroci, atque acie
vales? Nae tu is es in quem vere accidit Terentianum illud, Denique, metuebant
omnes iam me. Stomocharis, prouocas, clamitas, Ad arma, ad arma. Apage sis
(cubitalis Pigmae) sic Canibus catulos similes. Deterge gladium, qui totus
rubet ferrugine: tunc I prae, sequar. Sequar per quod libenter, efficiamque vt
Corpus tuum organicum non habeat vitam in potentia: saltem vt liguli soluantur,
sanguisque erumpat ^ natibus.

Valeto, (...) ab unde, valeto. Decas 2.
Epistola prima. Philoclono iudicium.
A In' vero, verbero? Philosophorum Hectore^ (mastigia) iuuenum carnificem
vocas? Obstupefacis. Alij quidem Platonis discipulum appellant: alij
caliginosum: qui durius Stagaritam: qui grauissime, sophistam: carnificem
praeter te, nemo. Moderator hoc intelligit: tu tamen viuis: viuis? imo vero in
Scholas venis, putida sophismata effutis, illoto ore garris. Hem, (inepte
puerule, and miselle pupe) responde huic ratiocinationi. Quod habet crura thymo
plena, apis est:
Tu habes crura fimo plena,
Ergo tu es fucus.
Quid negas? Piscis es ergo, non fucus? An elinguis etiam Veromanduus? Tentabo.
Comparata sunt quae inter se comparantur: horibilis definitio. Dialectica est
ars been disserendi: Quid opus est been? Imo quid hac appendice Eode^que sensu
logica dicta est? Dic amabo, anime mi, mi Philoclone, annon amputanda quae
redundant? Superuacancum esse liquido probo.

Quod neque ad indagandum, neque disponendum argumentum conducit, illud
(tanquam ciuis inutilis) e Logica ciuitate est exterminandum.
Atqui clausula illa est eiusmodi, Ergo.


Si in ipso libelli vestibulo tam insignia offendo vitia: quid de medio (in quo
consistit virtus) quid de fine sperare possim? (...), Lex Iustitiae possum
scire vbi tu vitam degis? Ah nimis verum est illud, Terras Astraea reliquit. I
nunc, miselle, Ramum tuum cole, Aristotelis, oculatissimi viri, candidum nomen
denigra. Sed plura quam decreueram. De magistri tui Scholijs propediem coram
cunfabulabimur. Vale, atque timida mente circumspice. Nam, si te apprendero,
faciam vt cum dentibus linguam excrees.

Epistola secunda. Cuidam olim condiscipulo suo.
Nunciatum mihi est, te non pingue quoddam sonare, sed ita pure loqui, vt
Latin solus videare. Papae! Nondum quatuor anni sunt, cum is eras, in quem
quiduis earum rerum conueniebat quae sunt dicta in plumbeum, and caudicem.
Rogatus olim a ludimagistro (memini enim, semperque meminero) quomodo Latin
diceres, My father clipped sheep: respondisti tu, Pater meus tondebat naues.
Ille subiratus, quaesiuit quomodo hoc: I have gathered flowers out of Terence,
tu autem sic, Collegi menstrua ex Terentio. Nonne tunc tibi opus fuit sacculo?
Cum autem asseruisti Candel^brum dictum esse a candela, and labris, quia
mulierculae solent vnguere Labra ^andelis, nonne praebuisti bellam materiem ad
ridendum? Attica iam in te est eloquentia, atquein labris lepos habitat:
lachrumo gaudio. Perge elegans, and limatus esse: perge rem proprijs, aptisque
verbis explicare. Id quod facilius assequere, si in Tullia^is eris scriptis
studiose and multum volutatus. Vale.

Epistola tertia. Eidem.
Rusticulus es: hoc me male habet. Dum enim togam sumpseris, philosophaster es
non philosophus. Idcirco restat vt miserias tuas conmmenteris, obnixeque
contendas, vt quamprimum in Academi^orum numerum cocptari queas. Interim
Maronem lectita: sitque Tullius in sinu semper, and complexu tuo.

Accipe quo semper finitur epistola verbo. Epi^tola quarta. Cognato suo Salutem.
HEu, hoi, (alter ego) superasne and vesceris aura?

Vereor enim vt potes sine me spiritum ducere. Instituenti mihi epistolam been
longam exarare, tutor aurem vellit, iussitque breuitati studere. Pro me
pernoctet epistola tecu^. Tu velim inprimis cures vt valeas.

Epistola quinta. Eidem.
Enimuero (mi tu) nihil nisi amor sum. O Narde, Narde, quid ni te egregie
diligam qui omnia tibi postputaris esse prae meo commodo? Sum quod eram, eroque
quod sum, Dum me mor ipse mei, dum spiritus hos reget artus. Viden' quam
repent poeta prodeo? Au, obsecro mitte me: n^lo in soluta oratione quasi
tabernaculum vitae meae collocare. Euax! volo agere rem seriam tecum. An nondum
est ex te a^ liquis qui appellet patrem?

Per mihi mirum sane videt^r te tamdiu esse soliuagum. Atat, homo verecundans;
Nec dulces natos, Veneris nec praemia noris? Vtinam, Iunone secunda, vxorcula
tibi esset: Vtinam (parce precor) spes ciuitatis in cunis vagiens. Vide quam
non a vulgari meo stylo abhorream, tametsi acerba plura nemini vnqua^ oblata
esse credo. Quantae quantae angustiae meae sunt, vnum tamen curo hoc quidem, vt
me non plane deseram. Quid quod plane diuino me cito inde emersurum? Quam ego
horam si videro, complures hilares sumemus die^. Vale, mea amoenitas, vale,
vale, and salve.

Epistola sexta. Lau. Will. suo.
ITane tandem quaeso est, perfide, vt te mei obliuio caeperit! Anno enim
Platonico sum suauissimis tuis literis frustratus. Vnum hoc scio me meritum
esse vt me in germani fratris loco diligeres. Etenim, dum simul viximus,
Heliotropium ego, tu Solmeus extitisti. Tecum circumactus sum, and, quocunqute
verteris, eodem flecti cacumen. Nocte autem, hoc est, absente te, tanquam
desiderio tui, florem contraho, Rore meo, lachrymisque meis ieiunia pascens.

Si tibi vel minima erit adulationis suspicio, insignem mihi iniuriam offeres.
Iusiurandum do, Gnatonicos, me infra omnes homines infimos putare. Siquid est,
in quo in operam requiras meam, fac periculum number idem sit Tyro qui semper
fuerim. Delatum est ad me, te paene esse a Musis auersum. Ita me ament superi,
vt nihil iam multis diebus accidit, cui aures meas aegrius dederim. Obsecro
(ocule mi) nolito prudens, sciensque perire. Satietate in literis nihil
periculosius. Accelera, accelera, and ad literariam nostram rempublicam aduola.
Si secus apud te statuis, famae tuae male consulis. Nihil nouarum rerum habeo,
nisi quod crassi quidam, and amusi homunculi, laudem mihi, siqua est,
detrahant: nullumque non moueant lapidem quo noceant. Profecto id genus hominum
est pessimum, quod ex Musca plusquam Elephantum facit. Sed quid incassum? Cur
Curetes, Coribantes, and sycophantas curem impudentes? Fac plane vt valeas
(amice singularis, atque optime) sicque tibi persuadeas, sic sentias, nihil
literis tuis mihi f^re acceptius.

Episto^^ septima. Eidem.
CVras, ^uibus circumuallor, grauissimas, in sinum tuum (lux mea) libenter
depono. Capitalis illa pestis Pauperies, me pessundat. Quam quidem confiteor
iure obtigisse, quandoquidem nunquam consului in longitudinem. Calcei mei sunt
pleni rimarum, hac, atque illac perfluunt. Caligae interiores scatent
nitentibus ouis: quam vereor ne non procul absint eorum Parents. Quos ego, si
sensero esse nimis familiares, vnguibus vtriusque pollicis coniunctis, morti
misero. Indusium meum est lacerum, and diuisibile in semper diuisibilia. O me
miserum! o me afflictum. Pater omnem de me eiecit animum patris. Quodnam ob
facinus? Dicetur. Absumens magnam pecuniam in germanas gerras, literas ad illum
dedi mendaciunculis aspersas, quibus incendi eum, nuncque vtor iratissimo.

Pro. Item pro pullis, 5. ss. scripsi ego Pro. Item pro pileis. 5. ss.
Pro Item pro artocreis, 6. ss. 8. d. scripsi ego Pro Item pro ocreis, 6. ss.
8. d.
Iamque aut vltra Sauromatas fugiendum est, aut vitae cursus alio reuocandus.
Salve igitur, Saturn, fons melancholiae: saluete virtutes leniores. Certum est
generosi alicuius adolescentuli tutelam in me recipere. Ah, quid dixi facturum
me? O crux, crux, vtinam tu mihi sis sepulchrum potius quidem quam sim
instrumentum animatum. Vah, grauedinosi, semihomines, lapides denique sunt, qui
sedem, aperto capite, infra salinum. Anxius viuo, and dubious moriar ni tu (spes
mea) sedulo facias ne ego perditus perdar. Non queo reliqua scribere (sic iaceo
in lachrymis, ac sordibus) ne tu etiam corrumpas oculos. Vale, and me, vt
facis, ama.

Epistola octaua. Ken. Hau. Salutem.
QVid putem? se pultumne te? An vtilitatem solam amicitiam nostra^
conglutinasse? Annon tantum est ab re tua otij tibi, vt syllaba^, velliterula^
mittas? Quot lepores in Atho, tot suspitiones in animo meo pascuntur. Euge
autem, rem teneo. Curas seminarium reipublicae: sic, dum alis familiam,
negligis familiarem. Nec tamen est cur ita suspicer. Nam, si vt olim, in
tenebricoso musaeo, tanquam vespertilio, latitas, non credo te Veneris pullum
ex Noctua factum. Caeterum facile adduci possum vt credam te in amicitia
refrigescere, temporisque ^onginquitatem affectum tuum extinxisse. O animum
varium, commutabilem, multiplicem, flexibilem, deuium: vix, ah, vix possum
temperare a conuicio. Sum te quidem breui aestu irae meae absumpturus, ni eam
epistola aliqua blanda, pureque fluenti, sedaueris. Quid ego? quid agitur?
Studetur, ambulatur. Iuuat aspicere lanigerum gregem, smaragdinum gramen
tondentem: pastorem cani officiosissimo imperantem, fuscam vaccam agros altis
mugitibus implentem. Neque vero iniucundum est agricolam contemplari colentem,
aut stercorantem. Sic, o sic animum, curis intensum, relaxare soleo. Comoedijs
valedixi, nec me applico ad studium Musicum. Sunt qui tragoedias nobis excitare
conantur: and, non tutum est agere in scena gestum, spectantibus Roscijs.
Paedagogus tu. O virum sedulum, dignumque qui in nostro oppid^ situs fuisses.
Precor, vt tibi res foeliciter incoepta, foelicissime succedat. Vae tui^
discipulis, qui quotidie sentiant Ternarium numerum esse perfectissimum.
Laurentio nostro plurimam ex me salutem dices. Fac va letudini inseruias.

Epistola nona. Grauissimo cuidam viro.
MVnsieur, innocuis orte parentibus:
Sunt, sunt, qui nequeunt carmina scribere:
Atqui versiculos ecce tibi meos
Limatos, nitidos: nonne ego sum arrogans?
Sum certe, fateor: Gloria calcar est.
Transcenden sine te non ego noueram:
Porro, non speciem, non Genus, Accidens.
Non Formam, aut Proprium. Tu deus es meae
Fortunae: O vtinam Virgilius forem,
Pol, late pietas sparsa soret tua.
At nostra (heu) tenera est musula. Iam vale.
Epistola decima. Idem Eidem.
EN tibi carmen, insigne offi^ij mei testimonium.
Quanquam te iam annum auscultantem (Marce) Cratippum,
Atque id Athae^is, Philosophum decet esse profundum,
Egregium propter nomen doctori^, and vrbis,
Quorum haec te exemplis, doctrinis augeat ille:
Vt tamen ad nostram non paruam commoditatem,
Semp^r coniunxi cum Graecis ipse Latina,
Id tibi item statuo (junior Tulli) faciendum.
Vale.
Conclusio.
SIcque opus exegi: quod si legisse, laboris
Non piget, euge, facis pulchra me pr^le parentem.
FINIS.
The mean in Spending: Promising Praise, to the Liberal, Pity, to the
Prodigal, Mischief, to the Covetous.


Praestat esse Prometheum quam Epimetheum.

At London Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1598.

The mean in Spending.
NO Delphicke oracle is truer than that Maxim, The hardest things been of
greatest value. Wherefore Aristotle the great, does easily win credit to his
books de Anima, by foretelling the difficulty of the intended subject. Now,
of all things under the heavens hollownes, naught is attained with less
facility than virtue: which is so inestimable a gemme, that the dainty sands
of Pactolus, the golden bowels of Guiana, nay, the perfect irrelenting Diamond
by comparison will become odious. The reason why she is so dearly bought is
perspicuous: for that there are millions of ways to evil, and poor one to
goodness. So then, it must needs be praisably done, to hit the clout in a
field, the punch in a butte, the center in a circumference. If the moral
Scholar will sit in Virtues triumphing chariot, he must be a Phoebus, and make
his wild affections tread the right path: lest if Phaeton like he give them
head, they forthwith carry him to the Lion, and Bull: to the Bow, and Scorpion,
to one ugly vice or other. It is much to come acquainted with virtue in
general, but especially with that gentlemanly habit beneficence: whose praises
no wight can express, though he run division upon them half a year
together. The very name of her is Doricall Music to a good ear: but (alas)
not one of many tha^ ^y shooting short, or over does not lose her. The ^^ying
of father Chremes to his selfe-vexing neighbor will suit with the most,
Vehemens in vtramque partem, Menedeme, es nimis,
Aut largitate nimia, aut parsimonia.


But, lest I be holden a vagabond, I betake me to method. First I describe the
bounteous man: then I point out the most direct, and compendious way to his
virtue. Some such order I observe in the extremes.

He is the liberal man that bestows his precious metal upon such persons,
and matters as is behoouefull, in such sort, and time as he ought.

That bestows.] For it is the property of virtue, rather to give than receive.
It is also more difficult.

Upon such persons.] For every Synon that has Or^ miserere laborum tantorum
in his mouth, does not taste of his mercy. He regards not the parasiticall
kissinger, and soothing ^able-friend, who seems to gratify him with fair
demeanure, when indeed he is a Melampus, a Pamphagus, and a deuourer of his
substance.

He abhorres the insufferable, execrable, and reprobate Iester; knowing him to
be the devils quaile-pipe, that calls gentiles to their bane.

As for the pas^iue wench with the loches quality, he may not brook her: and
why? He is sure she will go proud, when s^e goes proud: and cause both purse
and body to be soon exhaust.

No, no, he considers that Bounty and Justice are two loving twins, that
always walk hand in hand. He takes a view of the manners of his relative,
of his affection, of his laudable parts, rewarding him most freely whom he
finds most virtuous. Again, his purse is present where there is most need.
He is the Zephirus that breathes on the widow, orphan, and foure-footed criple,
and on the true Soldier maimed in defense of our common mother.

Above al, he is gracious to the learned sisters (whom antique Poets most
truly feigned to be virgins, so easily are they wronged and misused of this
graceles age.)

Concerning expenses upon liueles subjects, he is wary and provident:
providing always that he maintain his credit; imitating Nature, which abides
neither defect nor superfluity. He is none of those that build vast kitchins,
but cold: spacious ouens, but empty: gaudie ^himnies, but smokeles. He is none
of those that raise proud turrets, and ample chambers, with Peripateticall
galleries, till their purses lie speechles, and they become right housekeepers.
What does he then? Mary he uses the best method, beginning a ^otioribus
natura, with the barn and kilne, and in tract of time erectes a worthy house
to the relieuing of needy vifiters.

To take leave of this point: he spends nothing on go^geous array, the tel-tale
of vanity: nor upon frolicking, the immediate predecessor to Venerie: but has
his pu^se in a string, and keeps a decorum in his actions.

In such sort and time as he ought.] For benignity must be correspondent to
the giuers ability. Of all, and of all he looks to this, that himself be not
drawn dry, lest too late, he sigh forth a book de tristibus pestered with
such like verses, Tempus erat quando potera^ placuisse r^ga^ti, Hei mihi quod
non est.

Wherefore he ever forecasteth, and remembers that Dor non dicitur.

Furthermore, he pe^fourmeth his action with deliberation, advisedly,
prudently, chearefully, and for the right end: For Liberality consists not
in the quantity of the gift, but in the mind of the Giver. Finally, he is
never Practitioner when he is inuirond with eyes: for that is ostentation, and
rank poison to this virtue. Go too now, were I a Theophrast, or Marcus Tully,
that golden Trump of eloq^ence, yet should I come short in commending the
Liberal. O heavenly mind that esteems gold as Quick silver, and Brimstone,
scorning to be vaslalliz'd by an Indian Excrement. Who keeps open house, and
open purse: regarding others, and yet not neglecting himself, upholding
others, and yet himself not under. Surely so healthful a plannet, that
blesses his inferiors with his influence, in spite of Envy and Time shall
purchase immortality. There is a twofold thread will bring thee out of the
Laborinth of vice to Beneficence.

First, thou must endeavor to avoid that vice, which is most opposite to it.

Them thou must mark to which of the vices thou art most inclined by nature,
and frame thy self to the contrary.

Now step I over to the Spend-all, who consuming his Patrimony, killes
himself with kindness: and this yongster is rather to be pitied for his
folly, than condemned out of measure for his fault. This unthrift is only Pro
nunc (as Iauell says) never prognosticating, vnles^e ^n this wise.

The first day merry weather. The second and third unmasked heavens. The
fourth and fifth, weather indeed. Full moon on Monday the sixth, limpid air.
The seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, never such trim weather since king
Richard ^id naked to Leicester. The eleventh, and twelfth, dame Earths hair
waxes long. The thirteenth, the sun sheades his beams most radiantly. The
foureteenth and fifteenth the may-bird sings plain-song lustily. The sixteenth,
and seventeenth, weather, weather, weather, fine weather, wished weather. And
thus, regardlesse of sleete, black frosts, tempests, thunderclaps, eclipses,
after a while, like the Optatiue Mood, he has evermore an Aduerbe of wishing
joined with him. If he meet his mistress, he hales her to the Iuybush, and at
first dash cries out, Drawer, fill a quarte of thy most vendible claret. His
brain heated, the corruption of one pot is the generation of another. Then
coupleth he lips with his make, and threatens downfall to the chamber. And
when his purse is corke-light he thus tryumphs over her.

Dicite Io Peacocks, and Io bis dicite Peacocks: (as though he meant Io the cow
mentioned in Ouids Cronicles, and her vigilant keeper, whose hundred eyes were
set in the Peacocks tail:) Even so the good muckel-cock, when he has showed
all the kindness to his hen that he can, crows and clappes his wings, and is
lighter by an ounce at the least. Ne will he take heed of the Identicall sea,
called Item, and Item, till he be upon the merciless rock, named Summa
totalis. Alack for pity that the best wits and kindest natures are most
addicted to this good vice. Well, howsoever it be blameable, yet in some part
it agrees with Liberality, and by Age and Want may soon be brought to
mediocritie. Themistocles was such an ungracious wag, and so frank, that his
father disinherited him, and his mother dispairing of his amend, made a long
letter of her self. Yet in process of time he was not the man: for he left
his by-ways, and grew to singular account with the weale-publike. Fabius was a
wild youth, yet in his best time a man of good stuff. This so, no doubt but
the kind-hearted gentleman may descend to the mean, which shall in short time
be effected: if for a time he strive to be miserable. Not for a Persian
mountain would I amplify this point any more: for I think each Now an
hour, till I be at the indurate Button-capt Euclio. As this churl savors of
nothing but earth, so has he a down-looke. His neighbors maid cannot fetch
fi^e, but he thinks his pelf is gone with her. His cock cannot scratch for a
corn, but he fears his coin will be dug up. Where he is, there he is not,
where he is not, there he is, for his mind is amongst his silver. He is hourly
^aking up substance, and yet not for himself.

So ye, not for your selves, O oxen, bear the yoke. What more monstrous then
that money should beget money? yet he never quiet, but when his coin is
ingendering. At night his eyes see no sleep, or if they do, it is momentarie,
for at every minute he gruntles like a ringle-tailde hog. So that that shoo
will fit his foot, which the peerless Poet gave Dido when she was
loue-sicke Nec vnquam,
Soluitur in somnos, oculisue, aut pectore noctem
Accipit: ingeminant curae.


A Midaicall slave, that had his trunks full of bags, and his bags full of
baggage, kept but one boy, who was his cook and bedfellow. The wretch at
midnight by chance fell asleep, and dreamed that a thief with twenty sorts
of keys in his hand, was about the lock of his well beloved container.
Affright, he start up, crying out amain. Ferte cui fustem, date telum,
expellite furem.

And so laid about him, that he made his bedfellow full faced. The next day
waxed old, and the sun was giving light to our underlings, when the master and
man began^e to yield to Morpheus. The boy dreamed and would have sworn he had
been pined, in so much that he exclaimde: Ferte cite panem, date cruftum,
expellite famem. and supposing one had thrown him a manchet, he light upon his
masters gnomon, dilacerating it most currishly, so that eu^r since he is known
by his torn nose.

No matter if all usurers were so used. So used? by Stix I swear, were I a
Judge, they should all and every of them be turnde off roundly, to the great
indangering of their neck-bones. Certes Avarice is a capital plague, a
swallowing gulf, a bottomless hell, the greatest evil that the devil can
shuffle into a country. Where the Spleen is big, the body is little, where
this mischief increases, virtue is in a consumption, O what a rotten tail of
evils does this lean beast draw after her. Hence is it that the fatherless
has not his hunger quailed, while the mouse and weeuell pamper themselves in
the garner. Hence is it that the Clients purse is never less full than when
full. Hence it is that the tenth sheafe is scarce the tenth part of the ninth,
or at the least, the least in the company. Hence it is that one and the self
same dish, shows it self on one and the self same table, til it be either
gray headed, or vide Aristotelem de generatione Animalium. Hence it is that the
dunce hides his butter-teeth in bacon, while the approved scholar pickes
marrow out of a Spade-bone. Hence it is that the farmer deals with his
daughter, as he does with his hecfar in the market, he that will give most for
her, take her. In sum, hence it is that such a number of money-men ride
continually to hell in wheele-barrowes. Who lists to read Demea his repentance
in Adelphi, shall see as in a mirror, the cursed fruits of Illiberalitie. This
carle, who a long time had been ille agresti^, sae nus, tristis, parcus,
truculentus, tenax, (for so he speaks of himself to himself) on a sudden
becomes a Micio. The reason, Mei me sugita^t, meam mortem expectant Lo here the
guerdon of too much neerenesse, hate is the misers seruing-man. Money came in
by law, not nature, and was invented for the easy supply of men's several
necessities. O then, would not he be done to some exquisite death, that keeps
it in close prison till one piece infects another? Crassus thirsting after
gold, had his scull filde with lead. Aquilius gaping after wealth, had gold
powered into his mouth. Pity but all misers should have some such Catastrophe.

There is no remedy for this disease, no electuarie, no pill, no potion can
purge it: the only way to help it, is to get some Suppositorie fellow to
blow Pindust into his bumme. And thus, though rudely, have I played the
Summister.

FINIS.
Nam cur me verberas?

