THE COMBAT betwixt CHRIST and the Devil.

Four Sermons upon the temptations of Christ in the wilderness by Satan,
wherein are to be seen the subtle sleightes that the tempter uses against the
children of God, and the means that God has appointed to resist him,
sanctified to our use in the example of our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

By John Vdall Preacher of the word of God, at Kyngston upon Thames.

JAMES. 1. 2. 3. 4. My Brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into
diverse temptations: knowing that the trial of your faith, brings forth
patience: and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entier, lacking nothing. AT LONDON. Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for Thomas
Man, and William Brom.

TO THE RIGHT honorable HENRY Earl of Huntyngdon Lord Hastings. etc. Of the
most Noble Order of the Garter Knight, and Lord President of the Counsel
established in the Northpartes 1. V. Wishes increase of all spiritual
graces, and true honor in this world, and that endless glory that lasts for
ever.
WHEN I consider with my self (right honorable) that inestimable crown of
immortal glory which it has pleased God the father, in his son Jesus
Christ, to lay Math. 25 34.
up in store for those, whom (of his mercy Ephesians. 1. 4. 5.
and free favor) he elected unto him self before the foundations of the
world: and with all those Acts. 14. 22.
many tribulations and afflictions, by which his heavenly wisdom has
appointed them to enter into the same: I see (as in a glass) before mine eyes,
the cause that moved our Savior Christ to say, that Math. 7. 14.
strait is the way, which leads to life and fevv, there by that find it,
and the blessed Apostle Paul to set down: Romans 7. 23.
there is a law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind and
leading me captive unto the law of sin: for as the glorious majesty, of
that heavenly joy does ravish the mind of every man, to wish that he might
be partaker of the same, so (on the other side) the consideration of
afflictions and present calamities, that all 2. Tim. 3 12.
those who will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer, does not only
terrify many, from taking in hand the profession of Religion: but greatly Romans
7. 24.
vexes and greeueth (even) the dear children of God: Job. 2. 3. etc.
and makes such a co^tradictio^, betwixt the flesh and the spirit, that they
seem in such wise to be distracted, as though they were divided into two
parts. The one striving with main and might, to go, toward hell: the other
laboring, by all the force that it is able, to go toward God. But those
that ever mean to take that course which (alone) leads to the kingdom of
heaven, must not only John. 5. 39.
seek out of the word of God to know, what he would have them to do, and
carefully to put the same, in practice: but also, they must make their Luke.
14. 26. etc.
account to have infinite, and continual Crosses (even) for the same: so that
unless, they be thus resolved, that in respect of Jesus Christ, they Phil. 3.
8.
account all things vile (and therefore for the professing, and bearing witness
unto his truth, are contented to abide, all extremities, that Satan, the world,
or their own flesh, can raise up against the^) it is impossible that ever they
should Math. 24 13.
continue unto the end that they might be saved. For God in his wisdom, has
seen it most meet, that they who shall reign with his son Jesus Christ,
shall also be conformed unto the similitude of his Romans 8. 17.
sufferinges, to Math. 20 22.
drink of the cup that he did drink of, and to be Baptized with his Baptism.
Now Satan (who is a sworn enemy to mankind, and seeks as a 1. Pet. 5. 8.
roaring Lion whom he may devour) takes occasion by this decree of God to
drive man into all extremities inward and outward: to the end that he may win
him unto himself, in leaving the course of godliness, and giving himself
over to commit all iniquities, and that with greediness: and so much the
rather because he finds our corrupt nature, convenient matter to work upon,
which in it Gene. 6. 5.
self is altogether evil: so that (excepting only those who^ it pleases God
of his mere mercy (in Jesus Christ) to regenerate, by the John. 15. 3.
knowledge of his word and Ephesians. 1. 13.
working of his holy spirit) all the posterity of Adam, is utterly seduced by
Satan to be instruments of enlarging his kingdom, and increasing their own
condemnation. And those whom the Lord has reclaymed from the service of sin,
unto the obedience of his Gospel have ever been, and to the end of the world
shall be, so tempted of Satan, so ho^ted at, abhorred, and abused of the world,
and so enticed by their own flesh to retire unto the league, and amity of the
world again: that they seem to be of 1. Cor. 15. 19.
all men most miserable: but this is their only comfort, and (in deed) the
joy that passes all the pleasures of the world, that their trouble is but for
a Psalm. 30. 5.
time: God will release them, and Revel. 7. 17.
wipe all tears from their eyes: that as they Romans 8. 17.
are afflicted with Christ, so shall they be glorified and reign with him:
that the Lord makes a Psalm. 116. 15.
glorious account (even) of the death of his Saints and reserueth their tears
in Psalm. 56. 8.
a bottle, yea he accompteth all the troubles of his children to be his Acts.
9. 4. 5.
own, because (in deed) they suffer for his sake: but they shall not lack
their reward: yea such a reward as is, ten thousand times exceedyng the measure
of their sorrow: for the Romans 8. 18.
troubles of this life are not worthy to be compared to the glory, that shall be
reveled. But yet we have great need to be comforted, and stayed, least we
should be Heb. 12. 3.
wearied, and faint in our minds, for so much as no correction for the time,
is joyous, but tedyous sharp and grievous: able to make us fall down under
the burden of the same, unless it please the Lord, to teach us how, and to
give us might to support and sustain it: which is no where else learned neither
any other means given, then only the Psalm. 119.
word of God, which the Lord has given unto us, for that purpose. Now, for
so much as an experience, both of the subtlety of our enemy in our
afflictions, and also of the means how to beat him back, is to be seen in
those temptations of our Savior Christ in the wilderness, because I having in
my ordinary course Preached upon the same, and diverse who received present
comfort thereby (being desirous to have the continual use of the doctrine
delivered out of them) desiring me, to pen the same: I condiscended unto their
desire and (as near as I could remember) have set them down as they were
spoken: saving (only) that in some particular applications I have had regard
(in writtyng) unto those to whose hands they may come: as (in speaking) I
respect mine Auditorie. And I am bold to make choice of your honor to who^ I
may dedicate the same, partly for that I might show some token of
thankfulness unto the same, for your favor toward me, and especially for
that I am persuaded the doctrine, therein contained will be acceptable unto you.
The Lord of heaven and earth (from whom all true honor comes) increase the
same unto your duty more and more: for the advancement of his glory in this
world, and the eternal comfort of your own soul in the world of come. Amen.

Your honors most humble to command in the Lord. JOHN VDALL.

To the Reader.
THe particular branches of the whole matter (as you see in this Table) are in
number twenty and two, look what figures you find any point marked with all
in this place, and the same shall you find in the Margent of the book, where
the same matter begins to be handled.

A Method of the whole matter in this Book.
The temptations of Christ (...) General Occasion Circumstaunces Time, being
Baptized. 1. Place the wilderness. 2.
Causes Good: Gods holy spirit. 3. Evil: Satan the tempter. 4.

Thing Party: Christ Jesus. 5. Matter: tempted. 6.

Particular Preparation. 7 Actio^ three fold assailed in respect of his
Person. Occasion. 8. Thing. Manner. 9. Matter. Assault with Distrust in God. 10.
Use of ill Means. 11
Resistaunce. 12.


Mind in respect of his Estate Assault Circumstaunces. When. 13 where. 14
What Thing. 15. Reason. 16.

Resistaunce. 17.
Ornament of it. Assault Where. 18. What Showed. 19 Promised. 20.

Resistaunce in General. 21. Particular. 22.






Math. 4. 1. 2. 3. etc. 1. Then was Jesus led aside, of the spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted of the Devil.

2. And when he had fasted forty days. etc.


WE heard the last day (beloved in our Savior Christ) how it pleased God (when
the fullness of time was come) that his son our redeemer should begin to make
himself known unto the world, to declare the same, not only by the
testimony of John (who refused to Baptize him) but also by the holy Ghost,
discendyng on him in visible manner, and the voice of God from heaven,
pronouncyng him to be his beloved son in whom alone he is well pleased. Now
it remains that we proceed unto the entrance of Christ into the execution
of his office, in the public reuelyng of himself unto the world to be that
Messiah so long locked for, by whom salvation is purchased to all believers
whether they be Jews or Gentiles. In which is contained, For the view of the
particular branches see the Table.
first his trial, secondly his departure, into Galile: his trial containing
those several branches that are expressed in the Table, whereof we are to
speak as they lie in order.

Then) In this word is contained the first circumstaunce, which is the time,
when he was tempted: to wit, when he was Baptized and began to enter the
course of working the work of our redemption: whereby we learn, that when we
are baptized, for so much as in the same, we Gal. 3. 27.
put on the profession of Jesus Christ, and receive his cognisaunce, thereby
vowing our selves to be his soldiers, we must be sure of this, that Satan
will be our professed foe, to be pricking at us, either to terrify or allure us
from under the banner of our Captain Christ Jesus, and therefore we must
learn (so often as we think of our Baptism or see the same Sacrament
administered unto others) to remember what place we are called unto, The
continual use of Baptism.
and what a strong enemy we are to encounter with all, that we may be more
watchful and warye, that his sly subtilties do not deceive us, nor his
roaringes devour us. A meditation most needful to be thought upon. For we
see that many are contented to receive the press money of Jesus Christ, and to
give their names to be inroled into his book, who yet after all that, do flee
unto Satha^s camp, and fight with might and main against him and his
kingdom. For (if we shall try the truth hereof by the proof and event) how
many are found whose minds are infected with false and erroneous opinions?
The marks of reuolters from Baptism.
whose lives swarm with ungodly and wicked practices, and though they thus go
on from sin to sin, yet Satan will persuade them, that they be Christians,
for that their names are registered in the number of the Baptized: but if Christ
be no other way truly obeyed then by wholesome doctrine and holy conversation,
and Satan's kingdom, no otherwise erected, then by false opinion and dissolute
behavior: let us assure our selves, that unless we do labor, by all good
means to furnish our hearts with the knowledge of holy doctrine, and to adorn
our lives with godly behavior: say what we will and pretend what we list we
are reuolters from the obedience that we profess unto Christ by our Baptism,
and instruments for Satan, whereby he strengthens his kingdom to our own
destruction. The condition of the godly in this life.
Again it teaches us the state of Gods children here in this world to be in
continual battle: For so long as we be under the protection of Christ Jesus,
Satan is our sworn foe, by whom we shall be sure to have all y^ injuries that
he can procure us, either by his own person, our own flesh, or his
instruments, the worldlinges that know not God: which is a lesson needful
to be learned: for some (who (in deed) measure Religion by their own fancies)
think it an easy thing to be a Christian, and therefore account every man and
woman to be one: Again, some would gladly be Christians, so that the applause
of the world might also go with them. Whereupon it comes that the one never
understands what Religion means and so proceeds sleepely to destruction,
the other not having cast his accomptes before, sees those difficulties
therein, that he was not aware of, and forsakes all, both religion and
profession of the same: the example of our Savior Christ does very notably
meet with the^ both, with the first, in showing what a mighty foe, we shall
have in Religion, and therefore it cannot be an easy thing: with the second
that the difficulties will be many, With what mind we must take in hand the
profession of Religion.
and therefore to advise our selves before we make any profession of Christ,
least we be driven, thereby with shame to renounce that which heretofore we
have seemed to love, and so after Luke. 14. 28. 9. 62.
cur setting hand to the ploughe, and looking back be unfit for the kingdom
of God. The world is full of such people, whose estate is most fearful, and
therefore let us beware. Moreover we see that Christ, as soon as ever he
begins (as it were to point the finger) toward that public office,
whereunto he was allotted of God the Father, is forthwith assailed, showing
unto us, Trouble accompanies every good action.
that whensoeur it pleases God to move us to take in hand any good action, the
enemy will be sure to Cross it withal the stumblyng blocks, that he is able to
lay in the way. The which we see verified by experience in the book of God, ye
trouble of Moses did begin, Acts. 7, 23.
When it came in his heart to visit his brethren, 1. Sam. 17. 34.
David lived quietly until the Lord used means to bring him to Saules camp,
that he might set upon and overcome Goliath, and afterward his troubles were
endless. Acts. 9. 23.
Paul was not contradicted, but lived in great credit among the Jews, until
the Lord made him a Preacher of the Gospel, the^ was he never free from
slanderous accusations, violences and all kind of injuries, the reason
whereof is, for that Satan being ielous over his own kingdom, and fearyng
the overthrow thereof, when he sees any raised up to fight against it, does
most basely bestirre himself for the suppressing of the same. Therefore (as
every one that will do any good thing that may be acceptable unto God,
comfortable to his conscience, and profitable to his brethren) must learn to
have an invincible and indefatigable stomach, for that he shall be sure to have
many a counterbuffet and foil, if Satan ca^ procure it: so in the depth of
all his extremities, and in the midst of tribulations, he may gather an
argument unto himself of singular comfort, that if he do that which is
warranted by the word of God, and takes it in hand with the testimony of a
good conscience, he may assure himself (for most sure it is) the more troubles
that he endures, the more is he in the favor of God, and does him y^ more
service, against the enemies of his glory, the world and the devil, and surely
as this is a most profitable doctrine to be learned, so is it most necessary
for all Goos people in these days, but most especially for those Ministers of
the word of God that do with good conscience, rebuke the world of sin, and
plainly urge the necessity of walkyng in the narrow path, against whom the
world is so mad, (partly for that iniquity abounds among men, and
especially for that through lack of discipline in the Church, every man is
let alone to do what he list) that a man would think hell were broken up,
and all the hellhoundes there were transposed unto the shape of men, so
horrible, so false, so slanderous, and so bitter be their words and deeds
(when they ca^) against those sylie ones. But this is our stay, Psalm. 2. 4,
the Lord that is in heaven does laughe them to scorn, and this is to us an
argument of great comfort, that the more they rage, the more are we assured
that God is on our side.

Into the wilderness) the place where he was tried comes now to be
considered, which was the uninhabited wilderness, where were no creatures,
but wild beasts (as Mark. 1. 13.
Mark records) among which he lived for that time: whereunto the world may
welbe compared, because of the troublesomnesse, intricate ways, and danger
thereof. Our Savior was led by the spirit thither: First that he might come
thence, Cause of his being in the wilderness.
as a newman, fit to take in hand so wayghtie an enterprise, which also was
prefigured Exodus 34. 28.
by Moses his being forty days in the mountain, 1. Kings. 19. 8.
and Elias in the cave of Horeb. For the absence even of those with who^ we
have been most co^uersaunt, makes the^ appear unto us in more reverent
acco^pte: Secondly it was that he might be the more subject to temptation (for
Satan always gets more advantage against man when he is solitary, then
when he is with company) and also less hyndred by the world or any thing or
person therein, to conquire and get the victory of this enemy.

Led by the spirit) that is, he was conducted by the guidyng of Gods holy
spirit, according as God the Father in his wisdom had appointed. Whereby
arises unto us this doctrine very needful to be learned, and very
comfortable to be remembered, that (notwithstanding Satan 1. Pet. 5. 8
roareth night and day, and seeks by him self and his instruments,
continually to vex and trouble us, Luke. 22. 31
aiming at our destruction yet) all things are so determined and directed by
Gods mighty power and providence, that no vexation of body or spirit, can
befall us, without his will and appointment, whereof we have a notable example
in the servant of God Job 1. 12.
Job. whose estate, albeit Satan did greatly envy, yet until the Lord gave
power into the enemies hand against him, Satan can not touch us until God
give him leave.
he could neither touch his goods, his children, nor his person. The which if
we do learn aright, it will minister unto us manifold comfort and
instruction. For first it is unto us a notable shield against despair and
distrust that naturally grows in us, when we are in tribulations, to fear,
that our former estate is irrecouerable, or that the favor of God is clean
removed from us. For if we do consider with our selves that God is the author
of the afflictions of his people, A comfort in all afflictions.
and that they are not vexed without his appointement, and moreover that it is
his usual dealyng with his servants, it must needs teach us not to despise
the correction of the Lord, Heb. 12. 5.
neither faint when we are rebuked, for so much as he loves them, that he
corrects, and scourges every son that he receives. Again it will teach
us to take heed that we use no unlawful means to eschew the same: for when
we consider, that God, who (knows better then we what is needful for us)
has imposed the same upon us, A lesson to be practiced in afflictions.
it must needs make us very well contented with his gracious appointment:
never seeking to wynd our selves from under his hands by those means that be
unlawful, but patiently to abide his leisure for the removing thereof: at
whose good pleasure we shall be sure to be delivered, or else it shall come to
pass that the Lords correction (which he in love inflicted upon us) shall by
our misdemeanour be turned into the marks of his wrath and anger: Note this
well.
for that we have played the parts of unbridled coltes, striuyng to cast of
the Lords burden, and to wind our selves (as much as in us lies) out of his
government and protection: Moreover, it will teach us most carefully to use
all good and lawful means for the preuentyng of danger imminent, or the
remouyng of troubles present, in both which many do greatly offend: for some
are so secure and careless, that by their own negligente they procure to the^
selves many a woe, Two extremities to be avoided in respect of afflictions.
for that they have not prouidently foresene the evil approaching, others being
already fallen into extremity are not so vigilant in watchyng of all
opportunity of redress, in taking the occasions by those good means, which
their wise travail (by the blessing of God upon it) might have procured unto
them, against both which this doctrine does teach us a lesson to be noted,
that seeing afflictions come from God (and are not else good) who only knows
on whom, when and how they shall be imposed, if we desire to have no trouble but
which brings the favor of God with it, we must so prouidently forecast, and
use all good means so carefully, that we never be (through our own
negligence) the cause of our own trouble.

Of the Devil) that is, it was decreed of God the Father, and brought to pass
by the guidaunce of Gods spirit, that Jesus Christ (the Son of God) should
be tempted of the common enemy to God and man ( the Devil.) The name devil
describes the nature of our spiritual so.
The name wherewith he is here termed, does signify in the original tongue,
which the holy Ghost uses, a false accuser or a carpyng disgracer, that
seeks by all subtle cauilles to disgrace the truth and those that uphold it:
by which name is notably painted out unto us, the nature of our spiritual
adversary, to be a false accuser, and cauillyng wra^gler, which we may see by
him put in practice continually. Genesis 3. 5.
He falsely accused God, to cnuye the good estate of man, and therefore forbad
him the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Job. 1. 9. 10. 11.
He falsely accused Job to serve God, not with singleness of heart, in duty
and with an upright conscience, but because God had blessed him: and therefore
adueuched plainly and impudently, that if God would but touch him, Job would
curse him to his face: which, The qualities of the devil are in the wicked.
nature we may see also in his children that are marked with his stamp: For if
you talk with them of those that do unfeignedly fear God: they will either
falsely accuse them not to be the persons they make show for, (or the notes of
godliness appearyng in them most evident) yet they will so lessen, extenuate,
and clip the glory of their holy conversation, that they will be sure that
(as much as in the^ lies) they shall be disgraced. But (to return) the tempter
being thus described to be so cunning and so subtle, we may first see what
great care and diligent paynefulnesse must be in the course of our whole life,
that not alone in the matter of godliness, but also in the manner, we walk
very uprightly. What the subtilties of Satan must teach us.
For if our archeenimy or his members can but catch the least defect in the
simplest circumstaunce of any of our actions, they think it matter enough to
cavil upon, and sufficient occasion to speak against us and our whole
profession: Secondly we may behold the quality and affection of Satan in the
temptations of man, and thereby how it differreth from the mind of God in the
same: For Gods intent is to try his to fine them the more, that they may be
(as the purest gold) most glorious instruments for his praise: but the purpose
of Satan is, to darken, How God and Satan do both work in one action and
yet it is good in God evil in Satan.
extinguish, and utterly overthrow, all good things in man, and (at length) man
himself to endless perdition, and so the self same action appears good in
God, but evil in Satan.

Jesus was led.) The son of the eternal God, equal with the Father and one
with him, man like unto us in all things ( Heb. 4. 15.
yet without sin) was assailed of that spiritual adversary the devil. This
may seem very strange that he in whose nature was no corruption, (and
therefore no matter for Satan to work upon) should be tempted: but we are
first to consider that he was very man, How Christ could be tempted being
without natural corruption.
in whom all natural affections (which of themselves are not evil) rested:
which before they were corrupted, were capable of temptations, as we see in
Adam and Heua, who were created Genesis 1. 3.
exceedyng good, and yet sinned not, until they yielded to Satan's suggestions,
in which pure estate Christ Jesus is man. Secondly he took upon him out
nature, to the end that in the same he might overcome, (in which we are
conquered of Satan, when he is encountered only by our own power) so that it
is not only no strange thing, that he was tempted, but a thing most needful
for our benefit and comfortable for our consciences. The causes why Christ was
tempted.
The causes that moved him thereunto be further to be considered, which are in
number many: first, that he might (even in temptation) win that, which our
first parents lost, in which respect, the Apostle Paul makes an Antythesis
betwixt Adam Romans 5. 14.
and Christ, because the one did recover that which the other had lost, which
is not in matter only, but even in manner also. Secondly, that we might see and
know, what a professed enemy Satan is unto mankind, that durst presume to
assail (even) the son of God, when he was in the form of man. Thyrdly that
he might overcome in the flesh, to the end that we coming into the like
combat, and fighting against the same adversary, may learn not to quayle or
languishe, but valiauntly to set upon him, certainly hoping that as our head
overthrew him in the flesh, so will he give power to us (his weak members) to
do the same. Fourthly, that we may know, that temptations, trials, and
extremities whatsoever, can be fall unto man, are not signs of Gods
displeasure (as the world imagines) for so much as the son of God was
partaker of them. Fifthly that in his own person he might show the manner how
the adversary is to be resisted, that we (who are his members) and therefore
are to walk as he has set himself for an example, might learn to follow him
in the same. Sixthly that he having experience of temptations might have the
more Heb. 4. 15.
compassion toward us and therefore be more ready and willing at all assayes
to help us.

To be tempted) we see the party that was tempted, which temptation is first
set down in general, that he was tempted (as Luke says) for the space of
forty days, for (although the particular, and most especial trial is set
down afterward, and he is said to be there forty days) we must not
imagine that he was idle, but in that he was led thither to be tempted, it must
needs be, that he was in the whole course of that time assailed by the enemy.

Before we come to the particular temptations, let us consider briefly what is
to be found in the Scripture, of temptations, so far as may concern our
present instruction. The nature of the word tempted in the Hebrew and Greek
tounges.
And first for the word (which in our common speech is seldom spoken of but
in evil part) it is used in the Scriptures both in the Hebrew and Greek
tongue in more general signification, to try, and the same word is most
commonly used in both the languages, God tempts.
whether mention be made of good or evil tryalles, and is of it self (not
restrained to parties or circumstaunces) indifferently to be taken.

The parties that the Scriptures tell us, do tempt or try, be God, Satan,
and man: God is said to try Gene. 22 1.
Abraham Job. 7. 18 23. 10.
Job and the Israelites: Also Pharaoh Nabuchadnezar. etc. When the Lord tries
his servants, God tempts his two ways.
it is either with good success after sharp estate, or with extremity after
happy success, which is to the end that their faythfulnesse may appear, and
in all these things, they (setting God before their eyes, The mind of the
godly in trial.
the chief goodness of man and preferryng his obedience before their own
pleasures) do carry an even hand, acknowledgyng every condition to come of God.
The wicked on the other side, if the Lord try them with extremity, they burst
out into blasphemy as Exodus 5. 3
Pharaoh: or impatiencie as 2. Sam. 17. 23.
Achitophell: or else give them selves to all unlawful means of escape, as 1.
Sam. 28. 7.
Saul, if with good success in worldly blessings, they abuse them, some to
Epycurisme, as Luke. 16. 19.
Dives, some to pride as Dan. 4. 27.
Nebuchadnezar: some to revenge: 2. Sam. 14. 30.
as Absolon: some to forget God, as the Hose. 13. 6.
Israelites, so that by this may we notably examine our selves, how we stand
affected toward the Lord, for it is most certain, that we are within the
compass of one of these sorts of people, Satan tempted.
Satan tried, Job. 1. 26.
Job, Luke. 22 31.
Peter 1. Kings 22. 21
Achab. etc. For he sifteth both the godly and wicked, the godly by the sight
of Gods word and power of his spirit do resist him: the wicked take up all the
baytes laid for them and obey him: and therefore are not so properly said to be
tried. As for example, when he assayleth man to the breach of any of the
commandments of God and the practicing of any sin, the child of God seeing
that it is contrary to Gods word, (and therefore must needs be of the Devil)
strives by all good means, to overcome and to stand sure to the course of
true godliness. Contrariwise the wicked is carried away with the present
delight of sin, and coueteth the same with greedynesse. By this also we have
occasion to examine our selves in what estate we stand. The Scriptures tell us
also, that man does try: and that is two ways, either he tries God, Man
tempts God and man.
or he tries man: he tries GOD, when by continuance in sin, and presumyng
upon Gods mercies, he proves his patience, Exodus 14.
so did the Israelites often: such he, they among us, that when they hear that
God is merciful and ready to forgive do upon the same gather to them selves
immunitie to sin. But the Scripture speaks most fearfully, of such, that
Romans 3. 8.
their damnation is just, that they were Jude. 4.
foreordayned to that condemnation: that they abusing Gods Romans 2.
patience which should lead them to repentance, do heap up unto them selves
wrath against the day of wrath, he tries man, when he does any thing
wherewith to move his patience, or to grieve him: many such there be, who are
driven of Satan into such impudency and obstinacy, that they will not only
go on unto all sin, in the whole course of their life: but they will the
rather sin, if they think it will grieve him that is wont to reprove them,
clean forgetting that themselves, being the offenders, the vengeance of God
shall fall (not on the hearer, reproving it according to his Leuit. 19. 17.
duty) but on the doer of that whereby God is offended: This place is of
Christ Jesus his temptyng by Satan, and therefore is properly to be
understood of those temptations, Ephesians 5. 11.
wherewith the godly are assailed of Satan their sworn enemy, Heb. 10. 24.
Three causes move Satan to tempt the godly.
the causes that move him thereunto, be first in respect of God: 1. In respect
of God.
secondly of the godly thirdly of himself. 2. In respect of the godly.
Of God, for that he in justice has inflicted the pain of eternal woe upon
him for his rebellion, 3. In respect of himself.
(which he knows to be irreuocable and his former estate past recovery) and
therefore he labors (as he thincketh) to be revenged of God in assayling his
people: in vexing him in his servants: and seeking to lessen his kingdom by
seducing of those whom it has pleased God of his mercy to make worthy that
calling. He does it also in respect of man, whose estate he does envy, for
that it is better then his own, and therefore he labors by all extremities
that he can devise to vex him in the same, to make it less joyous unto him,
and to bring him, (if it were possible) to think his condition odious in his
own eyes: he does it moreover in regard of himself, who knowing that he is
finally to be damned, and that he is the king of hell, and Prince of perdition,
labors by all means to bring (if it could be) the very elect into the
compass of the same, for the enlargyng of his kingdom: being desirous to have
all others partakers with him in that endless torment whereunto he is finally
adjudged. The course that he takes in these temptations, is not forthwith to
set before the eyes of the godly, the thing that he aymeth at, (for he knows
that in soul they are brought to abhor it) but first he will sleyly suggest
into their minds, the cogitations and motions of his intent, which if they
rest upon, and do not forthwith beat them back, he will go a step further,
to wit, to bring them to consent thereunto: which once being gotten, there
remains nothing (for the party is won unto him) but to put ye same in
execution, the means whereof shall quickly be prompted into him: so that the
slightes of the enemy being so subtle, if ever we think to avoid the^ we
must have these two things, Two things required to resist Satan.
wisdom to discern him, and power to resist him. This wisdom is not
human, neither by nature, art nor experience, but the true knowledge of Gods
word, whereby to be able to discern the Phil. 1. 10
things that differ, without which we run headlong into our enemies hands
and (such is our natural blindness) chose to hearken to his motions and like
well of them, because he can turn him self into 2. Cor. 11. 14.
an Angel of light, and make virtue to seem ugly and vice beautiful unto
man, unto this wisdom and true knowledge is also power to resist him
requisite to be adjoined, for to no purpose were it, if we could never so
cunningly deciphar the subtilties of Satan and discern them at the first,
unless we be also able to resist him, (for else have we but gotten this, that
where other men go headlong into destruction and know not of it, we should
wittingly and willingly do the same) this power is no way to be sought or
found within our selves, or in any thing that we can do, but only of the
Lord, who as he is able, so is he willing to help all those that seek to
him: for so he says, Math. 11. 28.
come unto me all ye that travail and are heavy burdened and I will ease
you, Math. ^. 7.
ask and you shall have, seek and ye shall find, now this coming unto him
is by Faith, and repentance, carefully using those means that he has
prescribed in his word, and this must not only be, but it must also be without
delay, resisting the beginning. For Satan is far more easily driven back in
the first beginning, Satan must be resisted at the first.
then afterward when he has got more hold, for as by his continuance he
grows great in man, so does he daily lessen man's power to resist, and
therefore it is no putting of from day to day, as is the manner of the wicked
that know not God.

The things wherein he tempts, The things which he does tempt and the
reasons that he uses.
be diswading from every good thing, and persuading to the contrary: he
diswadeth from goodness, by showing the impossibility, the trouble and small
necessity of it: as for example when thou go about to seek to know Jesus
Christ out of his word for thy own comfort, he will tell thee, How he
dissuadeth from Religion.
that the Scriptures are exceeding long, merueilous hard to be understood, and
thou have such and such business to employ thy self about, that it is
impossible that ever thou should attain unto it: Also, that the troubles
which do accompany such a course be innumerable and intolerable, as these, the
world will note thee to be a puritan, and so thou shall be come odious unto
thy friends, who heretofore have loved thee: persecutions have ever been
styrred up against such persons, so that whereas thou now dwell safe and
have the world at will, thou shall be in hazard of losses, disquietnesse and
great vexation, whereas heretofore thou have taken thy pleasure in every thing,
now must thou leave them, thou must lay aside thy pomp and bravery, thy
dayntenesse and delights, so that thou had better be out of the world then
to live so austerely, besides this he will tell thee, that it is a thing, not
so needful, for the depth of knowledge belongs to Divines and great learned
me^^it is sufficient for thee to know a little, being a private man^ and to be
so strict in thy life as to follow Gods word in all points, is but curiosity,
and to much scrupulousnes, for man is not saved by his works, but by Gods
mercy, and if thou should do thus, they would think, that thou art
singular and contemnest all others in respect of thy self, so does he deal in
seducing from every good thing he will make thee think thou shall never
attain unto it, it were a turmoyle unto thee to practice it, and it is a thing
not so needful, The remedies against it.
you shall do well enough without it. But the child of God is to learn, that if
it be a thing that God has commanded, a thing whereby god may gain glory and
his Church benefit, and thine own soul comfort, you must be of an invincible
courage, never despair at the troubles, but commit the success to him that
commands: and to know that it is a thing that is most needful, or else God
was unwise to enjoin it to thee: Again, he persuades to evil by so many
contrary reasons, propounding, the profit, and pleasure, and remouyng the
pain and terror. How he persuades unto sin
He will tell thee the necessity of it, how you can not be without it in this
world, how beneficial and delightful it is unto thee, and how easy to be
attained. As for example, when he would have thee of no Religion, but a plain
Atheist and tymeseruer, he will tell thee, that the worlds estate is ticklishe
and uncertain, subject to change and alteration, so that if thou should
stand stiffly to one Religion, thou should be in danger of great trouble,
therefore use thy self so, in the time of this Religion, that when a contrary
does come, thou may be ready also to profess that, the necessity and
pleasure of it is great, for so shall thou be sure to have all thy possessions
to thy self, and thy posterity, thou shall live quietly without any fear of
alteration. And for the course it self it is very easily to be attained: for
if thou do only in a little outward appearaunce, satisfy the worlds request
it is sufficient. But all this while he steals out of thy mind, the view of
Gods severe vengeance against careless caytiffes, his horrible punishment to
them that are Revel. 3. 15.
neither hot nor cold, to them that Luke. 12. 9.
deny him before men: and this or the like cause Satan takes in perswadyng to
any sin. The remedy against it.
But the true Christian for the avoiding of these sleightes, must remember that
there is but one God, and therefore no Religion can please him but one, that he
created and I redeemed man to serve him, Luke. 1. 74.
and therefore he may not make a small account of it: Math. 10 25.
his soul is more precious then his body, and therefore it must principally
be provided for: the Lords protection is over his people, and therefore they
need Psalm 56. 4
not fear what man can do unto them: Romans 8. 28.
all things fall out of the best for the that fear God, and therefore come
death, or life, loss of goods or whatsoever else, The godhest are tempted most.
it shall be good for me: the parties that feel these temptations most, be
the holiest and the godlyest persons, as we see by David, Paul, and Jesus
Christ in this place. For the further that a man is gone from his allegeaunce,
the sorer foe he is unto him, and endeavors the more earnestly to reclayme
him again: but the other, that are not yet regenerated, he possesses wholly
in peace, and they obey him without resistaunce. For (being blind for lack of
knowledge, and senseless of sin) they are led blindfold by him and willingly
into destruction, It is a thing not evil but good to be tempted.
and therefore to be tempted, is not as man thinks a detestable, but a
comfortable thing, and therefore the James. 1. 2.
Apostle James exhorts us to account it an exceedyng joy, when we fall into
diverse temptations. Most ignorauntly then do they wish that seeing godly ones in
afflictions of mind, say (as is the manner of many) they would not for all the
world be in that case, al one as if the should say they would not for all the
world be out of the clutches of the Devil, nor be the soldier of Christ
Jesus, to did him battle. This temptation in the godly is effectual diverse
ways: First it aduaunceth greatly the glory of GOD: The effect of the
temptations of the godly.
for when so strange and subtle an enemy, so greatly experienced in deceit,
shall be vanquished by so mean an instrument as a man, weak and subject to so
many infirmities, the power of GOD appears most mighty, 1. Gods glory.
and his might most gloriously performed in 2. Cor. 12 9.
weakness. 2. Satan's overthrow.
Again it gives notable overthrow to the enemy, and disappointeth him of his
purposes: for being resisted he James. 4. 7.
flies away. Lastly it is beneficial to the party tempted two ways: First
it assures his soul of the love of God the Father to him, 3 The benefit of
the party tempted two ways.
whose presence he has experience of, in the beating back of so puissaunt an
adversary: Secondly it confirms the minds of the brethren to be fully
persuaded, that God does love him (and therefore to have all holy communion with
him) because they see that Satan (whose power and sleightes they are not
ignorant of) has so notable an overthrow in so weak an instrument.

The second Sermon.
Verse. 2. 3. 4. 2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights,
he was afterward hungry.

3. Then came to him the tempter, and said, If thou be the son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

4. But he aunswering, said, It is written, man shall not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.


ANd when he had. Now come we to the consideration of the particular trial
(which I so call in respect, that it is expressed to us in more particular
manner) before which is to be considered, his preparation thereunto contained
in the words followyng.

( When he had fasted forty days and forty nights) that is when he had
been in the wilderness among the wild beasts, and tasted no manner of food
for the space of forty days and forty nights, in all which time, he was
not hungry, neither had any desire of corporal nourishment, for it is said,
that he was afterward hungry. The Papists (who Apishly do counterfete How
the Papists reason for their Lento^ Fast.
every thing in the Scriptures, especially those that do no way appertain unto
them) would ground upon this place their Lenton Fast, and that (forsooth) they
reason: Is not all that is written, set down for our learning? is not every
action of Christ our instruction? does he not bid us learn of him? and that
we must take up our Cross and follow him: all which (so long as they speak
generally) is true: and (being rightly applied) is also in particular true: but
it does not follow that therefore every action that Christ Jesus did, it is to
be imitated of us. For the Evangelists do commend unto us, Three sorts of
actions done by Christ of which the last only is to be followed.
three sorts of actions done by our Savior Christ Jesus: the first are the
actions that were to be done for the accomplishment of the work of our
redemption, to wit, to be begotten without the help of man, to be borne of a
Uirgin, to satisfy the wrath of God on the Cross for the redemption of man:
to rise again the third day: to ascend to the right hand of god the Father and
there to make intercession for man unto god. Which no man will say, that we
must follow. The second sort are his miracles, which he wrought in the world,
as turnyng water into wine, walking upon the Seas, causing the surgyng waves
to cease with his word, healing (in a moment) the sick, clensing the leapers,
raising the dead: in the number whereof is this fasting, all which were done,
not that we should strive to do the like, which never man could do saving those
to who^ (in wonderful manner) he gave the gift of doing miracles, as the
Apostles in the primative Church, for the further confirmyng of their doctrine
among the gentiles, but partly to show most evidently, that he is very god and
therefore the true M^^sias: and partly for the more assurance and confirmation
(as the John. 20. 31.
Evangelist John says) of our faith: The third sort of actions be, his
obedience to god his father: his humility in submitting him self (even to the
least) to do them good: his patience in all extremities: and his love (even) to
his enemies: which we are not only to labor to follow in some measure, but
(which more is) to propounde unto our selves his perfection therein, and never
to content our selves with any scantlyng, but always to strive to be more and
more conformed thereunto by imitatyng of him: But let us a little consider how
aptly their actio^ is proportionably unto their pattern, Christ's fasting and
the Papists differ in five points.
Christ in that whole space eat nothing at all, they will only refrain from
certain meats of their own shoulyng out, and in all others gordge themselves
in most delicate manner: Christ did it but once and never after, they must do it
every year once: Christ did it, led by the spirit, they do it of their own
head, without the direction of gods spirit, for they have no warrant for it in
the word, and the spirit goes not without the company of the word: Christ
(only did it) and forbad no particular meats, they allow certain meats and
forbid the rest, and so 1. Tim. 4. 2. 3. Augustine Epist. 86. to Castulanus.
why Christ fasted forty days and 40. nights.
teach the doctrine of Devils: Lastly, Christ prescribed no set time of
abstine^ce, nor the Apostles after him, neither knew the primative Church any
for 400. years after they prescribe a determinate time (by an inviolable law
under ye great eurse) as that of the Meedes and Persians which may not be
altered. But let them go, and let us come to the right use of this action,
which is, first in fulfillyng that which the like (of Erod. 34 25.
Moses deliueryng the law and 1. King. 19. 8.
Eliah restoring the law) did prefigure: to show that it is he who is the end
of the law, and the fulfiller of the same, to the turnyng away of the curse,
which through the breach thereof was due unto all mankind: Secondly, it is to
show that great and extraordinary actions are not to be enterprised lightly or
rashly, but with great and singular preparation, which being not observed among
us. the Lord does justly punish our headynes, with ill success (as is
especially to be seen in ye course of the Magistracy and Ministry of this
whole land) the Lord lay it not to their charge whose fault it is.

He was afterward hungry) that is for the space of the 40. days he was not
hungry. But when they were ended he was: which declares plainly that it was an
exceeding miracle, and therefore not of us to be followed: A proof that Christ
was very man.
we learn by this, first, that Christ Jesus though he was the eternal son
of the everlasting God, yet he was also true and very man: for else could he not
be subject unto hunger, which is the proper passion of the flesh and blood:
Again he being hungry was in the wilderness, Extremity no cause of despair.
and had no present means to releive him, to teach us, for our comfort, that
we being in the like distress, yet are we not to despair of gods providence,
neither to condemn our selves as out of the favor of god: for so much as it
was, the condition of the son of god himself. But (which is the special
drift of this place) Satan came then unto him to tempt him in special manner,
Satan can espy his fittest opportunity and take it.
to show us the cunnyng of this Fox, that does then assail the son of God
in the matter of food) as we shall see anon) when he is hu^gry, for he can
watch his times, when most opportunity serves, and when or where man is
weakest and most like to be most easily overthrown. Which we may see
observed by the holy ghost in the Scriptures to be his wonted manner: He set not
upon Eve while the Lord was placyng her with her husband, nor while Adam Gene.
3. 2
was with her, but when she was alone most destitute of succor: neither did
he begin with Adam when he meant the overthrow of mankind, but with the woman
the weaker vessel: he labored not with David (to entice him to adultry)
before he was king, being set an work (by the malice of his foes) with
continual trouble, nor after he was king either in his wars with his foraine
adversaries, or in his house being compassed with his servant and subjects,
but when he was Sam. 22. 2.
walkyng (alone) on the roof of his palace: he sought not to fifth Peter while
he was in the company of Christ Jesus and his Disciples (whose presence and
comfort might have supported him) but when he was among a company of rakehels
the high Luke. 22. 55.
Priests seruyng men by the fire side. The Scripture is full of such examples,
and all is to this end, to teach us diligently to stand upon our guard and to
watch our own ways very warely, for when we seem in our own eyes in most
happy estate, then are we most easily deceived, so simple we be in spiritual
matters and so subtle our enemy is to take us at the advantage.

Then the tempter came unto him) the manner of the special temptation
follows, which may seem to be either in visible presence, The te^pter came
not unto Christ in visible manner, but in motion.
(as some have taken this place) or in sound of voice unto the outward ears:
but if we do compare his coming with the manner of his proceedyng, and consider
of Christ's temptations according to the right end thereof, we shall plainly
perceive, that this coming of the tempter unto hin, is only in motion, for
where it is said in the words following hereafter, that he showed him all the
kingdoms of the world in a moment, if his temptyng of him were in corporal
manner, it were impossible. For though Christ be God (and therefore infinite) yet
is he in body finite, and was in his corporalleyes able (only) to see so
far as another man, which is not the thousand part of the world, and
therefore it must be in motion that he did show them unto him, and so
consequently he came unto him not in bodily manner, but by offering unto him
such cogitations: Again Christ Jesus taking upon him our estate, not only to
redeem us, but also to be an example unto us, how can his temptations be our
comfort when we are tempted, if they were of diverse kinds. For it is evident,
that the temptations of Gods children be inward by cogitations, and therefore
the holy Ghost in the Epistle to the Hebrews, says notably, that Heb. 4. 15.
he was tempted in all things like unto us, this only excepted that his
temptations were (in him without sin) so that it serves to our great
comfort, that whenever Satan does any way seek to draw us away from the
faith and love of our God, or comfort of our souls, be his thoughts never so
secret and slye, yet it is no strange thing (though it be strange to us) for
so much as he attempted the same, or the like (even) against our head.

If thou be) now come we to the first assault which has in it (being rightly
considered) two branches, first he labors to bring him to deubte whether
he be the son of God or no: secondly to cause him use unlawful means for
the satisfying of his hunger: ( If thou be the son of God) as if he should
say, thou take thy self to be the son of God, and in deed such a voice
was heard in the air, when thou wast baptized, which to be so, is justly to be
doubted. For the son of God is the heir of all, to him must all Angels give
obedience, and all creatures do service and be at his beck: how can it then
be that thou should be he, and yet be in such extremity, not only to
lack the host of heaven to show thy majesty, but even to want the necessary
food that should refresh thy body: it is impossible that the Lord of heaven
and earth should suffer his own son, whom he loves to come to such
extremity. This is a marvelous sore temptation, which not only befell to
Christ the head, but even is incident also unto his members. If we look into
the book of Job and all those speeches that his three friends ( Eliphaz
Bildad, and Sophar) uttered concerning the power, wisdom and justice of God,
we shall see that they do tend only to this, that Job being in such
extremity could not be in the favor of God so highly as he professed,
neither could it be, if his so glorious profession (in the time of his peace)
had been sincere and single, that ever he should fall into such misery. This
motion comes too often, and sticks to near (not the ribs) but the heart
of the dearest child of God. For if we consider the present estate of our
souls, how weak and faint our faith is, Satan would persuade the godly to be
out of the favor of God, because they are in trouble of 1 mind.
yea and how it is (to our own feeling) often times utterly gone, our sins
which we profess to be buried in oblivion with the Lord, and utterly to be
rased out in the bloudsheding of Christ Jesus, do yet notwithstanding (often)
so assail us, lie so heavy upon us, and are so vitter unto us, as if the very
pains of hell had already seized and taken possession of us. In which case,
(the holiest do best know, how often) the motion of doubting comes into our
minds, saying unto us, if God the father loved me, I should see his
countenance: if Christ Jesus were my head, I should taste of his graces: if my
sins were forgiven me, they would not so press and oppress me: how can it
be that the severe countenance of God should be turned to them, whom he
loves. Again for the estate of our bodies: 2 Of body.
notwithstanding that the righteous are the Math. 5. 5.
heirs of heaven and earth, for that they be Romans 8. 17.
fellow heirs with Christ Jesus their head, yet how many are their miseries
here, in 2. Cor. 11 25, 10. 29.
poverty, in sickness, in travail in turmoyle, in slander and reproach, in
troubles for the profession of the truth: in troubles about the matters of this
life: in troubles with their wives, and wives with their husbands: with their
children and servant, hated of them that know them, and the^ that never saw
them, yea even of their dearest and nearest friends after the flesh. Then
comes in this motion, can I persuade my self to be in the favor of GOD,
being beset with such a world of trouble, and compassed about with so great a
sea of molestations? The example of Christ is comfort to the afflicted whether
in soul or in body.
against all these and such like, our Savior Christ's example does minister
unto us most singular comfort: for concerning the grief of soul, for sin,
was ever any man more or so much laden as he was when (having not his own but
our sins laid upon him) he suffered the very torments of hell, in such wise
that he burst out into these speeches of most bitter agony, Math. 27 46.
my God my God why have thou forsaken me? again for the troubles of the body,
does any thing befall unto thee that he felt not? thou lackest food, he was
Math. 4. 2.
hungry and had nothing, to eat: you have no possession, neither any worldly
stay to take to, he had Luke. 11. 58.
not where to hyde his head: thy fri^des become thy foes, his own Psalm. 55. 13.
servant and scholar betrayed him, thy own kinsfolks like not of thee, and
he had such good entertainment of his, that he says Math. 13 57.
that a Prophet is not without honor, save in his own country and among his
own kindred: the world hates thee without a cause, so it did Psalm. 35. ^
him, being without sin: they reward thee evil for good, he Luke. 19. 41. 23.
21.
went over Jerusalem, and would have gathered them as the hen gathers her
chickins, and they cried Acts. 2. 36.
Crucify him, Crucify him: Thou wishes and workest their wealth and they
abuse thee, he wrought their salvation, and they nailed him to the Cross, so
that his example in all our extremities is our stay and comfort, that
whatsoever befall unto us (although it seem strange unto us, for that we have
not been experienced in it, and for that it is unpleasant unto flesh and
blood) not only he himself has broken the Ise, and gone through the same
to give us an example: but even it has been the continual course that God has
set his dearest and best beloved servants to wade through from time to time.

Command that these stones be made bread) this is the second branch of
this temptation, The speech of Satan unto the Son of God.
which Satan subtly infers upon the other, either in particular being
confessed, or in general being denied: for the particular he reasons thus:
If it be so that thou will not be brought from that by no means, but that
thou will needs hold it for an undoubted truth, that thou art the very son
of God, then know this, that every thing is at thy commau^deme^t and will be
obedient at thy word, therefore (that thou may be provided for now in thy
extremity, and not languishe for want of food) seeing that here is no ordinary
way of provision, command these stones that they leave their natural
hardness, and become convenient nourishment for thine hungry body: a
conclusion in reason very plausible, for God may do what he will and who may
find fault with it? for there is no law, to the law giver, but he that made it
may dispense with it, and he that is above it, is exempted from it. If you
mark it well, Satan under pretense of Christian liberty persuades to sin.
the whole drift of Satan is, to show Christ what great liberty he has, and
to persuade him to use it: which is a temptation that the godly are much
haunted withal, for when Satan cannot persuade them by all the extremities
that are incident unto them both in soul and body, that they are out of the
favor of God, the^ comes he with a counterbuffet showing them the largeness
of their liberty, and how many things are lawful for him that is not under
the law but under grace. Which is a very sore temptation and preuayleth with
many in very many things that are evidently forbidden in the word of God,
especially, carelessenes and worldlynesse which we are to be very wary of, for
it is a great step toward that fearful estate of those that Jude. 4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and those that think they may sin,
Romans 3. 8.
because they are not under the law, but under grace. Whose damnation the holy
Ghost pronounces to be just, and who were before ordained to condemnation. But
it behooves the true Christian ever to stand upon this term: that though he be
freed from sin, yet is he carefully to strive against sin, though he be
brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, yet is it not that he
should any way serve sin, but being freed from the stynge and guilt of sin,
and the curse of the law, might Romans 6. 13.
give over his members to serve the living God Luke. 1. 74.
in all righteousness and true holiness all the days of his life: Now for the
general he reasons thus: Satan te^pteth to distrust Gods providence.
surely thou can not be the son of God, for else would he provide for thee:
and therefore thou must even make shift for thy self, by some means as thou
can, for surely God forgets to be careful for thee, in that he offers
not present means of help. And this is also a sore temptation, and such a one
as has overtaken the dear children of God. For Gen^. 12 13.
Abraham not seeing lawful means to avoid the cruelty of the Aegiptians,
did use unlawful, by teaching his wife to lie: Sara 16. 2.
in laughyng after the promised seed gave her maid to her husband: Lot 19. 8.
(to protect the strangers) offerred his daughters to be abused of the
Sodomites, the Exodus 1. 19.
midwiues of Egypt to save the children, lied to the king, Rahab Iosu. 2. 4.
to save the spies, lied to them of Jericho, the Scripture is full (but the
world is more full) of such examples: for many that would loath an evil
intent, does Satan overtake in this to make them to bring a good thing to
pass by unlawful means, How he prevails with them that would be rich.
or to do evil under the pretense and show of goodness: the man that
thirsts after gain, and desires to be rich, commits many a wicked fact
in ye course of his trade, as in facyng, lyeing, swearyng, exacting, inhansing,
deceiuyng, and what not? and all under pretense of this, we must live we must
utter our wares, we must follow our trade, How he prevails with the^ that are
in extremity.
we must provide for our family. The man that is in any extremity, in body,
in goods or credit, will easily strive by all lawful unlawful means, to
wind himself out, as for example, if thou be poor, the devil will tell thee
thou must steal, for thou must live: if thou buy an evil bargayne, and be
like to have great loss (thou must color the matter and post it over into an
other man's neck, for thou must not willingly be undone) if thou would
persuade an other in a thing which he will hardly believe, thou may curse and
swear (for else he will not believe thee) but all this while in what estate are
they? even in the same that Satan would have persuaded Christ Jesus that he
was in, namely to be forsaken of God, to be left to their own provision,
then which there cannot be a more heinous sin against the Lord: we must
learn then (if we will profit by this doctrine) not only (in most careful
wise) to go about that which is good, but also to attempt it by godly and
lawful means, least while Satan overtake us not in the matter, he go
behind us in the manner.

But Jesus said unto him it is written. etc.) The answer of Christ Jesus unto
this subtle cavil of Satan is, The answer of Christ unto Satan.
thus much in effect: I know that the ordinary way which God my heavenly
father has appointed to nourishe his children withal, is bread (by which the
Scripture means all kind of but yet he is not tied unto y^ course food)
always, his providence is larger, then that it should fail, where ordinary
means are wanting, and therefore though I see not in the course of nature any
present food for my repast, yet his protection is not so strait laced that
he is not able any other ways to provide for me, unless I do that which is
unlawful to be done, especially at thy commandment: and for the assurance
of this which I speak against thy cauilling lie, I have the express word of
God on my side to overthrow thee: so that this being (in brief) the sum and
substance of the answer of our Savior Christ, does minister unto us diverse
doctrines for our instruction. We must fight against Satan with the word of
God.
First we learn with what weapons we must fight against Satan, our spiritual
enemy, for Christ who is our captain, of us is to be followed encountering
with Satan his sworn enemy, does lift up against him this weapon: ( it is
written) that is beats him back with the word of God, which is therefore
called Ephesians. 6. 17.
the sword of the spirit for that it is Heb. 4. 12.
sharper then a two edged sword, cuttyng down all imaginations whatsoever are
reared up against the truth: and faith which is engendered in the heart of man is
called the Ephesians. 6. 16.
shield to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, being of force by reason
of that righteousness of Christ Jesus (wherewith it is lined) to discry and
drive away all the temptations of Satan, What a horrible fin it is, to take
the preaching of Gods word from men.
be they thrown against it never so cu^ningly, those then that do deprive
men of this heavenly and only defense for their souls, from the hands of
Satan, whether they he Papists denying the use of the Scriptures to
ignorant people, or carnal Gospellers which think preaching not so
needful, so that service (as they call it) be read distinctly, and therefore
upon every thing wherewith they are disconte^ted, will seek to must or
utterly displace (even) him that has all the gifts (in notable measure)
required by S. Paul out of the Lords byneyard, that he should not dress it.
Let the^ pretend what they can, and allege what siggeleaues it please them
wherewith to hide their shame, they are guilty of the destruction of so many
souls as by them might have been instructed, and shall be arayned, and (without
repentance) convicted of high treason against Jesus Christ, in the day of
Judgment, and shall be found guilty of sin so much more heinous the^ that of
Judas, by how much the betraying of thousands of souls into the hands of
Satan, to eternal death, is greater then the delivering of the body of one
innocent man, to the temporal death of the body. Besides these (for so much as
the blood of the sheep though it shall be Ezekiel. 33. 8.
required at ye hand of the shepherd, yet the sheep shall dye in his own
sins) they also that either for covetousness will not help forward: or for
worldliness will not attend unto: or for negligence frequent not, The
despisers of the preaching of the Gospel be wilful murderers.
or by blindness esteem not, the continual and ordinary preaching of the
gospel (though they think it a thing not so needful and therefore come not
unto it, until they have nothing else to do) for so much as (else) they lie open
for Satan to wound the^ at his pleasure, they shall also be convicted in the
day of reckoning, for guilty, of wilful murdering their own souls. A
comparison.
For if we say, (and that truly) that he who will venture with charge of money
alone, to travail over places suspected for robbery, without his weapons, is
worthy to be robbed, for that he runs into the hands of his enemy: much
rather shall he be so esteemed of almighty God a caster of himself willingly
into the hands of the devil, that trauailyng by y^ theeuish places of this
world (I mean the roaring of Satan) regards not to have this sword of Gods
word girt to his side, nor to be fenced with the sheilde of faith, but going on
in the course of flesh and blood, runs willingly where Satan will have him,
and sees it not, for that he is blind Math. 22 29.
not knowing the Scriptures for his direction defense and comfort. If the truth
of this were surely settled into our souls that we were persuaded it were so,
we should have a more lust and longing, for the knowledge of Gods word, then
yet ever we had, and (even) spare some time from our necessary affairs of
this world, (much more from our vanities and fleshly pleasures) for the
public hearing and private reading of that word by which we shall be John. 14.
48.
judged in the end. Again, Christ Jesus being God, having the whole world at
his commandment, might have beat him back by the power of his might, and
never have spoken word to him: But we are to note that as he came into the
world, to be our redeemer, so did he likewise, to set us an example
continually in such cases as befell unto him, to be followed. For which cause
he takes not himself to his power as he is God: Satan is not resisted as we
think good, but as Christ has given us an example.
But to the word prescribed unto man, to teach us, that if we will buckle with
Satan in deed, and if ever we will truly persuade our selves of hope of
victory, we must learn to resist him, not as we in our own foolish wisdom
think meet, but according as our head (whereunto we must be conformed) Christ
Jesus has given us an example in his own person: A lesson very needful to
be put in practice, which very few have yet learned. For if you came to him
that sins and (according to your Leuit. 19. 17.
duty) reproving him, and persuading him to amendment, Ephe. 5. 11.
do wish him to beware of the subtlety of Satan, Heb. 10. 24.
and take heed that he carry him not headlong into perdition: tushe (says
he) I defy the devil and all his works, I trust he shall never have power
over me: I trow, I am not so simple, but I know, what is what, How the wicked
think of the enemy of their souls.
and in the mean while he makes no conscience of any sin: cares not for
the knowledge of the word of God: but rather mocketh and molesteth them that do
and all this while he persuadeth himself that the devil can never come near
him: when (poor soul) he is even running headlong to destruction and sees it
not. How Satan deceives the wicked.
But Satan will give the leave (nay he will teach thee) to defy him: to spit
at the namyng of him: and to rail against him: and make thee believe it is
sufficient, and yet will have thee take the way that goes directly unto hell:
if we (then) will learn to be wise, we must have Gods word in our hearts to
light us: in our mouths to speak for us: and in our conversation, to rule us
and then we shall be sure to stand fast. The place of Scripture which Christ here
uses, is written in the eight Chapter of the book of Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
Deuteronomie: where the holy Ghost (by the mouth of Moses) exhorting the
people of Israel to obedience unto Gods commandments, shows how the Lord
did in most wonderful manner, try, and provide for them in the wilderness,
not geuyng them an ordinary means to get their meat withal, but in
miraculous wise fed them with Manna from heaven: to show that it is not bread
only that man lives by: but by every word of God: that is every decree and
determination, that God in his wisdom sees meet to put in execution, for so
much as he can both make Luke. 12. 15:
abundance, of meats to be unprofitable for the preseruations of man's life:
and also preserve man in all extremities, when food is wantyng and not to be
had Which does teach us first, y^ God is not tied to outward means. God is
not tied to means, but can work his will with out them as well as with them.
We may never use unlawful means.
But at his good pleasure both can and will feed man, as well with bread, as
without it, and provide for man when all help of the creature fails: which
is a sure staff to lean unto, in the time of extremity and distress. Again
that we take heed, that to the auoydyng of any inconvenience, we never use any
unlawful ways, or commit any sin against God, for our own benefit, or
ease: both which we see most notably practiced by those Dan. 3. 16 17. 18.
three faithful servant of God, condemned by Nabuchadnezar to be burned in
the fiery furnace, saying O Nabuchadnezar, An example never to be forgotten.
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter, behold our God whom we
serve, is able to deliver us from the hot fiery furnace, and he will deliver
us out of thy hand O king: but if not: be it known unto thee (O king) that we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image thou have set up: where
we see (for our example) 1. how they confess the power of God. 2. believe to
have the benefit of it in their distress, 3. determine to suffer any
extremity rather then to sin against God. O that such faith, such zeal,
such fear, and obedience were in us: then should Gods power shine among us
more wonderfully in preseruyng his and showing him self their God, the^ it
does. We learn further by this place, that as God is not tied to means,
Without Gods blessing no mean* can do us good.
but can help without it when he list, and will when it is meet for his glory
and the comfort of his: so also he is not tied unto means to give it a
blessing, for we see many that have outward helps at will, and yet the
blessing of God, not being upon them, they are unprofitable unto them. Which
doctrine (for our instruction) has a double use: first in particular
concerning food (which is especially here mentioned) that for so much as God
has given man leave to use all his creatures, and to feed of them (yet with
prayer, Tim. 4. 5 With what affection we must receive our ordinary food.
and thankesgeuyng) that we never presume to lay hands upon the same to apply
them to our bodies in the nourishment thereof, but first we call upon the name
of God, that his blessing may be upon the same, that he would sanctify them
unto us, and us unto him self in such manner, that they may be of force (by
his power given unto them) to nourish our bodies: knowing that howsoever the
use of them be common, and therefore seem unto carnal men to have power in
them selves to give nourishment: yet we know by faith grounded on Gods own
word, that he that made bread, not only ca^ but also has threatened that he
will, for the disobedience of man, Leuit. 2^ 26. Ezekiel. 4. 16. 5^ 16. Hag. 1. 6.
break the staff of bread, that is take away his blessing from it, that it
being eaten shall not feed nor nourish us. Which lesson I would to God that
the profane and Godless people of the world could once learn: who groueling
upon the ground like hogs, and never lifting up their minds to God the
author of all those blessings that they plentifully inioye, do fall to their
food like the horse to his prouender, How the wicked come to and go from
their mea^
and being satisfied, depart away like the beast of the field with out
understanding: and as for him, by whose meats they are satisfied, he never
comes into their remembrance, unless it be by tearyng him in pieces to
blaspheme his most holy name. But if they did know, that even while they sit
eating and drinckyng, the hand of God Dan. 5. 4.
writteth upon the wall, determinyng their destruction, if they knew how GOD
made the Number: 1 20.
quayles (a dainty food) to come out at the nostrells of the Israelites in
most loathsome sort: or if they considered that GOD might justly choke them
with every morsel that enters into their mouths, they would be more
careful to learn the lesson taught by the holy Ghost, that i. Cor. 10 31.
whatsoever we do, whether we eat or drink or what else soever, that all must
be done to the glory and praise of God, who is to be blessed for ever and ever.
It is also a lesson to us in general, concerning all the rest of Gods
creatures: that for as much as a man may be great, and cursed of God, as was
Pharaoh: rich and go to hell with Dives: that we do not build our selves
strong upon them, thinkyng if we have them, who may control us? and so do
what we list (as we see it is the manner of men that know not god) but
contrariwise, The right use of worldly blessings.
saying with our selves, if god mean to send a famine upon me, all the corn
in my garner shall not save me: if plague and pestilence, my walled houses
cannot preserve me from it: if fire and sword, my riches will not help me: and
therefore that we pray continually unto god, that he will so bless his own
riches bestowed upon us, and so guide us in the use of the same, that he by us
and them, may be glorified, and not they turned as faggots to increase the
fire of his wrathful indignation against us.

The third Sermon.
Verse. 5. 6. 7. 5. Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set
him on a pinnacle of the Temple.

6. And said unto him. If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down: for
it is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their
hands they shall lift thee up, least at any time tho^ should dash thy foot
against a stone

7. Jesus said unto him, It is written agay^ Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God


THen the Devil took him up) we have seen the subtlety of Satan, against
the son of God in the first temptation, and how he in most notable manner
has driven him back, and put him to the foil: Satan will not cease when he
has the repulse.
a man would think that now Satan should see, that he is the son of God,
and so never attempt any more to assail him, for fear of an other repulse,
but he plays the part of an invincible fighter, that having offered a blow to
the head, and seeing it warded, does offer again, not at that place, but at an
other: hopyng if he cannot speed, at one place, that yet he may hit in an
other: for Satan offers not again, with the same temptation, but tries an
other way clean contrary unto the other, as we shall see hereafter. The first
thing that offers it self to our consideration is the time when this second
temptation was, namely forthwith upon the end of the other. Wherein may seem
to arise a doubt: for seeing that Luke tells us that this was the last, (...)
Matthew (here) that it was presently (...) the first, they may seem to be
co^^ra^^ne to the other. But we are to note (for the solution of the doubt)
that it is not the purpose of the Evangelists to be precise in the obseruyng
of y^ times, but carefully to set down y^ thing, and therefore did every one of
them (as we see if we co^ferre the^ together) set down the things as they came
conveniently to hand. Now for so much as this second temptation is in a matter
clean contrary unto the former, and we know (by the word of God and our own
experience) that it is the course of Satan, so to assail: it may appear that
Matthew has rather set them down according to the time wherein they were done,
then Luke. The thing then that we are first to insiste upon in this place, is,
the time of this temptation (that is) when the first trial was ended, then
began the second to be taken in hand. Whereby we are first to learn this
lesson, that when one storm or trouble is past, We may not after one victory
against Satan look for continual quietness.
and the grief of one affliction ended, we must not then look to rest
vnmolested: which is worthy to be noted, for we see that flesh and blood
naturally, persuadeth it self, that (one broyle being once overcome) we shall be
in quietness and security afterward: but we may not be lulled in the cradle
of security in such manner, but learn, that for so much as our life Job. 7. 1.
is a continual warrefare: and man is 5. 7.
borne to travail as the bird to fly: and Satan is a sworn enemy to our
peace and well fare: that we assure our selves so long as we tarry in this body
4. 19.
of clay, we shall be sure that the end of one trouble must be the beginning of
an other, It is needful for us in the end of one trouble, to look for another.
and surely the due consideration of this brings great case unto him that
weyeth it a right. For what is the cause that we see so many in trial and
tribulation, either impatient, or counting it intolerable, utterly to relent
but only this, that they have promised unto them selves peace and safety,
dream of an heaven upon earth, and hoping to live as they would wish? who
being disappointed of their purpose, and falling into such a sodden sorrow
(which they never thought upon) do most lamentably increase unto themselves
their own woe. If then we will profit aright by this doctrine, we must
rather look for the worse, then the best, and the^ shall no estate too much
move us, but in every condition (whether of prosperity or adversity) we shall
set our hand Luk 9. 62
to the plough, not lookyng back, and so shall be found meet for the kingdom
of God. Again it ministers unto us a doctrine of exceeding comfort, for
though troubles come, one in the neck of an other, yet is not our whole life
one only trouble, without intermission. Wherein appears the exceedyng love
of our good and gracious God, who knowing our weakness, and pitieng our
estate, has in his unspeakable wisdom, so tempered the afflictions of his
servants, that yet in the midst of the same, he gives exceedyng comfort.
Gods great love appears in the manner of our afflictions.
For he knows well enough, that if our warrefar should be one, and ever in
like manner, without intermission, or alteration, we should fainte long before
we come to the goal. Therefore it has pleased his gracious Majesty, to make
them many and diverse, and to make them short, that we might have experience of
his presence, in our deliuerau^ce and so be hartened on to encounter again
with the more valor, Why our troubles be many and short, and not over large
in continuance.
knowing that the enemy being heretofore beaten back, will again be more
easily overthrown, when he sees y^ victorer set upon him a fresh: And also
have daily proof of the present hand of God to assiste us against that huge
and harmefull adversary.

He took him up. etc.) Now it remains that we consider the place where this
was done, to wit the holy City (meaning Jerusalem) so called (not in respect
that it was a place of it self more holy then other places (nay) it was the^ a
place of greatest corruption) but for that it had the sacrifices, and public
service of God in it, and for that there was wont to be great holiness, when
the Israelites truly feared God. We must not take this place as though he
carried him thither in deed, but (as I said before) in motion, laboring to
suggeste such persuasio^s into his mind: now in that the holy ghost meaning
Jerusalem, calls it the holy City, he does (no doubt) give us there by to
understand, what was the subtlety of Satan herein, to weete, to assail him
with this temptation, in such a place, as might seem to be most void of
Satan's presence: thereby laboring the more cu^ningly to deceive: Wherein we
may learn a lesson most needful to be observed, to wit that Satan (such is
his subtlety) when he goes about to seduce any (that makes a conscience of
sin, Satan temteth not the godly under the name of sin but of godlynes.
and knows in any measure how GOD is to be served and has a care to put the
same in practice) he will not attempt his purpose, in the name of sin, but
sleely under ye color of a good thing: for we see here that he brings
Christ Jesus unto Jerusalem, where he might seem to be most void of any
molestatio^, and there goes about to moleste him, for (in deed) he will be sure
to be in those Job. 1. 6. Math. 13. 19.
places, and prying into those exercises, that of themselves be most excellent.
As for example, if he can not persuade with thee, to leave of, or never
enterprise the hearing of the word of God (because thou know it must be
heard) if he can neither make thy profit keep thee at home, nor thy
pleasures cause thee to be employed else where: What course he (commonly)
takes in the matter of hearing the word.
yet will he seek to deceive thee when thou come there: for either he will
labor to put into thy mind, the consideration of such a business that thou
have at home, or such a thing that thou have left undone: or to make thee
heavy and fall on sleep: or else if he can not prevail that way, Note this
well.
he will put other motions into thy mind (which of themselves are very good
and godly) to this end that he may steal thy heart from attending unto the
doctrine in hand. And this is a marvelous subtlety: for who would think that
it were Satan that puts good cogitations into a man's mind. But it is most
certain, that if he can prevail no other way, yet will he have thee employed
in an other matter, less needful for thee at that instant, to the end that
he may make thee sin against GOD, in not listening unto him when he speaks
unto thee: and that he may deprive thee of the benefit of that doctrine then
delivered. I speak not all this while of those, whose minds he does carry
away, by the wandering of the eye, by beholding this man and that man: yea and
often the disquietnesse of some, where at thou art greatly grieved, does he
also use as a mean to draw thy heart from the thing in hand. What he does to
defraude thee of the benefit of prayer.
The same course he takes (even) in the holy action of prayer, how hard a
thing is it, for a man to pray zealously, feelingly, and attentively? either he
will make thee heavy, and therefore he will say thou art unfit to prayer, and so
let it pass for that time: or thou feel not the remorse of conscience for
sin, which heretofore thou have or which thou should, and therefore he
will bid thee take heed thou prayest not least you offend god in thy prayer. Or
if by neither of these means he can dissuade thee from that holy exercise,
yet will he come stealing on thee to take away thy heart from that which thou
speak, and so make it unprofitable unto thee. So that the true child of God
does know (for to the rest these things are parables) how difficulte and hard
a thing it is to offer unto the Lord this sacrifice, in such manner, that it may
be a sweet smelling savor in his nostrels. And when I consider the horrible
estate, whereunto (even in the eyes of man) Satan has brought the world, it
makes me quayle for fear, The great abuse of prayer in these days.
and marvel how the Lord in his justice can abide such profaning of his
name, and abusing of his most holy word, as is every where to be found. For
though we be gone from the Papists in this point, that we use not an unknown
tongue (yet in the most places) we differ from them in nothing else. For we
rest upon the work wrought as they did, we toss it from post* to pillar as
they did in one word, if a number of prayers he said, and a task done, it is
thought good prayer. In y^ mean while the heart of him yt prays is alienated,
his eyes wander hither and thither: and (if never so little occasion to be
offered) his tongue shall also beimployed to speak to him y^ is next him, these
be they that Eccles. 4. 17.
offer the sacrifice of fools, but the Lord will be surely revenged of these and
such like dealinges: and of them also by whose occasion so great abominations
be committed. Let us therefore (which is the drift of my speech) carefully take
heed (seeing Satan is so subtle, that he will labor to make the best exercises
unprofitable unto us, and cause us (unless we take good heed) to sin
grievously in them against the Lord) that we continually pray unto the Lord
our god, that it would please him to direct us, by his holy spirit, that our
adversary deceive us not in the same. Let us learn never to enterprise any
such action rashly, With what mind we must come to pray.
or soddenly (as commonly men do) but reverently, and diligently consider
with our selves aforehand, what we go about, and crave the Lords assistaunce
therein. It is not only said that Christ was carried into Jerusalem, but also
that he was placed on the pinnacle of the temple, in a most high and eminent
place above the rest of the whole City, where Satan thought more
commodiouslie to assail him, and to be more free upon him: Teaching unto us
this doctrine, Why Satan labors most to overthrow them of highest estate.
that he is most bitter against those that are in highest estate, and
condition, and labors above all to seduce the^: because he knows that, as
the Cedar tree is not cut down, but in the fall thereof, all the shrubes, and
inferior trees are crushed with it so far as it reaches: even so the fall
of the greatest, carries many inferious to fall with him: which Solomon well
observed, when he said of a Pro. 29. 12.
Prince that harkneth unto lies, all his servants are wicked, and our Savior
Christ that said, if Math. 26. 31.
the shepherd be smitten, all his sheep are dispersed. And therefore we see
that great men are brought often times into a most monsterous course of life,
because the enemy has labored by the^ to seduce many. We see moreover that
the Ministers of the word of God, because they be standard bearers in the host
of Christ, are either, overthrown by Satan into worldliness and vain glory
(which experience teaches us to be true) or so mightily hacked at, by time
seruers, and enemies to the truth, with tossing up and down, slau^ders, vile
reproaches, and such like, that they seem even to be the butte, for all men's
venomed arrows to be shot at, and (as the Apostle says) ^ Cor. 4. 10.
the of scouringes of the world, and a gasing stock to men and angels, and all
because of this that the candle John. 3. 19. 20.
which they carry in their hand, is so deadly hated of the enemy, that he will
never cease, until it be extinguished or greatly darkened. If behooves
therefore all those, A lesson for maiestrates and ministers.
whom the Lord has set a loft in the church to be teachers, or the common
weal to be rulers, to watch their own ways in most careful manner: knowing,
that if they do not greatly advance the glory of God (by the discharging of
their duty in an upright conscience) their lifting up to heaven (in regard of
their excellent calling, in this work) shall be a means to throw them the
lower down, into hell, and so to increase their condemnation, for that they
have abused gods great graces (given them to advance his glory) and turned
them into means of disgracing the same.

And said unto him if thou be the son of God, cast thy self down headlong)
as if he should have said, if thou be certain that thou art the very son
of GOD, The speech of Satan unto Christ.
of such Majesty and power: it is meet and convenient, that thou live not
here so obscurely, in a corner, but that thou make it known unto the world, by
some notable and singular miracle, that they may have occasion, to give thee
that honor, which is due to such a person: for which there is no more fit way,
then now that thou art here aloft, upon the top of the temple (which is in
this City where thy fathers name is called upon, and he daily served) to throw
thy self down, from hence headlong unto the ground: which when the men of
Jerusalem do behold, they can not choose but confess thee to be the only, and
very son of the everlasting God, and receive thee with a common applause, to
be their Savior and redeemer, and so advance thee among the^ unto great
honor. This is in effect the sum of this temptation. Whereby we see an
example of the wonderful subtlety of Satan, wherein we may note diverse
doctrines for our instruction. First how that the enemy (repeatyng again the
former part of the first temptation, wherein he having the foil, does yet use
it as an occasion to set upon the son of GOD a fresh) does plainly declare
himself to be of great skill and of an invincible mind, against him, whom he
labors to overthrow, for if he dealt thus with him, in whom he found no
shadow of inclination, nor weakness, in the manner of resistau^ce, much more
will he at us again, who^ once he is vanquished, who (howsoever it pleases
God to make us Romans 8 37.
more then conquerous in him that has loved us) ca^ not chose but see in us
much weaknesses: great fainting and infirmity, in our afflictions: and
therefore we may seem (to him) to give just cause of hope that at length he
shall captive us unto his desire. UUhereof we are to mark this use unto our
selves, that we never rest upon any thing that we ca^ do: neither ever
extenuate the power of Satan in our own imaginations (which the holy ghost
has described to be so Ephesians. 6 ^2.
great) but in continual view of his strength and subtlety, and contrariwise,
our own infirmity and blindness, always to rely upon Jesus Christ our
head, A lesson how to use our selves in fighting against Satan
shrouding our selves under the wings of his protection: setting him ever in
the forefronte of the battle* and then shall we be sure, to get the
victory. Again we may see in the manner of this temptation an other of Satan's
iuglinges most needful to be observed: to wit, how he assayleth not Christ
Jesus with the same again, or any like to it, but with a new temptation clean
contrary to the former, Satan afte a repulse uses (often a contrary
temptation to the former.
saying that thou may be sure enough from doubting, cast thy self down,
that thou may see that you are the son of God to the end (as no doubt he
imagined) that Christ might no way suspect it to be the motion of evil, being
so contrary unto the other: but rather a confident joy upon the victory:
wherewith (although he could not deceive the son of God, yet) he prevails
marueilously with it, in the world: for (if we shall view the thing in his
particulars) we see, y^ seeing Satan can not prevail in the world, to keep it
still drowned in blind ignorance, and superstitious devotion: but that the
same is described openly unto men, to be detestable and leadyng to final
destruction: now does he labor to bring men unto Atheism, and to be just of
no Religion at all. Wherewith how greatly he prevails (to the great dishonor
of God, and grief of all the godly) it is most manifest: for to put on the name
of Religion is present with every man, and to put of the title of Popery
(because the law does so) but to come to the point (which in deed is the mark
of a true Christian) so to Psalm. 1. 1. 2.
refuse the counsel of the ungodly: so to shun the way of sinners: and so
to abhor the seat of the scornful: as with all (for so the original text
is to be expounded in that place) to meditate in the law of God day and night,
to make it Psalm. 119. 105.
a la^terne to our feet, and a light unto our paths: to lay down all our
wisdom, and our own ways, at the feet of Jesus Christ: and to be
contented, both in Judgment, and in practice of life, to let the line of the
word direct us. how sew such are there found, and how thin be they sown,
throughout this whole la^d? and all because of this, The subtlety of Satan,
in the matter of reformation.
that Satan would persuade us, that the further we be from zeal: from godly
life: from fear of offending God and his Church: the further we be from
Popery, and therefore the safer, as in this one example shall appear: when we
do, by the word of GOD justly condemn, the tyranny and butchery of that
Antechrist in captiuyng the consciences of men, under his slavish subjection,
and then do hear that the word of God has prescribed an order in his Church
to bridle the varulinesse, and amend the abuses that rest in every one, who is
called a brother: if once we desire to have the same executed, that offenses
may be taken away (oh say they) yt were even to become slaves unto Popery
again: and therefore that they never come near that, they will be sure to give
them selves to all liberty and looseness: in the mean while, they forget
that Satan labored to practice so with our Savior Christ Jesus, to drive him
too far into ye contrary extremity. If he can not prevail with man to make
him couetously minded, to be always pludding upon worldly cares, that all good
things may be choked in him (whereunto almost) every man yeldeth: the^ will he
at him with the contrary, to drive him to carelessenesse, in respect of those
things which he is bound to look unto. In a word it is Satan's continual
practice, never to let man rest in that golden mean which Gods word
prescribes, but ever to intise him to the one extremity, or the other: and
therefore we have great need to pray unto the Lord, to make us wise hearted, that
we may see the course commanded, and continually proceed in it. Moreover, in
ye Satan, would have him throw himself down headlong, which is (as you have
heard) contrary unto the other: it is to the end that he may make him
vainly presumptuous, upon his own power, which is a temptation greatly
infecting the world, for notwithstanding that we be in our selves most foolish,
ignorant, and simple, yet Satan will steal all the sight of that out of man's
mind, and persuade him of himself very highly. Whereupon it comes that we
see the whole world so carried away in pride and presumption, that every man
swells in his own conceit, seeking to disgrace all other men in respect of
him self, and likes of nothing be it never so good, holy* or wisely done or
said, but that which is forged in his own imagination: but we must learn the
lesson of the holy Ghost set down by the Apostle Paul, in Romans 12. 10.
giving honor to prefer one and an other, and not our selves, in our own
blind persuasion: Satan labors not only in this, to make Christ Jesus
think too well of himself, but also upon the same to use unlawful means, to
make it known unto others, which is a brau^ch (if you mark it well) secret
poison, wherewith he greatly venometh mankind. For when once he can bring man
to think better of himself then others do, or (in deed) is cause why he or
they should: then will he ticle him with vain glory, The nature of vain glory.
yt is with an inordinate desire of blazing his power and dignity unto men:
whereunto when he can find no fit instruments, for the execution of the same,
in such measure as he would: rather then it shall be vnatchiued (such is his
thirst after praise, and popular fame) he will be his own spokesman, and plead
his own cause, as we may see in the words and deeds of men: words, when men
are not ashamed to commend of, and praise themselves, showing in boasting
manner what they can do, and what great things they have done (and often, all
stark lies) thinkyng the matter never sufficiently known until themselves
lay it open, The cause of gorgeous and disguised apparel.
in deed when me^ and women (as we see in their practice will adorn (or
rather disguise) them selves in such strange and monstrous manner, as we see
continually practiced amongst us: and all comes from a branch of that that
Satan would gladly suggest into the son of God, to think it shall not
otherwise be known how noble, how worshipful, how rich in livings, or great
of birth they are, and they persuade themselves, that every man admireth their
great estate thereby, when (poor souls) they take the readyest way, to be
mocked and tau^ted of every one that sees them: esteemyng them rather of
foolish, vain, and wanton, then wise, sober, or honest behavior. This kind
of decette is yet further to be ripped up, for it is an infection that steals
even upon him that is (otherwise) watchful: for it is a marvelous hard thing
(such is our corruption) even for the dearest children of God, to do any thing
that is good, or be in any good estate or condition, but as Satan would have
had Christ to have misdemeaned him self because he was the son of God: so
does he exceedyngly labor, to make their affections corrupt in the same
manner. In respect whereof, I pray God that we never let pass from our
remembrance the saying of that singular vessel of God S. Paul, that says
he had the 2. Cor. 12 7.
messenger of Satan to buffet him (a prick in his flesh) least he should be
exalted above measure, through the abundance of revelations. For of all
sins, Man hardly does any good thing but he is proud of it.
I am persuaded that the best and godliest ca^ most hardly avoid this, to do
any thing that is good, and not be proud of it: but let us pray unto God, for
his grace, that our affections may be so reformed, that we never ascribe any
thing to our selves, that is his: and then shall we never be proud of that
which is not our own. Mark yet an other point of Satan's doings* he carries
him unto an high place, above the rest of the buildyng, but it is to the end,
that he may throw him down the lower, and with the greater fall: for he means
never any thing less then to benefit any man, but his purpose is continually
to seek by all means his destruction: and yet will he set a goodly show upon
the matter, as though he labored for his welfare, to the end he may the more
easily deceive: whereby we may see, that as Satan is contrary unto God: so is
his doing most unlike y^ Lords. For the Lord while he intends the profice of
a man, The contrary course of God and Satan toward man.
does humble him, cast him down, and make him seem base in his own eyes,
that he may advance him, lift him up and adorn him with glory, and Satan
does here clean contrary to wit, exalts highly, to the end he may throw
down the lower, and therefore we are to take heed of those things in this
world, that either offer unto us present pleasure, or feed our humor in
pleasing of our selves. And on the other side, not despise the snubes and
checkes that the Lord does often lay upon his people, for so much as (howsoever
in present the former may be more delightful yet) the latter in the end (to
him that has the right use of it) is far more profitable. Lastly (to
conclude this point, and so to proceed) the drift of Satan is to make him,
bear him self to bold upon this that he is the son of God. A practice
wherewith he greatly prevails in the world. For where as GOD has in his
wisdom, set and appointed the places of men to be diverse: some in great, The
end of great callings one above another and how Satan peruerteth them.
and some in meaner conditions: to the end that by the greater his glory
might more eminently appear in those whom he has advanced: Satan labors
(and mightily prevails to deface this glorious ordinance of God, and to make
it unprofitable unto that end whereunto it is ordained, For he tells
Princes, and great personages, that for so much as they be in so great and
excellent estate all things are lawful for them: their will may be their
direction, and who may control them? whereby they promise unto themselves
great freedom to sin: for that they are not to be censured by man (the
meaner man also whom it pleases GOD to advance, unto dignity, and great
estate in the world, whereas he should reason thus: God has in his great
mercy dealt thus graciously with me, to prefer me, before many of mine
equales and betters (no doubt) it is to this end, that I should in more notable
manner aduau^ce his glory, and in greater measure be a staff unto those that
fear the Lord, and a shield to defend them against the wicked: Satan teaches
him to reason clean contrary: as thus. Now I am adaunced, now am I enriched,
now am I esteemed, I have all things that I can desire, How the wicked abuse
their high calling.
what should now let me, why I may not give my self unto my pleasures, to
feed my own affections and be it right or wrong, who shall say nay unto it? or
who dare find fault with it? I would to God that we had not too manifest
experience, of such reasoninges: for where as great personages, should be
glorious in great and raxe virtues, for others to immitate, it falls out
(ofte^tymes) that they be patterns of most monstrous sins, unto those that
will learn to follow them. Satan finds such fruit toward the building up
of his kingdom, by this course, that he infecteth all sorts of people by the
same, so that not so much as the simple countreyman (if that he can any way
persuade himself, that superior persons have any good likyng of him) but will
attempt whatsoever, shall any way serve his own turn: always thinkyng thus
with himself: if I be crossed in it, I have a friend, The cause of all
misdemenoure in the common weal.
a great man that will stand by me, and suffer me, not to have the foil. From
this fountain does arise all the troubles, and disorders that are every where
to be seen: which (if you mark well) you shall see, that it springs from his
brain, that bears himself bold of his friends that he can make, either in
Court or in the country. And thus can Satan cunningly deceive the world. But
(if it pleased God to put it in the hearts of superiors on who^ all wicked men
do rely) it behooves them to have especial care, who^ they stand with, for so
much as they can not choose but be guilty of the sins committed, by them,
and it is now come to that pass, that a livery coat makes a man lawless
where soever he dwells.

For it is written he shall give his Angels charge over thee. etc.) Now come we
to the reason that Satan uses, Satan will prove his matter out of the
scriptures.
to the end that he might with more probability seem to urge no unlawful
thing: his reason is thus much in effect. I persuade thee to nothing, that
either, may be any way offensive, unto GOD, or dangerous unto thy person, for
that which is written in Gods own word, must needs please him well, and that
which he has promised, can not be unperformed: and thou can not be
ignorant that he has commanded his angels to take heed, unto those that
are his, and so to protect the^, against all dangers that may seem to be
incident unto them, that they shall not so much, as trippe or stumble at a
stone, that lies in their way, a speech in appearau^ce, merueilous glorious,
but in truth (being rightly sca^ned) most wicked and impious: for mark, his
intent is (as we have heard) to persuade Christ Jesus to sin, and yet for the
proof of the same, he will needs allege the Scripture in which manner
(before we come to the text it self) there rests a double subtlety, first
he seeing himself co^uicted by the Scripture, begins now to fight with the
same weapon: both that he may seem to have as much force on his side to
persuade with, as Christ had in resistyng: and also, that he by taking that
weapon into his hand, might cause the son of GOD to refuse it, and use it no
more against him: either of which if he could obtain he would not greatly
doubt of the victory. Which we are diligently to consider, and observe: for
Satan knowing that he is no way so wounded as with the word of God, uses many
sleightes from time to time, to deprave us of the benefit of the same. How
Satan labors to bereue us of the benefit of the word.
For either he will labor to take it utterly away from us (as he does
mightily, by those miscreauntes the Papists) or if he can not get that, yet
will he use some means or other, to make us as good be without it as have it,
by setting before our eyes text against text, by showing us the diverse senses
wherein it has been taken: and all to this end to make us Academickes,
holding no certainty of any part of it. And therefore we have great need
(especially in these days, wherein the Scriptures are so many ways abused and
perverted) to crave the Lords gracious favor, to open our eyes, and enlighten
our understanding, that we may see the Psalm. 11* 15.
mysteries contained in his laws: that we may with the knowledge of the text
(in letter) understand also the spiritual sense and meaning thereof, to the
right reformation of our judgments, and conuersations, according to the same.
The second branch of the subtlety of Satan in alleging the text, is that he
may the more easily deceive: and with the more color work his purpose, and
not be descried. Wherein we see that verified which the holy Ghost does else
where warn us of, namely, that he can turn 2. Cor. 11 14.
him self into an Angel of light: that is set such a glorious face upon the
matter, that he would seem to lead a man into the highest heaven, when (in
deed) his purpose is to throw him down to y^ lowest hell. For would not a man
think, that the eternal word of the euerliuyng God, being given unto the
sons of men, to teach us to know God, and worship him aright, and to show us
the way to endless felicity, should never be spoken, but to that end, and
therefore the very sillables of the same to carry in them always, great
majesty and reverence? which in deed) is the end wherefore it is given us) and
yet behold how satan (as he uses it) would make it serve his turn, to
teach the way to perdition. Wherein (though the son of God could quickly
espy his legierdumain yet) he greatly ouertaketh mankind with it: especially
those, The danger to profess religion and not labor for sound judgment by
knowledge.
that have a general likyng to Religion and yet are (...), in the true sense,
and meaning of the text: we see how Satan c^^ieth them from opinion to opinion
and every thing that seems to have any probable show of Scripture in it,
they take by and by as an undoubted truth. Wherein as (at the first) he abuses
their simplicity, and vnstaydnesse: so (at the length) he brings them to an
obstinate frowardness, that in respect of their own opinion, they will not
stick to condemn those whom they know in their own consciences, to be the
notable instruments of God to set forth his glory. And therefore it behooves
us, to take heed that we truly learn to discern the spirits 1. Ioh 4^
whether they be of God or no: lest we (suffering the punishment of our own
carelessenesse) be carried about with every Ephesians. 4. 14.
wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men: but be so settled upon the rock
Mat. 16 18.
Christ Jesus through the knowledge of the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles) that the gates of hell do never prevail against us. Thus much for
Satan's slight in the alleging of the text. Now let us see how he does
allege it. ( He shall give his Angels charge over thee etc.) If you look upon
the words of the text alleged, and confer them with the Psalm. 9. 11.
Psalm from whence he had them, you shall see a notable piece of cunnyng. For
where as it is said here, that GOD will give his Angels charge over (those that
dwell under the shadow of the almighty) to guide them in their ways: he
leaves out this last word (their ways) which (in deed) is the very thing
that would have made him overthrow himself. And therefore he passes it over.
For the meaning of the promise is, that God will protect them that walk in his
ways which he has prescribed unto them. Now there is none so ignorant, but
knows, that when a man is upon the top of a pinnacle, his ways to come
down, is not to throw himself headlong, but, to come down by y^ stayres, that
be made for that purpose. UUhich Satan knowing well enough, does leave it out,
that his dealyngs may not be discryed: this lesson does he teach many a one to
put in practice, as for example, when he would persuade a man to be a Papist.
He will tell him that none can be saved, but whom the Pope will, and to prove
it he has a text to wit whatsoever Math. 16. 19.
thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest in
earth, shall be loosed in heaven, but he will never tell him that this is
restrained to the words of the commission Mat. 2^* 20.
teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, else it is your own
invention. When he would persuade one to abide still in his sin, he will
tell him that God has mercy ever in store, and to prove it he has a text, to
wit, whenever the wicked returns from his sins, Ezekiel 1^ 21. 22.
they shall no more be remembered, but he will never give him leave to learn
that the mercy Romans ^ 4. 5.
of GOD leads to repentance else thou heapest up unto thy self wrath against
the day of vengeance: when he would have thee to be superstitiously devout,
and so not to care for the doctrine of the word, he has a text 1. These. 5. 17.
pray continually, but he will not tell thee that he which refuses Pro. 2^* 9.
to hear the law, eue^ his prayers are abominable, and (in a word) to cause
thee make no conscience of any sin, he will tell thee God is merciful, but
he will never tell thee, God is just, until the latter end: then will he
labor to carry thee away, either in a sleep security, or else (in setting
before thine eyes the multitude of thy transgressions) to drive thee, to utter
desperation. It is meet therefore that we be wise, by the wisdom yt the holy
ghost teaches us in the word, least Satan do utterly deceive us, to our own
destruction, Behold yet an other trick of this enemy: he would carry Christ
Jesus into that safe tower of Gods providence and protection, not to the end,
that he may be safe, in deed, but that he might make him abuse y^ same to his
own overthrow. If you look into the doings of the world, you shall see that
this lesson is greatly learned, How Satan teaches man to sin under color of
the scriptures.
and of them that take themselves to be no small ones usually practiced. For
he offreth to ye view of those that know not y^ principles of Religion, the
consideration of Gods eternal decree in the predestination of his elect,
before the foundation of the world was laid, not to this end that he would
have them rest on it, as an unremovable rock, and have the right use of it,
for the advancement of Gods glory, in their careful obedience unto his laws,
and commandments: but rather, that he may make them altogether careless of
any thing that concerns God, or godliness: and so satisfy the lusts of their
own flesh with greedynesse in the whole course of their life. And therefore he
teaches them to reason thus, Gods decree is unchangeable, if I be elected I
cannot perish whatsoever I do, and if I be rejected, do I never so well, I
shall never be saved: and therefore to what end should I hear Sermons? pray?
live godly? or do any good thing else? Whereas the Lord in his word teaches a
clean contrary conclusion: the decree of God being unchangeable, is yet
secret, and known by none other means, but only the fruits of it: which is
the holy ghost assuring the conscience, and holy conversation witnessing
thereunto, and therefore I must labor (for the 2. Pet. 1. 5
assurance of my salvation unto my self) to live in all holiness and godliness:
and when I find it, still to endeavor more and more obedience to the laws of
that most loving and gracious God, that had such care over me, as to elect me,
and ordain me to salvation, before he made me. But as Satan deceaueth the
world in this point, so does he in many other: as the free justification only
by faith in Christ Jesus, does he set before the eyes of man, to make him
neglect good works: and so in all other points of true Religion.

Jesus said unto him, it is written again, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God) this is the answer of our Savior Christ, unto the former assault, The
answer of Christ unto Satan.
which (being in words very brief) contains, in effect thus much. Thou go
about to persuade me to do that which is not lawful: and for thy purpose thou
seem to allege yt Scripture. But know, thou this, that the place of yt
Psalm (if it were true as thou alledgest it) should be contrary to an other
text, where it is set down, as a general decree, of all men to be followed
for ever, that man must not tempt God by doing those things that are not
warranted. In which answer (before we come to consider the words of the law
alleged by Christ) we have diverse lessons to be learned for our instruction.
First in that he (notwithstanding that Satan had presumed to use the sword
of Gods word against him) flies not to any other weapon (as accompting that
either abused by the enemy, or unable any way to serve his turn) we learn
that although the adversaries of the truth, do abuse the Scriptures, and
pervert them to their own destruction: and though wicked me^, will (for the
defense of sin) and in mockyng manner) take yt word of God in their mouths,
The wicked abusing the word of God, make it not the worse for the use of the
godly.
yet is this no cause either to make us careless in searching yt food of our
souls out of the same: or to make it less of force to beat back, all our
spiritual enemies. But rather to be so much the more diligent, to meditate in
the same day and night, that we may attain unto the true understanding of that
(for our own comfort) which they snatching at, do abuse to their eternal
confusion. A lesson very needful to be learned: How the wiked shake of the
scriptures when they are aleaged against them.
for we see that the devil has wonderfully prevailed with all me^ in yt world
(the true professors of Jesus Christ only excepted) for if you reason with a
Papist concerning any point of doctrine or an Atheist for the conuincing of any
sin, and for your warrant do allege the word of God: tush (say they) every
man will allege Scripture for his defense, and so they think that they have
notably au^swered the matter. But we are to learn, by the example of our
Savior (in this place) that as the dronkarde abusing drink, is no cause why I
should refuse it, to quench my thirst: and the glutto^ gordgeing himself with
meat, A comparison.
no cause why I should think meat thereby abused, or the blessing of God
lessened in the same unto me, for the satisfieng of my hungry body: no more was
the abuse of Satan in perverting the Scriptures, any cause to drive Christ
from defendyng his innocence by the same: neither ought the godless practices
of the wicked (in profaning the Scriptures) be any cause, why I should not
make it still my direction to Tim. 3. 16.
teach me true doctrine: to improve in my self and others erroneous opinions:
to inform me in the way of godliness: to reprove sin and wickedness: and
to Romans 15. 4.
comfort me in all calamities and distresses, Moreover (if you mark the
manner of Christ's replye) you shall see how netably he pulls away the
visarde from Satan's face, and makes him appear in his own kind to be (as
he is) an abuser of the scriptures, to a wicked purpose. Which is to be noted
in this word ( again) wherein, Christ makes a contradiction (not betwixt
scripture and scripture) but betwixt the sense whereunto satan would apply the
text, and other places of the word of GOD: as if he should say, thou show
thy self to be a deprauer, in that thou would have a piece of Gods word,
so taken, as that it must needs carry with it, a manifest contrariety, to
other places of scripture, and therefore thou do abuse the text. A notable
example, for our direction, when we deal with any man, that would have the
word on his side: How to discern the abuse of the text.
to examine not only the circu^staunces of the text (as above) but also to
see how that place produced by him in that his sense, accords with the rest
of Gods word and the course thereof, wherewith if we find it to consent, it is
to be received, if not (by the example of the son of God in this place) it is
otherwise to be expounded. This doctrine (being rightly learned and used) is
many ways profitable. For it is first, a most excellent way (when we reason
with others that being carnal, do carnally allege the word) to reveal unto
the^ (if they be not wilfully blinded) their error, and so to teach them to
amend it. Besides that it is an excellent rule for us to observe in the reading
(or by any means searching) the true sense of yt word of God: for oftentimes
we shall meet with such places, that either by reason of the figurative
speech, or the phrase of the Hebrew, or Greek text, which unto our English
tongue is often strange) seem to be hard to be understood, or diversely to
be taken, or else at the first sight is a Paradoxe, and strange opinion, in the
course of Religion: then will, this lesson of our Savior Christ Jesus stand us
in good stead: namely it will teach us to confer it, with other places of
scripture, and see how it may be taken agreeable unto them, and so expounded,
according to the proportion of faith: And further it will be a notable shield
unto us against many and infinite temptations of Satan, wherewith he labors
to seduce us. For he (almost) never comes unto the godly in his own name,
but under color, and pretense of Gods word. Now if we have the right use of
this lesson, it will teach us to wey his drift to examine his proof, and
confer it with the course of true Religion and godliness, and then shall we
see, that howsoever the motion, that he suggested into our mind, seemed to
have his foundation from the Scriptures, yet was it no better then an illusion
of the devil, to entise us to sin. Moreover in the manner of his answer,
he gives us an other most excellent ensample for our instruction, for Satan
(in alleging the Scriptures) does not always leave out a piece of the
sentence, but sometimes he brings yt whole. Now as we are taught in the
former doctrine, to examine the sense, wherein he does use it: so (again) does
he teach us, to examine the end whereat he aymeth, which Christ does thus:
Satan alleging the promise of protection, drives at this, to make the son
of God sin against his father: which Christ lays open by joining yt
commandment, with the promise and then he reasons thus: My father never
promised protection unto any that go about to break his commandments: now
that which thou would have me to do, cannot be performed without a direct
breach of this law: Thou shall not te^pt the Lord thy God. A most excellent
point of Religion, for the Lord in his promises and commandments, aymeth at
one thing, to wit, his obedience and the comfort of his children, for if he
say do this, yt conclusion is unto a true christian, you therefore must obey him,
or if he promise protection, mercy, spiritual, or temporal blessings, the
conclusion is (still) therefore thou must obey him, if thou depend upon him. So
that this doctrine serves to most notable use, in the direction of man's whole
life. It is true that God has given unto us those laws which (by reason of
our natural corruption) we are not able to fulfill, and therefore the author
of our salvation is only, his mercy in his son Jesus Christ: yet are we to
know, that the law of god is not thereby adnihillated, but Romans 3. 31.
established, for the continual course and direction of man's whole life: and
therefore if we shall at any time, reason to our selves thus: I am saved by the
mercy of GOD, therefore why should I be so strickt and precise in my life? Let
us take heed, for in so doing we turn Jude. 4.
the grace of God into wantonness: and if at any time this motion shall come
into our mind: There is no use of the promise of God, being separated from his
commandment.
I may do such a thing, and I trust God will forgive me, or, to be thus, and
thus obedient, to Gods word, and law, is a wearisome thing, God knows that we
are flesh and blood, will bear with us, let us know, that it is the very
temptation of Satan, that seperateth the promise from the commandment: and
would have us fall into sin, and then let us set this lesson before our eyes,
that our Savior joined them both together, the one to show us the law of God,
and to give us matter of true confidence in him: the other to keep us in
order, by continual obedience unto his laws, to the adornyng of our
profession by a godly life and conversation. Now let us consider, the text,
that our Savior Christ does allege which is written in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 6 16.
Where Moses (showing the wonderful love of god to the Israelites) persuadeth
with them to take heed, how they walk, and what they do, least they tempt the
Lord their God unto anger: what it is to tempt God, we have heard before, to
wit, to try his power or his patience: his power, when we, seeing his mighty
protection over us, set down in his word, do take in hand some ventrous
thing, to see whether it be true or no: his patience, when we understanding his
severe vengeance pronounced in his word to light upon the^ that go on
carelessly in iniquity, do notwithstanding, little (or nothing at all) regard
the same: What it is to tempt God and what not.
but presuming upon his mercy and forgetting his justice) do give our selves
over to yt lusts of our own flesh: so that our Savior Christ alleges that
place to prove, that if he should throw himself down headlong, he should
tempt God, in the first sort, to wit in trying whether he would preserve him
or no. The doctrine (therefore) that we are to learn out of this place is
this: that we must not only have an eye to this, that every action which we
take in hand, and every thing that we go about, be warranted by the word of
God: but also that the manner thereof, and the means for the performance of the
same, be such as God himself has appointed, and not such as we in our own
(foolish wisdom) do like well of: which lesson) (if it were rightly learned
and put in execution) would be the cause of abridging many a mischief in commonweals: of healing many a breath in Churches, and in letting many a shipwreck
of conscience that is every day to be seen: How God is tempted by Princes and
magistrates.
For if Princes and governors of kingdoms and commonweals, could be
contented, to lay down all their honor at the Psalm. 2. 12.
feet of the son of God: and were persuaded that whatsoever they do that
pleases not him, is the greatest dishonor that ever can befall them in y^
world and the keeping of his command ^eutes (in the ruling of their people)
their sole and only true glory. They would not so much make their will to be
their law. In Church governors.
If those that would be counted the builders and master workers in the
erecting of the spiritual temple of God, could be contented not only to
propound unto themselves the building of the Church of God, for their matter,
that they would bring topasse but also (in the manner of the same) be contented
to let the holy Ghost be their counselor, and to renounce their own devises,
and let go their worldly dignities: we should not only see the glorious
beauty of the former temple (I mean the growyng of the gospel in the
primative Church) most flourishingly to shine, for that the Lord would
(according to his promise) bless his own ordinance, and institution: but also
that kingdom of Antechrist, that has so long been wind-shaken (and yet
falls not^) quickly have a most notable overthrow. If every private person
also, that has taken upon him the profession of the glorious gospel of Jesus
Christ, In private persons.
could be contented (as were Romans 6. 17.
the Romans) to obey from the heart, the form of doctrine, whereunto he is
delivered (both for the furnishing of his judgment in knowledge, and governing
his life in practice) the name of God should not be so evil spoken of: the
religion of God not so slaundered: nor the common enemy have so just cause to
rejoice, and say there, there, but in every of these conditions, men are so
wedded unto their own affections, and nature bears such sway (by the
instigation of the devil) that either in the matter of their calling, or (at
the least in the manner) they must have a trick of their own cunning: whereby it
comes to pass (for as much as the Lord cannot abide to part stakes with any
nor to give his glory unto any other) Isa. 42. 8.
that the just judgment of the eternal and mighty God is upon their
labors, that they see most lamentable success in the same: and all for this,
that they will presume, to prescribe unto him, what is to be done, and to add
unto his wisdom, which is every way most pure, and perfect: but we must
learn (if we mean indeed, to profit by the doctrine of our Savior Christ in
this place) not to tempt God in such sort, but that he be our director, and
counselor in every thing that we take in hand, or else never presume to attempt
it.

The fourth Sermon.
Verse. 8. 9. 10. 11. 8. Again the Devil took him up unto an exceeding high
mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

9. And said to him, al these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.

10. Then said Jesus unto him. Avoid Satan: for it is written, thou shall
worshipp the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11. Then the Devil left him: and behold the Angels came, and ministered unto
him.


Unto an exceeding high mountain) the last temptation follows to be
considered: The first thing whereof is the place whereunto he brought Christ,
that he might work his feate upon him, which is a very high mountain: not
y^ he carried him thither, in bodily manner, but (as they were before) offered
unto him such a cogitation. Now in that Satan (before he offer unto Christ
the consideration of the thing that he goes about) does first bring him to a
place (as he thinks) most convenient for his purpose, we may behold in an
other cuircumstaunce his cunnyng, and subtlety, for as at the first he took
the advantage of the time: so here does he also of the place: yea and that
before he goes about to practice the thing. And this we have diligently to
note (that we may make good use unto our selves of it) for if Satan begin his
practices against the godly by bringing them into those places that are fittest
for his purpose we are VVeemust take heed where and with whom we frequent
carefully to take heed into what places and companies we do come, and so
much the rather in these days of sin, when godliness is (almost every
where) barked at and sin and wickedness advanced and extolled: so that a
man shall scarce come into that company, but either he shall hear the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and the professors thereof evil spoken of, or the name of god
(in common talk) blasphemed and taken in vain, so that he is brought thereby
into this straight, that he must either consent by scilence, or sooth them up
in their sins and wickedness (and then has Satan that for which he brought
him thither) The inconvenience of evil company.
or else boldly (according to his duty) reprove the offenders and the^
(oftentimes) the rage of the wicked is so incensed thereby that he rather
increases his dishonouring of god then (which were to be wished) takes any
warning to amend, and then shall the party that fears god be greatly grieved,
to see it, and (as many consciences be very tender) fear least he have some
way been the cause of that outrage: how much better (therefore) had it been
for such a one to have taken heed before hand, and not to have come there at
al. Besides this inconvenience, we see by experience, that many are (often)
overtaken with that sin (by frequenting wicked places and company) which
they before abhorred, and if they had known or feared that they should have
been brought to that estate, they would have prevented it: By ill places and
company man is (often brought to commit that sin which before he abhorred.
as for example, many one that in his conscience approves the truth of
religion, and is persuaded that he ought to frequent the public exercises of
the same, and does determine at such a time to hear such a sermon: in the
mean while falls into the society of the wicked and is among them that make
no conscience of any such matter, who keep him worse employed, until the time
be past, so that when he enters into consideration of the matter: he may
justly say with himself, surely, this company with whom I have been, and this
place where I was, have frustrated my determination in better things. I speaks
not all this while of drunkenness: of whoredom: of gaming. and such like: which
(oftentimes) are committed contrary to the purpose of the party: yea contrary
to his former affection and desire. And therefore (if ever thou meanest, A
needful advise to all that will truly serve God
unfeignedly to take that course which becomes a true christian, and if thou will learn to discern the subtitlties of Satan, to shun them) beware of
places of wickedness, and ungodly company: and learn to frequent those places
and that company where godliness, is exercised, that when thou departest, thou
may go away bettered, and not hindered thereby.

And showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them) we see
how the enemy waited the opportunity of the place, and yet he finds not
all things fitly prepared to his purpose, (for he has experience of Christ's
wisdom in discerning his intentes) and therefore he does at the first only
show unto Christ Jesus the matter wherein he means to tempt him: that is,
he offers unto his consideration, the greatness, the majesty, magnificence,
Satan's sleightes against the holiest.
and glory of the kingdoms of the whole world: and so seems (for the time)
to go no further: wherein we may see that Satan dealing against one that has
given him the foil before, and therefore (he is assured) likes not of his
practices does use himself more subtly, then he has done: to teach us,
that the more, that the Lord reuealeth his will unto us, and descrieth the
sleightes of Satan, and the more troubles that he has assailed us withal,
and we, through (Gods help) have overcome, the more slyly will he assault us, to
the end that he may more easily deceive us. And therefore we are not to make
light of this enmity, and so be careless (as many be) but (the forewarder we
be in the school of Christ) to walk the more warely, and circumspectly:
knowing that our adversary watches us most deceiuably. Again behold how
Satan offers the beauty of the thing, unto his consideration and so lets
him alone: leaving (as it were) the object, and his senses to work further. a
matter worthy to be noted, for if Christ had been (as all other men are) of a
corrupt nature, it had been a forcible way for him to have prevailed: which he
(knowing enough) does use against mankind, and does greatly overtake them
therewith: He first offers the consideration of the thing to man's senses.
for when he would bring thee to commit any sin, he (knowing that thy nature
is corrupt, and inclinable to any thing, saving that which it should) does
offer the consideration of it unto thy senses, as for example when he would
have thee commit whoredom, he will use one mean or other, to bring thee to
the sleight of the harlot and to behold her beauty, whereunto if thy lust once
give consent, he has, what he would have for the resistaunce whereof we must
learn that he Mat. 5. 28
that looks upon a woman and lists after her in his heart commits
adultery, and therefore must we continually use that notable prayer of David.
Psalm. 119 37.
Lord turn away mine eyes that they behold not vanity. If he would bring
thee to fall into drunkenness, he will show to thy sight the color of the
drink, wherewith if y^ once be delighted the^ does this follow, that thou will
persuade thy self it is pleasant for thy taste. That we may also stay the
beginning herein, we must learn the counsel that the holy Ghost gives us by
the mouth of the wise king Solomon Prou. 23 31. 32.
look not then (says he) upon the wine when it is red, and when it shows
his color in the cup, or goes down pleasauntly: In the end thereof it will be
like a serpent and hunt like a Cockatrise. To conclude, his first offer is in
any temptation, to lay the thing (which of it self is lawful) and thy
senses together, We must take heed of our affections (even) in the things
that be lawful.
wherewith if he can see thee affected and moved, then will he proceed, and
therefore we have great need to take heed that our affections and desires do
not raunge abroad about the things that belong not unto them, neither be too
much delighted with the things that are of God alleged to man for his
necessity and delight: least Satan get occasion thereby to enter in with us
so far, that we shall not be able to resist him. For though the world
persuadeth it self, that thoughts are free, and man may behold what he list
and wish at his pleasure, yet we must learn to tie up our affections and keep
them in more straightly, least they open the door to great and heinous offenses.
Let us yet behold a further slight of Satan in this show of these things unto
Christ: namely that he offers them not simply as they are, Satan in tempting
steals out of man's mind all things that may let his purpose.
but (only) in the breast of them, for he shows the glory and honor of the
world, but not the inconveniences and crosses that accompany the same, and it
is a deceauable slyght. For when Satan would make a man vain glorious, if he
should together with the praise of men, show also the small affection that men
that be wise bear unto such persons: if with the present pleasure of
whoredom, he should recke^ up the sicknesses and punishments that follow: if
with the delightful taste of strange drink he should make mention of the
sorrows that ensue the same: in short, if with the fleshly conte^tment that
sin brings he sheuld also speak of the troubles that follow upon it, and
what punishment such shall abide at the hands of almighty God, he might justly
fear that he should prevail but a little. And therefore when he goes about to
bring man into any sin, he leaves out whatsoever may seem to make against
him, that he may the more easily obtain his purpose: which we see him most
notably to practice, against our Savior Christ in this place: for going about
to make him worship him self in stead of the living God (who only is to be
worshipped) he would draw him thereunto by the desire of the souerainetie over
kingdoms, the which (that it may more forcibly move the son of God) he
propou^deth in the most excellent condition that it can be of, and never
shows him of the great charge of a kingdom: the ficle estate of Princes, nor
the great account that they shall make, when the Lord of heaven and earth
shall call them, Luke 16. 2.
to give an account of their stewardshippes. And with this course does he
mightily blind the world, for we see that men are so ravished with the glory,
pleasure, and profit of this present life that for the attayning of the same
they do not only swallow up all the worldly inconveniences that can be fall
the^: but (which is more) make shipwreck of conscience, and tread all Religion
and godliness under foot. How true this is in the common weal, I refer it
to every man's conscience: and whether it be in the Church or no I pray you see
the Judgeme^t of him that lived before me, and spoke as he saw, which was
indifferent. Read B. Benthams sermons upon the same text.
Satan (says he) has taken many of our Ministers, and carried them up to an
exceedyng high mountain and showed them all the spiritual livings almost in
the world. Byshoprickes, Deaneryes, Prebendes, Personages and Vicarages, and
has told them: this is a wealthy Byshopricke, this is a rich Deanery, this is
a fat benefice, they are all in my gift. I am the patron of them: fall down
therefore before me and worship me, and if one will not content you, I will
give you pluralities. Let no man think these things to be forged or sucked
out of mine own fingers, for writers make mention, that the Devil in deed
gave the Byshopricke of Rome once, and since that time it was never good. And
is he not so able now, think you to give a poor benefice, as he was then to
give the fattest Byshopricke in the world? Let no man be offended with me for
speaking that, which all the world by experience sees to be true. For where
these Alymsters should be Preaches, they are tongue tied: and that comes
not without great temptation. For thus he reasons with them: speak no more of
justification, meddle no more with controversies: rub no man on the sore: Let
every man live as he list without reprehension or admonition, and you shall
lack no living. Do you think that Satan has not sworn many to silence: I
have hea^^ of diverse that at the beginning have been very godly preachers, but
after they have once ben choked up with many livings, they have had such a bone
their throats, as the Devil would have it, that they would seldom open their
mouth to speak any more. This far of his words. But it behooves those that
will learn (in deed) to shun the estate that Satan would bring the son
of god in this temptation, to consider of the world, and the things that are
therein, as they be described by the holy Ghost in the word of God, and wey the
manifold snares that satan has in the same, to seduce and deceive withal, to
the end that they may walk uprightly in this vale of misery, in y^ true
fear and obedience of Jesus Christ. It is added (by Luke) that this great
glory of the world was showed unto the son of God. In the twinkling of an
eye: Mark the wisdom of Satan.
UUhich does further set down unto us the forcible means that Satan used to
obtain his purpose, for we see that as pleasant things do greatly move the
mind of man, and the rather, when no bitterness is mingled therwithall, so
most especially when they (being many and glorious) do come altogether, and of
a sudden. All which circumstau^ces you see how wisely the enemy has packed
together. The doctrine then that we are to learn out of ye same is this: that
Satan will pretermit nothing (be it never so little) but he will take his
aduau^tage by it to do us harm: to ye end that we may learn not to be
careless seeing he so bestirreth himself: nor to be negligent in learning to
discern his sleightes and to avoid them, seeing he is so watchful to seek our
destruction, again in that this is said to be in a moment or the Twinkling of
an eye, we may further behold that which before was showed, namely, that the
said temptations, were not corporally, but by cogitation. For we know that the
mind of man (in such wonderful manner has GOD created it) can at once
conceive and see those things that are far distant, The excellency of the
mind of man.
and (as it were) lay them together, and make one common object unto it self
of all the world: thinkyng sometimes of all at once, and sometimes of one part,
sometimes of an other, and such is the wonderful celeritie and quickness
thereof, that it is now here, and forthwith at Jerusalem, or in any of the
uttermost parts of the earth, which Satan knowing well enough does labor
also to make this singular and most excellent grace of God to serve his turn,
Satan labors most to pervert the best graces of God.
for the accomplishment of imquitie, she wyng unto us, the exceedyng malice of
Satan, that not only uses the instruments of sin and imquitie to serve
his purpose, but also usurps (even) upon the best and most excellent graces
of God, seeking to pervert them from ye right use, whereunto God has allotted
them: which is a thing very needful of us to be noted, for as it pleases God
in his great love to mankind, to bestow his graces both of the mind and body
upon man in most liberal measure (as wit, wisdom, learning, riches,
honor, strength, beauty. etc.) so does Satan labor (even) to make all these
things, not only unprofitable unto us, but (which more is) as instruments of
our greater falling from GOD, and so of our more grievous Judgment. For he
will teach a man to turn his wit unto craftynesse: his wisdom to iniurye
others, his learning to bolster perverse opinions, his riches to choke the
good motions of the spirit in him, his honor to the forgetfulness of God, to
honor him, his strength to oppress others, and beauty to pride, even as he
would have used that excellent part of man (in the son of God) his mind, to
be a mean to draw him from his obedience unto God his father. And therefore we
have great need to take heed, that the graces which God has given unto us be
not abused by us through the suggestion of Satan, to our greater hurt and Gods
dishonor, which we shall the better regard, if we set this always before our
eyes (and endeavor it unfeignedly in the whole course of our life) that all that
we have, or are any way able to do, may be employed in such wise, as may best
serve to the glory of god the father, the buildyng of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ and the benefit of our brethren with whom we do live.

All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me) all this
while has Satan done no more but only made way for his purpose: for having
set him on an exceeding high mountain and showed (as it were) before his eyes
the beauty of all kingdoms, he comes then to his purpose, to wit, to offer
them all unto ye son of God, so that he will worship him, for (no doubt) he
thought that Christ must needs be ravished with the desire of that glorious
sight, and therefore would be willing to do any thing, for the attayning
thereof: which is easily to be found in man, subject to corruption, but Christ
was exempt from the same, and therefore Satan was deceived of his hope and
disappointed of his purpose. But let us consider his temptation: how cunningly
it is disposed and set in order. Satan does not go simply to the thing it
self (as he did in the former) but before he bids him worship him, he
sets down the promise, to the end (that unto all the circumstances) he might
ad this as the life (if Christ would have believed him) that he will bestow them
all upon him but Christ saw his subtlety, and therefore resisted him, and has
provided that the same should be registered for our instruction. And yet does
the devil most mightelie prevail with the world herein: for he sets such a
color upon sin, by glorious promises, and manifold pleasures and profit,
which come by the same that he can easily persuade (almost) any man to commit
any sin, for that appears by the course that men take in this world, Every
man is sharp sighted to sin but dull to goodness.
that he has already won their hearts unto this persuasion, that he will
give them all things. For if there be a practice which is clean forbidden in
the word of God, you shall find even the meanest (in outward appearaunce)
very perfect in it, but as for those courses that God has commanded
(whereunto he has promised a blessing, and which he will have done as
service unto himself) if you ask them, they know not what they mean: and if
you speak of them you had as good speak to a post: he does not only (in
most liberal manner) promise to bestow all these upon Christ: but also, for a
further assurance (as Luke records) avouches that they are delivered unto
him, and to whom soever he will bestow them. And yet we know by the
scriptures, that Psalm. 24. 1
the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein. Dan. 2. 37.
The Lord God of heaven gives power, strength, and glory. For there Romans 13.
1.
is no power but of god: Psalm. 113 7.
he lifts up and throws down. The Deuteronomy. 32 8.
most high deuideth to the nations their inheritance and separated the sons
of Adam: so that we may behold the impudency of Satan, and his lying
presumption that dare vindicate unto himself that wherein he has no
interest, where-withall (notwithstanding) he preuayleth much in the world:
for they that do believe that these things he the Lords, and are bestowed (as
blessings) upon none, who believe God to rule the world and who not.
but those that receive them at his hands (which is by those lawful means
that he himself in his word has prescribed and warranted) are careful that
they never desire that whereunto the Lord does not offer good means:
contrariwise they that believe it not, but have rather taken out the lesson ye
Satan is the giver of them, do by all subtle and indirect means seek to
attain unto their desire holding this for a principle, that he that
dissembleth not cannot live: and this for an other, that he that deals
justly shall dye a beggar: has not y^ devil (think you) persuaded such persons
that ye world is his, and he has the bestowing of it at his pleasure? yes
verily. And therefore they make no conscience of right or wrong: they neither
fear God nor man, but (so they may have their wills in pleasure, profit or
worldly estimation) they care for no further. Contrariwise those that fear God
have not only learned to abhor and detest such dealinges in themselves, but
also in those monstrous Anachims that follow such wicked ways. An objection.
But here may seem to arise a doubt, how this can be so, that Satan should
have so little interest in the world, seeing, our savior Christ does in Ioh.
31. and 14. 30.
diverse places call him ye prince of this world and s. Paul calls 1. Cor. 4.
4.
him ye god of this world. I answer y^ these be two true sayings: Answer.
satan has nothing to do with the things of this world, and satan is the
god of this world, for it is evident that god Gene. 1. and 31.
made all things both in heaven and earth, which were all exceedyng good, and
he does continually so protect and govern the^, yt the Mat. 10 29.
sparow falls not on y^ ground, without his will, so y^ in general they are
thus to be reconciled, whatsoever is good in ye world that is god ye ruler and
disposer of: but whatsoever is evil yt sin does satan direct and govern.
Then he has nothing to do with y^ things of this world, so far as they be
good, and used to the right end: Which is to y^ glory of him that made them and
the benefit of the possessor, but he is prince of this world, first in respect
of the sin that is committed in the same, for as he was the first ye sinned, so
was he y^ cause of the transgression of mankind, Satan in three respects
called the prince of this world.
and therefore is the continual ringe leader of all ungodliness. Secondly he
is called the prince of this world in respect of that he does, and not of that
he may do, for he is an usurper, to wit through sin captiueth and subdueth
man unto his obedience and slavish subjection, whereunto men do so generallye
yield, that he only seems to be served and the Lord of heaven and earth
thrust out at the doors, and therefore is he called the prince of this world.
Thirdly he is called the god of this world for that they why (by the just
Judgment of god) are given over Romans 1 28.
into a reprobate mind, being Ephesians. 4. 18.
blinded in their understanding, do give themselves over not to obey the
truth, but to 2. These. 2 11.
believe lies, and obey Satan in the whole course of their life, yet all this
his power and souerainetie is ruled by the raynes of Gods providence, that he
can do nothing, without his Job. 1. 12
leave, no not so much as enter into Mat. 8. 31
the swine, which is unto us a great comfort and (indeed) the staff of all
our affiaunce, for when we see the malice of Satan, the cruelty of the
wicked, and our own wickedness we could have nothing to resist, but only
this that Gods providence, whom we fear and in whom we repose our confidence,
so directs all things that without his will (which is in his son Jesus
Christ loving toward us) nothing can be attempted or performed.

If thou will fall down and worship me) We see his liberal offer and how
bountiful a hand he has in that which is none of his own, and yet
notwithstanding does he promise this upon mere liberality without respect of
any other matter, no, it was nener his meaning, for none shall be benefited by
him but such as will do him homage: so that we may note herein Satan, that
mind which he accused the servant of God Job. 1. 9
Job to be of: to wit that Job did not serve God for nothing: but because God
had enriched him therefore (only) was he godly and feared the Lord, and why did
he charge him with such a heinous crime? for sooth because he was of the same
disposition himself. The wickedest man thinks every man as bad as himself.
The doctrine (then) that we learn out of the same is this: that as we see
Satan to be minded, even so (if you look into the course of this world)
shall we see his instruments to be affected: that is, to measure others by
themselves, and to (think though they be most wicked, and most vilely
desposed) that no man is better: so that the deceitful man will trust none, but
thinks that every man will beceaue him. The liar believes not an other of
his word, because he himself makes no conscience of lying, he that shunneth
y^ offenses that the world exclaymeth against (only) to stop men's mouths,
does think that no man does more: in one word, let a man be never of wickedly
bent, yet thinks he no other men to be any better: contrariwise, the man
whose mind is truly regenerated thinks so basely of himself and by charity
(the fruit of his faith) 1. Cor. 13. 7.
hops so well of every man, that (unless he know the contrary) he always
judges the (...). Again you see how liberal he is of promise, but he tieth
it unto a condition: wherein you may perceive how contrary his affection is
unto the mind of the Lord: it is true that God will be worshipped of all that
he deals mercifully withal, but yet does he freely bestow his mercy, without
any respect of our worshipping him aforehand. But Satan will be worshipped
before he will perform his promise. So that as the contrary disposition of
God and Satan appear in this point, in like manner (if you examine it well)
shall you find them that are of God, Which what mind the. godly are. liberal.
and them that are of their father the devil to be, for the godly having
obtained mercy at the hands of God, are also inclined unto pity and mercy
being careful to do good (according to their power) not for gain, but
because God has been favorable unto them, the wicked (on the other side)
Whom the wicked do like and whom not.
being minded as he is by whom they are guided, will promise very bountifully,
and give as sugared words and use as glorious terms, as though their tongues
were made of Butter: But all that ever they promise is with an if for if, they
gain not by thee: or if thou please not their humor, or if thou crowch not
unto them: they will not only not perform the least part of their large
promises, but thou shall find it in experience, that they will be unto thee
(as Satan was ever after to Christ) thy greatest enemies, and as much as in
them lies) do thee the greatest displeasure. Well, let us proceed the devil
worshipped: what does he desire when he would have Christ Jesus to fall down
and worship him? surely no less then that which was due unto God the father:
for look what it is that God requires of us in his word, when he bids us
worship him, and all that does Satan most impudently challenge unto him: But
you will say unto me, that Satan showed himself herein a very fool, for no
man was ever found that would say he would worship the devil. Well, thus can
he cunningly teach thee to play with terms and speeches, while he get
dominion over thee to make thee worship him in deed. For (if we shall truly
measure things by the line of truth) we shall see that Satan is greatly
obeyed in this point, for what is it to worship God but to fear him, and bring
forth the fruits of the same which is obedience? Now we cannot tell one of us
when an other does fear, but by the fruits, which (Christ tells us) the
Mat. 7. 26.
Tree is known, by the fruit by which every Tree is to be known, is
obedience, and by obedience, are we known whose Romans 6. 16.
servants we be (as S. Paul teaches us) the obedience unto God is godliness,
in the keeping of his commandments, the obedience unto Satan is wickedness
in transgressing the laws of God. Now let us come to the point: if there be
more found that give themselves over unto sin, in neglecting of the word of
God, blaspheming of his holy name, profaining of his Saboath, disobedience,
whoredom, Who they be that fall down and worship the devil.
drunkenness, unlawful gettyng and slaundering: then that be careful to know
GOD, and strive against all impedimentes to reform their lives according to
his holy word, it must needs follow that the greatest number (how soever they
pretend the contrary) do obey Satan in this point to fall down and worship
him: besides this there is an other way to worship Satan, which many do walk
in and that is thus. We know that those which worship God do propound unto
them selves his laws to be obeyed, and so make godliness their chiefest
study: if then we propound any other thing for our chiefest mark, we
worship Satan. They therefore that make their Phil. 3. 19
belly their God (as the scripture speaks) in giuyng themselves over to
Epicurisme, and voluptuousness of living, they that are carried away with
covetousness (which Ephesians. 5. 5
is Idolatry) and have their greatest care to heap up riches together, they
that make the vanity of worldly pomp and honor their principal end: (unto one
of which (almost) the whole world is admitted) do not serve God, but fall
down before Satan and worship him. This is notable, for Satan preuayleth in
this point yet further not only in getting men into his jurisdiction to fail
down and worship him, but also in making men his substitutes herein, Petty
Devils.
creating them petty devils to challenge the same things unto themselves,
from the hands of men which he himself would have had given him there of the
son of God: Which (in a word) is thus put in execution, when soever any man
requires obedience unto himself, which cannot be done without the breach of
Gods commandementes, or commands any thing which is to the hinderance of
the glory of God and staying of ye course of godliness. For God has set every
man in his several place, not for the breaking, but the further obeying of his
laws, and he never erected that calling which is a stop unto his glory: For
so much as he made Pro. 16. 4.
all things to serve thereunto. Now you see (I trust) in some measure, what
the Devil would have Christ do, and how far he proceeds in practicing
this in the world among men. I am sure that you think by this time, yt this
temptation is not the subtilest, but the grosest and most palpable impiety of
all other, and therefore Satan may seem to deal foolishly, but we are
thereby to note, that he does not only deal cunnyngly but also most
impudently. For we see in experience how that he (often) labors to persuade
men unto most horrible facces, as to murder their dearest and nearest friends:
Yea oftentimes, to make away their own selves, and (alas) he prevails many
times there withal. But yet (even) by this may we learn (if it please God to
give us the right use of ^t) great comfort, for first, when Satan does deal
thus impudently, and shamelessel^^ with us, to suggest into our minds, most
heinous, and horrible motions, we are, as carefully to resist the^ (least they
overtake us to our own destruction) What we are to think when Satan is most
ferce
so comfortably to lift up our hearts in hope that God will in his good time
clear our minds of such cogitations, and also persuade the same unto others,
in the like ease ever hoping that the Lord will give their extremities a joyful
issue: Secondly, when we see that our troubles do not diminish, but increase
(and in our eyes we being weakened) and Satan seems to insult in such
boystrous manner as though he had almost got the victory, even in that case we
have Christ Jesus for our example, who was tempted at the last, most haynously,
and therefore we are to be so far from hanging down our heads and dispayring
at the view thereof, that we may conceive good hope, that our deliuerannce is so
much the nearer; as our foe is the fiercer and Gods presence is most forcible
and favorable, where Satan's enimitie is most hard and cruel.

Then said Jesus unto him avoid Satan) When Christ does see the impudency
and boldness of this tempter, that notwithstanding he was beaten back twice
before, yet he not only sets upon him again, but in most shameful manner,
arrogateth unto himself y^ dominion of ye world, which (indeed) is none of
his, though he do usurp upon it (as we have heard) and upon the same has so
brazen a face, as to bid Christ Jesus the son of God (who was come into the
world to teach men, the true worship of god) to give unto him that honor which
is due to god alone: He answers him more sharply then before he did, saying
unto him avoid Satan, as if he should have said get thee hence, thou
adversary to me, and to all mankind, thou enemy to all truth thou seducer and
deceiuer, thou liar and usurper, avoid out of my presence, for what soever
thou promisest, if it should be performed, for so much as thou art my
professed enemy it cannot be of any good meaning of thee, The view of the name
of Satan and what it signifies avails to beat him back.
and therefore cannot do me any good. So that by this first branch of the
answer of Christ Jesus unto satan, we learn, to begin withal this lesson
that the consideration of the name of the enemy and what it does signify,
because it expresses his nature, is a forcible means to beat him back and
disapoynt him of his purpose, and weaken his strength. And therefore it has
pleased the holy Ghost in the scriptures, to term him with these titles which
do make manifest his disposition, as the name of Devil signifies a deprauer
and wrangler, he is called Lion in respect of his devouring of men; the term
of Dragon imports his venomous poison, Christ says he is the Ioh. 8. 44
father of lies, to show that he never means so well as he prete^deth and
here he is reproved by the name of satan which signifies an enemy or
adversary. The fair offers of an enemy* can not be in good meaning.
All is to this end that we may learn this lesson: that for so much as his
whole endeavor is to destroy us, and that he is a professed enemy unto us,
those offers that he seeks to bestow upon us (for so much as they come from
him that wishes us no good) though we see no hurt in them, yet are we justly
to suspect them: and therefore to take heed, that we in no wise yield unto them.
Again we see how Christ takes him up far more sharply then in the former
aunsweres he did, for then he answered him simply with the text, and neither
reproved him nor urged the meaning of the words but only in the bare
alleging of it, and here he not only takes him up with a most sharp
reproof, but also pressed him (as we shall see anon) with the text in more
forcible manner. The cause whereof, we are to search out, that we may have the
benefit of it to our own instruction. If you mark well these things that
satan urged unto Christ before this, you shall find the^ to be of an other
kind, namely to concern him self and not God (immediately) as this does, for
though it be a dishonor unto God, when a man is urged to offend in the least
point of his Religion: yet it concerns the Lord more nearely when one shall be
solicited to violate that worship and honor thereof he is very Exodus 20 5.
ielous, and which he will not give unto an other, and according as it is more
heinous in the eyes of the Lord, so is it to be esteemed a thing more odious
unto man, and therefore to be repelled with more courage: Which (if you mark
well) you shall in the practice of our Savior in the combat, for so long as
satan meddled with those things that concerned Christ himself (as the matter
of his body) he answers him (though always most perfectly yet) more mildly,
but when he comes unto this point, to urge him unto those things, which
concern the threatening of God from the jurisdiction of his creatures, and
depriuyng him of his glory and worship, he deals no more mildly, and meckely
but rebukes him in most vehement manner, and painteth him out in his natural
colors: When we are to show our selves mylde, and when sharp
so that the example of Christ is unto us a notable president, how to behave
our selves toward wicked men in the world, whereof some are enemies (thought
to God in deed) in pretense, only to our persons: some even in speech and
behavior professed foes unto our Religion, and so immediately unto the Lord,
concerning them that are our enemies (for so much as we are to be patterns of
all patience and Romans 12. 21.
to overcome evil with good) we must use our selves more gently toward them
2. Tim. 2 24. 25.
reprouyng the^ with all long suffering, and meekness, to see if it will
please God to grant the^ repentance and deliver them out of the snares of the
Devil: But if they be enemies unto our Religion, then are we to put on an
other kind of behavior toward them, that is to resist them (even unto their
faces) with all courage and boldness, that they may know y^ we be zealous for
the Lord God of hosts, and tender his glory, more then our own estimation, or
benefit, which practice (if we look into the scriptures) we shall see to be
observed by the most notable instruments of Gods glory, for that is said of
Moses, that he was Number. 1^* 3.
meekest man that was upon the earth, and yet none was ever either before him,
or after him (Jesus Christ excepted) more filled with zeal and courage the^ he
showed himself to be, when he dealt with them that were enemies to God and his
truth. The Apostle Paul who in his doctrine does so often exhort us unto
Exodus 5. etc.
meekenes, and gentleness: yet look what singular boldness he shows him
self to be of when he dealt with that Ephesians. 4. 2. 3.
sorcerer, who would have perverted Sergius Paulus from the faith. But (to go
no further then our savior himself, who is to us an example of all
perfection) does not he bid us learn of him, for he is lowly and meek? does
not he show himself in the whole course of his life most mild? and yet how
Act. 13 10.
roughly and sharply deals he with the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
deprauers of the truth of Mat. 11 19.
the law of GOD. Math. 23 23.
We see (then) in what manner, and at what times we ought to be mild, and
again when we must be earnest, which is a lesson needful to be learned (as
generally of all true Christians so particularly and especially of us
Ministers) for these are such days (if not worse) as our savior Christ spoke
of, that whether we come Luke 7. 31 etc.
full or fasting, we are refused, if we pipe, they will not dance, and if we
weep, they will not mourn, that is of what spirit soever we be: The
perverseness of the world.
whether mild, or sharp, whether gentle or rough, no way will please them,
because they will needs be dampened. In which perverse frowardnes this doctrine
will stand us in good stead that is, to be patient, and gentle in our own
cause, but zealous, and whot in the cause of the Lord, and then let the world
take exceptions, as long, and as much as it can, our conscience will bear us
witness, that which GOD commands: wherewith whosoever is offended, sins
not against us, but the Lord.

It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou
serve) this is the repulse that Christ gives unto satan: and such a blow as
made him (finally) to depart for that time. The words that are here alleged,
be not to be found, in so many sillables in any place of the scriptures, though
the sense and meaning is in many places, that whereunto Christ alludeth is
written in two several places of Deuteronomy, where be these words: cap. 16.
13 10. 20.
thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him: In stead of fear, Christ
puts worship: and to the word (serve) he joins (only) both which are
to be considered: for the first: where Christ takes worship for fear, the
difference is no more, The difference betwixt the fear and worship of God.
but to set down the effect in stead of the cause, for the fear of God is
that reverent opinion that man ought to have of God, in regard of his greatness
and his own weakness: and the worship of God, is that necessary fruit that
fear brings forth. Now for as much as Satan challenged unto himself
worship, which is the fruit of the fear of god (and therefore is always
included in the word fear) Christ opposing his answer, to the demand of
the enemy, takes that part of the sense of the commandment (though not the
very word) which the adversary did seem to arrogate unto himself. Now for
the word (only) which Christ seems to add unto the text, if we mark it
well, we shall see that it is most agreeable to the meaning of the holy Ghost:
for that sentence (in so much as it belongs to the worship of God) must be
referred unto the first commandment, wherein God excludes all others and
takes all unto him self, the meaning of it then must needs be, that this
service is (only) to be given unto God: Again we know in the course of the
whole scriptures, that when god speaks (as we call it) indefinitely, the
sense is ever to be taken generally: as when he says Ier. 17, 5. Ioh. 5. 39.
cursed is he that makes flesh and blood his arm, he means all and every
sort of flesh and blood, again when he says, search the scriptures, for in
them you think to have eternal life: he means in them only, so when he
says, thou shall fear the Lord, and serve him, he means only him: you see
then how the answer of christ though it vary something in the words of the
text which he aleageth, yet it differs nothing from the sense and meaning.
Now if you mark the words spoken and lay them to the demand of Satan you
shall see that they are (being thus alleged) much more forcible then
otherwise. For if Christ had spoken in general of the fear of God, Satan
(being a cauyller) might have replied that he required worship and not
fear, but when Christ speaks of worship, which (in deed) is contained in
fear, he stops his mouth that way, again, if he had said thou shall serve
God: Satan might (peradventure) have answered, so thou may, and yet
worship me. But when Christ adds this word (only) he speaks no more,
then the text conteyneth in it (being compared with other places) and yet
cutteth of all occasions, from the enemies of further wrangling. The manner
therefore of Christ's dealing, with the text does teach us: that for the right
ouerthroing of an adversary, and conuicting of any gaynesaier, An example how
to allege the scriptures.
it is greatly material how the scripture be aleaged: for it is not only,
meet that the sword of the spirit be drawn out to cut down, all that is
raised against the truth: but also, that an edge be set upon it, by the
wisdom of the handler. For as every one that can handle a swoorde, is not
bye and bye able to wound his enemy, and defend himself with it, so every
one that alleges the Scripture (though he allege it truly, and to a good
purpose) is not able to overthrow the adversary with it, unless he do
understand the true meaning of it, that he may produce it, to the most
advantage to his cause. Thus we see how Christ applies the Scripture, and
what we have to learn, out of the manner of the same. The doctrine that we are
to observe out of the answer is this, that (in the matter of Religion) not
only the heart and inward affection, is due to God, What it is to worship God.
and to be given only unto him, but also all externe and outward gestures
either of word, countenance, or corporal behavior. Which is diligently to
be noted because of our Papists, who will confess that God (for so much as
he is a Ioh. 4. 14
spirit) must have all spiritual worship, but (say they) that lets not,
but we may give outward worship, unto Saints Images Relics etc. Wherein
they either show themselves marvelous ignorant, or (rather) wilfully
obstinate, for the word that Christ here uses for worship, is not to be
understood only of inward but outward worship rather: and signifies
(properly) to prostrate, or fall down upon the face or knees: Now for as
much, as Christ vendicateth this to be due only unto God, it is evident that
no outward worship (in respect of Religion) is due to any other, but because
they will evidently show themselves, of set purpose, to gaynesaye the manifest
truth, they flee unto a foolish and frivolous distinction of two Greek words
Latria, and Doulia: and say that (in deed) the worship, which is called
Latria, is due to God, but Dulia is due to Saints and Angels, but if I shall
show unto them, that both those words are used in the book of God
indifferently when the worship of God is spoken of, The popish distinction of
Latria and Doulia over thrown.
what will then become of their distinction, for the first word they make no
question, and therefore I need not speak of it, but let them (or their
Clerks that understand the tongues) look into the sixtenth Chapter, of the
Epistle to the Romans 6 the Romans 16. 18.
eightenth Uerse and there they shall see that he (speaking of the service of
Jesus Christ) uses the Greek word, from whence Doulia is derived: But let
them go (as not worthy to be named when we speak of the service of GOD) and
let us learn the lesson that our Savior does teach us in this place, to
know that God will have all inward and outward service that ever any man
ought to do, in respect of Religion, and therefore let us take heed that
while we part stakes betwixt him and others (who in deed can away with no
fellow) we procure his Majesty not only to reject our service as stinckyng in
his nostrells, but also renounce us and say at the latter end Mat. 7. 23.
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

( Then the Devil left him) Now follows (in a word) the issue of his
trial: First in respect of his adversary. Secondly of himself, of his
adversary that he (being put to the foil) went his way and left him ( Luke
says) for a season, whereby we learn: First that the end of trials is, (
James says) if we resist the Devil he will flee from us. Secondly, Iam. 4.
7.
that yet he will never finally be ouerthrown so long as we live, for as he
departed from Christ (but for a season) so does he leave us, not as though he
were utterly convicted, but as one that goes to make better provision against
us, and to wait his better opportunity, and therefore we may never promise
our selves rest, from his assaults so long as we are in this tabernacle of
clay (as is noted above) subject to corruption and mortality: again it is a
comfort for them that are often tempted, that they never distrust or despair,
though their troubles are many, for so much as it was the lot of Jesus Christ
the son of God.

( The Angels ministered unto him) that is, the Lord sent his holy angels to
comfort him, not that he was destitute before but that in his trial he having
lesser feeling of their presence might now have more consolation, in their
service, which is the end of all the trials of al Gods Children, (as we are
taught in many places of the scriptures) for that the Angels are also
appointed to serve for their comfort, which shall be Heb. 1. 14
heirs of salvation. And therefore let us with Heb. 12 1. etc.
patience run the race that is set before us, looking to Jesus the aucthour
and finisher of our faith: Let us be contented to abide the blows of Satan,
the reproves of the world: and pricks of our flesh, knowing that as it is
Gods will and determination to have us pass through the furnace of afflictions:
so will he give (in his good time) joyful issue of the same, to his own
eternal glory, the endless confusion of our adversaries that molest us, and
to the everlasting consolation of our own souls.

A Prayer after these Sermons.
MOst gracious God and loving Father, we thy unworthy servants present our
selves here before thy glorious Majesty, not trusting to our own merits or
worthynesse, but only to thy mercy in thy son Jesus Christ. For we
acknowledge, from the bottom of our hearts, against our selves, that we are
not only conceived and borne in sin, but also have continued in the same,
from the beginning of our time unto this present, transgressing thy laws and
commandments both in thought word and deed, in so much that we are not
worthy to appear before thee much less to presume to beg or crave any good
thing at thy hands, with hope to obtain the same, if thou should deal
with us according to our deseruinges, notwithstanding (most merciful and holy
Father) for as much as thou have commanded us to call upon thee, when we feel
our selves laden with the burden of our sins, and have promised to ease us.
We trusting unto the truth of this thy promise do come unto thee at this
present, most humbly beseeching thee (for thy son our Savior Jesus Christ's
sake) to pardon and forgive us all our sins, to blot them out of thy
remembrance, and to bury them is silence that they never appear before thee
to accuse us. And beseech thee (good Father) to work in our hearts an earnest
loathing of sin, a detestatio^ of all iniquity with a careful desire and an
unfeigned endeavor, to frame our lives and conuersations, according to thy
blessed will. Lord for so much as we have learned out of thy holy word, that all
those whom thou have vouchsafed to give into the hands of thy son Jesus
Christ, shall be continually (so long as they live in this present world) be
assailed, with trials, temptations, tribulations and afflictions, by reason of
the malice of Satan, their enemy, the allurementes of the world: and the
enticements of their own sinful nature: We acknowledge and confess, that a
greater honor can no way befall unto us, then to be molested by thy enemies for
the testimony of thy truth: yet (Lord) such is our weakness by nature, and
so unfit is our flesh to begin, or continue any good thing, that we must
needs quayle in the same, and utterly renounce thee and thy truth, unless
thou of thy gracious goodness assiste us with thy grace, in such wise, as both
the loathinesse of our flesh (to do any good thing) be taken away, and also thy
favor so support us, that we may be strengthened to abide in thy true fear
and service. We beseech thee therefore good Father (even for his sake whose
blood thou accomptest not too dear for our redemption) that as it is thy will
to impose upon us this estate of bearyng the Cross for thy sake, so thou
would give us strength, contentedness and patience to make us able to under
go the same. Lord let not our weakness, betray thy glory, let not our
shrincking, give advantage unto thy foes: neither let our wantes, any way
hinder thy graces from coming unto us: but for as much as thou have thought it
most meet, to have thy glory showed in weakness, thy power to be perfect in
infirmity, and the foolish ones of the world to confound the wise, grant (we
beseech thee) that we may so sight under the banner of Jesus Christ thy
son, and so strive to build his kingdom, in the midst of his enemies,
that by us thy name may be glorified, thy truth may be magnified, thy Son
Christ Jesus may be advanced, and our souls and consciences everlastingly
comforted. Lord we pray thee grant these graces, not alone to us that are here
present. etc.




