The Schoolmaster, or Teacher of Table Philosophy. A most pleasant and merry
companion, well worthy to be welcomed (for a daily Gheast) not only to all men's
boorde, to guide them with moderate and wholesome diet: but also into every man's
company at all times, to recreate their minds, with honest mirth and
delectable devises: to sundry pleasant purposes of pleasure and pastyme.
Gathered out of diverse, the best approved Auctours: and divided into four
pithy and pleasant Treatises, as it may appear by the contents.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones: dwelling oueragaynst S. Sepulchers
Church without Newgate. 1576.

The Printers preamble to al estates, for the friendly entertaynment of this
Teacher of Table Philosophy.
YOu worthy wights, that hautie halles do hold,
Whose tables sundry states do daily haunt:
Give leave (my Lords) this Teacher may be bold
To prease in place, and show him self a flaunt,
Amongst your merry gheasts of sere and sundry sort,
To play his merry parts, in plain and pleasant sport.
What though his phrase, and style be rudely framd,
His fruits are furthering to your healthes avail:
To deal in daily diet, although he may be blamd,
To tell his mind therein he does not fail,
To show the diverse kinds, of every meat and drink
Bread, broth, flesh, fish, or what you else can think.
Yea, more then this, he means for to show
Among the states your table round about
Demeanor meet from hie unto the low,
For each degree to teach he does not doubt:
The Prince, the page, the Gentle and the slave,
To serve his proper turn example here may have.
Divines perhaps, will hearken to his tale.
The warlyke knight, the Squire, the soldier h^ld,
The merchant eke that makes the merry sale.
The lawier to that pleads the case for gold.
The Lady bright will hear when he does speak,
The widow, wife, child, maid, lame, blind, and weak,
His problemes fine, will somewhat please you all,
And queint demaundes, so pithie in each poinct
His iestes I know will please both great small
And hit your vein, and nick you on the ioinct
What so you be, or where you do soiourne
This pleasant pithy book will surely serve your turn,
Then bid him welcome, Gentles all, and say:
Come merry Gheast, come near and sit thee down,
Undo thy pack, show forth we do thee pray
Such news as may us merry make in field and town:
Thus him to you I leave, to see what he can show,
For doubtless, I to joy your minds, this travail did bestow.
FINIS.
To the right worshipful M. Alexander Nowell, Deane of the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul's in London, Grace and peace from God, etc.
RIght worshipful, having by chance happened on this Pamflet, coming unto my
hands both without name and orderly beginning: I did not only peruse it my
self (according to my simple skill) but showed it also unto some of my friends:
of whose learning and Judgment very many have good opinion, and being thereto
sufficiently willing of my self, I was by them and others exhorted to publish
the same in print, for that it seemed to contain nothing else but wholesome
diet, sauced with honest mirth and pleasant pastimes: and interlaced with pithy
and effectual examples, tending unto the aduau^cement of virtue and suppression
of vice, a fit mean to delight and recreate the weak, and specially the over
weryed spirits of Studients. Now calling unto my remembrance (which I cannot
forget) the manifold benefits and courtesies at all times by your worship
bestowed on me and mine, as well in calli^g me (most unworthy) not a few times
unto your table, as otherwise, the least part whereof I am not able of my self
to recompense: my good will not wanting, but mine ability failing. I have now
presumed to offer this poor present unto you, coming from an unfeigned heart,
partly the travail of another man, but the testimony of my hearty affection,
hoping that your worship will accept it in the better part, the rather because I
have perceived you among other grave and weighty matters (as well of Religion as
otherwise) to solace your self and others at your Table, with seemly mirth in
opportunities uttered, according to the knowledge and capacity of those your
poor neighbors and others with whom your bourd is always furnished, either
concerning the qualities of meats, or their vsages in foreign co^tries, to the
great delectation of the hearers: To the which purpose, there is much matter
set down in this present work, as also to other effect, wherein if there shall be
any thing found, not convenient for your learned view and severe Judgment: I
heartily crave your worships pardon: protesting, that the same is not written
for so grave ears, but desirous to please all sorts in honest delight: I
thought it good not to leave out any thing, but to admonish, that who so shall
not so well like of some trifling tales of this book, in the fourth part, he
may sufficiently recreate himself in the other.iii. parts.

Thus much having been over bold to utter my mind unto your worship,
presuming upon your accustomed humanity, there remains no more, but that I
commend you unto the tuition of the almighty: who always keep you and yours,
and send you now a merry new year and many, to his good pleasure and glory. Amen.

Your worships to command.

This first book of Table Philosophy shows the nature and quality of all
manner meats, drinks and sawces, that are used at meals.
ACcording to the saying of Macrobius. Macrobi^^ lib. 1. de Saturnalia.
It were a very unseemly thing that Philosophy which entreats curiously in
books, of duties, and behavior at feasts, should be afearde to show her
self also at feasts: as who should say, she would not avouch that in deeds,
which she professes in words: Or that she could keep no mean or measure,
who only prescribes the mean and measure her self unto al humane affairs.
Neither do I now welcome her to my table to the intent she should moderate
herself, whose order of instruction is to teach all other, how to moderate and
govern themselves. And shortly after in the same place he says, Wherefore,
such a kind of Philosophy, there is no goodman, no place, nor company, that
will exclude it, which so behaueth it self in every respect, that it seems
to be necessary in every place, as though it were unlawful it should be
absent. Then forasmuch as moderate Philosophy ought to be present at the table
and feasts of the wise, and learned: every goodman must use the same, both
for to profit and delight others. For as the same Macrobius writes, our talk
ought to be merry at the table, more poudred with pleasure the sauced with
severity. And our communication at the boorde, as it ought to be faier with
honesty: so must it be pleasant with delight. Wherefore, it is generally
expedient, that all table talk be either concerning the nature and quality of
the meats and drinks whereof we feed, or of table questions wherewith we may
be made merry and sturred up to mirth at the boorde, or else touching them their
condition, and manners with whom we meet at the table, or lastly of such
meriments and honest devises wherewith we may be refreshed and delighted at our
meat. And for this cause I have determined to entitle this work, The
Schoolmaster or teacher of Table Philosophy, and have divided the same into
four several parts. The Arguments whereof, I have thought good to set down
together before the whole work, and afterward every Argument severally
before each book whereto it belongs.

The Argument of the first book, which is of natural Philosophy.
The first book treats of the nature and quality of all manner of meats,
drinks, and sauces, that are used at meals.

The Argument of the second book, which is moral Philosophy.
The second book speaks of the manners, bebauiour, and usage of all such,
with whom we may happen to be conuersaunt withal, as well at the table, as all
other times among company.

The Argument of the third book, and is of natural Philosophy.
The third book conteyneth certain delectable and pleasant questions and
pretty Problemes to be propounded for mirth among company at all times, but
most conveniently at the table.

The Argument of the fourth book, and is of moral discourses.
The fourth book, compriseth honest Iestes, delectable devises and pleasant
purposes to be used among company, for delight and recr^ation at all times,
but especially at meal times at the table.

The Teacher of Table Philosophy, as well Natural as Moral.
The first Book of Meats, Drinks, and Sauces.
Chap. 1. Of convenient time to eat meat, and how often a Man may eat
according to his Complexion.
NOw first of all, let us see concerning the time and hour to eat, which
were the most convenient: whereof Rhasis makes mention, saying, Rhasis.
that it is best time to eat, when the weight of the meat which we eat last
before is funck downwarde, and the bottom of the stomach is become light, and
there remain no swelling nor fulness, and a man have moderatly exercised
himself before, and he have a good appetite: then is it ye best time to feade.
Moreover, as the same aucthour says, a man must take heed that he defer not
to feade when his appetite serves him, unless it be some counterfeit
appetite, such as chances sumtimes to Drunkards, and those that loath their
meat. But so soon as one that is not drunk, begins to have an appetite,
and the nourishment which he received before were not mutch nor gross: then
ought he to eat presently without all delay. But if he defer eating so
long until his appetite be past which he had before: then were it best for
him to eat some of the Syrup of Violets, or the Syrup called Acetosus, or
drink warm water, and so to abstain from eating until he have vomited, or
gone to stool, or that his appetite begin to come again. Likewise, the same
aucthor in ye same place says farther. This is very diligently to be
observed, that every man eat such meats as he has binne accustomed unto, and
use to feed as often as he has binne wont, unless this custom of his has
bin eeuell, and therefore ought to be eschued howbeit not suddenly, but by
means, and by little and little. And a man must so dispose his feeding times,
that he eat twice beetweene one day and a night, or at the most twice in one
day, or, which is more temperate thrice in two days. As for those which have
lean and dry bodies, it is hurtful unto them to eat but once in a day. And
it is eeuell for such as have gross and fat bodies to eat twice in aday.
Also those that do exercise themselves, and labor mutch, have need of meat
of more gross substance then those which use contrary order, who require
contrary meats.

Auerrois. in Cant. Auicen.
The Commentary writer Auerrois, upon the Canticles of Auicen, says thus: It
is a more temperate and orderly custom for a man to feed twice in two days.
For some do think that the perfection of the third digestion is accomplished
in eighteen hours, in proportion whereof when we eat three refections the
digestion thereof is finished in all parts of the body in that time, or much
there about. And whereas I would have eighteen hours beetweene two meals:
it is thereby evident that the most convenient time to eat, is when a man
feels himself lightened, and has fully digested the meat which he eat
before.

Chap. 2. Of Appetite, and custom to eat.
Auicen. in Cant.
COncerning Appetite and custom to eat, Auicen writes in the second part of
his Canticles. Wherefore let a man feed according to the use and custom of
his own nature, not omitting to eat those meats that are delectable. Upon
which place Auerrois writes thus, Auerrois.
in his Commentary: Custom is likened unto Nature, which is to say, Custom
must needs be observed although it were eeuell, and not to be commended. And
whereas he says: Appetite is not to be omitted, which is a precept of this
Art: it is to be understood in all meats whether they be desired for that they
be of their own Nature commendable, or otherwise. And therefore it is said,
that of two sorts of meats that which is less good and pleases more the
Appetite: is better for us, then that which is better and less pleases our
fancy. Rhasis.
Rhasis also upon the fourth of Almansor says: it chances many times, Alm. 4
that some meats that are eeuell, are found to agree with some natures which
cannot abstain from them as other some can. And perhaps some meats that are
good, are perceived not to agree with some men's stomachs, from which it were
good for them to abstain wholly. And if there be some meats agreeing with some
Natures which are desirous of them, although they be not good nor wholesome: yet
are they to be yielded unto the Appetite, unless they be exceedinge eeuell*
and a man must beware that he use not always naughty nutriment.

Chap. 3. Of the order of Meals, and eating Meat.
THE cause why our Digestion is many times corrupt is this: because at one
meal we feed on sundry sorts of Meats, eatinge the gross before the
fine, and fillinge our selves with sundry kind of cates made with broathes
thickened with grated bread, and to to long protracting the time from the
beeginning of the Meal to the end. But for the better ordering of our diet,
we must note: that it is best in Winter to use meats actually hot, and in
Summer actually cold. Howbeit we must beware of Meats over hot as they come
out of the pot, or from the fire, and take heed of them that are very cold,
as such as are cooled upon the Snow. Auicen in his Canticles says thus:
that moist and slipperie meats are to be eaten before such as bind, Auicen.
and that which is sweet must be mingled with that which is sower, and the
dry corrected with the moist, and the cold with the hot. And whereas we say
that the moiste and liquid must be taken before the binding: that is a precept
in the regiment and order of meat, for that it is required to the preservation
of health, that the meat be measured in qualytie, quantytie, time, and order.
Adding also unto these conditions, yt the Meat be good, and well dressed.
Which rule is gathered of the contrary, to wit, that one contrary be brought
to a just temperature by his contrary, as are the qualeties sweet by sower,
dry by moist, cold by warmthe, and such like, above recited.

Chap. 4. Of a convenient place to feed in.
Auicen.
ACcording to the advertisement of Auicen in his Canticles, we ought to have a
special regard to the place wherein we feed, that it be quiet and cold, and
through blown with the wind, and that it be so at the time and hour when we
intend to feed therein. And therefore in this point it behooves a man to be
dylygent. Auerrois.
Auerrois the Commentary writer says, that we must look to this most
especially in Summer, because then erternall heat weekeneth natural heat, like
as the shining of the Sun puts out the fire if it come to it, and yet when
the fire is once come into the shadow it reuiueth again. Rhasis.
And Rhasis in the place above recited, wills us to eat our meat at cool
times, and if case we cannot get a cold place, yet to watch a cold time to
feed in, and so after that we be refreshed we may sleep, and take our rest.

Chap. 5. Of Meats and Drinks, whereon we feed at the Table.
HEreafter we have to entreat of such meats and drinks as are for the most
part used at the Table. And first of Bread, Rhasis.
Rhasis writes upon the third Book of Almansor, saying: Bread that is made
of Wheat is in many respects most convenient f^r men, especially if it be well
seasoned, well leauened, well ^aked, fine ground, and purely cleansed, although
it be then sumwhat hard of concoction. Auicen.
And Auicen shows the cause why it is so: saying that the better it is
boulted the easier it is of disgestion, and so m^tch the harder how mutch the
more it is full of Bran. And the cause is: for that the bran hinders the
passedge, and the slipperinesse of the voydinge of it. And that is the best
bread which is baked in an Oven, temperatly seasoned and leauened, and made
light, that when it is cut it be hollow like a sponge. Moreover Rhasis in the
place before alleged, affirms ye unleavened bread is hard to digest, and
discendeth slowly out of the stomach, causinge griping in the belly,
obstruction in the liver, and procures grief in the kidneis. He says also
that Barlie bread is colder then Wheaten, of small nutriment ingendring
windynesse, the colic, and other cold diseases, and makes a man costiffe.
The bread of other kinds of grain is of quality according to the nature of
the grain of which it is made. Auicen says, let no Man eat Bread while it is
hot, but when it is one night old.

Chap. 6. Of Wine, and the qualyties thereof.
Wine, as Isaac says in the third book of dietes, Isaac.
causes good nutriment, brings health to the body, and preserves the same.
And there is no drink nor meat to be found so comfortable unto natural
heat, by reason of a certain famyliaritie with it, for naturally it
strengthens disgestion. The heat thereof is like unto natural heat, and
therefore it is soon converted into natural and most pure blood. It claryfieth
thick blood, serching the passadges of the whole body, but specially of the
veins, and cleanses them, it opens the Liver, it takes away dark
smokinesse which ingendereth heaviness, repelling the same from the heart, it
comfort al parts of the body, it causes the mind to forget sorrow and
grief, it brings mirth, it makes hardy, it sharpneth the wit. Wherefore it
is convenient for all ages, all seasons, all cuntreis, being received according
to ye custom of him that drinks the Wine, as so much his nature is able to
bear. Thus is it manifest, that Wine is good for all men if they take it
moderatly. And therefore in old times, Wine was likened unto the great
triacle, and to the Nature thereof. For it heateth cold bodies, and cools
hot, it moistneth the dry, and dries the moist. And many times it quenches
the thirst more then water. Rhasis.
Rhasis in the fore alleged place of his third book, says thus: Wine
generally heateth the stomach, and liver, making passedge for the nutriment, it
also increases blood, and fleash, and augmenteth natural heat, helping
nature to accomplish her peculiar functions. By Wine digestion beecommeth
stronger, superfluities are expulsed, and the passedge made easy for their
riddance. By wine health is permane^t, and strength abides, and oldage kept
away. Wine also makes the soul merry, but if it be immoderatly taken it
hurts the Liver, brain, and Sinews, it breadeth the Trembling, the Palsy,
and Apoplexy, and brings suddein death.

Chap. 7. Of Meade, and the properties thereof.
Rhasis.
THe drink which is made of Honey commonly called Meade, by the auctorytie of
Rhasis is very hot, ingendring read Choler. It agrees not with hot
complexions, but it is very convenient for cold temperatures. Auicen.
Auerrois also upon the Canticles of Auicen, says, that Mead is better then
wine, for such as have natural feeble sinews.

Chap. 8. Of strong or double Ale.
Rhasis,
DOuble Ale says Rhasis, in the place above recited, and chiefly which is made
of Barley, hurts the sinews, makes the head to ache, fills the body with
wind, but it provoke urine, and represseth the heat which cummeth of
drunkenness. But that Ale which is made of wheat, having in it Mintes and
Smaledge, well burned* is supposed to be better for all men, but especially it
is forbidden them that are hot in the Sun and conversant abroad, and of hot
disposition, and in an hot time of the year.

Chap. 9. Of fleash in general.
IT is confirmed by the auctority of Rhasis in the place before alleged,
Rhasis.
that of all nutriments Fleash nourishes most soonest, fatteth, and
strengthens. And those that use it mutch: have full bodies, and have need to
be let blood often, and specially if they drink wine with it. Generally, all
fleash heateth, and is counted unmeet for those that have an Ague, and are
troubled with replecion. Fleash that is red without fat: nourishes more then
that which has fat, for it ingendreth less superfluity, and strengthens the
stomach more. Course fleash which is of gross substance is fit for such as
labor, and fine fleash for those that use small exercise.

Chap. 10. Of the fleash of wild beasts.
Every beast generally, according to the division of Isaac in his third book
of Dietes, is either wild, or tame. Isaac.
The Fleash of wild beasts is dry, and hard of digestion, and yields
discommendable iuce by reason of their ouermutch motion and exercise which they
use, and the heat and dries of ye air wherein they abide, happening through the
vehement heat of the Sun, and lack of covert from the parching Sun beams. So
that wild fleash is of no good Nutriment, neither in quality nor quantity,
sauinge only the fleash of wild Goats. For their natural coldness is mutch
repressed by the ouermutch heat and dries, whereto they do accustom
themselves. Wherefore, saying also that the taste and unsavory smell of their
fleash is corrected by their exercise: it is some help unto digestion, that
their fleash may be very well and easily concocted. Al other tame beasts in
comparison to ye wild: are better to be liked of, and do more nourish, by
reason of their quietness, and the temperate air, yet are they sumdeale gross
and hard of digestion. And among these in my judgment, the Male beast is hotter
and in different moist above ye female, and is therefore more commended and ye
sooner digested. The fleash of the female, is more cold with immoderate
moisture, and therefore slower of digestion. And ye fleash of those beasts that
are gelded is of a middle nature between both.

Chap. 11. Of Kiddes fleash.
Rhasis.
Again, in the place of Rhasis by me erewhile alleged, it is written of Kiddes
fleash, that it is temperate, having no eeuel quality mixed with it, which
albeit it engender temperat blood: yet is it not convenient for laborers. As
for such as take no great pain, but live a gentleman's life: they cannot choose
a better kind of meat then this. For it is not altogether so easy of
concoction that it destroieth the disgestion, neither yet yields it so gross
or such plenty of nutriment that the body be thereby filled with replection,
and corrupt blood engendered. But the blood that is made thereof, is between
both, as neither thick nor thin: hot nor cold. In the same place also Isaac
says, that the sucking Kiddes are the best, of al other most excellent both
for taste, nourishment, and disgestion, ingendring good blood, for the milk
which they suck of their Da^mes gives unto them natural moisture.

Chap. 12. Of Lamb.
Isaac.
Lambs fleash also, as says ye same mine aucthor Isaac in the place often
before alleged, is good while they suck, by reason of the stoare of moisture
and slimines: yet the superfluity of fleame which it ingendereth whereby it
slippeth forth of the stomach before it be fully concocted: makes it sumwhat
fautie. Auerrois.
Howbeit Auerrois in the fifte of his Collections sets down, how that most
convenient it is that Lambs Fleash be placed in goodness next unto Kiddes
Fleash, which although it have mutch superfluity: yet is it of a moderate, and
commendable temperature.

Chap. 13. Of Rams fleash.
Rhasis.
TOuching the Fleash of Rams, Rhasis in the place before alleged is of
opinion, that it is groser then Kiddes Flesh, and increases more the strength
of Man, yielding mutch more superfluity then Kiddes Fleash does. Young Rams
of one year old are better then Lambs or Ewes, for if their fleashe be well
digested it ingendreth plenty of blood, and that good, specially if it be
Weathers fleash, for the heat and moisture of it is temperate which causes
the fleash to have a very good taste. But Galen the prince of Physicians, Galen
as Auerrois reports of him in the fifth of his collections, mislyketh the
fleash of weathers, and commends Veale exceedingly.

Cap. 14. Of Veale.
NExt insueth to entreat of Veale, which according to the judgment of Auerrois
is good and wholesome, Auerrois
as not having that sliminesse and coldenesse which is in Beef, and is more
sweet both to the mouth and nose, then any other fleash. And in this respect
it is better then Kid. But again, kid is better then Veale because it
ingendreth better humors. And mine aucthour Isaac in the place often above
rehearsed, says: Beef ingendreth gross blood, troubled, and Melancholic,
yields mutch nutriment hard of digestion, and painfully overcome by the
stomach, and difficulti dissolved into the parts of the body, and it binds
the belly. And if a man that is of a Melancholik complexion, use to eat beef:
he shall be grieved with the Spleen, fall into a quartaine Fever, and come into
a Dropsy. Also he shall ware itchie, have the Morfewe, Leprosy, Canker,
ringewoormes, according to the complexion of him which agrees fit with this
meat.

Chap. 15. Of Swines fleash.
AFter the judgment of Auicen, Auicen.
Swinesfleash is more natural unto men then the fleash of any other living
thing on the ground, which experience it self declares according to Auerrois,
in the fifth of his Collections. Isaac.
And Isaac also in the woork above named, writes that Swinesfleash is colder
and moister then the fleash of any other beast, especially if it be of a tame
Swine. For wild swinesfleash in comparison of tame Swinesfleash, is hot and
dry, and nourishes less. Yet is it best to faede on tame swinesfleash but
seldom, and only upon the extreme parts thereof, as are the feet, chappes,
and Swinesfleash in deed nourishes mutch ingendreth good iuce, and loooseth
the belly by reason of the stoare of moisture and sliminesse which is in it:
howbeit, it provoke not urine, and agrees very well with them that use a
slender diet. But the young sucking pigge is best of all, and nourishes most,
and makes passing good blood.

Chap. 16. Of Deeres fleash, Hares fleash, and Bears fleash.
ANd still to follow the judgment of my first auctour in the place above
recited, Deares flesh is Melancholik and hard of digestion, but the young
sucking Fawnes are the best in that kind, and the middle aged are next in
goodness unto these, and the old ones worst of all. The gelded buck, and the
barrein Do, are best of the two last sorts, for that they be of a temperate
heat, and dries. Auicen.
Howbeit Auicen says, that they make gross substance which descends down to
fast, and breadeth the quartaine ague. And the top of the Deares tail is
poison. The Hare, as says Rhasis, most certainly ingendreth Melancholic blood,
above all other fleash. But Isaac says, that although it engender dry, and
gross blood: yet is it betttr then the fleash of the young Kid or Goat. And
Bears fleash, as he writes, is very clammie, repugnant to digestion, and
yield eeuell nutriment, and is more to be used for Medicine, then for Meat.

Chap. 17. Of the parts of Beasts.
Rhasis.
THe Head, says Rhasis, of every thing is of gross substance, nourishing much,
and heateth, and ought not to be eaten but at cold seasons: For thereby many
times is the Colic engendered, it much comfort blood, and increases the
seed of Man.

The Brain being cold, ouerturneth the stomach, and hurts it, and therefore
whosoever eats Brains: let him eat the^ before al other meat. Moreover it is
good for hot Complexions, and eeuell for such as are troubled with cold
diseases.

Marrow cummeth very nigh unto temperature, but it is sumwhat of the hottest,
it increases natural seed, and mollifieth the stomach. The Vdder of a beast
is cold and gross, and although it nourish mutch yet is it hard of digestion,
and is good for them that have a hot stomach, and Liver. The Liver is hot and
moist, heavy, and hard of digestion. Isaac says that it ingendreth good
blood, but specially of young beasts that suck. But the Liver of a Hen or
Capon is better then of sucklinges. The Heart, as he says, is of an hard
substance, and is slowly digested, but being well digested: it nourishes
mutch. The lights also, says he, is easily concocted, and soon departs
forth of the stomach, by ^eason of the lightness, and rarenes of the substance
thereof. The Kidneis are naughty in two resp^^tes, the one is for the hardness,
and grossenes of their substance: the other is, for that they be nourished by
the fattines of the urine, whereby they engender gross and very eeuell blood.
Rhasis in the place above cited says, Rhasis.
that read fleash without fat, ingendreth dry blood, making but small
excrementes, and nourishes more then fat: Fat ingendreth very moiste blood,
causes mutch superfluity, and nourishes but little. Fleash interlarded
beetweene fat and lean, ingendreth temperate blood. The feet augment slimie
iuce. The foremost part of the rumpe is lighter and hotter, and the hinder-most
heavier and colder.

Chap. 18. Of Fleash in Pasties and Pies.
FLeash, says Rhasis, which is baked in Pasties and Pies is eeuell, Rhasis.
and nourishes little, but is good for them that have the sower belchyng. And
generally all sorts of Pasties and Pies yield but little nourishment in
comparison of meats made with brothes. Yet many times they do good to them yt
are full of humors, and pleasure them that would dry up, and make their bodies
proper. Fleash roasted on the spit, is gross, and nourishes mutch, if it meet
with a strong and a hot stomach to digest it, it binds the belly, which is
manifestly proved, if a man eat the lean only without fat.

Fleash boiled with Eggs and Pepper is hot, and is a good meat for winter,
for it strengthens the body, and nourishes above al other meats, it
increases also seed, and blood. It makes a man well coulered, strong, and
well set. But in Summer it brings lothsomnesse, heateth, and breeds the
stone.

Chap. 19. Of Fowls in general.
Isaac.
AL Fowls generally, as Isaac reports, are lighter and finer then the beasts
that go on the earth, but they nourish less. And the wild Fowls are better
then the tame fowls, their fleash is more tender, and ^asier of digestion. The
cause whereof is the lightness and rarenes or their fleash proceeding of their
often flying, and the dryness of the air. But the tame Fowls nourish more,
and make commendable blood, and are more temperate by reason of the good
temperature of their moisture and exercise. But above all fowls these are the
finest the Stare, young Pertredges, and house chickens, and next unto them the
elder Pertredge, the Feasant, the house Hen, and the Capon. Chickens are
lighter of digestion then other Fowls, and engender good blood. They comfort
the appetite, and unto all natures and complexions they are most agreeable,
especial the Cockrel chickens nietheir to fat nor to lean. Auerrois.
And Auerrois in the fifth of his Collections writes thus: among Fowls the
Hen is principal insomutch that the broth thereof is good Medicine for those
that have the Leprosy, and some say, that a Hens Brain augmenteth the
substance of a man's brain, and sharpneth the wit.

Chap. 20. Of the Hen.
Isaac.
THE House Hen, says Isaac* is not althing so moist as is the Chick, and for
that cause if it be compared to the temp^rament of the chickins, it is hard of
digestion, but if it be well digested it nourishes mutch, and specially if it
be showed or boiled in fine broth, by which orderinge it takes a certain
moistur of the water, and comfort the stomach, and yields much nutriment.
Rhasis.
Moreover, mine aucthour Rhasis in the place often before alleged, says thus:
The fleash of ye Stare is fownde by experience to be best of all other fowls,
and most fit for those that mean to live with a fine, and subtle diet. Next
to this is the fleash of the Quayle, which ingendreth but little superfluity,
and is supposed not to be very hot. Then after this cumth the fleash of
Chickens, and next of Pertredges which is more gross, bindinge the belly, and
nourishinge mutch.

Chap. 21. Of young Pigeons.
YOung Pigeons are very hot, ingendringe inflamed blood, and soon bringing an
ague. And Isaac mine auctour says, Isaac.
that young Pigeons are hot, and full of moisture, wherefore they make gross
nutriment, a witness whereof is their heaviness and ^naptnes to fly, but when
they beegin to fly they wax lighter and more acceptable to digestion, they
be meet for phlegmatic persons, but naught for the collericke. And also as
the same writer says: Duckes are the woorst of al fowls, for their fleash,
says Rhasis, ingendreth mutch superfluity, and destroieth apetite, and is very
warm, Rhasis*
but if nourishes more then Hens fleash does. To conclude, the fleash of all
water fowls in general breeds mutch superfluitye, and if it have therewith
an eeuell savor: the^ is it judged much the worse.

Chap. 22. Of parts of fowls, as they be eaten.
THe Giserd of all fowls, says Isaac, Isaac.
is full of sinews and hard of digestion, but being digested it make mutch
nutriment. But of all Gisardes the Gooses is best, because of the plenty of
moisture in it, and next unto that is the Hens or Capons Gisard. Likewise
their Livers is best commended, and most nourishing. The Wings of all fowls
are better then any other part of the body, because of their often moving and
exercise, for moving consumes the superfluitye of moisture. The Gooses and
Hens necks are best of all other fowls necks, and all parts of carved
fowls are better then of the stoned, which makes the Capon to be most
excellent, and to yield best nutriment, and to engender perfect blood. The
Brains of fowls are less moist and slimy, but drier, then of four footed
beasts, and therefore more to be lyked, chiefly of young Stares, Partredges,
Hens, and Cocks before they crow, or come to be carved.

Chap. 23. Of Eggs, and their properties.
Isaac.
FOrasmutch as Eggs, says Isaac, do yield mutch nutriment for that their whole
substance is converted into good iuce, by reason of the affinity which they
have to man's nature, and specially the yolke: therefore in respect of their
temperament they be most like unto man's body. In this qualitye, says Rhasis,
Rhasis.
above the rest are Hen eggs, and Pertredges eggs, both which augment seed
in man woonderfullye, and provoke him to Lechery: next unto which are Ducke
eggs, in goodness not mutch inferior, but making eeuell iuce. Geese eggs
are loathsome, and have an eeuell smell. Hen eggs, and Pertredge eggs are most
temperate, and convenient. The yolke being temperate in heat, causes good
nutriment. The white is cold and slimy, and hardly concocted. But concerning
the yolke, Auerrois. in Cant. Auicen.
Auerrois upon the Canticles of Auicen shows, how some be of opinion, that
it ingendreth as mutch blood in weight, as it self is of. And Rhasis says,
that eggs that are sodden or roasted hard, are more hard to digest, and
descend, slowlier out of the stomach. But soft eggs are more quick to descend,
being good for those that are troubled with a bloody flux, whose strength
thereby is mutch decayed. As for reere eggs which are nether hard nor soft,
are as it were in ye mids between both ye other. Moreover, eggs are good
against roughnes in the throat, and by them is engendered te^perate blood, and
much strength. What shall I say more? they are as good as fleash, and many times
stand in steed thereof, wherefore those persons yt be very fat ought not to use
them.

Chap. 24. Of Milk.
OF Milk also it is Isaacks opinion, that it is very like unto blood. Isaac*
For in deed it is none other the^ ye milk ye second time co^cocted in the
breasts or vdder, whereof it receives whitnes, taste, and ability. Rhasis
likewise says, Rhasis.
that new milk comes near to the temperment, although it decline a little
unto coldness and moisture, whereby it fatteth and moistneth the body. It is
medicinable unto those that have the fever Hesticae, and the dry cough, and
the burning of the urine. It ministers excellent good nourishment unto dry
bodies, and brings them to temperature: it also increases blood, and seed.
But in that it is soon altered, it is noisome for those that be haunted with
sharp fevers, or ar troubled with headache by accide^t of sickness, and to them
that are subject to the colic, or unto any other disease coming of cold.
Cow milk of all beasts milk is counted the grossest, and is good for the^
that would fain be fat of body. And Asses milk is the subtilest of any
beasts milk, and is good for all that are diseased in ye Lungues. Goats milk
keeps a mediocrity beetweene both, but Eewe milk causes more superfluities
then any of them all. Isaac.
Isaac writes of milk in this manner: Milk of beasts that be sound and not
sick, if it be not eaten often, nor mutch, but moderatly: ingendreth
commendable blood, moisteneth the belly, healpeth the breast, Lungues, and
bladder, especially if the watrishnes thereof, be sumway corrected: as altered
with bread, flouer, oatmeale, rice, or such like and then eaten. Rhasis
writes, ye Butter milk is good against ye Laske proceeding of red choler, and
helps the^ yt are lean, and have weak bodies, and the rather, if there be a
piece of hot iron or steel often quenched in it* whey extinguisheth red
choler, it cures ye scab, whelks, blisters, the yelow iaundice, and healpeth
the^ yt are hurt with drinking strong wines. He says also that Butter being raw,
aswageth the sharpnes of the throat, helps the Letters and ringworms, takes
away the rednes of the face, and cleereth the skin, makes whole pimpels and
quiddles yt are sharp and dry being therewith anointed, but it breeds
lothsomnes, and ascends up to the mouth of the stomach. Sedde^ butter
weakneth ye stomach, softneth hard impostumacions, laid unto them plaster
wise: it resists ye most venomous bityng of Vipers. Whosoever uses to feed
mutch on butter shall continually be troubled with diseases cumming of fleame.
It nourishes most of any unctuous thing, an^ is of great faculty.

Chap. 25. Of Cheese.
Likewise he says that green Cheese is cold and gross, and thought unmeet
for cold natures. But old Cheese is esteemed of, according to the age. Tange
Cheese which tastes sharp of ye rennet is hot, burning, breeds thirst, and
nourishes eeuel. But if a man eat a little thereof after meat: it strengthens
the mouth of the stomach, also it takes away satietie, and lothinge of the
meat, which chances many times in the mouth of the stomach after sweet
meats, but it must be neither to new Cheese nor to old. Moreover Isaac
says, Isaac.
that all Cheese in general is naught, noisum to the stomak, and hard of
digestion, so that they which commonly eat it fall into the colic, and are
grieved with the stone in the kidneis. Howbeit the better the Cheese is, the
less harm it does.

Chap. 26. Of Fisshes
Isaac.
THe temperament of Fish generally, as says Isaac, is cold and moist,
ingendring fleame, most agreeable unto hot and dry complexions in Summer time,
and in hot regions. And inconvenient unto cold and dry complexions, in winter
time, and in cold Regions. Al Fish is either of the Sea, or of the fresh
water. Those that are of the Sea remaininge in the deep not near the shore
in gravely and sandy places, are most subtle and commendable and easier of
digestion then the other sea fish and engender better blood, but they descend
slowly out of the stomach and intrailes for lack of moist slimines. Fresh water
fish are universally more gross and slimie, and slow of digestion, but they
void out of the stomach with more facility then the seafish, and nourish
more. The best of these are they which remain in dowfalles and swift running
streams, whose bottom is grauelly or sandy, and far of from the filthiness of
any town or city. Pond Fish is of all other the worst, of eeuell savor and
hard of digestion, especially if they be far from the sea or any running
stream. Rhasis, Rhasis
(mine aucthour (says: all Fishes are hard of concoction, and tarry long in
the stomach, and make a man thirsty. The blood which young Fish ingendreth
is flegmaticke, breedyng vicious sliminesse in the body, whereof spryng sundry
diseases. Wherefore we ought to choose such fish whose substance is not
clammy, nor very gross, nor have any eeuel smell, nor will quickly putrify, nor
that abide in pondes, Lakes and Meeres, that yield forth a stinkyng savor.
For they that are conversant in filthy places are not fit to be eaten, neither
such as live in waters aboundyng with unwholesome weeds whereon the Fish do
feed, for they be made thereby unapt to be eaten. Saltfish ought not in any
sort be set on the boorde, nor to be fead on, unless it were when a man for
medicine sake would cause himself to vomit. But if any be desirous to eat
thereof, let him eat but a small quantity, dressed with some slippery or
unctuous thing, which may loath the stomach. The Crafish of the river is very
good for weak persons, as says Auicen, Auicen.
their fleash is good for them that have a consumption, so is their broathe,
and Asses Milk. And some say, that they will break great impostumarions if
they be laid thereto.

Chap. 27. Of Pulse.
COnsequently we must entreat of Pulse, Isaac.
in all sorts and kinds, and first of Rice, of which Isaac in the first book
of the work before alleged, says thus: Rice is dry in the fourth degree
and hot in the first, which being sodden with water is good against the
Colic that holds but one day. But being sodden with Almond milk it leeseth
the binding faculty, and nourishes well, and ingendreth good blood, and
augmenteth seed. And if with the Rice or with the broth of it you wash
freckles, it takes them away, and cleanses the skin. Auicen writes, that the
husk of Rice is thought to be poison, for if it be given in drink to any
man, immediatlye he feels pain in his mouth, and his tongue wilbee blistred.

Isaac.
Beans, after Isaac, that be green: are cold and moist in the third degree,
and nourish but little, they engender gross and raw humors, and breed wind
in ye uppermost part of the belly. Dry beans are cold and dry in the first
degree, ingendring thick winds in the uppermost part of the belly, from whence
there arise hurtful fumes into the brain. They cause sundry gross and
corrupt dreams, and are hard of concoction. The great white bean not being
old, is the best, and if it be sodden in water there is mutch of the windines
taken away thereby, and of the grossenes likewise, specially if the first water
be thrown away, and they be boiled again in another. Being sodden with
Mintes, Organ, Cumin, and such like, and so eaten, their windines is mutch
amended. Whosoever is desierous to cleanse the skin of his body: let him use to wash
himself with the meal of Beans, and he shall have his will. Rhasis.
Rhasis, says, that green beans engender gross and raw humors, augmentyng
fleame in the stomach and intrayles, which breeds mutch windiness. Lentles
also says he are cold and dry, ingendring melancholic blood, and dryinge
the body, they darken the eyesight, and nourish Melancholicke diseases, if a
man use them mutch. Isaac says, they fill the Brayn with gross fumes and
Melancholy smokes, causing pain, and fearful dreams. Isaac deuideth Chitch
Peasen into white, Isaac.
and black. The white is hot in the first degree, and moist in the middle of
the same, hard of co^coction, ingendryng wind and fumositie in such
quantity: that it puffs up the fleash, and drives the skin abroad, so that
they which use it have a fair white skin, for when the skin is borne up and
stretched abroad: it shows white, and clear. The black Chitch is hotter
then the white, but not so moist and is good against oppilation of the Liver,
if it be boiled with Smaledge and Radish, and the iuce thereof drunken, it also
increases Milk, Arnold.
and seed, and provoke Vryne. Peason, according to the famous Arnoldus de
villa noua, in his government of health: are of this nature: if they or
Chitche^ be laid a steep all night in fresh water, and be boiled next day
in the same, a two or three wallops, and then be strayned and kept, and when
ye goo to meat there be put unto the liquor a little white wine, and a small
quantity of Spikenard in powder, and saffron, and a little salt Indie, and then
once boiled together one wallop, and ministered at the beginning of the meal to
be drunken or eaten, crummed like potage. It cleanses the small veins, and
the passedge of the vryne, especially if the Peasen and Chitches be laid in
soke, and boiled with Persley in the same water. The unskillful sort say that
they should be laid a soke in Lie, but that soking takes away all the openyng
faculty, and the finest part of the substance of them.

Chap. 28. Of Pothearbes.
NOw let us say sumwhat of Pothearbes according as order and doctrine
requires, and first of Garlike, which, as says Rhasis, is hot and dry, and
takes away thirstines, Rhasis.
and increases fleashly lust, breaks wind, and heateth the body. In hot
regions, hot times, and unto hot complexions it does harm, and Galen calls
it the husbandmens triacle. Galen.
Beans or Lentles sod and eaten take away the stinking smell of it, and so
does Rue being chawed, and a little thereof eaten down. So lkewise does
Setwall, or Mintes of the garden or wild, if it be broken between the teeth,
and after it a little quantity of vinegre be received. To the same purpose
serves the root of Beetes, says Pliny, being roasted, and eaten after it.
Sorrel in Rhasis judgment is cold and dry, pliny.
it binds the belly, and sharpneth the stomach, Rhases.
extinguishing red choler, and thirst. Auicen says, that it takes away
toothach if they be washed with the iuce thereof. Dill, according to Isaac in
the second book is hot and dry, and being drunken in wine: Auicen*
resolves windines, puffines, and swelling in the stomach, Isaac.
and belly. The branches thereof boiled in Oil, dissolve swellings beeinge
outward anointed, aswage pain, and bring sleep. The seed drunken provoke
urine, increases milk, cleanses the stomach from putrified humors, it
healpeth the hicket proceeding of the long abiding of meat in the stomach, and
the often eating thereof weakneth the eye sight.

Isaac.
Garden Smalledge by the authority of Isaac, being eaten opens oppilations,
provoke urine, binds the belly, is eeuell for the falling sickness, and
hurts weemen with child: and such as are with child and frequent the eating
of it, it ingendreth in the childs body biles, and rotten impostumacions.
Neither may we comme^d ye use of Smalledge, for it draws humors together
from all parts of the body unto the stomach, whereof insueth vomiting. The
seed provoke urine above the branches, Rhasis.
and as says Rhasis, Smalledge opens oppilacions and puffs up there
withal, it moves to venery, and takes away ye eeuel savor of the mouth.
Arredge also, says he, is cold and moist, loosing the belly, nourishinge
well, and is good for them that have an hot liver.

Pliny.
Pliny in his second book writes, that it ingendreth sundry sicknesses, Lib.
2.
and therefore the liquor wherein it is boiled, ought many times to be
changed, or else it ingendreth pusshes, and foul spots in the skin. Persnep,
as says Rhasis, is hot and windy, slowly digested, it makes the seed of man
hot, and expels urine, and farther says Isaac, it helps fleshly lust,
provoke the terms, and ingendreth disco^mendable blood.

Pliny.
After Pliny in the second book, Beetes are of two sorts, white, Lib. 2.
and red. The root of the red sod in water kills the itch, the iuce
appeaseth the ancient pain in the head, and the daseling, and the singing in
the ears, it drives forth urine, it appeaseth the toothach, it provoke to
venerie, and is good against poison. Constantinus.
Borage, as says Constantinus, is hot and moist in y^ first degree, it purges
red choler, it helps yt heart burning, and being steepedin wine and drunken:
it makes them merry that are sad by reason of Melancholy, and the hea rbe it
self eaten raw, as some say, ingendreth good blood.

Colewortes, according unto Rhasis opinion, breeds black choler, Rhasis.
troubles the sleep with eeuell dreams, but it lenifieth the throat and
breast, it makes the belly soluble, and takes away drunkenness. Isaac writes
of Colewortes, Isaac.
that the iuce thereof drunken loses the belly, but eaten without broth they
do bind, and therefore to amend their fault, the first iuce wherein they were
sodden must be cast away, and the^ they must be sodden with good fat meat.
Onions seasoned with oil, do neither heaten nor cool, nor provoke thirst, but
make an Appetite. And Dioscorides says, Dioscorides.
that if the iuce of them be received in at the nose: it purges the head very
well, and stamped with Vinegar takes away spots, provoke sleep, and
softneth the belly.

The Gourd after Auicen, is good for the choleric persons, Auicen.
and hurtful to the melancholic and fleagmatick, and Dioscorides writes,
that the iuce thereof holden in the mouth aswageth the toothach. Rhasis.
Cummin according to Rhasis is hot and dry, because it healpeth digestion, and
breaks wind, and Dioscorides reports, that being mingled with Vinegar, it
stays the terms, and being drunken or anointed stops the bleeding at the
nose, and makes pale and low coulered. The seed drunken with water, does
effectually cure wringings, gripings, and windines in the guts, and Isaac
says, Isaac.
if it be mingled with windy meats, it rectifieth them, and kills worms
being drunken. Fenell seed also says he, increases milk, it discharges
the stoppinges of the Liver, and bladder, and expels the stone of the
Kidneis, and is good against long agues, and says Dioscorides, Diosco.
being mingled with eye confections: it takes away ye mistines from them.
Hyssop, after Rhasis, is hot, being eaten helps the eye sight of weakness, it
remedieth ye wheezing in the Lungues, it drives forth woormes and causes
abortion, and healpeth to digest our meat. Garden Lettice, as says Isaac,
Isaac.
is the best of all other Herbs to engender good blood, and being unwashed it
is the better, and is soon concocted. It provoke urine, it quenches red
choler in yt stomach, it cools the boiling of the blood, it brings sleep,
and increases blood, and seed. Mintes also, says he, is hot and dry in the
second degree, comfort the stomach, and provoke appetite. It cleanses away
al lothso^nes of meat from ye stomach, proceeding of corrupt humors, also it
cleanses the roughnes of ye tongue being rubbed therewith. If it be sodden in
vinegre, and with the liquor the chawes be washed: it cleanses the rottennes of
the gummes, but they must afterward be rubbed with powder of dried Mints. Cresses
as Rhasis says: are hot, and therefore heat the Liver and stomach, Rhasis.
they also molifie the belly, and drive woormes out of the Maw, they provoke
desire of weemens company, cleanse the Lunges, and take away the wheesing, help
stopping of the Milt, and procure abortion. Poppie, as Isaac deuideth it, is
white, and black. The black is yt whereof they make Opium, the white is more
commendable, and nourishing, of which Dioscorides writes thus: They that are
wont to eat Poppie, it breeds in them mutch sleep, Diosc.
and forgetfulness. Rhasis says that the seed of white Poppie is cold, good
for the throat and breaste, and makes one sleep. Persley also, says Isaac,
is hot and dry in the end of the third degree, it provoke urine and Weemens
terms, resolving windines, and increasing seed, Serapiour
and, as Serapion says, Persley laid plasterwise upon wheles, scabbes, and
morfew: cleereth the skin wonderfully, aswageth the pain of the kidneis and
bladder, rarefieth y^ passedges of yt body in opening the pores, provoke
urine and sweat, cleanses the Liver, and resolves the windy colic. I eekes,
as testifies Rhasis, ar hot and dry although they provoke appitite, yet make
they the head to ache, and engender eeuyll dreams, Rhasis.
and are hurtful for them yt are commonly troubled with the continual headache,
and those that are soon offended with heat. Isaac therefore gives counsel
that it were good immediately upon them to eat Lettice, Purslain, or Endive,
that by the colones of one the heat of the other may be delayed. Isaac.
Being eaten raw: they cleanse the pipes of the Lunges from gross humors,
they open yt oppilacions of the liver, and stop the salt rewme. Purslaine,
according to Rhasis, by quenching thirst and inward burninge, binds the
belly, and takes away the chillness of the teeth, and binds the laske,
proceeding of red choler, and it diminishes natural sede. If wartes be rubbed
therewith, says Auicen, Auicen.
they will come away by the roots. Radish, as Rhasis writes, is hot and dry,
Rhasis.
tareing long in the stomach, it makes the iuce subtle, and lifts it up
unto the mouth of the stomach, and so provoke vomit. The leaves digest our
meat, and provoke appetite in us, being received but in small quantity. And
Isaac says, that if they be eaten after meat they break wind, and by
reason of their heauynes they make the meat to go down. And Dioscorides
adds, that the root being eaten with salt: Diosco.
increases milk, provoke urine and the Flowers, and with a little grated
Ginger put into an hollow tooth, aswageth the toothach presently. The Rape,
after ye judgment of Isaac is hot in ye second degree, and moist in ye first.
It nourishes more the^ al other herbs, yet is it hard of digestion, it makes
soft and foggie flesh, it stirs unto company of weemen, and increases
seed. Pliny in ye second book writes yt ye Rape being sodden, Pliny.
drives cold out of ye feet. And ye co^mentarie writer Auorrois, in ye fifth
of his colections says, yt the Rape has a marvelous force to clear y^ eye
sight. Rue, as ye learned Isaac reports, is good for concoction, because it
has ye faculty to expel gross and cla^mie humors, it breketh windines, and
moistneth ye belly. And Auicen says, yt it takes away ye loathsome savor of
Garlic, Leekes, and Onions, sharpnethe the sight, and takes away the desire
to weemen. Sage, after Diosc. provoke ye terms, and procures abortion. The
broth wherein the twigs and leaves are boiled repres the thoughts of lust, and
motion to venery. The iuce of ye leaves makes heir black. Macer says thus of
Sage: Macer.
If it be laid upon the bite: It heales the poisoned rankling quite. Spinach
and Succorie are temperate, agreeable to the throat, Lunges, and stomach, the
lenifie ye belly, and make very good nutriment. Todestooles, according to ye
doctrine of Rhasis, are cold and gross, and engender raw fleame. Those of the^
which be red are naught, for if they be eaten they engender the colic, and at
no time they must be eaten without warm sauces. Mus^hroms are far worse then
Todestooles whereof some be stark poison, and will choke a man, and kill him
presently. But the best of them engender fleame. Isaac says thus of them:
Isaac.
by these tokens you shall know them that will kill men. They be soft, slimy,
and gross, and being slit in the middle and let to lie so all a night: the
next morninge you shall find them rotten.

Chap. 29. Of Fruits.
THus by experience the noble Galen writes of Fruits, my father, Galen.
says he, had his health all his life time because he eat no fruits. And
when he was dead I began to eat fruits, and by means thereof I fell into
sundry, and long continuing diseases. And after that I abstained from rathe
fruits, I had never any sickness saving an ague which held me one day. Then
showed I the same unto my friends, and they that believed me abstained from
rathe fruits, and in all their life time were never sick. This mutch of fruits
in general.

Figs, according to Rhasis, cleanse the kidneis from gravel, being green
they breed wind in the belly, and they loose the same, and make indifferent
good iuce. If they be dry, they nourish mutch, and do heaten, the often use
whereof ingendreth the itch, and lyse, and loose the belly beeinge eaten
before meat. Isaac.
Of whom moreover, mine aucthour Isaac says, in his second book, that if they
meet with a stomach well cleansed from humors, they are then good of
digestion, they engender good blood, cleanse the stomach, lungues, kidneis, and
bladder if they be eaten fasting. Dates, says he, are hot and make gross
nutriment, and if they be eaten oftentimes they engender gross blood in the
inner parts, they corrupt the teeth, and make steame and blood to abound. And
in the second book Isaac says, that Dates being hot and dry in the second
degree, are better of digistion then Figs, and more provoking urine. But whosoever
accustometh himself unto them: shall feel an hard swelling in his Liver, and
Spleen. Raisens, as witnesses Rhasis, Rhasis.
which are very sweet, are hot, but not so hot as Dates, neither so stopping
as they are, they be windy and hurt mutch, they frank up the body suddeinly,
they also increase motion unto venery, and work to the erection of the yeard.
Those which have the thinnest skin, do soonest descend, and breed less
windines, and the contrary do contrariwise. Those that are sower do not heaten,
but being washed in cold water, and eaten before meat, do as it were
extinguish heat. Sower grapes are cold, they bind the belly, and they
repress blood and red choler.

Raisens are temperate in heat, which causing good nutryment, do breed no
oppilacion as Dates do, although they nourishe stronger and in greater quantity.

Pomegranates which are sweet, according to Rhasis, Rhasis*
do not cool, but puff up, and cause thirstinesse, but they lenifie the
throat. The sower ones make the breast and throat rough, also they puff up the
stomach and Liver, but always they moderate the heat of blood and red choler,
Isaac.
they quench Fevers, and repress vomites. And Isaac says, that Pomegranates
are fitter for medicine then for meat, for they yield but small nourishment,
but it is good. It is the property of tart Pomegranates to extinguish the rage
of humors, and to comfort the stomach. Rhasis
The iuce dropped into their eyes that have the yelow Jandies takes away the
yellow color.

Quinces says Rhasis, be they sweet or sower, they strenghthen the stomach,
but principally the sower, they provoke also a good appetite, and bind the
bellye. Beeinge eaten after meat, they make the ordure to discende quickly,
and expel it out of the belly. And beeinge eaten before meat they work the
contrary effect. The sower ones are strongest in bindinge the belly.

Pears after Galen being eaten before meat, do bind, Galen.
but after meat they loose the belly. Pears that are very sweet do not puff
up, but they all bind the belly, unless they be eaten after meat. For being
eaten after meat they drive the ordure forth, and then they strengthen the
stomach.

Isaac also says, ye sweet Pears are temperate, and if they be boiled with
Musshroms they take away all their cleansing, especially if they be wild
Pears, by reason of their tartnes. Appels, after the judgment of Isaac: Isaac.
are cold, and because of their sowernesse do bind the more. And although
they agree well with the mouth of the stomach: yet they fill it full of slimy
humors. Auicen says that Apples do comfort, especially those that smell
sweet. Baked in a Pie they help the appetite, but the daily eating of them
causes ouermutch heating of the sinews.

Peaches, according to Auicen, if they be ripe: are good for the stomach,
causinge good concoction unto meat, but they may not be eaten after other
meat, for they corrupt it, but rather before meat. If the Appels be dry
they be hard of digestion, and although they nourish mutch yet are they not
good. Isaac.
And Isaac says, that the greater Peaches, if they be ripe they loose the
belly, but otherwise they bind it. The less which are called in Latin
Praecocia, and in English (as I think) Africoes, are wholesome for the stomach,
and take away lothsomnesse. Medlers, says he are cold and dry in the first
degree, they comfort the stomach, and take away the flux of choler, and
repress vomitinge, they provoke urine, and beeinge taken before meat they
comfort the stomach the more, and hurt not the sinewnesse thereof. Diosc.
And Dioscorides writes, that some say they help mutch the toothach if they
be eaten while the teeth ache.

The Pome Citron, after the opinion of Auicen, being pared and the rine eaten
or chawed: Auicen.
makes the mouth smell pleasantly. The sower iuce beeinge anointed kills
ringewormes, the decoction drunken makes a good color, and fatteth the body.
Mulberies which are ripe and sweet, as says Isaac, loose the b^lly, are soon
cast forth out of the stomach, and provoke urine. Being eaten fasting out of
could water, they are very cooling, they quench thirst, and unnatural heat.
Plummes, likewise, says he, are of two sorts. Some white, which are hard of
digestion, and noisome to the stomach. The black of the gardein, beeinge ripe,
moisten the stomach, and make soft the bellye, and pourge red choler. But if
they be eaten ouermutch: they hurt the stomach, but they do less hurt eaten
before meat.

Cheries also, as the same aucthour writes, are soon converted, they engender
gross fleam and slimy with in the hollownes of the Liver and Spleen. And
therefore engender long agues, and are very eeuell every way. The best time to
eat them is before meat, for when they be eaten upon a full stomach, they
flit above, and turn to putrefaction.

Almondes, according to Rhasis, are temperate in heat, Rhasis
which although they make the throat smooth, yet are they heavy in the stomach,
and tarry long there, they open oppylacions, and aswage the burning of the
urine, and being eaten with sugar: augment seed of generation.

The bitter Almondes, according to Isaacks judgment, Isaac.
are hot and dry in the end of the second degree, they cleanse, scour, and
comfort, they move urine, and dissolve gross and clammye humors, by means
whereof they cleanse the breast and Lungues from fleagmatick humors, and release
the oppilacions of the Liver and Spleen.

Nuts likewise, says the same aucthour, in a choleric person, and one that
has a hot stomach: are soon turned into choleric vapors ascending into the
head, causinge the pain and giddiness thereof. But if a man would correct
them and make them good, he must crack them, and blanch them, and lay them a
stiepe a whole night in water, that they may get some moisture.

Dioscorides says, that two Nuttes, and two dry Figs, Diosco.
and twenty leaves of Rue, or Herb Grace, and one grain of Salt pounded
together, and being eaten fasting: keeps a man from infection of Poison, or
Pestilence.

The Fildbeards, after Rhasis, Rhases.
are not so hot as the other Nuttes are, but are heavier, and are good
against the stynging of Scorpions. And Serapion says of them, that if
Fildbeards be roasted with a little Pepper and eaten, they ripen the Catarre or
Rewme.

Cheastnuts, as Constantinus writes, are wyndie, Serapion.
they move to the act of the fleash, they yield mutch nutriment, they are
hard of digestion, and therefore accordin^ unto the counsel of Isaac, Isaac.
they must be roasted, that their eeuell facultye may be thereby amended, and
their substance rarefied. Then do they aswage the dryness of the breast and
all the body, and moderate the difficulty of making water. The Acorne also
according to the same auctour, beeinge disobedient unto digestion, binds the
belly, but provoke urine, and they do nourish. Beaten into powder, and the
powder laid upon the Vuula: dries up the rotten humors that use to haunte
and hurt the same.

Cap. 30. Of Spices.
Rhas^^.
PEpper, by the aucthority of Rhasis, helps to concoct ye meat well, and
dissolueth windines, and being very hot: heateth the stomach and liver, and
hurts hot bodies especially in Summer. Ginger also, according to the same
Aucthour is hot and moist, and in helping concoction is profitable for those
whose stomachs and Livers are cold. It amendeth the dimnesse of sight rising
of moisture, Auicen.
and as Auicen writes, it augmenteth the memory, and cleanses the moisture, of
the head, and throat.

Constan.
Zeadoarie, according to the same Auicen, is a triacle or preservative against
all poisons, and as says Constantinus, if consumes the swelling by wind, and
comfort the stomach: it provoke ye appetite, takes away yt stinking of
the mouth through eating garlik, Macro.
and according to Macrobius, aswageth the heat of the wine which we have
drunken. Galingale likewise, Auic.
as writes Auicen, is hot and dry, it resolves windines, makes the mouth
savor well, helps the stomach, concocteth the meat, augmenteth defier to
weemen, and cures the pain of the kidneis. Cloves also, says he, are hot
and dry in the their degree, they make the body smell well, they sharpen the
sight, they comfort the stomach and Liver. Cinamom, Rhasis.
after* the opinion of Rhasis: is hot and dry, which in strengthening mutch
helps the stomach, and liver, it causes good concoction, Isaac.
and expels windines. Also, says Isaac, it opens oppilacions, and
provoke the terms. Saffron likewise, says he, being hot and dry in the
first degree: Isaac.
comfort the stomach, opens the stopping of the Liver, helps them that
are shortwinded, and comfort the weak parts. And Rhasis thus speaks of
Saffron in his Almansor. Almansor.
A certain woman, says he, was very long in labor of child bed, and could
not be delivered. And I gave unto her one dram of Saffron, and immediately
she was delivered, and this have I tried often. And being drunken in wine, it
is of singular force to make one merry. Plini.
Pliny in his second book says: whosoever drinks Saffron first, Lib. 2.
shall not feel any surfeit: and a crown made thereof and put upon the head,
releaseth drunkenness. Carawaies, Constantinus.
according unto Constantine is hot and dry in the third degree, it dissolueth
wind, it strengthens the stomach, it kills woormes, it helps concoction,
and provoke urine.

Chap. 31. Of Certain Sauces.
MUstard is hot and dry in the mids of the fourth degree, it dries up the
moisture of the head and stomach. Auicen.
And Auicen writes, some say (quod he) that if one that is fasting drink
it, it makes a good understanding, and it cleanses the humors of the head.
And Pliny says in the second book, Pliny.
that musterdseede prepared with vinegar, drives forth gravel. Salt, says
Rhasis, is hot and dry, it takes lothsomnes from meats, and makes the taste
sharp, and it provoke the appetite. But whosoever eats salt in any great
quantity, it causes mutch adustion in the blood: it weakneth the eye sight, it
diminishes natural seed, and ingendreth the itche. Venigre, according to the
same aucthour, is cold and dry, making a man lean, and weakening the powers,
it diminishes the seed, it strengthens Melancholye, and weakneth red choler
and blood, and makes the meat subtle and fine wherewith it is received. Honey,
Isaac*
as says Isaac in the second book is hot and dry in the second degree, it
takes away the cause why the body cannot be nourished, and alters the
eeuell disposition unto better, and expels the abundance of eeuell humors
out of the pores, and cleanses the filth of the veins, and therefore is very
agreeable unto them that are cold and moist of Nature, and unto old men. And
unto hot complexions it is as poison, for it is soon converted into choler.
If it be turned into ye warmnes of blood, it makes it the warmer. So that
Honey being eaten raw: ingendreth windines, and makes a man to swell, breeds
the roughness of the throat, and provoke unto vomit and siege.

Oil Olive, as Plinius writes in the fourth book, makes every body soft
which it touches, Plini.
gives force and strength, restrains al manner of poisons, drives away
pain, loses the belly, cleanses the face, appeaseth the swelling, cleereth
the eiesight, helps the headache, and aswageth the heat of Fevers. Rhasis.
The Oil of Nuts, says Rhasis, is very hot and dissoluing, and according unto
Auicen, it is good against the ringwoorme, inflamacions, Auicen.
and pustles in any part of the eye. The Oil of Almondes, after Rhasis, is
temperate, and is good for the Breast, Rhasis
Lunges, Bladder, and Kidneis, but if it be eaten it breeds lothsumnesse, and
departs slowly out of the Stomach. And, as says Dioscorides, if it be
mingled with Honey: it takes away yt spots in ye face, Diosco.
and makes smooth the skarres where wounds have bin, it cleanses the mistines
of the eyes, and takes away the skales from the skin.

Oil of Poppie is to be judged of, according to the nature of Poppie, whereof
we entreated in the Chapter last going before. And thus ends the first
Book, the contents whereof I have gathered out of the best approved Aucthours.

FINIS.
The second book of Table Philosophy, which speaks of the manners,
beehauiour, and vsedge, of all such with whom we may happen to be conversant
at the TABLE.
The Preface.
Having ended the discourse concerning the Nature of Meats and Drynkes, which
are set before us upon the Table, it follows now, that we say sumwhat
touching the Manners and conditions of whom we be matched at the Boorde. For
as says Macrobius in the third Book of his Saturnalia: There is no part of
wisdom so great, as to apply a man's talk to the place, and time, having a
regard to the estimacion and calling of those that are present. For some will
be encouraged with examples of Virtue, other with good turns, and some with
the commendation of Modesty, that such as have used themselves otherwise, and
hearing the same: may amend their lives. And therefore as touching them with
whom we be set at the Table, I will say sumwhat out of the ancient Records of
our Elders, beginning with the most worthy Personagies.

Chap. 1. Of Emperors.
ANd first to speak of Emperors, how that some of that excellent calling have
bin very frugale and sparing at their Board, Sueton^* lib. 3.
as Suetonius in the third Book of the lives of the. 12. Emperors, writes of
Julius Caesar, saying that he drank very little Wine, which thing his
enemies could not deney, and was indifferent about the residue of his diet.
Upon a time when at the Table the good man of the house where he supped, had
set before him old preserved Oil that was rank and stale, in the steed of
new and sweet, when other in company refused it, he only eat it greedely, for
yt he would not seem to reprove him yt had invited him to supper, either of
little good manner or covetousness. The same Aucthour also says of Augustus,
that he was a man of small feeding, and drunk but very little wine, for he
used not to drink thereof above thrice at a meal. Neither used he commonly to
drink Wine, but when he was dry he would dip a sop of bread in fair cold
water, or eat the slices of a Cucumber, or of a green mellow Apple, whose
taste were tart, or sumwhat like unto wine. In the Ieastes of the Romans it is
written, that the Emperor Augustus was a very small feeder. For he would eat
common bread, and little fishes, or cruddes made of Cowmilke which he would
wringe in his hand, or green Figs which he lyked well, and these things
would he eat in every place, and when so ever his Appetite served.

Helinan.
Helinandus in his Book of the institutions of Princes, says that Julius
Caeser, Lib. 3 de insti.
committed his Baker to prison, because he gave him better bread at his Table,
then he gave to the residew of his Soldiers. Suetonius also in his work
before alleged, Suetonius.
writes of the Emperor Tiberius, yt at his first coming to the Empire he was
very frugall and moderate, but afterward he grue so glouttenous, and given to
the belly: that in steed of Tiberius he was called Biberius, for Claudius
Caldius, for Nero, Mero, that is to say, one over much given to wine. And upon
a time spending two whole days and nights with Pomponius Flacchus, and Piso:
for a reward, he gave unto the one the government of the Province of Syria, and
to the other the Lieuetenantship of the same. He lyked better of one that
presented him with a Musshrom and a kind of Bird called Ficedula, then if it
had bin a greater matter.

Eg^sippus
It is also written of the Emperor Vitellius, by Egesippus in his fourth Book
of the destruction of Iherusalem. When he knew there was secret wait laid for
him, Lib. 4.
in the mean time he gave himself to feasting and garmandize, because he would
not lose the famous ignominy of the shame that hung over him. He was drawn
from the banquet, he was contemptuously insulted upon, and slain in the midst
of the City, at one time together, both sheading his blood and vomyting his
surfeat, who if he had lived any longer: would have devoured the treasure of
the Roman Empire in riot, and banketinge. To conclude, he had reigned but
eight Months and five days, and yet Rome was able no longer to serve his
bellye.

Ghap. 2. Of Kings
FRrontinus in his fourth book and third chapter of warlike Policies,
reports how that Alexander king of Macedonia, Frontinus*
was used to eat of such bread as he found while he traueiled upon the
way. Lib. 4.
Also in the fourth book and vii. chapter, he writes in this manner.
Alexander king of Macedonia, traueilinge by great iourneies through the
deserts of Africa, both he and all his army being greatly athirst, a
soldier offered him a draught of water in a Sallet, which in presence of them
all he powered on the ground, deserving more praise by that example, then if
he had drunk it. Helinandus in the place before recited, Helinand.
tells how that Piso desiering Romulus to supper, and perceiving how little
wine he had drunk at that meal: O Romulus, if every man would do as thou
do, wine would be better cheap. Nay (quod he) it would be dearer if
every man might drink what he would. Valerius Max. in his fifth book and
sixte chapter, Valerius Max.
writes that king Alexander upon a time being repulsed from some purpose by
a tempest in the winter, beeholding an old Macedonian soldier quaking and
beenummed with could, and himself sitting in his regal seat by a good fire:
Note.
even with those hands wherewith he was wont to bestow liberal rewards,
he took the old man that was crooked and doubled with cold, and set him in
his own place. What merueill was it then if it were pleasant unto them to
serve so many years under that captain, which esteemed more of the goodhealth
of a common soldier, then he did of his own dignitye? In the same place it
is also written, that Pyrrhus the king, said that certain Tarentines had talked
of him very broad, and undutiful language at a banquet. Then demanded he of
one of the company, whether they had any such talk or not? yea truly said
he, we had so indeed, and unless our wine had failed us these had bin but
trifles in respect of that we would have spoken. So pleasant an excuse of their
rioting, and so frank confession of the truth, turned the Kings wrath into
laughter. By using of which clemency he obtained this mutch, that his Subjects
the Tarentines thanked him when they were sober, and prayed for him when they
were drunken.

Chap. 3. Of Princes.
Plutrach.
PLutrach of the institutions of Princes, cites the authority of Plato,
which says thus: when Potentates oppress their subjects, it is like as if the
head of a body should swell to such hugines, that the other parts were able
scarcely, or not at all, to bear it, but with great pain. Likewise when the
hier powers do hate and persecute the subjects, it is like as if the tutor
should pursue his pupil to slay him with the sword which he gave him to defend
him against others. Helinan.
Hel^nandus in his book of the institution of Princes says, yt a Prince
should do as the Physician does, which never gives extreme medicines, but when
he sees that gentle pocions will never recover the Pacients health. Unto which
purpose said Lucius very well, Lucius.
that it behooved a Prince to be an old man in manners, and to follow ripe and
wise counsel, and to imitate the order of good Physicians, which sumtime cure
by filllnge that which is empty in spare bodies, and sumtime by emptyinge yt
which abounds to much in full bodies, aswaging the grief many times with hot
burning irons, and often with fomentacions, and sumtime otherwise, unto which
intent he sets down these verses: To punish let a Prince be slow, and
quick to give reward:
And let it grieve him when he is constrained to be hard.


Aristotle.
Aristotle in the third of the Politickes writes thus: whosoever would have wit
and understanding to govern (says he) it seems he would have God and the
laws to govern: but whosoever will have a man of himself without these to
govern, puts a very sauedge beast in authority. For when rage and lust
bear sway, then good men go to wrack, so that understanding without affection
is as good as a written law. Likewise Vegetius in his first book and first
chapter of the art of war, it is decent for a Prince (says he) yt no man know
mo things nor better things then he, for his knowledge may profit all his
subjects, and for that cause Princes ought to apply themselves to the study
of wisdom.

Chap. 4 Of the Gentile Bishops.
VAlerius in his fifth Book and fifth chapter, writes of Horatius Puluillus,
who being Bishop, Valerius.
and as he was after the guise at those days, consecrating a great Church
unto Jupiter, while he was pronouncing the solemn words, and holding the
post in his hand: word was brought unto him that his sun was dead: he
neither plucked his hand from the post, neither changed his countinaunce from
the public religion to his private sorrow, because he would not seem at that
present to sustain rather the person of a Father, then of a Bishop. In the
same place likewise he writes of Xenophon, who being offering a very solemn
sacrifice, it was told him that his eldest sun was slain. Then did he only
put of the crown from his head, demanding of the messenger in what sort he
was slain. And understanding that he was killed fightinge very valiently: he
put the crown upon his head again, showing that he took more joy of his
valiencie, then he did grief of his untimely death. S. Jerome in ye second
book against Iouinian, Jerome.
writes yt Zenon yt Stoic reports of the lives of the ancient priests of
Egypt, how that setting all worldly care and business apart, they always
remained in ye Church, searching the hid natures of things, and observing the
motions of the stars They never companied with their wives, nor any woman, nor
never saw their children nor kinsfolks after ye once they betook themselves to
divine service. They abstained from eating flesh and drinking wine, chefly to
avoid ye motion to ye flesh, which comes by those meats, and ye drink. They
did seldom eat bread, but they used oil both to drive away lothsomnes, and
to take away the roughnes of their throats. What shall I speak of fowls,
seeing they eschewed eggs and milk as fleash, whereof they said the one was
liquid fleash, and the other blood, the color only being changed. They
laid a footstool under their heads in steed of a pillow, Aristole.
and fasted two or three days together. And Aristotle in the seventh of his
Politickes: the Priests says he, have charge of althings appertaining to the
God, and to see that houses be kept up tight in repairacions, and those which
be fallen down may be builded up again, and that others be appointed unto
their purposes, and for this cause they be had in reverence. Sum of these
Bishops are termed by one man, Princes, by an other Kings, sum call them
Potestates, Prouosts, and Masters. See then if the Priests and Bishops of
the Gentiles, were so religious, continent, and holy: what ought our Christian
Bisshops to be?

Chap. 4. Of noble Personages.
Tullie
TVllie in his book of old age, writes that when a certain man in reproach
said unto Themistocles, that he had no honor of himself, but that all his
estimacion came unto him by reason of his country: surely, said Themistocles,
if I were Seresius I should be but a verlet, and if thou were an Athenian thou
would never have bin of any estimacion.

Cecilius.
Cecil^us Balbus, of the toys of Philosophers writes: that when one a time
one being borne of the race of a Senator and at that present mutch imbased,
objected to Epaminundas the vil^nes of his birth: I am glad (quoth he) that I
am risen of my self, and thou art fallen of thy self, and we both together
are honor and dishonor.

Salust.
Salust in the Oracion of Marius against Iugurth, when one (...) ^ery mutch in
his own conceit in respect of his own (...) and therefore reproched Marius
baseness: although (says h^^) we have one nature common unto us all, that
eue^^^ (...) man, if he can, be most valient and most noble, yet if there ^^
an^ man that despice-me, let them do that which is a agreeable to their
manners, since the exercise of virtuous exploites, is the very beginning of
mine honor. They envy at mine honor, let them also envy at my pains, and
mine innocence, and my traueiles, and my dangers, for by these have I won it.
Now see (I beseech you) how unjust they be, they will not suffer me to get yt
by mine own virtue, which they boast in themselves to have bin gotten by
another. And because I have no images, and my Nobility is new and now first
risen in my self, which better it is to get first, then to dishonor it being
once gotten before. As for me, in my judgment, there can no man's talk hurt
me. For if they speak ill of me, my beehauiour shall declare their report to
be false. The Spear and Shield, Ensign, Barbed Armor for the Courser, with
other rewards of the Field, and scarres in the fore part of my body, these
are my Images, this is my Nobility, not left unto me by inheritance as theirs
is, but gotten by mine own adventures and traueill. Iuuenall.
And Iuuenall the Poet says very well.

I rather had Thersites sun thou were, so that thou might
Like Pyrrhus bear Vulcanus Arms in midst of Martial fight.
Then if Achillus should beget one like Thersites foul,
A dastard wretch, that could do naught, but prattle, scould and skoule.
And Albertus upon the first Book of the Ethickes says, Albertus.
how it is read, that the Emperor of Rome Dioclesian, who governed that Empire
very valiently, was taken from among sheeperds. And he is a right Gentleman,
says Seneca, Senica.
that is naturally disposed unto virtue.

Chap. 5. Of Knights.
VAlerius Maximus in the third Book and second Chapter, Vale. Ma.
writes of a Knight that was Captain of a band under Augustus, and had given
many a sharp shoure unto Antonius, and went away evermore with the better hand.
At length being taken by treason, and brought prisoner to Alexandria, Antonius
asked him what he should do to him? Then the Knight, said command me to be
slain (quod he) for neither with hope of life, nor fear of death will I be
persuaded, to forsake Caesar and serve thee. Howbeit, the more constantly he
despised his life, so mutch the more easly he obtained it. For Antonius
pardoned his life for his virtuous sake. Frontinus.
Frontinus in the fourth book and first chapter of his warlike policies,
reports, that when Flaccus and Varro were Consuls then were Knights first
dubbed, and admitted unto that order by an oath, for before they were governed
by the Tribunes. The tenor of their oath was after this sort, that they would
never depart one from another, nor break their array in the field, unless it
were either to recover their weapon or to strike the enemy, or to save a
citizen.

Helinand.
And our Knights, says Helinandus, march forth into the wars as it were to a
wedding, for at Feasts they talk of Arms, and in the tents they speak of
feasts. The art of warrefare, Valerius.
says Valerius, in the second book and first chapter, beeinge earnestly
followed, brought the whole Empire of Italy in subjection to the Romans. And
gat them the souerainity of many cities, puisant kings, and most valient
kingdoms. That same opened unto them the bosom of the sea, and broke up the
streights and passedges over the Alps, and Mount Taurus, and delivered them
into their hands. And Clearchus, Captain of the Lacedaemonians, says the same
acthour, was wont to say often, beating it into the soldiers ears, that
soldiers should stand more in fear of their Captain then of their enemies.

Chap. 7. Of Squyres.
Vegetius.
VEgetius in the first book and fourth chapter, says, that the things which are learned in childhoode are not learned very speedely, but they are retained
very perfectly. And moreover the nimblenes which beelongeth to a Soldier, as
in leapinge and runninge, is oftentimes to be exercised, that the body wax
not vnweldye with age. For it is Swiftnes and nimblenes, which are gotten with
daily exercise, that make a good soldier. For unto him that is so trained up
it shall be no fear to encounter with any enemy, but rather a pleasure.

And again in the same work and third chapter he says thus: I doubt not,
says he, that any man can be of another opinion but that the common
husbandman is fittest for the wars, that can abide to toil in the sun and
open air, cares not for the shadow, knows not the baynes nor hothouse, is
ignorante of delicacies, Note.
plain meaning, content with a little, able to abide all pains, to bear
armor, to ditche, or cast a trench, and of custom to carye great burdeins,
not fearinge the Sun or the Dust. Wherefore, meeseemeth we must for the most
part take all our force out of the country, for me thinks he must needs
care less for death that never felt any pleasure or sweetness in his life,
and therefore such are to be trained up in the wars.

Likewise in the first book and first chapter, we see, says he, that the
people of Rome conquered all the world be none other means then by exercise of
the mind, by disciplyne of the field, and daily practice of Chiualrye,
whereby they rose to that greatness. And when we choose new soldiers, we
must choose nimble men, and furnishe them with daily practice, for the
knowledge of the order of the wars makes a man bold to fight. For no man
wilbee a fearde to do that which he knows that he has learned to do
perfectlye. And when they come to the battayll, the small band that is well
trained, is most like to have the victory. The rude and unskillful multitude
lies always open unto slaughter.

And Frontinus in the fourth book, and second chapter, Frontinus. lib. 4. ca.
2.
writes thus: Alexander King of Macedonia, says he, with a few soldiers
well trained, which his father Phillip left behind him, setting upon the whole
world: slew innumerable armies of his enemies.

Chap. 8. Of warriors.
Aristotle.
AS the noble Philosopher Aristotle writes, in the seventh of his Politickes,
many cities have flourished by making war, but when they had once obtained
the soueraintye; through peace they fell to decay, as iron gathers rust with
lyinge still. Valerius in the second book, and sixth chapter, writes, Valerius.
that Laelius Atticus Dentatus was an hundredth and twenty times in batteill,
unto which he always went with such courage of mind and force of body, that
he seemed ever to presume of the victory. The same aucthour also reports
that there was one which cut of the fingers of his left hand, because he
would not goo into the Italian war. Then by the decree of the Senate his
goods were openly sold, and him self cast into perpetual prison, enforcinge
him to yield up that ghost most lothsomly in cheines, which he refused
valiently to venture in the field. Frontinus.
Frontinus in the first book, and ninth chapter reports, that one Seruius
beeinge a young man, and present in the batteill which king Tarquinius faught
against the Sabines, perceiuinge those that were about the Standards to fight
very slowly: snatched away one of the Standards and thrue it amongst the mids
of the enemies. To recover which, the Romans fought so sharply: that they
obtained both standard, and victory. He tells moreover of Macillius which
was Consul, and at the war which the Romans made against the Samnites, who
perceiuinge the soldiers fleeing out of the batteill toward their tents:
bent the force of his own band which he led, against them: swearing, that he
would fight against good Citizens if they would not fight against their
enemies, and by that means brought them all again into the batteill.

Chap. 9. Of Philosophers, and Orators.
Architarentinus.
ARchitarentinus in the sixth book, writes, that when on a time Aristippus the
Socration Philosopher being throwe^ into the sea by shipwreck was cast a land
at the shore of Rodes, and found there certain Geometrical figures and
demonstracions drawn in the sands: he cried aloud joyfully unto his Mates,
let us be of good cheer Mates (quod he) for I see here the foot steps of
men. And forthwith he entered into the city of Rhods, where disputing in
their schools with professors of Philosophy, he was rewarded with many costly
gifts, wherewith he not only appayrelled himself, but also all that were with
him, and bore their charges sufficiently for meat and drink. And when his
Mates, being willing to return into their own country, demanded of him what
service he would command them home: tell my country men (quod he) that I
wish they should prepare such possessions and inheritances for their children,
as if they cha^ced to escape shipwreck, might escape with them, and not be
taken away neither by violence of conquest, neither by change of fortune, nor
by any other adversity. Behold here a Philosophical and wholesome document,
moving men more to the study of learning and wisdom, then to heaping up of
Monye. In the old time when cities wear in peace, says Eustacius upon the
first book of the Ethickes, the noblemen and politic gouerners, provided of
the common charge, Eustacius.
for such as were students in Philosophy, that they should be void of all
cares and troubles, and only apply themselves unto contemplacion. Hermes.
Hermes surnamed Trismegistus in his second book of Constellacions, reports
that Politinus the Philosopher, being, as it were, made unto all ornaments of
virtue, to the intent he might express that which he taught by his own
example, and not by any others, and to a void all the insultes of Fortune:
chose him a secret place of rest, where he was far from the trouble of humane
conversation only beestowing his time in divine contemplacions. And first he
contemned all titles of honor, accoumpting those to be the true honors which
by perfection of wisdom he had gotten. He coueted after no worldly thing,
but judged that to be the true riches, namely whereby a garnished mind may
find out the original of it own aucthoritye. Aristotle.
Aristotle in the Secrets of secrets, asks th^^ question, what (says he)
has so advanced the Empire of the Greeks to be perpetually renowned over
all the world? Surely that did the dilygence of students, and the virtue of the
wisemen which loved knowledge, and science above all measure.

Aulus. Gellius.
Aulus Gellius in his book of the Nights of Athens, writes, that it is one
of the greatest poincts of commendacion which was in Phillip king of
Macedonia, father unto Alexander the Great, that he caused him whom he
thought should be his heier, to be delivered in charge unto the most
excellent Philosopher Aristotle, to be instructed in wisdom, and learning.
And, says Seneca, in that world, which men commonly call the golden world,
Posidonius affirms that wise men governed kingdoms, these contained their
hands from othermens goods, and defended the weak from the more mighty, they
persuaded men from dishonesty unto honesty, and through their wisdom they
declared what was profitable, and what otherwise.

Chap 10. Of Phisicions.
ISidorus in the third chapter of his Etimologies, writes, that Apollo is
reported to be the first finder out of Physic among the Greeks. Isidor.
Which his Sun Esculapius brought more into the light, who was stricke^ with a
tempest of lightning and so died, and by that means both the art and the
author perished together, and lay unknown the space of fiue-hundred years,
unto the time of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, at what time it was revived
again by Hippocrates, sun to As^ulapius.

Valerius writes, that when Alexander king of Maced^nia fell sick at Tharsis,
Valerius.
Phillip the Physician made him a potion with his own hands, and ministered it
unto him. For this Phillip was both an Earl, and a Physician. And while he
was thus attendant upon the king, there were certain letters received and
opened, written to this effect, That the king should take heed of Phillip, as
one of corrupted by Darius to poison him. But so soon as the king had read the
letters, without any staying he drank of the Medicine, and delivered them
unto Phillip to read, for which good opinion of his trusty friend and
Physician, he received of the Gods an immortal reward. Howbeit I wot very
well, that Quintus Cur^ius in the history of Alexande^ the great, Quin. cur.
tells this story otherwise, namely, how that Alexander returning from
Babylon, and spendyng long time in rest and idleness, he renewed the
solemnity of Feastynge and Banquettinge, which of long time he had omitted,
and thus in a ioylitie he spent an whole day and a night, when Thessalus his
physician invited him and his companions again to drinking a fresh. And taking
the Pot in his hand, when he had drunk, as it were, half a draught, he
suddenly stayde in the mids and cried out: and his friends reported that
same to be the cause of his death. But the truth is, there was Treason wrought
against him, the infamy whereof was covered by the punishment of his
successors. And in deed Antipater was cheeif of the conspiracy, and gave the
poison unto him. Thus died Alexander in the xii. year of his reygne, his
traitrous nobles falsely accusinge his faithful Physician of poysonyng him.

Chap. 11. Of youngemen.
MAcrobius in his fourth book of Saturnalia, reports, how that Papirius when
he was but a child, Macrob*
came into the counsel court with his Father. And when he returned home, his
mother demanded of him what his Father had done or said in the Senate
counsel. The child answered, that he might not tell. But when his Mother
threatened to beat him unless he would declare it: immediately he devised a
fine and pleasant lie to stop his mothers mouth withal, saying, yt it was
disputed in the Counsel house, whether it were more expedient for man to have
two wives, or for a woman to have two husba^s. This news told she immediately
unto other Matro^s and gossips of her acquainta^^e. And ye next day there came
a great flock of them to ye Counsel house, desiring ye honorable ass^^bly, ye
one woman might rather have.ij. husbands, then one man.ii. wives The Senators
wondringe at that strainge request: merueyled at their so unreasonable, and
dishonest importuniti. Then the child resolved the Senate of that doubt, she
winge them what he had told his mother. The Senate embraced the childs wit
and faithfulness, and made an Act, that heareafter there should no children come
into the Senate with their fathers, but he only.

Vale.
Valerius also in the sixth Book and fifth Chapter, writes of Manlius
Torquatus, yt while he was young: he was of so blunt and dull a wit, that his
father iudgeing him never like to be profitable member to govern in the
common wealth, sent him into the cuntry to follow husbandry. But afterward he
delivered his father from danger of judgment. And likewise his country in the
tumult among the Latins, which was welnigh consumed in the conflict, and
obtained therefore a most excellent triumph. Valerius.
I suppose, says Valerius, that he was imbased with this blemish of Fortune in
his youth, whereby the excellency of his old age might appear more bewtifull.

And again in the same place he says, Scipio surnamed Affricane, whom the
Gods would have to be borne to the intent all virtue should be effectually
expressed unto men in him, is reported to have spent thriftely his younger
years, but farthest of all other from suspicion of lascivious dissolutnesse.

Fabi* Max
And this also says he, has Fabius Maximus pu^^^ased unto his posterity, that
there was never any of better fame then he while he was young, neither did our
City of Rome ever bring forth one that in his age was of greater honor and
estimacion.

Chap. 12 Of old Men.
^ro. pom.
TRogus Pompeius in his second Book, writes of Alexander the great, that on a
time when he was goinge forth in a dangerous expedition: he levied his army
not of Cutters and lusty youths, but of such ancient soldiers as had served
his father and his cuntry in foretimes, to the intent he might have no common
soldiers, but rather teachers of Chivalry about him. He made no Captains but
men of threescore year old, so that no man thought of fleeing, but of haueyng
yt victory. And Valerius speaking of the old Romans, Valerius.
ssith in those days young men honored old age, as though all old men had bin
their fathers. Cicero in his Book of old age, Cicero.
reports, that in a certain controversy when Pisistratus the tirant demanded
of Solon, for what cause he durst resist him so boldly, he answered, because of
mine old age.

Josephus in the first book of Antiquities: Joseph.
Let no man (says he) think that to be false which is written concerning
the long living of our forfathers in the old time. For in respect of their
virtues, and the singular profits which they devised for mankind, as are the
Arts of Geometry, Astronomy, and such like: GOD enlarged the term of their
life, for else they could never have come unto that perfection in them. It is
read in the Cronacles, that about the year of our Lord a thousand an hundred
twenty nine, Ioa^nes de temporibus which lived in the time of Charles the
Maine, and whose Squire he was, died.

Papius in the beginning of his Roman history, Papius.
writes that the same Romulus which builded the City of Rome, and called it
after his own name, chose into his counsel an hundred Senators whose advice
he might use in all matters, whom by reason of their years, and for the
likeness of the charge, he called Fathers.

Chap. 13 Of Citizens.
ARistotle in the third book of his Politickes defines a City after this
manner. Aristotle.
A City (says he) is an unity of those that be like, meeting together to
live in happy society. And felicity is a certain treasure surpassing all other
things, and the very exercise of all virtues. And these be the things without
which there can be no City, for why the life of man requires many
necessaries. The first is food, then Arts, next weapons to subdue the
disobedient: the fourth store of money: the fifth instructions in religion whom
they call Priests: the sixth a company of Judges to confer together what is
right and what not, and if any of these be lacking it is no perfect city. And
therefore there must needs be Husbandmen to prepare Victuales, Handycrafts
men, Warriors, ritchmen, Priests and judges. And moreover (he says) whosoever
has abilytie to participate or communicate, that is to give or take counsel,
to rule or to be ruled: the same is a perfect Citizen.

Likewise Citizens ought to agree and not to fall out, for as says Orosius in
the second Book of his Orchmestra, Orosius.
the most wise Citizens of Athens, being taught by their own harms, have
said that small things grow greater by concord, and great things are destroyed
by disagreement, and whatsoever was done well or ill in their Commonwealth,
their Domestical contention at home, and their continual warringe abroad
subverted all, wheerby they left to their posterytie an example of ruin with
small hope of recovery, but yet a most certain lesson to learn, that it is good
to follow that counsel in prosterytie, which seems best unto us when we were
in adversity.

Vitarbius.
Vitarbius in his work of Architecture or Building, writes that the Temple of
Mars was builded without the walls of the City, because their should be no
bloody dissension among the Citizens, but their force should serve them to
defend their walls in time of war.

Chap. 14 Of Marchantes.
Valerius.
VAlerius in his seventh Book and fourth chapter, makes mention of one
Claudius Centimmalus, who having an House standinge very high upon the top of
the hill Celius in Rome: was commanded by the College of Southsayers, to take
down sumwhat of the height thereof, for that it hindered sumdeale the perfect
view of their Southsayinge. But he immediately sold it unto Calphurnius
Lauarius. Then Cato being a man of great integrity, condemned the seller in
the law, for that he toulde not faithfully to the byer both the commodities
and discommodities like to ensue of the purchase, which he ought to have
done.

Likewise, the same Aucthour in the first Book and second Chapter, writes,
how that in the Prenestine Siege it fortuned that one which cought a Mouse,
sold him to another for two hundred Pence, such was the scarcytie of
victuales there. But it chanced not long after that he which sold it dyed
for hunger himself, and he that bought it escaped a live. The like Example is
reported by Frontinus, Frontinus,
of the Casseline Siege.

Aristotle in the first of the Politickes writes, Aristotle.
that upon a time a certain man reprochfully cast Millesius in the teeth that
he was a Beggar, as though Phylosophie were a knowledge unprofitable to it
self, and in no respect benificiall to the Professors thereof. Then Millesius
perceyuinge by the judgment of Astronomy, that the next year there would
be but very few Olives, in the Winter while there was great stoare he gave
Monye in earnest unto the Fruiterers and Masters of Gardeines in Miletum and
Tyrus, upon a price for all their Olives the year following, as though he
distrusted not but that there would be great stoare. But when the time came,
and there were indeed but few, and many called for them, he soulde them all
suddainlye together, making what price he list, and by that means gatheryng
a great sum of Money, declared thereby how easy a matter it is for
Philosophers to be rytch when they list, but Riches is not the thing that
they seeks for.

In the same place it is also set down that in the I Will of Sicil a certain
Merchant suddaynlye bought up all the Iron that was there about, or that was
to be gotten out of the Mines. Afterward there came strainge Merchants unto
the Mart, and no man soulde Iron but he only, not mutch raising the price,
but of every five Talentes he gained ten Pence, reserving unto himself a
compotent profit. But Dionisius the Tyrant took his goods from him, and would
not suffer him (as a finder out of wealth, which thing was mutch against his
profit) to dwell any longer in siracusis. For as the expositour says upon that
place, tyrants may not abide to have their subjects rich.

Chap. 15. Of husbandmen and Husbandry.
IN the commendacion of husbandry, Orosius in the seventh book says, Orosius.
that in the three hundred fourscore and eleven year, after the building of
the city of Rome, Quintus Cincinatus, which was Distator, was found in the
country, and taken from the plough, and taking the honor upon him, and
mustering his Army: obtained a great conquest over his enemies. And Valerius
writes, Valerius
that they which were sent unto Astilius to come take the whole government of
the army upon him, found him in the fields going after the plough tayll,
sowing of corn. Howbeit those hands which were worn with exercise of
husbandrye, established the sure welfare of the commonwealth, and vanquished
hugie armies of raging enemies. And those hands which not long before guided
the yokes of the drawing Oxen, held then the reigns of the triumphant charret.

And Plinius in the xviii. book of the history of nature, it is the saying of
Marcus Curious, Pliny.
says he, that the same is a naughty Citizen, that cannot be sufficed to live
with seven acres of land. What was the cause then that they had such plenty?
Forsooth their generalles, and gouerners tilled the land with their own
hands, and the ground rejoiced at a Laureat share, and a triumphant
ploughman. And look with what diligence they went into the wars: with
the same they tilled their fields. And ordered their land with as mutch care, as
they did their Camps. Many times captains, yea, and whole Senates have bin fet
out of the country. And now bondslaues till the same ground, and damned hands,
and proscribed countnances.

Valerius
Valerius in the seventh book and tenth chapter, tells of Valerius Coruinus,
how he being an hundred year old, Vale.
and in good strength of body, left beehind him not only a wished example of
dealing in Public functions, but also in tilling the land, and all manner
husbandry.

And Noble Cicero in the fifte of his offices says, Cicero.
that among all trades, whereby a man may live: there is none to be preferred
before husbandrye, nothing sweeter, or more plentiful, nor fitter for a
gentleman.

Chap. 16. Of Handicraftes men.
ARistotle in his book entitled secrets of secrets, Aristotle.
shows of the wonderful operation of the influence of ye Planets in the
natures of men and other things, by that which happened unto a child the sun
of the king of India. For when the child his sun was grown to some years,
the king would have had him brought up in learning, for which intent he sent
him throughout all India and other Provinces adjacent, very honorably
accompanied, as it was beesittinge for the sun of such a Prince. But the
fathers diligence profited him nothing at all, for why, the childs disposition
could not be brought unto any other thing, but to be an handicrafts man.
Wherewith the king beeinge mutch troubled in his mind, sent for all the wise
men of his Realm to come unto him, and when he had told them that the cause
why he sent for them was to know their opinions, concerning his sun: They
answered him, that he should apply him to that where to he was most inclined,
and so he did. In the same place also he tells of a certain weauer that had
a sun, whose nativity foreshewed that he should be a great wise man, full
of grave counsel, and in favor with Princes. And when his father would have
instructed him in his own art of weauing: he could not learn it. Then did he
whip him, and beat him and gave him up unto his own will, and the b^y ioyninge
himself unto learned men, obtained knowledge, and understanding of the
heavenly motions, and of the government of Princes, and at length was made one
of the kings Counselors Macrobius tells in the second of his Saturnalia,
Macrob.
that when Augustus returned from the Acticane victory: among those that went
to gratulate his return, there was one which carried a Chough whom he had
taught to say: God save thee Caesar our Empe. vanquisher of Antonius and: being
likewise saluted by a Parrat, he willed y^ they should both bebought. And
wondering at the same in a Pie, commanded that to be bought also. Which thing
a poor Cobbler beeholding, taught a Crow to speak in the same manner. And
being ouercharged with cost, and seeing that his bird would not answer, was
wont to say often, all my labor is lost, all my labor is lost. But at length
when the bird had perfectly learned the salutacion: he offered her unto the
Emperor, who answered that he had already enough such Birds at home, which
saluted him after that sort. Then the Crow by chance remembering the other
speech which his Master, mistrustinge his docility, had often times vttred:
beegan to speak aloude before the Emperor saying: I have lost my labor, I
have lost my labor, whereat Caesar laughed, and commanded him to be bought
likewise.

Chap. 17. Of Rich men.
Aemelius.
AEMilius Probatus in his book, of Captains of foreign Nations, tells a
story of the Princes sun of Athens, how marvelous liberal he was, who
having fermes and grainges in many places of the country: he never put any
keepers over his corn or fruits, but suffered every man to take what he list,
his servants followed him with money to give away if any lacked immeadiatly,
lest he should seem to deney it by deferring it. If he saw any man ill
apperrelled, he woould give him his own clothes from his back. He always
prepared great plenty of meat, that those whom he found unbidden in the
streets, he might have them all home unto his house, which he did every day
and missed not. His credit, his help, his goods, never was failinge to any
that had need. He encritched many, and buried many poor folk of his own
cost. Cecilius Balbus of ye Philosophers toies, Cecili. bal.
reports that Agathocles king of Sicilia said, that a man ought to use plate
of gold as he would cups of clay, for it is far more better to shine in good
manners, then in riches. He used at his meals to dine and suppe in earthen
vessels, and on a time when one demanded of him the cause, he answered in
this sort: Of Sicil though I now be King, a Potter was my sier.
Whosoever to rich and high estate shall happen to aspire,
Arising eft from base degree: use fortune reverently,
And call to mind what was thy state before thou rose so by.


And therefore this king considering the baseness of his parentage, was content
to feed in earthen vessel as other poor men are.

Valerius in his third book, and fifth chapter, Valerius
reports that Marcus Curious, at what time the Ambassadors of the Samnites
came to speak with him, bid that they should come into him, where they found
him sittinge upon an evil favored form, very homely. Who merueiling at his
poverty, and delivering unto him a great sum of Money which they desiered him
to accept and to use it at his need and pleasure: Marc. Cu.
he refused it, willing them to tell the Samnites, yt Mar. Curious had rather
rule over rich men, then be rich himself. And remember this, (quod he) that
I can neither be overcome in batteill, nor corrupted with money. The same
aucthour likewise tells of Frabricius, who was greater then any man in all
the City in honor and aucthoritye, and match with the poorest in wealth and
revenue, who also sent back unto the Samnites many great gifts, in whose
tuition and charge they were. He was rich without money, and kept a great
family, for why, it made him rich not to possess mutch, but to desire
sufficient.

Chap. 18. Of Poor men.
FRontinus in his fourth book and first chapter tells how that Scipio after
ye he had atchiued notable exploits in Spain, Frontinus.
writes, that according unto a law made by Seleucus against adultrie, his
sun, who was apprehended in the same, should have lost both his eyes. And
when the whole City for the honor and duty which they bare to the father,
deured that the punishment might be remitted, long time refusing to be
entreated, but at length relenting at the peoples suit, first putting out one
of his own eyes, and next one of his suns: notwithstanding fulfilled the
whole punishment, dividing himself, as it were, beetweene a merciful father,
and a just judge.

In Policratus the fifth book, and second chap. it is set down, that when on a
time there arose a certain controversy beetweene King Alexander and certain of
his soldiers, Policra.
and the king had the foil in the field judgment: he thankefully accepted
the judgment, and gave great thanks to the judges, whose faith he had
experimented in preferring justice, before the respect of any Potentate.

Chap. 23. Of Lawiers.
AVlus Gellius in his Nights of Athens, tells an history of a young man,
Aul. Geli.
who cumming to Pithagoras to be instructed in eloquence, promised him a great
sum of money for his pain to be paid that day, when he first pleaded cause
before the Judges and obtained it. But when he had well profited in the art,
and would take the handlinge of no causes upon him: Pithagoras conuented him
before the judges, saying unto him, now will I have my reward, whether
sentence go with thee or against thee. For if sentence go on shy side, then my
reward is due: and if it go against thee, then is it due also, for have I
judgment on my side. The^ answered the scholar, understand this mutch Master
(quod he) if sentence go on my side then owe I nothing unto you by virtue of
the sentence: and if it go against me, then by our bargain I owe you nothing
because I preueill not, and am not well taught. Which controversy the judges
perceiving to be very litigious, and doubtful, deferred the Matter unto a
very long day, so that I judge the case is not yet discussed. Helinand.
Heylinandus in his second book of the institucion of Princes, tells how on
a time Demosthenes demanded of Aristodius what reward he had received to
speak, who answered, a Talent: and I, (quod Domosthenes,) had a more to hold
my peace. Thus a man may see that some Lawiers tungues may do hurt unless they
be tied with a silver chein, and many times they sell as well their silence, as
their words. Valerius writes in the seventh book and third chapter, Valerius.
how that two men which were geastes in a house, brought certain money and
delivered it unto the goodwife with this promise, that she should deliver it
again unto them both together. And a good while after, the one of them came
and deceived the woman, requiringe the money, and saying that his fellow was
dead, which she forth with delivered. Not long after the other came also, and
demanded the money. Whereat the poor woman being in distress: made the
orator Demosthenes of her counsel, who made this answer in her behalf. My
friend (quod he) this woman is ready to tender the money, but she may not pay
it to you unless your fellow come with you, for as you say, this was the
agreement beetweene you, that it should not be paid to the one of you without
the other.

Cecilius Balbus in the place before recited, Ceci. Bal.
tells of an ancient soldier of Rome, who on a time being in some danger
before the judges, beesought Caesar to come avrode into the court to help
him. Unto whom Caesar appointed a good lawier. Then the soldier said, ( O
Caesar quod he) when thou wast in danger in the Asiane war I sought not a
deputy, but I fought myself for thee, and there with all he discovered unto
him the skarres of the wounds which he had received there for him. Immediately
Caesar sprang forth and came to help him, fearing lest he might seem not so
mutch proud, as unthankful.

Chap. 24. Of great men's Bailiffes.
Josephus in the thirtenth book and twelueth chapter of Antiquities, Josephus.
writes how that the Emperor Tyberius was sumwhat hard and waiward in all his
business and affairs, and look what Receivers he had appointed in Provinces,
he seldom or never changed them. And being demanded why he did so: he
answered, because he spared the poor people. For if the Receivers knew that
they should have their office but short time, then would they suck until the
blood followed, and how mutch the shorter time they should be in office: so
much the more intolerable they would deal, and they that came new would
destroy all that they found. Which saying of his, he confirmed by the example
of a man that lay wounded by the way, in the Summer season, and would not have
the flies driven away which were about the wound. And one which came upon the
way, supposing that of weakness he had let them alone: drove them away. Ah,
(said he) you have done ill, for these flies were now full of blood and
troubled me but little, and the fresh ones which come will sting me more
sharply. Even so new appointed officers do pinche the commons more eagerly.

Aristotle.
Aristotle in the Secrets of Secrets, writes in this wise unto Alexander:
Never set such a Bailiffe to rule in any place which will be corrupted with
money, for in so doing thou shall subvert thy realms, and beesides thou can
repose no assurance in such a one as gapeth after treasure, and commodity. For
he serves thee for the gold, and gives up his senses unto money, and by
pouling of others: seeks to fill up up his bottomless bags. And look how
mutch his money increases so mutch the love thereof grows, and perhaps the
love of money may induce him to ye destruction of thy self, and thy kingdom.
And shortly after in the same place, he sets down fifteen conditions
generally to be required when we would get, or choose a Bailiffe. The same
Aucthour likewise in ye second book of his Rethorickes, proving that
Procuratours, Rent gatherers, Bailiffes and Receauers ought not upon small
occasion to be changed, where he uses for proof Esops fable of the wounded
Fox goinge upon the way, and the flies which sat upon him and sucked his
blood. Then the Vrcheon coming by, and moved with compassion would have
driven them away. To whom said the Fox, do not so I pray you, for these are now
full of blood, and if new should come they would molest me more, as new
Bailiffes and Stuewards do.

Chap. 25. Of Frindes, and Frindship.
VAlerius in the fourth book and fourth chapter, Valerius
writes of a paier of frindes, called Damon and Pithias, which were so
faithfully linked in frindship, that when Di^nisius the tyrant would have put
one of them to death, and had given him respite before he died to go home and
dispose his goods in order, the other of them doubted not to yield his life in
pleadge for his frinde. And when the day of his return approached, and he was
not yet came, every man condemned this foolish suerty, of folly. Howbeit he
said, that he doubted nothing of his frindes constancy. But at the very same
houer and moment when his friend should have died in his steed, he came and
offered himself to death. Whose frindship and constancy the tyrant wondering at:
forgave the punishment, and moreover requested them to let him be the third
frind, and to receive him into their constant band of amity.

Likewise the same Aucthour in the fifth book and ninth chapter, reports how
that one Pretolius denyinge the request of a certain frinde of his, why then,
quod his frind what need have I of thy frindship? Nay, (quod Pretolius) what
need have I of thine, if I must do a dish^^est deed for thee? Tullie in his
Book of frindship writeth^ y^ when Tarquinius the proud was expulsed out of
his kingdom, he then understood who were his trusty frinds, and who
vntrusti, when he could neither be eeuen with them, nor requite their benefits.

Seneca also in the second of one of his works, Seneca.
writes yt the philosopher Arthesius had two frindes, a poor man, and one
that was sick, but both of them for shamefastnes sake, disse^bled their
frindshippe. Which thing when the Philosopher understood: he thought ye he
ought to succor them with out shamefastnes, and that with speed. He privily
put a bag of money under one of their Pillowes, the other not knowing thereof,
that laying aside all foolish and unprofitable shamefastnes, his frinde might
seem rather to find that which he wanted, then to receive that which he
asked.

Chap. 26. Of Kinsfolks.
Valerius.
VAlerius writes in the first book and first chapter, that in the old time
men were wont to make solemn feasts, which they called Caristia, whereat were
none present but kinsfolk and alies, that if chance there were any
controversy or breatch beetweene any of them at that solemnitye, in that time
of making merry, the matter might be proposed, and heard, and frindly ended.

Likewise he writes in the eight book, that when Decius the General or
Emperor for the time, would have set the imperial Diadem upon his sun Decius
head, he refused it, saying, I fear me least when I am Emperor I leave to
be a sun, rather let my father have the government, and let it be my dignity
to be obedient unto him.

Moreover in the fifth book and fifth chapter, he tells of Cesetius* who
being commanded by Caesar, the conqueror both of all abroad, and at hom, to
banishe his sun for that he had ministered some occasion of distruste that
he affected the kingdom, answered him saying: truly Caesar (quod he) thou
shall sooner take all my suns from me, then I will send away one of them at
thy commandment. See what great bouldnes this was, that he would not yield
unto him to whom all the world was in subjection. Likewise the same aucthour in
the fourth chapter writes, that on a time the Praetor delivered a malifactour,
which was a woman, borne of a good family, unto the Jailer to be executed in
the prison, who being moved with compassion toward the woman, put her not to
death immediately, but gave leave unto her daughter to come unto her, lookinge
unto her that she should bring her mother no food, to the intent he might kill
her by famine. And when certain days were past, merueyling how she lived so
long, in the end he perceived how the loving daughter reliued her mothers
hunger with the milk of her breasts, which strange fact being reported to the
Counsel, procured the woman's pardon. For what will not love and duty find
out? and what is so rare to be seen, as the daughter to give the mother suck?
A man would think that it were against nature, unless it were the first and
principal law of nature, to love our parents.

chap. 27. Of good Weemen
A Good Woman ought first of all, to set light by temporal goods: touching
which poinct Valerius, Valerius.
in the fourth book and first chapter tells the story of Cornelia, which was
mother unto ye Gracchi: the same upon a time received into her house of gestred
a gentlewoma^ of Campania, who showed her very beutifull Jewels and ornaments,
which she had in store made according to the fashion in those days, but she
gave her a quip for it: For when her children came home from school, and al
these be my jewels and ornaments, quoth Cornelia. For truly, who so coueteth
nothing, has althing, and in greater assurance then he that has mutch goods
in possession. And since worldly goods are but casual, yet are the virtues of
ye mind such as are subject unto no misaduentures of Fortune. Secondly she
ought to overcome all carnal desire. Orosius.
Touching which poinct, Orosius writes in his fifth Book, that when the
Germans were overcome by Marius, their weemen with a more constant courage
then if they had bin the conquerours, desired the Consul that he would save
their virgins lives upon condition yt they might preserve their chastyty, and
be reserved to minister unto the Gods. But when they could not obtain so much
of him: they dashed the brains of their young children against the stones and
hanged themselves. Vale.
Thirdly she ought to preserve her loyalty, and the tokens of her goodwill
toward her husband, whereof Valerius writes in his fourth book and fifth
chapter, that at what time the Spartanes kept certain Lacedaemonians in prison,
whom they detained there to put them to death, their wives being weemen of
noble blood, came thither, and desiring to speak with their husbands before
they were executed: obtained license of the Gailer to go into the Prison unto
them. And when they were gone in they exchanged their apparel with their
husbands, and so the men departed out of the prison in their wives atyre,
muffled, as though they had covered their faces for grief and heaviness.
Moreover a woman ought to give her husband good counsel.

Seneca.
The like example as touching the force hereof, is by Seneca set forth, showing
yt when Augustus the Emperor of Rome bethought him how he might revenge
himself on one which sought his death, the Empress advised him that he should
follow the trade of all good Physicians, who seeing that they can not prevail
with Medicines of the same quality with the disease, apply the contrary.
Wherefore said she, seeing that you cannot prevail by severity, prove to win
by gentleness, which he did willyngly, and took effect.

Chap. 28. Of wicked Women.
Orosius.
ORosius in his first book of the woork before alleged, sets it down,
that when Ninus king of the Assyrians was dead his wife and Queen Semiramis
reigned in his steed, blouddely embruing the kingdom with slaughter the space
of.xly. years. The same burning in lust, and thirstyng blood, among so many
horrible murders and abominable whoredoms, having quatted her greedy desire
with so many whorish devises and strange manners of couplyng, at length having
conceived a son by shameful dealyng, and nourishing him up by ungodly
means, and having had with him incestious meddling, she sought to cover her
private shame with public wickedness. For she gave forth in commandment
that there should be no such reverence nor respect between parents and
children, nor no discretion used in taking of wives or obseruinge of
matrimony, but in that point it should be lawful for every man and woman to
take whom they lusted. S. Jerome writing against Iouinianus, S. Ieaom.
reports that the wife of Sylla was a common woman, or as they term them a
good fellow. And likewise Pompeius that overcame welnigh the whole world, had
an incontinent Lady to his wife. Cato
Cato also which was called Censorinus, married a very baggage of a mean
parentage, yet was she a shrew and a whore, and that more strange is, proud and
saucy to her Lord and husband.

Justinius the abridger of Torgus Pompeus writes, Justinius.
that when Grippus which was sun to Deem. had recovered his Fathers dominions,
and had quite ended al foreign dangers, he was afterward assaulted by ye
treason of his own greedy mother. Who for the desire that she had to reign
having betrayed one of her suns and by that horible deed puttinge of all
motherly affection, supposed now that her dignity and honor was mutch embased
by the conquest and renown of her other child. Wherefore upon a time she
watched opportunity, and preparing a cup of deadly poison, presented him
therewith when he came hot and thirsty from exercise. But her attempt took
contrary effect. For Grippus, as it were offeringe dutyfull courtesy to his
mother, desired her to begin unto him. At the last he urged her so far, that he
found out great proofs of her purpose, wherewith the Queen being overcome,
and turning the mischief unto her self, died with the poisoned potion which she
had provided for her sun.

Chap. 29 Of married Weemen.
VAlerius writes in the fourth book and third Chapter, Valerius.
that when Iulia, who was daughter unto Caesar and wife to Pompeius the great,
beehelde her Lord and Husbands Gown brought home all bloody out of the
feelde, being stricken with sudden fear that some violence had befallen unto
him, fell down in a swonde and was delivered of Child before her time, not
with out great loss and detriment of the whole Empire.

And Cecilius Balbus in the place before recited, Cecili. bal*
writes a story of a certain man whose name was Damelius, to whom a companion
of his objected that he had a stinking breath. The^ departed he home unto his
Wife discontented, and chiding with her for not telling him thereof before. The^
his wife said surely I would have done so (quod she) but yt I thought that al
men^ breathes had smelt in that sort, and therefore very like it is that she
had never joined her mouth unto any other man's.

Valerius.
Valerius also writes in the sixth book, and third chapter, of Tercia Emilia
the wife of Scipio African, whose singular good will and patience toward her
husband was so great, that perceininge that her Lord bare good affection unto
one of her Handmaides: she dissembled the matter and would not see it, for that
she would not seem to suspect or blame her Lord of incontinency, or to move
him to impaciencie which was conqueror of the world. Yea after her Husbands
decease, she made her handmaid free, and bestowed her in mariadge with one of
her free men.

Likewise Sulpitia was most diligently kept by her mother Iulia, because she
should not follow her husband Lentulus into Italy, who was proscribed and
condemned to dye. Howbeit she changed her atire, and put one the garment of a
servant, and taking with her two Handmaides, and two men, stole away secretly
unto him, not refusing to banish her self, that her faith might be known to
her condemned husband.

Chapter. 30. Of good widows.
THe word Vidua which signifies a Widow, sounds as it were Diuisa, that is
to say, one that is divided and parted fom her Husband. And Valerius writes in
the first book and first chap. that in the old time those weemen yt were
contented with one husband and once marrying, were crowned with a Garland of
chastyty, supposing that the tasting of many and often wedlockes, was a token
of a certain kind of intemperancy.

Ierom.
Saint Jerome in his work against Iouinianus reports that when Catoes
Daughter had mourned four weeks for the death of her Husband, a certain Matron
demanded of her when she would make an end of mourning? who answered, when
she made an end of living.

Likewise ye same Aucthour in his book de Anima, writes other, that when on a
time a frind of hers persuaded her to marry another husband since she was yet
but young, and her beuty fresh and flouring: she answered that she would not:
For, said she, if I chance to find as good an husband as I had before, I will
not stand in fear to leese him: but if he be eeuel, what need I to trouble
myself with such an one? And again in the same place, when one in the
presence of Porcia, praised a certain woman which had buried one husband and
Married the second, she answered, that a good and an honest woman never
marries but once. And semblably Valeria which was sister unto the Messalas,
after the decease of her Husband would never marry again, and being demanded
the cause, she answered that her husband always lived unto her. Arthemisia
also which was Queen and wife unto Mausolus king of Caria, although in
respect of her fidility toward her husbands she be singularly commended, yet
is she most praised for that she loved her Husband always as dearly when
he was dead, as if he had bin living: and in the honor of him she builded a
most bewtyfull and renowned Sepulcher, in so mutch that thereof all great and
sumptuous Sepulchers are called Mausolea, that is to say, like Mausolus
monument.

Chap. 31. Of Virgins.
COncerning Virgins, Saint Jerome writes against Iouinianus, that it appears
in how great honor virgins were had among the people of Rome, for asmutch as
Consuls and generalles of Arms sitting in their triumphat chariots when they
returned home with conquest over their enemies, and finally all kind of
degrees were accustomed in meetinge them, go out of the way, and give them
place. Nichanor when he had overcome and subverted the City of Thebes, was
taken in the love of a captive virgin. And desiringe her imbracinges and
company in the commendable law of wedlock, which thing a captive might well
have liked of, he found by trial that unto chaste minds virginity is more
dear then a kingdom. Whom the lover when she was slain held in his own
hand, lamenting his own grief, and her most miserable condition. Seneca.
Seneca in his sixth book of declamacions reports that a vestale virgin wrote
these verses following: O happy married wives, your life is fraught with joy,
For that I may not taste your state, I die in great anoy.
Against which, there was alleged an answer in this sort: As one that tried
have a man, thou yeeldest up the ghost,
Or die because thou art denide the thing thou couetst most,
both which things ought to be farthest from a woman of that cote. For unto
thee the Magistrates do cast down their faces in token of reverence, unto thee
the Consuls and Pretors give the upper hand in the streets, and it is no
small calling to be both a virgin and a priest: and that which has bin
spoken with so great affection that it seemed to proceed from the very hark
and intrailes must needs be true, that what woman soever wishes the act,
even without the act doing is an harlot. Valerius.
Valerius in the seventh book and third chapter, writes of a certain vestale
virgin in Rome called Tuccia, whose chastity being obscured with a sinister
report of incontinency, and she her self being privy of her own innocence,
took into her hands a sieve, and thus prayed unto the goddess Vesta, saying:
Vesta, if I have always touched thy sacrifices with chaste and undefiled
hands, command that I may take water out of the river Tyber with this Sieve,
and carry it into thy Temple. Which indeed she accomplished, the common course
of Nature giving place to her boulde attemptes.

S. Ierom.
Likewise Saint Jerome in the place before alleged, writes of another vestale
virgin named Claudia, who beeinge suspected that she had played the harlot, and
at that present the Image of the mother of the Gods stuck fast in the Oase of
Tyber in a ship, to give example therefore of her integrity, it is reported
how she tied her girdle unto the ship and that she drew it so away, more
the^ many thousand men were able to accomplish.

And, Saint Augustine in his work de ciuitate Dei, s. August*
writes that the ancient Romans were wount to bury alive the vestale virgins
that were corrupted, and whatsoever other Weemen were taken in adultrye, they
were one way or another punished, but none were put to death: supposinge it
meet to punish more severely the breach of a divine vow, then of humane
chastity. And thus as I judge I have run over all sorts of men with whom a
man may happen to be conversant with all at the table.

FINIS.
The third Book of Table Philosophy, which contains certain delectable and
pleasant Questions, to be propounded while we be at meat, or at any other
time.
The Preface.
NOw, since we have already briefly entreated concerning the manners and
behavior of those, with whom we may chance to be accompanied at the table,
next it remains that with like breuity we run over certain pleasant questions
of table talk. For as witnesses Macrobius in his first book of Saturnalia: A
well nurtered mind cannot solace it felfe with more profit or seemelines, then
in taking opportunity to dispute and demand questions after a learned and
virtuous manner, and if need be to answer with courtesy, and men cannot
question of any thing with greater delight then of matters of learning. And
therefore as says, the same Macrobius in the third book, the first thing
which we ought to observe at the table is to weigh the estimation and calling
of every geast, and the next to take occasion when he sees it offered to
speak, not to pour forth our own secrets among the cups, neither yet to
minister crabbed and unpleasant talk, but rather profitable and delightsome
Questions.

The first Chapter containing five several Questions.
FIrst therefore and foremost, this may be demanded: whether that the Aier or
Meat be more necessary for the preservation of the life of Man? And it
seems of the twain that Meat is more necessary, since that is more
necessary which supplyeth that substance which is lost, and which may be a
member or part of a member of the body, Auicen. Constan.
of which nature is our Meat according to the assertion of Auicen. But
indeed Constantinus is of the contrary opinion, saying, that Aier is more
necessary, to the body, proving the same both by Reason, and experience. By
Reason thus: Life consists in natural heat, because natural heat is the
beginning of life, wherefore that thing which tempereth natural heat,
retayning it in the natural temperature is more necessary, but the Air which
by way of breathinge we draw in, is of such sort: wh^rfore it is more
necessary. By experience thus: If a man be suddenly brought out of a stinkinge
close prison, first he desi^eth to take the fresh Aier, and afterward calls
for Meat, and Drink. But against the reason first alleged it may be answered
negatiuely, for life consists in two points, the one is a beginning sumwhat
far of, as restoringe that which is lost, and the conservation of all the
members and parts. In respect of which, the nourishing of natural heat is most
necessary, which is immedyatly and principally maintained by the qualities of
the Air. And therefore Aier is more necessary to the preseruacion of life, for
that it respects the life principally and immediately.

Secondly, it may be demanded which of the two, Meat, or Drink, is more
necessary unto life? To this may be answered that Meat is, although that
Drink be commonly more desired then Meat. The reason of the first is, that
that is more necessary which restores the thing which is lost, then that
which serves only to convey the iuce about all the body. But Meat is ordained
to restore the parts, and Drink to carry the meat about the body: wherefore the
conclusion is manifest. And that Drink is more greedely desiered: the reason
is, for that drink delayeth the vehemence of natural heat, in which respect it
is more necessary unto life then Meat, as is ye Aier also. Thus Drink has
two offices, first it conueieth the Meat unto all parts of the body, and so
is Meat a thing more necessary then drink. Secondly, it mitigateth the
natural heat, and preserves it in the just temperature, and is thereby more
necessary then meat. Wherefore any lyuinge creature can longer live without
meat, then drink.

Thirdly, this question may be demanded: Wether euel Aier or evil Meat do
more hurt the body? Whereunto it may be absolutely answered, that eeuell Aier
hurts more, for, that it is more noisome unto the heart, which is the
fowntaine of Natural heat, and of the spirits. Howbeit we may use a
distinction herein, that a thing may do harm after diverse manner of ways.
First, if it touch some noble and princypall part, and the other thing do not
so. Secondly, if it alter it often times and it cannot otherwise be avoided.
Thirdly, if it touch it immediately. And by these three means eeuill Aier
hurts more then eeuell Meat. For it touches a principal part, and it is
often drawn in, and it touches the part immediately. Fourthly, a thing may
hurt the more, because it makes a strong impression. Fifthly, if it continnue
there long, and cleave long time unto the ^^^ber. And by these last means,
corrupt meat eaten a^^^ more then naughty Aier drawn in.

^^urthly, this demand may be moved: Whether Meat ^^^pe do more comfort the
body? It may be answered, (...) lack of Meat does more grieve the body then
lack of sleep, and thereby concluded that Meat is more necessary then sleep. And
the reason is this, for ye sleep restores not that which is lost, neither
appeaseth the vehemence of natural heat from woorking upon the natural
moisture, which being consumed, then death is at ye door, which meat does:
wherefore it is more necessary. Moreover, there be three powers, the Vital,
Natural, and Animal. The Animal is not so mutch appertayning unto the
substance and effect of life, as the other two are. Wherefore, nutriment which
belongs unto the Natural and Vital faculties: is more needful then sleep,
which belongs unto the Animal virtue only.

Fifthly, it may come into question: whether the Aier or Meat do more nourish
the body? Unto this may be answered, that there is some kind of Nutriment
which goes into the substance of that which is Nourished, and is converted in
to the same, and after this manner the most finest and subtilest parts of the
meat is nutriment unto the spirits, and not the Aier. Secondly, a thing may
be termed a nutriment unto the spirits, because it comfort them, and thus
we call that the temperature or temperame^t of any thing which preserves the
same and nourishes it, having some proportion with that which is nourished.
And in this manner, Aier nourishes the spirits, refreshinge, and preserving
them in their natural temperature. And this mutch concerning this Question.

The second Chapter containinge 12. Questions.
THe sixth Question moves this demand: Whether evil Meat can engender good
iuce? And according unto the opinion of Haly super tegni, Haly.
etc. It is answered that there may be engendered good blood out of eeuell
Meat, and contrariwise also. The reason is this, good Meat may be eeuelly
digested, and so thereof become eeuell blood. And contrariwise, naughty meat
well digested, and so converted into good blood. So yt in every kind of meat,
yea if it were of a venomous qualiti are found two natures. The one, wherein it
is unproportionable unto the nature of the parts of the body, and by this
means eeuel meat ingendreth eeuel iuce, and this is the proper effect which
eeuel meat works. The.y. nature is whereby meats have the quality to become
proportionable unto the parts and like unto them, and in this sort naughty
meats may engender good iuce. For when Nature is strong, she is able to
remove the other quality which is nearest unto her, to wit in the same meat
which is received, and when it is altered she brings it unto her own
quality, and so of eeuel meat engendereth good blood. And contrariwise, if
Nature be weak and feable, she is not able to overcome the meats, and to
bring it unto good effect, which of it self is of power to be converted into
commendable nutriment, and therefore failing for want: turns good meat into
eeuell iuce.

Seventhly it may be demanded: Whether a simple, or a compowned Meat be
easiest of digestion? To this we must answer with Dyasanus, Dyasanus.
as appears in ye last of the Saturnalia that simple meat is the easiest.
For cruditie and surfeit comes two manner of ways, either by the quality or
quantity of the meat. By the quality, into which the meat is converted if it
be not agreeable unto the rest of the humors of ye body, and by ye quantity
thereof, if there be more received into ye body then nature is able to digest.
Then, for as much as the diversity of meats has diversity of Natures, and
some are soon digested and converted into iuce, whiles the harder lie boylyng
in the stomach: the first waxes sower and unprofitable and is perceived by
sower and evil sauouring belching, and there whiles that which is harder of
concoction procures gulping, and boiling in ye belly, even as green wood
lies smoking when it takes heat of the fire. Besides that, the diversity of
meats provoke gurmandize, and a desire to eat more then enough, so that
Socrates counseled very wiselye that men should abstain from such meats as
seem to provoke appetite when the belly is full, or to increase thirst, when a
man has drunken sufficient.

Eighthly, it may be demanded whether it be good to walk immediately after
meat or not? And hereunto it is to be answered, that there is two sorts of
Motions, or exercises. The one may be termed a toil, and that is not good
after meat. The other is a kind of walking either within doors, or abroad
down sum hill, Isaac.
whereof Isaac entreats, and the same moderately drives the me^te down unto
the bottom of the stomach, to the intent that ^^turall heat, which before
was as it were a sleep may be awakened and stirred up, which is requisite
after meat.

Ninthly, some man may demand whether it be good to sleep immediately after
meat or not? whereto I answer, that sleep is not wholesome while the stomach
is burdeined, for it procures the meat to be burned, Auicen.
as witnesses Auicen, li^^ as the bread burns when the Oven is over heated,
as also because it procures the reume and pain in the head, wherefore most
expedient it were to defer sleeping until the meat be departed out of the
stomach.

Tenthly, What is the cause that if a man stay longer for meat then his
accustom hour, he leeseth his appetite? It must be answered, that when the
stomach hungreth and finds no meat to work upon, it draws eeuil humors
from al parts of the body and feeds upon them, and is thereby falsely and
cou^terfaitly satisfied, and so desiereth no more, wherefore in this case Rhasis
gives advise, Rhasis.
to drink a draught of warmewater or tisane, whereby to provoke the party to
vomit if it may be.

Eleuenthly, Are our bodies warmer before meat or after? Galen says in his
second book of the sum of Physic, Galen.
that natural heat is augmented three ways: either in quantity, as in
applying sweet and warm furs, or the bellye of a young whelp unto the
stomach: or in quality by medicines, or jointly by both means in meats, and
by this means the body is warmer after meat then it was before.

Tweluethly: whether does fasting hurt more a choleric person or a phlegmatic?
I answer according to Hyppocrates, Hyppocr.
that it hurts most a choleric, the reason is, for that heat more abou^deth
in a choleric persons stomach then in a flegmaticke so that the same heat
consumes more, and consequently makes him more to desire food. Moreover,
fleame may be turned into blood, but choler can never, so that the phlegmatic
person contains in his body the matter and substance of blood, and may thereby
the better satisfy the appetite. As for the choleric, he has in him no
such mattter, wherefore hunger is more grievous unto him then to the
phlegmatic, as experience in them both proves to be true.

The.iii. Chapter, conteinyng. x. questions.
NOw in this question i^ ^alleth out that many are desirous to understand, what
should be the cause that many men are very hungry, and look when they sit
down to their meat, they are immediately satisfied with a little. Again, some
have but small appetite, and when they be sit at their meat, they eat
greedely: Whereunto we must answer, that this chances according to the
diversity of stomachs. For some men's stomockes are small and hot, and in yt
the stomak is hot desires much, and in that it is small the heat disperseth
soon the meat over all the capacity thereof, and makes a fantastical fulness,
so that little meat suffices such. Other some have large stomachs and could,
and in that their stomachs are cold, a little meat fills them, but in that
their stomachs are large, they feed much and a long time.

Secondly: which of the twain, those which have a strong heat or a weak, are
able longest to abide hunger? Surely I suppose that they which have the
stronger may fast longest, since for the more part such persons are of the
stronger constitucion. Howbeit this distinction is to be noted, that there be
two poincts to be considered in fasting, to wit, ye resolution of natural
heat, and the utter quenching of the same, and the stro^gest nature is able
best to sustain them both. And secondly, the disco^modities ar to be weighed
which ensue fasting, of which the strongest nature sustayneth more then does
the weak.

Thirdly: how chances it that those whose powers be small and narrow, can
abide honger better then they which have wider? Because through wide and large
pores, the body is more abundantly resolved, and less through the narrow and
small pores, wherefore ye remains which should provoke appetite.

Fourthly: does choler nourish or not? unto this demand we answer, Galen.
Isaac. Auicen.
that although Galen and Isaac say, that it nourishes not, because blood only
nourishes: yet Auicen holds opinion that choler nourishes also, which two
opinions of singular learned men, we must make to agree after this manner. There
are two sorts of choler, whereof the one, which is contained within the gall
cannot nourish: the other necessarely concurreth with the blood, wherewith the
parts of the body which are of a choleric constitution, are as well
nourished, as the sanguine parts are with the blood.

Fyfthly, whether can the sick or the whole best endure hunger? Some hold
opinion that the sick can, because natural heat in a sick person is busy in
resolving mo fumosities, breathes, and vapors rising from the humors, then in
an whole person. Howbeit this reason is weak, first because there can be no
parts nourished, nor spirits engendered by corrupt humors, and secondly if
this were so, then should there be more spirits in a sick body then in an
whole, and because the spirits are the carriers of the powers and strength into
althe parts, the sick should be stronger then the whole, which is evidently
false. But to grow to the purpose, we answer that whereas the sick
tollerateth hunger better then the whole person, there are three causes to be
given: the fist is because nature is occupied about the sickness, and the cause
thereof: the second, for that the parts of the body are infected and cheaked
with the corrupt matter, and therefore do not desire nutriment: and the third is
because the strength of the sick party beeinge, as it were, laid a sleep and
weakened, ^auseth them to have no appetite unto meat.

Sixthly, whether in the force of a strong or weak stomach best able to abide
hunger? The force of a strong stomach desires most, but it may best sustain
forbearing of meat, and contrariwise the appetite of a weak stomach looks
less for meat, and is not so well able to abide delay from it.

Seventhly, which of the twayn is best able to endure hunger he that is
accustomed to eat much meat or little? It may be answered that he that uses
to eat much meat may best fast for by reason of his great ravening he has
but small heat, and therefore may best endure hunger, and so likewise
contrariwise, because of the contrary cause.

Eighthly, whether does fasting more grieve men in hoate or cold seasons of the
year? It is more noisome in Summer then in winter, because the body is more
resolved in Summer then it is in winter, and therefore ought then to be fead
more abundantly and very often, and in winter it suffices to eat once in a
day. Ninthely, why are those that feed griediestly soonest filled? Hereunto
we must answer as it is written in the Saturnalia, that they which feed
griedely eat in mutch aier with their meat by reasen of their wide gapinge,
and often fetchinge of their breath. And therefore when the veins are filled
with aier, the appetite is fully satisfied.

Tenthly, wherefore are we able to abide hot meats and drinks in our mouth,
which we cannot for heat suffer in our hands? we answer as appears in the
place before alleged, for that the natural heat which is contained with in
the inner parts of the body is very sharp and vehement, and therefore it
overcomes and weakneth whatsoever other hot substance cummeth within the
mouth, wherefore then when thou put any extreme hot thing into thy mouth,
gape not wide nor fetch not thy breath in often, thinking thereby to cool it,
but rather shut thy lips almost close together, to ye intent yt the greater
heat which cu^meth out of ye belly, may help the mouth, and that greater heat
overcome the lesser, as for the hand that can abide no hot thing because it is
helped by no other heat then is in it self.

The. 4. chap. containing. 7. questions.
SOme man may happily move this question: what is the cause that when a man which
is hungry drinks, thereby he asswageth his hunger? but if he be a thirst
and eat, his thirst is not thereby slaked? Unto this demand there is answer
made in the Saturn* that there is no impediment but that liquor may pass into
every part of the body, and replenishe the veins thereof. But the substance of
meat is more grosser, and it cannot pass into the veins until it be digested
by little and little, so that it cannot slake the thirst which it finds, yea
rather it soketh up ye moisture which it finds, whereby thirst which is the
want of moisture, is more increased.

Secondly, Such as are fasting, whether be they more an hungered then a thirst?
By the same place I answer yt they thirst most, forasmuch as natural heat
works continually upon the food and nutriment which we receive, consuming
it away. Which also appears in children whiles they be infa^ts which consume
and concoct great stoare of nutriment by reason of their vehement heat. But
contrariwise we perceive how easily old men can sustain fasting, by reason of
the defaute of natural heat in them. But in the middle age, if natural heat
be stirred up with exercise, it procures a stronger appetite unto meat, for
want of natural heat. Wherefore, if there be always heat in appetite, and
moisture be the peculiar substance whereon heat works, if when a man is
hungry he desires meat, surely heat especially requires his own nutriment,
which being received, the whole body is therwt refreshed, and ca^ yt longer
tarry for more sou^der sus^ena^ce

Thirdly, why is it that we conceive more delight in drinking when we are a
thirst, then in eating when we be hungry? Drink, as a substance more liquid
the^ meat, sooner perceath into the stomach and the rest of ye body, and at one
time make^h a great and sensible delectation of the body to arise in eueri part
thereof, whereas meat by small and small recomforteth ye want and weakness of the
same, whereby the delight thereof is much diminished. Fourthly: why does the self
same drink seem stronger to one tha^ is fasting, the^ to one that is full?
Hunger emptieth ye veins, and fulness stops the^, and therefore when as the
drink passes through the empty parts, it is far more evident perceived, and
causes more strong sense of delectation unto the tastinge.

Fifthly, If a man be thirsty and have a dry stomach, whether may a little
drink suffice him or not? It is hereunto to be answered according unto Galen,
Galen.
those which have dry stomachs are soon a thirst, and a little drink
suffices them. The reason whereof may be this, for that every member which is
dry, shrinketh together and waxes to be of less capasitie then it was before,
which happens unto the stomach which is dry, and therefore is soon filled,
and with a little drink. And in the stomach there is engendered great thirstines,
when the mouth thereof waxes dry and desires to be moistened with drink, and
then a little drink suffices it. For when that which was dry and hard, is
shrunken together, the capacity thereof is soon filled with drink and a little
extinguisheth the thirst, insomutch as it feels not it own emptynes, and
this thirste soon returns again.

Sixthly, May the stomach be over charged and troubled with to mutch drink?
Surely Galen affirms the same, Galen.
and the reason may appear out of the premises. For if a dry stomach by reason
of the narrownes thereof, be full with a little drink, if then the drink be more
then the capacity of the stomach be able to contain, needs, as Galen says,
must much drink over flow and runouer in it.

Seventhly, why can a moist stomach bear mutch? A moist stomach is in all
points contrary to a dry, for it is very soft, like unto a soft bottle or
bladder, and for that cause is able to co^teine more, for it yields every way
as the meat which is received chances to fall or sway in it, and also
apparent it is to sense, that a moist bladder will receive more then will a dry
one, and so likewise will a moist stomach. And moreover forsomutch as it is moist
without any drienesse, which may procure thirste, therefore it mutch desires
not drink, howbeit it receives much and is nothing grieved therewith, as is
the dry stomach. And for this cause, the Danes, Polonians, Flemmynges, yea,
and the Englishmen can bear mutch drink, because their stomachs are wide,
procured by the softness of moisture. But in hot Regions as are Spain,
Barbary, and such like, the inhabitants do thirst mutch, and drink but
little, because of the dryness of the mouth of the stomach, and in such their
stomachs can receive but little, because of the dryness thereof.

The. 5. Chap. of Thirstinesse, containing 4 questions.
NOw are we occasioned to move this question concerning Thirstines, Whether
the cause thereof proceed sumtime from the Lungues or no? Which Galen
affirms, for that when the Lungues are hot and dry, Galen.
they long to be moystned, which drines is specially aswaged by drawing in of
cold aier, and cold and moist.

Secondly, what is the cause why thirstines, which cummeth from the Lungues, is
appeased by drawyng in cold and moist aier? And the dryness of the stomach by
drink? It is thus to be answered, that there be two passages, the one for air,
which is directed unto the Lungues: the other for meat and drink, and that
passes into the stomach. And for this cause the thirstinesse which cummeth of
the Lungues, is abated by drawyng in of cold aier, and that which rises of
the stomach, is slaked with drink.

Thirdly, Is thirst a desire of that which is cold and moiste, or of that
which is hot and moist? There are in the body two appetites or desires: the
one in respect of meat, to restore that which is lost, which appetite is
satisfied with that which is hoate and moist, according to the nature of the
parts to be nourished. The other looks for that which is cold and moist, to
repress the flame and firines of natural heat, which is accomplished by
drink only, and such drink as men seldom use but in the way of medicine, or
when they be sick.

Galen.
Fourthly, Which quenches the thirst best of wine or water? Thirst, as says
Galen de simplici medicina, is caused two manner of ways: the one by
emptiness: the other by heat and drought of the heart. That which comes by
emptiness of the parts, is chiefly aswaged by Wine which is both meat and
drink, for it requires such drink as is able to restore that substance
which is lost, which quality since it is in Wine, that is the only drink then
whereby that thirst is appeased. But as for the other thirst which is caused by
heat and drought of the heart that is again double, the one cummyng of heat
only, which is quenched with cold only, as with Vinegar and such like. And
likewise some is caused by drienesse, and is slaked by moisture. Again, thirst
which is engendered by heat, is of three sorts: The one rises forth of the
stomach: the other forth of the Lungues, and the third from the parts which
are farther of. So that which cummeth from the Lungues is slaked by drawing in
of cold Aier, and that which proceeds from the stomach and other parts
near thereunto, is quenched with cold water, but that which springs of some
eeuil disposition of ye parts and members which are far distant, as are ye
Liver and such like, is delayed with water wherewith sum pearsing and subtle
thing is mingled to cause it the sooner to go unto the place, as is vinegar or
such like, for water of it self is but slow and dull in operation, wherefore it
is needful that some sharper thing be joined with it.

The 6. Chap. of Hurtes which come after meat, conteing. 15 questions.
HEreafter we mean to entreat concerning certain accidents which chance
after meat and drink, And first to begin with the sower belching, it may be
demanded whereof it comes? And unto this point we answer with Galen, Galen.
that the Sower belching proceeds of a fainting heat, which fails and
decays by means of cold. For heat is the beginning of the sowernes which
begins to digest, but is not able to accomplish it, which defaut cu^meth
especially by hindera^ce through cold. Secondly, why is not this sowernes felt
in the stomach* immediately upon the receiving of meat? At ye first falling of
the meat into the stomak, it remains a while in ye same nature Which it had
before it was eaten, and cannot so soon be sower, but when once the heat
begins to work upon it, there insueth indigestion, and after that the
sowrnes.

Thirdly, Why happens this sowernes rather, and in more abundance to them that
sleep, then do wake? In sleeping the meat discendeth not down forthwith
unto the bottom of the stomach where the digestion is wrought, but remains
in the mouth of ye stomach, fleeting there about, and ingendring windynes. But
for the more part while men be awake, they be stirringe about or walkinge,
whereby the meat is driven down, and enforced into the bottom of the stomach,
which is the most effectual place of digestion, and repugnant to the cause of
sowernes.

Fourthly, Why (says Auicen) do sweet things soonest wax sower in the stomach,
Auicen.
as milk, and such like? Milk, and sweet blood are soon altered, and when
ye stomach assaieth to digest them and cannot, then turn they to be sower.

Fifthly, Why will wine wax sower quickly in the stomach? Wine and Milk of
their own nature are very soon converted into sowernesse, and the stomach
uses to bring things from power into act, and so makes them sower.

Sixthly, since all Wines be hot: How chances it, that they engender cold
diseases, and not hot? Wine of it self breeds no disease, but by filling
the sinews and brain, and such repletions ensue indigestion, and indigestion
nourishes cold sicknesses, and by this means Wine breeds none but cold
infirmities.

Seventhly, Whereof comes wringing, and griping in the belly? Wringing and
gripinge chances in all parts of the body, and it is of diverse sorts. One
cummeth of gross windiness, and this happens in the bottom of the stomach:
anoof gross and tough humors, and another of choleric superfluities. And
this last kind of gripinge in whatsoever it begins, for ye most part it
ends in ye stomach, the bottom thereof being a place of great sensibilitie,
notwithstanding that this griping also may pain any other place of ye guts
whersoeuer.

Eighthly, May a sick Man eat as much meat as he was won^ to do when he was in
good health? Custom is a second nature and he that is accustomed to eat
mutch when he is whole, cannot fast when he is sick, and therefore must be
more often refreshed with meat, even as often as he used to be being in good
health, and more abundantly then he that eats little.

Ninthly, whether does bread or fleash more hurt unto such as are recovering
out of sickness? Rhasis.
Rhasis says that fleash is less hurtful then bread unto them, and among all
fleash, Swines fleash nourishes most, and being light of digestion it is most
agreeable unto them.

Tenthly, whether is bread or fleash most meetest for the^ that have an Ague?
Concerning fleash, there be two poincts to be considered in the dieting of
Agues. The one is light digestio^, and herein fleash excels: the other is
easy conversion into nutriment, and herein bread is better then fleash, for
that fleash by reason of the oylines thereof is soon inflamed.

Eleuenthly, whether is it good to permit such as recover out of sickness to
drink wine immediately after their fleash, or before? In this poinct the common
people is deceived, for the fleash should first be eaten, and afterward the
wine drunken because above all things wine is soonest converted into blood, and
spirits, and augmenteth natural heat, and therefore ought to be given later
then fleash.

Tweluethly, whether ought one that is recovering out of sickness, to be dieted
and governed two days, like as when he was sick? verily he ought so, and
that for three causes. First, for the debility of natural power: Secondly,
because of custom: Thirdly because of some distemperature remaining yet with
in the body since the sickness. This also may be a reason, that it is not good
to change suddenly from that whereto a man is accustomed but by little and
little, and therefore the recouerer ought for a while to retain the same diet.

Thirtenthly, Is gross meat good for such as recover out of sickness? According
unto the judgment of Hyppocrates, it is not for, says he, it is convenient
that they be nourished two or three days with the same diet which they used
before. For otherwise they would soon be altered by feeding on gross
meats, which were not good for them to do.

Fourteenthly, which of these two alterations hurts a man most, from emptines
to repletio^, or from repletion to emptines? The sudden change from emptines to
fulness is more hurtful then from fulness to emptines, according to the opinions
of Hyppocrates and Auicen. Hypp. Auicen.
The reason is, for that through the emptines which went before, the strength
of the body is overthrown, the natural heat and spirits being resolved, so
that he cannot bear a great quantity of meat, nor a sudden change unto fulness.

Fiftenthly, how chances it that some meats of evil iuce as Eeles, fresh
Beef, and such like, do many times free many men of the Ague? It fortuneth ye
sundry, many times are delivered by such contraries in their feeding, both by
the provocation of nature, who after the receiving of such meats is much
lightened, and thereby assaying to disburden her self does often cast herself
headlong, sumtime to better, and sumtime to worse: and also for the comforting
of nature as taking great strength by ye receiving of customable meats, and so
the powers being strong, the pacient is eased and freed by such meats: but
being weak, are overthrown, and quite extinguished.

The. 7. Chap. of Bread, containing. 8. quest.
BRead is in diverse places made of diverse and sundry sorts of corn, and
therefore it may be demanded, why bread, which is made of wheat, nourish more
then that which is made of Barley? unto which Aristotle answers in his
problemes, because it has more moderate clammines, which it beehooueth all
good nutriment to have, whereby it may be joined and cleave unto ye body, also
it sticks fast together in the moulding, and is therefore the more commendable.

Secondly, why does stale bread seem whiter and fairer the^ new? Moisture is
the cause of the blacknes which is more abounding in new bread then in stale,
for in the new bread it yet remains, but in the stale it is exalted away, and
departed together with the heat.

Thirdly, why is unsalted bread heavier then salted? Salt dries and by it
things are preserved from putrefaction, so yt by salt the moisture is consumed
and is expelled away by exhalatio^, which makes stale bread to be lighter then
new, and again, in new bread the moisture yet remains and makes it heavy.

Fourthly, why is not bread made of wheat, hard when it is cold? wheat
naturally co^teineth in it a sweet slimy humor, which is as it were the soul
thereof, and will not permit it to be hard.

Fifthly, why does wheaten past rise, and barley past fall both in woorking and
baking? Barley meal when the water cummeth unto it shrinketh down, because it
lies houer and thin, and is full of husks. And wheaten meal rises up,
because before it lay very near together: but when once it cummeth to heat,
the^ does it puff up, and rise up into a greater heap.

Sixthly, Why looks the dough which is of wheat, white when it is wrought, and
barley dough black? For two causes, first for that that which is in the
uppermost of the wheaten bread is sooner altered by the heat of the oven as
beeinge a thing hot and is converted into whitenes: And secondly because the
husky part of the barley reteineth in it more moisture then does wheat, which
causes the blacknes.

Seventhly, Since honey is a more clammye substance then water, how chances it
that paste which is made up with honey is more brittle in the baking? Water is
joined and glewed together by heat of the fire. But honey glueth together and
dries with all, and therefore is more brittle, for brittlenes comes of dryness

Eighthly, why is bread which is made of new corn worse the^ that which is made
of old? In new corn there yet remains much watrish and slimy clamminesse,
whereby it is less commendable then that which is made of old grain.

The. 8. chap. Of Wine, containing. 13. Quest.
COnsequently I think it meet to entreat of wine, concerning which there may
be many profitable questions moved, Auicen.
and likewise resolved not with out delight, as first, if, according unto ye
assertion of Auicen in his ca^tickles, and Rhasis in Almansor it be good once
in a month to be drunken with wine? Unto this answers Auerois, Aver. Auicen.
Galen.
in his co^mentarie upon the Canticles of Auicen, yt this opinion of drunknes
is but a drunken opinion, and erroneus. For although according unto the
judgment of Galen, Wine is as agreeable to the mayntenance of natural heat,
as Oil in the Lamp to preserve the burning light: notwithstanding like as to
mutch oil rather hinders the light and extinguish the candle, so does
ouermutch Wine quench natural heat altogether. Howbeit if it be delayed with
water it is more convenient, but it hurts the animal heat and the sensible
organes thereof, both the brain, and sinews.

Secondly, why surfeit they sooner that drink delaid Wine, the^ they which drink
it pure? Concerning pure Wine generally, Galen says, Galen.
that for such as naturally have weak veins, it is better to drink water
then Wine. And to come nearer to the purpose, Aristotle.
Aristotle in the third part of his Problemes gives a threefolde cause unto
this demand: the first, because that which is tempered or mingled by reason
of the subtilitie thereof enters into more narrow passages then does that
which is not tempered: secondly, because men drink less of that which is
mingled as liking not so well of it as of yt which is not tempered, and
thirdly, that which is impermixt and without minglyng is hoater and digesteth
the residue of the meat, which is in the stomach, sooner, then the delayed Wine
is able to do.

Thyrdly, Why does Wine which is unmingled with water sooner cause a man's head
to ache then that which is mingled? The unmingled Wine is thick, and sticks in
the passages, sendyng up the vapors and fumes with heat into the head: and the
mingled Wine being thinner and also delayed, both perceth sooner, and fumeth
less.

Fourthly, what is the cause that mingled wine moves a man more to vomit then
the clean wine does? The swimminge of the watrishnes of it about the stomach,
procures lothesomnesse, and makes apt to vomit.

Fifthly, why do not children which are hot of complexion, love wine, which
aged persons, and men of perfect strength being hot also, do greedely desire?
Men are hot and dry, and children hot and moist, and the desire unto Wine is
the appetite unto moisture, which moisture abundyng in children keeps them
from drinkyng, and the dries which is in aged men and strong persons,
provoke them to a desire of drink.

Sixthly, when wine is cleansed from the Lees why is it stronger and not durable?
Macrobius in his Saturnalia the fourth book, Macrobius
writes that having no strength nor matter to cleave unto, it is on every side
exposed unto dangers: for the Lees is as it were the root whereby the Wine is
strengthened and preserved?

Seventhly, why does wine immoderatly taken ingendre both hot and cold
diseases? It is to be noted that there be two qualities in Wine: the first is
to heaten, and in this respect it rather procures hot then cold sicknesses:
the second is to stuf the brain, and to fill the sinews. Thus when cold
vapors arise from the Wine, they cause vnlustinesse, fullness, and
vndigestion, and consequently procure cold diseases.

Eighthly, Whether does Wine engender most of Fleame or Blood? Seeing as we
have before concluded Wine breeds cold humors, doubtless it breeds also
more Fleame then any other humor. The reason is, that when wine is quaffed in
great abundance, it is not perfectly digested and causes likewise the residue
of the meat to fail in concoction, thereby ingendring abundance of Fleame: But
indeed if it be moderatly drunken, it increases blood above other humors.

Ninethly, Does Wine hurt the brain? Isaac says yea. Isaac. Galen.
And Galen also affirms that it hurts the brain, and helps the stomach.
And albeit that at the first drinkyng wine does properly warm, yet because it
fumeth mutch, it anoyeth the brain, fillyng it with vapors and stoppyng the
sinews.

Tenthly, Why does strong Wine hurt the brain and comfort the stomach, and
weak wine works the contrary effect? Because Wine heateth the stomach
whereon consists digestion, strong Wine is of greater effect in this case
then is the weak. But again, how mutch stronger the Wine is, so mutch the more
it sends vapors up into the head, so that the strength thereof breeds
inconvenience.

Eleuenthly, Why does the use of Wine engender the sower gulpyng or belchyng in
the stomach, more then water? The sower belchyng never happens in the stomach
but when digestion is beegun, and Wine stirs up natural heat, and is as
soon digested as Milk. Wherefore, like as when they be out of the stomach
they soon wax sower: so do they likewise in the stomach.

Tweluethly, Whether does wine or meat comfort natural caliditie? Isaac says
that wine does, and the reason is, because it is very swiftly converted into
natural heat, Isaac.
comfortinge it mutch more then any meat does. But meat when it is converted
into nutriment, does more restore that which is lost, and comfort and
preserves the body longer.

Thirtenthly, and lastly, If wine must needs be given unto the sick, whether
were it most expedient to give them new wine or old? Although the common
people do contrary and mutch amiss, yet new wine is far more holsom for them
then old. The reason is, for that how mutch the newer the wine is, so mutch
the less it is inflatiue or windy, and for that cause is more convenient for
them, then are the old wines.

The 9. chap. Of Fleash: conteinyng. 4. quest.
HEnceforward now let us see what may be said of Fleash. And first it may
demanded, why strong Fleash is soonest digested? It is answered in the Saturn.
that natural heat is strong in a man which stoutly inuadeth the matter and
substance which resists it, consuming and dissoluing the same, and that which
is tender and light it burns sooner into ashes, then turns it into juice.
For like as sound wood being hewn in to pieces is soon converted into coals,
and if chaf fall into ye fire there scarce remains any ashes thereof to be
found: so fares it in the digestion of strong and light meats. So likewise an
heavy millstone breaks the greatest corns, and lets the small depart
whole. The strong winds also throw down hie Firtrees and mighty Oaks to the
ground, and lets the low shrubs, and bushes to stand: Even so natural heat
digesteth the hard fleash, and ouerpasseth the fine and tender nutriment.

Secondly, Why be Cullices which are made of Fleash, harder of digestion then
the fleash it self? The lightness which it gets by pounding, causes it to
swim upon the top of all kind of moisture which it finds in the stomach, so
that it cannot cleave unto the sides of the stomach, the truth whereof is
perceived if some portion of the cullice be thrown into water, for it will
always fleet upon the top, and for that cause is the slowlier concocted in
the stomach.

Thirdly, which is moister of roasted or sodden fleash? We must answer hereunto
with Aristotle in the. 4. book of the Meteors, Aristotl^.
that the roasted is moistest: for in roast fleash by reason of the fire the
outward parts are hardened, and consequently ye the pores are stopped, so that
ye inmost moisture cannot issue forth. But in sodden fleash the outward pores
are resolved through the heat and moisture of the water, and so opened yt al
ye moisture departs. Thus it happens that roasted fleash seems dry without
and is moist within, and sodden fleash contrariwise. Fourthly, why do the
beams of the Moon cause fleash sooner to putrify, then of the Sun? There
can be no putrefaction unless heat and moisture do meet. And the
putrefaction of fleash is nothing else but a certain secret dissolutio^
converting the sodility of the flesh into moisture. And heat if it be
temperate, nourishes humors, but being immoderate dries the^ up, and does
extenuate. So yt the Sun being hot, draws all ye moisture out of ye flesh
and dries it. But ye beams of ye Moon, in whom there is no manifest heat but
an hidden warmth, increasing the moisture, ingendreth quickly therein great
putrifactio^. For there abides in the beams of ye Moon a certain natural
propriety to moisten bodies, and to imbrue the^ as it were with a misty dew,
whereunto ye heat which she has being joined, corrupts ye flesh which lies
any time in it.

The. 10. chap. Of Eggs, containing. 9. quest.
THis Chapter requires now some special treatice of Eggs, wherein the first
question which offreth it self most fitly to be demanded, is this: which is
the hoater of the yolke or the white? Among all humors blood is warmest in
temperate warmth, so that the yolke as cu^ming nearest unto the blood, is
surely ye warmer. Moreover, the Liver is hoater then the breasts, and the
blood warmer then the milk, and the yolke in the egg is in temperature unto
the white, as is the blood in the Liver.

Secondly, why does the yolke being cast into water, sink down to the
bottom, and the white fleet on top? The white is very slimy, and cleaves unto
that which is next unto it, and by reason of the slimines swimmeth above the
water, and the yolke because of the soundnes and want of pores, sinketh down.

Thirdly, why have birds fewer eggs and bigger then the fishes, and they have
more and smaller then birds? The greatness in a thing which is continual,
Auicen.
is procured by a strong heat: but a multitude in that which is divided is
long of the matter, because the matter is the beginning of division. And
because birds have more heat then fishes have, therefore have they great eggs
in continual, and but few in division, and contrariwise it fares in fishes.

Fourthly, why have birds eggs an hard shell, and fishes eggs a soft? Fishes
lay their eggs in a moist place, and therefore they need no hard shell. But
birds lay their eggs in hard and sound places, as upon the ground, stones,
trees, and such like, and therefore have need of an hard shell to keep them
from hurt, until such time as the chick or bird be hatched.

Fifthly, why are birds eggs speckled and of diverse colors, and it is not so
in fishes? In birds there is a strong natural heat which is able to separate
things of diverse natures asunder, as the yolke from the white, and in fishes
this heat is so weak that it is not able to work the like effect.

Sixthly, why are birds eggs long, and fishes eggs round? Heat moves from
the center, and especial causes a form like a pillar, broad beneath and
sharp above, as appears in flame of a fire which rises up into a sharp
poinct. Wherefore, heat being more abundant in birds then in fishes, the birds
Eggs are long, and fishes round, for the weak heat carries the matier equally
round.

Seventhly, what breaks the eggeshell when the chicke is hatched? There be
two causes hereof alleged, the one is, for that by long and continual lyinge
the shell waxes soft and thin, as it is if an egg be stieped nine days in
vinegar: the second is, for that when the young bird lacks nutrimente, he
breaks the shell to seek meat.

Eighthly, why does the yolke of an egg which is laid in the full of the moon,
and in the light thereof, Rhasis.
scour spots out of cloth? The fatty drop in the mids of the egg beeinge
the means of the generation, conceiueth a pearcinge and a dividing heat both
by the great light, and the moisture which the Moon moves, which it can not
do at another time.

Ninethly, why do some eggs crack when they be laid into the fire and some
not? Such crack as have within them windines, which is perceived when the shell
reueth, to issue forth with great noise and force. And this happens when the
fire is great. For if a birds egg were cast into the mids of the fire, the
shell would soon break, and the windines would start forth with great noise
and force, which it would not do if the fire were small. But proportionably,
there is mutch more windines in the eggs of fishes, and therefore they make a
great noise when they be cast into the fire, as appear for example in the
row of an hearring.

The. 11. chap. Of Fishes, containing 4. Questions.
NOw let us a little come to demand a few questions concerning the nature of
Fishes, and first, whether Fishes do feed upon their own fry or not? whereto
it is to be answered affirmatively, both because they be ravenous by reason
of their cold stomachs, and also because they have blunt senses and cannot
discern their own fry from other, devouring up all a like.

Secondly, do Fishes chawe their meat? No, for if they did, superfluous water
would enter into them with their meat, and suffocate them. Again, they be
ravenous, and feed greedely and eat down their meat whole as it cummeth.

Thirdly, why does the rain profit fishes, and hurt birds? Sweet water
nourishes only, and therewith are fishes nourished being mingled with mud and
clay. As for birds they live in the aier, and seek their living by flying
about, and the feathers of their wings will clod and cleave together with the
rain, and so are hindered in their flying. Whereof it may be gathered, that
abundance of rain hurts as well fishes as fowls, for in such times they fall
into oppilations of the nutritive parts, by reason of the sweetenes of such
water. For sweet things, as says Galen, do stop the parts nutritive.

Fourthly, Why do the Roes of fishes crackle more in the fire then other
things do? When the fire is so hot that it resolves more then it consumes
then do they break in ye fire, as it also appears by the example of the
chestnut: But when it is so temperate that it consumes as much as it
resolves, then do they neither reeue nor break: beesides that fishes eggs or
Roes do crackle by reason of windines included within them, which issuinge
forth at a little hole, causes a noise.

The 12. Chap. Of Pultes or Podware containing. 3. Questions.
NExt we may take a conueniente occasion to dispute of Podware, Galen
or grains contained in a Cod or shale, wherein we may first demand the
reason, why Galen supposes that such as use to feed on that kind of ware
are mutch subject unto the gowte? And the cause is for that beeinge hard and
windy, they be of evil digestion and are soon turned into fleame, and of
fleame springs the gowt.

Secondly, Beans being windy, why do they not lose that evil quality by
boiling, as well as barley? Beans are naturally more windy then barley. Or this
may be the cause, for that beans are of a harder, more compacte and gross
substance then barley which is light and houer, and is sooner discharged of the
windines. Isaac. Galen.
Whereupon says Isaac according unto the doctrine of Galen, we cannot
altogether take away the windines from beans, but we may diminish it by
boylinge them.

Thirdly, may Lentils prepared with vinegar, be ministered in sharp diseases?
Auicen holds opinion that they may, Auicen.
but Galen denies it. And therefore it is thus to be understood, that Lentils
prepared with vinegar are noisome in a Fever with impostumation, because they
freat and bind the passages, which thing Galen means. But in a Fever without
impostumation, by reason of contrariety they be good, as Auicen understands
it.

The 13. Chap. Of Pot herbs, and Sallet herbs. containing. 6. Questions.
HEreafter now insueth to discourse with like breuity concerning a few usual
herbs, where as first the cause and reason may be required, why Colewortes
do dissolve drunkenness? Aristotle answers herunto in the third part of his
problemes, Aristotle*
that Colewortes yield a sweet iuce, and contain a purgative faculty, the
effect whereof Physicions use to prove in the ministering of emollient Glysters,
so that by the same virtue it draws the supefluous and indigested matter from
of the wine or drink in those that be drunken. For this being left in the
uppermost part of the belly, the body waxes cold, which being cold, the
thinnest part of the moisture is conveyed into the bladder. Wherefore the body
being rid of this double moisture, must needs be discharged of the surfeit.

Secondly, why does Purcelain take away the benumming, or edge of the teeth?
The same Aristotle also in the second part of his work before named, says
that the slimines of Purcelain entering within the teeth, draws forth the
sharpnes which is the cause of beenumming, and likewise milk meltinge about
the teeth, has the same effect.

Thirdly, why do Leekes and Onions prosper best in dry ground, and worst in
moist? It is also to be answered by the same Author in the first part of
the Probleames, (...) as all that is milted by hot and dry is of the nature
of water as appears by all kinds of Metals. And Earth is turned into Salt,
when it is cleansed from the dross in moisture and burning heat, and dries
congelyng and hardenyng it, so that Salt is a certain dryness of the earth
burned by an heat into a watrish hardness, whereby the taste thereof comes near
unto bitterness, which is engendered of heat woorkyng upon an earthly dry
substance. Then being of this nature, by heat it is hot and dry, and by
reason of the bitterness it kills the belly worms, and by drithe it
drinks up putrifiynge moisture, abolishyng the same, and consequently
prohibiting all stinking. Now because it dries, and consumes moisture and
heat, it hinders generation and fruitfulness of the ground, and because it
has a sharpness of a burning heat, it sharpneth the things that are mingled
with it. And because it has a certain bitter dryness, the taste thereof is
loathsome, and provoke thirst by reason of dries, and because of the
sharpness it dissolueth, and being mingled with other sauces makes them
pearce into the tungue, and so it hates other tastes. Moreover Salt has a
certain marvelous nature, which is to draw forth the like unto it self, out
of another thing. For if poudred Fish or fleash which is very salt be laid to
sooke in brine which is newly made, it draws the saltnes out of it sooner
then fresh water does.

Lastly, Why does Salt crackle when it is cast into the fire? According unto
the same doctrine in the fourth of the Meteors, Salt is of substance earthy
combust mingled with water and therefore it crackleth when it is thrown into
the fire. But if you would know the cause why Salt preserves fleash from
corruption, read it before in the discourse of fleash.

The. 16. Chap. Of Honey: conteynyng 2. Questions.
Among many other we must not forget to say sumwhat of Honey, and first to
demand this question therein, which is the better of new or old Honey? The
choice in Honey and Wine is quite contrary, for the newest Honey, and oldest
Wine is preferred according unto Macrobius judgment. Macrob.
The cause hereof is this, for that the nature of wine is moist and of Honey
dry, as the proof appears in the use of Physic, for things which are to
be moistened, must be fomented with Wine: and such as are to be dried, must
be cleansed with Honey. Thus in continuance of time there is some part of the^
both consumed away, and the Wine waxes stronger, and the Honey drier.

Secondly, If Honey be put into a Wine vessel why do the Lees rise up unto the
top of the Honey, whereas whatsoever else is put in, the Lees as the heavier
substance always keeps the bottom? The dragges or Lees, as being the most
earthly and heauiest part of the substance, fall down to the bottom, and yet
are overcome by Honey, for Honey naturally by reason of the weight thereof,
falls down to the bottom, and drives up the Lees as lighter then it self.

The. 17. Chapter Of Oil, conteinyng. 3. Questions.
NOw lastly we come to the consideration of Oil, where these questions are to
be moved.

First, wherefore fleeteth Oil in the top, wine in the mids, and Honey in the
bottom? The better the Honey is, the heavier it is: and that which lies in the
bottom is always the best, and in Wine that is, chiefest which lies in the
middle not troubled with the Lees, nor above corrupted by the air. For the
husband men of the country, not contented only to cover their vessels abroad,
hide them up in the ground, and defend them from external hurt, preseruyng
them as mutch as is possible from taking the air, wherewith they be so
manifestly anoyed, that sumtime the whole full vessels are almost corrupted.
Wherefore the Wine which is in the mids of the vessel, being farthest from
the aier and the Lees in the bottom is best, as farthest dista^t from two
noysom neighbors.

Secondly, why does Oil amend in goodness, which is preserved in a vessel but
half full? The aier fills up the other void place of the vessel, and dries
up the superfluous moisture which abounds in the oil, which being taken
away it gets a new sweetness in the taste.

Thirdly, why does Oil congeale, but wine very seldom? Oil is a smother and
thicker substance then wine is, and therefore more apt to congeale: but wine is
nothing so soft, and beesides is much more liquid. And whereas upon occasion
hereof it may be replied, why vinegar which is passing cold does not freese,
when other things do which are not so cold: Surely it may also be answered by
the same reason, for yt among all liquours it is the thinnest, sharp also and
eger, which is some hindrance, as it is evident if we take the sea for
example, which by occasion of the bitterness and saltnes thereof, is kept from
congealing. And now also of purpose a little to digress, what is the cause that
Pepper and Mustard being applied unto the outside of the skin do blister and
inflame the place, but received into the stomach they offend very little, or not
at all? Sharp spices and drugges do exulcerate the upper most part of the skin
because they be thereto applied in their full virtue without the mixture of any
thing else with them: but being eaten down into the stomach, their force is
delayed by the moisture of the belly, so that they be altered by the heat
which is there, before that they be able to do any harm.

FINIS.
The fourth Book, of Table Philosophy, which compriseth many merry honest
Iestes, delectable devises, and pleasant purposes, to be used for delight and
recreation, at the board among company.
The Preface.
Jn this fourth Book we intend to set down somewhat concerning honest mirth,
and pleasant recreation in words, whereby men are refreshed, at the table. For
as says Aristotle in the fourth book of his Ethics, In this life if at any
time we have the liberty to live in rest and quietness, and to refresh our
selves with any pastime, we ought therein to frequent comely and courteous
speech, and to behave our selves gently, so that a man's words and deeds
do tend unto delight, dysposing himself to utter himself accordingly, and
to bear the merry deeds and words of others. Upon which place, Albertus in
his Commentary says: Every man that is given to study has need of
recreation that his wit be not wholly overthrown. For whosoever evermore
applies his study, and bends his mind always to practice or look upon
sumthinge: doubtless his spirits shall be resolved, and the animal power be
destroyed, and the proper functions of the parts surceasse: which parts being
destitute, then is the force of study brought to ruin. In consideration
whereof those which are studious, and mutch troubled with affairs, have need
of rest, wherein their spirits may be released, and their senses resolved in
some pleasure. For like as in the common course of our life nature wants
sleep, so in study and travail, rest is semblably needful. But who so is
a student, or wearied with honest exercise, to such is none other then honest
recreation acceptable: which plainly consists in such words and deeds as
are not repugnaunt to virtue, but stir up the delight of our affection. For
look how bodylie weariness is cured by bodylie rest: so is tediousness of
the mind assuaged by pleasure of recreation, which is also a certain resting
of the mind. As it i^ read in a certain writer, that as there was a man of
ripe years, and much addicted unto contemplacion; playing for his delight
among children which he taught: there came one by, who beholding the same,
mocked him to scorn. Then said this good man, why mockest thou? bend thy bow,
which thou have in thy hand, and he did so. Nay, bend it more quod he: J dare
not said the other for fear of breaking it. Even so, quod he, it fares with
my mind: For unless I should refresh it with some pla^e: it would fail me,
and be quite extinguished. And therefore it is expedient to use honest
recreation* by means whereof to recreate a man's mind, as namely after godly
studies, and painful trauayles And among many it is a pretty kind of solace
and delight, to use wyttie inuectiues and quippes one at another at the table,
so that the wit therein be exercised, not by biting: but by sharpning one
another. Or whether it were in pleasant questions or picked devises, whereby
the one provoke another to break silence. Or else in pleasant tales or
hystories, wherewith the hearers are delighted, and made merry.

Chap 1. Of pleasant quippes, and tauntes.
Macrobius.
ACcording to ye doctrine of Macrobius in his fourth book of Saturnalia, there
be two kinds of quippes, or inuectiues. The one a plain railing, or chacking.
The other a figuratiuelye shadowed speech covered cleanly with mirth and
ciuilyty, sou^ding one thing, and covertly meaning another, but not proceedyng
to express bytternesse. The first kind is altogyther to h^e banished the
table. For as the same aucthour writes, like as a little thrust dryueth down
him that stands upon a narrow footing: so a small grief being sprinkled
and bathed with wine, will soon drive a man into madness. The other kind
which is coouert, may also be sauced with sharpne^se. The like whereof is
reported of Octauianus, who seemed to be a noble man of birth. Before whom
when on a time Cicero pronounced somewhat, I heard not what you said, quod
Octauianus. That is maruayle said Cicero, since your ears were wont to be so
well boored, which he spoke for this cause, for that Octauianus was borne in
Lybia, where the manner of the people was to make hoales through their ears.
This kind of nypping, because it is next neighbor to railing: ought amongst
wise men to be avoided at the table. But some there is which has in it less
sharpness, as that which Cicero used against Gneus Seruilius, which was
Consul but one day. In foretymes, quod Cicero, Flamines were but for one day,
and now the Consuls be so. And again, when Fannius had been Consul but a
few days: then said Cicero: there happened a great wonder in Fannius year,
for when he was Consul, there was neither Winter, nor Spryng, nor Summer, nor
Harvest. And when Fannius demanded of him, why he came not to see him while
he was sick in his Consulshyppe: he aunsweared, I would have come, but the
night came to fast upon me. These, and such other like may be used, which
touch certain faults and deformyties of the body, which engender little or
no grief at all, as are the crokednesse, rising up, or flatnesse of the nose.

Certain nyppes and gyrdes, do seem at the first appearaunce to have some
reproochefulnesse or sclaunder in them, and yet they do not touch the
hearers, as this is. When Quintus Lucius said unto his friend which sat by
him, that his hands were cold, then said his friend: that is great maruayle
having brought them warm so latelye out of the Province. Wherewith Quintus was
much delyghted, for that he was without all suspicion of thee uerie, whereas
contrariwise, if he had spoken it unto one that had b^^ne guiltye and pryuie
of his own theeft: it would have mutch troubled him.

Or if a man should say unto one that lives very chastely, he loves a whore
as well as you, it should much delight him. Contrariwise, if you should say
unto a coward or timorous person, thou art as hardy as ever was Achilles, or
Hercules, or unto some notorious naughty person, I accoumpt thee more vicious
then ever was Aristides: these words do sound as a praise, when as in d^de
they be plain discommendation. Also in the uttering of a nyppe or inuectiue:
it is well commended if he which speaks it be also of the same condition. As
if a poor man mock at a poorer then himself for poverty, or one that is borne
of base parentage, floute at another as meanly borne as himself: as did one
Tharseus, who from a Gardener coming unto some better calling, flouted at his
old friend and acquaintance which was blind and of base parentage: but
immediately he added: And I also am borne of the same seed. There be moreover
some kind of nyppes, which do not only not displease the hearers: but make
them merry. The like whereof Diogenes cast forth against Aristenes his
master, saying: This man of a rytch man has made me poor, and from a fair
house, has brought me to dwell in a Tub. For by these words he uttered
better his sense and meaning, then if he had said, I thank my master that
has made me a Philosopher, and a man perfectly fraught with all virtue.

Chap. 2. Of speeches convenient for every kind of person.
THe assembling together of men for honest mirth and banketting, Macrobius.
as it is commendable, so ought it not to be dumb, and without words, as
says Macrobius. And who so is desirous to be a pleasant companion, and a
prouoker unto talk, and dele^table devises: must demand such questions as
are easy to be resolved, and wherein he knows the party to have some skyll
and exercise. For every man is glad when he is provoked to utter his knowledge
in that wherein he is skylfull, and would not willingly have his ^unning hyd
wherein he has travailed, which is perhaps unknown unto the residue, be it
Divinity, Physic, Astronomy, Law, or such like. For herein he seems to
have attained unto some end of his study, when he has gotten fytt occasion
to utter yt which he has read, without suspicion of ostentacion, wherewith he
can not be touched, when he speaks, not intruding himself, but being thereto
required. Again, it is a great grief, and a point of discourtesie, to demand
a question of a man in some matter wherein he is ignorant, and that also in
company. For he is then either enforced to confess his ignorance, or to
answer unadvisedly, or to commytte him self to the hazard of a true or
false event. Such as have trauayled far by land and Sea, are glad when they
be asked of the situation of far Countries, or of the worcking of the wild
Seas. Captains and Soldiers do wyllinglye blason their own valiant acts,
yea, sometime without any mocion of arrogancy. And generallye, every man
reioyseth to discourse of his own dangers and troubles, which he has passed
in his life. If thou can, prouooke him often to talk, who has been many
times favorably entertained of great personages, or has accomplished
embassages with happy success, or has been honorably entertained of ye
Prince: or who so having been beset by Pirates, among the whole fleet of his
fellows, has himself only escaped away by his wit and valiencie. It will
like some man well to declare if thou require him, the sudden felicity of his
friend, which he would not utter of his own accord, and yet is loath to
suppress it, for fear of suspicion of envy. He that loves hunting, is
delighted to talk of Hounds, Forestes, Chases, and the event of hunting. If
there be any religious person present, as Monk, or Friar, give him leave to
gloss of his own holiness, how he may deserve well of God, what is the
commoditye of Ceremonies, and what rewards are promised unto the devout
fulfyllers of the same. But if there be ever an old man in the company, you
shall do him a great pleasure to ask him of such matters as are nothing to the
purpose, for that age is much given to talk, as witnesses Macrobius. All
these and such like things may be invented to delight and procure the whole
assemblye to talking, and to fall unto variable communication, of what calling
so ever they be.

Chap. 3. Of apt pleasant words.
Sweet and pleasant words do cheer the feast no less then Wine, as is the
old saying. For if this delightsome provocation be myngled with oportunitye,
it persuades more then does any herb myngled with the Wine, or whatsoever
inchauntment it be, no not the best iuyces which are brought out of India or
Arabia, are of so great effect. For this is the charm wherewith that fair
Helen of Greece, allured her amorous gheast, and turned him from sorrow to
joy, even the opportunity to utter her pleasant discourses. Whereby it is
evident, that pleasant words and apt sayings, not exceeding the bounds of
honesty, do much cheer the table, and solace the company. And now to speak
of antiquitye, there be two very eloquent companions, says Macrobius, to wit,
Cicero and Plautus, excelling all other in delitefull conversation, where he
brings in certain places out of Cicero to the same purport, as this is, that
on a time it happened that Cicero supped at the house of Damasippus the
Philosopher, who setting a little wine of Falernum before him: said, drink ye
of this wine which is forty year old: surely, quoth Cicero, it bears his age
well. Likewise being desired to dinner by a friend of his (for commonly he
denayd none that requested him in that behalf) which was but simple and
ordinary, when he was coming away and taking leave, he rou^ded the master of
the house in the ear, saying: I knew not before yt we two were so familiar and
coming also on a time unto Pompeius house, some yt were there before, said
that he came to late: Nay not so said Cicero, for I see nothing preuided.
Likewise seeing Lentulus his son in law, a man of small stature, going with
a long sword by his side: who, quod Cicero has tied my son in law to a
sword? The same beholding the counterfayte of his brother Quintus Cicero set
forth very large, and in a great portrayture, and Quintus him self being a man
but of a very small s^antling: half my brother said he, is bygge^ then the
whole. After the victory which Caesar obtained Cicero being demanded how he
was so deceived in taking part: answered thus: his gyrting deceived me,
testing at the manner of Caesar, who was wont to let his gown trayle down
after him, going somewhat wantonly and ^ff^minatly in apparel In so much that
Sylla foreseeing what might haplye ensue, said on a time unto Pompeius, take
heed of that vngyrted boy. Laberius passing by Cicero and faking a place to
sit on: I would give you part of my place then quod Cicero, but that I sit in
a narrow rowme, thereby both dis^ayning him, and iestyng also at the new
Senate, the number whereof Caesar had augmented beside right and order. Howbeit
he carried it away not s^otree: for Laberius answerered him home again, saying:
It is maruayle that you sit so narrowlye, which use to sit on two stools at
one time, thereby reproching Cicerces lyghtnesse. Therefore, for as much as
these and such like iestes, do provoke laughter and delight, in them that hear
them: I have purposed to fill this fowrth part with the like, according to
sundry estates of persons, drawing them forth of allowable aucthorityes, and
dysposing them in a convenient order, and beginning eftsoon with the greatest
personages.

Chap. 4. Of Emperors, and their merry iestes.
MAcrobius writes, that Augustus the Emperor was delyted in jesting, having
always respect of his honor, and honesty. Macrobius.
And many maruayled more at the iestes and quippes which he bare, then those
which he gave. On a time when he saw a grauer grauing a tomb for his father:
In deed quod Augustus this is the true reuerensing and culture of the fathers
sepulcher. When he heard that king Herod among the chi^dren which were but two
months old, whom he slew for Christ's sake, had also killed his own son,
said, that he had rather be Herodes hog then his son. There came unto Rome
a certain young Gentleman very like unto Augustus, whom when the Emperor had
seen, be demanded of him if his mother had sometime been at Rome or not? No
quod the Gentleman, but my father hat been often. When Augustus had written
certain inuectiues against Pillio: but I will hold my peace quod Pillio, for
it is a shrewd matter to write against him yt can banish me. Then one as he
was passing by, said, there goes a tyrant: Augustus turned about, and
answered, if I were one, thou would not dare to say so. One night as he lay
in a vyllage in ye country, an Oule troubled him so with her crying, yt he
could not sleep. But when one of ye soldiers going forth had taken the Oule,
he commended his industry, and commanded that he should have a thousand pence
given him for a reward. Which the soldier mistyking of said he had rather yt
she should live, and so let her fly. Who will not marvel how this saucie
soldier could escape so well, having offended an Emperor? Lucan, ye Poet
reports, that when ^^^ that was inferior unto Julius Caesar euert^, war^ed
him in certain matters, he au^sweared him saying:

No stare whereto thou can aspyre,
Can make thee wothie Caesar's y^e.
Of a necromancer that deluded a noble man.
There is a storye told of a certain Necromancer, who had a noble man to his
Scholar, that promised him many great gifts and bountiful rewards. Whom
the master meaning to try what he would do in deed, wrought so by his art
that he seemed unto him self that he was elected Emperor. And having thus
obtained much land and living as he ^hought, his master desired him to
bestow some part thereof upon him. Why quoth his Scholar, I know thee not.
Then said the master, I am he that hat has given you all these rytches, and
now I will take them away again, and there withal caused the vision to
surcease, and then he found him self to be in case as he was before. Thus
many men promise many goodlye matters, which they never mean to perform.

The determinacion of Frederick the Emperor.
Frederick the Emperor lying in siege before the Cittye of Mill^yn,
determined if he might take it, to slay man, woman, and child. Then answered
the Earl of Subandia, saying, that his Majesty had yet a greater conquest then
that in hand, which he must also obtain. What is that, quoth the Emperor?
truly said the Earl, your own will and courage of mind. Which saying the
Emperor having well dygested within him self, altered his determination, and
granted them al their lives.

Chap. 5. Of Kings, and their sundry merye iestes.
THe noble Seneca, in his book which he wrote of anger, shows yt ^ing
Antiochus, hearing certain of his subjects evil reporting of him, and railing
against him in a place where there was nothing but a curtain drawn between
them that spoke, and him that hard: he gently reproved their folly, as it
had been some other man, saying unto them, depart from hence least the king
hear you.

How king Alexander would kill the Ass dryuer.
Valerius in the seventh book and third Chapter. Writes, that king Alexander
being warned by an Oracle, that whomsoever he met when he walked forth of ye
Gate, he should command him to be slain, seeing a dryuer of Asses, coming a
far of, wylled immediately that he should be killed. Then ye poor Ass
dryuer asking the cause why he should be put to death nothauing ^ffe^ded,
they answered, yt it was the commandment of the Oracle. Then quod the Ass
driuer, If it be so, O king, then has this lot fallen upon another and not on
me, for the Ass which I drove before me met with you first. Then king being
delighted with this subtle answer, and seeing how he was revoked from his
error, saved the man, and commanded the Ass to be slain.

When the people of Athens would have yielded divine honors unto Alexander,
beware quod Demades, that whiles ye keep heaven, ye loose not ^he earth. Of
the va^let that told king Philip that he was his kinsman.
A certain poor varlet meeting with Philip the king, desired him to give him
somewhat for that he was of h^s kynred. Which way said the king? Marie quod
the varlet, by our great grandfather Adam, Thou say true quod the king, and
commanded that his men should give him a penny, Which when the varlet
disdayned at, saying, that it was no princely reward: The king answered, that
if he should give so much unto every one that is as near of kyn unto him, as
he, he should leave nothing for him self.

King Antiochus showing his mighty and excellently furnished army unto
Hanibal, Another pleasant jest of king Antiochus.
asked him if he thought not that it was sufficient for the Romans? Yes surely
quod he, unless they be to covetous. Pleasauntly jesting at the kings saying,
who asked him touching the number and strength of his army, and he answered of
the spoil. Philip king of France, having certain poor priests with him at
his table at dynner, Of the priest that took a capon from king philips table,
and how the king ^spied him.
perceived one that sat farthest of at the boardes end conueying an whole
Capon into his pocket. When dinner was ended, the king called him aside, and
enquired of him secretly what he studied? who answered, Divinity. Why said
the king, is it not written in the Scriptures, that you should not be careful
for meat against to morrow? yea said the Priest, and therefore because I would
put away all carfulness, I have done this thing.

Chap. 6. Of princes, and their merry iestes
IN the second book and second Chapter of the before alle^ged aucthour
Valerius, Of a gentle man that kissed the kings daughter in the open s^^ere.
there is set down an his^orie of a young gentleman, who burning in the love
of Philis^iatus d^ughter, which was Prince and Tyrant of Athens, and me^ting
with her by chance: kissed her openly in the s^reete. For which ^^ct, his wife
the queen dealt earnestly with him, to cause the young gentleman to be put to
death. To whom he answered, if we kyl them that love us, what shall we do
unto them that bate us? Frontinus in the fourth book of his stratagemes,
says, that it behooves a Prince to be sage and ancient in behavior,
meaning, that he ought to follow grave and moderate counsel.

Again, Valerius in the first book and third chapter writes, that when
Dionisius Prince of Syracuse, how Dionisius called him self a robber.
having sacked the temple of Proserpina at Locris, passed the sea^ with a merry
wind and a prosperous course: he laughed unto his friends, saying: see what an
happy journey the immortal gods have given to a thief, How king Dionisius
stole a golden coat.
and a stealer of holy things. The same king taking from the Image of Jupiter,
a golden coat of a great weight, and putting him on another of cloth, said,
that the golden coat was to heavy for summer, and to cold for winter: and
the woollen indifferent for both the seasons. Likewise he took away the golden
platters and crowns which the Images held forth in their hands, How
dionisius took the golden crowns from the images.
saying, that it was a folly to refuse their gifts which they offer us, of
whom we require all kind of good things. S. Auste^ in his work de Ciuitate
Dei, writes of Fabius the destroyer of the city of Tarentum, that when his
secretary demanded of him what should be done with the images and pictures
of the gods, which were many, and armed as though they were going to the
wars? declaryng his incontinencie, he spoke gestingly saying: let us leave
unto the Tarentines their angry gods.

Chap. 7. Of Earls, and their meerie iestes
How the Earl Subadia ansvveared the Jews.
IN books of histories I find it written, that when certain Jews came unto
the Earl of Suba^dia, desyring him that they might dwell within his dominions,
he forbid them, saying, that they had not yet made peace concerning the unjust
death of their Lord, and therefore how durst they be so bold, as to come into
his land? How the Earl Bellimo^t ansvveared the priest that begged tole.
A certain religious man, required of the Earl of Bellimount for Gods sake,
to give some timber out of his Forest toward the making of seats in his
Church. Then said a knight that was present, My Lord will consider of the
matter. Nay quod the Earl, God forbid that I should take any deliveraunce on
this matter, since he asks for Gods sake, of whom I have received all that I
have, and therefore let him take whatsoever he needs for the service of God.
A certain soldier desired an Earl, (his lord and master) to aid and help
him to bring up his daughters, which were ten in number. Which request one
of the Earls servants, a churlishe fellow and very rich, hearing: excused
his lord, and said, how a soldier gat a hundred pounds of a churl.
that he had not where withal. Yeas said the Earl, I have thee, and I give
thee unto him, and thou shall give him an hundred pound to redeem thy
liberty, and so he did. When the Earl of Bellimount was hardly besieged in a
Castle by the Infidels, HOW the Earl Belimount over came the infidels that
besieged him.
and determined to go forth with a few, and to fight for the faith of
Christ against an infinite multitude: one of his soldiers said, that it was
dangerous for a few to encounter with so great an host: then quod the Earl,
I would to God that as many as believe not in God, were here with them, and so
by reason of his strong faith, be obtained over them a glorious victory.

Cap. 8. Of knights, or soldiers, and their merry iestes.
Now must we give to understand, that whatsoever is here written of knights,
is likewise to be applied unto the name of soldiers, for that the latin word,
Miles, Of a knight that said that he was kin to niene kings.
is indifferent to them both, so that what so is said of one, may be applied to
the other. But to come to the matter, I find it written in histories, that
there was a certain noble knight, which gloryed that he was of kin unto nine
kings, whereof having named six, he could not devise the other three. Then a
iester standing by said unto him, Sir, I know well the other three. O, well
said friend (quod the knight) I pray thee tell me which they be? Mary quod the
iester, the three kings of Collein.

Of a knight that made the priest to vvash before him.

Of a knight that said, it was good luck to meet a priest in a morning.


A knight which made a feast, would have the priest to wash first: you do
well said the priest to make us wash first, and sit down last: Yea, answered
the knight, me thinks we do best, for of al other you ought to be first
clean, and last drunk.

A certain knight which was ryding to a turneament, chanced to meet with a
Priest by the way: and returnyng from the turneament, brought home a broken
leg with him. And perceiving that the Priest came not to see him, demanded
the cause of him: who answered, I was afraid that you had been angry with me
because I met with you before you broke your leg, for it was counted ill
luck to meet with a Priest, if a man were going forth to war, or to
turneament. Nay said the knight, it was good luck for me, for if I had not met
with you, Of the two knights that fought a combat
perhaps I had broken my neck. Two knights fought a combat for life which
should slay the other, and when the one had overthrown the other the
conqueror standing upon him, said unto those that stood by, some body take
pity upon him. And when he had often called unto them, and no man would
entrea^e for his life: then quod this gentle knight, I my self will take
compassion upon him, so he let him rise, and they shoo^e hands, and departed
both together over the seas.

Of a knight that asked a d^onken Prior what ^evves in the Abbey.
There was a knight which me^te with the Prior of his Parish, cumming home very
drunk from the Chapter which was held in the Abbey whereof he was, of whom he
asked what news? The drunken Prior answered, a vengeance on this Abbey, for
they were wont to have twelve dishes of meat at a dinner, and this day they
had but eleven. Then answered the knight, If I had but two disshes of meat in
my house, they would suffice me, and thou wretch as thou art, can not be
contented with eleven? surely I will give thee the twelfth, and there withal
he threw him down in the dirt.

Of a knight that desired to hear his vviues confession.
There was a knight which desired much to hear his wives confession, which she
denied him, because he had on neither Surplice nor Stoale. And when he had
gotten them, and put them on and disguised him self, he called her, and she
confessed her self unto him, saying, that when she was young, she loved a
young Gentleman, and afterward a Squ^re, and then a Knight, and next a Fool,
and lastly a Priest. Then the knight hearing that, in a rage cast of the
Surplice and the Stoale, and asked her angerly, if that Priest were now
living, and she said yea, requesting him that he would reueile it to no man.
And after three days, when he had sufficiently bit on the bridle, and vexed
him self: she came unto him and said, Dear husband, understand, that that
which I said unto you in my confession, I spoke it for the nonce, and I told
you the truth: for first when I was married unto you, you were a young
gentleman, and afterward a Squire, then were you dubbed a Knight, and after
that, you became a fool, because you coueted to understand such matters of
your faithful Lady, and now lastly you are become a Priest, for you have
heard my confession. Frontinus in his first book, writes, that when Scipio
landed in Africa, coming forth of the ship, he fell down to the ground, and
because his soldiers should not be afraid, Hear ye my soldiers said he, I
have now taken all Africa.

Cap. 9. Of Squires and armor bearers, and their merry iestes.
QVintus Curtius in his history of Alexander the great, writes, Quincut
Curtius.
that when Alexander fought with Darius, there was a Persian who putting on the
armor of a Macedonian soldier, came behind Alexander, and struck him on the
head, How king Alexander forgave the armourer that vv^uld have killed him.
but his helmet was so hard, that the stroke glaunced away, and did him no
harm. Then being apprehended and brought before the king, and demanded why he
had done so: answered, that Darius and he had couenanted, that if he could
kill Alexander, he should then marry his daughter, and have part of his
kingdom. Then Alexander liking well of the covenant, and praysyng his
adventure, suffered him to depart safe to his company.

A certain Squire offered him self unto a king to serve him, saying, that he
was very sturdie, and bold. On a time seeing rain lying upon the kings head,
he would have beaten it of, and as he was doing, the king boughed with his
mouth, to make him afraid. Then he immediately lyfted up his hand, Of a knight
that gave the King a box in the ear.

Of tovv Squires, that were sworn fellows.


and gave him a box on the ear, that he cast him to the ground, saying, wylt
thou eat me up? But when the other servants would have apprehended him, the
king bid them let him alone, saying, I took him into my service because he
promised me that he was bo^ld. Two Squires were sworn fellows, concerning all
their gaynes and pray, whereof one went into turneament, and gained much, the
other went not, but required his my Lord said the poor man, Of a lavvier that
took away a poor man's covv.
if you hear him speak, then have I surely lost my Cow in deed. An Advocate
^ntred into the Cisterian order, and was set to keep sheep. In a time when
great trouble arose in the Abbey, there was none found that could give any good
counsel, but he only. At the length, being called and required, Of the
Advocate that was set to keep ^hep.
wh^rfore he meddled not with the Monastery matters, answered, O brethren, God
gives abroad in the world, and the Abbot in the order of religion.

A certain Earl going forth on Pilgrimage, put his lawier in trust with his
wife, while he should be absent: When the Earl was departed, the Lawyer began
earn^stly to solicit her to consent to his incontinent lust: whereunto,
because she would not agree, Of a lavvier that was put in trust with an
Earls wife
he withdrewe from her her meat and apparel, and other necessaries
apper^eyning unto her necessary furniture. At length fearing lest she should
be starued, and that the people would think that it came through some evil
desert of hers, granted to consent unto him, and sent her handmaide to bed
unto him in her steed. And when he had taken his pleasure of her he cut her
finger, which ye Lady hearing, tred a linen cloth about her own finger. Now,
when the Earl was returned, and this bawdy Lawyer thought to have shamed the
Lady before her Lord, she disprooued his treachery, and proved him a liar,
saying, Look whose finger is cut, and she it is that lay with you, and there
withal she plucked away the cloth, and showed her finger that was whole. A
certain Lawyer had taken sees of both parties, in a controversy: of one, a
Cow, of the other, an Ox. Of the clie^t that bid his lavvier speak Ox.
Now when he should plead for him that had given him the Ox, he was dumb,
and could not speak. Then said the Client, Speak Ox, and he answered, The
Cow will not suffer me. Of the country man that asked his Lavveir a months
^espite to pay him his Coselinges.
A man of the country desired an Advocate to teach him the best word
belongyng to an Advocate, and he would give him a certain number of Goslinges
for a reward. Then said the Advocate, whatsoever is asked of thee in judgment,
deny it, and require a longer time to answer, although thou know it w^ll
already. N^w when the Advocate sent his servants for the Goselinges, the
countreyman denied them, saying that he owed him none.

But at length confessing the det he required a longer term to pay him, which
was an whole year after.

A certain Lawier which obtained the upper hand in all causes, became a Munke,
Of a Lavvier which became a Munke.
and being made solicitour for the Abbey, all matters went against him. And
when the Abbot was much displeased therewith, he said unto him, my Lord be
not angry, for now I dare not lie and face as I have done before, and therefore
I loose all matters that are committed unto me.

And Advocate being very sick, Of an advocate that would he^^ Judgment,
before he would receive the comunion.
his friends that were about him thought it expedient for him to receive the
Communion ere he died. Then said he, I will hear judgment whether it were best
for me to do so or not. Then said his frindes we judge it best. But I appeal
from your sentence (quod he) for you are not my judges, and so died. And an
old verse there is written of lawiers many a year ago:

I have heard some which made their moan,
That Lawiers friendly are to none.
But whether that be true or no:
It is not lawful to say so.
Chap. 12. Of Merchant men, buyers and sellers.
A Proper jest of a certain Merchant that would never come to Church, nor hear
sermons, Of a Marcha^^ that did not love to go to Church.
and being moved often times by his wife thereto, said always unto her, go
thou for us both. On a night he dreamed that he was called into judgment, and
seeing his wife with many other holly folks entering in at the door of ye
celestial joy, and he likewise would have gone in with them: the porter put
him back, and said, she shall go in for you both. Thus he tareing without,
awaked with sorrow and grief and aterward lead a godlier life. Of a Marcha^t
that wroght a steight to try his wiue^ falshed.


A certain Merchant having occasion to travail beyond the sea, who had a
fair woman to his wife, which he had sumwhat in jealousy: At his home
coming, demanded of his wife, between jest and good earnest, how often she
had made him cuckold since he went: who answered that she had not done it at
all, well (quod he) I shall know it on Sunday when I come at church: how can
you (quod she) mary said he, look how often you did it, so many horns will
appear on my head at church: well then (quod she) try it a gods name: This
merchant in the mean time got a company of sheep horns, found the means
to make the^ stick in the hear of his head, and when Sunday came his wife and
he went to church together, and coming to church, either of them went to their
own Pew. And as soon as ye merchant had said his prayers he took preeuely
one of the sheep horns and stuck it on his head, and by and by his wife
spied it, but she said nothing, within a little while after he privily stuck on
another, and his wife spied it, and yet said nothing, the marchante within a
while stuck on the third horn: At last, the wife perceived the horns to grow
up so fast, stepped to her husband and rownded him in the ear, and desired him
for the passion of God to get him out of the church quickly for surely said
she, if you tarry here any while you will have a hundred horns on your head,
so by that means, he tried his wives falshed, although not greatly to his
contentment.

A Merchant cumming to Paris, delivered a casket full of Gold and silver to a
certain rich Citizen to keep, Of a Marcha^t that was deceived of a casket
full of gold.
who was godfather to Philip the French King. And when the merchant came to
require his money, the Citizen denied it him, and said that he never saw him
before. Then the merchant complained unto the King, whereat he being greatly
astonished, caused the Merchant to hide himself secretly in his Chamber and
caused the Citizen to be sent for, whom curteouslye interteined, and communed
with him of many familiar matters. And seeing a ringe upon his finger, which he
had often times offered to give him: good godfather (quoth the King) have you
yet your ringe: yea my Lord, quoth the Citize^, and I have often desired your
grace to take it at my hand, and now again I desire you to accept it. Then the
King received the ringe, and sent it immediately secretly unto the Citizens
wife, that by the same token she should send unto her husband the casket of
gold and silver. In the meanewhyle he enquired of the Citizen touching the same
casket, which he utterly denied that he had it, until the messenger returned,
and the king brought it forth before his face, and for the fact expulsed him
out of the realm.

One that had bought an horse, when he had paid his money, Of one th^^ bought an
horse.
demanded of the seller if he were good? yea (quod the seller) Why do thou
sell him then (quod the byer) because I am but a poor man, (quod the seller)
and he will eat to mutch. What other evil conditions has he said the byer?
none answered the seller, saving that he will not clime trees. But when he had
bought the horse, and brought him home, he bit every body. Then said his
master, he that sold him to me said true, for he eats to mutch indeed. And
another time ridinge forth upon him, when he came to a wooden bridge he would
not go over. Which when some saw that where with him when he bought the horse,
he told you true said they, for he will clime no trees.

There was a certain good woorkeman which gained much and yet was always poor.
Of a dru^kard that was enjoined to penance to drink always by measure
And cumminge on a time to confession, the Priest perceived that he was given
mutch to drinkinge, and therefore enjoined him penance that he should not
drink above a certain measure of wine at a meal, whereunto he consented,
unless he sold or bought sumthing that day. On a day being at dinner with his
wife, he dra^k up his measure of wine, and was yet a thirst. The^ his wife
knowinge of ye penance that was enjoined him, husband said she, follow my
counsel, I will sell you a cow and then you may drink more by covenant, and you
shall sell her to me again, and by this means he deceived himself, and could
never be rich. Of one that bought a horse that would not stand by his
fellows.


One bought an horse, and demanded of the seller what faut he had? None (quod
he) but that if you traueill him in company, he will not stand with his
fellows. The byer lyking well of that, and imputing it unto courage and
stomach, said that he liked him never a whit the worse for that. But when he
proved him, he found him a lame, dull, and tired jade and could never reach to
his bayte with his company, but always was feign to tarry behind.

Chap. 13. Diverse pleasant hystories, and pithy examples of Usurers.
Of certain vserers that would not stand up for the priests blessing.
A Preacher which in a Sermon had declared the vile wickedness, and abominacion
of usurers, pronounsing absolution after the Sermon unto all sorts of people
according to the manner that then was, willed yt every sort of them should
stand up to have his Benediction, when he named them, according to their
vocation. And first (said he) arise al you that be Carpenters, which they did,
and when he had blessed them he bid them sit down again. Next arise Clothiers,
and after them Shoemakers, and so of the residue. Now said he last of all let
the Usurers stand up to be blessed, and when none stood up, although there
were many present: Good Lord, (quoth he) how will they appear before God in
the day of judgment to receive eternal damnacion, which dare not stand up
before men to receive blessing?

Of the vserer that wild to have a bag of money with him.
A certain Usurer very ritche and covetous, dwellinge in the City of Mentz,
being sick and perceiving that he should die, willed that a bag which he had
full of Money should be buried with him in his grave, for the sure perfourmance
whereof, he caused his friends to swear unto him by an oath.

When he was dead and buried, and afterward some came pri^^y in the night to
his grave to take away the Money, they saw there the Devil sitting with a great
Spone of Iron burnying hoate, f^^dyng him with the Money flamynge in at his
mouth bright with fire.

Of the vserer that confessed to have sined three manner of ways,
A certain Usurer which was sick, confessed himself to a Priest, saying, that
he had but three sins whereof he was gilty, to wit, Usury, Lechery, and
Gluttony. To whom the Priest said, that he could absolve him of twain of
them, but of the third, that is to say Usury he could not absolve him, unless
he would make restitution. Then said the Usurer, do the Scriptures, and learned
men say so? Yea quoth the Priest. But I will see first whether they say true or
not, said the Usurer, for yet I will not make restitution, and therefore in Gods
name you may depart.

An Usurer which was sundry times moved to make restitution, Of the vserer
that was buried under the Gallowe^
notwithstanding could not be thereto persuaded. Falling sick, and waxyng weak
to the death, he sent for a Priest and desired to have the Rites of the
Church. The Priest denied him, unless he would restore the goods ill gotten,
which the Usurer refused to do. When the Priest was departed, he waxed weaker
and weaker, and was even at the point of death, and the Priest was sent for in
all have to commend his soul unto God, but he could not be found. Then
(quoth the Usurer) I my self commend my Soul unto all the Devils of Hell,
and so died. But when he was dead, his friends besought the Priest that he
would bury the body in the Holly procession pathe, which he denied to do. Now
the Priest had an Ass which served him for none other purpose, but to carry
his books to the Church, and knew none other way but that. Wherefore ye
Usurers friends, desired the Priest to show the^ so mutch curtesy, as to let
them lay the Corse upon the Asses back, and look whether soever he carried
it, there to bury it, supposing that he would go directly to the Church, or
home to the Priestes-house, because he knew none other way. The Priest was
contented, and the body was laid upon the Asses back, and he went forward,
never turnyng to the righthand, nor to the left, until he came unto the
Gallows, and cast him down there under the gallows, and there was buried
among his fathers.

Chap. 14. Certain merry jests of rude Husbandmen of the Country.
WHen king Liberius, of whom Macrobius writes in the third book of the
Saturnalia, was lately advanced from the plow tail unto great riches, he
called certain Philosophers unto his table, and mocking at their often
controversies and quiddities in Philosophy, desired them to resolve him
certain questions. Namely, why of white and black beans ground together,
there rises Meal of one color? Whereat Aricides disdaynynge: then answer thou
me this question said he, why if a man whip with a Lash made of white and
black thonges, the strippes look all alike which they make.

A young delicate Cocknie of the City was married unto a ritche Fermour of
the Country. Of a Cockny, maid that married a farmer of the country.
And always against he should come home to dinner or supper from his work,
she prepared him some fine little deintie dish in a potenger, wherewith he was
mutch discontented. And once she dressed him a capo^ for his supper, whereat he
was much more offended then before. This pretty parnel seeing that she could not
please him, went and complained to her mother of the matter, who asked of her
what she gave him to eat, who answered, this, and that, and recited as before
is written. Then said her mother thou art mutch deceived, but henceforwarde set
before him a great bowl full of Beans and Peason, with brown Bread, for he
is a labourynge man, and must be grosely fead. Now when the daughter had
followed her mothers advise, he laughed and was merry, and said that he laughed
at the Capon which she dressed for him the day before, but truer it is, that
he reioysed because his belly was full.

Of a woman that was very willing to please her husband.
There was a woman which could never make Bread that would please her husband.
On a time strippyng her self naked, and wasshyng her self clean all her body
over, she made Dough and molded it upon a stool, and when she was weary,
she forgot herself and sat down upon the stool and the Dough cleaued to her
Buttockes. Anon she arose and sought for it, and her husband asked her what
she looked for, and she said for the lofe which I have made for thine own
tooth. Mary quoth he, it sticks to thy buttocks, and then the cleanly
huswife remembered her self.

An honest strong woman of the Cuntreye, when her husband came home from
work out of the fields: Of the woman that blessed her husbands eye.
having one of his eyes so grieuouslye hurt that he could not see with it,
would needs bless her husbands other eye that it might not be infected by
that which was sore. And so while both his eyes were stopped, her sweet heart,
whom she had hid up in a corner, slipped out of the doors, the husband not
saying him.

chap. 15. Of merry Iestes of the Jews.
A Certain Jewe fell into a ditch upon a Saturday which is the Jewish Sabbath,
Of a Jew that fell in a ditche on the saboth day.
at what time there came a Christian by and would have helpen him forth, but
he would not saying, that he must not violate the Sabbath day. The next day
the Christian passed by again, and the Jewe called unto him desiring him to
help him forth. But he answered, this day is Sunday, and now I may not
break my Sabbath, and so the wretch remained there. A good fellow in
Merseborow in an evening stole away a poor widows Cow, and brought her in the
night unto a Jewe to whom he pawned her for five shillinges, Of a fellovv that
stole a widow Covv.
and the same night he stole her away again from that Jewe, and pawned her
unto another Jewe for so mutch money, and again the same night he stole her
from him and pawned her unto the third Jewe for the like some. Then devising
with himself how the widow might come by her Cow again, he stole her
likewise from the third Jewe, and brought her home in the morning betimes by
the horns. And meting with the widows maid that was goinge to the brook to
wash clothes, he chid her, saying, that if he had not ben, the cow had bin
lost for ever. Thus the knave served his own necessity for money, deceived the
greedy Jews and restored the widow her cow.

Chap. 16. Of merry Iestes of Thieves.
A Theif wandering in the woods, by chance met with a Priest, and said unto
him, that he would fain be shreuen. For, O^ a thief that would be ^hriuen of
a p^^^st in the vvoods.
said he, there passed to day a Priest by this way, and I took his Horse from
him, and therefore I pray you inioyne me penance. Then quod the Priest, give me
five shillings to say mass for thine offense, and the theif told him out ten
shillings into his hand, saying, take here five shillings for the Priests
horse which I took away this day, and because you make so good a market, I
give you five more for the Horse whereon you ride, and so he took away his
horse also.

Of the thief that stole the poo^e man's goose.
There was a theif which had stolle^ a poor man's goose who complained thereof
unto the Priest of the Parish, desiringe him to speak to ye people thereof out
of ye pulpit the next Sunday. When Sunday was come, and the Priest in the
pulpit, he bid all the people sit down, and when they answered that they were
all seat, nay said the Priest, for he is not yet set that stole the pooremans
goose (yeas quod the thief that I am) then (quod the Priest) for shame restore
to the poor man his goose again, Of the thief that gave one that sold an ox
a pice of his shirt to put in his money.
or else I will excommunicate thee.

There was a theif which watched a man that had soulde an Ox, and took
acquaintance of him, and lead him to the Tavern, and gave him a quarte of
Wine. And when he that had soulde the Ox, would have bin gonne, saying,
that he must go bie him a purse to put his money in: Nay quoth the Theif, lay
thy money to mine, and let us drink more, and I will give thee a piece of my
shirte to wrap thy money in, and he did so. But when he departed, this
cousening theif ran after him with hew and cry, saying that he had cut away a
piece of his shirt with his money in it, and showed the place, so he got the
money, and the true man was hanged.

Of a thief that cousened a gentlwoman of a Sil^^ Cup.
A cousening knave seeinge a silver Cup in a gentleman's house, which was broken
a little in the foot: he bought a good Pickerell and carried it unto the
Gentlewoman, while her husband was abroad saying, My master your husband has
sent you this Pickrell to be dressed for dinner, for he will bring home geasts
with him, and wills you to send him the broken cup that he may have it
mended for the geasts to drink in, and she delivered it vnt^ him. Now when he
had toi^d this tale to his fellow, surely, quod he, and I will have the pickrell
again. And when he came to the house, finding there the Mistress, and all the
household weeping, he spoke unto her with a counterfayte merrye countenance,
saying. Be of good cheer now, for my master has taken the thief, and
sentence is given that he shall be hanged immediatlye with the pickrell about
his neck, and therefore you must send him the pickrell out of hand, which she
delivered. Thus the thief and his fellow had both the cup, and the pickrell.

Chap. 17. Of Iesters, and their merye devises.
MAcrobius in his Saturnalia, writes of Cicero, that he was so pleasant in
words, and so full of pastime: What means a iester used to make Eurelius to
laugh.
that his friends termed him a scoffer and Iester. Frederick the Emperors
iester, with words provoked very much one Eurelius a learned man, to have
moved him to laughter, but h^e could not. Shortly after perceiving him to be
in some deep cogitacion, he made a great many of little balls of herbs, and
threw them hard at him. And when he demanded of him what he meant by that: the
Iester answered, saying, I have hard say that there is great force in three
things, to wit: words, herbs, and stones, And as for words I have
sufficiently assayd you with them and can avail nothing, now will I try you
with herbs: and if I can profit nothing that way, surely I will stone you to
death: at which saying he fell in a laughter, How a Iester taught his horse
to knele down when he said Flectamus genua.
and gave the iester a reward. A Iester taught his Horse to kneel down on his
knees as often as he said Flectamus genua. It happened afterward, that a
thief seeing the iesters Horse to be a proper Gelding, stole him away. It
fortuned this thief ryding upon this Horse which he had stolen, to ride
through a deep slough, and full of mire, which the iester seeing, cried
alowde, Flectamus genua, and forthwith the Horse fell down upon his knees, Of
a iester that eat poudered beef greedilye, when he was in danger of
drowning.
and threw his ryder in the dyrt. Another i^ster being upon the Sea, and
suddenly a tempest rising, began very greedily to eat powdered beef, and when
one asked him why he did so: he answered that perhaps he should have
occasion to drink more shortly then ever he did.

How a Iester in a tempest cast his wife over ship board.
A certain Iester being upon the sea in a tempest, every man in the ship was
commanded to cast the heauiest thing which he had over board. Then took he
his wife and threw her into the Sea, saying: that he had never any thing so
heavy. A skoffer seeing thieves ryfling and searching his house in the night:
How theeus came to rob a Iester.
sirs quod he, I maruayle what you can find here by darcke in the night, when
I can find nothing in the broad day light. A certain merry fellow being sick,
How a man Iester made his will.
was admonished by the Priest to make his will* Mary gladly quod he. And I
have none other goods but only two horses, which I bequeth to the Kings and
Princes of the earth But the Priest demanded why he would not rather give them
unto the poor: answered, you preach that we should imitate God, and he has
given all the riches of the earth unto them and not unto the poor, and
therefore I would feign do as like unto him as I could. Of a Iester that should
be hanged for railing at a noble man.
A Iester had rayled and skoffed so bytterlye at a noble man, that he threatened
to hang him, wheresoever he took him, At length being taken by the noble man's
servants, and brought before his presence, my Lord, then quod he, I see now
there remains nothing unto me but present death, which I have well deserved:
I beseech you grant me one request, which may be profitable for my souls
health, which as ye earnest request of those yt stood about him, the Lord
frankly yielded unto. Then said he, when I am hanged, I beseech you to come
unto me three days after with a fasting stomach every morning, and kiss my
bare tail with your mouth. Now the Devil hang thee, and kiss thy tail, quod
the Lord, and went away in a rage, ^ovv a merry fellovv pre^ented the Fires that
came to dinner.
and so he escaped. A merry companion, having prepared a morsel of good meat
for his own eating, and his wives: there came unto his house a company of
Friars, and knowing not how to excuse the matter and to shyft them of, said
vnthem: syrs I am very sorry yt you may not eat with me, for I am
excommunicate. Then said the Friars, we will not believe thee, unless thou
tell us the cause why? For beating of a Friar quod he. Then a^t y^ worthily
excommunicate said they, and fearing least he would have beaten the^ also, they
departed incontine^tly.

Chap. 18. Of merry iestes of weemen.
MAcrobius writes in his Saturnalia, yt when one demanded of Iulia, which was
daughter vnt^ Augustus ye Emperor* why she decked not her self according to her
fathers plainnes* The aunsvvere of Iulia the Emperor Augustus daughter.
fragilitye, she answered saying: My father forgets that he is Emperor, but
I remember that I am the Emperors daughter. When some that were privy of her
incontinencie, woondred yt her children were so like unto Agrippa her husband,
considered that she yielded so commonly the use of her body abroad in every
brothel house: I never take any passenger to sail in my ship, quod she, but
when my ship is already fraught. Of Populia the daughter of Marcus.
When one said yt he maruailed why all brute beasts would not abide to company
with ye males, but only when they would co^ceyue young: Populia which was
daughter unto Marcus answered, because they be beasts. Faustus son unto
Sylla, A pretty quippe of F^ustus to his sister.
knowing yt his sister used the carnal company of twain, namely Pompeius and
a fullers son: I must said he how my sister ca^ have any spet in her, while
she has the company of a fuller? A woman seeing a souldior valiently behauing
himself in a turneame^t, much commended him, and fell in love with him. Of a
vvoma^ that fell in l^ue with a soldier.
But when he put up his beauer to take ye air, and the woman coming apace to
see him, perceived that it was her husband, she made a mock at the matter, and
cared not for him. A certain ielous man set two overseers to tend upon his
wife, who passing by the house where her lover was, for the nonce fell down in
the mire. Of a ielous man, and hi^ wife.
And leaving her two keepers at ye door, she feigned an excuse to go into
that house to wash her self, and when she had made merye with her lover,
she came forth and went her way. There was a woman which oftentimes would say
unto her husband that if he should dye, she would never marry more. Of a
vvoma^ that said she vvoulde not marie, if her husband were dead.
But when he was dead, and she talked as touching marrying another, even by
his coffins side, her maid rebuked her, saying, that her mas^er was warm yet:
If he be warm quod the mistres, I will blow upon him till he be cold. A
certain ielous husband followed his wife to confession, of the ielous man
that followed his wife to confession.
whom when the Priest should lead behind the Altar to be displyed, the
husband perceiving it and doubting the worst, cried unto him, saying: hear ye
master Person, my wife is young and tender, I pray you let me be desplyed for
her: And kneeling down before the Priest, I pray you quod ye wife to the
Priest, strike him hard, for I am a great sinner.

Of a vvoma^ that told a gentle^an that her husband was a good Physician.
A woman whose husband had swynged her well, went unto a Gentleman that was
disseased, and told him that her husband was a very good Physician, but that
he would cure no man unless he were first well beaten. Then she caused him to
go thither, from whence he brought home his back full of stripes, and thus his
honest wife was revenged on him.

Chap. 19. Merry iestes of maidens, and young women.
Of an old woman that caused her bitch to eat mustarde for a policy.
AN old woman which was desirous to make a match between a young man and a
maid, caused a little bytch which she had, to eat mustarde, and when the
bytche wept with the strongnesse of the mustard, she showed her unto the maid,
saying, that sometime she had been a maid, and for refusing a young man which
loved her entirely she was changed into a bytch, and for sorrow thereof wept
so continually. Of a young man that gave himself to the Devil for the love of a
maid.
Which thing the maid hearing, consented unto her lover. A certain young man
gave himself to the Devil for a maid which he loved ardently, and could not
obtain her love. But when the Devil also doing his best, saw that he could not
bring it to pass, to make her love the young man, he went to an old woman and
promised her certain skins for a reward, if she could mollifye the maidens
heart. Which when she had brought to pass, and required the skynnes of the
Devil, he reached them unto her upon the end of a long poa^e, saying: I dare
not come nere thee, because thou art worse then I am, according unto the old
verse: A wicked woman fraught with all evil,
Is by three farthinges worse then the Devil.


Of the good man that took his wife a bed with another man.
A good honest whore woman, being by her husband taken a bed with her lover,
consulted with an old mother Be of her acquaintance, how to excuse the
matter. But the old woman perceiving that the husband ye night before had
eaten an herb called Cheruile unto his supper, sought occasion to meet him in
the street, and saluted him, saying: God save you both. Then said the husband,
why speak thou thus unto me, since I am alone? Then she rubbed her eyes,
saying: a vengeance on this herb Cheruile which I eat the last night, for
^uer it makes me to take one for twain. The husband rem^mbring that he
likewise had eaten Cheruile the night before, thinking the old wives tale to
be true, and that it had wrought in him the like effect, held his wife
excused. of the good wife that kneeled before the hearth worm vvood.
A certain old woman hearing a young wife evermore gyuing her husband
overthwart answers, and for that cause had borne him many a blow: said unto
her, if thou wylt I will tell thee how thou shall live in quiet with thine
husband, whereunto she wyllingly agreed. Then quod the old woman, thou shall
go into my garden at the full of the Moon, and kneel down before the herb
called wormwood, and desire it to tell thee some counsel that is good. And
mark well what the herb says unto thee, and do so. At the time appointed
the old woman hyd her self behind the bushe of wormwood, and when the young
woman according to her instruction, began to utter her request to the herb,
saying: O thou most bitter wormwood, tell me what I shall do that is good:
the old woman answered: If thou wylt live in peace and rest,
Answer with reason for that is best:
And ever after she used her tongue better, and lived more in quiet.

Chap. 20. Merye iestes of Boys.
Boethius in his book of the discipline of scholars, of the boy that byt his
fathers nose, when he was going to the gallovves.
writes a story of a boy whom his parents corrected not in his youth, for his
naughty demeanor. But increasing every day more and more in wickedness, at
last committed such great robberies, that he was led to the gallows to be
hanged, and desyring to kiss his father ere he dyed, came unto him and byt of
his nose, saying, that if he had corrected him for small faults when he was a
child, of the boy that told his father that he had forgot to beat his mother.
he had not then come unto that shame. A certain little boy seeing his father
beating his mother every day, and hearing him say one night when he was a
bed, that he had forgotten to do one thing: I know what that is quod the
child, what said the father? Mary said he to beat my mother. A man had two
sons, whereof one always craved a piece of whatsoever was at the board, whom
the father rebuked, of the boy that he^med to his father for meat.
and set them both together on a stool. And when the young boy saw meat on the
table that he lyked and durst not ask it, he hemmed, and the father threw a
piece of meat at ye other. Then said the little one, what a pain is this that
I must hem, and another must have the meat?

Chap. 21. Merye iestes of bl^nde folk.
Of Senecas wife, when ^hee waxed blind.
SEneca the wife, in his fifty two Epistle, writes thus unto a friend of his:
you know Harpasta ye foolish woman my wife, whose eye sight sodainlye failed
her. She requesteth of her schoolmaster to go into another house, saying
that it is very dark where she now is. In ^raiectum the lower, there was a
blind man which by begging had gotten twenty pounds in Turone groates, Of the
blind man, that hyd xx. pound which he got a begging.
which he hyd up in the parish Church where he dwelt, under one of the pewes,
which the clarke perceiving, sought for in the same place, and found it, and
carried it away. The next morning the blind man seeking for ye money, according
to his custom, and not finding it: said unto his boy, lead me into the chancel
among the chaplins, and mark whom thou see to laugh bring me to him and he
did so. Then the blind man calling him a side, said unto him: Sir I have hard
much good report of you, yt you be of a very honest life and virtuous
conversation, I have a secret matter to break unto you, which I would have no
man to hear. I am blind and weak, and I know not how soon I shall dye. So it
is, that in this Church under such a pew I have hidden twenty pound in Turon
groates, whereof no man knows, and I mean to lay up there twenty more, which
I would have you to take and to employ at your pleasure, bestowing some part
thereof for my souls health as it is convenient. When yt clark hard this, he
went and laid the twenty pound in the place again where he had it, hoping to
have the other twenty pound also. But the blind man coming to church very
early in the morning, took away the money with him, and so deceived the
clarke that had deceived him. Of the blind man that bid his wife set a ca^dle
light before him.
A certain blind man, commanded his wife always to set a candle a light by
him. On a time the wife being offended at him, discovered her naked tail and
so stood before him. Then said he, wife is there a candle a light in the
house? yea quod she: Surely said he, if there be never a better, yet is there
a brighter. Of the blind man that turned the goose.
A blind man and his wife had a fat goose to dinner, and while the wife was
gone forth about business, and the blind man turned the spyt, there came a good
fellow into the house, which he hearing and thinking it to be a dog, rose up
to ratle the dishes to drive him away. In the mean whiles this fellow stole
away the goose, and put a great brown loaf which stood there by upon the
spyt, and departed, and he turned the loaf about very dilygently. But when
the good wife came in, he chyd her sharply for leaving ye door open, for said
he, there came in a dog even now, and had I not moved the dishes to drive him
away, he would have done some harm. O husband said she, it was no dog, but
some thief, and he has stolen away the goose. Of two that were eating a
ioule of sammon.
One yt had but one eye was eating of a iowle of Sa^mon with another yt had two
eyes, who being ready to eat ye Sa^mons eye, he yt had but one eye cried unto
him saying, for Gods sake give me that eye for thou lackest none, and I have
but one.

Chap. 22. Merye iestes of fools.
THere was a merry companion that said there were four kinds of fools. of
four kinde^ of fools.
The first of the^ that threaten so much yt no man cares for them. The second,
that swears so much yt none will believe them. The third, yt gives so much
away to others yt they keep nothing for them selves. The fourth, Of the fool
that wept when the sun did shine (...) laughed ^^^n it ^^^d.

(...) fool L^^^inu^ tha^ ^^^e not himself when he had on his (...) coat^.


yt having none to help them, will not help them selves. There was a fool,
who when he saw the Sun to shine wept, and when it rayned, laughed: and being
asked why he did so, answered that rain comes after the Sun shyning, and
therefore he wept: and when it rayned he knew that afterward the Sun would
shine, and therefore he laughed. There was a fool called Lobellinus, who upon
a time putting on a new coat knew not him self, and went about inquyring of
every body if they saw not Lobellinus? Then one raught him a good sowse on the
ear, saying, this I give not to thee but to Lobellinus, and therewith he
remembered himself who he was. A Lord gave his fool a new caote whereon were
imbroidred a great many Asses heads. The^ a strange^ seeing him, said unto him:
It apeareth yt thou art a fool, (...) fool that had ^^coate imbroidered with
Asse^ heads.
because thou wearest so many Asses heads upon thy coat, which ye fool
hearing, went unto ye Lord his master and bid him take his coat again, for he
would not wear it. Why so quod ye Lord because ye make me a fool, said
he, in putting Asses heads upon my coat. No said ye Lord, they be deeres
heads. Deeres heads, qoud the fool, where be the horns? Then said ye Lord,
they have no horns yet for they be fawnes, and with that answer ye fool was
contented, and so he answered unto whosoever mocked him therewith. Frederick the
Emperor was wont to say, that they were (...) most fools in all the world,
that believe the punishments and rewards that shall be in the world to come,
and yet live still in their sins. Of the fool that hyd his money in the hole.
A certain foolish fellow having a little money, hyd it in a hole, and covered
it with a stone, whereupon he wrote: here it is. Another coming by, and
reading the superscription, and maruayling what it should signifye, ouerturned
the stone and carried away the money, and laid the stone again in his place,
and wrote upon it: It is not here.

Chap. 23. Merye iestes of those that are possessed.
Of a maid that was possessed with an evil spirit.
A Maid in Westphalia which was possessed of a spirit disputed with every one
yt came to her in what science soever, which a certain master of Art, that
came lately from Paris hearing, came unto her. To whom said the Devil: thou
come lately from the vyllage of straw, therefore tell me the quantity and
quality of this proposition: Every horse is a mare. Wherefore he being amazed,
Of the husbandman that asked the Devil how many children he had.
departed immediately. When a certain man of the country demanded of one that
was possessed, how many children he had: the Devil answered that he had one.
Now it appears quod the husbandman, that thou art a liar, for I have twain?
Nay said the Devil, I have told true, for one of them is not thine, but a
Priests. A Priest being defamed with a certain woman, promised a devil that
if he would help him in his purgation, he would give him a sufficient reward.
Then the Devil promised him yt if he happily should be searched, it should not
appear at all that he had any members. But when the time came, and he had
stryped himself naked, it was of all manifestly seen that he had as much as
was requisite for any man to have. Thus we may see how they are deceived that
put their trust in the Devil. Of one that committed his wife to the Deuyls
custody while he was from home.
One that was going away from his wife because of her naughtiness, meant not
to take leave at his departure. Then said his wife unto him, to whom ^^ll you
commyt me in your absence: to the Devil quod he, and immediately he went on his
journey. But when he was gone, and her lovers according to their custom came
to the house, the Devil always frayd them away. Long time after when the
husband came home again, now take thou the charge of thy wife again, quod
the Devil unto him, for I had rather keep all the wild boores in the whole
country, then her only.

One that was possessed, coming through the Market place in a City, fell
thrice in a laughter: Of one possessed that fell thrice a laughing in the
market place.
and being demanded the cause, answered: the first was, because he saw a man
bying shoes and a Capon, and too day he shall die (quod he) for all he has
bought them. The second was, because he saw a Bailiff leadyng a poor thief to
hanging that had stolen a trifle, saying, that it was a strange matter to see
a great thief leadyng a little theife to the gallows.

Thirdly because he saw a Priest following a child that was going to burying,
singing, and a husbandman cumming after, weeping, when as in deed (quoth he)
it ought to have bin otherwise, as namelye the Priest to have wept whose sun
he was, and the husbandman to have sunge as being discharged of a great
burden. The Devil spoke in one that was possessed, saying: In hell there is
no redemption, and therefore man is very unwise that will hazard so noble a
pleadg, which if it be forfeited can never more be redeemed. One upon
occasion of talk said to his fellow. I marvel said he, that the Devil
suffers us to live, since we be all such grievous sinners? to whom the
other answered, but I marvel rather why he hurts not his servants.

Chap. 24. Of Popes and their merry Iestes.
IT is read in the Cronicles that when the Pope is consecrated, The manner of
consecrating Popes.
as they term it, there is a great handful of Towe set on fire in presence of
them al, and therewith al these words spoken: Thus passes the glory of the
world, remember that thou art ashes and a mortal man. A good lesson if they
would follow it.

Sergius the Pope was called before he was Pope Os porci, Of Pope Hogs mouth
that is to say, Hogs mouth, and since his time all Popes have changed their
own proper names.

Euaristus the Pope, appointed seven deacons to gward the Popes person while
he preaches, which I think is but seldom, Of the Pope^ preaching.
or to asist him that he err not, whereby he might come into obloquie, and
be diffamed by his adversaries, Adrian the Pope with the whole assembly of
Cardinals, Bishops, and prelates, and all the Synod gave up all the aucthority
unto Charles king of Rome, to choose and appoincte who should be Pope. And
moreover that all Archbyshops should receive their inuesture of him, and that
all that were disobedient unto this decree should be accursed: mutch repugnant
unto that wherein the Popes will take upon them to make, and depose Emperors at
their pleasure.

Chap. 25. Of Cardinals and their merry Iestes.
how the Pope sent for friar Tortus, to make his Niece conceive.
OCtauianus a Cardinal, caused the Pope to send for one friar Tortus to Lions,
that had very good knowledge in Physic. And when he was come unto him, ye friar
demanded ye cause why he sent for him. The Pope answered, I have a Niece that
has bin this long married, and can have never a child, and I have sent for
you because you are a Phisitio^, to do your endeavor to make her conceive. Then
answered, the Friar, your hollines is hoate, young, and lustye you should
sooner make her to conceive then I can: whereat the Pope laughing took him to
be his chaplein.

How two Priests striued for a benefice.
Two Priests striuinge before the Cardinals for the Maistership of a certain
hospital, it is a strange matter to se quod one of the Cardinals, how you two
poor fellows and vnlearded, can not agree for one simple Maistership of an
hospital. Nay, said one of the Priests, it is more marvel to beeholde how you
ritche prelates and learned men are at such contention for one great Popedom.
A certain Cardinal hearing of a friar yt always preached against prelates,
would needs have him to preach in his audience, and he did so. Then taking
occasion to speak of Cardinals, he said that the Lords Cardinals were so
termed of this Latin word cardo which signifies the hinge of a door. Of a
Pr^este that preached against Cardinals.
For like as the hinges of a door lacking oil do always murmour and make a
noise, but beeinge oyled do open an shut very pleasantly: so fares it with
these Cardinals, for until they have promotion they never leave prechinge and
cryinge out at covetousness and ambition, and when they have to mutch then
they preach no more, but grease their bellies with dilicates and give
themselves wholly to all voluptuousness.

A certain Cardinal had a chaplein called Michael whom he promised that if
ever God called him to greater dignitye, Of a Cardinal to p^e^^^ his Chaplein.
he would prefer him to his contentacion. Afterward being made Pope and
troubled with many affairs, he quite forgot his old Chaplein Michael. Who
seeing that he could have no access unto the Pope, wrote upon a door by the
which he should pass, these verses following.

Here stands without before the door, Michael the Chaplein pore,
Saying that honors do manners change,
But seld to better, for that were strange.
Which the Pope reading, and seeing him standing before the door, remembered
his promise, and gave him a good benefice.

Chap. 26. Of Archbisshops and their merry Jests.
A Certain Archbysshop preachinge upon Palm Sundaye discoursed very much of
Christ's humility, Of the bishop that preached of the she ass that Christ^
rid upon.
and of the she Ass whereupon he rode. And when the sermon was done, he
mounted up upon his lofty palfry, and was ridinge home. Then came an old woman
running, and took the horse by ye bridle saying, I pray you my Lord, is this
the she ass whereupon Christ road? An Archbysshop in a sermon sorely inveied
against ye whole order of Preaching friars, and compared them to the Pharasies.
When the sermon was finished, Of the Archbysshop tha^ preached against the
friars.
and the Archbysshop come down out of the Pulpit, the reader of the same covent
arose and came to him saying: My Lord, your grace had forgotten one text which
is this: Thy Nation and thy Bishops have delivered thee unto me. Again, the
same Archbysshop preached another time against Masters and Readers in the
universities, Of an Archbysshop tha^ preached against masters.
how they clothed themselves in soft apparel, and sought to be magnified and
placed in the chief seats in the scooles, and Churches, and such like.
Shortly after the same Archbysshop chanced to meet with a Reader, in a very
foul and dirty place. Then said the Archbysshop to the Reader, what do you
here Master Ammirandu^? for that was his name: Mary my Lord (quoth he) I come
to make clean and neat mine apperell whereof your Grace spoke of late and
therewith all he showed him his tail all dirty behind.

An Archbishop being in visitation, sharply punished a certain Lady Prioresse
of a Nunrie for trespaces which she had committed, Of an Archbishop that
punished the Lady priores.
whom she earnestly entreated that in consideration of a piece of money, he
would in part remit the punishment. But he deneying so to do, saying, that he
loved her not, and therefore he would not pleasure her so mutch: I think so
quoth she, and well believe it, for there was never yet Capon that loved an Hen.

Chap. 27. Of Bishops, and their merry iestes.
Of one that flattered a bishop for ad^antage.
ONe thinkyng to get the goodwill of a Bishop by flattery, said unto him, my
Lord, if your Lordship would take less pains you might live yet five years,
but if you continued so still you will scarce live two years to an end. Who
answered, I had rather be a good Bishop two years, then an ill Bishop five
years.

Of one that objected against a bishop because he was covetous.
One objected unto a Bishop, that he was to covetous, for that by keeping a
nigardly house, he had saved money enough to redeem his Church lands which his
predicessour had laid to morgage. But he answered that he was far more liberal
then his predicessour, for (said he) I have paid his debts and mine own also.

Of a bishop that promised to give a Prebend at the kings appointment
A Bishop in France, promised Philip the French King, yt the first Prebend yt
fell in his gift, he would give it to whom soever it pleased the King. And
when many fell void, and the king was pleasured with none, he was sore
offended. To whom ye Bishop sent this answer, desiring his grace not to be
offended, for he had yet given never an one of them, but sold them all.

Of a Bishop that coursed a Heart.
The Bishop of Mentz coursed an Heart, and after long ru^nyng, the beast leapt
into a deep ponde, and a great Pike caught him fast by the throat. And when
the Heart came out of the water, he brought the Pike with him hanginge by his
throat, and so he took them both, and sent pieces of them abread for present
to his friends.

A priest rebuked by the Bishop for buryinge a ^ead Ass.
A certain Priest was accused unto the bishop of the Diocese for buriyng his
dead Ass solemly with Dirige, and Masses of Requiem. And being much rebuked
for so doing he certified the Bishop that it was a very godly Ass, and had
made a will, and had bequea^hed his Lordship five pound, which he had now
brought unto him. And when the Bishop had received the money, he said, let him
then rest in peace, and so discharged ye priest.

A noble young Gentlemen that was a scholar in Paris, A gentilman that said
all bishops were blind.
said that all Bishops in France were blind, because they gave not some good
benefice to his master, being but poor, and well learned. Not long after,
being himself made a Bishop, he was so blinded with his spiritual promotion,
that he neither gave his poor master any thing, but on a time when he came to
Paris, his Master went and met him, bearyng a couple of Wax candles burning
in his hand. And when the Bishop asked him why he did so: he answered,
because your lordship should see me, for you are blind. Of a Bishop that
preferred his kinsfolk,


A certain Bishop had many young Nephews and Kinsfolks in his house, which
always sat at meat at a low table before him, and whenever any preferment
fell void, he repulsed other, and bestowed it upon one of those. Then a man of
worship, whom the Bishop had bid to dinner, set himself down at the childrens
Table. And being demanded by the Bishop why he did so, he answered that he
could not be preferred sittyng at any other Table, neither knew he any other
then those that sat there, advanced by him unto any dignity.

Chap. 28. Of Archdeacons.
AN Archdeacon being in visitatio^, Of a woman that told the Archdeacon, he did
not his duty.
spent whole days in feasting and making good cheer, when the people looked
that he should have preached unto them the word of God. And as he was going
from hearing Mass unto dinner, an old woman said unto him yt they looked for
that which was his duty to do meaning, to show them their duties out of the
word of God. Well (quoth the Archdeacon) I will not call thee to counsel what
I had best to do. But she answered, surely he had small care of our souls
that put them in trust to thee.

An Archdeacon visited his parish Church, Of a man tha^ had a poor woman to
his wife, asked the Archdeacon if h^ might not marry another that was (...).
from which he was promoted unto the Archdeaconrie. And there came unto him an
husband man to ask counsel, saying: M. Archdeacon I married a poor wife, and
now I know where I may have a rich one, is it lawful for me to f^rsake the
poor one, and to take the ritche? The Archdeacon answered, by no means. Then
said ye husbandma^, but you have forsaken a poor church and keep a rich
Archdeaconry. Which he hearing, gave up his Archdeaconry, and returned to his
own Church.

Of a Priest that killed a young Ass in steed of a Calfe, etc.
A certain Priest against his Archdeacon should come in visitacion, having
none other provision, killed a little Ass which he had, and dressed him in the
stead of Veale, and when the Archdeacon fead hungerly thereon at dinner and ye
Priest himself would eat none, the Archdeacon demanded the cause. Then quod
the Priest, your Mastership says yt I have wit and learning little enough
already, and therefore I need to eat no asses fleash. When the Archdeacon
heard this, he arose from the table in a rage, and immediately departed.

chap. 29. Of Canons and their merry Jests.
Of the Chanceler of Paris that had many benefices.
IVlius in his book of Bees, writes an history of one Philip that was
Chancellor of Paris, who having many benefices was in his sickness admonished
by the Bishop to resign the^ up, for fear of longer incurring Gods
displeasure: who answered that he would try the truth of that, before the
great judge. But shortly after he was dead, he appeared unto the Bishop
like a shadow, and said: I most miserable wretch am damned, and that chiefly
for three causes: First for my fruits which I kept from the poor: Secondly
for my pluralitye of benefices: And lastly for my detestable whoredom.
Moreover he said, is the world yet at an end? Then quod the Bishop, I
marueill that thou having in thy life time been a great clarke, and seeing
me and other living, who must all die before that day come, should ask
me that question? But he said marueill not at all, for in hell there is
neither knowlegde, nor reason. Master Albertus said unto a Canon of Colein, Of
the Caro^ that had got a dispensatio^, for many benefices.
which came home from the Court with a dispensation to have many benefices:
Before you might have gone to Hell without license, and now you must needs go
thither by virtue of your dispensation.

There was a Canon which had two Canonries, one in one Church, another in
another, ye dreamed one night ye two staves were reatched unto him, and the
same night ye bishops of both Churches died. Then some of his familiars
expounding his dream, said that he should be chosen bishop in both places and
riding out the next day morninge, he fell from his horse and brake both his
legs, and was feign to go with two crutches to bear himselft up withal.

Chap. 30. Of the Hault and Lame.
ON a time there came unto a sanctes church, How a priest did drive the hault
and lame out of the Church.
so many hault and Lame people to be cured, yt the Priest could not drive them
forth. Then said the priest, give me your staves and I will heal you all. And
when he had them, he sent for fire, and being demanded what he would do with
it: Burn him yt is most lamb, quoth he, that you may all be healed with his
Ashes. And when they heard this, they ran all away.

Cap. 31. Of Priests.
A Certain poor lecherous Priest had a concubine, Of a priest that lost his
Concubine and, his benefice together.
whom he loved well, whereof the Archedeacon hearing, commanded him either to
forsake his Church, or to leave his concubin But being loath to depart from his
Concubine, he resigned his benefice, and when the harlot saw that he had
nothing now to live withal, she would tarry no longer with him, and so he lost
both profit and pleasure together.

A certain Priest had two Concubines, one young, Of a priest that had an young
and an old concubin
another old: The young because she would have the Priest to be like
herself, plucked all the gray hears out of his head, and the old plucked away
all the black, until between them both they had made him bald, not only in
head, but also in his goods, and mind.

A poor aged woman, being weak and like to die, bequeathed unto a Priest one
Hen which she had, Of a poor woman that bequeathed her Hen.
to be delivered after her departure. But the Priest came and took away the
Hen while she was yet living. Then said the old woman, I perceive that
Priests be worse then the Devil, for many a time have I given my Hen to the
Devil, and the Fox and they have letten her alone, and now have given her but
once to a Priest, and he takes her away.

There was a Priest which used to carry holy water, as they termed it, about
unto his friends and parishoners houses, and, when he came to a certain
ritchmans house, Of the (...) that had (...) leg.
he was sure of nothing else but railing, curses, and evil language. It fortuned
that he caught a sore in one of his legs, and at the Priests next cu^mynge
thither, he ma^e him good cheer, and desired him to pray for him. Then quod
the Priest, I pray God send your other leg to be sore also, that you may
be more devout. Which the rich man hearing, well bumbasted the Priest, and
with strayning his leg found the pain to be eased. This or the like is always
the end of ungodly prayers.

Chap. 32. Of Abbots and their Jests.
Of one Arsemus, that sent both his Scholars to ^^e Abbots.
IT is read in the book entitled vitae patrum, that it belonged unto the duty
of one Arsenius an Abbot, always to provide an Abbot for a certain Monastarie
being destitute, who sent unto them a scholar of his own bringynge up, one
that was religious and severe. But when the Munkes could not away with him, he
sent them another yt was calm and gentle, and finding him to be soft and
tractable, they yet misliked him and required another. Then said Arsenius, I
have sent you twain, whom I my self have bought up, and I know that neither of
them is destitute of the grace of ye holy ghost, who appeared in the form of
fire, and of a Dove, and in none other likeness yt I have heard: And therefore
I can provide you none other.

Of an Abbot that came ^uddinly among his munkes,
A certain Abbot came suddeinly upon a company of Munks as they were talkinge,
and when they saw him, they were abashed. Then said the Abbot, whereof were you
talkyng? Whereunto one yt had the rediest wit among them answered, of your
Lordship. And what said you of me, qouth the Abbot? Surely we were talkyng,
said the Munke, how you and other Abbots can so soon wax evil. Mary answered
the Abbot, because we be made of so ill stuff, that is to say, of Monks.

Of an Abbot that was by his munkes dep^^ued of his dignity.
An Abbot being in the Chapter house among the Munkes, said that he had no
pleasure nor rest, but pain and vexacion both of body and mind in the office,
and that he was no lord, but rather their servant and underling. To whom the
munkes answered: Midsummer and the feast of S. John the Baptist is now at hand,
go play thy self sumwhere else, for we will have thy service no longer, and so
deprived him of his office.

The Abbots room of S. Dennise in France being void, Of three munckes that
gave to the king five ^^po^^ a piece, to have the Abbotship of S. Denis.
and the time of the election drawing near, the Provost of the same house,
offered unto the king five hundred pound for his good will, the Chamberlayne as
much, and the Sellerer as much also: all which money he severally willed them
to deliver unto his Chamberlain. When the day appointed for the election was
come, and the king was sat down under his cloth of estate, those three above
named gaping every one for the preferment, the king called unto him a simple
Munke which sat in a corner, and made him Abbot: who alleging his
insufficiency for it, and the worthynes of many other in the Covent: the king
smiling, I will supply your want, quod be, and give you fifteen hundred
pounds toward your charges, (which was the Prouostes, Sellerers, and
Chamberlaines money.) and besides help you with the best counsel and aid
otherwise that I can. Of a merry demand that the Abbot of Paris asked the
scholemen.
An Abbot of Paris, coming into the schools at the Quodlibets, demanded this
question, whether it were better to know a little good and to follow it, or to
know much and follow nothing? It was answered that the first was the best.
Then, quod the Abbot, you be all fools, that learn many sciences and follow
none.

Chap. 33. Of Priours and of their merry Iestes.
IN the Priorie of Ramessa there dwelt a Priour that was very liberal, which
caused these verses to be written ever his door: Of the liberal priour of
Ramessa.
Be open evermore, o thou my door,
To none be shut, to honest or to poor.


But after his death, there succeeded him another whose name was Raynhard, as
greedy and covetous, as the other was bountiful and liberal, who kept the
same verses there still, changing nothing therein but only one point, and made
them run after this manner: Be open evermore o thou my door
To none, be shut to honest or to poor.


Afterward being driven from thence for his extreme niggishnesse, it grew
into a proverb: that for one point Raynhard lost his Priorie. A Priour having
gheastes to dinner, caused his servants to mingle water with the wine, Of a
Priour that served his gheastes with wine mingled with water.

Of a Priour that told his Mu^kes, that he was like to God in ^. qualities.

Of the Munke that displied the Priour with hard blows


to the intent it might stretche the farther. And perceiving one of the Munkes
to be very talkatiue, and full of words, said unto him: Brother when will
your myll leave clacking? It cannot leave sir, quod the Munke, as long as ye
give it so much water. A Priour said unto one of his Munkes, that he was like
unto God into three qualities: First that he could not sin, for that he
defended so much his own innocence at t^eyr Chapters: Next in knowing
althinges, for he went about from shop to shop to learn new; what was done
or said in any place: And thirdly in being in every place, for he wandered very
much abroad. A certain Munke displying the Priour and others after Complin,
stroke very hard blows upon the Priours head. But meeting afterward at the
Chapter, the Priour said unto the Munke: Brother, you know not yet well how to
displie. But when you disple the Priour, you must strike handsomely and gently,
and not thus, and thus, and buffeted him well fauouredly about the ears, and
so was even with the Munke for his hard displying.

Chap. 34. Of many merry Iestes of Munkes.
Of the young Munke that douckt alvvaies dovvnvvard till he had found the keys
of the Abbey.

Of an old Munke that fell a sleep in the quire.

Of him that bid the Munke to drink, when he was in his prayers.


Sometime there was a young Munke in an Abbey, who always went casting his eyes
to the ground, and was very mild and lowly in behavior. Afterward being
made Priour, he held up his h^ad aloft* and was very severe and arrogant,
which seeming strange unto them that knew him before, and being demanded the
cause of so great alteration: Answered, that before he always looked on the
earth for the keys of ye Abbey, if happily he might find them: which now having
found, he looked no more on the ground, but bear himself according to the
dignity whereunto he was called. An old Munke sitting in ye quire* fell a
sleep, and dreamed that there came unto him a foul long slouen with such a
filthy wispe as they use to rub horses withal, and looking grimly upon him,
would forcibly have wyped his face therewith. But he striving to escape from
him, plucked back his head and knocked it against the wall, and so awaked. A
Munke being devout in his prayers, one asked him if he would drink, who wagged
his finger, signifiyng that he would not. Then said the Munkes servant, my
master means that he would drink a cup of white wine. But when the Munke
beck^ned with two fingers, signifiyng that he would have none at all, and it
was demanded of his servant what he meant thereby, he answered that he would
also haue-a cup of red wine, so the mast^r drank but little and the knave
drank up all the residue. Of a fellovv that told the Munke his as^e being
laden was able to carry all the patience in the Abbey.
A certain Munke leading his horse to the water, saw a country fellow going
over a bridge driving an ass before him so heavily laden, that he could
scarce move one foot by another, whom the country fellow notwithstanding
beat forward without pity or mercy. Then said the Munke, why wylt thou kill
thy beast being laden? The fellow answered, he is not so laden, but he will
carry all the patience of your Abbey, whereat the Munke was very wrath. Then
said the fellow: The dumb beast murmureth not under his burden, Of the Friar
that ra^g the bell, and told the Munke he rang for the charity that was gone
out of the Abbey.
and you are out of patience for one words speaking. A certain Friar coming
unto the gate of an Abbey, seeing that he could not get in, range the bell
very hard, and a Munke coming to the gate, asked why he range? then said the
Friar, I ring for the charity which is gone a way from the Abbey, which the
Munke hearing, took the bell and range harder then he had done. What means
this, then quod the Friar. Then quod the Munke, I ring for the patience which
is departed from your Frierie.

Chap. 35. Of merry Iestes of preaching Friars.
IT is written in the Cronicles of Friars, that after the Lateran counsel,
when the Pope traueyled into the coasts of Toledo, How the Pope writ to
Dominicke the preaching Friar.
about certain affairs, and would write unto Dominick the Friar: he said
unto the Notarie, write unto Dominick the Friar, and to the residue of the
preaching Friars. Then staying a while: write quod he, unto master Dominick,
and to the preaching Friars: and after that time they began to be called the
preaching Friars. A certain Friar tossing the pot, Of the Frie^ that said he
must drink after every good word
and drinking very often at the table, was reprehended by the Priour. Then said
the Friar. It is an old proverb, that a man ought to drink after a good
saying. And there were so many read even now, Of the friar that bid the
official if he were the son of God to make the stones bread.
that there is not wine enough to drink after them all: for at that time the
book of the proverbs of Solomon was read at the table. One master Hugh, an
Official, having a Friar at his table at dinner, and seeing that he could not
eat of the bread because it was so heart, asked of him why he did not eat? to
whom the Friar answered: If thou be the Son of GOD, command these stones
to be made bread. Friar Nicholas of Bronsbarch, an ancient and ^ reverend
father would often declare, how he was the Duke of Sa^ons son, How friar
Nicolas of Bronsbarch said he was the duke of Saxons ^onne.
and after this manner. The Duke dreamed that the Duchess his wife, being with
child, should bear a child that should be poor and a beggar, and therefore
when she was delivered, he commanded the child to be slain, because he
should not shame him. But the Duchess being moved with motherly pity,
delivered her son unto a poor knights wife, to bring up as her own, and he
increased in learning and knowledge, and taking himself to be that poor
knights son, he entered into the order, that the Dukes dream might be
fulfilled. At length when he was made a master of his order, and came into
Saxony: the Duchess much rejoiced in him, and told him all the whole matter.
Howbeit he long time refused to credit her, supposing himself in deed to
have been the poor knights son.

Chap 36. Of Friars called Minours, and of their merry Iestes.
How a friar that had displeased the Pope made his answer.
A Certain Minour Friar had displeased Boniface the Pope, and by the Friars of
the same order he was delivered unto him. Who being brought before the Pope,
and desiring pardon, said the Pope unto him, thine own nation and thy Bishops
have delivered thee unto me. To whom the Friar in his own defense answeares:
He that delivered me unto thee, has the more sin. Of the vvoma^ that
bequethed her garment to the minor friars.
At which answer the Pope being delited, sent him away free. A certain woman
of Brunswik, bequeathed unto the Minour Friars (of whose fraternity she was,)
one garment worth a noble. But when the Antonia^s came to the town and
preached great pardons and indulgencies of their fraternity, this woman
hearing thereof, carried her garment unto them, which they received with great
thanks. Which when the Minors understood: they blamed her much for so doing,
who made them answer that all fraternities were one fraternity. Then the
Minours understanding that the Antonians had there in the town a S. Antonies
pig, that was fat and worth a mark, they took him home to their house and
killed him. And when the Antonians complained thereof, for that it was to great
an injury, the Minours answered that the pigge belonged unto their
fraternity, for that all fraternities are one fraternity. In the end the
matter being brought before the judges of the city, it was agreed upon that
every one should keep that which he had, and take better h^^de hereafter.

A certain Minour Friar of Brunswik fell mad, but notwithstanding* Of the
friar minor that fell mad.
he could help to Mass. And seeing the Priours man bearing a great Capon in a
platter, whose legs hunge a great way over the platters side, he ran unto
him, enquiring of him whether it were a Crane or a Capon? But the servant
sharply rebuked him away, and would not tell him. In the morning after, when
the Priour should say Mass, he would help him. And when the Priour began
Confiteor, that is to say, I confess, (a superstitious part of the Mass:) Now
said this Friar, tell me whether it were a capon or a Crane which you had
yesternight to supper, else I will not absolve you? Then the Priour taking
compassion upon his folly, swear unto him by God that it was a capon. Then
said the Friar, Misereatur vestri, etc. God forgive you, and so forth, and they
proceeded in their l^usines. On a time when many minour Friars coming from the
Chapter, Of a citezyn that deceived a company of friars of their good cheer
flocked unto a certain citizens house, carrying with them wine and other
provision to make good cheer: the townesman understanding thereof (for he had
been forth) caused the Belinan to ring alarm at the door, and to cry out
aloude as though there had been enemies coming, which noise the Friars
hearing, and fearing the loss of their horses, and their alms: in all have
ga^ up into their wagons, and rode away as fast as they could, and the goodman
of the house came in, and took the wine and other provision, which lasted him
to make merry withal many days after,

Chap. 37. Of diverse merry Iestes of Nouices.
Of the young nouice that said that he never read that Christ was either
black or white or gray friar.

Of the ^arle of Blaakenburgh son that became a Nouice.


A Certain Nouice of ye order of the Preaching Friars, being in place among
other Friars where they co^tended of ye excellency of their orders, every man
preferring his own before the other: the^ said this Nouice, is it true yt every
thing which christ did is for our instruction? Y^a, said the Friars. But I
never read, quod the Nouice, that our savior Christ was either a black,
white, or gray Friar, but hearing that he was a poor Pr^acher, I had rather
follow his steps therein, then any others. The Earl of Blankenburgh hearing
that his Son, whom he sent unto Paris to study, was become a Nouice: he
roo^e thither to bring him from thence. Then said his son, I would go with
you, if you could assure me of one thing. What is that, quod the father? The
son answered: that I may be sure not to die so soon when I am abroad, as
when I continue here. Which the father hearing, and perceiving his obstinacy,
with sorrow departed, Of a poor man's son, that became a Nouice.
and let him alone. A certain poor man had put his son to stud^e at Paris,
upon whose maintenance he bestowed all that ever he could earne, thinking that
he should have kept and relieved him in his old age. But when he was entered
into the order of preaching Friars, his father weepyng and lamenting thereat,
asked him why he had done so, who answered, because I would live in poverty.
That might you have done, son, quod the father, if you had ta^ied at home
with me, and never have gone out of the doors, for you should have found
there poverty enough. A certain Nouice entered into the order at Paris, Of the
Nouice that was anointed with lamp oil.
and as he was going to bed at night, a lamp fell down and all the oil was
spilt upon him. Then they brought him unto his bed, where were woollen sheets
laid upon a bed of straw, and he was commanded to keep silence. The next day
morning, How Friar numbertsed certain nouices with three pieces of bread.
when the other Friars came unto him, and asked him how he fared, and was used
since he came into the order: He answered, yesternight I was anointed, and
laid upon straw, and made dumb. One Friar Humbert a master of the order,
carrying with him certain Nouices unto Lions, came to a village where they
could get no meat. At length an old woman brought them a little bread unto the
bridge whereon they sat, which when the Nouices had eaten, he asked her if
she had any more, and she brought another piece, and the young men eat it
immediately very greedily. The third time he willed her to fetch more, if she
had any: which she did, and they eat it up all straight ways. Then said the
Mast^r unto the Nouices, he will provide you bread, that increased the five
loa^es in the wilderness, reciting unto them the whole story out of the
Evangelist, and how there were twelve baskets fu^lle^t, over and besides that
which was eaten. Now by Jesus quod the old woman, you be no such, for you have
left none at all.

Chap. 38. Of merry Iestes of Connertites.
A Certain Conn^rti^e serving in an Abbey, Of the connerti^e that mocked the
Munkes as they were at banquet.
waited upon the Abbot, Priour, and Monks at a feast, after that they came
from the Chapter, where there was much good cheer prepared. And having many
disshes to carry in, when he had brought in the first, he said, there is no
more, and likewise at the second he said, there is no more, and so at every
one. Then the company being offended that they had fed so much of one dishe,
seeing there was plenty, and that they were so filled that they could not taste
of the other: demanded of him, why he said always at every dishe that there
was no more? In deed, said he, I spoke that word, but I meant it not of
meat, but of Paradise. For in this world you will wear soft apparel, eat
delicate meats, ride with great traynes, and live in all pleasure, and
therefore I meant that you shall have no more in the world to come. All the
Cattle belonging unto a certain Monastery, Of the Connertite that vve^t to
fetch the A^bots cattle out of the pound.
were carried away to the pound a good way of, and the Abbot sent a simple
Connertite which was in the house, to bring the^ home, commanding him that he
should not come again empty, but bring what soever he could get. But when he
which had them in pound, had answered him that he should not have them,
notwithstanding if he would sit down and eat meat with him, he should be
welcome: he fead very greedely. Which the Master of the house beholding, and
reproving him somewhat therefore: he declared what commandment was given unto
him, and because he could bear nothing else home with him, he would carry at
least wise as much as his belly would hold. Then all the company laughed well,
and perceiving the simplicity of the man, gave him all that he required.

Chap 39. Of many merry Iestes of Nuns.
THe Nuns of a certain Monastery had this custom, that when any of them
were delivered of child, she should use recreations, and bathings, and other
things necessary for women in that case, The punishment of young Nuns when
they be g^t with child.
and the Nuns would come a gossipping unto her, and bring her presents. But
because that the correction that belonged to the order should not be
abrogated, at the months end she must come naked into the Chapterhouse before
them all, and receive three strypes at every one of her sisters hands with a
Fore tail, which always hunge up in the Chapter house for that purpose. In a
certain Monastery were a company of old Nuns, that had been good fellows
in their youth, unto whom the young Nuns cleaued very fast. Of the young Nuns
that were restrained of their liberty.
It fortuned the old lady Prioresse died, and there succeeded one that was
more severe in her room which forbad the coming in of religious men, or any
other unto them. So that the young Nuns seeing themselves restrained of their
liberty, said unto the elder Nuns: happy are you, Sisters, for you lost
your virginiti^ in your youth, which if you had now, there were as small hope
for you to loose it as is for us. Other that said in con^essio^, it was good
reason to prove all thing.
A certain Nun conf^ssing ^yr self unto a Bishop, that she had sinned in
the act of the flesh: he sharply reproved her for so doing, and demaund^d what
cause moved her thereto, and she answered, good reason, for it is written,
prove all thing. Yea, said the Bishop, but if you had read all that text, you
had not done it, for it follows in the same place, keep that which is good.
But she answered, O my Lord, I did not turn over the leaf.

Of friar Co^^ade that called for ^i^^ger in the^unrie.
One, Friar Conrade, dining once in a Nunrie, called at the table for vinegar,
and the Nuns said then had none. That is marvel, quod the Friar, being so
many broken vessels in the house.

Chap. 40. Of many merry iestes of systers.
A Certain Sister in a Priory, being an old merry wenche, Of a merry vvench in
a Priorie said that none might justly find fault with her behavior.
made her boast that none could find any fault with her behauior. For said
she, if I laugh it is good fellowship, if I weep it is devotion, if I speak
it is Philosophy, if I hold my peace it is religion, if I sleep it is
quietness, if I rise it is a vision, and so of many things more. But thee
forgot one thing, that the more she gloryed, the more fool she was counted.

A merry fellow that would feign set out the idle occupations, Of a merye
fellovv that drevv a pattern of all the systers idleness.
wherein the systers busyed them selves: He made a ^yrle, wherein he painted how
three systers were stealing of one goose: one held him by the leg, another
laid a knife upon his neck: and the the third struck the knife with an
hammar: and round about the cyrcle it was thus written: Look how these three
holy systers are occupied about stealing of a goose, so are all the rest also.
Certain systers conferred together on a time, How the systers imagined for
each a several death.
by what deaths they would wyshe to dye. One said I would desire to be hanged
in the coard of contemplacion, according to the saying of Job. The other said,
I would choose to be buried in the grave of humility. The third coueted to
be burnt in the fire of charity: And the fowrth to be drowned in the tears
of compunction. But how far their inward thoughts were differing from
their outward hipocrisy, their holy and chaste lives did well declare. A sister
being in the monastery bare headed and in her peticote only: How a sister
uncovered her lovver part to hyde her face from the Friar.
two Friars knocked at the gate, and she ran to the gate and opened it. And
being ashamed because she was bare headed, she took up the tail of her
peticoate to cast over her head, and uncovered her naked buttockes, and ran
away as fast as she could. Then one of the Friars calling unto her, wylled,
her to cover her naked parts, saying, it is better to see a woman's bare top,
then her bare tail. It fortuned that in a Priorye one night, there was a
Priest found a bed with one of the systers, unto whose chamber many other of
the systers flocked to see the sight. Of the two systers that were taken a bed
with two priests.
And when another of the systers, in whose bed a;lso at that present there lay
a Priest, heard this stir, making have to go see the other, thinking to
cover her head with her accustomed veil, threw the Priests breaches upon her
head, and came unto that merry or rather lamentable spectable to bewail yt case
among y^ other, as though she had been gyltie of no such matter. But when one
of the systers saw the breach: O sister said she, and dearly beloved fellow,
what thing is this, or what means this strange sight? who then beholding her
own naughtiness, was much astonished, and because of this accident, the other
escaped unpunished, for that she was found not to be in that fault alone.

Chap. 41. Of many merye Dreams.
VAlerius in the first book and seventh Chapter, writes, that Alexander the
king of Macedonie, now king Alexander was warned in a dream of one that
should kill him.
was warned of the hand yt should slay him in his dream, before that he felt
it to be true in effect, for he thought that he saw him in his sleep yt
should kill him. And shortly after, when he saw the party, and knew that he
was Antipaters son, he declared the vanity of his dream, and he cast out of
his mind the suspicion which he had conceived of the poison, whereof he dyed
at Cassanders hands. Likewise he tells that whylst Amilcar, that was
captain of the Carthagians, Of the dream of Amilcar the captain.
lay in siege about the City of Syracuse, he thought that in his dream he
heard a voice which said, that the night following he should suppe within the
City. Then Amilcar being careless, or rather thinking himself sure of the
victory, was somewhat negligent in not loking carefullye to his Army, upon
whom the Syracusians issuing forth the next day, possessed his tents, took
him prisoner, and led him into the City, Of the the dream of Friar John of
Duren.
where the same night he supped not as a conqueror, but as a captive. Friar
John of Duren, dreamed one night, that he rode upon a snayle, having two long
horns, and that his arms touched the ground, and how the boys in the
str^etes seeing him, laughed and shouted at him: after which dream, Of the
farmar that dreamed vvher great tresure was to be found.
as he said, he had very good fortune, but wherein, he would not tell. A
country man dwelling near Ratisbona, dreamed that upon the bridge at
Ratisbona he should find great treasure. And coming thither in the morning
very earlye for that purpose, he met with a rytch man which asked him what he
sought, and he told him the cause of his coming, and how and whereof he had
dreamed the night before. Then the rytch man up with his fyst, and gave him a
box on the ear, saying: Ah fool, wylt thou believe dreams? I my self
dreamed this night, how that in the vyllage of Regendolf in such a place,
(naming a certain farm place) I should find a great sum of money, but I
mean not to be so much a fool as to go seek it. But when the country man
heard this, and perceiving that it was his own farm where he dwelt, thought
within himself, it is happy for me that I came hither this day to have a box
on the ear, and going home immediatlye, dygged in the place which the other
named, and found a rich treasure. Of the Ca^non that made verses in his sleep.


A certain Cannon in VVerda nigh to the Rhine, which never could make verse in
all his life, dreamed of these two verses in his sleep, which he remembered
well when he awaked, to this effect. The words of revenge, a bitter doom has
given on thee.
Though thou ne know, how that thy life shall shortly ended be.
And when he had openly told it at the table, one of his familyars said unto
him, what ever it should signify, if I were in your case, I would take order
with my goods, and dispose them as I thought best, whatsoever should befall:
but others said it was but a tryfle, and that dreams were not to be accoumpted
of. But he being stricken into a dumpe, gat him upon his horse, and took his
hawke upon his fyst, and road abroad into the fields for pleasure, to digest
the melancholy. And coming homeward at night, where he must ride over a bridge
yt lay over an arm of the Rhine, his horse began to strive and plunge, and
threw them both headlong into the Rhine, and there were drowned.

Chap. 42. Of diverse and sundry Artificers.
MAcrobius in the second book of the Saturnalia, How Seruilius asked a
painter why he painted not as well for him self as for others.
writes yt when Seruilius of Rome, beheld the children of Mallius, an
excellent painter, how misshapen and evil favored they were, said unto him,
Mallius why do thou not paint likewise as well for thy self, as thou do
for other men? To whom Mallius answered, I devise in the night time, but I
paynt in the day.

of a keruer that carved Pismares.
One Gallatricus a keruer, made Pismares of yuorie of so small quantity, that
they were no bygger, neither could be discerned from those Pismares that lived
in deed.

Of a Shoemaker that was made a Judge.
A certain Shoemaker dwelling in a City of Lumbardie, was made a Judge in
certain causes, before whom one of the same occupation had a matter then
presently to be handled. And perceiving himself to be in some danger, came
unto this Shoemaker Judge whereas he sat in judgment, and secretly requested
him to be favorable unto him, saying more-ouer unto him: Do you not know me
sir? I am such a friend, and sometime a fellow of yours. But he answered him
churlishlye, and said, stand away and trouble me not, for at this present I
know neither thee, nor my self.

Many mo examples, and sayings might be alleged of Artificers, The
conclusion.
of whom there is no special treatise made in this book. But because I have
already touched the chiefest sorts and degrees, and it were impossible to run
through all: I shall request the loving Reader to hold himself contented with
these few, which I have gathered together for his delight, and to receive them
for his part as friendly, as I have wyllinglye employed the travail to wry^e
them.

FINIS.
T.T.
A Table containing the principal matters comprised in this present work of
Table Philosophy. And these are the contents of the first book, which is
Philosophy natural.
THe Preface into the first book. Of the times to eat, and how often in one
day we should eat meat. Chap. 1. Of appetite, and of the custom in eating.
Chap. 2. Of the order of meats, and eating of them. Chap 3. Of the place to
eat in. Chap. 4. Of meats and drinks wherewith men be refreshed at the table.
Cha. 5. Of wine and the properties thereof. Chap. 6. Of mead and the properties
thereof. Chap. 7. Of double beer and ale. Cha 8. Of flesh in general. Cha.
9. Of the flesh of wyld beasts. Ca. 10. Of Kiddes flesh. Chap. 11. Of Lamb.
Chap. 12. Of Mutton. Chap. 13. Of veale. Chap. 14. Of Porke. Chap. 15. Of
Deeres flesh, or venison. Ca. 16. Of Hares flesh. Chap. 17. Of Bears flesh.
Chap. 18. Of the parts of beasts. Cha. 19. Of baked flesh, or pyes. Cha. 20. Of
Fowls in general. Cha. 21. Of Pultrey. Cha. 22. Of young Pigeons. Cha. 23. Of
the parts of Fowls. Cha. 24 Of eggs and the propertyes thereof. Cha. 25. Of
milk. Cha. 26. Of cheese. Cha. 27. Of fyshes. Chap. 28 Of all kinds of fetches
or podware, as: Rice, Beans, Lentiles, Chitches. Peason. Cap. 29. Of Pot
herbs, and sallet herbs, as: Garlike, Sorrel, Dyll, Smallage, Arrage,
Bancia, Beetes, Borrage. Colewoorts, Onions, Gourdes, Comin, Fennel, Isope,
Lettice, Mintes, Cresses, Poppie, Perceley, Leekes, Purcelain, Radishe, Rapes,
Rue, Sage, Spinach, Mushrumes. Chap. 30. Of fruytes, as: Figs, Dates,
Raysons, Pomegranats, Quinces, Pears, Aples, Peaches, Medlars, Pome citrons,
Mulberies, Plums, Cherries, Almonds, Nuttes, Fylberds, Chestnuts, Akorns. Ca.
31. Of Spices, as: Pepper, Ginger, Zedoarie, Galangall, Cloves, Cinanamon,
Saffron, Carrowayes. Cha. 32. Of Sauces, as: Mustard, Salt, Vinege^, Honey,
Oil. Chap. 33.
The contents of the second Book of Table Philosophy, which is moral.
The Preface. Of Emperors. Chap. 1. Of Kings. Chap. 2. Of Princes. Chap. 3. Of
the gentle Bishops. Chap. 4. Of Noble men. Chap. 5. Of Knights. Chap. 6. Of
Squires. Chap. 7. Of VVarriours. Chap. 8. Of Philosophers and Orators. Chap.
9. Of Physicians. Chap. 10. Of Yongmen. Chap. 11. Of old men. Chap. 12. Of
Citizins. Chap. 13. Of Merchants. Chap. 14. Of Husbandmen and Husbandry. Chap.
15. Of Artificers. Chap. 16. Of Ritchmen. Chap. 17. Of Pooremen. Chap. 18. Of
Religious persons. Chap. 19. Of strangers and Pilgrims. Chap. 20. Of Hunters.
Chap. 21. Of Judges. Chap. 22. Of Lawiers. Chap. 23. Of Lords baylifes. Chap.
24. Of Friends and friendship. Chap. 25. Of Kinsfolks. Chap. 26. Of good
women. Chap. 27. Of naughty women. Chap. 28. Of Married weemen. Chap. 29. Of
good widows. Chap. 30. Of Virgins. Chap. 31.
The contents of the third Book of Table Philosophy, which is natural.
THe Preface. Whether air or meat be more necessary for life? Whether meat
or drink is more necessary for life? Whether sleep or meat be more
profitable for the body? Whether meat or air nourish more? Chap. 1. Whether
can good blood be engendered of ill meat? Whether simple or compound meat be
soonest digested? Whether it be good to walk immediately after meat? Whether
it be good to sleep immediately after meat? Why the appetite fails, when the
accustomed time of eating is past? Whether our bodies be warmer before meat or
after? Whether fasting hurt more a choleric or phlegmatic complexion? Chap.
2. Why some desire much, and are filled with a little meat? Whether they that
have a strong heat can more tolerate hunger then they that have a weak? Why
they that have narow powers can better abide hunger then they that have wide?
Whether choler nourish? Whether sick persons can better fast then whole?
Whether the strength of a strong stomach can better tollerat fasting then of
a weak? Whether he that uses to eat much can better abide to fast then he
that uses to eat little? Whether fasting anoy more in warm or cold seasons?
Why are the greediest feeders soonest filled? Why we receive hotter meats
into our mouths then we are able to abide in our hands. Chap. 3. Why if one
that is hungry drink, it appeaseth hunger? Whether those that fast are more a
hungered then a thirst? Why it is more pleasure unto us when our thirst is
quenched with drink or when our hunger is appeased with meat? Why one kind of
drink seems stronger to one that is fasting then to one that is full?
Whether unto them that are thirsty by a dry stomach a little drink be
sufficient? Whether the stomach be burdened with much drink? Why a moist
stomach can bear much? Whether thirst proceed at any time from the Lungues?
Why thirst of the Lungues be appeased by drawing in of cold air, and of the
stomach by cold drink? Whether thirst be a desire of that which is cold and
moist, or of that which is hot and dry? Whether water slake thirst more then
wine? Chap. 4. Of the hurtes which happen after meat, with the questions
thereto belonging. Chap. 5. Of Bread, and the questions thereto apperteining.
Chap. 6. Of wine, and the demandes thereunto incident. Chap. 7. Of flesh, with
the proper questions thereof. Chap. 8. Of Eggs, and the demaundes touching the
same. Chap. 9. Of Fyshes, and their questions. Chap. 10. Of Pulse and Podware,
with their probleames. Chap. 11. Of Pothearbes and Sallet herbs, and their
questions. Chap. 12. Of Fruits, and certain demaundes concerning the same.
Chap. 13. Of Salt, and the proper questions thereof. Chap. 14. Of honey and
oil, and motions touching their natures. Cha. 15.
The contents of the fowrth book, of Table Philosophy, which morally
treats of honest mirth, and pleasant pastimes.
He Preface. Of honest mirth and pastimes. Chap. 1. Of pleasant inuectiues.
Cha. 2. Of speeches convenient to every person. Chap. 3. Of apt pleasant
words. Cha. 4. Of Emperors. Chap. 5. Of Kings. Chap. 6. Of Princes. Chap. 7.
Of Earls. Cha. 8. Of Knights and soldiers. Cha. 9. Of Squiers. Cha. 10 Of
Physicians. Cha. 11. Of Lawiers and advocates. Cha 12. Of Marchaunts. Chap. 13.
Of Vserers. Chap 14 Of Husbandmen. Chap. 15. Of Jews. Chap. 16 Of Thieves.
Chap. 17. Of Iesters. Chap. 18 Of weemen. Cha. 19. Of young weemen and mayds.
Ca. 20 Of Children. Cha 21. Of Blindfolke. Cha. 22 Of Fools. Cha. 23. Of
persons possessed. Cha. 24 Of Popes. Cha 25. Of Cardinals. Chap. 26 Of
Archbishops. Cha. 27 Of Bishops. Chap. 28 Of Archdeacons. Chap. 29 Of
Cannons. Chap. 30. Of the halt and lame. Chap. 31. Of Priests. Chap. 32. Of
Abbottes. Chap. 33. Of Priours. Chap. 34. Of Munkes. Chap. 35. Of Preaching
Friars. Chap. 36. Of Minour Friars. Chap. 37 Of Nouices. Chap. 38. Of
Connertites. Chap. 39. Of Nuns. Chap. 40. Of Systers. Chap. 41. Of Dreams.
Chap. 42. Of sundric Artificers. Chap. 43.
Thus ends the Table.

