The state of the Church of England, laid open in a conference between
Diotrephes a Bishop, Tertullus a Papist, Demetrius an usurer, Pandocheus an
In-keeper, and Paul a Preacher of the word of God.

PSALM. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper that love the
Lord.

REVEL. 14. 9. 10. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice,
if any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God.

THE PRAEFACE.
JEntle Reader, I have set down here in a dialogue, the practice of Satan
which he uses (as I have observed by experience) to subvert and utterly
ouerturne the course of the gospel here in England: the names of the speakers
contain in them for the most part, the matter that they defend, and the
affection that they are of. For thou know that Diotrephes was he of whom S.
John speaks in his third Epi. v. 9. that loving to have the pre-eminence,
disturbed the course of good things in the Church, and therefore sustaineth the
person of a Bishop, or byshoplie prelate. Tertullus is he of whom Luke speaks
in the 24. Acts, that was the speaker in the embassage from Jerusalem to
Foelix the governor, against Paul, in the defense of ceremonies, abrogated
from the overthrow of the Gospel, and so represents the Papists, that
maintain their trash, to the rooting out of true religion. Demetrius is he of
whom mention is made in Acts 19. that was enemy to Paul, because he lived by
an unlawful trade, and for that cause does play the part of an usurer. Paul
was the defender you know of the Gospel in sinccritie, and he whose pen the
holy Ghost did use to express the discipline of the church most clearly, and
therefore speaks for the ministers of our time that stand for reformation.
Pandocheus is an In-keeper in Greek, and it is as much as to say, a receiver
of all, and a soother of every man for his gain; so that the persons in their
nature thus considered, it remains that thou would be entreated by me,
whosoever thou art, to who^ this little book shall come, that thou would in
reading of it, set all affection aside, and neither believe it, because one of
thy disposition did pen it neither yet rei^ct it. because it was not composed
by one of thy complexion; but considd^r well of the speeches uttered by every
party, and compare them with the practice of the world, and then look what
it is that so hardens Pandocheus in Atheisine, Demetrin in usury, and
Tertullus in Papistrie; and you shall (I doubt not) plainly perceive, that the
cause of all ungodliness so to reign in every place, and of the Papists so to
increase in strength and number, arises from our Bishops and their unlawful
government; on the other side, look into the answers that Diotrephes makes
to Paul, and the council that Tertullus gives to Diotrephes, and compare them
with the practice of the B. in all points, and you shall euidentlye perceive
that the cause why the gospel being so long preached, and has taken so little
effect, arises from them only, for so much as they have weakened the knees of
the true Preachers, and every way crossed them in all good actions. I have
touched things very briefly of purpose, partly for that they who see what
reformation means, will quickly understand my meaning, and partly, for that I
would have him that understands not mine intent and would be resolved, to
confer at large of it with some godly learned for his further instruction. Now
I pray thee, let me entreat thee to think thus of mine intent; namely, that it
is not of purpose to disgrace any man, albeit we ought to disgrace them, by
whom God his son is disgraced: but especially to this end, that every man in
his calling, might see how he is or has been made an instrument to do
harm, or for want either of knowledge, or provident forecast, being overtaken
under color of right and law, and lastly that we al seeing the subtilties of
the devil against the kingdom of Christ Jesus, may first of al return to God
by speedy repentance, from the wickedness that we have in our hands, which in
deed is the cause of this curse upon us; and then pray unto his Majesty,
that he would detect the crafty subtilties of all his adversaries, reveal the
truth to those that are seduced and abused, and erect the kingdom of his
Son Christ Jesus amongst us, by the form of that discipline that his own
word expresses unto us.

The state of the Church of England.
Diotreph MIne host, I pray you stay with me and my friend M. Tertullus, and
tell us some news, for we are lately come out of Scotland, and would hear
before we come nere London, in what state things do stand, least we coming
on a sudden, speed as ill as we did at Edenborough, and S. Andrews.


Pandoch Good my Lord, I can tell you no great news, for I go not so far
as to Church once in a month, but if I do happen to go, one of my servants
does come for me in all haste, to make merry with one guest or other, but
there be two in this house that came from London, if it please your L. I will
entreat one of them to come unto you, it may be he can tell you some thing.


Diotreph I pray thee do so: you are welcome my friend, I understand that you
came from London, I pray you tell me some news for I having been in Scotland,
some space, have not heard much of the state of England.


Demetri My L. I hear no news, but that our Bishops (Gods blessing have
their hearts for it) say pretty well, by one and by one, to these precise and
hot Preachers, for some of them are put to silence, some of them close
prisoners in the Gate House, some well laden with yrons in the White-lyon, and
some in the Clinke, I hope to see them one day all put down, for they trouble
the whole land, and are neither contented to obey the authority of these holy
fathers, neither yet will suffer us to live as our forefathers have done
before us, and here is a good fellow which I met yesterday upon the way, who
is just of their opinion.


Pandoch I know not of what religion he of whom you speak is of but I am
sure that he has many of our Preachers quallities, for which I like him the
worse, for since our Preacher came, I have not gained half so much as
heretofore I did, but if I had but every night such a guest, within one month
all men would refrain from coming to mine house, and so I might beg.


Diotreph Why mine host, what are his qualities that you dislike so much?


Pandoeh What? I will tell you, as soon as ever he lighted, my man that took
his horse, chanced but to swear by God, and he was reproouing of him by and
by, and a gentleman cannot come in this evening, in any place where he is, but
he is finding faut with him for one thing or another: and when he should go to
supper, with other gentlemen, sitting at the lower end of the table, he would
needs say grace (forsooth) before and after supper, and so stay them that were
hungry, from their meat the longer, and from their sleep afterward but one
wiser then the rest, served him in his kind, for he started up saying: my
father had never grace said before meat, neither will I have any.


Diotreph I perceive he is one of these peevish puritanes, that troubled the
Church, when my friend and I went into Scotland, have not the Bishops yet
suppressed them, neither by countenance, nor by authority?


Tertulluss Suppressed; No my Lord, a frind of mine writ unto me, that one of
their Preachers said in a pulpit, he was persuaded that there were 100000 of
them in England, and that the number of them increased daily in every place
of all estates and degrees.


Diotreph I am sorry for that, I marvel that you never told me of it.


Tertullus I did of purpose conceal it, least, together with your ill success
that you, and so consequently I, had in Scotland, your grief should have been
aggrauated, for I know how that the growing of them does grieve you.


Diotreph You may be sure, that it would have grieved me, if you had told me
that, when you told me of the increasing of your friends the Papists, I
think I should have died for sorrow.


Tertullus I know that, therefore did I keep it cloase, but if news had come
in like monne, of the growing of the Catholic religion unto your man, that
Puritan knave, he would have told it you at the first, and so have molested
you the more.


Diotreph You say well, and I percciue it is better to have a Papist, than a
Puritan in an house, and more charity to do for them.


Pandoeh Your Lordshippe asked me forsome news, but your speech of your being,
and ill success that you had in Scotland, gives me occasion, to enquire of
you (if I may be so bold) Some Scottish news.


Diotreph Ah my host, though it grieve me to think upon it, yet it eases
my stomach to tell it out. The Puritanes in Scotland, have got up their
discipline, and utterly overthrown all the sovereignty of Bishops, by which
they prevailed so mightily, that we feared our fall in England shortly to
ensue, whereupon I was sent together with this my friend, who came out of
France into England, to go and seek the subversion of their great assemblies,
and the rest of their jurisdiction, wherein I prevailed a while, but now it is
worse, than ever it was.


Pandoeh How came it to pass, that when you had gotten some ground, you held
it not?


Diotreph Because the whole land cried out for Discipline again, and the noble
men so stiffly did stand to it, and lastly, the Ministers that came home from
England, dealt so boldly with the King, that I was utterly cast out without
all hope, ever to do any good there again, and now I make homewarde in haste,
least I loose all there also, but I pray you help me to speak with that
Puritan, I shall learn more by him, because he is better acquainted with the
cause than either of you.


Demetri He may soon know more in that case than I, for I promise you, mine
only study is in my counting house, to see my money, and when each parcel is
due unto me.


Pandoch And I meddle with nothing but my In-keeping, as for these
controversies and this scripturing, I never trouble my self with it, but I
will go to him to see whether I can get him to come to your Lordship: but
before I go, I must beseech you to say nothing to him as from me, for you
know, I must be friendly to all, least I leese my custom, and drive away
some of my guests.


Diotreph Great reason, for every man must live of his trade, neither must you
tell him what I am.


Pandoch Sir, here be certain gentlemen in an other chamber, that hearing of
your coming from London, would gladly speak with you.


Paul Whence are they can you tell?


Pandoch They are English men, but they are but new come out of Scotland.


Paul I am willing to go to them, though it be late, and so much the rather,
because I long to hear some good news from thence.


Pandoch Here is the Gentleman that you desired to speak withal.


Diotreph You are welcome my frind, I was desirous to speak with you, for that
I perceive you came from London, I pray you, can you tell us any good news?


Paul No surely, for I am a very ill obseruer of such things.


Diotreph You seem to be a Minister, can you tell me what good success my
Lords the Bishops have in their proceedings?


Paul They have too good success, they wax worse and worse, they grow even to
the height of their iniquity, so that I hope their kingdom will not stand long.


Diotreph Why sir, what do they, that they offend you so grievously?


Paul They stop the mouth of the sheepeheardes, and set at liberty the
ravening wolves, and turn the foxes among the lambs.


Diotreph I must desire you to express your mind more plainly, for you seem
to be so possessed with coffeehouse, that it makes you to speak (as it
were) snatchingly.


Paul I confess my self discontented, and greatly grieved, but yet not so
much, as to make me less able to express my mind.


Diotreph I pray you therefore, lay open your former speeches, that I may
understand your meaning.


Paul My meaning is this; That there are three abominations committed by
them: The first is, that they do bear such an enmity against the kingdom of
Jesus Christ, that they put to silence one after an other, and will never cease
(if God bridle them not) until they have rooted out of the Church, all the
learned, godly, and painful teachers: The second is, that they enlarge the
liberty of the common enemies the papists: The last is, that they commit the
feedinge of the flocks of Christ, unto those that prey upon them, and either
cannot, or will not labor to reclaim the wandering sheep. So that the
conclusions that may be gathered upon their actions, must needs be the
euersion and overthrow of the Gospel, and so consequently the bringing in of
popery and atheism.


Diotreph They put none to silence, but the puritans, who do indeed more hurt
than good.


Paul I know no puritans, if there be any, it is meet that they be put to
silence: But Satan taught the Papists, so to name the ministers of the
Gospel, and you are his instrument in continuing the same rerme.


Diotreph I mean them, that are not contented with the estate, but mislike the
government of the Church, and would have a new form of government, which
would mar all.


Paul Would you have them contented with Antichristian prelates, to be
rulers of the spouse of Christ, when as the word of God has prescribed
expressly, another form direct contrary to that?


Diotreph I am a doctor of divinity at the least, and yet could I never read
any thing in the word of God, contrary to this government, neither yet to
speak of any other, but that the ordering of the Church is left to the
discretion of the wise and learned.


Paul Yes, you have read it, if God had given you eyes to see it: But if your
study had been principally to advance Gods glory, and benefit his Church,
which you never aimed at, but rather preferred vain glory and gain, you
should easily have found it. I pray you therefore, when you come to London, see
if you can get these books: the Ecclesiastical Discipline: A learned discourse
of Ecclesiastical government: The Counterpoyson: A Sermon upon the 12. to the
Romans, and M. Cartwrites last reply: some of which books have been extant
this dozen years, and yet are none of them answered, and you shall find it
otherwise.


Diotreph If their Lordsh, were taken away, the credit of the Gospel would
fall to the ground, and men would not regard it.


Paul Nay, their jurisdiction makes it not to be regarded, for the
simplicity of the Gospel, can not match with such outward pomp, it was of
more credit before their calling was hatched, than ever it was since.


Diotreph I hope never to see the^ ouerthrown, and I think they will never
give over their Byshopricks.


Paul I am of your mind, that they will never give them over, they have such
experience of the gain of them, the use of the bag prevailed so much with
one of their Apostles, that rather than he would lack money, he would sell
Jesus Christ himself.


Diotreph You speak too irreverently and uncharitably of these holy fathers.


Paul Surely I have so much experience of their impious dealing, that I can
no better esteem of them in respect of their plaees, than of the ennemies of
God, but as they be men, I will not cease to pray for them, that God would
open their eyes, that they may see their sins, and repent, which is the best
way to deal charitablie with them.


Diotreph I pray you tell ne why these men be put to silence, I am sure it is
for their notorious misdemeanor.


Paul I will tell you wherefore some of them were put to silence; one had
conference with a Bishop about subscription, and he was restrained for that he
gave his friend a coppie of his conference, another, because he taught that
the Church of Antichrist was no part of the Church of God, another, because
his prayers before and after Sermons were too long, and such like.


Diotreph Away, it is rather for not observing the book of common prayer, than
for any such thing as you speak of.


Paul Indeed many are suppressed therefore, but if any man will give them their
titles and authority, they will give him leave to use his discreation with the
Book, as we see by experience, for they use the Book and ceremonies as
brieles to curb them that ki^k at their lordlinesse, which is the only thing
that they mind.


Diotreph Well, I love not to hear these reverend fathers so abused, and
therefore I pray you talk no more of it, but if it please you, you may depart.


Paul I am contented, only let me request you this one thing, that for so
much as GOD has given you learning, you would pray unto God, to guide you
with his grace, that you abuse it not to your own destruction, but employ it
to his glory, and the good of his church.


Diotreph I thank you for your good counsel, and so fare you well, we will
talk more in the morning.


Paul With a good will: I pray God our talk may tend to a good end.


Diotreph M. Demetrius and mine host, how like you this fellew? is he not a
saucy merchant, to presume thus to speak against those that were Preachers
before he was borne? But this is the misery of our nation, that every young
boy will take upon him to reach the ancient, and to reprove them, for that
their green heads think that to be true.


Pandoch Your Lordship says very well, I pray you forget not to urge him with
that in the morning. For it must needs make him mute.


Demetri I promise you he is a bold fellow, it is no maruayle, if such as he
is, do stand stiff against us that be unlearned, seeing they be so bold with
you, I tell you, he took me up as if I had bin but a kitchen boy, and all
because I said I lived by my money, and was of no other trade, calling me
caterpiller, thief, and murderer, and said plainly, that he that robbed in
Stran-gate hole, was an honester man than I.


Diotreph You must take heed, that you do not oppress your brother too much,
but as for these fellows, it is their manner to be so bitter and sharp, that
they do ever with their preaching, more hurt than good.


Demetri I hope you will course him tomorow for it: but I pray you my L. let me
have a little talk between you and me, of a matter that now comes in my
mind; this man that is with you, and went and came in your company, what is he?


Diotreph To be plain with you, he is a Papist.


Demetri Papists are enemies to the Queens religion and laws; I do therefore
much marvel, that he should be put in trust by the Bishops.


Diotreph The cause is this, he light into the familiarity of one of our
friends, who confuted a Book called the Abstract, and helped him so
painefully with reasons out of the Rhemish testament, and other such like
writers, to confute the Puritans, that he was thought a fit man above all other
of his religion, to go with me.


Demetri Why, could you not have had another of your relgion, but you must
needs have a Papist your assistant?


Diotreph No, no, if I had not had a Papist with me, I could never have looked
to have prevailed.


Demetti Why so? I pray you tell me the reason of that.


Diotreph Because our dignities and government, comes wholly and every part
thereof from the Pope, and is ruled and defended by the same canons, whereby
his popedom is supported. So that if I had wanted their helps, I had had none
authority, either from God or man, no help either by reason or learning,
whereby I could have been furthered.


Demetri Why did you not rather take some doctor of the Arches, to go with you?


Diotreph That was consulted upon before I went, but it was not thought meet,
because the most of them would never deal in that law at home, but only
because they know not else how to live, and therefore it was feared that they
would not be sufficiently diligent in a matter that concerns others. And for
the rest (who indeed) be the same men they were in Queen Mary's time, we
durst not carry any of them from home, for none defend our kingdom thorowlie
but they.


Demet^i Me thinks this man should be an unfit assistant, for if he be a right
Papist, he will labor to erect the Popes kingdom, and so to cross you.


Pandoch No question but he did so, and that made for us, for albeit we would
if we might, of the twain, keep rather the protestants religion with our
dignities than the other, yet had we rather change our religion, than to
forgo our privileges; this I tell you between you and me, but I would have it
go no further.


Demetri Do the old popish doctors stand you in such great steed, me think you
might have had learned lawyers for cuerie place before this time, and have
turned them out:


Diotreph It is true, but we have received them of purpose (man) for we can
bear, I tell you, with their religion, so that they do bear up our authority:
do you not see likewise, that we have reserved man my popish prists in the
ministry, whereof diverse do yet remain, which we have done upon special
consideration: to wit, least there should be too many learned, not one whereof
will stand to us, sane only they that either have, or look to have better
preferment, or live more easily than S. Paul's Epistles will allow them.


Demetri I have been bold to trouble your L. I will now leave you for this
time, I will come unto you in the morning to breakfast.


Diotreph You shall be welcome unto me at all times, for I perceive you are
none of them that favor the Puritans.


Pandoch My L. your breakfast is ready, will you have them come to you that were
here yesternight.


Diotreph I would have him that tarried yesternight so late, for he is a very
honest gentleman, and a quiet, but in any case let not the Puritan come until
breakfast be done, for he is too precise: I must needs be merry, and if he be
here, he will not let to reprove us, if we do butfortune to swear at unawares,
so that I shall be afraid of him in every word I speak.


Pandoch Here is but simple cheer this morning, because it is fasting-day.


Diotreph M. Tertullus will eat no eggs to day: will you M. Demetrius?


Demetri Yea by S. Mary, I am a protestant, for I love to eat flesh on the
friday.


Diotreph It is well said, but I pray you, think not ill of me M. Tertullus
for it, for saint Paul has taught us, that we that eat, should not indge them
that eat not; for we being strong, must bear with the infirmities of the
weak.


Demetri You promised yester-night to send for the Puritan, to talk further
with him, I pray you do so, for I would have him taunted thorowlie.


Diotreph By my troth I had forgotten him, mine host, call him.


Pandoch Here is the Gentleman you willed me to call.


Diotreph You are welcome, this Gentleman M. Demetrius tells me, that you,
and he, had great controversy on the wap yesterday, and he is very defirous
that I might hear your reasons, and give my judgment of them for his
satisfaction.


Paul Sir, I said nothing to him but the truth out of the word of God, in
condemning of usury, by which he said he lived, and showed him the
horriblenesse of the sin, the inconveniences temporal that come of it in the
commonwealth, and the judgments of God against the practices thereof.


Diotreph Usury in deed in some sort is unlawful, but it seems that you
dealt not with the man, as meaning to win him, but rather by such sharpenes as
might harden him.


Paul Surely my desire was to win him, and therefore my purpose in reasoning
was, to lay open the sin unto him, and the cause why I dealt some what
roundly, was this: he confessed the scriptures that I alleged, but so
cauelled and wrangled against the clear light therein contained, that it
appeared unto me his purpose was, not only to abide an usurer, but also to
justify it by the word of God.


Diotreph Such chollerike fellows as you do mar al, for you cannot deal
mildely, and so you trouble the conscience, and disquiet the mind of the weak.


Paul His conscience must be troubled by launcing, before that ever his soul
can be cured.


Diotreph Then I perceive you like well of them that prech the law so much as
they do.


Paul Yea, or else should I not like of bringing men unto Christ, which can
never be until they be humbled by the law, and made pure thereby to receue the
gospel.


Diotreph Do you not also like of them, preaching of predestination?


Paul Yea, or else should I dislike of preaching the truth, for it is a part of
Gods revealed will.


Diotreph So do not I in these dais, when there be so many weak ones, I
think it to be a very breake-necke of all religion.


Paul I have heard of free will men, that have said so, but I never heard man
of learning affirm it, but one that was a Bishop in a Sermon, but his words
were no less than blasphemy, and so are yours, and al they that say or think
the same are guilty of no less sin.


Diotreph Are you a Preacher and speak so of these reverend fathers, it may be
your own ordinary to whom you are sworn to give canonical obedience.


Paul It was the Bishop indeed, who usurped even the place where I dwelt, but
I neuet swear him any obedience.


Diotreph Well, we are gone from our matter.


Paul And I pray you let us tarry a little longer from it, to consider one
thing before we do return, which the talking of the Bishops brings into my
head.


Diotreph What is that?


Paul Surely, that I think you are either a B. or else brought up in the
school of a B. and would feign be one, for you do use your self very like,
as I have known them do.


Diotreph Wherein?


Paul In this, that whereas we reasoning of usury, wherein your conscience is
clear within, you are contented for the favor of him, and for that you like not
me, to maintain the same, and to disgrace the truth, because of the party that
defends it, who is not according to your humor.


Diotreph You may be ashamed to speak to of these holy fathers, I dare say,
that none of them ever did so.


Paul If mine ears had not heard it, mine eyes seen, and mine own person
had not felt the experience thereof, I should have been of your mind, for I
once liked them, and their very wicked dealings made me look into the
lawfulnes of their calling, which I see now to be mere Antichristian: but
shall I tell you one example among manic?


Diotreph I am willing to hear you, but I can never be brought to think so.


Paul Yet will I tell it you, that you may think of it, I was accused unto
the B. of such crimes as were most slanderous and false, where upon I desired
him to send for mine accusers, and see how they could prove, that I (if I
were con^icted) might be punished, or else they might have the reward that
molesters of the preachers of the Gospel do deserve: he granted it me, and
appointed a day, which being come, rather than I (whom he thought not to
favor his authority) should have any help at his hands, he made me a
sleeueles answer, and sent me away. Thus are Bishops coutented to be
bawdes unto al kind of sinners, rather than they will any way seem to further
the ministry of those whom they favor not, and even thus do you: for your
hatred unto my person, makes you to stand with that monstrous usurer, but take
hecde of it, for God will not be mocked, he sees your dealing, and will judge
you accordingly, howsoever you can pretend the contrary to the world.


Diotreph As for mine own part, I pass not what you speak: but let me ask
you one question concerning these holy fathers, and that is this, what reason
is there that they should do any good in any respect unto any of you, seeing
they know you to be professed foes unto their dignities.


Paul Because they taking themselves to be the fathers of the Church, should
have a regard to the good cause, and defend it without respect of persons.


Diotreph No sir, I see no reason in that, for above all things, they must look
to themselves, without whose authority the Gospel would be trodden under
foot: and therefore they may defend no cause nor person further than may stand
with their own safety.


Paul Suppose that were lawful, what hinderance is this to themselves, to see
the^ that be common and known drunkards, usurers, adulterers, and profane
persons punished, for that they are railers at me, for teaching the 'trueth of
religion, and reproouing sharply their godless conversation.


Diotreph Oh you are a simple man, it is great hinderance, for they can do
nothing in defense of you, though it be in matters wherein you and they do
agree, but it tends to the derogation of their own estimation, such is the
contrariety betwixt your building and theirs.


Paul By that means shall we be so wearied with adversaries, that we shall
never have any hope to do good, but even to be constrained to give over the
ministry.


Diotreph I would I might see that once come to pass, we have labored for it
hitherto, and never could attain unto it neither will the Church ever be in
quiet until you all be turned out.


Paul So thought the Sodomites, that they should never be well, so long as Lot
was in their city; but when he was gone, fire from heaven consumed them: but I
pray you tell me, if all were turned out, how should the people be taught, for
it is evident, that none else (almost) makes a conscience of his duty that way.


Diotreph You think teaching would fail without you: No sir, teaching would
be more regarded than it is.


Paul Show me how that can be.


Diotreph We would have none to preach above once a month, and then should
he do it profoundly, and confirm his matter out of the fathers, and humane
writers substantially, whereas you taking upon you to preach three or four
times a week, must not only of necessity handle your matters very rawlie,
but also breed loathsomeness in the people.


Paul Surely my heart waxes cold, and my flesh trembles to hear you speak
so monstrously: does preaching consist in quoting of doctors, and alleging
of Poets and Philosophers, in what part of his commission has a minister war
rant so to do? You find fault with our often preaching, because your selves
cannot so do, but if you would leave off your vain glory, in hunting after
promotion, and your covetousness in adding murder unto theft, I mean living
to living, and betake your selves to study and prayer, bending your whole
endeavor to the glory of God, and edifying of his people, you should see the
blessing of God so abundantly upon you, that you should preach four times
every week, with more fruit than you can do now four times every year, for
while you be minded as you are, the Lords judgment is upon your gifts, and his
curse upon your labors, that you appear ridiculous even unto children. And
whereas you say often preaching cloyeth the people, you show your self
plainly to have no feeling in the sweetness of the word of God: for it is so
delightful unto the child of God, that the more he hears and reads it,
the more desirous is he to proceed therein, it is the property of the
ungodly, to whom the word is foolishnes to be cloied with the same.


Diotreph You shall not be my teacher, neither will I learn at your hands, I
know well enough what I have to do.


Paul I do not speak as a teacher unto you, but in brotherly love do
admonish you, and if you refuse mine (or rather the council of the
holie-ghost uttered by me) you do but as they do, whose condition you defend,
I pray God forgive it you, and lay it neither to your nor their charge.


Diotreph They are great moates in your eyes, they know better what to do than
you can tell them, they see what is meet for the Church, being ancient grave
men of long experience, better than a sort of young boys start up but yesterday.


Paul Though some be but young, yet al are not so, for we have some more
ancient than they have any, we have of all ages and degrees of Schools to
compare with the best of them, and yet years, and humane learning, and
experience, must not carry away the matter, but the evidence of truth in the
old and new Testament, and as for experience, they have none, for they were
first brought up in the universities, then became Deanes, and such iollie
fellows, and now are made Mitred Lords, so that they cannot tell what it is
to train up a people to the gospel, and reclaim them from ignorance and
sin, for they never stouped so low as to labor therein, but if they had
even my experience, they would sing an other song, for before I came into the
harvest to work, I liked their hierarchy well enough, but when I laid it to my
labors to further them, I found that they could not possibly stand together.


Diotreph Did the gospel ever so flourishe in England as it does now at this
present?


Paul No surely, God be praised for it, and increase it more and more, but to
what end do you speak it?


Diotreph To prove that the authority, and wise government of the Bishops
has had good success.


Paul I thought so, but it is (if you would look into the matter with a
single eye) clean contrary, for the good that has bin done, the Lord has
brought it to pass by these men whom you despise, and by that course which
the Bishops were ever enemies unto.


^^^^^eph How can you prove that I pray you, let me hear your reasons that
move you to think so, for I am persuaded of the clean contrary.


Paul It serves not in this case what you are persuaded of, for a Bishoptick
has so blinded your eyes, and corrupted your judgment, that you like nothing
but that which agrees therewithal, but I will show you my reasons that makes
me of that judgment, and if you look equally into the matter, or ask any
indifferent man, you shall see it to be so.


Diotreph Show me them, for I long to hear them, I am sure they be wise
stuff.


Paul First for the men, what congregation, what town or people is there in
this land, that they have been in the reign of our sovereign Q. Elizabeth,
converted to the gospel, that those men have not been the instruments to
perform, whom the Bishops have continually persecuted, and for the courses
that have been taken, and which God has greatly blessed, which of them have
not bin ouerturned by the Bish. and the preachers put to silence, as soon as
ever the gospel began to appear: On the other side, tell me if you be able,
of any such effect of the ministry of a B. or bishoplie preacher, in any
place of this land, though it has been interrupted these twelve years, as
you shall see in many places by the other sort, even in few months now and
then, so that the matter is not only clear unto all that will weigh it in
the balance of equity, but unto me, if I had no reason, it is an evident
proof that they take the right way, whose labors the Lord does so bless,
and contrariwise, the curse of God is on the other, for their indirect dealing.


Diotreph Thus you imagine because you please your self in your own peevish
ways, but tell me who are of your opinion: even a few Puritans like your self.


Paul's Call us as you list, Christ was never the worse for that his ennemies
called him a seducer, and a deceiuer of the people, but I am sure (all for the
most part that fear God) of every degree and calling, are of the same mind,
saving those whom you by your sutleties have be witched.


Diotreph You will have but a few then in this land that fear God, and so you
will condemn the rest, which is the manner of all of you.


Paul I condemn none, I wish that not a few, but all (if it were possible)
did truly fear God, but I would have you learn of Christ with me, who may
without disgrace be your teacher, to try the tree by the fruit, and seek me
out that man which makes a conscience of sin, and has a care to live as a
christian, that is not of the same mind with us: on the other side mark what
kind of men they be, that are the patrous and defenders of the Bishops, and
you shall see them to be men that make no reckoning of sin, but have their
ways fraughted with all impiety, if they be ttied with the touchstone of
Gods word.


Diotreph Well then you confess yet, that the general sway goes on our side,
and so long as it is so, we care not.


Paul I will easily grant it, and so have they from the beginning, and shall to
the ending of the world (against all goodness) but I will tell you one thing even
of the^, that few of them like you indeed.


Diotreph How can these two stand together, many are with us, and few like of
us, they be mere contrary?


Paul I will tell you how, the Papist is on the By. side, because he can find
shilter under them to hide his idolatry. The atheist is tooth and nail for
them, because by them he enioieth carnal liberty, the man of most notorious
life defends the^, bieause he can from the^, redeem the corporal punishment
of his sins by money, but none of these like of the^ indeed; The first, because
they keep the possession of the seats of their popish prelates, the other,
because they are so greedy in their courts for money, that even every man
cries shame on them, who then do love them indeed, and stick to them only?
these three hang-bies, that depend upon them, and live by them, as their
chaplains and servants, the Cananits (I should say) the Canonists, and such
ministers as either cannot, or will not, labor in their function, to convert
souls unto God, so that they do stincke in the nostrels both of God and man,
especially in these three last years of their tyranny, that I do verily hope
their sin is very near the height, and the Lord in mercy will ease us of
them shortly.


Diotreph You are a strange fellow, and please your self with wonderful
persuasions, but I pray you tell me, what makes you say they are now more
hated, seeing that in the last years, the best means have bin used to
establishe the ministry in a consent and conformity unto them.


Paul Let the means be as good as it will, I praise God for the success of
it, howsoever the contrary was meant.


Diotreph Why praise you God for it, I am sure you never liked of it?


Paul The means indeed, I never liked, neither I think, did ever any
reasonable man, but it being a britle wall, dawbed with untempered mortar, had
that success that such sandy foundations do deserve.


Diotreph Why man, what success had it, I am sure the greatest part, yea even
of your forwardest men subscribed: and those that did not, are not like to
^arry in the Church very long.


Paul Well, sooth up your self in your own persuasion, and brag of the
multitude of subscribers, if it were to do again, hundreds of them would
never do it, because they were subtly circumuented and deceived (they
meaning well, and tendering the peace of the Church) but (being now sorry for
it) will stand in defense of the cause (I dare say for them) with their
brethren, even unto death: So that the Bysh, have but their names written: And
yet that if they would also, show the protestations and conditions, by which
they were induced, and whereof the B. made alowance, it would plainly appear,
that either they dealt wickedly to admit exceptions, if the articles were true,
or more ungodly if they were not, ever to attempt any such matter.


Diotreph Tell me now, what is that wherein you seem to rejoice, as though the
issue of it fell on your side?


Paul It is even this, that the Bish. straight dealing made men to look so
narrowly into the cause, and to seek the reasons on both sides, for their own
satisfaction, that there are at this day (I am fully persuaded) ten times as
many of all degrees, that are fully persuaded of the matters of reformation as
were before, so gracious God is unto his servant, to make even their enemies
to do them good, and so tender is he over his own cause and glory, that he
will make the very means intended to oppugn it, be notable ways to advance
it.


Diotreph I do not believe you, albeit I cannot control you in it, because I
have not bin in England of late, but what will come of it, if it be so?


Paul Even the government of the church, by the rules of that discipline
which Christ him self has prescribed in his word, which I do persuade my
self to see before it be long.


Diotreph You would be examined before a justice and punished, for saying you
hope to see an alteration, you cannot be the Q. friend that thus look for
innouations in the state.


Paul Examine me when you will, and punish me as God shall give you leave, I
will be tried to be so far the Q. friend, as that I wish so well unto her as
unto mine own soul, and all that I say or desire, is not to inuert any thing
in the state that is good, but to have the corruption thereof removed, and her
majesty more honored before God and men, in drawing more near unto her God,
in aduauncing the kingdom of his son more gloriously within her dominions.


Diotreph These be but fained words, I do not believe that you speak as you
think.


Paul It is because you measure me by your self, who indeed care neither for
Qu. Country, nor your own soul, but for a Bishoppricke, but I thank God in
Christ, my conscience bears me witness that they be all very dear unto me.


Diotreph Away thou railing hypocrite, I will talk with thee no longer, if I
catch thee in London, I will make thee kiss the Clincke for this gear.


Paul Indeed the Clincke, Gate House, White-lion, and the fleet have bin your
only arguments whereby you have proved your causes these many years, but you
shall prevail no longer, for your wickedness is made manifest unto all men,
which God will shortly repay into your own bosoms seven fold, but pray you to
God to give you repentance that those things happen not unto you.


Diotreph Pray thou for thy self, and care not for me; I know well enough
what I have to do without thy counsel, but it is your manner to teach all men.


Tertullus Out upon him, what a fellow is this my Lord? I never heard such a
one in my life.


Diotreph I can tell you, he gesseth shrewdly I per eiue, that our course
which we have taken, and our intent in our actions have bin descried by one
means or other.


Tertullus My lord, it was a thing observed in the Puritans at Geneua, and in
France, while I was in Rhemes, that we could never invent any practice, for
the furtheraunce of the Catholic religion, but they knew it often before we
put it in execution, so that for the most part, they prevent all our
determinations.


Diotreph Howsoever it be, I am wonderfully sorry that they seem so to
triumph, and that our matters have no better success, it behooves us to look
about us, we will speed our selves to London, to take some way in have, least
it be too late: in the mean while, I pray you tell me, for you must be my
counselor when all is done, what way you think best to be taken.


Tertullus I will do the best I can, I must first request one thing of you
before I join to help you.


Diotreph What is that? if it be not unreasonable you may assure your self of
it, for you know that I have never bin strait laced against you nor any of
your friends.


Tertullus I doubt not of it, but how can I have it before I ask it of you?
you know, that we received letters from England, that there were very hard
laws made this last parliament against the Catholics: this is it therefore I
must request, that you would use means that the rigor of them be not
enforced, for you know that we have many, both in Court and country, that
shall else be in great danger.


Diotreph I am very well contented to do so, but what way shall I take to do
it?


Tertullus Surely, such a way as shall also make greatly for your own cause,
and that is this, complain of the domestical, for the Puritan, and say, that
they be worse than we, and that you shall never prevail against us, until
first they be suppressed, and desire that we may be let alone for a time, and
that al men would bend their forces against them.


Diotreph This is excellent, I am very willing to do this, for it will help
forward our own cause: now go on and tell me what is to be done further.


Tertullus The first thing you must take in hand, must be the suppression of
those preachers in London, and in other countries that be of most special
note, for their forwardnes against you, and you must do it very wisly: that
is, you may not suppress them all at once, neither all of them in a long time,
for you must take heed that the world do not conceive opinion of you, to be
enemies to the Gospel, for then have you no way but to turn wholly unto us.


Diotreph That will be a very good way, but how shall we have good matter
against them, for their lives are thought to be very upright, and they have
learned of late to be more pollitike than heretofore: for if they speak
against any thing established, they do it so cunningly, that advantage can not
be taken against them by law?


Tertullus Never doubt of that, was there ever any man that went to beat a
dog, but he could easily find out a staff to do it, you must in this case
prefer your safety before your credit, or the estimation of any that
belongs unto you?


Diotreph Yea, but show me some particulars, for I promise you, I see not how
to do it.


Tertullus You must be sure to let none preach at Paul's cross, but they of
whom you have experience to like well of you, and you must give them
instructions before hand, that they do inuey mightily against the reformation
that our adversaries desire, and there will one or other of them speak against
that, and so you may have sufficient advantage against them.


Diotreph But these fellows be very sharp to find a fault: What and if the
matter which our friend preaches be false, and so the other take occasion to
confute it?


Tertullus Then must you urge him to defend that which he has said, and so
shall you have more occasion to entrap the adversary.


Diotreph But in so doing, he whom we set on work shall lose his credit.


Tertullus What and if he do, do you compare his credit with the weight of your
Bishoprics? There is no comparison.


Diotreph You say true, but what if it shall fall out, that the adversary be
not blameworthy, neither in matter nor manner?


Tertullus If he maintain the controversy it is sufficient cause to put him
to silence though he have the better part, for you must maintain the peace of
the Church.


Diotreph But this is not all, for how shall we do for the court, that is the
place, which above all we must fortify, or else we are gone?


Tertullus Indeed there is great care to be had of it, and there be many ways
to prevent us there, but we will do what we can in it. First you must take
heed from time to time, what chaplains be put to the queen, seeing they are the
teachers of the whole court, namely, that they be eloquent of tongue, and good
companions, not too precise in their conversation.


Diotreph It is very true, for they may else mar all, I have heard some of
them speak dangerously, even before her Majesty.


Tertullus Therefore you must take heed, that they be such as can be contented
with the course of the world, and then if they happen to speak home now and
then, as it is a thing incident unto a rethoritian to be girding, the Courtiers
will never regard his words, because thee see he walks not according to
that himself.


Diotreph But I am afraid that the court shall in time come to knowledge by their
preaching, aod then we are gone.


Tertullus Fear not that, I read once in a Book made by one nf the Puritanes,
that if a man would have the blessing of God (as he termed it) upon his
hearing, he must submit him self to an ordinary teacher, which thing I
promise you is somewhat: for I see, that the greatest knowledge of their
religion, as in those places, and men, that have that same ordinary teacher,
and therefore keep them from any more preaching, than one sunday in the
month, and that by diverse men, and I warrant you that gappe is stopped for
ever.


Diotreph It is something that you say, and I will not forget to look unto it,
but there is an other thing which is greater than that, which is, how we may
keep the Queen on our side, for I have often feared her, seeing (there is no
question) but she is grounded in the foundation of religion.


Tertullus How have you kept in with her all this while?


Diotreph Marie thus, we have been very careful to take heed who be admitted
to preach before her in the Lent: There was one Deering, that by our negligence
preached, if he and such as he, had but continued the whole Lent, I am
afraid, there would have been never a lord Bishop left in England before the
next Lent had come again.


Tertullus That I like very well, but that is not all, they will make books, and
it can not be but some of them do come to her hands, how will you do if she
like well of them, and the matter of Discipline in them?


Diotreph I promise you I cannot tell, you must help us that dead lift, or else
we are undone.


Tertullus It is an easy matter to remedy, you must when you hear her speak
of such things, make her believe that all is well, and that the drift of these
men is not seen, for they would have no magistrare, and so would pull down
Kings and Princes, and this will be sure to prevail, and make them to be
esteemed the vilest men alive.


Diotreph How can I tell her that all is well, when I have bin constrained to
tell diverse Preachers, that have so sore urged me with the text, that I could
wish things were amended, but the Q. will not at any hand?


Tertullus Surely, you are a very simple man (my Lord) as though the Queen
hears what you say unto them, or they, what you say to the Queen, you must
still continue that course of excusing all things to her, for she believes
that you are learned, and lay all the blame when you talk with them on her:
for you cannot overthrow them by Scripture, and so you shall not only keep
the Q on your side, but also make the Preachers have a tolerable opinion of
you, that you would have some things reformed if it lay in you.


Diotreph That is a notable way, I will always observe and practice that, but
there be many Noble men, Counselors, great courtiers that seem to like well
of our adversaries: how shall we do to retain them, or to bridle them that are
gone from us?


Tertullus That will be some what hard to do: yet the best counsel I can see
meet to be taken, is this: you must show your selves very affectious unto
those that desire glory and estimation, you must wink at the vices of all of
them whatsoever they be, and not reprove them, much less correct them, and
those of them that be needy, you must have them to beg the Bishopprickes,
Deanr^es, and such great places, and let them that shall have them pay well for
them. So shall you not only have them beholding unto you for a benefit, but
keep them still on your side, in hope to have the like booty an other time.


Doitreph This is very well, and shall be always observed: but there is yet an
other thing I heard of late, that there be very many Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen in the Court that like us not, and it has often times been, that
Kings and Princes have been induced by information of mean men, to do that
which great Counselors could not be at into their heads, how shall we do to
stay the mischief that may come of these?


Tertullus Easily, you must consider that they be of two sorts, either they
be such as be highly in favor, or they be common courtiers: if they be of the
former sort, you must when you have opportunity to speak to her, tell her,
that she must take heed of such, and such persons: for though they be very
wise and discreet, because you must not dislike any that she likes, yet are
they (being of a good nature) deceived, by the fair pretense of Puritans, and
for them, you must say they do great harm, by reason of their countenance
in the court, with favoring the Puritans, so that it shall come to pass, by
these informations, that the Queen shall not only reject their speeches (if
they use any against you) but also take them up roundly, that they shall not
dare to speak any more.


Diotreph This pleases me at the very heart, but how shall we do to be sure
in the counsel table, for they are wise, and many of them like us but from the
teeth outward, and we have received many a foil there?


Tertullus That is even the hardest of all: I know not in the whole world any
way but one.


Diotreph Tell me that one, for if once I know it, we will say well to it but we
will bring it to pass.


Tertullus This is it: in King Edwardes days, there were Bish. of the
counsel: now if you could get, though it were but one to be a counselor, then
might he very well, whenever any matter of complaint came, tell the lords it
pertained to ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and he and his brethren would hear
it at large: so might he stop their mouths quickelie, and then he might for
fashions sake hear the cause, but send the plaintifes away with a flea in
their ear. And thus very quickly would all complaints to the counsel cease.


Diotreph Oh most notable device, all our friends in England shall fail us,
but we will have this take place: there is yet an other thing that must be
helped, and that is the universities, for they have great privileges, and
Puritans start up there every day.


Tertullus So there will do some, do what you can, unless you have a fire and
a faggot, which weapon of ours, you only lack, and none but it: the best course
that I know to be taken is this, let no College choose his own head, but let
him have a Mandamus, procured from the Queen, and see that he be such a one,
as has been a non resident before, and let him have diverse livings: and so
that will draw with it formalitie. Let him be the Q. chaplain, or at the least
brought now and then to preach in the Lent, and that will so set him a gog for
a Bishopric, that you shall be sure he will suppress your adversaries as they
arise, and let the heads of the houses be admonished from time to time, that
they choose none to be fellows that be Puritans, but such as like the estate,
and for the more assurance, let them be urged to subscribe, yea to swear to
your authority, before they be admitted.


Diotreph Shall we go by Cambridge, and see this put in execution as we go?


Tertullus Nay soft, be sure of the court, before you enterprise any other
where, least you mar all.


Diotreph You say very well, now how shall we do for the parsons and vickars,
of the country that like us not?


Tertullus I promise you those that be in already, will say hard unto you,
and those that be to come also, if they will subscribe to the articles, so far
as they concern faith and sacraments, the statute law favors them too much.


Diotreph But have we no help by the cannon law?


Tertullus Yes, there is help enough in the cannon law, if they will take it:
but I will tell you one thing in your ear, which I would not for a thousand
pounds were known abroad, and that is this: if the statute made in the 28. of
H. oct. cap. 19 and the reviving of it in the 1. of Elizabeth cap. 1. were
thorowlie sifted, I am afraid, not any cannon law would be found good law in
England, and so what would become of you, and your authority? But I know to
whom I do speak it.


Diotreph What shall we do then?


Tertullus You must set a good face upon the matter, and pretend law, both
statute, and cannon, especially cannon, because they know not that they deprive
them of their livings, which if you (though they know you do them wrong) could
remedy it by law, yet are not their purses so well filled as yours, and so lack
of living will make them to yield at length, as we see it has done many.


Diotreph But may we not well suppress them, for not using the surplice, and
book of common prayer in all points?


Tertullus I tell you there is no law in England to hurt them, for any thing
that they have done concerning the surplice, the judges having been set on by
you, and us, have indicted them for it, but it is more than they can warrant
by law, and as for the book it is clear, that the strickt keeping of it was
meant against us, but we thank you for turning the edge to them from us.
Sumnaries must be your best help in this case, and look that you practice it
continually.


Diotreph This will do very well, how shall we do to keep the Ministry from too
much knowledge, for that must be done, though we pretend the contrary?


Tertullus Indeed it is a thing that you must look narrowly unto, and
therefore take heed above al things, that the exercises of prophecy come not
up again, for you know what harm they did unto you in every place where they
were kept, and especially where men were moderators therein, that had been
beyond the seas, to see the practice of the^ at Geneua, and you must beware of
the exercises that ministers have at their meetings: for you know, that in
Leichestershire, they furthered knowledge greatly.


Diotreph But how shall we do with this, the exercise of prophecy is expressly
set down in the 14. Coloss. 1. to the Cor. and it is known, that they whom
you and we set on work to get it forbidden, confessed since that they knew
it not, but took it to be foretelling of things to come, and not expounding of
the scriptures.


Tertullus You must answer it as you do the rest of their reformation, the
particulars where of are expressed in the new Testament: namely, that they
were things only for the time, and for them that helped you, what if they
conf^ssed their ignorance, you must still excuse their exercises to be
unlawful assemblies, and ^onuenticles to breed sects and schisms, and your
authority will be are you out in all this and more too.


Diotreph But what shall we do to make the world believe we would have the
ministry learned?


Tertullus Make them first Ministers, and set them to school, enioining them
to g^t some part of M. Nowels Catechism, or of Bullingers Decades by heart, and
so you shall seem to desire a learned ministry, as well as these reformers.


Diotreph We will not fail to put this also in practice, is there any more
that you know, that may serve our turns, for the further establishment of our
dignities?


Tertullus No nothing of any great weight, but it may be referred to some one
of these points, but the particulars of every branch are many, which your
own wisdom may easily look unto.


Diotreph Then let us go, for I long until I do set these things abroach.


Tertullus Yet I pray you remember to do something for us poor Catholics,
seeing you stand by our help especially.


Diotreph Great reason we should do so, or else were we ungrateful creatures,
but you must devise what must be done.


Tertullus You know that some of us be in prison, and others abroad, for those
that are restrained, I pray you that they may have their liberty of the
prison, and their friends to come to them, and when any of them come before
you, that you would deal favorably with them.


Diotreph Your request is very reasonable, for the first you shall see that
your friends shall have the best chambers in every prison, and when any
Puritan falls into our hands, you shall see him have the most stinking
place that can be found. Now when any of you, yea if you your self come
before us, you must be content to let us rail on you, and call you traitor, and
threaten you grievously, but you shall be sure you shall sustain small harm,
if you receive any, you must impute it to the times and not to us.


Tertullus I thank your lordship, let us now be going, for we have tarried too
long in our lodging this morning.


Diotreph He never tarrieth too long that is well employed, as we have been, it
was the best morning that ever I spent.


Demetri How now mine host, what say you to these iollie fellows, had not they
notable talk?


Pandoch Yes sir, I have learned of them, that that will do me good I hope.


Demetri What is that?


Pandoch I have learned how to course our Preacher, and he shall be sure of
it, and though it cost me the price of a tun of wine.


Demetri Why, what does he that deserves coursing?


Pandoeh What? He sets men together by the ears, the town was never at
quiet since he came, he teaches such doctrine as some do like, and some not,
and so they fall at variance.


Demetri I pray you tell me some particulars of the worst of all.


Pandoch This for one: our town stands on vittelling, because it is a
thorow-fare, and he preaches against good fellowship (which he calls
drunkenness) and against playing at cards and tables, wherein if he might
have his will, I and my neighbors might go on begging within one
twelue-moneths, and he has so prevailed, that I take not so much by four
pounds in a week, as I was wont to do: yea I have had ten shillings of one
man in a week for drink only, that will now scarce spend three, but I
will look unto him.


Demetri Well mine host, deceive not your self, I perceive that you and I are
in a wrong box, you are an enemy to the Preacher, because he speaks against
your unlawful gain, and so was I yesterday with him that took the same
course to amend me: and I thought he had spoken falsely, because he was a
Puritan: and when I came to hear my matter debated, the bishop disalowed my
course, and yet took my part. And why? Because I might defend him in his
unlawful calling: But I see their ingling well enough, and if the man with
whom I was so offended be not gone, I will talk further with him, for I
perceive that he meant better unto me than they did.


Pandoch I perceive we shall have a Puritan of you, if you would so feign
speak with him, he is but new gone out at the gate, you may ride after him:
but as for our Preacher, I will in hand with him, because I cannot tell how I
shall else gain and maintain my self as heretofore I have done.


Dixi.
THE CONCLUSION.
BRethren, ye see by lamentable experience, how injuriously the church of GOD
in England is d^al^e withal, by taking away, and stopping the mouths of their
faithful teachers, and by thrusting upon us unlearned, and insufficient men,
which neither have will, nor ability, with wholesome barking to drive away the
wolf, but ^ontrariwise does give privy encouragement unto the enemy, to
continue in his wickedness, whereby the church of God is assailed most
dangerously; and Satan does not cease by all means possible to overthrow
that good work which is begun in England: and therefore it behooves us
brethren to look about us, and not to suffer the ennemie to grow so strong
against us if by any means we may let and hinder his wicked enterprises. And
now my brethren, what is to be done on our parts? Surely I am one of the
simplest of a thousand, to give advise to proceed in any good course in so
weighty a matter. But this, in my judgment were a good way, eueu to join our
selves together, so many as fear GOD, and to frame our most humble
supplication unto her Highness, showing unto her Majesty the great damage
and loss that the Church does sustain, for that they can not have the
voices of their faithful pastors, which have diligently, and with great pains
labored to draw men back from superstition, and the false worship of God,
unto the true and sincere worship of his majesty, and laying down before us
most purely, the doctrine of the Scriptures, to the end, that we should know
what we ought to do, and what to leave undone, leading us, as it were, even
by the hand, to the true worship of God, and our loyal duty unto her
Majesty, and al her officers. And these men (we can not tell by what means)
are let and stopped from doing those notable duties of their calling, and
are not permitted to speak any more unto us in the name of the Lord, whereby
we her poor subjects sustain great dearth and scarcity even to the food of
our souls. Therefore we her loyal subjects, most humbly do entreat her
Highness, that she would look upon the affliction of the poor Church, and
let us have our true teachers restored unto us again. And so we her subjects
should yield continual thanks unto her highness, praieng unto GOD always for
her prosperity. And (our brethren) if this way shall be thought good, when
there shall be some advise taken upon it. Then to choose out some fit man that
can indite and frame our supplication, one that fears God, that has a
feeling of this plague in his heart (as the Scripture speaks) I mean of the
want and lack of these good preachers.

And this being done, then to appoint other godly and honest men, to present
our supplication, two, or three, as it shall be thought good unto you, and the
rest to aid them with money, or in what other danger may fall out: so that
they present it in the name of the whole congregation, or otherwise, if it shall
be thought good: first to move our suit unto some of the Bishops, as Winchester
or Salisburie, or both, or any other that you shall think good: I beseech you
let us not sit still, when we are touched so near, but as those good men have
ventured their liberty and living for our good: so let us take some pains for
them, to adventure some danger of reproof, or what else may fall out.

Better is the day of death (says Solomon) than the day of birth, man that is
borne of a woman, lives but a short time, and is replenished with many
miseries, but happy are the dead, that die in the Lord.

Man is borne of woman in travel, to live in misery, man thorough Christ does
die in joy, and live in felicity. He is borne to die, and dies to live.
Straight as he comes into the world, with cries, he utters his miserable
estate, straight as he departs, with songs he praises God for ever. Scarce
yet in his cradle, three deadly ennemies assault him: after death no adversary
can anoy him: whilst he is here, he displeases God: when he is dead, he
fulfilleth his will. In this life, here he dies through sin, in the life to
come, he lives in righteonsnes, thorough many tribulations in earth, he is
still purged: with joy unspeakable, in heaven is he made pure for ever: here
he dies every hour, there he lives continually: here is sin, there is
righteousness: here is time, there is eternity: hecre is hatred, there is
love: here is pain, there is pleasure: here is misery, there is felicity:
here is corruption, there is immortality: here we see vanity, there shall
we behold the majesty of God, with triumphant and unspeakable joy in glory
everlasting.

Seek therefore the things that are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God the father, to whom with the son and the holy ghost, be al
honor and glory, world without end

Amen.

