TWO LEARNED SERMONS.

The one, of the mischievous subtlety, and barbarous cruelty, the other of
the false Doctrines, and refined Haeresis of the Romish Synagogue.

Preached, the one at Paul's Cross the 5. of November, 1608. The other at the
Spittle the 17. of April. 1609.

In the first, are examined diverse passages of that lewd English Libell,
written by a Profane Fugitive, against the Apology for the Oath of Allegiance.

In the second, are answered many of the arguments published by Rob. Chambers
Priest, concerning Popish Miracles; and Dedicated (forsooth) to the Kings most
excellent Majesty.

By Robert Tynley, Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of Ely.

LONDON Printed by W. Hall for Thomas Adams. 1609.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, GRACE AND PEACE.
I Am to pray thee (Christian Reader) not to ascribe it to the itching humor
of these times, (wherein the saying of the Poet is truly verified, Scribimus
indocti, doctique etc. never more writing and printing, from the pens of the
unlearned as well as the learned;) nor to any vaineglory that J seek in
publishing these Sermons, which I made account should have had their last
period with the compass of the times wherein they were delivered. It is the
authority of such as with me is sacred, and whose word is my command, that
they come further abroad, to thy view, then I intended when I made my first
reckoning.

Wherein if thou shall find ought that may serve for thy instruction, and
better strengthening in these last and perilous times, wherein there are so many
back-sliders, and fallers away from the truth; I shall think my labor,
whatsoever, abundantly rewarded, and God shall have the praise and glory of it.

My purpose was, in the first of them, to set before thine eyes the wily
snares, and cruelty of the Romish Synagogue, by whose fiery zeal and blind
devotion, the powder treason was near upon the kindling: from which most
barbarous and bloody treachery being delivered, beyond all that man could
imagine and conceive, by his fatherly providence and powerful hand, which
works all in all, (when we were like sheep appointed to the slaughter, and
as silly birds, ready to be intrapped by the snares of the Fowlers) if we
should be silent in Gods praises, or forgetful of that our wonderful
deliverance, well may our right hands forget their cunning, and our tongues for
ever cleave to the roofes of our mouths.

Jn the latter, I have to my ability done my endeavor to give thee warning of
the false Prophet; who was never more busy then he is now, compassing sea and
land to make a Proselyte, one of his profession; and when he is so, making him
twofold more the child of Hell then himfelfe is.

Thou may thereout observe the shop and forge where popish doctrine is
hammered, even upon the anuill of old haeresies, long sithence condemned by the
Catholic Church; howsoever the Jesuits (the Pope his holy anchor) garnish and
polish it with their rhetorical flowers, and by all the pains and skill that
is in them, to make it salable to the ignorant, which cannot judge of their
colors.

Read iudiciously, and with a mind that loves truth; not praeoccupated with a
praeiudicate opinion, and I hope thou shall find something that may favor
with thy relish.

As for the Momes, that are ready to carpe at all men's pains, when themselves
will not put to one finger to help support the common burden; J pass not for
them; the rather because I hope to find them more indifferent Judges, which
know what belongs to these labors. To whose learned and charitable censure I
submit my self, and commend thee to the blessed protection of the Almighty.
Farewell.

From my Charge of Wictham in Essex, 23. Maij. Anno 1609. The least of all thy
Brethren, R. T.

The Printer to the Reader.
GOod Reader. It is the fashion of some men that write or speak, that they are
ready and desirous to have the same put in Print. It fared othertherwise with
the Author of these two godly and learned Sermons: for although he has been
entreated by diverse his good friends to publish them, yet he could hardly be
brought thereunto, until such time as he was persuaded, that as they did
edify, and content many hundreds that heard them preached, so would they,
being printed, instruct, and strengthen many that should read them, against
the subtlety, and impiety of Popery, which secretly is buzzed into the heads
of the simpler sort. Upon which resolution, that so they might be beneficial
unto God his church, he has at the last condiscended to the putting of them in
print. And I doubt not but as to his credit, so to the comfort of all that shall
read them. And so I leave thee to God his blessing, and holy protection.

Faults to be amended in the two first sheets printed before it was thoroughly
corrected.
FOr ^ page 2. in the Margent. read ^

For Fremel ibid, read Tremel.

For in aestu page. 5. line 13. read ni astu.

For may names page 6. line 5. read many names.

For quilibit ibid line 11. read quilibet.

For he recusant page. 7. line 17. read the recusant.

For false page 11. line 26. read false.

For commonwealth page 12. line 31. read of the commonwealth.

For is kindled, page 15. line 3. read was kindled.

A SONG OF DEGREES. A PSALM OF DAVID'S.
PSALM 124. VERSE. 1. If the Lord had not been on our side (may Israel now
say.)

2. If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up against us.

3. They had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us.

4. Then the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our souls.

5. Then had the swelling waters gone over our soul.

6. Praised be the Lord, which has not given us as a pray unto their teeth.

7. Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers: the
snare is broken, and we are delivered.

8. Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth.


TO enter into a discourse concerning the title of this Psalm [ A Song of
Degrees] common to the four Psalms immediately going before this, and to the
ten ensuing after; were (as I suppose) more easy to observe the variety of
opinions old and new, then to come to a knowledge of the truth therein.

The Jewish Rabbis Calvin. and Jacob. de Valent.
(whose manner is, when matters are obscure, like Painters and Poets, to come
and feign any thing) observe, that there were fifteen steps or degrees, in a
part of the Temple, appointed for men; when women had their place below: to
which fifteen steps, these fifteen Psalms of degrees had a reference. Luther.
Others think they were so called, because they were wont to be sung by the
Priests and Levites, upon certain steps and degrees in the Temple, as on a
higher place, that they might be the better heard by the people. Of such steps
and degrees, there is mention made, in the like case, Nehem. 9. verse 4. Basil.
Beza. (...)
Some expound them historically, by way of Ascensions, (as the word signifies)
namely, of the children of Israel, ascending up to Jerusalem, in returning from
their captivity; to the memory of which benefit, they were principally
consecrated. Basil. Arnobius. Hierome. Augustine. Cassiodorus.
Some mystically, of Gods children, profiting in this world of their
peregrination, rising from sin to grace, and ascending by degrees from virtue
to virtue, until they appear before God, in the heavenly Jerusalem. In which
current, the ancient Fathers run, for the most part. Calvin.
Some of an higher tune or note, whereunto they rose, in lifting up their
voices, when they sung them. F^emel and Junius.
Last of all, some in regard of the excellency of that dittie, expounding the
word, of excellencies. A song of excellencies, that is, an excellent song, like
that Song of Songs, that excellent Song of Salomons.

Howsoever, I take it, the matter is not great, nor worthy any curious inquiry
after the name, so long as we agree in the substance and matter of the Psalm:
that it is indeed an excellent Psalm, describing in lively colors the state
of Gods Church upon the earth, so exposed to enemies, as that sometime, like a
general deluge, they are ready to drown it, verse. 4.5. sometimes like savage
beasts, to tear it in pieces, verse. 6. yea not making any bones of it, to
devour and swallow it up quick at once, verse. 3. sometimes like crafty
fowlers, with ginnes and snares to entrap it. verse. 7. So maliciously are they
bent, so furiously are they incensed against it. verse. 3. But that God, who by
his power made heaven and earth, and by the same his power, rules it still, as
best pleases him, verse. 8. was evermore at hand, thereby upholding it; and at
one side thereof; and then no matter who is against it. verse. 1.2. Maugre their
wrath and malice, they could not prevail, for they lost their prey, verse. 6.
The godly escaped as a bird out of the snare, and were delivered, verse. 7. What
remains then, but that the Lord be praised for this their deliverance. verse.
6. For he was their only help then; and in his holy name they will set up
their rest. verse. 8.

I have, after my Country manner, briefly analized, and paraphrastically, in
few words, delivered you the sense and meaning of the Prophet in this Psalm:
which howsoever it spread it self like a most fruitful tree, into many
branches; my purpose is, omitting others, to make choice of these points, to
insist upon: 1. The subtlety of the adversaries of the Church, in laying
snares to entrap it, as fowlers do to catch birds, out of the 7. verse. 2.
Their cruelty, in seeking to tear it in pieces, yea to swallow it up quick,
as some cruel beasts do their prey; or, as mighty inundations, ouerflow
whatsoever comes in their way, out of the 3.4.5. and 6. verses. 3. The cause
producing these effects of subtlety and cruelty in these adversaries; namely,
their wrath; out of the 3. verse. 4. The deliverance of the Church from her
enemies, notwithstanding their craft and cruelty, by the omnipotent power of
almighty God; out of the 1.2.6. and 7. verses. Last of all, the duty performed
for this deliverance; praise and thanksgiving to the Lord, verse 6.

1. First therefore of the subtlety of the enemies of the Church; wherein the
holy Prophet likeneth them to fowlers, laying their snares so covertly,
shadowed over with entising baits, that they draw and allure the silly bird,
the Church, until she be brought within compass of the net, and so become the
fowlers prey.

A wile as ancient as the world is old, and plotted by the father of wiles the
Devil, against the Church, when she was in her infancy, in Adam and Eve, our
first parents in Paradise: whose happiness in that state of innocence, and
felicity in a garden of all delightful pleasures, the enemy of mankind
subverted, by a trap of more surpassing happiness in show; delivering to the
woman the forbidden fruit, Gen 3.5.
so canded with the entising hope of Eritis sicut dii, Ye shall be as Gods,
that she forgot Lord and Loare, God and his Commandments, taking and eating
it, and giving it to her husband; wrapping him in the same snare with her
self; whereby, both of them, with all their succeeding posterity, were made
their enemies pray. Whilst they would be as Gods, they cease to be as men,
compared now to the beasts that perish; Psalm. 49.12.
not continuing in honor, wherein they were created; but inthralled to death,
by transgressing the Commandment. Such now is the end of one and all of us.

The Nimrods and Fowlers of the world (to make good the old proverb, Esa. 24
2. Ezekiel. 16.44.
Like Master, like Servant; and, As the mother is so is the daughter) do
herein resemble the nature of their father the devil; transforming themselves
into all shapes, and laying their ginnes to catch the simple and innocent.
Witness Ioab, who taking Abner aside, under pretense to speak with him
peaceably, smote him under the fifth rib, that he died, 2. Sam. 3.27. And
encouraging himself in this mischief, not long after, he greeted Amasa with
the like salutation, enquiring after his welfare, Art thou in health, my
brother? and taking him by the beard with his right hand to kiss him, but with
the other, sheathing his sword in his bowels, 2. Sam. 20. verse. 9.10. Judas his
Aue Rabbi, God save thee, Master, was much like this treachery; and his kiss,
whereby he betrayed his Lord into the hands of them that sought his blood, Luc.
22.47. So cunningly and as commonly, are the sugared names of friend and
Brother, Lord and Master, made snares for mischief, Cum venena Latent
circumlita melle verborum, Lib. 3. de sum. bono. ca. 26.
whilst the poison (says Isidore) lies hid, spread over with the hunnie of
sweet words, the imposter making a show of virtue and honesty, until he get
within a man, and fetch him over.

For this they learn by experience, as Chrysostom observes in a treatise
against the Gentiles; that he which will deceive, must set a good face upon it;
and make the matter seem, at least wise probable; else were they not their
crafts-master: for as the commicall Poet says, doli, Plautus.
doli non sunt, in aestu colas, guiles are no guiles, if deceit cloak them
not: Chrysostom. contra gentil.
and malum maximum si id palam proueniat; no greater mischief then if they be
seen. For thereby the pray is lost, and they go home emptie-handed; as fowlers
do, when the birds epsy the net.

But there lies the skill, to spread the net, that it appear not; that the
bait hide the hook: wherein, how well the adversaries of our Church have
profited, let the Jesuits of our times testify for all the rest, whose very
name serves for nothing else, (as by their practice is evident;) but as Hierom
writes in the like case, fraudem facere, Ad Rusticum.
to circumuent us. So far are they from that Dooue-like simplicity; to
which, the Lord Jesus (and from whom they would derive their name,) exhorts
his Disciples, Math. 10. verse 16.

There are that have branded them with this mark. Jesuits Catac. li. 3. fol.
156.
There is not in the world any beast more subtle then is the Jesuit; not the
Fox, which Chrysostom in his 19, Sermon describes thus: Vulpis calliditate
Potens, inuentrix doli, fraudis artifex, simulationis magistra, simplicitatis
vacua, Mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur.
plenastrophis. Change the name and you may render it thus: the Jesuit is a
beast, powerful in craft, an inuentor of guile, the artizen of deceit;
master of fauning, deuoid of simplicity, and full of wily subtlety.

For whereunto tends it, that one Jesuit must be called by so many names?
Proceedins against he late Traitors.
as Garnet that most treacherous Provincial Wallye, alias Darcie, alias
Roberts, alias Farmer, alias Philips? Is it not, that going masked under so may
names, as under so many visards he may the more securely lay his snares to
entrap us? what is their drift in transforming themselves into as many shapes
as they meet with objects? now a Courtiour, then a Citizen; here a country
Gentleman; there a country Swain: sometimes a Seruingma^; a swaggerer,
Pot-companion; another while a Priest; in a word every man for every body, a
quilibit for a quolibet, a Polipus for all orders and degrees? Is it not, that
by this means, they may come within men of all sorts; insinuate themselves
into their companies; creep into their bosoms; pry into their hearts; that so
they may more easily beguile them unawares.

But of all their Wiles, I commend unto you, the Aequiuocating Sibboleth, Judge.
1.2.6.
the very forge of lying and deceit; which bewraieth them by their speech, to
be no other then false faining Ephraemites. By this they affirm and deny,
swear and forswear, and all with a breath: they are Priests, and they are no
Priests, that is to tell you, they say Mass, and they say not Mass, that is,
in Paul's Quier or in Westminster Quier. When they talk with our Magistrates,
they speak as to the Walls; for men with them are no men, and all by virtue
of this mixed proposition: their Gorgons head, (a point in Logic which
Aristotle never taught, and the ancient schools knew it not) whereby they go
beyond the course of nature, making things merely contradictorie to subsist.

Let me trouble your patience with one instance, which shall be worthy your
observation. When a Recusant shall swear; for example, in taking the Oath of
Allegiance, according to the express words of the Oath, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
Aequiuocation, or mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever. Could it be
imagined that any shifting or cauelling wit should be able to find a starting
hole in the same, to wind himself out of it? yet behold an English Catholic
(as he names himself) but indeed the very fiery match of this state and
kingdom) in a letter written to a friend of his; has (as he would bear
others in hand) found a means to avoid the force of this Oath, by
Aequiuocating: as namely where it is said That the Pope has no Authority to
depose our King, Pet. 18.19.
nor to dispose of his Kingdoms, and so forward what concerns the Pope: true
says he, Without just cause; or directly he cannot; or in some such like
sense. When as the deponent, swears directly against all, and every such
mental evasion and secret reservation whatsoever; and that heartily, and
wittingly, and truly; or else, let him refuse the Oath, and not swear at all.

Here is the very quintessence of this cogging Artt: he recusant takes the
Oath according to the express words; not so says our English Catholic, but
he must Aequiuocate: the Recusant follows the plain and ordinary sense and
meaning of the words; our English Catholic teaches him to keep somewhat in
his mind, by secret reservation: the Recusant abiureth and swears against
all mental evasion; our English Catholic instructs him to make escape, by
his mixed proposition; expressing a part of his mind by word of mouth, and
reserving an other part in his heart. Whether this be to make shipwreck of
Faith and a good conscience, maliciously and of set purpose; by open and
manifest perjury, let any man judge, which does not wilfully shut his eyes
against the noone-light? and being past feeling, is by Gods justice given over
to a reprobate sense.

Ye see the foulers of our times; their nets, their sleights, their wiles;
wherein they go beyond the Foxes in subtlety in hunting after their prey.
What remains, but that we humbly desire our vigilant Magistrates, (to whom
the charge of the Lords vineyard is committed) to take these Foxes both great
and small: for what do they else, but spoil and destroy our vines, which God
has placed amongst us, in this fruitful soil? And that we our selves
setting their snares before our eyes, carefully shun and avoid them, which
else will bring us to perdition both of body and soul. And this of the
subtlety of the adversaries of our Church.

2 The second circumstance and property, whereby the Prophet describes them,
is their cruelty; in renting and tearing Christ his flock, and swallowing
them up quick, as cruel beasts do their prey.

It is not a new face of the Church; or proper to those days and seasons,
only, which our Savior sets forth to our view. Stel. in Luc.
Mat. 10.16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of Wolves, For in that,
our Savior speaks in a time, neither past nor yet future to come, but in the
present (I send you) he thereby gives us to understand, that the dangers which
are immine^t to his sheep, conuersing amongst wolves, are always present with
them; there being no season wherein they are free from their rage and cruelty:
whether we call to mind the times past, or consider what now is or hereafter
shall ensue. In hoc seculo, in his diebus malis, in this world of wickedness
(says the Godly Father Saint Augustine) in these evil days, De Ciuit. dei.
li. 18. cap. 18
wherein sin has got the upper hand; the Church, as a stranger and Pilgrim,
holds on her course, sustained by Gods holy spirit; not only, ever since
Christ and his Apostles conuersed here upon the earth; but even from the time
of Abell the righteous, whose blood, his cruel brother Caine spilt upon the
earth. So ancient is the cruelty of these Wolves and ravenous beasts, preying
upon Christ his Flock; and so continuing from time to time as their rage and
ravenous appetite has edged them forward.

By the fury of these Wolves, the holy Prophets were consumed, from Abel unto
Zacharias; Matthew. 23.35.
yea our Savior himself was made a pray unto them; whose example served to
instruct his flock, in all ages, what they were to expect, and trust unto. For
the disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord, Matthew.
10. verse. 24. And if they have done these things to the greenetree, what shall
be done unto the dry? Luke 23. verse 31. The Apostles of our Savior, the
rams and bell-weathers of the flock, have all, in a manner, verified the
words of their master: and what the condition of the Saints was in the
Primitive Church, the Author to the Hebrews reports unto us: Some were
racked, some tried with mockings, bonds, scourgings, C. 11. v. 35. etc
imprisonment; some stoned, some hewn asunder some slain with the sword. With
which exquisite torments, and many more of like sort, the cruelty of these
Wolves could not be satisfied; but as Tacitus in his Annals records, Li. 15.
Pereuntibus addita ludibria, The Saints of God suffering martyrdom after this
cruel manner, were further made laughing stocks to the world; in being clad
with skins of wild beasts, and so exposed to the tearing and renting asunder
by dogs. And this not in some few, to the terror of the rest, but as the same
Author adds, when the day was not long enough to make them away in, they
served in vsum nocturni luminis, for men to see by in the night, by the flames,
wherein their bodies were consumed. Eusebius goes yet further, that the
numbers in some places grew to be so great, that the executioners fainted with
weariness, in their making havoc, though one succeeded after another; and
that the edges of their swords and axes, were dulled and made blunt with the
multitude of the slain bodies of the Saints; which he takes not up by way of
credit, upon other men's report; himself was an eye witness of it, in Thebais
of Egypt. Eccles. histor. lib. 8. ca. 9.
So cruel was the rage of these ravenous beasts, in these ten persecutions,
under the Roman Emperors.

From which, if we suppose that the ages following were free, Job 40.10.
we err and are greatly deceived. Dilatat Behemoth caudam suam in fine mundi
nequius. Behemoth (says S. Gregory) enlarges his tail (wherein lies his
strength) more wickedly now in the end of the world; Moral. 3^. c. 12
The Devils wrath waxing greater in these Wolves his instruments, by how much
shorter he knows his time is to wreake his malice upon the Saints. So that,
as Berna^d distinguishes, sermon. 33. in Cantica, Pax est, and non est pax;
there is peace, and there is no peace. Pax a Paganis. etc. The Church being in
peace and rest from Pagans and Infidels, sed non profecto a filiis, Micah 7.6.
but in sooth not secured of her own children, nor of them of her own house,
yea most infested by them: For who are they, that for these many years have
made havoc and spoil of the Church, but such as would be termed, Gal. 2.9.
I say, not only Pillars, as were James, and Cephas, and John; but the very
heads of the Church, Christ his Vicars upon earth (as they style themselves)
the Popes of Rome, that very Antichrist, and scarlet colored Whore, drunk
with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, C. 17. v.
6.
as the Spirit testifies in the Revelations. Witness, amongst many others,
the Albigenses, against whom Innocent the third so proceeded by his censures,
that in one Town of theirs, 17. thousand of them were put to the sword,
without any respect had, of age, sex, or degree: and in another Town, one
hundred and fourscore consumed together in one fire, because they would not
abjure the faith of Christ, Histor. part. 3. tit. 19. c. 1.. 3. and 4. Li. 4.
pa. 1132.
as Antoninus reports: witness the Protestants in Germany, against whom,
Paul the third excited Charles the Emperor, instigante Paulo, says Genebrard
their Chronologer; who, for the better managing of that war, assisted the
Emperor with an Army out of Italy, of ten thousand foot, and five hundred
horse, under the conduct of his Nephew Octauius Farnesius, who was so confident
in his forces, that departing out of Italy, he boasted before hand, that he
would make such a slaughter in Germany, that his horse should swim in the
blood of the Lutherans, as John Sleidan is Author. Last of all, Commentar. li.
17. pa. 534.
not to stand upon examples, which in this kind are infinite; witness the
slaughters and butcheries Factionis Hugoniticae, of the Hugonites in France,
Histor. li. 23.
as Natalis wronglie terms them; of whom, to the number of sixty thousand,
perished at Paris, and in other Cities of France, what time the Admiral was
murdered: and in the civil wars, not so few as twelve hundred thousand,
natural French, are numbered to have been slain: in which combustions, the
Popes of Rome were the very Alastores and Apollyons, Brutum fulmen. p. 108.
the firebrarnds of these mischiefs.

With whose flames, if this our native Country have not in like manner burnt
within these late years, it was Gods watchful eye over our Princes and us,
which extinguished the sparks whilst they were enkindling; and not want of
malicious cruelty in them, who were always ready pressed to minister fuel to
these flames. The Bulls of Pius 5. Gregory the 13. Sixtus the 5. testify as
much, breathing out fire and sword against our late Sovereign (whose memory
shall be blessed in all posterity) and by their loud lowing, calling in
foreign powers against our Land, and exciting disloyal subjects; as were
Tichborne, Parry, Squier, Walpoole, and such like, to treacherous conspiracies
at home: some of which conspiracies, howsoever our English Catholic (having
made his forehead as the Adamant) in his letter before mentioned, Pa. 34. and
89.
term Ridiculous falfe devises, and monstrous fictions, made against some
Priests, to make their whole company and cause odious: yet our Tribunals, and
benches of Justice and Judgment, have convinced evidently this shameless
untruth; and the Secular Priests have likewise published as much, Import. Con
sid. p. 16. and p. 23, 33, 40.
concerning these treacheries, to all men's view. So that now it necessarily
ensues, ex ore proprio, from the confession of our Adversary, that the
company of these Jesuits, and their whole cause, is justly odious both to God
and man, for their treacherous and bloody designements.

From which aspersions, in like manner, the two Breues of Clement the 8. will
not be purged, although this Impostor wash them with niter (to use the words of
the Prophet) and take much soap to him. Ier. 2.22.


For most evident it is, that Catesby that Arch-Traitor, laid upon them the
foundations of the Powder Treason, in his conference with Garnet; Proceedings,
R. 4.
arguing from their authority rightly and strongly, that if it were lawful not
to receive his Majesty, that now is, or to repel him, as the said Breues did
import; then it was also lawful to expel or cast him out. Which was
endeavored with no less labor, then it was apprehended by hope to be
effected by powder, from the vault: by which most barbarous stratagemme, like
ravenous beasts, they would have swallowed us up quick, and ouer-whelmed us
with a flood, but not of water: thunderclaps of powder, and streams of fire,
should have been the swelling waters, which should have gone over our souls.

^ueton. in vita
C. Caligula, that monster of mankind, for his cruelty more then savage, is
famous for a wish, that in his bloodthirstinesse he conceived against his
subjects the people of Rome, which was, that they all had but one head, that so
at one blow he might chop it off. But in this powder treason, consider cruelty
more brutish then was ever that of Caligula: For here not the Prince (with
whom, under God, is stored up all power of life and death) is plotting against
the subject, but the subjects against the Prince: and that not in heart only
wishing, but by their practices laboring, yea in a manner effecting, not the
ruin of a famous City, but of a flourishing Kingdom; and not of the
Kingdom, the Commonwealth alone; but of the Church also: in both Church and
Commonwealth, aiming, not at the members without the head, but jointly at
both together, members and head also: not with the stroke of a sword directed
by man's hand, in whom still resideth mercy, but by the merciless element of
fire: and that not ordinary, consuming by degrees, but the extraordinary
invention of the devil, ministering that kind of fuel to man's rage, which
swalloweth up at one breath, and as it were at one mouth-full, whatsoever
stands in the way.

The holy oil, wherewith his sacred Majesty was inthronized into this royal
Kingdom, should have been no protection to defend him from the rage of this
fire; though the Prophet, in Gods person, had before expressly charged, Touch
not mine anointed; the Law provided, Psalm. 105.15. Deuteronomy. 22.6.
that men should not take the damme with the young. Does God take care of
birds, Cor.
as the Apostle reasons in the like argument? or was it written for our
sakes? And yet in this share, the mother must have perished with the son;
root and branch together had been consumed in this combustion. Gods justice
would have spared Sodom, had there been found in it but ten righteous: Genesis
^8.32.
but ravenous fury had so possessed these beasts, that whom themselves deemed
just, must have perished with the rest. The height of Majesty adorned with so
many peerless virtues, of learning, wisdom, godliness, temperance, justice,
clemency; the matchless Vine, with her tender plant, the future hope of our
succeeding age; the noble Peers, the most reverend Bishops, the wise
Counselors, the grave Sages of the Land, the Knights and Burgises, and
Officers of all sorts; all together, at one instant, Lutheranum inuentum ad
ignem rapi^nt, vt sic anima eius in curru ignco, ^t loquitur Jesaita Hoffaeus,
ad inseros feratur. Hassemmil histor. Iesuitic. ca. 6. pa. 224. P. 6. 7. 41.
etc. Pa. 26. 42. and 125.
must have mounted up into this fiery Chariot (as Hoffaeus that bloody Jesuit
was wont to say) that so their souls might have been harrowed into hell, if
these Gunpowder-powder-inginers had been their Judges.

In this treacherieso cruel and barbarous, as Impudency it self would be
ashamed, I say not, to excuse, but, once to extenuate the heinousness of the
attempt; see how our English Catholic plaieth the part of a diligent Advocate,
alleging the tribulation of Catholics in our state and government, merely for
conscience and Religion (of which he grievously complains in sundry parts of
his Letter) for the cause of this woeful attempt (to use his own words) in
these unfortunate gentlemen.

Wherein, to pass over the ingratitude of this unworthy person toward his
gracious Majesty (of whose clemency, not only the Recusants in general, but
many of the Popish Priests have been, and still are partakers in great measure)
I say only this, and that in a word, and I speak it in the sight and hearing
of Almighty God, that if to be a Rebel and a Traitor, be all one with a
Catholic; and if due execution of justice, be pressure and tribulation; then I
willingly acknowledge, that some Catholics in England have perished under this
pressure and tribulation. As for others, which suffer pecuniarie mulct in
goods, or bodily restraint, or loss of Country by banishment; let him be
pleased to call to mind the fires and gibbets in Queen Mary's days, by which
more innocents perished in some one or two years, only for profession of the
Gospel, without the least imputation of treason, then Popish Traitors of all
sorts, suffered in 45. years of our late Sovereign, and in the six ensuing of
his Majesty that now is; when as our holy Martyrs would have reckoned it for
great favor, to have gone away with life and limme, whatsoever became of their
goods and native Country.

Away then, even for shame, with these foul blots and stains of cruelty and
persecution: the mild and gentle aspect of our merciful King admits them
not; neither are they found in our State: they are the inseperable marks and
badges of the Romish Synagogue, as you have heard; and of these holy Fathers,
who rather succeed Romulus in murders and slaughters, The saying of Pope
Adrian, Illine Catalog. testium verit. tom. 2. p. 483.
then S. Peter in feeding Christ his flock. And this be spoken of the cruelty
of the Adversaries of the Church.

3 I come now in the third place, to discuss the cause which produces these
effects of subtlety and cruelty in the adversaries of the Church: whereby they
seek and endeavor the subversion and ruin thereof.

The Prophet lays it down in the third verse. They had swallowed us up quick
when their wrath is kindled against us. Wrath then was it that quickened the
wits, and sharpened the ravening appetites of these enemies; making the^ so wily
in theirsnares; so powerful in their forces; and all to the perdition of the
silly and weak Lambs of Christ his flock? An affection by nature incident in
a man, but as Bernard well notes, Sermon. 13. upon the 91. Psalm. abutentibus
bono naturae, grauis perditio est, and miseranda pernicies: men abusing natures
good, it becomes a miserable ruin, and heavy perdition; not to men only,
but to things also without reason, yea without sense too.

Aspice nobilissimarum ciuitatum fundamenta vix notabilia, Lib. ^de ira. Cap. 2.
Behold says Seneca the foundations of most noble Cities, hardly to be
discerned, such is their desolation, has ira deiecit, it was wrath that cast
them down, and made them level with the ground. Consider countries and
regions made desolate places, for many miles together; has ira exhausit, it was
wrath, that in this manner drew them dry, and made them void without an
inhabitant. It was wrath that put the instruments of cruelty into the hands of
Simeon and Leui those Brethren in evil, Gen, 49, 5
whereby they put Hamar and Shechem with their people to the sword; and sacked
their City after they had received circumcision, breaking thereby the bonds of
promise, and the very seal of their faith. And therefore most true is that
verdit which the wise King has given of this unbridled affection; Proverb.
27.4. Anger is cruel, and wrath is raging. And Saint Chrysostom in his 29.
Hom. to the people of Antioch, as if he had foreseen the Powder Treason, ira
ignis vehemens omnia deuorans, anger is like a mighty fire co^suming all
things. And Saint Augustine Ser. 1. De tempore, Iracundia bestia crudelissima,
wrath says he, is a most cruel Beast, renting and tearing with her teeth:
consonant with our Prophet in this place. With whom accords Saint Basil in a
Sermon of this argument, comparing it to the swelling Waters, of which our
Psalmist speaks. The violent forces of men enraged with fury, carry (says
he) all things before them* like floods and inundations. Such a fire, such a
Beast, such a swelling water is wrath in a man, possessed therewith: it
consumes, it deuoureth, it ouer-whelmeth al things, and therefore no marvel,
when the fountain is so bitter, if the streams issuing from thence, be so
unpleasant as has been declared.

Yet because as Saint Ambrose observes upon the fourth to the Ephesians; Ira
motus est naturalis conceptus ex causis, anger is a natural motion, or
commotion rather, conceived upon some cause: Let us consider the cause, that
exasperated the adversaries of the people of Israel in such sort, as the
Prophet in this Psalm. co^plaineth. A learned modern expositer, Wolf. Muscul.
renders this reason of it: that Israel having obtained a king of the Lord,
that went in and out before them; they would no longer put their necks and
shoulders, under the yoke of their enemies; who before that time had dominion
over them: upon this defection, they make out after them with their forces,
pursuing them in hostile manner to reduce them to their wonted servitude, as
Pharaoh had dealt with them in former times.

A lively Type of the adversaries of Gods Church in all ages, wherein we may
plainly see, what has caused them from time to time to pursue Christ his
members, with such deadly wrath and hatred. It is, because upon the admonition
of the Angel, Revel. 17.4. 2. Cor. 6.14
they are gone out of Babylon; or to speak with the Apostle, because they will
not, iugumducere cum infidelibus, be yoaked with Infidels and Heretics in
their errors and superstitions, having obtained a David a King of God his Son
Christ, that holy one, the Lords anointed.

For if there be any thing in the world that does provoke a man and kindle
his affections, it is Religion which makes him not only defend to the
uttermost of his power, and with his best endeavors, what he conceiueth to be
pure, but also to prosecute with all might and fury, the contrary sect, to
the utter extinguishing and rooting up of it, supposing that in so doing, they
fight Gods battles. Hence proceeded that deadly fewd between the Hebrews
and the Egiptians; Gen 43.32
they might not eat together, for that was an abomination unto them: between
the Jews and the Samaritans, Ioh. 4.9.
they meddled not one with the other. The Poet observed as much among the
Gentiles.

Immortale odium, and nunquam sanabile vulnus. Inuenal. Satyr. 15.
Hatred without end, and a breach which never could be cured.

-- Quum solos credat habendos
Esse deos, quos ipse colit. --
Because every nation believed those only to be Gods whom they worshipped.
And Julian noted it amongst the christians, as Amnianus Marcellinus reports:
who found, he said, no beasts so deadly one to another, as Christians were to
Christians: which being spoken by so great an enemy, as was that Apostate,
would carry little credit with it, were it not that the histories of the
Church recorded as much of the Nouatians, the Arrians, L. 22.
the Donatists and such like Heretics against the Catholics; whom impatience
as S. Cyprian notes, ad hostili a and furiosa odia compulit, provoked and
forced to furious outrage and deadly hatred.

Here was that Sword, of which our Savior forewarned. Mat. 10.34. Think not
that I come to send peace into the earth, I came not to send peace, but the
sword: whose part, Christ his Vicar thinks he plaieth not well, if he be
not ever now and then sending abroad his sword into protestant kingdoms,
because both Prince and people, are in his censure no better then forlorn
Heretics, past all hope of recovery and amendment.

To which grievous imputation we answer with Saint Paul, that after this way
which his holiness is pleased to call Heresy, we so worship the God of our
Fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets;
Act. 24.14.
yea moreover in the Evangelists and Apostles, to whose judgment if he will
stand, we will easily lay this crime upon himself; in departing from the
truth of that Gospel, which not only Moses and the Prophets, but our Savior
and his Apostles preached.

I will not now anotomize, and rip up the whole body of popish superstition;
wherein nature is opposed to grace; Saints merits to Christ's his blood; their
mediation to his intercession; unwritten vanities, to the written truth, works
to faith, with many such like will-worships, which are after the doctrines of
men: let the trial be made in one point; the misundersta^ding whereof so much
troubles the Christian world: I mean the natural and civil obedience of
dutiful subjects toward their lawful princes.

A duty enjoined by our Savior. Mat. 22.22. Give unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's: and seconded by that chosen vessel, the Apostle of the Gentles,
Romans 13.7. Give to all men their duty, tribute to whom you owe tribute,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom you owe honor.
Whence are those grave and Religious exhortations of the holy Apostle Saint
Peter. 1.2.13. Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of men for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as unto the Superior, etc and of S. Paul, Let
every Soul be Subject unto the higher powers, Romans 13.1. The reason of both,
is worthy to be engraven in the heart of the subject with the point of a
Diamond: for the Lords sake says Saint Peter; for there is no power but of
God, says Saint Paul, with whom concur the Law and the Prophets; the
ancient Fathers of the Church, both in their writings, and in their meetings in
general counsel: which might as easily be alleged if need required.

But our Adversary acknowledges as much, as he does us to wit in his letter;
namely, Pa. 16.50.
that Subjects are bound to obey their Temporal Princes in all things lawful;
and those not only good Princes, but had also; and that not only of fear and
flattery, but of conscience, as the Apostle teaches, Propter conscientiam,
for conscience sake.

Why then join we not, as in tongue, so in hand and heart also, and admit the
trial of our obedience by the touchstone of true fidelity, in taking the
Oath of Allegiance? Pa. 14.15.16. and 50.
Because (says our English Catholic) besides the exaction of natural
obedience which is lawful, the Oath contains diverse other points also,
concerning matters of Catholic Religion, which are unlawful. For whereas the
Oath is divided into 14. several parts, 12. of them at the least (as he
avouches) touch the Popes supremacy one way or other. As where it is said in
the Oath, that the Pope has no authority to depose our King, 2. to dispose of
his Kingdoms, 3. to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or anoy him or his
Countries, 4. or to discharge his subjects of their Allegiance, 5. to give
license to any of them to bear arms against him, 6. or to offer violence to
his person, or government, or Subjects, The assertion of all which points, and
other such like specified in the Oath, are (says he) matters of Catholic
Religion.

But who sees not (whose eyes God has opened to behold the light of his
Gospel) that this Religion falsely termed Catholic, utterly peruerteth the
lawful subjection of people to their Souereignes; and that Hell is not more
opposite to Heaven, then the bearing of arms by the subject against his
Prince, raising tumults in his dominions, offering violence to his person,
state, or government, is contrary to his allegiance and fidelity? Christ
(says S. Chrysostom in his Commentaries upon the 13. to the Romans) made nor
Laws, to overthrow the state of commonweals, but that he might the better
order and establish them: but to depose Kings, to dispose of their dominions,
to take the Crown from one, and give it to another, as men toss a tenice ball
in the Court, from Henry to Rodulph, and so along; to assoile subjects of
their fidelity; these and such like, which are after the decrees of latter
Popes, overthrow the very foundations of Kingdoms and Commonweals: which
transcendent authority, whilst they assume unto themselves, by virtue of the
Churches censure, they go far beyond the bounds and limits of their
commission.

For excommunication, being a punishment merely spiritual, depriueth a man
only of such spiritual comforts, as otherwise he should receive at the hands
of the Church: but no way impeacheth his estate in his goods and possessions;
De Iure and iusti. li. 1. c. 6. Conclus. 2.
as their own Soto teaches. And much less has it any force to depose
Princes from their thrones, to absolve subjects from their obedience, to
warrant them to rebel, to say violent-hands upon their Souereignes, or any way
to conspire, or work their death.

Wherefore, let this be the obedience of such Popish Recusants as refuse to
profess their fidelity by taking the Oath; Bulla Pij 5. and Gregorij 13.
outwardly to make a show of it, ad redimendam vexationem, to keep themselves
from troubles and mulcts; yet with these circumstances: 1. Rebus sic stantibus,
the State standing so firm, as (God have the glory and praise for it) it
does: such an union and consent in Prince, Peers, and all good Subjects, as
need not dread the face of all their enemies: and 2. Donec publica Bullae
executio fieri possit, that is, until they have got strength enough to make
head against their Sovereign: and then down with him, by open hostility, or
secret conspiracy, it makes no matter which, so they have their watchword
from Rome by the Popes excommunication and deposing of him. But for us,
beloved, which have otherwise learned Christ, let these seeds of disloyalty
and treason be far from our hearts: Let us give to our Caesar his fear, his
honor, his service, his protection, by our bodies, goods, and lives; which are
his, were he as wicked as was ever Nero: how much more, being so good and
gracious, so zealous of Gods honor and of his subjects good: Neque enim
pietatem subuertic ista subiectio; this subjection (says S. Chrysostom)
subuerteth not piety; nay it confirms it more. Neither is this spiritual,
but civil obedience, due to the Prince ordained by God; not depending upon the
Pope, who exalts his own self.

Were he placed in his due rank, Sieve Apostolus, says S. Chrysostom, were he
an Apostle, that is, as good as S. Peter himself, or were he an Evangelist, or
were he a Prophet; he were but a Subject: or if all this serve not, the next
words immediately ensuing will order him; Sieve quis quis fuerit, or be he what
he will be or may be, says S. Chrysostom, if he consist of a soul and body,
Romans 13.1.
he must be subject to the higher Poxers, that is, to the King, or to the
Emperor, Gods viue images upon earth; and acknowledge them for his Lords,
Epist. 32.
as Pope Gregory the great did Mauritius the Emperor.

Or if these be matters which concern Religion, and such as touch the Popes
Supremacy spiritual, why does not our English Catholic bring forth his
proofs, especially having made promise so to do, in the forefront of his
Pamphlet? But open it, and peruse it from the first page to the last, you shall
find nothing therein, but his own assertion; the Popes supposition, or at the
most, Pa. 13. 14. 15. 50. 62. 74. 85.
his determination; the authority of Cardinal Bellarmine; and the chiefest
learned men of their Church, as he terms them: that is, Herod and Pilate,
the high Priests and Elders, the Scribes and Phariseis, with the nation of the
Jews, conspiring against our Savior, and seeking false witnesses against him,
but finding none. For no better with us is the credit of the Pope and his
Consistory, his College of Cardinals, and the whole swarms of his Priests and
Friars, in matters concerning their own authority, contrary to the express
words of holy Scripture.

Yea, Pa. 14.19.85.
but if the Pope have not this authority to proceed against Princes, by
dethroning and deposing of them, for their restraint and amendment, Gods
providence should be defectuous (says our English Catholic) for the
preservation of his Church. I answer; Nothing less. For if S. Peter and his
successors were able to govern the Church in the midst of all the storms of
persecutions under the Pagan Emperors (who labored by all cruel means to
root out the very name of Christianity) without the use of any such
authority; how much more easy must it be for them who claim succession from
S. Peter, to govern the ship of the Church, when by the commandment of our
Savior, the winds are ceased, and the storms are laid? Unless we shall
say, that the Church had not her due government, but was tossed up and down
with every wave and puff of wind, for the space of 1000. years and upward
after Christ, until such time as Hildebrand, surnamed Gregory the seventh,
lifted up his Priestly lance (as they say) against Caesar's sword, and usurped
the authority of decrowning Princes. Which were absurd, once to enter into any
man's conceit of common sense or learning. Yet more then this our English
Catholic says not.

But perchance Matthew Tort, Cardinal Bellarmines Chaplain, proves the
point more substantially. True, if the wresting of a place or two in holy
Scripture make any thing to the purpose. He allegeth out of John 21.15.16. our
Savior his charge to S. Peter, Feed my Lambs, Feed my sheep: And out of S.
Matthew, c. 16. v. 19. the like saying to S. Peter, I will give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth,
shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. From whence (says he) omnes Catholici colligunt, all
Catholics do gather, that it appertains to the authority of the high
Bishop (he means the Pope of Rome) not only to have power to loose from
sins, sed etiam a poenis, censuris, legibus, votis, atque iuramentis, but
from punishments, Censures, Laws, vows and Oaths, When it shall make for Gods
glory and the Salvation of souls.

But when, may this [when] ever be; that God shall be glorified, by
overthrowing all laws, both divine and humane? or is any thing more
impossible, then that truth should receive honor from lying and periuries? Is
not this to make a lie for God, which holy Job so much detesteth c. 13. ve. 9.
Or in the best sense to do evil, that good may come thereby? which whosoever
shall attempt, the Apostle pronounces of them, that their damnation is just.
To. 3.8.

Again, where the Chaplain avouches his exposition of loosing to be meant,
not only of remission of sins, (which we willingly acknowledge with his
Lord and master the Cardinal) but also of relaxation, from laws, de Romans
pontifi lib. 1. C. 12.
vows and oaths, from the authority of all Catholics (omnes Catholici
colligunt:) either the ancient Fathers of the Church, In Mathae.
Origin, In Psalm. 38.
Ambrose, Aduersus. Iouiu. l. 1.
Hierome, In I^ha. tract 118. and de Agon. Christi. Ca. 30.
Angustine De Trinit. l. 6
Hilary, and Chrysostom. de sacerdot. lib. 2 Theophilact in Mat. cap. 16 Cypria^
de unit Ecclesiaeseu de simplicitat. praelatorem. Ansel. in Mat c. 16. ver. 19.
Beda ibid. etc.
such like are no Catholics; or else he fathereth that upon them, which never
came within compass of their thoughts.

Who moreover jointly teach and profess, that the authority of binding and
loosing, and feeding Christ his Sheep, was by our Savior given as well to the
rest of the Disciples as unto Peter; that they all received the Keys as well
as Peter; what was said to Peter was said to all, the promise to Peter was
common to all: they are the express words of these Fathers. So that as yet
neither our English Catholic, nor the Cardinals Chaplain have said any thing
to prove, that the authority of binding and loosing, and feeding Christ his
Sheep, belongs more to Saint Peter and his Successors, then to the other
Apostles and their Successors; or that the Deposing of princes is a point of
Doctrine belonging to the Popes supremacy, more then to the Supremacy of
other Patriarchs; and much less that it is a matter of Catholic, that is,
Apostolic or Christian Religion, for Subjects in any case at his command to
bear arms against their Sovereign, or to attempt any thing against his state
and person.

By this which has been delivered, I hope it is manifest, not only how
repugnant the voice of that Antichrist of Rome is to the voice of christ and
his Apostles, in the dutiful obedience of Subjects toward their Sovereign:
but also how pernicious Popish Doctrine is to States and Kingdoms, deposing
Princes from their Throanes, and arming their Subjects against them.

And therefore howsoever the English Catholic in his Letter auerreth, Psalm. 31.
that liberty of Conscience (he means in Popish Religion) ought to be as
free in this Kingdom, as breathing, and the use of the air is common to all:
yet the wisdom of our Solomon does see, that as one Temple could not contain
Gods Ark and Dagon; 1. Sam. 5.3.4. 2. Cor. 6.14.15
as light has no communion with darkness; Christ no concord with Belial; so
neither can the purity of the Gospel have any agreement with Popish
Superstition.

Our Savior himself has delivered his judgment in this case. Mat. 12.25.
Every kingdom divided against it self shall be brought to naught; and every
City or house divided against it self shall not stand. And what greater
division then this can be thought in a state and kingdom, then where Pote^tate
is opposed to Potentate? the Pope against the king: Subject against Subject:
Servant against Servant: both walking diverse ways, after diverse Masters. Such
divisions of hearts and affections, cannot but prove deadly in the end to the
body, wherein they shall be found, be it civil or Ecclesiastical, Church or
Commonwealth.

From hence proceed wrath, enuyings, seditions, contentions, Dion. Cass.
murders; as Mecaenas long since told Augustus the Emperor. You may take it
from a latter writer; whose testimony is beyond all exception, as being an
enemy; and therefore likely to advise us no more for our good, then what the
force of truth wresteth from him. It is Weston the Divinity professor in the
English College at Dowaie lib. 3. de triplici hominis Officio. ca. 14. If,
says he, the people conceive an opinion of their King to be an enemy to
their Religion, or to contemn it; what is there that they will not attempt
against his life, to the effusion of his blood, iubente religione, and
impelle^te cos de super numine, vti omnino apud se animis firmabunt. Religion
commanding them, and the God, whom they worship, forcing them thereunto, as they
are persuaded in their consciences.

Could he more lively have described our Iesuited Romanists, Whose Religion is
rebellion, and murdering of Princes, especially when their Lord God the Pope,
Glos. in cap. Cum inter. Extrauag. Ioa^. 22
dominus Deus noster Papa (ye know whose saying it is) shall encourage and
exhort them thereunto? And again, in the conclusion of the Chapter. Whosoever
(says he) shall consider the infinite hatred, which from time to time, has
passed between Heretics and Catholics, shall easily perceive that it cannot
stand with civil Policy, that sectaries of such contrary opinions in
Religion, should be fitly conjoined in the same civil society; and that the
safety of the Prince cannot suffer such promiscuous conuenticles, and confused
manners of worship in Religion.

Our English Catholic acknowledges as much in his Letter: adding further,
that besides internal dangers, Page 124.
which (says he) are ever consequent upon such inward divisions of Religion;
if foreign occasions should be offered us again (as in former times they have
been, by foreign wars) we should not know how to trust the one the other.

Here is plain dealing indeed, you hear him now speak plainly, laying
aside his usual manner of cogging and Aequiuocating: and is there not, judge
ye, great cause, that liberty of their conscience and Religion, which
threatens such dangers both to Prince and Country, should be as common
amongst us in this Kingdom, as the use of the air and breathing is common to
all? or rather is there not great need that the Statutes concerning obstinate
Recusants, were put more duly in execution, and not lie sheathed so much as
they do in the scabbard? and that all loyal subjects were sealed like the
Servants of God in their foreheads: making open profession by their Oath of
their dutiful allegiance toward their Sovereign, Revel. 7.3.
which in a cause so conformable to Gods will and command; so behooufull to
church and commonwealth; so nearly touching Gods glory, the peace, safety
and honor both of Prince and People: whosoever should refuse, I wish his legs
so fettered, though not with gives of iron, and his arms so weakened, though
not by drawing one drop of blood; that these Serpents might not be able to
sting, when they most desired; nor these Wolves to prey upon us when they most
longed.

Thus ye have the root from whence spring these bitter fruits of subtlety
and cruelty in the Adversaries of the church; their wrath kindled not upon a
light and frivolous occasion, but burning with the zeal of Religion, though a
zeal not according to knowledge, and religion without due fear of God, and
reverence of man.

There remain yet two points unhandled: the one, of the deliverance of the
Church from her enemies: the other, of the duty of praise, and thanksgiving
to be performed for this deliverance: which (the time being so ready to
prevent me, and my voice failing) I will fould up in a word, by way of
application to our selves: whom as God has made examples of his mighty
power, no nation under heaven more, in delivering us out of the hands of all
our enemies, both from the Snares of secret treacheries, and from the open
violence of their intended cruelties: so there is no people in the world more
obliged to the duty of praise and thanksgiving to the Lord.

I will not now stand to repeat unto you our former deliverance; that
mirabilis Annus the year 88. so long before spoken of, for the wondrous effects
which it was expected it should produce: it suffiseth, that it was wonderful to
us, when standing, as it were still, we saw the salvation of the Lord,
fighting his and our battles, against these, his and our enemies; and chasing
them, until he had made almost a final end of them, whom the Pope had
blessed, with the name of invincible.

Neither will I call to your minds the manifold dangers and treacheries, so
often plotted against our late gracious Sovereign, and in her life, against
ours: with which our most noble King that now reigns, has been as freshly
assaulted, sithence his entrance into his Throane and Kingdom: of all which,
we may say with the blessed Apostle, From them all the Lord has delivered us.
2. Tim. 3.11.


Consider but this day, the birthday, as I may term it, of our Country; in
which both Prince and people came as it were anew into the world, delivered
from the dreadful Powder-vault, the very belly of hell and confusion, C. 2.10.
as Jonah sometime did from the belly of the Whale.

How desperate and bloody was the attempt? How secretly was the snare laid to
entrap us unawares? When every man sung to his neighbor, nothing but Peace,
Peace, how near were we brought to the pits brinke? I say not as Jonah did,
Yet 40. days; but yet, not so much as one day, C. 3.4.
and we should have been destroyed: when being ready to sink, God stretched
forth his hand unto us, as sometimes he did to Peter, and took us as a brand
out of the fire. Matthew. 14.31. Zechar. 3.2.


Surely here was neither want of malice, will, or subtlety in the Adversary,
in spreading the net, that it prevailed not; nor force of wisdom or deep
insight in any that prevented it: the heart of our most wise and prudent King,
how large soever it be, as the waters which cover the sea, yet was it at this
time extraordinarily inspired from above, when out of a cloud of dark
speeches, by the finger of God, he noted and pointed at the treachery.

And therefore more properly may we take up this saiing then ever did Israel,
Tremel. and Iun.
who spoke it but in a trope and figure: If the Lord had not been on our side,
may we of England say; if the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up
against us; they had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
against us. But praised be the Lord, who gave us not over for a prey unto their
teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers; when our
enemies fell into the pit of destruction, which they had dug for us.

Wherefore, let the praises of God be always sounding in our mouths, both of
Prince and people, old and young, men and maidens, women and children: let us
all in our places and callings, age and sexes, praise the name of the Lord,
which is only to be exalted; not wisdom, strength, or worthiness in our
selves. And let others put their trust in horses and Chariots, in the multitude
of their hosts, in the strength of their ships, in the Popes cursings and
blessings; but let us always think and say, with our Prophet in the
conclusion of this Psalm, Our help is in the name of the Lord.

To which most glorious name be rendered all praise, honor and glory, might and
Majesty, this day, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE SPITTLE.
MATTHEW. C. 7. V. 15.16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Ye shall know them by their fruits, etc.


AMong the manifold dangers, amidst which the Arc of Gods Church is tossed up
and down by the sly impostures of her enemies, as by so many storms and
surges; the perils by false Prophets and seducing Teachers are such, as if with
diligent heed and attention they be not avoided, as the Syrtes and Rocks of
the Sea, we are in danger every hour to make shipwreck, before we can so much
as see the haven, wherein our souls long so earnestly to be at rest.

The greater is the vigilancie of Gods watchful eye over his silly flock;
never slumbering nor sleeping; Psalm. 121.4.
but as a careful father warning us before hand of them, Beware of false
Prophets; and as a painful master diligently instructing us how we may know
and avoid them: Ye shall know them by their fruits, says our Savior: masked
otherwise so with sheepes-cloathing, as that by their outward show and habit,
they are able to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect.

For this sheepes-cloathing is that external habit, which naturally and
properly belonging to the sheep, makes us take them to be so, which come so
clad unto us. It is, says De praescript. Haeretic. Calvin. Jansen.
Tertullian, nominis Christiani extrinsecus superficies the superficial
outside of a Christian; that is, holiness, but feined; piety and Religion,
but in show: it is Author operis imperfecti, in Matt. hom. 19. Lucas Burgensis,
etc.
vestimentum ouile, the sheep skin indeed, his wool, his fleese, his
outward appearance and resemblance: but it is not Opus ouile, the true sheep
deed, his natural work; the Religion is not pure, the holiness not sincere
and upright: which yet notwithstanding dazleth our eyes, and peruerteth our
judgment, if we be not very wary and circumspect.

Therefore our Savior wills us, not to stand at gaze, and to look upon
them; but (...), says he, heed them, mark them, eye them well; which is, as
S. John expounds his Masters meaning, Believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God, 1.4.1. A point of skill, beyond the reach of
Babes, who being inexpert in the word, use milk (such as they were, whom the
Author to the Hebrews therefore reprooueth for it, c. 5. v. 12.13. and as the
Lay people are in the Romish Church, whose faith lies foulded up in the faith
of the Church, Fides implicita.
without any further search and inquiry:) it is the part of stronger men; yet
not of the Pastor and Doctor alone, as Promptuar. Cathol. Dominic 7. post
Pentecost.
Stapleton would have it; but of the flock too, which through long custom
have their wits exercised, to discern both good and evil, Heb 5. v. 14.

Author operis imperfecti, in Mat. hom. 19.
Magna virtus boni, malum cognoscere: Here is a special virtue and property
peculiar to goodness it self, to discern that which is evil: and, firma
tutela salutis, scire quem fugias; a sure defense preservative of our welfare,
to know him whom thou must eschew and avoid: which that we may be able to
perform, our Savior adds Lucas Burgens. Maldonat.
Symbolum, a badge or cognizance, though not a Priore (for God only is Act. c.
1. v. 24.
(...), the searcher of the hearts and reins) yet a Posteriore, a sign better
suting with our understanding, from the effect; By their fruits ye shall know
them. Per hoc quod foris agitur, quicquid intus lat et aperitur, that which
lies hid within the heart, is made manifest (says M^ral. l. 15 c. 34.
Gregory) by that which a man does without: as in the Water a face answers
to the face (says Solomon) Proverb. 27. verse 19.

And what are these fruits? The Hom. 19.
author of the imperfect work upon Saint Matthew his Gospel, resolves the
doubt very fitly in two words. Fructus hominis (says he) confessio fidei
eius, and opera conuersationis ipsius: the fruits whereby a man is known, the
true Prophet is discerned from the false, the sheep from the Wolf; are the
confession of his Faith, and his life and conversation. For if a man hide the
Wolf under the sheepes-cloathing, how can thou know him, says the same
author, Ioh. 1.47.
nisi aut per vocem, aut per actionem: but by his voice or by his deeds? Si
confessio eius conueniat cum scripturis, if his confession be consona^t with
the Scriptures, if his life answerable to his profession, verus Christianus
est, this man indeed is an Israelite, in whom is no guile: if otherwise,
falsus Propheta est, it is the Wolf under the sheepes-cloathing, shun him,
and beware of him.

So the^ ye have in the word^ read unto you, first a Caveat like a Pharos, set
at the entry of my text, Division.
to give light unto us, beware. Secondly the Rocks and Syrtes* which we are
to shun, false Prophets. Thirdly, a reason of the danger, their disguised
masking of themselves, because they come to you in sheepes-cloathing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves. Lastly, the marks and tokens whereby ye may
discrie and discern them, ye shall know them by their fruits. Which being the
very foundation of all the rest, my labor and time shall be spent, (by Gods
gracious assistance and your wonted patience) in laying open of them: which
being disclosed, the rest of it self will fall to the ground, it being an
easy matter to beware of the Wolf, when he is stripped of his
sheepes-cloathing.

Yet the case so standing, as Homil. de auaritia. tom. 5.
Chrysostom does truly report it: multa ouium vellera, innumeri vbique lupi
sub his occultati; that there are many Sheepe-skins, and as many Wolves that
lie hid under them: and that many false Prophets, under color of the true,
have in all ages crept into Christ his flock: we must herein also use a
moderation: and out of many sorts, make choice of some, by which you may judge
of the rest.

And because every one as he is jealous of his reputatition: labors to
remove this imputation from himself; the Huiusmodi sunt Coluinistae Maldonat.
Stapleto. Rubenus de falsis propheti^.
Papists falselie charging us with it; and we laying it, as the truth is, and
where it is to be found, upon them: we will herein follow the advice of In
Mar. c 7. verse. 15.16.
Ferus one of their Friars: laying aside our own asseuerations, we will name
an Arbitrator between us, to decide this controversy; Scriptura iudex sit,
let the Scripture says he, be the judge, quem illa falsum Prophetam nominat,
is procul dubio talis sit; whom the Scripture shall say to be the false
Prophet, let him be so reputed and accounted.

Now the instance to make trial by (to limit my self within some bounds) I
will put infoure points. The first, concerning traditions. The second in
worshipping of Images. The third in Miracles; all matters of Doctrine as ye
know, and controuerted between us and our adversaries the Papists, and
belonging to the voice of the Prophet: the first principal fruit, by which
he is known: the fourth and last, concerning manners and life; which are his
deeds and actions, the other principal fruit, of which our Savior has
pronounced, by their fruits ye shall know them. By these ye may make an
estimate of the rest, and accordingly judge of the true and false Prophets.

First then to begin with that, which is the foundation of many others. Our
Savior (says Ferus) calls them false Prophets, Mat. 15.3. which transgress
the commandments of God by their traditions. Lib. in c. 7. Mat.
For these. Mat. cap. 23.16. he calls for the same cause, Blind Guides,
which are all one with false Prophets, and denounces a vae against them, Woe
be unto you blind guides.

Now this is an essential property of the Guides and doctors of the Romish
Synagog; who not contenting themselves with the fountains of living waters,
the holy Scriptures and word of God, as not containing all things sufficient
for manners in this life, and Salvation in that which is to come, dig to
themselue pits, even broken pits of diverse and sundry traditions, which in
truth can hold no water.

For thus Bellarmine de verbo dei. l. 4. c. 2.
they teach and profess, that besides the written word of God, there is an
other part thereof not written (their meaning is in the Scriptures) and by the
first Authors thereof, the Apostles of our Savior, though otherwise it be
exta^t, almost in the ancient Fathers, ( Bellarmine.
as they say) which they term and call traditions, of which they make many
sorts; agreeing in this, that they concern both faith and manners.

What reckoning and account they make of these traditions, shall come from
their own mouths: for otherwise it would seem, I suppose, incredible, what
they ascribe unto them.

The Pari pietatis affectu et reuerentia ses. 4. decret. 1
Council of Trent decrees, that they are to be received with the like
affection of Godliness and reverence, whereby we admit and reverence the
books of the old and new Testament. Eande^ vim habent. de verbo dei. li. 4. c.
2
Cardinal Bellarmine says, that they have all one Force and strength. Perinde
infallibile^ auctoritatem habent. Analis. fidei Cathol. li. 8. cap. 6. sec. 2:
Gregory of Valentia; the authority of each is alike infallible, and cannot
deceive. Cardinal Hossius Multo maxima pars euangelij, peruenit ad nos
traditione per ex igua literis est mandata. confess. Catholica. c. 92.
not content with this paritie, adds further, that far the greatest part of
the Gospel came to us by tradition, when but very little thereof was committed
to writing. And Ex traditione noui testamenti scripta omnia authoritatem
acceperunt. Annal. 46.1. Ann. 53. number. 11.
Cardinal Baronius, as if this were not enough, avouches, that all the books
of the new Testament, receive their authority from traditions. In regard
whereof he prefers them before the Scriptures; because Scriptures, says
he, unless they be established by traditions, have no being: when as
traditions without the Scripture, are firm and stable in themselves. So
Scripturae nisi traditione firmentur, non subsistunt, traditiones vero sine
scriptis, suam obtinent firmitatem.
likewise t Petrus a Soto before him, Fundamentu^ and explicatio defens.
Cathol. confess. l. 2. c. 68
calls them the foundation and exposition of the Scriptures: And Lydius
lapidus Panopl. li. 1. cap. 9.
Lindane, the touchstone of true and false doctrine. Finally, Andradius says,
That many points and heads of Faith, would reele and totter, were they not
supported by the assistance and authority of traditions, Multa sidei nostrae
capita reperies nutare iam et vacillare, si tollas traditionum subsidium et
auctoritate^. Orthodox. Explicat. l. 2. p. 80.
yea not only reele and totter, but a great part of Religion would also perish
(says Sine quibus magna pars religionis perit, et ad inane nomen Euangelium
redit. de. sens. Cathol. l. 2 cap. 68.
Soto) were it not for those parts of Doctrine, which are maintained by
tradition; and the Gospel would come to a vain name, without substance; which
I easily grant and acknowledge, in their Popish Faith and Religion, which can
no more stand without traditions, then a huge building without a foundation.

For it is the confession proceeding from their own mouths, that the Primacie
of the Pope, and Sea-Apostolike is from tradition; their five Sacraments of
Confirmation, Order and Matrimony, Penance, extreme unction, with their
elements, words, fruits, and effects; the consecration of water and oil in
the sacrament of Baptism; The Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and receiving in
one kind; of auricular confession, satisfaction, choice of meats, Fastes
purgatory, monastical profession, single life, prayer for the dead, Petrus a
Soto vt supra. Peresius de traditionibus part. 3. Lindanus panop. li. 4. c.
100. Canus locor. Theologic. li. 3. ca. 3. 4. 5. with the rest.
invocation and worshipping of Saints, worshipping their Relikes and images; in
a word, scantly any matter in controversy between us, which they acknowledge
not to be grounded on tradition; howsoever with consciences more then seared,
in their disputes they allege Scriptures for proof of them; and In his Rock.
Sanders proclaims that they have most plain Scriptures, in all points, for
the Catholic Faith (falsely so called) and none at all against the same.

The case then standing thus with the Popish Religion, it is no marvel if so
highly they extol their traditions, and on the other side think and speak so
baselie of the holy Scriptures, tearming them Tilmannus. H^shusius sexcent.
errores. Tit. de Scriptura. Sac.
a nose of Wax ready to receive any impression, expound it how a man list, a
leaden rule, flexible and easy to be wrested, whither a man will; a dumb
teacher, which can neither answer nor express his own meaning; a dead
Scripture; the matter and subject of strife and contention: which without the
Churches authority, is of no more credit then Aesop his fables; yea a very
babble, as Dr. Fulcke his confutation of Saunders treatise of the worshipping of
images, page 575.
Doctor Cole the Papist, being Visitor in Cambridge, when a Bible was brought
unto him to be defaced, called it Bible Babble.

These blasphemies against Gods sacred word, which Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.24.
S. Paul calls, the wisdom of God, and the power of God unto salvation, to
every one that believes; demonstrate these Popish Doctors (if I should add
nothing more) to be those false Prophets of which our Savior here speaks.
For right so did their forefathers, the ancient Heretics, vilify the holy
Scriptures, and magnify their Traditions, as Lib. 3. cap. 2.
Irenaeus a mostancient Father testifies. Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, When
(says he) men argue against them, and they are reproved out of the
Scriptures, they turn themselves to accuse the Scriptures, quasi non recte
habeant, as if they were not right, neque sint ex authoritate, nor have
authority in them, and quia sint vary dictae, and because they are diversely
spoken, and have diverse senses, and quia non possit ex his inueniri veritas, ab
his qui nesciant Traditionem, and because the truth cannot be found nor
gathered out of them by such as know not the Traditions: Non enim per literas
traditam illam, sed per viuam vocem. For (say they) the truth was not delivered
by writing, in the holy Scriptures; but by word of mouth, from man to man.
Never Non tam ouum ouo simile Cicer. Acade^. quaes. l. 2.
was one egg so like another, as these old Heretics and our Popish Doctors,
Soto, Lindane, Pighius, and such like of the Popish crew.

So likewise are many of their reasons and arguments, the dull and blunted
weapons of the old Heretics, returned upon them so often by the ancient
Fathers.

De verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 5.
Bellarmine allegeth, for proof of his Traditions, that of our Saviors, John
16. v. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. With which saying of Christ's, all Heretics, even the most absurd and
foolish, which notwithstanding would be called Christians, did endeavor to
color (says Omnes insipientiss haeretici, qui se Christianos vocari volunt,
audacias figmentorum suorum, quas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac occasion
Euangelicae sententiae colora^e conantur. Jn Euang. Johann tract. 97.
S. Augustine) the audacious fictions of their idle brains, which the sense of
man did most of all fear and abhor. But as that godly Father answers, so
say I; If our Sau^our concealed those things, quis nostrum dicat, ista velilla
sunt? who is he amongst us, that may say, they are this, or they are that. Yet
Haec multa non erant diuersa ab his, quae hactenus Dominus praesens docuerat,
sed planior and clarior eorum explicatio. Concordant. fol 964.
Iansenius, one of their own, well observes, that these many things were not
diverse and contrary to those which our Savior taught his Disciples whilst
he was present amongst them; but only a more full and cleerer explication of
them.

So Loc. theol. l. 3. c. 3. fundamento 4.
Canus allegeth that of the Apostles; We speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect, 1. Cor. 2.6. whereby he would prove, that certain holy mysteries
were communicated by the Apostle, apart from the ignorant, to the perfect:
perfectis and maioribus. Even as the old Heretics (says Hanc sapientia^
vnusquisque eorum esse dicit, quam a semetipso ad^nuenit, fictione^ videlicet.
Irenaeus) by occasion of these words of S Paul, Did every one of them call the
fiction of their own b^aine, this self same wisdom of which the Apostle
spoke? But Si quaedam inter domesticos disserebant, non tamen ea fuisse
credendum est, quae aliam regulam fidei superducerent, etc. De praescript.
haeretic.
Iansenius rightly notes, Sed quod suae prae^^^otionis and fidei mysteria
perfectius aperiret perfectioribus, sermonemque suum aptaret audientium
capacitati. Concordant. f. 965.
as did Tertullian before him, that the Apostle did not signify by those
words, that he taught the perfect one thing, the imperfect and ignorant another
thing; cum vtrisque eandem fidem praedicaret, when as he preached the same
faith to them both: Sed quod suae prae^^^otionis and fidei mysteria perfectius
aperiret perfectioribus, sermonemque suum aptaret audientium capacitati.
Concordant. f. 965.
but that his preaching was not all after one manner, which he applied to his
hearers, to some more perfectly and profoundly, to others after a plainer
fashion, according to the capacity of each of them.

Again, what the Apostle writes to Timothy, O Timotheus, keep that which is
committed unto thee, depositum custodi, 1.6.20. is Canus. Bellarmine. etc.
generally alleged of them, for proof of their Traditions. And so was it by
the old Heretics, as De praescripion. hae^eticor.
Tertullian witnesses; who from thence taught, that the Apostles Apostolos non
omnia omnibus tradidisse, ibid And non omnia omnibus reuelasse: quaedam palam
and vniuersis, quaedam secreto and paucis demandasse: quia and hoc verbo vsus
est Paulus ad Timotheum, O Timothee, depositum custodi ib.
delivered not all things to all sorts of men, but committed some things openly
and to all men; other matters secretly, and to few. But depositum, or the
thing committed, signifies the whole charge which the Apostle committed to
Timothy, Quod praeceptum supra and infra ex scriptis intelligerat, non nescio
quid ostendi hoc dicto de remotiore doctrina, etc. ib.
and particularly the true form of sound doctrine, delivered unto him in that
Epistle by S. Paul, and not hid elsewhere, or far fetched, as Tertullian
expounds the Apostle.

But of all authorities of Scripture alleged by our adversaries, that which S.
Paul writes to the Thessalonians, 2.2.15. is in show most clear for them,
Stand fast, and keep the traditions which ye have been taught, either by
word, or by our Epistle. In which words the Apostle makes mention of doctrine
not only written, but also taught by express word of mouth. Which as we
ingenuously acknowledge, it being a truth; so we say withal, that it makes
nothing for our adversaries. For although at that time, when the Apostle wrote
those Epistles to the Thessalonians ( Baron. Annal. tom. 1. an. 53. number. 11.
which are more ancient then diverse of the writings of the Evangelists, and the
Epistles of the Apostles) some, yea many points of doctrine were delivered in
the Church by word of mouth; yet this is not against us, which have those
writings of the Evangelists and the Apostles, which the Thessalonians had not
then: In all which now written, we affirm to be comprehended all things which
concern faith and good manners, and whatsoever is needful to be believed: so,
as that it is either expressly written, or by necessary consequence may soundly
be deduced and concluded out of the Scriptures.

For concerning the old Law, Moses gives this charge in the person of God: You
shall put nothing thereto, neither take ought therefrom, Deuteronomy. 4 2. And of the
Gospel, S. Paul says, that though himself, or an Angel from heaven preach
otherwise then that which he had preached to the Galatians, let him be
accursed, 1.8.9. The like is S. John's testimony of the things recorded in his
Gospel: These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the son of God, and that in believing, ye might have life through
his name, c. 20. v. 31. Upon which words, Hugo the Cardinal has this
remarkable note: Specialiter intentio huius libri, generaliter vero totius
Scripturae finis, his verbis declaratur: By these words, the scope of this
Gospel in special is showed; but in a generality, the end of the whole
Scripture is declared. According herein with S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16.17. The
whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. So the Prophet David
witnesses of the testimony of the Lord, that it gives wisdom to the simple.
Psalm. 19. v. 7. Even that wisdom which is able to make us wise unto salvation,
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. c. 3. v. 15. Therefore when
one demanded of our Savior, what he might do to inherit eternal life; he
referred him to the Scripture for his direction, Luc. 10.25.26. As Abraham sent
the rich Gluttons brethren to school to Mos^s and the Prophets, that he might
avoid the torment of hell fire, Luc. 16. v. 28.29.

If then the Scriptures are so perfect, that we must add nothing to them, nor
take ought from them; if no other Gospel must be preached, under pain of
Gods curse; if by the writings of the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles,
we believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and by faith in his
name, obtain eternal life; if they make the man of God absolute, and give
wisdom to the simple, that wisdom which makes wise unto salvation; if they
direct us to eternal life, and keep us from the torments of hell fire; it is
as clear as the Sunne-light at noone day, that they contain all things
necessary for salvation: and therefore the Papists, not contenting themselves
with their sufficiency, do the very same, for which our Savior rebuked the
Scribes and Phariseis, Mat. 15. v. 3. transgress the Commandments of God by
their Traditions.

Now if beside the voice of God speaking in his holy word, any here present,
require further the witness of man, and desire to know the mind and opinion
of the ancient Fathers; although where God speaks, it may well become man to
be silent, yet that it may appear, that we teach the same doctrine with the
old Greek and Latin Church, it shall not be amiss, the rather for the
stopping of the mouths of our adversaries, who are always bragging of the
Fathers (of whom they are the degenerate children) to observe their judgment
in this point.

First therefore, Quod per Dei voluntate^ in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt,
fundame^tu^ and columna^ fidei nostrae futurum. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Irenaeus says, that the Gospel which the Apostles and Evangelists delivered
in the Scriptures, is the foundation and pillar of our faith. Ad puteos
Scripturarum, ad aquas Spiritus sancti and haurire se^per, ac ple^um vas
ref^rre domu^, etc. hom. 10. in Genes.
Origin instructs us to have daily recourse to the Wels of the holy
Scripture, the waters of Gods holy Spirit; and to draw from thence, and to
carry home our vessels full, like holy Rebecca. (...). Theodoret. li. 1.
histor. Eccles. ca. 7.
Constantine the great, in his speech to the Bishops assembled in the Council
of Nice, has this worthy saying: The books of the Evangelists and Apostles,
together with the Oracles of the old Prophets, do plainly teach us the things
which we are to know concerning God. Athanasius in his Oration against Idols,
the Piae Religionis and veritatis de vniuerso ratio cognitioque, per Christi
doctrinam, sole clarius sese demonstrat.
very first words thereof, The reason and knowledge of godly Religion and
truth, does demonstrate it self, more clearly then the Sun, by the doctrine
of Christ. And immediately after, Sufficient quidem per se, tum sacrae and
diuinitus inspiratae Scripturae, ad veritatis indicationem.
The holy and inspired Scriptures from above, suffice by themselves, for the
finding out of the truth. (...). page 394.
Basil says, that it is a manifest falling from the faith, and crime of
arrogancy, either to reject any thing which is written, or to add any thing
which is not written. Omnia clara sunt and plana ex Scripturu diuinu:
quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt, homil. 3. in 2. Thessal.
Chrysostom yet more directly to the point: All things are clear and plain
out of the holy Scriptures; whatsoever things are necessary, are manifest. Non
omnia quae D^minus fecit, co^scripta sunt: sed quae scribentes, tam ad mores
quam ad dogmata putarunt sufficere: vt recta fide, and oper^bus, and virtule
ru^^lantes, ad regnum, etc. l. 12. in Job. c. 68
So likewise S. Cyril: All things are not written, which our Lord did; but
those things which the Evangelists the Writers did think to suffice, both for
manners of life, and precepts of faith: that shining with a right faith, and
good works, and virtue, we might come to the kingdom of heaven. (...). De
Orthodoxa fide, li. 1. ca. 1.
Damascene confesses, that he receives, and acknowledges, and reuerenceth,
all things which are delivered in the Law and the Prophets, the Apostles and
the Evangelists, seeking after nothing beyond these.

Ye have heard by these, what the opinion is of the Greek Fathers, concerning
the sufficiency of the Scriptures, without the supply of traditions: With
whom in like sort concur the Fathers of the Latin Church. Scripturae
plenitudinem adoro. aduers. Hermoginem.
I adore (says Tertullian) the fullness of the Scriptures. And immediately
after: Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina, aut t^meat Vae illud,
adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. ib.
Let Hermogines his shop teach, that it is written; or let him fear that Woe
appointed for them which add or detract any thing from the Scriptures. Vnde
est ista traditio? vtrumne de dominica and Euangelica authoritate descendens;
an de Apostolorum mandatis atque Epistolis veniens? Ea enim facienda esse, quae
scripta sunt, Deus testatur, etc. ad Pompeium contra Epistolam Stephani.
Cyprian distinguishing of Traditions, makes this demand: Whence is it? (says
he) Does it descend from the authority of our Lord, or his Evangelists; or
comes it from the commandment of the Apostles and their Epistles? For God
witnesses, that those things are to be done, which are written. And
immediately after, he infers this conclusion: Si ergo aut in Euangelio
praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum epistolis aut actibus continetur, etc.
obseruetur etiam and haec sancta traditio. ib.
If therefore it be commanded in the Gospel, or comprehended in the Epistles
or Acts of the Apostles, etc. let this holy tradition be kept and observed
also. But on the other side, it has no ground in the word of God. Then mark
what Alia quae absque authoritate, and testimonijs Scripturarum, quasi
traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt, atque contingunt haeretici; percutis
gladius Des. Jn ca. 1. Aggei.
S. Hierome says: Other things, which Heretics do find of their own
accord, without the authority and witness of the Scriptures, as though they
were delivered by Apostolical tradition, the sword of God (which is his holy
word. Ephesians. 6.17.) cutteth off. But of all the ancient Fathers, the judgment
of Saint Augustine is worthy your observation, as being most sound, and
directly to the purpose, who writing against Sieve de Christo sieve de eius
ecclesia, sieve de quacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad fidem vita^que nostram
non dicam nos nequa qua^ com parandi ei, qui dixit, licet si nos, sed omnino
quod se^utus adiecit, si angelus de caela vobis annuncia uerit preterqua^ quod
in scripturus legalibus et euangelic is accepistis, anathema sit, co^tra
literas Petiliani li. 3. c. 6.
Petilian the D^natist, denounces this sentence, as it were with the spirit of
the Apostle. Whether of Christ, or of his church, or of any other thing which
appertains to faith, and to our life and conversation, I say not we, who are
by no means to be compared with him, who said, but though that we etc. Gal. c
1. v. 8. but that which the Apostle added, if an Angel from heaven preach unto
you otherwise besides that which ye have received in the Scriptures of the law
and the Gospel, let him be accursed. And in his Book de Doctrina Christiana
li. 2. c. 9. In In jis quae aperte in scripturis posita sunt inueniuntur illa
omnia, quae contine^t fide^ moresque vine^di spem scilicet atque charitatem.
Act. 26.28.
those things which are set down plainly in the scriptures, all those things
are to be found, which concern Faith, and the manners of a man's life, namely
hope and charity.

These testimonies of the ancient Fathers, are plain and evident, and taken
out of such their writings, as are on all parts confessed to be their own,
and not counterfeited, such as our adversaries usually press us with in their
daily disputes; and they are so forcible even with them, that with Agrippa they
become almost Christians: and subscribe to as much in effect, as we teach of
the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures.

Quae fidei veritates absolute et simpliciter ab omnibus hominibus necessario
cognosce^dae et credendae sunt, vt et fide, et spe, et charitate ad beatitu
dinem con^e^dere valiant. eas non diffitemur, pers^icue fere, in scripturis
ipsis doceri vt Augustinus etiam nolauit Analy. fidei cathol. l 5 c. 2.
Gregory of Valentia, a Jesuit of great note amongst the^, acknowledges,
that what verities of faith are absolutely and simply necessary to be known
and believed of all men, that they may be able to come to everlasting bliss
by faith, hope, and charity, those (says he) we deny not to be taught in
the Scriptures themselves, perspicue fere, almost and in a manner plainly, as
Saint Augustine has also noted. But this fere almost, which the Jesuit
inserteth, is like to that wicked gloss, which corrupts S. Augustine his
text. Of the two, Cardinal Bellarmine deals more ingenuouslie, acknowledging
Dico illa omnia scripta esse quae sunt omnibus necessaria de verb. dei. l. 4 ca
11.
that all those things (without any fere almost) are written of the Apostles,
which are necessary and needful for all men's knowledge. And Non inficiamur
precipua illa fidei capita, quae omnibus chr^stianis cognitu ^ut ad salutem
necessaria, perspic^e satis esse Apostolicis scriptis comprehensa. c. de
scriptura. 5.
Coster the Jesuit in his Enchiridion: we deny not (says he) that those chief
heads of faith which are needful to be known of all Christians for their
salvation, are contained plainly enough in the writings of the Apostles. To
whom I might add a cloud of witnesses of their own writers, both modern and
more ancient, justifying against themselves, what we teach of the sufficiency
of the holy Scriptures: but I must omit them for breuities sake.

What then mean those reproachful speeches of the Papists, concerning the
insufficiency, obscurity, uncertainty, and inualiditie of the Scriptures, as
I have observed? Wherefore is it, that they seal them up in an unknown
tongue, that the unlearned may not understand them? Jndex libror. prohibitorum
regul. 4.
Why Nauar Enchi rid. c. 11. nu^. 26
prohibit they the common people from reading them? why is it accounted a
mortal sin amongst them for a lay person to dispute of matters of Faith? De
expresso dei verbo.
why does Hossius avouch, that it is fitter for women to meddle with their
distaffe then with Gods word? why does De verbo dei l. 2. ^5.
Bellarmine so greeuouslie complain, that the translated bibles are in the
hands of all artificers, not only men but Women? but that by these woluish
voices of theirs, you should know them to be the generation of those false
Prophets and ancient Heretics, whom De resurrec. carnis.
Tertullian, for contempt and shunning of the Scriptures, calls Lucifugas
Scripturarum such as fly the clear light of the holy Scriptures, and the
wicked brood of Melius esta scripturarum lectione hominines arcere quam ab
Jdolothytorum cibis. Ciril. contra. Iul. l. 7.
Julian that Apostata, who objected this as a crime and imputation to the
Christians, because they kept not men from reading of the Scriptures: as the
Papists at their pleasures now adays, term us Chambers in his epist to the
Reader.
Scripturists, and Jdem in his epist. to the King.
worthy Scripturians.

The voice of the shepherd and Bishop of our souls, is after another note,
willing us to search the Scriptures, 1. Pet. 2.25.
John 5.39. And so says the Prophet Esaias, to the Law, and to the testimony,
8.20. And S. Peter commends such as take heed to the words of the Prophets,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, 2. c. 1. v. 19. By which the
noble Jews of Berea, made trial of S. Paul's doctrine, searching the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Act. 17.11. And in Theodorets
time, He flourished about the year 433. Genebrard.
it was so far from being a sin or reproach, to be conversant and skillful
in the Scriptures, or that any were forbid the reading of them, that
contrariwise, Sutores, sabri ferrarij, lanifices, foeminae omnes, agricolae,
fossores, bubulci, etc. de curandis Graecorum aff^ctibus, l. 5.
Artificers, and those of the meaner sort, as Smiths, Weauers, Deechers,
Heards-men, Cobblers, with women of all sorts, Mistresses and maid-seruants, did
know and understand them, and De diuina trinitate, rerumque omniu^ creatione
decertantes, ib.
dispute of high points and mysteries of their salvation.

And therefore to conclude this point with Hom. 9. in Collossen.
Chrysostom his exhortation, Audite obsecro seculares omnes, etc. Hear (I
beseech you) ye of the Laity of all sorts; Comparate vobis Biblia animae
pharmaca, etc. If as yet ye have not, then get you the Bible, which is the very
physic of your souls, in which you may find a cure for every disease. As
you are Christ his sheep, so hear ye the voice of Christ, speaking unto you
in the holy Scriptures; therefore August. de doctrina Christiana. li. 2. c. 5.
vt scriptura pervarias Jnterprcium linguas lon^e lateque diffusa innotesoeret
Gentibus ad salutem, etc.
translated into diverse tongues and languages, that they might be read and made
known to men, for their salvation. Suffer not your selves to be robbed of
these waters of comfort; neither dig unto your selves the broken pits of
unwritten verities, which can hold no waters: and take this of Hom. 9. in Col.
S. Chrysostom as a most grounded truth, that the cause of all evil and
mischief is, quia Scripturae ignorantur; because men are ignorant in the
Scriptures.

Thus much of the first instance, of the sufficiency of the Scriptures,
without traditions; whereby the Popish Doctors are convinced to be the false
Prophets, of which our Savior forewarned us, in these words: Beware of false
Prophets.

The second instance which I proposed, as the touchstone to try the false
Prophets by, is the worshipping of other gods in stead of the true and living
God, which is God almighty, blessed for evermore.

For so Moses (says Ferus) describes to us the false Prophet, Deuteronom. c.
13. v. 1.2.3. etc. If there arise amongst you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
dreams (and give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder, which he
has told thee, come to pass) saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou
have not known, and let us serve them; thou shall not hearken to the words of
the Prophet, or unto the dreamer of dreams, etc. From which testimony of
Moses, Ferus gathers this true proposition, that In cap. 7. Mat^h.
whosoever with-draweth us from God the Creator, to the creature, falsus
Propheta est, he doubtless is a false Prophet, and one of these Wolves
clothed under the sheep weed.

Now by this note, the Popish Doctors are so manifestly descried, as nothing
can be more plain and evident.

For these have made unto themselves, their god-saints, and their god-saints
relics, their breaden-god, their Crucifix-god, their Image-gods, of gold,
silver, brass, wood, stone, and I know not what all. They have made the Saints
not only their Mediators and Intercessors unto God, but also join them with
God, as their protectors and defenders. So (says In his Epistle to the king,
prefixed before the miracles of our Lady of Mont-aigne.
Chambers) our English in their battles call upon S. George, the Scottish
nation and the Burgundians, upon S. Andrew, the French upon S. Denice, the
Spaniards upon S. James. Chambers, ibid.
They fly unto them in their maladies and diseases, for their particular
helps; as to S. Sebastian and S. Roch, to be preserved from the plague; to S.
Hubert for the biting of mad dogs, to S. Blasius for the pain and swelling
of the throat, etc. Dicat vtru^ Deus aliquando infir^ior fuerit, quam v^
potuerit prae^sse eis, etc verum non dignatus est, inquit, hoc facere: at hoc
esset crimen superbiae. Cyril. contra Julian. li. 4.
As though God were not all-sufficient and able of himself, or at least wise
not willing to defend and succor us. They build and dedicate Temples and
Altars in their honor, appoint their festival days, and set forms of
service; they burn incense before their Relics and Images, light Tapers
before them, go on pilgrimage unto them; they garni^h them with all manner
offerings, of gold, silver, jewels, and whatsoever else may serve to make them
seem glorious in the eyes of foolish and superstitious men; they reverence
them with cap and knee, fall down prostrate before them, make their prayers
unto them before their Images, yea to the Images themselves. Thus, although
their foreheads are not yet grown so whorish and impudent, as to call them in
plain terms, gods; yet in giving to them that Sacra, sacerdotia, templu^,
altaria, sacrificia, ceremoniae, dies festi, and quicquid aliud ad eam
seruitutem pertinet, quae Deo debetur, and Graece proprie latria dicitur. Aug.
de ciuit. Dei. li. 7. ca. 32.
divine and religious service and worship, which is proper to God only, they
make them Gods, setting them up in their Churches to be adored and worshipped.

Time will not permit, neither is it my intent, to prosecute all these several
sorts of Idolatry, but to insist only upon that which of al others is the
most blockish and foolish; namely, the worshipping of Images: of which, when I
shall make it apparent that the Papists stand convicted, ye may the more easily
judge of the rest of their idolatry.

First therefore, this is euinced by the second Commandment, Exodus 20. v. 4.5.
Thou shall make thee no graven image, neither any similitude of things that are
in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them. In
which Commandment, by the first clause, the making of an Image to represent
God by, is forbidden; by the second, all manner kind of religious worship,
whereby superstitious men go about to adore God, at, in, or before an image,
any manner of way whatsoever. Thus Lib. 7.
Origin writing against Celsus, gives the true sense of the Commandment,
saying that Religion keeps Jews and Christians from worshipping of God, in
Temples, Altars, Images; because the Law says, There shall be no other gods
unto thee before my face; and, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.

To this Commandment Prohi^eri imaginem Dei factam ad exprimendam perfectam
similitudinem formae and naturae ipsius. Si quis hac ratione Deum pingere
tentaret, is verum idolum constitu eret. De ima. Sanctor. l. 2 c. 8
Bellarmine says, It might be answered in a word, that it forbids the
making of Gods Image, thereby to express his nature; which whosoever should
attempt; should erect a true idol, and so be guilty of the breach of this
Commandment.

But this the Gentiles knew, especially the wiser sort amongst them, Hermes,
Zenophon, Euripides, Plato, as the ancient Fathers of the Church, In
protreptiad Gentes.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Li. 8.
Arnobius and Li. 1. contra Julian.
Cyril record; namely, that God in his nature was incomprehensible, and that it
was impossible, incorporeum corpore significare, to signify and represent him
in a body, who himself had none. And therefore they made not their Images, by
them to express their divine nature; but only some effects of it; to which
they suited their images, worshipping God and his virtues respectively in them,
and not the images themselves; as In 3. Aquin. quaes. 25. ar. 3.
Caietane, and In c. 17. Actor.
Ferus, with others of their own, observe. So that if by this answer, the
Papists can salve themselves from breach of the Commandment, the Gentiles in
like manner may do as much; who yet by the judgment of S. Paul, are condemned
of Idolatry, because they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of foure-footed
beasts, and of creeping things. Romans 1. verse 23.

This the Cardinal happily understanding very well, leaves his first answer,
and flies to a second; understanding the Commandment to forbid the making and
worshipping of De quibuscunque simulacris, quae habentur pro dijs. Bell. de
imag. Sanct. li. 2. c 8.
such Images, which are reputed and taken for gods.

But this was already forbidden in the first Commandment; so that this answer
of theirs confounds the Commandments, making Oporte^ dicere, illud non esse
preceptum distinctum a primo, vt reuera dicunt Catechismi omnes Latini. Bell.
de imag. Sanct. li. 2. c. 7.
one of two, as the Papists do in their Primars and Catechismes, that so men
may not take notice of their idolatry, when the Commandment is after this
manner as it were razed out.

But the Commandments are distinct: the first condemning all false gods, Thou
shall have no other Gods before me Exodus 20.3. The second all false worship,
either in making of Idols, by them to represent God, or in worshipping them
with any manner of Religious service. Thou shall make theen graven Image, etc.
thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship them. Exodus 20. v. 4.5. For as God
and his Worship are two distinct things, so the commandment concerning them,
are two different precepts.

Thus the Jews (who were most accurate in calculating the law, and every
member and part thereof, understood them to be distinct, as appears out of
Antiquita. l. 3. c. 4.
Josephus and Decalogo.
Philo: as also do In Synopsi.
Athanasius and Jn Exodus ho^. 8. haec omnia simul nonnulli putant vnum esse
mandatum quod si ita putetur, non complebitur december nume rus mandatorum, et vbi
iam erit decalogi verita^? ib. Exodus 32.4.
Origin; Origin acknowledging, that some took them but for one, but (says he)
if we do so, the number of the ten commandments will not be complete, and
what then shall become of the truth of the decalog?

Furthermore it is worthy the enquiry, who these were, so sottish, that took
images made by the work of man's hands, for Gods, as Bellarmine says? Surely
they were not the Jews, who worshipping the Golden Calfe, did not so much as
once imagine, that it was God, but by it, did represent, and in it worship the
true God Jehovah, which brought them out of the Land of Aegipt. Nor the
Gentiles: for they as Orat. 12.
Dion, Chrysostom, and Sermon. 38
Tirius Maximus declare, professed, that in their Images made of Gold, silver,
brass, Iuorie, etc. They did worship summum, primum, maximum deum, the
cheifest, first, and greatest God; the Creator and preserver of all things. As
for the Christians, Origin acquiteth them, as you have already heard. The
Papists only remain; who herein, especially the ignorant sort, are more
blockish then the Gentiles; reputing the very images of wood and stone (whom
they adore) for God and his Saints

Thus De Jnuentor rerum. l. 6. ca. 13.
Polydore Virgill one of their own, and therefore more like to cover their
nakedness, then to lay open their shame, more then truth, urged, reports of
them, that they were Eo insanie deuentum est. etc. Ib.
come to that height of madness, that they worshipped Images made of wood,
stone, brass, or painted upon the walls, and set forth in diverse culloms;
Non vi figuras, sed perinde quasi ipsae sensum alique^ habeant, et iis magis
fident quam Christo. ib.
non vt figuras, not as figures or shapes, but as if they had some sense in
them; yea (says he) they put more trust and confidence in them, then in Christ
himself.

He taxes other their follies in their offerings and pilgrimages unto them:
but being too lavish of his tongue, the Popish Index expurgator. Belgic. in
Polydor.
censors have taught him to be more silent hereafter, and not to publish so
unnaturally the spiritual fornications of his Mother the holy Church, razing
and expunging out of him what I have observed, and much more.

Thus notwithstanding, whatsoever has been hitherto answered to the
contrary, the worship of Images, used in the Church of Rome, is Idolatry, and
condemned by the second commandment, 2. King. 18.4 5
and therefore by no means, nor in any consideration whatsoever, lawful.

Heereunto may be added the example of that godly King Hezekiah, who when the
people of Judah worshipped the Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.8.
and burnt incense unto it, brake it in pieces, though before time it had been
erected at the commandment of God himself: leaving thereby an example to
Christian magistrates, what is to be done with Images, erected only by the
will worship and curiosity of superstitious men, when religious service is
done unto them.

Revel 19.10.
For if the Angel, when Saint John fell down to worship before his feet,
corrected him, and forbad him, saying, See thou do it not; adding not only a
reason thereof, for I am thy fellow Servant; but also instructing him in the
true service, Act. 10. ve. 25.26.
worship thou God. And if Saint Peter when Cornelius fell down at his feet,
and worshipped him, took him up, saying: stand up, for even my self am a man:
what may we imagine they would have said, if they had found any so blockishlie
and superstitiously addicted, as to have worshipped their Images, which the
Papists will not, (I suppose) make fellow Servants with Gods Saints, Esa.
44.10, 19
as not being so good as mortal men; but such as the holy Prophets describe
them, abominations and profitable for nothing: Ier. 10.8. Habac. 2.18.
The doctrine of vanity, and teachers of lies: then which, the Frog and Mouse,
the Moule and the Batre, and every creeping thing is better, because as Jn
protreptic.
Clemens Alexa^drinus says, these have life and sense; but images have none;
as the Psalmist describes them, they have eyes and see not, 115. v. 5.6.
ears and hear not.

Last of all, will the Papists have us worship Images? let them produce some
example out of holy Scripture for this practice; and we will follow it: let
them allege some precept of God, some exhortation of the holy Apostles or
Prophets, for our warrant, and we obey: which if they cannot do (as hitherto
they have not, neither can do, themselves with one voice confessing that this
point of Doctrine is grounded upon tradition wherein what force there is has
been declared:) then we say with Saint Augustine in his Treatise De bono
viduitatis, c. 1 or who soever he were that compiled that work, Sancta
scriptura doctrinae nostrae regulum figit, ne audeamus sapere plus quam
oportet, Romans 12.3.
the holy Scripture pitcheth the rule of our Doctrine in such sort, that we
presume not to understand above that which is meet to understand, as the
Apostle teaches, not daring in matters of Religion and Gods service, to turn
aside from the holy Scripture so much as one step, either to the right hand or
to the left.

How much less then to the worshipping of Images, forbid by God himself, and
condemned by all the ancient Fathers or the Church, when she was most pure and
in her prime? l. ^ cont. Celsum. impossible est vt quideu^ norit, supplex fiat
statuis.
Origin says that it cannot be, that a man should know God, and worship
Images. And Non est dubium quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est.
l. 2 cap. 18.
Lactantius puts it out of al doubt, that there is no Religion where an
Image is erected to be worshipped. Therefore Nobis nullu^ est simulachru^ in
mundo quoniam in rebus genitis, nihil potest dei refer imagine^ lib 6.
Stro^ma 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus teaches, that men are to learn from the Apostle, that
they have no Image in the world, because amongst the Creatures there is nothing
that can resemble the image of God. S. Regem adorauit non lig^u vtque quia hic
g^^^ ^ est er ^ur, et ^an^t (...) impio^um, sed ^d^raun illum qu^ pepe^dum in
igno. De ^bi^u T^eodosii.
Ambro e yet more directly to the purpose, speaking of Helen, who by the title
found out the Cross whereon our Savior was crucified: she worshipped (says
he) the King not the wood at all, because this is the error of the Gentiles,
and the vanity of wicked men; but she worshipped him, who hung on the Tree,
that is Christ the Lord: Whereof Cultores d^i imaginem ado rare no^ dehe^t, In
^a. 3. Daniel.
Hierom gives the reason, because such as are worshippers of God, ought not to
Worship an Image. So likewise Saint Noui multos esse sepulchrorum et
pictucarum adorato res, quos Ecclesia condemnauit, et quos quotidie ta^qua^
malos filios cor rigere studet, de moribus ecclesiae cathol. c. 34.
Augustine, I know (says he) that there are many Worshippers of Sepulchers
and pictures, etc. whose manners the Church condemns, and which she
indeuoureth to correct and amend daily, as being evil Sons; which was the
labor and diligence of Church of Rome, in the time of Quia eas adorari
ve^uisses o^^ino laudaui mus. Ep. l 9. Ep. 9 et l. 7. ep. 109.
Gregory the great, as appears by his Epistle to Serenus, in which he
teaches expreslie, that Images are not to be worshipped. And this was the
current Doctrine of the Church, for the space of 600. years after Christ.

The greater is the untruth which Cardinal Imagines suum honorem in ecclesia
semper habuerunt, de imag. li. 2 c. 12
Bellarmine sets abroach, affirming that Im^ges have always had due honor
in the Church. For until the second which was in the year 788. Center.
Magdebur. Cent. 8. c. 9. pa. 589.
Nicene council a^sembled by the superstitious Empress Eirene, the honoring
and worshipping of images was never publikelie established: and then being
authorized, it was eft-soones disanulled by a council held at Anno. 794. cent.
Magd. ib. pa. 626.
Fra^k-ford, under Charles the Great, which defined out of Gods word, that the
Worshipping of images was unlawful; pronou^cing against that of Niece, that it
was Pseudo synodus a false Synod or Council, and therefore no credit to be
given to it. Since which time, many have risen amongst themselves, in the very
height of Popery, which have gainesaid it.

Spiritus. S. aggreditur reprobare idololatras, qui colunt imagines and
artificiales figuras. lectio. 158
Holcot in his Lectures upon the book of Wisdom says, that the spirit of God
reprooueth Idolaters, that worship images and artificial figures: condemning
the determination of Thomas 3. sentent. distinct. Idem honor debetur imagini,
and illi cuius est imago. ib.
4 that the same honor is due to the image, which is due to him whose image it
is. And so Imagines non adoramus nec deos appellamus, necsoem salu^is ineis
porimus, quia hoc ess t idololatr^ae Rational li. 1 c. 3.
Dura^dus, We do not, says he, adore images, nor call them Gods nor put our
hope in them, because this were to commit Idolatry. Ad adorandum et colendum
prohibentur imagines, fieri. in Exposit 1. precepti
Gerson in like manner, Images are forbidden to be made to be adored and
worshipped either inwardly by the affection of the mind, or outwardly in the
body, by bowing before them, or bending the knee unto them. Who further
advises Iudicate si tantae imaginu^ and picturarum in ecclesiis varietas
expediat and an populos simplices nonnunquam ad idololatriam peruertat De
clara^ defectuum ^iror Ecclesiastic. dec 67.
the Clergy of his times, to consider whether such variety of Images and
pictures in the church, be profitable or not, and whether they do not sometime
pervert the simple people to Idolatry. That which Gerson proposes by way of
question. Vt fac^lius, ita tutius quoque est, omnes imagines e templis
summouere, quam impetrare, vt nec modus praetereatur, nec admisceatur
superstitio Jn symbolo.
Eras. a man of exquisite learning, after diligent inquiry made, delivers in
plain words after this manner: that as it is more easiy, so it is also more saf,
to remove al images out of churches, the^ to obtain, that either a mean be kept
in their worship, or that superstatio^ be not mingled with all. To these J might
ad, their bishops Haec non proprie dicuntur, neque secundum verita^em, iuxta
commune^ acceptione^ vocabulorum, scil cet quod imago, vt imago, avt vt excreas
officiu^ imaginis, quod est representare Christum aut deum, sit adoranda
adoratione l^triae. De tultu imaginum
Catharinis, and Nos nihil numinu tribuimus imagini, neque ei diuinos honores
domus. De traditionibus pa. 3. fol. 222 de cul^u imag li. 2. c. 23.
Peresius, both of them denying that Images are to be worshipped with divine
worship: ye, Bellarmine himself, howsoever he maintain the Doctrine which now
is most current in the Church of Rome, that c the images of Christ and the
Crucifix, are to be worshipped with Latria, that is, Divine Worship; by his
distinction of improprie and per accidens, improperly: (by which distinction,
Quaelibetres posset a dorari per accidens vbi supra.
every thing might be worshipped with latria and divine Worship, says
Catherine, so foolish is this distinction in his judgment) yet as though his
conscience checked him, he Quantumad modum loq^endi, ^raesertim in concione ad
populum, non est dicendum imagines vllas adorari deberelatria, sed e co^trario,
no^ debere sic adorari Deculto, etc. imag. l. 2. c. 2.
thinks it no sound kind of speech, for the preacher to use in the pulpit;
and rather the contrary: that no images are to be worshipped with divine
worship. A wholesome piece of Doctrine ye may suppose, which dares not abide
the light; yet herein he said not so much, as Durandus did before him, who
acknowledging the position of the Papists to be false, that the same reverence
is to be given to the image, that is given to the thing signified thereby: yet
says he, Apud Chemnicium in examine. council. Tridentin par. 4. page 46.
loquendum vt vulgus, we must speak and say as the many do.

Thus ye see the Popish Doctors, like Judge. c. 7. v. 22.
the Midianites, sheathing their swords every man in his neighbors bowels.

Only Gregory of Valentia more audacious, that I say not, more impudent then
the rest, not being able to purge himself and his Church, from this sin of
Idolatry, indeuoureth to prove that Illud co^tendonon om them imaginum
venerationem esse prohibitam de idol. l. 2. c. 7
all Worshipping of images is not forbidden, that is, that some Idolatry is
lawful, because Saint Peter writes. 1.4.3. It is sufficient for us, that we
have spent the time past of the life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking
in wa^tonnes lusts dru^kennes in glutronie, drinkings, et illicitis Idoloru^
cultibus, and in unlawful worshipping of Images, as he reads after the
vulgar, for that which Erasmus, Arrias Monta
others of his own very learned, translate, nefarijs Idolorum cultibus:
abominable worshipping of images. From which words this great Jesuit Neque
absurd profecto putaueris. b. Petruminsiauasse cul^um aliquem simulacrorum
nempe sacrarum imaginum rectum esse, cum fideles nominatim, ab illi^^tis
idolorum cultibus, deterrere voluit.

Quid enim attineba^, i^a determinate cultus s^mulachrorum illicitos notare, si
omnino null^s simu lachrorum cultus licitos esse censuisset. de idol. l. c. 7.


makes this collection: that a man may think without absurdity, that Saint
Peter gave us to understand that some worship of Idols, namely of holy Images,
was right, when he would deterr the faithful by name, from the unlawful
worshipping of Images; for else what needed he to have noted so distinctly, the
unlawful worshipping of Images and Idols; if he had thought that no kind of
worship had been lawful? which manner of reasoning if it be sound, then may
some sins be said to be godly, (which is, to speak good of evil, for which
there is a woe stored up. Esa. 5.20.) because Saint Jude calls sinners
wicked. v. 15. which he needed not to have done so distinctly; if some sinners
were not godly. And Shechem, or any wa^to^ fornicator, or adulterer, may as well
maintain his filthy lust; because it is said of the defiling of Dinah, Genesis
34.7.
that it was, res illicita, an unlawful thing, which the spirit of God needed
not to have noted so distinctly, if he had thought, that no deflowring of
virgins had been lawful. And in that Fox Acts and Monum. page 957. and 1024.
great controversy which busied the heads of all the learned, in the famous
Universities of Europe, I mean the cause of divorce between Henry the 8. of
famous memory, and the Lady Catherin Princess Dowagar, sometimes wife to his
brother Prince Arthur; the Advocates on the Ladies part might have argued
strongly out of the Scriptures (after Valentia his manner) for the lawfulness
of the marriage, because it is said, Leuitic. c. 20. v. 21. The man that takes
his brothers wife, commits an unlawful thing, rem facit illicitam. For if
some marriage of a man with his brothers wife were not lawful, what needed
Moses at the Commandment of God to have noted so distinctly, the unlawful
marriage of the brothers wife?

Ignorant man, shall I say, or maliciously blind, that either knows not, or
dissembleth that which boys in the Schools learn in their first rudiments,
that Epithets are used, not so much for distinction sake, as by way of
amplification and exaggeration: and yet, as though the former of distinction
were only in use. So the Jesuit peruerteth the place of S. Peter, who used the
Epithet of abominable or unlawful, when he said, abominable idolatry,
exaggerating the heinousness of the offense, because idolatry is the greatest
and most heinous of all sins, as himself De Idololat. li. 1. ca. 2.
elsewhere truly proves out of the holy Scriptures.

Thus by the verdit of Gods word, and testimonies of the ancient Fathers, the
Papists stand convicted of idolatry; thereby showing themselves to be the
offspring of these old Heretics, the Eusebius. histor. Eccl. l 2. c. 13.
Simonians, the J^^nae. li. 1. ca. 24.
Gnostiques, the Epiphan haeres. 27. and 79.
Colliridians; and to be those false Prophets, and ravening Wolves, clad in
sheepes-cloathing, of which our Savior here gives warning, Beware of false
Prophets. And so I come to the third instance, which is their Miracles, alleged
commonly as an argument; as for other points of their doctrine, so for the
worshipping of Images. The confutation of the one will be the overthrow of the
other.

Now concerning these false Prophets, we have our Saviors prediction, Matthew.
24.24. There shall arise false Christ, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
elect.

As then our Savior teaches us by the parable of the fig tree, Matthew. 24.32.
when her bough is tender, and it brings forth leaves, we know that Summer
is near; so likewise when we see and hear the signs and wonders whereby the
Church of Rome labors to commend unto us many her novel and superstitious
doctrines, and amongst them the worshipping of Images, we may by them take
perfect notice of the coming of Antichrist, which the holy Apostle foretold
should be, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.
by the working of Satan, with all powers, and signs, and lying wonders, and
in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness: which in these latter ages of the
doting world we have seen accomplished in the false Prophets of the Romish
Synagogue.

For amongst them, their images, for example sake, have been seen, Council.
Nicen. secund. ^ction. 4.
to sweat, to weep, to laugh, to distill drops of dew, with which, diseases
have been cured, to shift themselves from place to place, yea Preuiarium Romans
in festo S. Thom Aquin.
to speak also; thereby to convince the Prophet David of falsehood, who says
of them, They have mouths, and speak not, Psalm. 115. verse 5.

The Action. 4.
Fathers of the second Nicene Council are frequent in this argument, reporting
that a woman sick of the palsy, praving before the image of S. Anastasius,
rose up whole and sound. Another possessed with a foul spirit, brought before
the same Saints image at Rome, was so cured. And that a man molested with the
devil, was by him told, that if he would not have him struggle and wrestle
with him, he must beware that he worshipped no more the image of the Virgin,
bearing Christ in her arms, as she is usually painted. Whereupon Carol. magnus
de imaginibus. l. 3. c. 31.
Abbot Theodorus inferred, that a man were better frequent all brodell houses,
then to omit the worship of that image.

Examples of this sort are infinite, it being an endless travel to recite the
only bare names (as In his Epistle to the king, prefixed before the miracles of
our Lady of Mont-aigue.
Robert Chambers a fugitive Priest says) of those who have laudably, as he
supposes, imploted their labors herein. And therefore, omitting others, I
commend only to your consideration that pamphlet translated our of French, by
him, into our mother tongue, of the Miracles lately wrought before the Image of
our Lady of Mont-aigue, in the Low Countries, and dedicated not long since to
the Kings Majesty. These in his Epistle dedicatorie, he avouches to be
semblable to those divine operations whereby the Savior of the world did
manifest his godhead to the world. For (says he, turning his speech to the
King) here your Grace may behold, how the blind see, the deaf h^are, the
lame walk, the Devils are expelled, the Leapers are cleansed, and many other
painful, deformed, and desperate maladies are cured.

Indeed our Savior said little more, when he would show to John Baptist, his
two Disciples, that he was that Christ, foretold by the Prophets, to come into
the world, for the redemption of mankind. Matt. 11.45.6
Go (says he) and show John what things ye have heard and seen; the blind
receive sight, and the halt go* the leapers are cleansed, and the deaf hear
the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the Gospel. And blessed is he
that shall not be offended in me.

The greater is the blasphemy of this Popish Priest, to ascribe that to a
wodden image, which was the handy work of Christ, God and man, the Savior and
Redeemer of the world: yet what he briefly repeateth in his Epistle, is to be
read at large in the history of these miracles; in which he is so confident,
that he says, It cannot be imagined that his royal wisdom would pass them
over, as though his Grace had no apprehension of them. Yet to make his
imagination the more sure and strong, he gathers together the reasons and
arguments which his great Masters allege for proof of the miracles wrought in
the Romish Church.

Epistle dedic.
And first (says he) where miracles are seen to favor the persons or things
that appertain to their congregation; who can deny, but that God is well
pleased with them, and well allows of their rites, faith, and profession?

Will he know who can deny this? I will not now answer him with the authority
of the ancient Fathers, of whom I shall speak hereafter; neither of all the
reformed Churches in Christendom, which happily in his eyes are but deformed.
His fellow Priest, In his answer to Suttl^ffe his appe^dix, fol. 179.
Matthew Kellison, in effect denies it, acknowledging that Simon Magus,
Montanus, Maximilla, and the Gnostique Heretics, deceived many by their
illusions, and that Antichrist at his coming shall seduce many more. As much
does Cardinal Bellarmine, reciting out of Valerius Maximus, and M. Ciero,
miracles wrought by the Pagans, as that a Vestale Virgin drew water in a sieve;
that a Southsaier cut a whetstone with a rasor. Which if De notis Eccles. 4. c.
14.
Bellarmine set light by, as though they were, as he calls them, leuia,
light, and of small account, yet those which are recounted by the same
Valerius, Tit. de miraculis.
li. 1. ca. 8. may not be so answered.

As namely, where the image of fortune is reported to have said to the Matrons
and Ladies of Rome, Rite me Matronae vidistis, riteque coluistis: Ladies and
Matrons, ye did rightly see me, and as well consecrate me. For as unlikely a
Miracle as this is chronicled in their reformed Roman Breuiarie, of the Infesto
S. Thom. Aquin.
Image of the Crucifix; before which, Thomas of Aquine praying, he heard a
voice (the Antonin. his. par. 3. ^it. 23. c. 7.
Crucifix spoke it) Be^e scripfistide me, Thoma: Thomas, thou have written well
of me. Which is true, if that be true which he wrote, that the Tom 3. quaes.
25. artic. 3.0.
image of the Crucifix was to be worshipped with latria, such worship as we
give to God: for thereby he makes the Crucifix a God; which is well, I trow,
for the Crucifix.

Will any man think, that has eyes in his head, that both these miracles came
not out of one shop, from one and the self same forge?

The same Valerius reports, that the Chapel of the Salij being burned,
nothing was found in it Praeter lituum Romuli. ib.
besides Romulus his deuming staff. The like is recorded amongst the miracles
wrought by our Lady of Mont-aigue, that Pa. 278.
certain Heretics ransacking her Chapel, and burning the foormes and seats,
and other things of wood within it, yet the Chapel took no fire, although
they labored to burn it also.

Besides these reported by Valerius Maximus, what shall be said of that which
Jn his life.
Suetonius writes of Vespasian, that he restored sight to a blind man by
spitting into his eyes, and healed another of a lame leg or thigh, by touching
of him with his heel? as also of that which Aelias Ib.
Spartianus records of Adrian, that he restored one to sight, that was borne
blind: of that which Julius Jb.
Capitolinus reports of Antoninus, surnamed the Philosopher, who by his
prayers procured lightning from heaven, to set his enemies engines on fire, and
rain for his army, when they fainted with thirst? of that which Lib. 4. c. 12.
Philostratus has committed to writing of Hercules and Apollonius Tyanaeus,
that they raised up the dead to life. These and such like, Bellarmine must not
blow away with his breath, terming them light; for greater miracles then these,
are not recorded in the most lying and fabulous legends of Saint Francisco,
Saint Dominick, Saint Antonie of Padua, of Franciscus Xauerius out of the
Indies; or out of the Low Countries of the Image of our Lady of Mount-aigue.

If Chambers his reason be good, it follows, that God was well pleased with
these Pagans, and allowed of their rites, faith and profession, because
miracles favored their persons, and then let the Papists see what will become
of their Church, which Bellar. de notis Ecclesiae. l. 4. c. 14.
they say, is known by her Miracles; when the Pagans miracles are as glorious
as theirs, what distinctions can the working of miracles make? They Art
daemonis opera diaboli. Bell. vbi supra. And Chambin his Epist.
will say, that these miracles and cures wrought by the Pagans, were no true
miracles, but were done by the aid and assistance of the Devil; be it so,
and what hinders, why we may not answer in like manner, (as Bellarmine does)
of the cures wrought at the image of our Lady of Mount-aigu, if any were
wrought, and such like? that Diabolus infi^ens, in ocu^^ vnius, et al^e ^^s
tibia, imped^chal vsum eorum membro, rum, idque eo fine, ^t videretursanare,
cu^ de sineret nocere. Bell. ib,
the Devil being in the eye of one, in the leg of an other, and so in the
rest, which are reported to have been cured, hindered the use of those members
to the end that our Lady (to speak with the Papists) might seem to cure
them, when the Devil did desist and leave off to hurt and hinder them.

But miracles (says Chambers) are works that surpass the power of any
creature, and therefore where God vouchsafes to work any miracle in the
defense or honor of any person or any point belonging to any religion or
belief, In his Epist.
such a miracle is, as it were, his very word.

I answer, if we take miracles in a strict sense, for such works as are done
against nature, as to stay the course of the sun in the firmament, to ra^^e
down Manna from heaven, etc. So, the holy Angels themselves, as by themselves,
can work no miracles; much less the Devil or any his instruments, Antichrist
or false Prophets whatsoever; neither are they such that are wrought before the
Image of Mont-aigu: but if we will speak as Saint Augustine does, and call
that a miracle, miraculum voco, quicquid and ^^ aut insolit^m supra spem aut
facultatem mirantis apparet. de vtil. credendi c. 16.
which being hard or not usual, appears to be done beyond the hope and
ability of men that wonder at it; as it is commonly taken, sueh miracles the
devils can work, and false Prophets and sorcerers by his assistances, and not
only the holy Angels. But these are no way to be compared with the
authority of Gods word, in as much as true miracles themselves, without their
dependence and congruitie with the Scriptures, cannot now adays give any
credit or authority to any point of Doctrine or Religion. And therefore S.
Ecclesiam suam d^mostrent si possint, no^ in sermonibus etc. no in signis et
pr^dig^s fall l^cibus etc. sed in prescripto legis, in Prophaetarum predictis
etc. hoc est in omnibus canonicis sanctorum libroru^ authoritatibus. de vnitat.
Eccles, c. 16.
Augustine having to deal with the Donatists, in the question of the Church,
provoke and calls them from their signs and wonders, to the praescript of
Gods word; which is the touchstone of all miracles, as In c. 24. Mat. fol. 542.
as Ferus rightly observes from the testimony of Moses and our Savior: upon
which, he groundeth this true conclusion: Doctrina non ex miraculis, sed
miracula ex doctrina probanda sunt; that doctrine must not have his proof from
miracles, but miracles from the truth of doctrine: howsoever In his epistle
dedicat.
Chambers most untruly, if not blasphemously, auerreth, that miracles are more
evident proofs of a true Religion, then are the Scriptures.

Jbid.
But God (says he) being truth it self, cannot by his omnipotency give his
testimony to any error or falsehood: aend being very goodness it self, it is
impossible that he will permit us to be seduced by any his extraordinary
supernatural operations, etc. Which as I willingly acknowledge to be true, in
the elect; so I further add, that God permits Satan and his members
sometime to work miracles, not to the end that he would thereby give credit
and authority to their false doctrine and haeresies: but as In c. 24. Matht.
Ferus and Promp. nor. pars aestiual. dominica 24. post Pentecost.
Stapleton his Doctors observe, and that truly, ad probationem bonorum,
excaecationem vero malorum; for the proof and trial of the good his chosen,
and excaecation of the wicked and reprobate: According herein with Moses,
Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. The Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the
Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all your soul.

But miracles have been always in the Church, from her first infancy, and so
have continued from age to age, even to our times, as Li. 4. de Eccles. c. 14.
Bellarmine observes, which to In his Epist. dedicatorie.
Chambers seems an argument unanswerable.

We answer, not as he vainly conceiueth, that all such histories are fictions;
neither, by bare and incredulous denials, as he would make us, but we
distinguish the times, acknowledging that in the primative Church, miracles
were truly wrought; the exigence of the times so requiring, when the doctrine
of the Gospel was strange, new, and incredible to the natural man; and, as S.
Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.23.
to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Graecians foolishness: which gift
continued in the Church until both Jews and Gentiles were generally gathered
to Christ his flock. And yet, what small force there was in miracles, even in
those times of themselves, to bring men to the truth, when God withheld the
inward operation of his holy Spirit, by the efficacy of the word preached, is
manifest by some unbelieving Jews, who ascribed the miracles wrought by our
Savior himself, Matthew. c. 9. v. 34. etc. 12. v. 24.
to the power of Beelzebub the prince of the Devils.

As for the miracles of the latter ages, we answer with De vnitate Eccles. c.
16.
S. Augustine, Aut non sunt vera either they are not true, such as are many the
Legendarie Fables, and the miracles wrought amongst the Indians, by Franciscus
Xauerius, and others of that crew, as the Bellar. de notis Eccles. li. 4. c. 14.
Jesuits report: Aut si haereticorum aliqua mira facta sunt, or some of them
are true, as Haeretikes and Impostors in all ages have wrought some, and still
do by the assistance of Satan; and then we are to be the more wary of them, as
De vnitat. Eccles c. 16.
S. Augustine teaches us, as being wrought by the permission of God, for the
trial of his children, and further obdurance of the wicked.

And that we make no more reckoning of their miracles, they must not take it
amiss at our hands: the wiser and better learned amongst them have taught us
to do so, if we knew it not before. Aliquando fit in Ecclesia maxima deceptio
populi, in miraculis fictis a sacerdotibus, etc. Gloss. in c. 14. Daniel.
Lyranus acknowledges, that the people are sometimes much deceived in the
Church by miracles made by Priests and their consorts, for worldly gain. And
for the Writers of the Legends of their Saints, which are full fraught with
them, De vanitate scientiarum, ca. 97. Pietatis loco ducunt, men dacia pro
religi ne fingere De traden disciplinis, li 5.
Cornelius Agrippa gives this testimony of them, that they do miracala
fabricare, and confingere terribiles fabulas, make miracles after their own
devices, and feign terrible fables. Ludouicus Viues says, that they hold it
for a point of godliness, to coin lies in defense and maintenance of
Religion. And 2. Tim. 4. d^gress. 21.
Claudius Espencaeus, that no stable is so full of dung, as the Legends are of
fables; and that very fictions are contained in their Portesses. So Apparat.
sac. tit. Apochry.
Posseuine the Jesuit, the Critic of our age, confesses, that many
histories of the Saints lives are so written, vt haereticis subsannandi,
cordatis dubitandi, pijs lachrymandi occasionem praebeant; that they give
occasion to Heretics (it is the livery which the Jesuit bestows upon us) to
laugh in their sleeves; to men of courage and judgment, to suspect them; to
devout and godly men, occasion to weep and lament them. But of all others,
their Bishop Canus sets them forth in their colors. First he says that
the Historiographers amongst the Gentiles, Laertius, Suetonius, and such like,
Long incorruptius and integrius, etc. Loc. Theolog. l. 11. c. 6. fol 333
wrote the lives of their Philosophers and Emperors, with much more integrity
and sincerity then their Catholics had wrote the lives of their Martyrs,
Virgins, and Confessors: which Dolenter hoc dico, potius quam contumeliose, ib.
he uttered not by way of reproach, but from the very grief of his heart. He
says further, that whilst they follow their fond affections too much, they
make us Tales diuos quandoque nobis exhibent, quales diui ipsi et si possent,
esse tamen noluissent, ib.
such Saints sometimes, as the Saints themselves, if they might, would by no
means be such in very deed. Of which sort, the examples are so many, that
they cannot be numbered for multitude. He adds further that Olent aut
quaestuosorum hominum imposturam, aut quod Gelasius ipse ait, haereticorum
foetu^. ib.
they savor eith^r of the imposture and deceit of covetous men; or, as Pope
Gelasius says, of the untimely fruit of Heretics, res diuorum praeclare
gestas non se putant egregie exposituros, nisi eas fictis and reuelationibus
and miraculis adornarint, ib.
who think they cannot declare the noble deeds of Saints excellently well,
unless they garnish them with fained, both revelations and miracles. His
censure of the golden Legend is this, that a man may oftener read in it
miraculorum monstra, monstrous miracles, rather then true: branding the
Compiler of it with that mark which Sueton in vita Neronis.
Licinius Crassus set first upon Domitius, that Hanc homo scripsit ferreioris,
plumbei cordis, animicerie parum seueri and prudentis, Canus ^b.
he was a man of an iron face, and a leaden heart, and a mind neither severe
nor wise. To Divines he gives this wholesome admonition; that they do not
forthwith persuade themselves, that all things are absolutely perfect, Quae
magni authors scripserint. nam and labuntur aliquando, and indulgent
ingeniorum suorum voluptati, vulgoque, ib.
which great Authors have written, because they slide sometimes, and follow
their own wits will, and yield too much to the common people. In this rank he
places his Pope Gregory, and our Venerable Bede; the one in his dialogue, the
other in his English history, inserting such miracles, as were usually in
Miracula scribunt vulgo iactata and credita, quae huius praesertim seculi
Aristarchi incerta esse censebunt. Ib.
every man's mouth, and commonly believed: which the rigid Censors of this age,
would judge and repute for no better then uncertain. And speaking of
Vincentius and Antonine, he says that Vterque non tam dedit operam, vt res
veras certasque describeret, quam ne nihil omnino praeteriret, quod scriptum in
schedulis quibuslibet reperiretur. Jb.
they both endeavored, not so much to describe matters true and certain, as
that they might not omit ought that they found written in every scrole and cast
piece of paper.

Now if the case thus stands, as the learned Papists themselves deliver, not
only with the Legendaries, with Vincentius, and Antonine; but also with S.
Bid and Pope Gregory, yea with holy men and very great; that they have after
this manner stuffed the history of their Saints, with such prodigious and
monstrous false miracles; is it not a wonder to behold this punie Priest
Chambers, after the judgment and censure of so many learned reputed amongst
them, so boldly to insult, and bear himself upon the miracles, collected out
of their Chronicles and Legends, In his epist. dedic.
as though no men were able reasonably to make answer to this historical
demonstration, gathered before to his hand, by his great Bell. de notis Eccl.
l. 4. c. 14.
Master Bellarmine?

Yet will not this true answer of S. Augustines give him satisfaction, unless
we be able, by some ancient and In his epist. dedic.
authentical Chronicles, Records, Doctors, or learned Writers, to note the
time when God withdrew his powerable hand from these kinds of supernatural
works, or that ever they should end so long as his Church should last.

Here then let Chambers hear the record of S. Augustine, whom he calls
(and that worthily) the renowned and famous Champion of Gods Church; who to
some demanding of curiosity, why those miracles were not wrought now adays,
which were done in the times of our Savior and his Apostles? I might (says
he) answer Possem dicere necessaria fuisse priusquam crederet mundus, ad hoc vt
crederet mundus. De ciuit. Dei, li. 22 c. 8.
that miracles were needful before the world believed, that so by them, the
world might believe. But he that still requires miracles, to make him
believe, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo credente, non credit; himself is
a great wonder and miracle, who believes not now that the world is brought to
faith and belief. Of which assertion of his, concerning the ceasing of
miracles, after that the world was brought to the faith of Christ, Nunc
signorum petitio tentatio est. hom. 23. in Euangel. Johan
he gives many reasons in other his Treatises. As in his book de vera
Religione, c. 25. this amongst others, ne animus semper visibilia quaereret,
that the mind of man should not still seek after things visible, Et eoru^
consuetudine rigesceret genus humanu, quoru^ nouitate flagrauit
and mankind wax cold through the daily use of miracles, with the novelty
whereof it burned with zeal at the first. And de vtilitate credendi, c. 16.
quia non mouerent nisi mira essent, at si solita essent, miranon essent:
because miracles would not move men, unless they were wonderful, and
wonderful they would not be, if they were usual.

With Saint Augustine accords Chrysostom, affirming that the asking of
Miracles now adays, is a tempting of God. And to the question that some then
made, as the Papists do now, why are not miracles wrought as in former ages?
he returns this answer, Si fidelis es vt oportet, si Christum diligis vt
diligedus est, non indiges signis, signa enim incredulis dantur. ib
If thou be faithful as thou ought to be, if thou love Christ as thou
ought to do, thou need not signs and miracles; for these says he, are
for unbelievers.

So the Nunc signoru^ operatio o^nino laeuata est, magis aute^ et apud eos
inuenitur, qui falsi sunt Christiani, fieri facta. ho. 49.
author of the imperfect work upon Saint Matthew his Gospel, the working of
signs and miracles is now ceased and at an end, and it is found to be done
rather amongst them qui falsi Christiani sunt, who are false Christians: let
the Papists if there be any here present, mark the evidence that this author
gives.

In these steps of S. August. and Chrysostom, treads their Pope Greg.
Miracles (says he) Signa necesria in exordi^ Ecclesiae fuerunt. Vt enim ad
fidem cresceret multitudo credentium, miraculis fuerat nutrie^da, etc. hom. 29.
in Euangel.
were needful in the church in the beginning thereof, when faith was to be
nourished by them; as men do water plants which are newly set until they have
taken root; which being done, the watering cease; and so say I do miracles
in the Church. So likewise our English Numquid quia ista signa non facimus,
minime credimus? sed haec necessaria in exordio Ecclesiae fuerunt. l. 4 in Mar.
c. 16.
Bid, what says he? Do we not believe, because we work not these signs
and miracles? but these were needeful in the beginning of the Church. And b
Isidor Hispalensis: The reason why the Church works not the same miracles
which were done in the times of the Apostles is, Quod nunc Ecclesia non ea
miracula faciat, quae sub Apostolis faciebat, ca causa est, quia tunc oportebat
mundam miraculis credere, nunc vero iam credentem, oportet bonis operibus
coruscare, de summo bono. l. 1, cap. 27.
because the world was then to be brought to faith by miracles; but now
believing, it must shine with good works. And again, Iam in fide miracula
quicunque requirit, vanam gloria^ vt laudetur, quaerit. ib
He that now requires miracles when faith is planted, seeks after vain
glory, that he may be praised: he proceeds further, and avouches in plain
terms, that Antequam Antichristus appareat, virtutes ab ecclesia et signa
cessabunt, vt per hoc sanctorum clareat patientia, et reproborum qui
scandalizabuntur leuitas ostentetur, et perseque^ tium audacia ferocior
efficiatur, ib.
miracles shall cease in the Church before the coming of Antichrist, whereof
he alleges these reasons; that by this the patience of Saints may be famous;
and the leuitie of the reprobat, which are offended, may be showed; and the
boldness of persecutors may be made the more fierce.

To this grave testimony of the ancient Fathers, I will add the witness of some
of his own writers, that the negligent stupiditie of this Popish Priest may be
seen of all men more apparently. Amongst them, Catharinus in his discourse of
the worshipping of Images, has this saying in the end of his treatise, Non
dico vt inde (a cultu imaginu^) expectent oracula and signa, quae rara sunt,
neque curiosis conceduntur, nec expediret imperfectus ea dari, perfectis autem
minime necesse est. etc.
Men should not look for Oracles and Miracles from the worship of images,
which (says he) are rare, and not granted to curious persons; neither is it
expedient that they should be given to men that are imperfect; and as for such
as are perfect they need them not. Stella says, that Miracula potius nu^c
da^num nobis offerrent, qua^ commoda. Puer enim quando ambulare incipit,
adiunatur vehiculo, at si homo adultus etc. in Luc. c. 11.
miracles now a days, would rather hurt then profit us: as props which are
needful for Children to learn to go by, are a hindrance unto them, when
they are grown to man's estate; so (says he) if Miracles were wrought now
adays, men would be offended by them, and say that our Faith were not as yet
well grounded: beware therefore, lest it befall them to demand a sign at Gods
hand* satis sint tibi signa vetera, let the old signs and miracles suffice,
and do not now seek after new. As much says Promisit Christus vt discipuli
daemonia ^ijcerent quam promissionem, nullu^ his diebus effectum sortiri
dilucide cernimus, etc nec tame^ inanis illa promissio fuit, quam noluit
efficaciam habere perpetuam, sed pro tempore nascentis et adolescentis
Ecclesiae. De captiuit. Babilonica adu. Luther. c. 10. par. 4.
Fisher, sometimes bishop of Rochester. Christ promised that his disciples
should cast out devils, which promise we see to take no effect now adays;
because no man now does cast out Devils bodily, nor cure diseases, yet was not
that promise of our saviors vain, which he would not have to be always
effectual, but for the time wherein the Church was borne and grew up. With
whom accords also our unnatural Countriman Thomas Stapleton. Vt opera
miraculosa tunc necessaria erant ad fidem hominum animis ingenerandam, sic
postea bona opera Praedicatorum necessaria sunt ad fidei opera producenda.
Prompt. moral. dominic. 2. aduentus.
As (s^^th he) miracles were needful in the times of our Savior, that faith
might be bred in men's hearts; so afterward the good works of Preachers are
necessary, to bring forth the works of faith. Which he confirms with the
testimonies of S. Augustine and Gregory, which ye have already heard.

Now then, if S. Augustine, Chrysostom, Gregory, Bid, Isidore, be ancient
and authentical Doctors; if Catharine, Stella, Roffensis, Stapleton, be
learned Writers, as I assure my self Chambers dares not gainsay; then we have
from them an answer to his demand, and proved out of them, which he says In
his epist. dedic.
can never be done, not only that true miracles and wrought by the finger of
almighty God, are ceased in the Church, and the time when, (namely, when the
world was generally brought to the faith of Christ:) but further, that such as
in the clear Sunshine light of the Gospel, yet require miracles still, as
the Papists do, do tempt God in so doing, that they are infidels, without
faith and belief, that they love not Christ as they ought to do, that they
are false Christians, and hunters after vain glory. All which convince
Chambers of much ignorance, both in the ancient Fathers, and his own modern
Writers; and argue much folly in him, to conceive, not only of his Majesty
(whose wisdom and learning all that know, admire) but of any of us, that we
should be so simple and credulous, as to believe those miracles, which the most
learned amongst them reject as fabulous and foolish, as has been showed.

It irketh me to follow the pursuit of this ignorant Priest, who from his blunt
arguments comes in the end to the usual Popish rhetorike of railing and
reuiling, tearming us Heretics, and spending his jests upon us; Ib.
who therefore think miracles superfluous, because we can work none, as the
fox will eat no grapes, because he cannot get them.

But laying aside all bitterness and scurrill jesting in matters so weighty
and serious, and to speak the words of truth and soberness; we therefore
think miracles superfluous unto us, not because we can work none, which we
acknowledge, and therefore we attempt none; but because we profess the same
doctrine which our Savior and his Apostles, and such Apostolic men as
succeeded in the Primitive Church, have confirmed to our hands, by so many true
signs, and divine miracles, which all belong to us and our Church, who
profess the same faith which our Savior and his Apostles preached.

As for the faith of the Church of Rome, as it is new and strangely
degenerating from the ancient Catholic faith, so it is no marvel if it be
confirmed by new miracles, which are of the same nature with their new faith;
false, both the one and the other.

And yet to stop the mouths of our insolent adversaries, which are always
craking of their miracles; if with a single eye they will look upon our
Church, they may in it, and amongst us, behold such miracles as make greatly
for Gods glory, our private comfort, and the true honor of our Church.

For both the restoring of the purity of religion, in these late times, from
the dross and corruptions of Antichrist, was not without the extraordinary and
powerful working of almighty God; and the preservation thereof unto this day,
mauger all the conspiracies and forces of our enemies against our Princes and
our people, are such as euince sufficiently, that it is the Lords doing, and it
is wonderful in our eyes.

Again, if they will observe the fruit and efficacy of Gods word sincerely
preached amongst us, they may from thence behold De verbis domini secundum
Matthew. sermon. 18. See Chrysostom. hom. 6. in c. 2.1 ad Cor. And Greg hom. 39. in
Euangel. And Bernard. ser. 1. in ascensione Domini. And Raban. in Psalm. 9.
Maius fuit Paulum paersecutorem conuertere, quam Lazaru^ de monumento
suscitare, ib. Quae miracula tanto maiora ^unt, quanto per haec non corpora,
sed animae suscitantur. Gregor. supra.
maiores sanitates, as S. Augustine speaks, those greater cures and greater
wonders wrought amongst us in our Church, even those cures and wonders for
which our Savior and his Apostles did vouchsafe to work minores illas, those
lesser cures upon men's bodies.

For although now adays coeca caro non aperit oculos miraculo Domini, the
blind man is not restored to his sight by our Lords miracles; yet cor coecum
(...) oculos sermon Domini, the blind heart of man opens the eyes of his
understanding, by the efficacy of his word preached amongst us. The carcass
that lies dead in the grave, is not raised up; but the soul that lies dead,
even in the living body, by reason of sins and trespasses, is quickened
amongst us, by the preaching of the Gospel: the ears which were deaf before,
and stopped at the crying of the poor; the hands which were fast bound and
shut from their relief, are open to hear their groans and requests, and
loosed liberally for their comfort.

Witness your own eyes and ears this very day, here at home amongst your
selves, which may hear and see the multitudes of Christ his poor and
distressed members; most charitably and carefully relieved in your See the
number of these poor, affixed to the Psalm of thanksgiving, sung by the
children of the Hospital, upon Monday in Easter week. 1609.
Hospitals, to the great glory of God, the comfort of the poor and afflicted,
and the eternal memory of the worthy founders and benefactors of the same.

Witness abroad the planting intended, or rather already happily begun of our
English Colonie in Virginia, whither the charity of our late Sovereign of all
blessed memory Lady Elizabeth, and of his most excellent Majesty now reigning,
assisted with the godly endeavors of many chief and of principal note in this
noble City, has extended, to their great costs, labors, and perils, for the
gaining and winning to Christ his fold, and the reducing unto a civil society
(as hope may justly conceive) of so many thousands of those silly, brutish,
and ignorant souls, now fast bound with the chains of error and ignorance,
under the bondage and slavery of the Devil.

Which being the principal scope of this business, we may with Gods blessing
assuredly expect the fruits which usually accompany such godly enterprises; as
are the honor of his Majesty, whose name shall by this means be glorious
unto the ends of the world, the enlarging and further strengthening of his
Realms and Dominions, the easing of this Land, which even groaneth under the
burden and numbers of her i^^^bitants, the plentiful enriching of our selves
and our Country with such commodities as she now labors with the penury of
them: all which, and many other of this sort, I wittingly passe-ouer, as having
been at sundry times and places, by diverse of more ability and leisure,
commended to your godly considerations: nothing remaining to be said by me in
this kind, but that with all thankfulness we acknowledge, and with most
hearty prayers we commend to almighty God the happy preservation and
continuance amongst us, of that noble instrument of his glory, our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King James, by whom he effects so powerfully his
miraculous works now adays in our Church, to the wonder and astonishment of
the world, not wilfully malignant.

Thus if need were, we could speak, and that without vanity, of the true
miracles of our Church: as for those false and fabulous sorts which I have
touched, I leave them to those Mirabiliarij, as Tractat. 13. in Euangel.
Johannis.
S. Augustine calls them, our Popish miracle-mongers, by which they are
descried to be the very limbs of Antichrist, and natural brethren of these
old Heretics, the Aug. de haeres. c. 24.
Seuerians, and the Id. de vnitat. Eccles. c. 16. and tractat. 13, in Johan.
Donatists, and therefore those false Prophets of which our Savior forewarned
us, when he said, Beware of false Prophets.

The fourth instance which I proposed as a note to distinguish the true and
false Prophets, is their life and conversation; which answering to true faith
and doctrine, is a note of the true Prophet, it being sincere and holy, as
otherwise if corrupt, a sign of the false. For Chrysostom. ex varijs in Mat.
locis, hom. 11.
Indicium me^tis operata hominis, a man's work is the manifestation of his heart
and mind, and therefore Qui ouium indumento co^tecti, quod profitentur,
infamant, qui aliud docent, quam faciunt, etc, ib.
though he be clothed with the Sheep weed, if he teach one thing and do
another, if he be a shame and obloquie to his profession, he is a false
Prophet, Ibid.
as Chrysostom rightly observes from the words of our Savior, ye shall know
them by their fruits.

Here then if I should go about to rip up the lives of the Romish Praelates:
as there would be no end of it, so the savor thereof would be most unpleasant
and offensive to your chaste senses; which I could make evident, not as they do
from the slanderous reports of Bolseck, Coclaeus, Staphilus and such
companions, against our reverend Pastors, Luther, Calvin, Beza, to whom they
were professed enemies: but out of their own writers, and some of them so
near, as that they were eyewitnesses of the things which they report.

Tacitus said long since of Rome heathenish, Quo cuncta vndiqueatrocia ac
pude^da co^flu unt celebra^turque Annal. l. 15.
That all shameless and heinous enormities ran into it, as into a common
sewer, which Theodoricus of Cu^ Nilo porte^ta paris, nutris crocodilos, etc. de
scisma l. 3.6 41.
Niem one attending sometime on the Pope, makes good upon Rome popish applying
certain verses unto it, wherein it is compared with Nilus which bred monsters,
and nourished Crocodiles. And there Saint Bridget affirmed, that she heard the
blessed Virgin saying to her Son, that Roman esse ferace^ agru^: respondisse
vero christu^, est, sed zizaniae catalog. test verit. to^. 2. page 800.
Rome was a fruitful field, to whom Christ should answer, it was so indeed,
but the fruitfulness thereof consisted in tares. Epistol. 20.
Petrarch calls it the mother of al Idolatry, the refuge and Sanctuary of
all errors. Ministri christi sunt, et seruiunt Antichristo. ser. 33. in Cantica.
Bernards complaints are not so many, as just; he says of the whole Clergy,
that in name they are the Ministers of Christ, but in very deed the Servants
of Antichrist, whose sins were grown to that height, as Vitia nostra eo
creuere, vt vix apud deu^ misericordiae locum nobis reliquerint, in vita
Marcel. 1
Platina one of the Popes Secretaries reports, that they scarcely left any
room with God for his mercy. Now all these, and many of this sort put
together, say no more then what Pope Nos scimus quod in hac sa^cta sede, ia^
annis aliquot multa fuerunt abhominabilia etc Nec miru^ est, quod infirmitas a
capite in me^bra, a Papis in minores prelatos deriuarit, etc. paralipome^ ad
Chro. Abatis vsperg.
Adrian the sixth gave his Legate in charge to confess before the States of
Germany at a meeting of theirs, that Rome had for many years together
offended, and that many ways, and that all Plurimis. nunc annis grauiter
multisque modis p^ccatum esse Romae, et inde a Pontificio culmine malu^ hoc
atque luem ad inferiores omnes ecclesiarum Praesectus defluxisse. Slei dan
Commentar. l. 4.
this corruption, and infection, flowed from the Pope, as from the head unto
the inferior and lower Praelates; according with the Prophet Jeremy, c. 23.
verse. 15. From the Prophets of Jerusalem, is wickedness gone forth into all
the Land.

Habetis confitentem reum, ye hear the Pope answer guilty to the crimes
objected, what need then have we of any more witnesses? If Decima nota est
sanctitas vitae Auctorum sieve primorum patrum nostra religionis. De notis
Eccles. li. 4 cap. 13.
sanctity of life, especially of chief Pastors, be a note of the church, as
Bellarmine says, then a contrario, the wicked and abominable life of our
Romish Praelates, argue sufficiently that they are the false Prophets of which
our Savior gave us this watchword, beware of false Prophets. Whereby it
appears what may be inferred upon that Antecedent, which In his preface to
his Detection of Master Jewels errors and lies.
Thomas Harding himself makes and acknowledges. What if Popes have suffered
great Princes and Monarkes to kiss their feet, to hold their Stirrops, to
lead their Horses by the Bridle? What if a Pope showed himself cruel and
without pity, in suffering Francis Dandalus the Venetians Ambassador to lie
under his table like a Dog, whiles he was at dinner? What if Pope Alexander
used Frederick the Emperor more proudly, then became a man of his calling?
What if the Popes at certain times cared not, or, for the wretchedness of
Man's ill inclination could not, or for great considerations would not utterly
purge the City of Rome, of Curtesans and Brodel-houses? What if the life of
many Priests, Bishops, Cardinals yea of some Popes also, has justly deserved
to be reproved? must this now be made a good argument; some of their lives
were sinful, ergo their Doctrine was false? Not so M. Harding, we conclude
not so, but we infer out of Hom. 11. ex variis in Mat. locis.
Chrysostom and De notis Eccles. l. 4. ca. 13.
Bellarmine: the lives of many your Popes and chief praelats, were most
sinful, flagitious and heinos: therefore they were no sound members of the true
Church; but such false Prophets, as being clothed with Sheep skins, are
not-withstanding inwardly no better then ravening Wolves.

How then comes it to pass (belooued in the Lord) that this famous and
ancient City of London, the Mother City of the Kingdom, the beauty and
glory of the land, is become a cage of these unclean and filthy Birds, and a
Den for such ravening wolves, as thirst after nothing more then your blood, and
that not of the body alone, but much more of your souls? Gal. 3.1.
have ye been delivered from the bondage and darkness of Aegipt, into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and sunshine light of the Gospel, to
return again in your hearts, into bondage and darkness, more then
Aegyptiacal? Shall I demand with the Apostle, Who has bewitched you that ye
should not obey the truth? Are they these popish Sirens, with their alluring
songs of hope, and expectation of a golden day, so long expected, and so
hopefullie conceived in the declining age of that most renowned Q. Lady
Elizabeth, our late Sovereign? But the tune of that Song is altered, (God have
the glory for it) and they lament anotherwhile (and so may they ever) with O
spes fallaces, O our deceitful hopes, our vain dreams, our idle
imaginations: D. Bishop in his Epist. to the King.
the state is now settled (they say) and so let it be, O Lord, even for ever and
ever) and a continual posterity is like to ensue of one nature and condition,
Amen Lord Jesus. Is it the splendour of their miracles, which so long have
dazeled the eyes of the World? but these are convinced to be false and
fabulous; or no better, then the workings of Satan, and illusions of
Antichrist. Is it the sincerity of their doctrine? but that is no better then
the Beggars cloak, patched together of old haeresies, long since condemned by
the Catholic Church, as in part has been showed, and may as easily be proved
in the rest. See Faxa sacrae panitentiariae.
They rob God of his honor, and give it to stocks and stones: they take Christ
his office from him, and join Saints with him in his Mediatorship, Gods sacred
word is but a babble with them; and of no worth, in regard of their traditions,
and unwritten verities: their religion is the high way to Atheism, and al
impiety; there being no sin so heinous, so enormous which they dispense not
with by their indulgencies: and pardon by their absolutions, incest, rapes,
murders, vows, periuries, all venial, so money be not wanting.

Their profession is known to be the dethroning and murdering of princes: and
for their practice it is the utter overthrow of civil states, and societies, by
swearing and forswearing, by Aequiuocating and dissembling, taking aaway all
truth and sincere dealing from amongst men. As for their life and manners; no
puddle is more impure then this sinck: Romans 1.26.28. et v. 21.
and that by the just judgment of Almighty God, God giving them up to vile
affections, and to ^ reprobate mind because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankeful, as the Apostle speaks of
the Gentiles, and is as truly verified in the Romanists.

So that if any man here present, will still be misled and seduced by the
false Prophets, notwithstanding the warning that has been given, I must
pronounce of him, (though with much grief of heart) that he is guilty of his
own blood, Eccles. 33.4.
his blood be upon his own head; for my part, I say, as (...) is in the
Prophet, for the integrity of my conscience, and discharge of this duty,
liberaui animam meam, I have delivered my own soul, now look ye to it.

But for you (belooued in the Lord, of whom we have persuaded our selves
better things, and such as accompany salvation) stand fast, I beseech you, in
the bowels of Christ, in the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, which ye
have received, grounded upon Christ the Cornerstone, and sealed unto you with
his blood, and with the blood of his holy Martyrs in all ages; and beware of
false Prophets, beware of these Sheep-skin'd wolves: try their spirits,
examine their faith, look into their manners: by these fruits you may know
them; and knowing them, avoid their steps which lead to hell and destruction.
Which that ye may be able to do, that God of mercies, and father of all
goodness, which commanded the light to shine out of darkness, illighte^ the eyes
of your understandings, confirm you with his grace, and guide you with his
holy spirit amidst the storms of these last and perilous times, that so in the
end ye may ariue at the haven of all bliss and happiness. Amen.

FINIS.

