The parable of the Wicked Mammon.

Compiled in the year of our Lord. M. d. xxxvi. W. T.

Romans. iii. Chap. We hold that a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law. Imprynted at Lodon by Ihon day, dwelling in Sepulchers
Paryshe at the sign of the Resurrection, a little above Holbourne Co^duit. M.
d. xlvii.

Wyllyam Tindale otherwise caled Hychins to the reader.
GRace and peace with all manner spiritual felyng and lyuinge worcester thy of the
knidnes of Christ, be with the reader and with all that thrist the will of God
Amen.

The cause why I set my name before this little treatise and have not rather
done it in the new testament is, that then I fo lowed the council of Christ
which exhorts men Matthew. vi. to do their good deades secretly and to be
content with the conscience of welldoynge, and that God sees us, and
pacyent^ye to a bide the reward of the last day which Christ has purchased
for us: and now would feign have done likewise, but am compelled otherwise to
do.

While I a bode a faithful companion which now has taken another viage
upon him, to preach Christ where (I suppose) he was never yet preached (God
which put in his heart thither to go send his spirit with him, comfort him,
and bring his purpose to good effect) one Willyam Roy a man so^^what craftye
when he comes unto new acquayntaunce and before he be through known and
namely when all is spent, came unto me and offered his help. As long as he
hade no money, somewhat I could rule him, but as soon as he had gotten him
money, he became like himself again.

Nevertheless, I suffered all things till that was ended which I could not do
alone without one both to write and to help me to compare the textes together.
When that was ended, I took my leave and bad him farewell for our two lives,
and as men say a day longer, After we were departed he went, and gat him new
friends which thing to do he passes all that ever I yet knew. And there
when he had stored him of money he got him to Argentyne where he professes
wonderful faculties and makes bost of no small things. A year after that and
now. xii. Months before the pryntynge of this work, came one Jerome a
brother of Grene which also, through Worms to Argentyne, saiynge: that he
intended to be Christ's disciple another while and to keep (as nigh as God
would give him grace) the profession of his bap tysme, and to get his living
with his hands, and to live no longer ydely and of the sweat and labor of
those captyues which they had taught, not to believe in Christ: but in cut
shows and russet coetes. Which Ierom with all diligence I warned of Royes
boldness and exhorted him to be ware of him and to walk quiyetly and with all
patience and long sufferynge according as we have Christ and his Apostles
for an ensample, which thing he also promised me. Ne uerthelesse when he was
comen to Argentyne willyam Roye (whose tunge is able not only to make fools
sterke mad, but also to deaceyue the wyseste that is at the first sight and
acquaintance) gat him to him and set him a work to make rymes, while he him
self translated adyaloge out of laten in to english. In whose prologe he
promises more a great deal than I fere me he will ever pay.

Paul says the second Epistel to Timothe the second Chapter, the servant
With Gods word ought a man to rebuke wikednes and false doctrine and not with
raylyng times
of the Lord must not strive, but be peaceable unto all men and ready to teach,
and one that can suffer the evil with meekness, and that can inform the^
that resist, if God at any time will give them repentance for to know the
truth. It be comes not then the lords servant to use raylynge rymes, but
Gods words which is the right weapon to slay sine, vice and all iniquity.
The scripture of God is good to teach and to improve. ii. Ti. iii. ii. Tes.
ii. Paul speaking, of Antichrist says, whom the Lord shall destroy with ye
sprete or breath of his mouth, that is, with the word of God. And. ii.
Corinthians, tenth The weapens of our war are not carnal things (says he)
but mighty in God to cast down strong holds and so forth: that is, to
destroy hye buyldinges of false doctrine. The word of God is that day whereof
Paul speaks. i. Cor. iii. which shall declare al things, and the fire
which shall try every man's work and consume false doc tryne: with that
swearde ought me^ sharp ly to fight, and not to rail with foolysh rymes. Let
it not offend the yt so^e walk inordinatly, let not the wickedness of Judas
cause the to despise the doctrine of his fellows. No man ought to think that
Steue^ was a false preacher because that Nicolas which was chosen fellow with
him. Actu, vi. to ministre unto the wydowes, fell after in to great heresies
as histories make mention. Good and evil go always together, one can not be
Antichryst.
known with out the other. Mark this also a boue al things that Antichriste
is not an outward thing, that is to say, a man that should suddenly appear
with wonders as our fathers talked of him.

No verily for Antichrist is a spiritual Antichryst is as much to sai as
against Christ and is nothing but a ^recher of false doctrine.
thing. And is as much to say as against Christ, that is one that preaches
^^ls^ doctrine contraty to Christ. Antichriste was in the old Testament and
fought with the prophtes, he was also in ye time of Christ and of the Apostles
as thou rea dest in the epistels of Ihon and of Paul to the Corinthians and
Galathians, and Antichrist was ever.
other Epistles. Antichriste is now and shall (I dout not) endure till the
worlds end. But his nature is (when he is uttered and overcome with the word
of God) Antichrist wh^ he is spied, goes out of the play and disguyseth him
self and then comes in again.
to go out of the play for a season and to disgyse him self and then to come
in again with a new name and new rayme^t.

As thou seyst how Christ rebukes the scrybes and the pharisees in the Gospel
(which were very Antichrists) saing woe be to you pharisees for ye rob widows
houses ye pray long prayers under a color, ye shut up the kingdom of
heaven and suffer not them that would to enter ^^^^e have take away the key
of knowledge, ye make men break gods commau^ dementes with your tradicions, ye
begile the people with hypocrisy and such like. Which things all our
prelates do: but have yet gotten them new names and other garments and
weeds, and are other wise dysgysed. There is difference, in the names between a
pope, a Cardinal, a Bishop, and so forth, and to say a scribe, a pharisey, a
sen^oure and so forth: but the thing is all one. Even so now when we have
uttered him, he will change him ^^lfe ones more and turn himself in to (...)
angel of light. ii. Corin. xi. Read the place I exhort the, what so ever thou
art that read this and note it well The Jews look for Christ and he is
come. xv. hundred years a go and they not ware: we also have looked for
Antichrist and he has raygned as long and we not ware, and because either of
us look carnally for him and not in the places where we ought to have sought.
The Jews had found Christ verily if they had sought him in the law and the
prophets, whither Christ sends them to seek Jhon. v. We also had spied out
Antichrist long Antychrist is a spiritual thing and cannot be seen but in the
sight of gods word.
a go if we hade looked in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, where
because the beast sees himself now to be sought for, he roareth and seeks new
holes to hyde him self in and changes himself in to athousande fashions with all ma^^^r wilines, falshed, subteltie and craft. Because that his
excommunications ar com to light he makes it treason unto the king, to be
acquainted with Christ. If Christ and they may not rainge together, one hope
we have, that Christ shall live ever. The old Antichrists brought Christ
unto Pylate saiynge by our law he ought to dye, and when Pylate bad the^,
judge him after your law they answred it is not law full for us to kill any
man: which they did to the intent yt they which regarded not the shame of their
fause ex The prelates ^auea burning ^eale to their ^hyldren
comunicacions, should yet fear to confess Christ because that the
temporal swearde had condemned him. They do all thing of a good zele they
say they love you so well that they had lever burn you then that you should
have feloweshyppe with Christ. They are gelous over you a mysse (as says
saint ^aule Gala. iiii.) They would deuyde you ^ro^ Christ and his holy
testament and join you to the pope to believe his testament and promyses. Some
man will ask peradventure why I take ye labor to make this work in as much as
they will burn it seyenge they burnt the Gospel? I answer in burning* the
new testament they did none other thing then that I looked for, no more shall
they do yt they burn me also if it be Gods will it shall so be. Nevertheless in
transslatyng ye new testament I did my d^utye, and so do I now, and will do as
much more as God has ordained me to do. And as I offered that to all men to
correct it, whosoever could, even so do I this. Who so ever therefore reads
this, compare it unto the Try all doetryne hy Gods word.
scripture. If Gods word bear record unto it and thou also feleste in thine
h^^^e that it is so, be of good comfort and gene God thanks. If gods word
condemn it the^ hold it accurssed, and so do al other doctrins As Paul
counceleth his Galathians. Believe not every spryte suddenly, but judge them by
the word of God, which is the trial of al doctrine, and last teth for ever.

Amen
The parable of the wicked Mammon. Luke. xvi. Cha.
THere was a certain rich man, which had a steward that was acused un to him
that he had wasted his goods. And he called him and said unto him. How is it
that I hear this of the? Give accomptes of thy stewardshyp. For thou may be
no longer my steward. The steward said with in himself: what shall I do? for my
master will take away from me my stewardshyp. I cannot dygge, and to beg I am
ashamed. I wot what to do, that when I am put out of my stewardshyp, they may
receive me into their houses.

The^ called he al his masters detters and said unto the first, how much owe
thou unto my master? And he said, an. C. tonnes of oil, And he said unto him,
take thy byl, and sit down quickly, and write. l. Then said he to another,
what owe you? And he said, an. C. quarters of wheat. He said unto him. Take
thy byl and write. lxxx. And the Lord commended the unjust steward, because he
had done wisely. For the children of this world, are in their kind wiser then
the children of light. And I say also unto you, make you fryndes of the wicked
Mammon, that when ye shall have need, they may receive you into everlasting
habitatio^s.

FOr as much as with this and diverse such other textes, many have enforced to
draw the people from the true faith and from putting their trust in the
truth of Gods promyses and in the merits and deseruynge of his Christ our
Lord, and have also brought it to pass, for many false prophets shall arise
and deceive many, and much wyckednes must also be, says Christ. Mat. xxiiii.
And Paul says. Ti. iii. Fuyl men and deceivers shall prevail in evil while
they deceive and are deceived them selves, and have taught the^ to put trust in
their own merits, and brought the^ in belefe that they shall be justified in the
sight of God by the goodness of their own works and have corrupt the pure
word of God to confyrme their Aristotle wtal. For though that the
philosophers and worldly wise men were enimyes above al enemies to the Gospel
of God, and though the worldly wisdom cannot comprehend the wisdom of God,
as thou may se i. Corin. i. and. ii. And though worldly ryghtuousnes cannot
be obediente unto the They give mo re faith to Aristotle then to Christ.
ryghtuousnes of God: To. x. Yet whatsoever they read in Aristo, that must
first be true. And to mayntayn that, they rent and tear the scriptures with
their distin ctions and expound them violently, contrary to the meaning of the
text, and to the circumstances that go before and after, and to a thousand
clear and euidente textes. Wherefore, I have taken in hand to expound this
Gospel and certain oter places of the new testament and (as farfurth as God
shall lend me grace) to bring the scripture unto the right sense, and to dygge
again the wels of Abraham and to purdge and cle^se them of the earth of worldly
wisdom, wherwyth these Philistians have stopped them. Which grace grant me
God, for the love that he has unto his son Jesus our Lord, un to the glory
of his name.

Amen.
THat faith only before alworkes and without al merits but Chri stes only,
justifies, and sette^h us at peace with God: is proved by Paul. Roman. i. I
am not a shamed (says he) of the Gospel, that is to say, of the glad tidings
and promyses which God has made and sworn to us in Christ For it (that is
the Gospel) is the power of God unto salvation, to all that believe. And it
follows in the foresaid Chapter the just or ryghtous must live by faith.

For in the faith which we have in The law is death, and the promyses life
Christ and in Gods promyses find we mercy, life, favor, and peace. In the
law we find death, damnation, and wrath* moreover, the curse and vengeance
of God upon us. And it (that is to say the law) is called of Paul. ii. Cor.
iii. the ministration of death and dampnation. In the law we are proved the
enemies of God, and that we hate him. For how ca^ The law wha^ it is preached
gives no power to fulfill the same.
we be at peace with God, and love him, seeing we are conceived and borne under
the power of the Devil and are his possessyon and kingdom, his captives and
bondmen, and led at his will, and he holds our her^es, so that it is
impossible for us to consent to the will of God, much more is it impossible for
a man to fulfill the law, of his own strength and power seeing that we are by
birth and of nature the heirs of eternal damnation. As says s. Paul Ephe ii.
We (says he) are by nature the children of wrath. Which thing the law does
but utter only and helps us not, yea, she requires impossi ble things of
us The law when it com maundeth that thou shall not lust gives the not power
so to do, but damneth the, because thou can not so do.

IF thou wylt therefore be at peace with God and love him, thou must turn to
the promyses of God and to the Gospel, which is called of Paul in the place
before rehearsed and to the Corin. the ministration of rightuous nes and of the
spirit. For faith brings pardon and forgeuenes freely purchased by Christ's
blood and brings also the spirit, the spyrite loses the bonds of the
devil and sets us at lybertye. For where the spirit of the Lord is there is
lybertye says Paul in the same place to the Corinthians, that is to say,
there the heart is free and has power to love the will of God, and there the
heart mourns that he ca^ not love enough. Now is that consent of the heart unto
the law of God The consenting unto the law with the heart is eternal life.
eternal life, ye though there be no power yet in the members to fulfill it.
Let every man therefore (according to Paul's council in the. vi Cha. to the Ephe.
arm himself with the armor of God, that is to understand, with Gods
promyses, and above al thing (says he) take unto you the shylde of faith,
wherewith ye may be able to quench all the fyry darts of the wicked, that ye
may be able to resist in the evil day of temptacyon, and namely at the
hour of death.

Se therefore thou have Gods promy ses in thyn heart and that thou believe the^
without wauerynge: and when temptacyon aryseth, and the deuel layth the law and
thy deeds against the, answer him with the promyses and turn to God and
confess thy self to him and say it is even so, or else how could he be
merciful? but remember that he is the God of mercy and of truth and can not
but fulfill his promyses. Also remember that his sons blood is stronger then
all the sins and wyckednesses of the whole world and therwyth quiet thy
self, and there unto commyt 'thy self, and bless thy self in all temptacyon
(namely at the hour of death) with that holy candel Or else perishest thou
though thou have a thousand holy candels about the, a hundred tonne of holy
water, a shipfull of pardons, aclothsacke full of freers coats and all the
ceremonies in the world, and all the good works deseruinges, and merytes of
all men in the world be they or were they ne uer so holy. Gods word only
lasts for ever and that which he has sworn does abide, when all other
things peryshe. So long as thou find any con sent in thine heart unto ye
law of God yt it is righteous and good, and also disple sure that thou can
not fulfill it, dispayr not, nether dout, but that Gods sprite is in the, and
that thou art chose^ for Christ's sake, to the enheritaunce of eternal life.

And again, To. iii. We suppose that a man is justified through faith without
the deeds of the law. And likewise To. iii. We say that faith was rekened to
Abraham for righteousness. Item To. v. Seeing that we are justified through
faith, we are at one with God. Ite^ To. x. With the heart does a man believe to
be made ryghteous. Item Gal. iii. Received ye the spirit by the deeds of the
law, or by hearing of the faith? He which ministers the spirit unto you and
workeh miracles among you does he it by the deades of the Law or by hearing
of faith? Even as Abraham believed God and it was tekened to him for ryghteous
nes. Understa^de therefore (says he) that the children of Abraham. For the
scripture saw before, that God would iustifi the heythen or gentyls by faith,
and showed before glad tidings unto Abraham, in thy sede shall al nacious be
blessed. Where fore they which are of faith shall be blessed, that is to say made
ryghteous with the righteous Abraham. For as many as are of the deeds of the
law are under the curse For it is written (says he) curssed is every man that
contynueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
fulfill them.

Item Gal. ii. where he resists Peter in the face he says. We which are
Jews by nation and not sinners of the gentyls, know that a man is not
justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus. Christ and have
therefore believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be iustfied by the faith of
Christ, and not by the deeds of the law: for by the deeds of the law shall no
flesh be justified. Item in ye same place he says Toutchyng that Inow live, I
leave in ye faith of the son of God, which loved me and gave him self for me
I despise not the grace of God. For if ryghteousnes com by the law, then is
Christ dead in vain. And of such like ensamples are all the epistles of Paul
full. Mark how Paul labors with him self to express the exceadyng
mysteryes of faith in the epistle to the Ephesians, and in the Gpistle to the
Collossians. By this and many such like textes are we sure that the forgeuenes
of sins and iustifienge is appropriate unto faith only with out the adding
of the works. Take for the also the lykenes that Christ makes Mat. vii. A
good tree brings forth good fruit. And a bad tree brings forth bad fruit.
There seyst thou that ye fruit makes not the tree good, but the tree the fruit,
and that the tree must before hand be good or be made good: e^ it can bring
forth good fruit. As he also says. Mat. xii. either make the tree good and
his fruit good also, et her make the tree bad and his fruit bad also. How can
ye speak well while ye your selves are evil? So likewise is this true and
nothing more true, that a man before all good works must first be good, and
that it is impossible that works should make him good, if he were not good
before, e^ he did good works. For this is Christ's prynciple and (as we say)
a general rule.

How can ye speak well, while ye are euel? So likewise how can ye do good,
while ye are euel?

This is therefore a plain, and a sure couclusion not to be dowted of, that
there A man must have so^e good nes in his heart before be bring forth good
works
must be first in the heart of a man before he does any good works greater
and a preciouser thing then all the good works in the world to reconcyle him
to God to bring the love and favor of God, to him, to make him love God
again to make him righteous and good in the sight of God, to do away his
sin, to deliver him and loose him, out of that captivity wherein he was
conce^ued and borne, in which he could nether love God nor the will of God. Or
else how can he work any good work that should please God, if there were not
some supernatural good nes in him given of God freely whereof the good work must
spring? even as a syck man must first be healed or made whole, e^ he can do
the deeds of an whole man, and as the blind man must first have sight given
him er he can se: and he that has his fete in fetters, gives, or stocks must
first be loused or he can go, walk or run, and even as they which thou
read of in the Gospel, that were possessed of the deuyls, could not laud
God till the deuyls were cast out.

That precious thing which must be in the heart er a man ca^ work any good
work is the word of God which in the Gospel precheth, profereth, and brings
unto all them that repent and believe, the favor of God in Christ. Whosoever
hears the word and believes it, that same is thereby righteous, and thereby is
given him the spirit of God, which leads him unto all that is the will of
God, and is loused from the captivity and bondage of the deucll, and his heart
is fre to love God, and has lust to do the will of God. Therefore it is called
the word of life, the word of grace, the word of health, the word of
rede^pcion the word of forgeuenes, and the word of peace. He that hears it
not or believes it not, can by nomeanes be made ryghteous before God.

This confirmth S. Peter in the xv. chapter of the acts, sayng that God tho
row faith does purify the hertes For of what nature soever the word of God is,
of the same nature must the hertes be which believe thereon and cleue there unto.

Now is the word living, pure, ryghteous and true, and even so makes it the
hertes of them that believe thereon. If it be said that Paul (when he says
Roma. the. iii. No flesh shall be or can be justified by the deeds of the
law) means it of the ceremonies or sacrifices, it is a lie verelye. For it
follows immediately, by the law comes the knowleg of sin.

Now are they not the ceremonies that utter sin, but the law of
commandments. The law utters sin, and setteh us at de bate.
In the. iiii (he says) the law causes wrath which can not be understand of
the ceremonies for they were given to reconcyle the people to God again after
they had sinned. If as they say the ceremonies which were given to purge sin
and to reconcile, justify not, nether bless but temporallye only, much more
the law of cammaundementes justifies not. For that which proves a man sike
heals him not, nether does the cause of wrath bring him to favor, nether ca^
yt which damneth, save a man When the mother co^maundith her child, but even
to rock the cradell, it grudgeth: this commandment does but utter the poison
that lay hyd, and sets him at debat with his mother and makes him believe
she loves him not. These commandments also (thou shalt not covet thy
neighbors house, thou shall not lust, desire, or wish after the neybours
wife servant, maid, ox or ass, or what soever pertayneth un to thy
neighbor) give not me power so to do, but utter that poison that is in me and
dampne me, because I can not so do, and prove that God is wrath with me, seeing
that his will and mine are so contrary. Therefore says Paul Gala iii. If there
had been given such a law that could have given life, the^ no doubt ryghteous
nes had come by the law: but the scripture did conclude all under sin (says
he) that the promise might be given unto them that believe through the faith that
is in Jesus Christ.

The promyses when they are believed, The promises justify.
are they that iustyfie, for they bring the spirit which louseth the heart,
gives lust to the law and certyfieth us of that good will of God unto us ward.
If we submytte our selves unto God and desire him to heal us, he will do it,
and will in the mean time (because of the consent of the heart unto the law)
count us for full whole and will no more hate us, but pytie us, cherish us, be
tender herted to us, and love us as he does Christ him self, Christ is our
redemer, savior, peace, atonement, and satisfaction, and has made ame^des
or satisfaction, to God ward for all the sin which they that repent
(consentinge to the law and felelynge the promyses) do, have done, ^r shall
do. So that if th^rowe frag^^^e we fall a thousand* times in a day, yet if we
do repent again, we have al way mer cy laid up for us in stoare in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

WHat shall we say then to those criptures which go so fore upon good works?
As we read Math, xxv. I was as hu^ gred and ye gave me meat. etc.

And such like. Which all sound as though we should be justified and accep
ted unto the favor of God in Christ through good works. This wise answer
I. Many there are which when they hear or read of faith, at once they co^se^t
there unto and have a certain ymaginacion or opinion of the faith, as when aman
tells a storye or a thing done in a strange land, that pertayneth not to
the^ at all. Which yet they believe and tell as a true thing. And this
ymaginacyon or opinion they call faith. They think no farther then that faith
is a thing which stands in their own power to have, as do other natural
works, which men work: but they feel no manner workynge of that spirit,
neither the terrible sentence of the law, the fearful judgments of God, the
horrible damnacion and captivity under Satan. Therefore as soon as they have
this opinion or imaginacion in their hertes: that says: verily this doctrine
seems true, I believe it is even so.

Then they think that the right faith is there. But afterward when they feel
in them selves, and also se in other that there is none alteracion, and that the
works follow not but that they are altogether even as before, and abide in
their old estate: then think they that faith is not sufficient, but that it
must be some greater thing, then faith that should justify a man. So fall
they away from faith again, and cry sainge faith only iustifyeth not a man,
and makes him acceptable to God. If thou ask them wherefore They answer, se
how many there ar that believe and yet do no more then they did before. These ar
they which Judas in his epistle caleth dreamers which deceive the^ selfs with
their own fa^tasies For what other thing is their imaginacion which they call
faith, then a dreamyng of ye faith and an opinion of their own imaginacion
wrought wout the grace of God? These must needs be worse at the later end the^
Old vesselle^ that (...) is put (...) Mat^
at the beginning. These ar ye old vessels, yt rent when new wine is powered
into them, that is, they hear Gods word but hold it not, and therefore wax
worse then they were before. But the right faith sprin geth not of ma^s fa^tasy,
another is it in any man's power to obtain it, but is altogether the pure gift
of god poured in to us fr^lye with out all manner doing of us* without
deserving and merits, ye and without seekinge for of us. And it is (as Paul
says. ii. Ephesians.) even gods gift and grace purchased through Christ Thet for is
it mighty in operation, full of virtue and ever workynge, which also renueth a
man and begets him again, alters him, altogether in to a new nature and
conuersacio^ so that a man feleth his heart altogether altered and changed and
fare otherwise desposed the^ before, and has power to love that which before
he could not but hate, and delyteth in that which before he could not love.
And it sets the soul at liberty, and makes her free to follow the will of
God, and is to the soul euen-as health is unto the body, of a man that is
pyned and waysted away with a long sokinge disease. The legs can not bear
him, he can not lift up his hands to help himself, his tayst is corrupt,
sugar is bitter in his mouth, his stomach abhoreth, longinge after sibbersruse
at the which a whole stomach is ready to cast his gorge. When health comes,
she changes and alters him clean, gives him strength in all his mem bers
and lust to do of his own accord that which before the could not do,
nether could not sustre that any man exhorted him to do, and has now lust in
whole some things, and his me^bres are fre and at liberty, and have power to do
of their own accord all things which belong to an whole man to do, which
before th^^ had no power to do, but were in captivity and bondage. So likewise
in all thing does right faith to the soul.

The sprite of God a co^panieth faith, and brings with her light, where with
a man be holds him felfe in the law of God, and seyth his miserable hondage
and captivity, and humbles himself, and abhors himself: she brings gods
promyses of all good things in Christ, God works with his word, and in his
word, And when his word is preached, faith works her self in ye hertes of
the elect: and as faith enters and the word of God is believed, the power of
God loses the heart from the captivity and bon dage under sin, and knitte^h
and coup leth him to God and to the will of God, alters him and changes him
clean, fassioneth and forgeth him a n^w, gives him power to love and to do
that which before was impossible for him either to love or do, and turnneth him
in to a new nature: so that he loves that which he before hated, and hates
that which he before loved, and is clean altered and changed and contrary
disposed, and is knyt and coupled fast to Gods will, and naturally brings
forth good works, that is to say, that which God commau^ death to do and not*
things of his own ymagination. And yt does he of his own accord as a tree
brings forth fruit of her accord. And as thou neadest not to bid a tree to
hrynge forth fruit, so is there no law put unto him that believes and is
justified through faith, (as says Paul in the first epistle to Timothe the
first Chapter.) Neither is it nedfull. For the law of God is written and
graven in his heart, and his pleasure is therein. And as without commandment
and of his own nature, he eats, drynketh, sets, hears, talks, and
goethe: even so of his own nature, with out coaccion or com pulsio^ of ye
law, brings he forth good works. And as an whole man when he is a thirst,
taryeth but for drink, and when he hungreth abydeh but for meat, and then
drinks and eats naturally: even so is the faithful ever a thrust and an
hongred after the will of God, and tarieth but for occasion. And when soever an
occasion is given, he works na turally the will of God. For this blessing is
given to all them that trust in Christ's blood, that they thyrst and honger to
do Gods will He that has not this faith, is but an unprofitable babbler of
fayeth and works, and woteth nether what he bableth, nor what he means or
where unto his words pertayne. For be seleth not the power of faith nor the
workynge of the spirit in his heart, but interprets the scriptures which
speak of faith and works, after his own blind ^^a^one and folish ^a^ta^ies
and not of any feling that he has in his heart: as a man r^h^rseth a tale of
an other man's mouth and woteth not* whether it be so or not as he says, nor
has any experience of ye thing it self. Now does the scrip ure asscribe both
faith and works not to us, but to God only, to whom they belong only, and to
whom they are appropriat, who^e gift they are and the proper wor^ke of his
spirit. Is it not a fr^war^ and perverse blyndnes? they teath how a man can do
nothing of his own self, and yet presumptuously take upon them the gre atest
and highest work of God, even to make faith in the^ selves of their own power
and of their own false imagina^y on and thoughts. Therefore I say, we must
^ispayre of our selfs, and pray God (as Christ's Apostels did) do give us
faith, and to increase our faith. When we have that, we need none other thing
more.

For she brings the spirit with her, and he, not only teaches us all
things, but works the^ also myghtily in us and carries us through aduer^ite,
perse cutio^, death and hell, unto heaven and ever lastyng life.

Mark diligently therefore seeing we are come to answer. The scripture
because of such dreams and feigned faythes sake, uses such manner of
speakinges of works, not yt a man should there by be made good to God ward or
justified, but to de clare unto other, and to take of other the difference
between falce fained faith and right faith: for where right faith is there
brings she forth good works, if there follow not good works, it is no
doubt but a dream and an opinion or feigned faith. Where for look as A fruit
makes not the tree good, but declares and testifi eth outwardly that the tree
is good (as Christ says / every tree is known by his fruit: even so shall ye
know the right faith by her fruit.

Take for an ensample Mary that anointed Christ's fete, Luke. vii. When Simon
which bad Christ to his house had condemned her, Christ defended her and
justified her saying: Simon I have a certain thing to say unto the* And he
said master sa^e on. There was a certain lender which hade two detters, the
one ought five hundredth pens, and the other fi^ftye. When they had nothing to
pay he for gave both. Which of them tell me, will love him most? Simon
answered and said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he to him,
thou haste judged truly. And he turned him to the woman, and said unto Simon
See thou this woman? I entered in to thine house and thou gave me no water
to mi fete, but she has washed my fete with teres, and wyped them with the
hears of her head Thou gave me no kiss, but sense the time I came in has
not she reasted to kiss my fete, Thou haste not anointed my head with oil.

But she has anointed my fete with costlye and preciouse oyntement. Wherefore
I say unto the, many sins are forgeuen her for she loved much. To who^ less
is forgeuen, the same does love less and here by se we that deades and works
are but outward signs of the inward grace of the bounteous and plenteous
mercy of God freely received, with out all merytes or deeds, yea and before all
deeds. Christ teaches to know the in ward faith and love, by the outward
deeds. Deeds are the fruits of love, and love is the fruit of faith. Love and
also the deeds are great or small according to the proporcio^ of faith. Where
faith is mighty and strong, there is love fervent and deeds plenteous, and done
with exceadynge mekenes: Where faith is weak, there is love clode and the deeds
few and faydeth as flores and blossoms in winter. Simon believed and had faith,
yet but weak ly, and according to the proporcyon of his faith loved coldly,
and had deeds thereafter he bade Christ unto asimple and abare feast only,
and received him not with any great humanite. But Mary had a strong faith, and
therefore burn ning love, and notable deeds done with exceadinge profounde and
deep mekenes. On the one side she saw herself clearly in the law, both in
what danger she was, and her cruel bondage under sin her horrible
dampnacion and also the fearful sentence and judgment of God upon sinners. On
the other side she heard the Gospel of Christ preached, and in the promises
she saw with Egles eyes the exceadinge abundaunt mercy of God, that paseth all
vtterau^ce of speech, which is set forth in Christ for all meke sinners. Which
knowledge their sins And she believed the word of God myghteli and glorifed
God over his mercy and truth, and being overcome and over whelmed with the
unspeakable, yea and inco^prehensyble abundau^t riches of the kind nes of God,
did inflame and burn in love, yea was so swollen in love, that she could not
abide nor hold, but must break out, and was so dronken in love that she
regarded nothing, but eue^ to utter the fervent and burning love of her heart
only. She hade no respect to her self, though she was never so great and
notable a sinner, neither to the curyouse bypocrisie of the pharisees which
ever dysdayne weak sinners, nether to the costlynes of her ointment but with
all humbelnes did run unto his fete. Washed them with the tears of her
eyes, and wiped them with the hears of her head, and anointed them with
precious oyntement, yea and would no doubt have run in to the ground under
his fete to have uttered her love toward him yea would have descended down in
to hell, if it had been possible. E^^ as Daul in the nyenth chapter of his
epistle to the Romans was drunk in love and over whelmed and with the
plentuousnes of the infinite mercy of God (which he had received in Christ
unsought for) wi shed himself banished from Christ and dampened, to save the
Jews, if it might have ^en. For as a man feleth God in him self, so is he to
his neghbour.

Mark an other thing also. We for the most part because of our grossenes in
all our knowledge proceed from that which is last and hi^^ost unto yt which
is first, beginning at the later end, disputynge and making our arguments
backwarde. We begin at the effect and work and proceed unto the natural
cause. As because of an e^sample we first se the moon dark, and then search
the cause, and find that the puttyng of the earth between the son and the moon is the natural cause of the darkness and that the earth stops the
light. Then dispute we backwarde saying the moon is darkened, therefore is the
earth directly between the son and the moon. Now yet is not the darkness of
the moon the natural cause that the earth is between the son and the mo^e,
but the effect there of and cause declarynge and leadyng us unto the knowledge,
how that the earth is between the son and the moon direct lie and causes
the darkness, stoppynge the light of the son from the moon. And contrary wise
the being of the earth directly between the son and the moon is the natural
cause of the darkness. Likewise, he has a son therefore is he a father, and
yet the son is not cause of the father, but contrary wise.

Not withsta^dynge the son is the cause declaratyue where by we know that
the other is a father. After the same manner here, many sins are forgeuen
her,* for she loved much, thou may not understand by the word for, that
love is the natural cause of ye forgeuyng of sins, but declares it only,
and contrary wise the forgeuenes of sins is the natural cause of love. The
works declare love.

And love declares that there is some be nefyte and kyndnes showed* or else
would there be no love. Why works one, and an other not? Or one more then
another? Because that one loves and ye other not or that the one loves more
the^ the other, Why loves one and another not, or one more then another?
Because that one feleth the exccadynge kyndnes of God in his heart and another
no^, or that one feleth it more then another. Scripture spea keth after the
most grossest manner. Be diligente therefore that thou be not deceived with
curiousnes. For men of no small reputacion have been deceived with their own
sophistrye.

HEreby seist thou, yt there is great difference between being rightuous, and
good in declarynge and vtterynge a man's own ryghtuousnes The office of faith*
and goodness. The faith only makes a man safe, good, rightuous and the
friend of god, yea and heir of al his goodness and possesses us with the
spirit of god. The work declares the same faith and goodness. Now uses the
scripture The office of works.
the commune manner of speakinge, and the very same that is among the people.
As when a father says to his child, go and be loving, merciful, and good to
such or such a poor man, he byddeth him not, there with to be made mercyful,
kind and good: but to testifye and declare the goodness that is in him already
with the outward deed: that it may break out to the profete of other, and
that other may feel it which have need thereof.

After the same manner shall thou enterprete the scryptures which make mention
of works: that God thereby will that we show forth the goodness which we have
received by faith, and let it break forth and come to the profet of other that
the false faith may be known and weded out by the rotes. For God gives no
man his grace, that he should let it lie The talent. Math. xxv.
still and do no good withal: but that he should encreace it and multiplye it
with lendynge it to other, and with openly declaryng of it with the outward
works, provoke and draw other to God, As Christ says in Matthew the fifth
chapter. Let your light so shine in the sight of men that they may se your
good works, and glorifye your father which is in heaven.

Or else were it as a treasure dygged in the ground and hid wysdo^e, in the
which is no profete. Moreover therewith the goodness grace, favor, and gifts
of God which a^ in the, not only shall be known unto other, but also unto thin
own self and thou shallt besure that thy faith is right, and that the true
spirit of God is in the, and that thou art called and cho sen of God unto
eternal life, and loosed from the bondage of Satan whose presoner thou waste.
Peter exhorts in the first of his second epistle, through good works to
make our calling and election (where with we are called and chosen of God)
sure. For how darre a man presume to think, that his faith is right, and that
gods favor is on him, and that Gods spirit is in him, when he fealeth
not the working of the spirit, ne^ there him self desposed to any Godly
thing? Thou can never know or be sure of thy faith, but by works which
works must also come of pure love with out lokynge after any manner reward
thou may be sure that thy faith is but a drea^e and not right, and even the
same that James calls in his epistell the seco^ chapter dead faith and not
iustifyenge.

Abraham through works Genesis. xxii. was sure of his faith to be right, and
that the true fear of God was in him* when he had offered his son (as the
scrip ture says) Now know I that thou fear God, that is to say* Now is
it open and manifest that thou feareste God in as much as thou haste not
spared thy only son for my sake.

So now by this abide sure and fast that a man inwardly in the heart and before
god is rightuous and good through faith only before all works. Notwithstanding
yet outwardly and openly before the peo ple yea and before him self, is he
rightuous through the work that is, he knows and is sure through the
outward work that he is a true beleuer and in the favor of God and
ryghtuous and good through the mercy of God* that thou may est call the one an
open and an outward righteousness, and the other an inward righteousness of ye
heart (so yet) that thou under stand by the outward rightuous nes, none other
thing save the fruit that follows as a declaringe of that inward iustifiyng
and ryghtuousnes of the heart, and not that it makes a man rightuous before
God, but that he must first be rightuous before him in the heart. Even as
thou may call the fruit of the tree, which follows and utters the inward
natural goodness of the tree.

Thus means James in his Epistle where he says, faith without works is dead
that is, if works follow not, it is a sure and an euidente sign, that there is
no faith in the heart but a dead ymaginacion and drea^e which they falsely call
faith.

Of the same wise is this saying of Christ to be understand. Make you
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that is show your faith openly and what ye
are within the heart with outward geuynge and bestowynge your goods on ye
poor, that ye may obtain friends, that is, that ye poor on whom thou haste
showed mercy may at ye day of judgment testify and witness of thy good
works.

That thy faith and what thou waste within in the heart before God may there
appear by thy fruits openly unto al me^ For unto the right beleueynge shall
all things be confortable and unto consolacion at that terryble day. And
contrary wise unto the unbelieving, al thing shallbe unto desperacion, and
confusion, and every man shall be judged openly and outwardely in the presence of
all men, according to there deeds and works. So that not without a cause thou
mayeste call them thy friends, which testify at Why he called them friends*
that day of the, that thou louedest as a true and a right christen man and
folowedest the steps of Christ in showing mercy, as no doubt he does which
feleth God merciful in his heart. And by the works is the faith knows, that
it was right and perfect. For the outward works can never please God nor
make friend, except they spring of faith. For as much as Christ him self
Matthew in the. vi. and. vii. Chapter dysaloweth and casts away the works
of the pha rises: yea prophesyenge and workynge of miracles and casting out of
deuels, which we count and esteem for very excellent virtues. Yet make they
no friends with their works, while their hertes are false and vnpure and their
eye double. Now without faith is no heart true or eye singel: so that we are
conpelled to confess that the works make not a man ryghteous or good but that
the heart must first be ryghteous and good before any good work proceed
thence.

SEcondarely all good works must be done freli with a single eye, with Good
works must be done freely.
out respect of any thing, and that no profit be sought thereby.

That commands Christ where he says Math. x. freely have ye received,
freely give again. For look as Christ with all his works did not serve heaven,
for that was his all ready, but did us service therewith, and nether looked nor
sought his own profit, but our profit, and the honor of God the father
only: even so we with all our works may not seek our own profit, neither
in this world nor in heaven, but must and ought freely to work, to honor God
withal, and with out all manner respect, seek our neighbors profyt, and do
him service.

That means Paul Philip. ii. saying Be minded as Christ was which being in
the shape of God, equal unto God and even very God, laid that a part, that is
to say, hyd it. And took on him the form and fashion of a servant, That is,
as concerning him self he had enough, that he was full, and had plentuousnes
of the Godhead, and in all his works sought our profit and became our
servant. The cause is, for as much as faith justifies and puts away sin
in the sight of God, brings, life, health and the favor of God, makes us
the heirs of God powers ye spirit of God into our souls and fylleth us with all godlynes in Christ, it were to great a shame, rebuke, and wrong unto the
faith, yea to Christ's blood if a man would work any thing to purchase that,
wherewith faith has endued him already, and God has given him surely. Even as
Christ had done a rebuke and shame unto him self, if he would have done good
works and wrought to have been made there by Gods son and heir over all,
which thing he was already. Now does faith make us the sons or children of
God, John. i. he gave them might or power to be the sons of God, in that they
believed in his name If we be sons, so are we also heirs Roma. viii. and
Gala. iiii. How can, or ought we then to work, for to purches that
enherytaunce with all, where of we are heirs all redye by faith? What shall
we say then to those scriptures which sod^e as though a man should do good
works and live well for heavens sake or eternal reward? As these are, make
you friends of the vnrihgtuous mammon. And Math. vii. Ga there you treasure
together in heaven. Also Math. xix. If thou will enter in to life keep the
commandments and such like. This say I, that they which under stand not,
nether feel in their herts what faith means, talk and think of the re ward
even as they do of the work, nether suppose they that a man ought to work
but in a respect to the reward.

For they ymagen that it is in the king dome of Christ, as it is in the world
among men, that they must deserve heaven with their good works. How be it
their thoughts are but dreams and false imaginacions. Of these men speaks
Mala. Chap. i. who is it among you that shuts a door for my pleasure for
naught? that is, without respect of reward. These are servants, that seek
gaynes and advantage, hyrelynges and day laborers which here on earth receive
their rewards, as the pharyses with there prayers, and fastinges Matthew. v.

But on this wise goes it with heaven, with everlasting life, and eternal
reward, likewise as good works naturally follow faith (as it is above
rehearsed) so that thou nedest not to commau^de a true beleuer to work or to
compel him with any law, for it is impossible yt he should not work he
taryeth but for an occasion, he is ever disposed of him self, thou need but
to put him in remembrance, and that to know the faulse faith from the true.
Even so naturally does eternal life follow faith and good living, with out
seeking for, and is impossible that it should not come, thought no man thought
there on. Yet is it rehearsed in the scripture, alleged, and promised to know
the difference between a false beleuer and a true beleuer, and that every man
may know what follows good lyuinge naturally and of it self without taking
thought for it. Take agrosse ensampel. Hell, that is everlasting death is
threatened unto sinners, and yet follows it sin naturalli without sekyng
for. For no man does evil to be damned therefore, but had lever avoid it. Yet
the one follows the other naturally, and thought no man told or warned him of
it, yet should the sinner find it, and feel it. Ne uerthelesse it is therefore
threatened, that men may know what follows evil living. Now then as after
evil living follows his reward unsought for eue^ so after good living
follows his rewad naturally vnsoughte for or vnthoughte upon even as when thou
drynkest wine, be it good or badde, the tayst follows of it self, thought
thou therefore drink it not. Yet testifies the scripture, and it is true, that
we are by enheritaunce heirs of da^nacion, and that before we be borne we are
vessels of the wrath of God and full of that poison whence naturally all sins
spring, and where with we can not but sin, which thing the deeds that
follow (when we behold our selves in the glass of the law of God) do declare
and utter, kill our consciences, and show us what we were and wist not of it,
and certify us that we are heirs of damnacion. For if we were of God we
should cleave to God and lust after ye will of God. But now our deeds compared
to the law declare the contrary and by our deeds, we se our self both
what we be and what our end shall be.

So now thou seyst that life eternal and all good things are promised unto
faith and belefe: so that he that believes on Christ, shall be safe. Christ's
blood has purchased life for us and has made us the heirs of God: so that
heaven comes by Christ's blood. If thou would obtain heaven with the
merytes and deservings of thine own works, tha^ dyddest thou wrong, ye and
shamedest the blood of Christ, and unto the were Christ dead in vain. Now
is the true beleuer heir of God by Christ's deserving, ye and in Christ was
predestinate and ordened unto eternal life, before the world began. And when
the Gospel is preached unto us we believe the mercy of God, and in beleuynge
we receive the spirit of God which is the arneste of eternal life, and we are
in eternal life already and feel al ready in our hertes the swetnes thereof,
and are overcome with the kindness of God and Christ and therefore love the will
of God, and of love are ready to work ferly, and not to obtain that which is
given us freely, and whereof we are heirs already

Now when Christ says. Make you friends of unrighteous Mammon Ga there you
treasure together in heaven and such like. Thou seyst that the meaning and
intent is none other, but that thou shouldes do good, and so will it follow of
it self naturally, without sekyng and taking of thought that thou shall find
friends and treasure in heaven and receive a reward. So let thine eye be
syngle, and look unto good living only, and take no thought for the reward.
But be content. For as much as thou knoweste and art sure that the reward
and all thing contained in Gods promyses follow good lyuinge naturally, and
thy good works do but testifye only and certifye the that the spirit of God
is in the, who^ thou have received for an ernest of gods truth, and that thou
art heir of all the goodness of God, and that all good things are thine all
ready purchased by Christ blood and laid up in stoare against that day when
every man shall receive according to his deeds, that is, according as his deeds
declare and testifye, what he is or was. For they that look unto the reward,
are slow, false subtel and crafty workers, and love the reward more then the
work, yea hate the labor* yea hate God which commands the labor and
are w^ry both of the commandment and also of the co^maunder and work with
tedyousnes, But he that works of pure love without sekinge of reward works
truly. Thyrdly that not yt saints, but God only receives us in to eter nall
tarbernacles, is so plain and evident yt I need not to declare or prove it
How shall the saints receive us in to heaven, when every man has need for
him self, that God only* recyue him to heaven, and every man has sk^ce for
him self? As it appears by the five wise virgins. Mat. xxvi. which would
not give of the oil unto the unwise virgyns. And S. Peter says in the iiii.
of his first epistle that the ryghtuous is with difficultye saved. So* see
thou that the saying of Christ (make you friends of the. etc. That theye may
receive you into the everlasting tabernacles) pertayneth not unto the
sayn^tes which are in heaven, but is spoken of ye poor and nedy which are
here present with us on earth, as thought he would say. What byldest thou chur
ches, foundest abbayes, chauntryes, and colleges in the honor of saints, to
my mother, saint Peter, Paul and saints that be dead to make of the^ thy
fre^des? They need it not, yea they are not thy fre^des but theyrs which lived
then, when they lived, of who^^ they were holye^* T^^ friends are the poor
which are now (...) thy time and a live with the, thy poor^ neighbors which
need of thy healp and succoure. Them make thy friends with thy unrighteous
mammon, yt they may testifye of thy, faith and thou may know and feel that
thy faith is right and not feigned.

UNto ye second, such receyuinge into ye everlasting habitacions is not to
be understand, that men shall do it. For mani to whom we show mercy and do good
shall not comme there, nether skylleth it, if we mekely and louyngly do our,
duty yea it is a sign of strong faith, and fervent love, and strong faith
and fervent love, if we do^ well to the evil, and study to draw the^ to
Christ in all that lies in us. But the pore give us an occasion to exercyce
our faith, and the deades make us feale our faith and certyfye us and make us
sure that we are safe, and are escaped and translated from death unto life, and
that we are delivered and redeemed from the captyuyte and boundage of Satan, and
brought in to the lybertye of the sons of God in that we feel lust and
strength in our heart, to work the will of God. And at that day shall our
deades appear and comfort our hertes, witnese our faith and trust which we
now have in Christ, which faith shall then keep us from sha^e as it is written.
None that believes in him shallbe a shamed Romans ix. So that good works healpe
our faith, and make us sure in our consciences and make us feale the merci of
God. Not withstandinge heaven, everlasting life, Io^e eternal, faith the
favor of God the spyryte of God lust and strength unto ye will of God, are
given us freely, of the bou^tuous and pleteous riches of God purchased by
Christ, with out our deseruinges, that no man should rejoice, but in the
Lord only.

FOr a forder understanding of this Gospel, may here be made. iii. questions.
What mamo^n is, wh^ it is called unrighteous, and after what manner Christ
byddeth us counterfeit and follow the unjust and wicked stuard which with his
Lords damage provided for his own profit and vantage, which thing no doubt
is unrighteous and syne.

First Mammon is an Ebrewe word Mammon
and signifies riches or temporal goods, and namelye all superfluity and all
that is above necessary yt which is not reputed unto our necessari vsees,
where with a man may healpe an other, with out un doing or hurtinge him
self. For hamon in the Ebrewe speech, signifies a multitude or a bundaunce or
many

And therehence comes mahamon or mammon abundance or plenteousnes of goods
or riches. Secu^darili, it is called unrighteous mammon, not because it is
gote^ vnrightuousli or with vsuri. For of unrighteous gotten goods can no man
do good works, but ought to restore the^ whom again. As it is said Isaias.
lxi. I am a God that hates offeringe that comes of robbery. And Salo. pro.
iii. says, honor the Lord of thine own good. But therefore is it called
unrighteous, because it is in unrighteous use. As Paul speaks unto the
Ephesians. v. how that the days are evil though that God has made the^, and
they are a good work of Gods making. How be it they are yet called evil
because that evil men use them a mysse, and much sin, occacions of evil,
perrell of soulis are wroughte in them. Even so is riches called evil, because
that evil men bestow them amiss and misuse them. For where riches is there
goes it after the common prouer^e. He that has money has what him lysteth.
And they cause fyghtinge, ste linge, leynge a wait, lyinge, flatteringe and al
unhappiness against a man's neigh boure. For all men hold on riches part

But singularly before God is it called. unrighteous mammon, because it is not
bestowed and mynistred unto our neybours neade For if my neyboure neade and I
give him not, nether depart liberal ly with him, of that which I have: than
with hold I from him vnrightuously that which is his own. For as much as I
am bownden to healpe him by the law of nature, which is, what soever thou
would that another did to the that do thou also to him. And Christ Mathey. v.
Give to every man that desires the. And John in his first pystle, if a man
have this worlds good and se his brother neade, how is the love of God in him?
And this unrighteousness in our mammon se vert few men, because it is
sprituall, and in those goods which at gotten most truly and justly are me^
much begyled For they suppose they do no man wrong in kepinge them, in that
they got the^ not with stelinge, Robbinge, oppression, and usury, nether hurt
any man now with them.

Thrydly many have busyed the^ selfs Who is the steward
in studyenge what or who this unrighteous steward is, because that Christ so
praises him. But shortly and plainly this is the answer. That Christ
prayseth not the unrighteous stuard, nether sets him forth to us to
counterfeit, because of his unrighteousness but because of his wisdom only in
that he with unright so wisely prouldid for him self. As if I would provoke
another to pray or study saying. The thieves watch all night to rob and
stele: why can not thou watch to pray and to study? Here praise not I the
thief and murderer for there evil doing, but for there wisdom* that they so
wisely and diligently wait on there unrighteousness. Like wise when I say mysse
women tyer thiem selfs with gold and sylke to please there lovers. What wylt
not thou garnysh thy soul with faith to please Christ? here praise I not
whordome, but the diligence which the whore mysuseth.

Of this wise Paul also Roma. v. likeneth Adam and Christ together, saying
that Adam was a figure of Christ, And yet of Ada^ have we but pure sin, and
of Christ grace only, which are out of measure contrary. But the similitude
or likeness stands in the original birth, and not in the virtue and vice of
the birth.

So that as Adam is father of all sin, so is Christ father of all
righteousness. And as all sins spring of Adam: even so all rightuous men and
women spring of Christ. After the same manner is here the unrighteous stuarde
an ensample un to us in his wisdom and diligence only, in that he provided so
wisely for him self, that we with righteousness should be as diligent to
provide for our souls, as he with unrighteous provided for his body Like
wise may thou soil all other texes which sound as though it were between
us and God as it is in the world where the reward is more lo ked upon, then
the labor: yea where me^ hate the labor and work falsely with the body, and
not with the heart and no longer than they are looked upon, that the labor
may appear outward only.

WHen Christ says Mathe. v. Blessed are ye when they rail on you, and
persecute you, and say all manner evil sayings against you, and yet lie, and
that for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven.
Thou may not ymagen that our deades deserve the Joye and glory that shall be
geven unto us. For then (Paul says To. xi.) favor were not favor I can
not receive it of favor and of the bou^teous goodness of God freely, and by
deserving of deads also. But believe as the Gospel* the glade tidings and
promises of God say unto the that for Christ's bloudes sake only through
faith, God is at one with the and thou received to mercy and art beco^e the
son of God and heir annered with Christ of all the goodness of God the
ernest where of is the spirit of god poured in to our hertes. Of which things
the deades are witnesses and certify our consciences that our faith is
unfeigned and that ye right spirit of God is in us. For if I patiently suffer
aduersite and tribulacion for conscience of God only that is to say, because I
know God and testify the trueh. Than am I sure that God has chosen me in
Christ and for Christ's sake, and has put in me his spirit as an ernest of
his promises, whose workyng I feale in mine heart, the deades beringe wittnes
unto the same. Now is it Christ's blood only that deserved all the promises of
God and that which, I suffer and do is partly ye curinge healing and
mortifieng of my me^bres and filyng of that originally poison, where with I was
conceived and borne, that I might be altogether Christ, and partly the doing of
my duty to my neighbor, whose det ter I am of all that I have received of
God, to draw him to Christ with all suffringe, with all paciens and even with
shedinge my blood for him, not as an offe ringe or merit for his sins, but
as an ensampel to provoke him. Christ's blood only puts away all the sin
that ever was, is or shallbe from them that are elect and repent believing the
Gospel that is to say gods promises in Christ.

Again in the same. v. Chap love your enmyes, bless the^ that curse you do
well to them that hate you and persecute you, that ye may be the sons of your
father which is in heaven. For he makes his son shine up pon evil and on
good, and sends his tayne upon Just and unjust. Not that our works make us
the sons of God. but testify only and certify our consciences that we are
the sons of God and that God has chosen us and weshed us in Christ's blood,
and has put his spirit in us. And it follows, if ye love them that love
you, what reward have ye? do not the publicanes even the same? and if ye shall
have favor to your fre^des only what singular thing do ye? do not the
publicanes even the same? ye shall be perfect therefore as your father which is
in heaven is perfect. That is to say if that ye do no thing but that the
world does, and they which have the spirit of the world, wherebye shall ye
know that ye are the sons of God and beloved of God, more than the world?
But and if The sign of Gods favor.
ye conterfecte and follow God in well doing the^ no doubt it is a sign that
the spirit of God is in you and also the favor of God, which is not in the
world and that ye are enheretours of all the pro myses of God, and elect unto
the fellowship of the blood of Christ.

ITe^ Math. vi. Take heed to your Alms, that ye do it not in ye sight of men
to the intent that ye would be seen of them, or else have ye no reward with
your father which is in heaven. Neither cause a trompet to be blown before the
when thou do thine Alms, as the hypocrites do in the sinagoges and in the
streets to be gloryfied of the world. But when thou doist thine Alms let not
thy lift hand know what thy right hand does, that thy Alms may be in secret,
and thy father which sees in secret shall reward the openly. This puts us
in remembrance of our duty, and she weth what follows good works, not that
works deserve it, but yt the reward in leayd up for us in store, and we there
unto elect through Christ's blood, which the works testifye. For if we be
worldly minded and do our works as the world does, how shall we know that God
has chosen us out of the world? But and if we work freely, without al manner
world ly respect, to show mercy, and to do our duty to our neighbor, and
to be unto him as God is to us, then ar we sure that the favor and mercy of
God is upon us and that we shall enjoy all the good promyses of God through
Christ which has made us heirs thereof.

Item in the same Chap. it follows. When thou prayst be not as the hypocrites,
which love to stand and pray in the synagoges and in the corners of the
streets, for to be seen of men. But when thou prayeste enter in to thy chamber
and shut thy door to ye, and preaye to thy father which is in secret, and thy
father which sees in secret shall reward ye openly. And likewise when we fast
(teaches Christ in the sam place) that we should behave our selfs that it
appear not unto men how that we fast, but unto our father which is in secret,
and our father which sees in secret shall reward us openly. These. ii. textes
do but declare what follows good worcester kes, for eternal life comes not by
the deseriunge of works but is (says Paul in the. vi. to ye Romans) ye gift
of God through Jesus Christ. Neither do our works justify us. For except we
were justified by faith which is our righteousness Without we be justified we
can not work freely.
and had the spirit of God in us to teach us, we could do no good work freely
without respect of some profit, other in this world or in ye world to come,
neither could we have spiritual Joy in our hertes in time of afflicition and
mortyfyinge of the flesh.

Good works are called ye fruits of the Good works are called the fruit of
ye spirit and right wysnes.
spirit, Galt. v. Cha. for ye spirit works them in us, and some time fruits
of righ tuousnes, as in the second epistle to the Corhinthians. ix. Chapter*
before al works therefore we must have a righteousness within in the heart, the
mother of all works, and from whence they spring.

The righteousness of the scribes and What is the ryghtuousnes of scribes* and
pharisees.
Pharisees, and of the^ that have the spirit of this world, is the glorious
show and outward shinyng of works. And Christ says to us Mat. v. except your
righteousness excede the ryghtuousnes of the scribes and pharisees, ye can not
enter in to the kingdom of heaven. It is righteousness in the world, if a man
kill not. But a Christen perceyueth righteousness if he love his enemy, even
when he suffeth persecucio^ and formente of him, and the pains of death, and
morneth more for his adversaries blindness than for his own pain, and prays
God to open his eyes and to forgive him his sins, as did* Steven in the Acts
of the Apostles the. vii. Chap. and Christ Luc. xxiii.

A christen considers him self in the law of God, and there puts of him
al manner rightuosnes. For ye law suffers no merits no deseruinges, no
rightuous nes, nether any man to be justified in the sight of God. The law is
spirytuall The law must be fulfilled spiritually and with obedience as Christ,
has done
and requires the heart and commandments to be fullfillyd with such love
and obedience as was in Christ. If any fulfill all that is the will of god with
such love and obedience, the same may be bold to sell pardons of his merits,
and else not.

A Christen therefore (when he beholds him self in the law) puts of al
manner righteousness, deserueuinges and merits and mekely and unfeignedly
knoweledgeth his sin and mysery, his captyuite and bondage in the flesh, his
trespass and gylte, and is there by blessede with the poor in spirit Math.
v. Cha. Then he morneth in his heart, be cause he is in such bondage that he
can not do the will of God, and is an hongred and a thrust after righteousness.
For righteousness (I mean) which springs out of Christ's A christen when he
prays abides and sticks
blood, for strength to do the will of God. And turns him self to the
promyses of God, and desires him for his great mercy and truth, and for the
blood of his son Christ to fulfill his promyses, and to give him strength.
And thus his fast to Gods promises.
spirit ever prays within him. He fasteth also not one day for a weke, or a
lent for and whole year, but professes in his heart a perpetual sobre^es,
to tame the flesh and to subdue ye body to the spirit, until he wax stron^ge
in the spirit, and grow ripe in to a full ryghtuousnes after the fulness of
Christ.

And because this fulness happens not till the body be slain by death, a
Christian is ever a sinner in the law, and therefore fasteth and prays to God
in the spirit, the world seeing it not. Yet in ye promises he is ever
rightuous, through faith in Christ and is sure that he is heir of all gods
promyses, the spirit which he has received in exnest, beringe him witness,
his heart also and his deades testifiinge the same. Mark this then. To se in
wardlye that the law of God is so spiritual, that no flesh can fulfill it.
And then for to morn and sorrow and to desire, ye to honger and thurst aftir
strength to do the will of God from the ground of the heart, and (not
wythstandyng all the soutelty of the devils, weknes and feebleness of the flesh,
and wondringe of the world) to cleue yet to ye promises of god and to believe
yt for Christ's blood sake thou art received to the enherytaunce of eternal
life, is a wonderful thing, and a thing that the world knows not of: but
who so ever fealeth that (thought he fall a thousand times and is sure that
the mercy of God is upon him.

If ye forgive other men their trespasses, your heavenly father shall forgive
you yours, Math. in the. vi. Chapt. If I forgive, God shall forgive me, not for
my deeds sake, but for his promises sake for his mercy and truth, and for the
blood of his son Christ our Lord. And my forgeuing certifieth my spirit
that God shall forgive me, ye that he has forgeuen me all redye For if I
consent to the will By co^sentyng unto the will of God and knowledging our
fault mekely we be assured of the spirit of God.
of God in my heart, thought through infirmity and wekeanes I can not do the
will of god at al times, more over though I can not do the will of God so
purelye as the law requires it of me, yet if I se my fault and mekely
knowledge m^ sin we^inge in mine heart because I can not do the will of God,
and thruste after strength, I am sure that the spirit of God is in me and his
favor upon me. For the world lusts not to do the will of God, neither
soroweth because he can not, though he sorrow some time for fear of the pain
that he believes shall follow. He that Wherefore the beleuinge forgeueth
has the spirit of this world can not forgive with out a mendes making or
agreater vau^tage, If I forgive now how comes it? verily because I feale the
mer cye of God in me. For as a man fealeth God to him self, so is he to his
neighbor I know by mine one experience that all flesh is in bondage under
sin and can not but sin, therefore am I mer cyfull and desire God to loose
the bo^des of sin even in mine enimye.

GAther not treasure to gether in earth and cet. Math. vi But gather you
treasure in heaven. and cet. Let not your herts be glued to world ly things
study not to heap treasure upon treasure and riches upon riches, but study
to bestow well that which is gotten all ready, and let your abundau^ce suc
core the lack and neade of ye pore which with yt which abounds of ^ure
necessary fode ought (...) to sustain the nedy.
have not* Have an eye to good works, which if ye have lust and also power
to do them, then are ye sure that the spirit of God is in you* and ye in
Christ elect to the reward of eternal life which follows good works.

But look that thine, eye be syngle and rob not Christ of his honor
ascribe not that to the deserving of thy works which is given the freely by
the merits of his blood. In Christ we are sons In Christ we are heirs. In
Christ God chose us and elected us before the beginynge of the world, created
anew by the word of the Gospel, and put his spirit in us, for because we
should do good works. A Christen man works because it is the will of his
father only. If we do no good work nor be merciful, how is our lust therein?
If we have no lust to do good works, how is gods spirit in us? If the
spirit of God be not in us, how are we his sons? How are we his heirs,
and heirs annexed with Christ of the eternal life which is promised to all
them that believe in him? Now do our works testify and witness what we are, and
what treasure is lead up for us in heaven, so that our eye be single and look
upon the commau^deme^t with out respect of any thing, save because it is
Gods will, and that God desires it of us, and Christ has deserved that w^ do
it.

Math. vii Not all they that say unto Not only to speak of the Gospel is
accepted before God but to live after the Gospel.
me Lord, Lord, shall enter in to ye kingedome of heaven, but he that does
the will of my father which is in heaven. Though thou canste laud God with thy
lips, and call Christ Lord, and can babble and talk of the scripture, and
know all the stories of the bible. Yet shall thou there by never know thine
election or whether thy faith be right. But and if thou feale lust in thine
heart to the will of God, and bring forth the fruits thereof, then have thou
confidence and hope, and thy deeds and also the spirit whence thy deades
spring certyfye thine heart that thou shall enter, yea art all ready entered in
to the kingdom of heaven. For it follows, he that hears the word and does
it, bildeth his house upon a rock, and no tempest of temptacions can over
through it. For the spirit of God is in his heart and com forteth him, and
holds him fast to the rock of the merits of Christ's blood* in whom he is
elect. Nothing is able to pluck him out of the hands of God, God is stronger
then all things. And contrary wise he that hears the word and does it not,
byldeth on sand of his own imaginacion and every tempest over throws his
byldinge. The cause is, he has not Gods spirit in him, and therefore under
stands it not a right another works a right. For no man knows the things
of God (says Paul in the.i. pistle to the Corinthyans in the second Chap
(save the spirit of God: as no man knows what is a man, but a man's spirit
which Where the spirit of God is not, there can not a man work according to
Gods will.
is in him. So then if the spirit be not in a man, he works not the will of
God nether understands it though he babble never so much of the scriptures.
Nevertheless soch a man may work after his own ymaginacion, but Gods will
can he not wor^ke, he may offer sacrifyce, but to do mercy knows he not. It
is easy to say unto Christ Lord, Lord: but thereby shall thou never feale
or be sure of the kingdom of heaven. But and if thou do the will of God then
art thou sure that Christ is thy lord in dead, and that thou in him art also a
lord, in that thou fealest thy self loosed and fere from the bondage of sin,
and lusty and of power to do the will of God. Where the spirit is there is
fealynge. For the spirit makethe us feale all things. Where the spryte is not
there is no fealynge, but a vain opinion or ymaginacion. A phisician serves
but for sick men, and that for such sick men as feale there sekeneses and
morn there fore, and long for health. Christ like wise serves but for such
sinners only as feale there sin and that for such sinners, as sorrow and
morn in their hertes for health Health is power or strength to fulfill What
health is to say.
the law or to keep the commandments. Now he that longs for that health
that is to say, for to do the law of God is blessed in Christ, and has a
promise that his lust shall be fulfilled and that he shall be made hole. Math. v
blessed are they which honger and thurst for rightwesnes sake (that is to
fulfill the law) for there lust shall be fulfilled.

This longyng and consent of the heart unto the law of God, is the workynge of
the spirit which God has poured in to thine heart in ernest that thou myghtyst
be sure that God will fulfill all his promyses that he has made the. It is
also the seal and mark which God puts on al men that he choseth unto
everlasting life. So long as thou see thy sin and mornest, and consentest
to the law and lo^gest (though you be never so weak) yet the spirit shall
keep the in all tempta cions from desperacion and certify thine heart, that
God for his troth, shall deliver ye and save the, yea and by thy good deades
shallt thou be saved not which thou have done, but which Christ has done
for the. For Christ is thine, and all his deades are thy deads. Christ is in
the Christ's merits are ours
and thou in him knyt to gether insepara bly. Neither can thou be damned
except Christ be damned with the. Neither can Christ be saved except you be
saved with him. More over thy heart is good, right, holy and Just. For thy heart
is no enemy to the law but a friend and a lover. The law and thy heart are
agreed and at one, and therefore is God at one with the. The consent of the heart
unto the law, is unite and peace between God and man. For he is not mine enemy
which would feign do me pleasure and morneth be cause he has not where with.
Now he that opened thy disease unto the and made the long for health, shall as
he has promised heal the, and he that has loesed thy heart shall at his Godly
pleasur, loese thy mem bres* He that has not the spirit has no fealyng,
nether lusts or longs after power to fulfill the law, neither abhorteth the
pleasures of sin, nether has any man more certentie of the promyses of God,
than I have of a tale of Robyn hode, or of some jest that a man tells me was
done at Rome Another man may lightely make me doubt or believe the contrary,
seeing I have no experience there of mi self. So is it of them that feale not
the working of the spirit, and therefore in time of temptacio^ the byldinges of
there ymaginacions fall.

MAthei. x. He that receives a pro phete in the name of a prophet, that is
because he is a prophet???? shall receive the reward of a prophet and he
that gives one of these li^leons a cup of cold water to drink, in the name
of a dysciple, shall not lose his reward. Note this, that a prophet
singnifieth as well him that enterpreteth the hard places of scripture, as him
that pro phisies things to come. Now he that re ceyueth a prophet, a just
man, or a disciple, shall have the same or like reward, that is to say, shall
have the same eternal life, which is appointed for the^ in Chri stes blood
and merytes. For except thou were elect to the same eternal life, and had
the same faith and trust in God, and the same spirit, thou cowldest never
consent to their deades and healpe them. No man can consent to the deades of
the law except he be chosen.


But thy deades testifye what thou art and certyfye thy conscience that thou
art received to mercy, and sa^tyfied in Christ's passions and sufferynges, and
shallt here after with all them that follow God, receive the reward of
eternal life* Of thy words thou shall be justified and of thy words thou
shall be condemned.

Math. xii. That is thy words as well as other deades shall testifye with the
or against ye at the day of judgment. Many there are which abstain from the
vtte ward deades of fornicacio^ and adulteri, never the less rejoice to talk
there of and laugh, their words and laughter testify against them, that their
heart is vnpur, and they Adulterers and Fornicatours in the sight of God. The
tongue and other signs often times utter ye malice of ye heart though a man for
many causes abstain his hand, from the outward dead or act.

IF thou wylt enter in to life keep the commandments Ma^hei. xix. First
remember that when God??? commands us to do any thing, he does it not
therefore, because that we of our selves are able to do that he com mau^deth,
but that by the law we might se and know our horrible damnacion and
captivity under sin and should repent and come to Christ, and receive
mercy and the scripture of God to loose us, strengh us and to make us able to
do gods will which is the law. Now when he say eth if thou wylt enter in to life
keep the Except a man have ye spirit of life it is impossible for him to keep
ye commandments*
conmaundementes, is as much to say, as he that keeps the commandments is
intred in to life, for except a man have first the spirit of life in him by
Christ's pourcheasinge, it is impossible for him to keep the commandments,
or that his heart should be loose or at liberty to lust after the^* for of
nature we are enemies to the law of God. As toutchinge that Christ says
after ward if thou will be perfect, go and sell thy substance and give it to
The greatest perfection.
the pore he says it not as who should say that there were any greater
perfection then to keep the law of God (for that is all perfection) but to
show the other his blindness which saw ^not that the law is spiritual and
requires the heart. But because he was not knowinge that he hade hurt any man
with the outward dead, he supposed that he loved his neighbor as him self.
But when he was bade to show the deades of love, and give of his abundance to
them that neaded, he depar ted morninge. Which is an evident toke^ that he
loved not his neyboure as well as him self. For if he had need him self, it
would not have greaued him to have received succor of an other man. Moreduer
he saw not* that it was morder and theft that a man should have obo^dau^ce
of riches lyinge by him and not succoure his neiboures neade. God has given
one man riches to healpe an other at neade. If thy neighbor neade and thou
healpe him not being able you with holdist his duty from him and art a thief
before God.

That also that Christ says, how that He that with draws from his negboure
the which is his can not come to heaven.
it is harder for a rich man (which loves his riches so yt he can not find in
his heart liberally and freely to healpe the pore and nedy) to enter in to the
kingdom of heaven, then a camel to go through the eye of an nedle, declares
that he was not intred in to the kingdom of heaven, that is to say, eternal
life. But he that keeps the commau^ deme^tes is intred in to life, yea has
life and the spirit of life in him.

THis kind of devils goth not out but by prayere and fasting. Math. xxvii.
Not that the devil is cast out by merits of fasting or pray inge. For he
says before that for there vnbelefes sake they could not cast him out. It is
fayeth no doubt that casts out the devils and faith it is that fasteth and
prays. Faith has the promyses of Faith casts out deuels and does such like
miracles.
God where unto she cleaves, and in all things thristeth the honor of god
She fasteth subdueth ye body unto ye spirit yt the prayer be not let, and that
the spirit may quietly talk with God: she also when so ever opportunity is
given prays god to fulfill his promises unto his praise and glory. And God
which is mercyful in promysinge and true to fulfill 'them, casts out the
devils and does all that faith desires and satisfies her thurst.

COme ye blessed of my father, enherete the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. For I was a thurst and ye gave me drink. etc. Mat.
xxv. Not that a man with works deserves eternal life as a work man or
labourer his hyre or The kyngdo^e of heaven is prepared for ye faithful* ergo
their works do not deserve it.
wages. Thou read in the text that the kingdom was prepared for us from the
beginnge of the world. And we are blessed and sanctified. In Christ's blood
are we blessed from that bitter cruse and damnable captivity under sin, where
in we were borne and conceived. And Christ's spirit is poured into us, to bring
forth good works, and our works are the fruits of the spirit, and the
kingdom is thr deserving of Christ's blood, and so is faith and the spirit
and good worcester kes also. Not withstandinge the kingdom follows good works, and
good works testify that we are heirs thereof, and at the day of Judgment
shall they testify for ye elect unto their comforth and glory, And to the
confucion of the vngod^ie unbelieving and faythlesse sinners, which had not
trust in the word of Gods promyses nor lust to the will of God: but were
carried of the spirit of their father the devil unto al ab hominacio^, to
work wyckednes with all lust delectacion and gred^nes.

MAny sins are forgeuen her for she loves much Lu. vii. Not yt love was
cause of forgeuenes of sins. But co^ trary wise the forgeuenes of sins
caused love, as it foloueth, to whom less was forgiven, the same loves less.
And before he commended the judgment of Simon, which answered that he loves
most to who^ most was forgeuen: and also said at the last, thy faith has
saved the or made ye safe, As long as we see the law we ca^ not love Christ
but when we se ye gospel, then re joyce we.
go in peace. We can not love except we se some benefit and kyndnes. As long
as we look on the law of god only where we se but sin and damnacion and the
wrath of God upon us, yea where we were damned before we were borne, we can
not love God: No we can not but hate him as a ryrante unrighteous and unjust,
and fle from him as did Cayn. But when the Gospel that glad tidinges and
io^full promises are preached how that in Christ God loves us first,
forgeueth us, and has mercy on us, then love we again and the deades of our
love declare our faith. This is the manner of speaking, As we say. Somer is
nigh, for the trees blosome. Now is the blosome An example for declaracion of
inward deeds
of the trees not the cause that somer draws nigh, but the drawinge nigh of
somer cause of the blosomes, and the blosomes put us in remembrance that somer
is at hand. So Christ here teaches Simon by the ferue^tnes of love in the
outward deades to se a strong faith within whence so great love springs.
As the manet is to say do your charity, show your charity, do a dead of
charity, show your mercy do a dead of mercy, meaning there by, that our
deades declare how we love our neighbors and how much we have compastion on
them at there neade.

More over it is not possible to love except we se a cause. Except we se in
our hertes the love and kindness of God to us ward in Christ our Lord, it is
not possible to love God a right.

We say also he that loves not my dog loves not me. Not that a man should
love my dog first. But if a man loved me the An example of love to ward our
neghbour
love where with he loves me, would compel him to love my dog, though the
dog deserved it not, ye though the dog had done him a displeasure. Yet if he
loved me, ye same love would refrain him from venging him self, and cause him
to tefet the ve^geaunce unto me. Such speakinges find we in scripture. Ihon in
the iiii. of his first Epistle says, he that says. I love God, and yet
hates his brother is a liar. For how can he that loves not his brother whom
he seith, love God whom he seyth not? This is not spoken that a man should
first love his brother and then God, but as it folowith.

For this commandment have we of him, that he which loves God should love
his brother also. To love my neighbor is the commandment, which
commandment he that loves not, loves not God. The keeping of the
commandment The keeping of ye commandment declares outr love toward God.
declares what love I have to God. If I loved God purely, no thing that my
neighbor could do were able to make me neither to hate him either to take
ve^ geaunce on him my self, seeing that God has commanded me to love him, and
to remitte al vengeance unto him. Mark now how much I love the
commandment, so much I love God how much I love God, so much believe I yt he
is merciful, kind and good, yea and a father un to me for Christ's sake, how
much I believe that God is merciful unto me, and that he will for Christ's sake
fulfill all his yromyses unto me: so much I se my sins, so much do my sins
grieve me, so much do I repent and soro we that I sin, so much displeases
me that poison that moves me to sin, and so great ly desire I to be healede.
So now by the A goodly order of perfecti on.
natural order first I se my sin. Then I repent and sorrow. The^ believe. I
Gods promises, yt he is merciful unto me and forgeueth me, and will heal me at
the last: then love I and then I prepare my self to the commandment.

THis do and thou shall live Luc. x. that is to say, love thy Lord God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy stre^gh and with all thy
mind, and thy neighbor If we do but lust it is a sign that the spirit is in
us.
as thy self. As who should say, if thou do this, or though thou can not
do it, yet if thou fealest lust there unto, and thy spirit sigheth morneth, and
longs after strength to do it, take a sign and evident token thereby that the
spirit of life is in the, and that thou art elect to life everlasting by
Christ's blood, whose gift and purchase is thy faith and that spirit that
works the will of God in ye, whose gift also are thy deades or rather the
deades of the spirit of Christ and not thine, and whose gift is the reward of
eternal life which follows good works.

It follows also in the same place of Luc. When he should depart, he pluked
out. ii. pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him Take the charge or
cure of him, and what so ever thou spen dest more I will recompense it the at
my coming again. Remember this is a parable, and a parable may not be
expounded A parable can not be ex pouned in all po^^tes but ye se^^^ only.
word by word. But the intent of the similitude must be sought out only in the
whole parable. The intent of the similitude is to show to who^ a man is a
neigh bour or who is a man's neighbor (which is both one) and what it is to
love a ma^s neighbor as him self. The Samaritane help him and showed mercy
as long as he was present, and he left his mony^ behind him. And if that were
not sufficient, he left his crede^s to make good the rest, and forsook him not,
as long as the other had neade The^ said Christ go thou and do like wise, that
is, without difference or respection of persons who so ever neadeth thy
healpe, him count thy neighbor, and his neyboure be thou and show mercy on
him as long as he neadeth thy soccour, and that is to love a man's neyboure as
him self. Neighbor is a What neighbor signifies.
word of love and signifies that a man should be ever nigh and at hand and
ready to healpe in time of neade-

They yt will enterprete parables word for word fall in to straytes often times,
whence they can not rid them selfs. And preach lies in stead of the truth.
As do they which enterpret by the two pence the old testament and the new,
and by that which is bestowed, Opera supererogationis. How be it
superarogancia were a meter term. That is to say, deades which are more then
the law requy^eth, deades of perfection and of liberalite which a man is not
bownde to do, but of his freewil. And for them he shall have an higher place in
heaven, and may give to other of his merits: or of which the pope after his
death may give pardons f^ome the pains of purgatory.

Against which exposicion then I answer. There is no greater perfec tion than
the law.
First a greatter perfection then to love God and his will, which is the
commandments, with all thine heart, with all thy mind, is there none. And to
love a man's neiboure as him self, is like the same. It is a wonderful love
where with a man loves him self. As glad as I would be to receive pardone of
mine own life (if I hade deserved death) so glad ought I to be to defend my
neighbors life with out respect of my life, or of my good. A man ought nether to
spare his goods nor yet him self for his brothers sake, after the ensa^pel of
Christ, i. John. iii. Here in says be, perceive we love, in that he (that is
to say Christ) gave his life for us. We ought therefore to bestow our lives
for ye brethren Now says Christ Ioha^. xv. there is no greater love than that a
man bestow his life for his friend. More over no man can fulfill the law. For
(Ihon says. i. Chapter of the No man fullfylleth the law.
said epistle) if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves and true
this not in us. If we knowledge our sins he is faithful and rightuous to
forgive us our sins. Now if we be all sinners, none fulfyleth the law. For
he that fulfileth the law is no sinner. In the law may another Peter nor Paul
ner any other creature save Christ only reioise. In the blood of Christ which
fulfilled the law for us may every parsone that repents believes, loves
the law and morneth for strengh to fulfill it, rejoice, be he never so weak a
sinner. The two pence therefore and the credens that he What ye two pence be
^oken.
left behind him, to bestow more if neade were, signifith that he was every
where merciful, both present and absent, with out fayninge, cloking,
complayninge, or excusinge and forsook not his neyboure as long as he had
neade. Which exemple I pray God men may follow and let, opera superrogationis
a lone.

MAry has chosen a good part which shall not be taken from What the part
was yt Marye had chosen.
her. Lucc. x. She was first chosen of God and called by grace both to know
her sin, and also to hear, the word of faith health and gladtidiges of
mercy in Christ and faith was given her to believe and the spirit of God losed
her heart from the boundage of sin.

Then consented she to the will of God again, and again, and a boue all
things had delectacio^ to hear that word wherein she had obtained
everlasting health, and namly of his mouth which hade purchased so grate
mercy for her God choseth us first and loved us first and optneth our eyes to
se his exceadinge abundaunt love to us in Christ, and the^ love we again and
accept his will above all things, and serve him that office where unto he
has chosen us.

Selle that ye have and give alms. And make you bags which wax not old, and
treasure which fails not, in heaven Lu. xii. This and souch like are not
spoken that we should work as hyrelinges in respect of reward, and as though
we should obtain heaven with merit. For he says a little before, fear not
litel flock for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom. The
kingdom comes then of the good will of Almighty God through Christ. And
souche things are Scriptur speaks to us dine^s ways.
spoken partlye to put us in remenbrau^ce of our duty to be kind again. As
is that sainge let your light so shine before men that they se your good works
and gloryefye your father which is in heaven. As who should say, if God have
given you so great gifts be not unthankful, but bestow them unto his
praise.

Some things are spoken to move us to put our trust in God, as are these.
Behold the bryddes of the air. If your childerne ask you bred will ye
profer the^ a stoon? and many souch like. Some are spoken to put us in
remembrance to be sober, to whatche and pray, and to prepare our selfs
against temptacions, and that we should understand and know, how that
tentacions and occasion of evil come then most, when they are lest looked for:
lest we should be careless and sure of our selves, necligent, and
unprepared. Some things ar spoken, that we should fear the wonderful and
inco^pre he^^ible iudgme^tes of God lest we should presume. Some to confort us
yt we despair not. And for like causes are all the ensamples of the old
testament* In conclusion ye scripture speaks mani things where the spirit is
not there is no vndersta^ dynge of scrip ture.
as the world speaks. But they may not be worldly understand, but goostlye
and spirituallie, yea the spirit of God only understands them, and where he
is not there is not the understanding of the scripture. But unfruitful
disputynge and braulinge about words.

The scripture says, God sees, God hears, God smells, God walks, God is
with the^, God is not with them, God is angry, God is pleased, God sends his
spirit, God takes his spirit a way, and a thousand such like. And yet is
none of them true after the wordly ma ner and as ye words sown. Read the
secound Chapter of Paul to the Corinthi ans, the natural man understands not
the things of God, but ye spirit of god only and we (says he) have received
the spirit which is of God, to understand the things which are given us of
God.

For without the spirit it is inpossible It is impossible to understand the
scripture without the spirit of God.
to understand them. Read also the. viii. to the Romans They that are led
with the spirit of God, are the sons of God. Now the son knows his
fathers will and the servant not He that has not the spirit of Christ (says
Paul) is none of his. Likewise he that has not the spirit of God is none of
Gods, for it is both one spirit, as thou may se the same place. Now he
that is of God hereth the word of God Io. viii. and who is of God but he that
has the spirit of God. For there more, says he ye here it not, because ye
are not of God, that is, ye have no lust in the word of God, for ye
understand it not, and that because his spirit is not in you. For as much
then as the scripture is no thing else but that which the spirit of God has
spoken by the Prophets and Apostls, and can not be understand Pray ye spirit
to leuse you from your natural blindness and to give you understand dyng of
spiritual things.
but of the same spirit: Let every man pray to God to send him his spirit to
loose us from our natural blindness and ignorance, and to give us vndersta^
ding and fealinge of the things of God and of ye speakinge of ye spirit of
God And mark this process. First we are damned of nature, so conceived and
borne, as a serpent is a serpent, and a tode a tode Mark the or dre of Gods
works.
and a snake a snake by nature. And as thou see a young child (which has
pleasure in mani things wherein is present death, as in fire, water and so
forth) would sle^ him self with a thowsande deaths, if he were not waited
opon and kept therfroe. Even so we, if we should live this thousand years
could in all that time delight in no other thing nor yet seek any other
thing, but that where in is death of the soul.

Secundarily of the hole multitude of the nature of man, whom God has elect
and chosen and to whom he has appointed mercy and grace in Christ, to them
sends he his spirit, which opens their eyes, shows the^, their meserye,
and brings them unto the knoledge of the^ selves, so that they hate and
abhor the^ selves, are astonyed and amassed and at there wits ends, nether
wot what to do or where to seek health. Then le^t they should ^^ie from God
by despetacion, he conforteth them again with his sweet promises in Christ
and certifieth there hertes that for Christ's sake they are received to mercy
and their sins for given and they elect and made ye sons of God and heirs
with Christ of eternal life: and this through faith are they set at peace with
God.

Now may not we are why God choseth one and not another, other think that God
is unjust to da^me us before we do any actual dead, seeing that god has power
over all his creatures of right, to do with them what he list or to make of
eueri one of the^ as he lysteth. Our darkness can not perceive his light. God
will be feared and not have his secret judgments known. More over we by the
light of faith se a thousand things which are impossible to an infidle to
se. So like wise no doubt in the light of the clear vis^on of God we shall se
things which now God will not have known For pride ever accompanies hye
knowledge but grace accompanies mekenes. Let us therefore give diligence rather
to do the will of God, then to search his secrettes which are not profitable
for us to know.

When we are thus reco^syled to God, made the friends of God and heirs of He
that is reconciled to God
eternal life, ye spirit that god has powered in to us testifyeth that we may
not must not live after the old lusts of iogno raunce.
live after our old deades of ignorance.

For how is it possible, that we should repent and abhor them, and yet have
lust to live in the^. We are sure therefore that God has created and made us
new in Christ, and put his spirit in us that we should live a new life,
which is ye life of good works.

That thou may know what are good works, or what works are good and the
end and entente of good works, or wherefore good works serve, mark this that
follows.

The life of a Christen man is inward between him and God, and properly is the
consent of* the spirit to the will of God, and to ye honor of god. And gods
Good works.
honor is the final end of al good works. Good works all things that are
done with in ye laws of God, in which God is honored and for which thanks
are given to God. Fasting


Fasting is to abstain from sur^eting or over much ca^inge, from dronkenes
and care of the world (as thou may reed Lu. xxi.) and the end of fasting
is to tame the body, that the spirit may have a free course to God, and may
quyetly talk with God. For over much eating and drinkinge and care of worldly
busynes persse down the spirit, choeke her and ta^gle her that she can not
lift up her self to God. Now he that fasteth for any The cause of fasting.
other entente, than to subdue the body, that the spirit may wait on God,
and freely exersice her self in the things of God: ye same is blind and
woteth not what he does, er reth and shoteth at a wrong mark, and his entente
and ymaginacion is abhomynable in ye sight of God. When thou fastest from meat
and drinkest all day, is that a Christen fast? either to eat at one meal that
were sufficient for four.

A man at four times may bear that he can not at ones. Some fast from meat
and drink, and yet so tangle them selves in worldli business that they can not
ones think on God. Some abstain from butter, some from eggs, some from all
manner wit meat, some this day, some that dai, so^e in the honor of this
saint, some of that, and every man for a sondr^ purpose. Some for the tothache,
so^e for the head ache, for fevers, pestilence, for soden death, for hanginge,
drounding, and to be delivered from the pains of hell. Some ar so mad that
they fast one of the thursdayes between* the two saint marye days in the
worship of that saint whose day is hallowed betwne criste^mas and candelmas,
and that to be delivered from the pestilence. All those men fast without
conscience of God, and without knowledge of the true ente^te of fasting, and
do no other tha^ honor saints as the gentels and heathen worshipped, their
ydolles, and are drowned in blindness and know not of the testament that God
has made to manward in Christ's blood. In God have they another hope nor
co^fide^ce, nether believe his promyses nether know his will, but are yet in
captyuyte under they prince of the darkness.

Watch is not only to absteyne from sleep, but also to be circu^spect What
watch signifies
and to cast al pereles: as a man should watch a toure or a castle. We must
remember that the snares of the devil are infinite and innumerable, and that
eueri moment In all tentacio^ we must call upon God.
arise new temptations and that in all places mete us fresh occasions. Against
which we must prepare our selves, and turn to God, and complain to him, and
make our moan, and desire him of his mercy to be our shylde, our toure, our
castle and defense from all evil, to put his strength in us (for wy thout him
we can do naught) and above all things we must call to mind what promises
God has made, and what he has sworn that he will do to us for Christ's
sake, and with strong faith cleue unto them, and desire him of his mercy and
for the love that he has to Christ, and for his truths sake to fulfill his
promyses. If we thus cleue to God with strong faith, and be leave his wores:
then (as says Paul i. Corint. x.) God is faithful, that he will not suffer
us to be tempted above that we are able or above our might that is to say, if
we cleave to his promyses and not to our fantasyes and ymaginacions, he will
put might and power in to us, that shall be stronger then all the tentacio^ which
he shall suffer to be against us.

PRayer is amorninge a longinge and a desire of the spirit to god What prayer
is.
ward for that which she lacks as a sick morneth and soroweth in his heart
longinge for health. Faith ever prays. For after that by faith we are
reco^siled to God and have received mercy and forgiveness of God the spirit
longs and trusts for strengeth to do the will of God, and that God may be
honored, his name halowede, and his The condicio^s and propreties of prayer.
pleasure and will fulfilles. The spirit waits and watches on the will of
god and ever has her own fragilite and weakness before her eyes, and when she
sees tentacion and perell draw nigh, she torneth to God and to the testamente
that God has made to all that believe and trust in Christ's blood and desires
God for his mercy, truth and for the love he has to Christ, that he will
fulfill his promise, that he shall soccur and help and give us strength, and
that he will sanctify his name in us and fulfill his godly will in us, and yt
he will not look on our sin and iniq^ite, but on his mercy, on his truth, and
on the love that he owes to his sone Christ and for his sake to keep us from
tentacion, that we be not overcome and that he deliver us from evil, and what
so ever moves us contrary to his Godly will. More over of his own experience
Let the sam mind be in yon that was in Ie su Christ which. etc.
he fealeth other men's neade, and no less commends to God the infirmites of
other then his own knowing that there is no strength, no help, no succure but
of God only. And as merciful as he fealeth god in his heart to him self ward
so merciful is he to other, and as greatly as he fealeth his own miseri, so
grate co^passio^ has he on other. His neighbors is no less care to him then
him self. He fealeth his neybours grieffe no less then his own. And when so
ever he sees occa sio^ he can not but pray for his neibour as well as for him
self: his nature is to seek the honor of god in all men, and to draw (as much
as in him is) all men unto God

This is the law of love which spring eth out of Christ's blood in to ye
hertes of al the^ that have their trust in him. No man needs to bid a christen
man to pray if he se his neybours neade: if he se it not put him in
remembrance only, and then he can not but do his duty.

Now as toutchynge yt we desire one a One to pray for au other.
another to pray for us, that do we to put our neybour in remembrance of his
duty and not that we trust in his holiness. Our trust is in God, in Christ
and in the truth of gods promyses, we have also a promise that when.ii. or
*iii. or more agree togethere in any thing according to the will of God, God
hears us. Not wythstandynge as God hearethe many: so hears he few, and so
hears he one, if he pray after the will of god and desire the honor of God.
He that desires mer cye, the same fealeth his ow^e mysery, and sin and
morneth in his heart for to be delivered, that he might honor God and God for
his truth must hear him, which says by ye mouth of christ Mat. v. Blessed
are they that ho^ger and thurst after rightousnes, for they shall be fulfyllled.
God for his truethes sake must put the righteousness of Christ in him and In
what hour the sinner sigh eth I shall hear him.
wash his unrighteous away in the blood of Christ. And be the sinner
never so weke, never so feable and frail, syne he never so often and so
areuousli, yet so long as this lust desire and morninge to be delivered
remains in him, God sees not his sins, rekeneth them not, for his truethes
sake and love to Christ. He is not a sinner in the sight of God, ye would be
no sinner. He that would be del^uered has his heart loose already. His heart
sins not, but morneth repents, and co^senteth unto the law and will of
God and iustifith God, that is, bears record that God which made the law is
rightu ous and iustc. And such an heart trustinge in Christ's blood, is
accepted for full rightuous. And his weakness, infirmity and frayltie is
pardoned and his sins not lokede upon: until God put more strength in him
and fulfill his lust.

When the weak in the faith and inexpert in the misterites of Christ desire
us to pray for the^, the^ ought we to lead then to the truth and promises of
God, and teach them to put their trust in the promises of God, in ye love yt
God has The love of God to ch^^ste is inf^^t*
to Christ and to us for his sake, and to strength there weke consciences,
shewing^ and prouinge by the scripture, that as long as they follow the
spirit and resyste sin it is impossible they should faule so deep that God
shall not pulle them up again, if they hold fast by the anchor of faith having
trust and confydence in Christ. The love that God has to Christ is
infinite, and Christ did and suffered all things, not for him self, to
optaine fauouer or ought else: for he had ever the full favor of God and was
ever Lord over all things, but to rec^nsile us to God and to make us heirs
with him of his fathers kingdom. And God has promised, that whosoever calls
on his name shall never be confu^ded or a shamed To. ii, If the ryghtwis fall
(says the scriptur) he shall not be broised, the Lord shall put his hand
under him.

Who is rightuous but he that trusts in Christ's blood, be he never so weak?
Who is rightuouse.
Christ is our ryghtuousnes and in him ought we to teach all men to trust,
and to expound unto al me^ ye testament that God has made to us sinners in
Christ's blood. This ought we to do and not make a pray of them to lead
them captyue, to sit in there conscyences and to teach them to trust in our
holiness, good deades and prayers, to the intent that we would feed our idle
and slow belyes of their great labor and sweat, and so to make our selves
Christ's and saviors.

For if I take on me to save other by mi merits, make I not my self a Christ
and a savior, and am in dead a false prophet and a true antichrist, and
exalt my self and sytte in the temple of God, that is to wit the consciences
of men? A mo^g Christian men love makes al things Love makethe all things
common.
commune: eueri man is others detter and every man is bo^u^de minister to his
neigh boure, and to supplye his neighbors lack, of that where with God has
endued him. As thou seeest in the world how the Lords and officers minister
peace in the commune wealth, punyshe murderers, thieves and evil doers, and to
maynteine there order and estate do the communes minister to them again re^t,
trybute, toll and custom So in ye Gospel the curates which in every paryshe
preach the Gospel ought of duty to receive an honest living for them and their
how sholdes and even so ought the other officers which are necessarilye
repu^ed in the commune wealth of Christ. We neade not to use fylthy lucre in
the Gospel, He yt seruethe ye aultare oug hte to live of ye aultare also
to chope and change and to play the tauernars, altering ye word of God, as
they do their wynes to their most a vauntage, and to fascion Gods word after
every man's mouth, or to abse the name of Christ to obtain thereby autorite and
power, to feed our slow bealies. Now see thou what prayer is, the end
thereof, and wherefore it serves,

If thou give me a thousand pownde to pray for the I am no more bound the^ I
was before. Man's ymaginacion can Temporal reward another augmente the* nor miny
sheth Charity.
make the commandment of God nether greater nor smaller nether can it either
add to the law of God or minishe. ^ Gods commandment is as grater as him
self. I am bownde to love the Turk with all my might and power, yea and above
my power even from the ground of my heart, after the ensample that Christ loved
me, nether to spare god des, body or life to win him to Christ. And what can
I do more for the if thou gaueste me all the world? Where I see neade there can
I not but pray if Gods spirit be in me.

Alms is a greake word and sygnifyeth mercy One Christen is detter to a
another at his neade of all that he is able to do for him until his neade be
suffised. E uery Christen man ought to have Christ all ways before his eyes, as
an ensample to counterfaite and follow, and to do to his neyboure as Christ
has done to him as Paul teaches in all his epystles and Peter in his first
and John in his first The order of Paul in setting forth of Christ.
also. This order uses Paul in all his epistles. First he preaches the law
and proves that the whole nature of man is damned in that the heart lusts
contrary to the will of God.

For if we were of God, no doubt we should have lust in his will. Then
preaches he Christ, the Gospel the promises, and the mercy that God has set
forth to all men in Christ's blood. Which they that believe and take for an
erueste thing, turn the^ selves to God, begininge to love God again, and to
prepare the^ selves to his will by the working of the spirit of God in the^.
Last of all exorteth he to unite, peace and sobernes, to a void braulinges,
sects, opinions, disputinge and arguinge a bowt words, and to walk in the
plain and syngle faith and fealinge of the spirit, and to love one an other
after the ensample of Christ, even as Christ loved us and to be thankful,
and to walk worthy of the Gospel and as it ^e comes Christ and with the
ensa^pel of pure living to draw al to Christ.

Christ is Lord over al, and every christian is heir a^nered with Christ and
therefore Lord of all, and every one lord of what soever a another has.

If thy brother or neyboure therefore By what reasone al thing is commune.
neade and thou have to healpe him and yet showest not mercy but wythdrawest
thy hands from him: then robbest thou him of his own and art a thief. A
Christen man has Christ's spirit. Now is Christ a mercyful thing: if
therefore thou be not merciful after the ensample of Christ then have thou not
his spirit. If thou have not Christ's spirit, then art thou none of his To.
viii. nor haste any part with, him. More over though thou sh^we mercy unto
thy neiboure, yet if thou do it not with such burning love as Christ did unto
ye, so must thou knowledge thy sine and desire mercy in Christ. A christian man
has naught to rejoice in, as concer ninge his deades. His reioysinge is that
Christ died for him, and that he is washed in Christ's blood. Of his deades
reioyseth he not, nether countech his merits, nether gives pardons of them,
nether seeks an hier place in heaven of the^, nether makes him self a
sauoure of other men, through his good works. But gives al honor to God, and
in his grea tist deades of mercy knowleageth him self a sinner vnfaineadly,
and is a bundantly content with the place that is pre pared for him of Christ.
And his good deades are to him a sign only yt Christ's spirit is in him, and
he in Christ, and through Christ elect to eternal life.

The order of love or charity which, some dream, the Gospel of Christ
shows not of that a man should begin at him self first and then descend
I wot not by what steps. Love seeks not her own profet. ii. Cor. xii. but
makes a man There is no order in charity.
to forgette him self, and to turn his pro fet and other man, as Christ
sought not him self or is own profit but ours.

This term my self is not in the Gospel, nether yet father, mother sister,
brother, kinsman, that one should be preferred in love above a another. But
Christ is all in all things. Every christen man to an other is Christ him
self, and thy neyg bours neade has as good right in thy goods as has
Christ him self which is heir and Lord over all. And look what thou owe
to Christ that thou owe to thy neybours neade. To thy neybour owe thou
thine heart, thy self and all that thou* haste and canste do. The love that
springs out of Christ excludes no man nether puts difference between one
and an other. In Christ we are all of one degree without respect of persons.
Not withstandinge thought a Christen man's heart be open to all men, and
receives all men. Yet because that his abilite of good des extends not so
far, this provision is made, that every man shall care for his own
howsehold, as father and mother and thine elders that have helped ye, wife
childerne and servants. If thou should not care and provide for thine
howseholde, then, were thou an infidele, seeing thou haste taken on the so to
do, and for as much as that is thy part committed to the of the congregation.

When thou have done thy duty to thine How and to whom alms ought to be
given*
howescholde, and yet have farther abundance of the blessinge of God, that
owe thou to ye pore yt ca^ not labor or would labor and can get no
work, and are des titute of fre^des, to ye pore I mea^e which thou knoweste,
to them of thine own pa rysh. For that provision ought to be had in the
congregation, that every parish care for there pore. If thy neighbors which thou
know be served, and thou yet have su pers^uyte, and hear necessite to be
among the brethren a thousand mile of, to the^ ar^ thou detter. Yea to the
very infydels we be detters, if they neade, as ferforth as we mayntene the^ not
against Christ or to blasfeme Christ. Thus is every man that neadeth thy
healpe, thy father, mother, sister, and brother in Christ: even as every man
that does the will of the fa there, is father, mother, sister, and brother unto
Christ.

More over if any be an infydele and a falls Christen and forsake his household,
his wife, chylder and such as can not healpe them selves, then art thou bound
and thou have where with, even as much as to thine own household. And they have as
good right in thy goods, as thou thy self. And if thou with draw mercy from
them, and haste wherewith to healp the^: the^ art thou a thief. If thou show
mercy, Who is a thief.
so do thou thy duty and art a faithful minister in the household of
Christ, and of Christ shall thou have thy reward and thank. If the whole
world were thine, yet has every brother his right in thy goods and is heir
with the, we are all heirs with Christ. More over the rych and they that have
wisdom with them must se the pore set a work, that as many as are able may
feade them selves with the labor of there own hands, according to the
scripture and commandment of God.

Now se^st thou what alms deades means and wherefore it serves. He that
seeks with his alms more than to be mercyful, to be a neybour, to succonr his
brother, to give his brother that he owith him, the same is blind and seth not
what i^ is to be a Christen man, and to have fellowship in Christ's blood.

As partayning to good works, understand that all works are good which are
Alworkes ye be done in faith are good.
done with in ye law of God in faith and with thanks giving to God, and
understand that thou in doing them please God, what so ever thou doiste
with in that law of God, as when thou make water. And trust me if other wind
or wa ter were stopped you shouldeste feale what a preciouse thing it were to
do either of both, and what thanks ought to be given to God therefore. More
over put no difference between works, but what so ever comes in to thy hands
that do as time, place and occasion gives, and as God has put the in degree
hye or low.

For as toutching to please God, there is no work better then an other. God
looks not first on thy work as the world does, as though the bewtifulnes of
the work pleased him, as it does the world or as though he had neade of them.
But God looks first on thy heart, what faith thou have to his words, how thou
beleuest him, trustest him and how thou love him for his mercy yt he has
showed the, he looks with what heart thou workest, and not what thou workest,
how thou acceptest the degree that he has put the in and not of what degree you
art, whether you be an Apostle or a show maker.

Set this ensample before thine eyes. An example of diversity of estates.
Thou art a ketchin page and washeste thy masters dyshes, an other is an
Apostle and preaches the word of God. of this Apostle herke what Paul says
in the second to ye Corinthians. ix. If I preach (says he) I have naught to
rejoice in, for necessite is put unto me as who should say, God has made me so.

Woe is unto me if I preach not. If I do it wylingly (says he) then have I my
reward that is, the^ am I sure that gods spirit is in me and that I am
elect to eternal life. If I do it against my will an office is committed
unto me, that is, if I do it not of love to God, but to get aliuing there by
and for a worldli put pose and had, lever other ways live, then do I that
office which God has put me in and yet please not God my self. Note now if
this Apostle preach not as many do not, which only make them selves Apostles,
but also compel men to take the^ for greatter then Apostles, yea for great ter
then Christ him self, then woe is unto him, that is, his damnacion is just. If
he preach and his heart not right, yet mynistreth he the office that God has
put him in, and they that have the spirit of God here the voice of God, yea
though he speak in an Ass* More over how so ever he preaches he has not to
rejoice, in that he preaches.

But and if he preach willyngly, with a true heart and of conscience to God:
then has he his reward, that is, then fealeth he the ernest of eternal life
and the workinge of the spirit of God in him. And as he fealeth Gods goodness
and mercy, so be thou sure he fealeth his own infir mite, weakness and
unworthiness, and morneth and knowledgeth his sin, in that ye heart will not
arise to work with that full lust and love that is in Christ our Lord. And
nevertheless is yet at peace with God through faith and trust in Christ Jesus.
For the ernest of the spirit that works in him testyfyeth and bears wytnes
unto his heart* that God The ernest of the spirit
has chosen him, and that his grace, shall suffi^e him, which grace is now not
idle in him. In his works puts he no trust. Now thou that ministerest in
the ^^tche^ and art but a keche^page receyuest al thing of ye hand of God
know that God has put the in that office, submittest thy self to his will
and serueste thy master, not as a man, but as Christ him self with a pure
heart, acordinge as Paul teaches us, put thy trust in God, and with him
seek thy reward. More over there is not a good dead done, but thy heart
reioyseth therein, yea when thou hereste that the word of God is preached by
this Apostle and see the people trune to God, thou consentest unto the dead,
thine heart breaks out in joy, springs and leapeth in thy breast, that God
is honored And in thine heart doist the same that the Apostle does and happly
with great delectacion and a more fervent spirit. Now he that receives a
prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive the re ward of aprophete.
Math. x. that is he conce^teth to ye deed of a prophet and main teineth it,
the same has the same spirit and ernest of everlasting life which the
prophet has and is elect as ye prophet is. Now if thou compare dead to
dead there is difference betwixt, washing of dis ches and preaching of the
word of God.

But as toutchinge to plaise God none at all. For another that nor this
pleases, but as ferforth as God has chose^ a man, has put his spirit in him
and purified his heart by faith and trust in Christ.

Let every man therefore wait on the office wherein Christ has put him and Let
every man wait upon the office that Christ has put him in.
therein serve his bretherue. If he be of low degree let him patiently therein
abide till God promote him and e^alte him hier. Let kings and head officers
seek Christ in there* offices and ministre peace and quietness unto ye
brethren, punyshe sin, and that with mercy* even with the same sorrow and
grefe of mind as they would cut of a finger or ioynte a leg or arm of
their own body if their were such disease in the^, that either they must be
cut of or else all the body must perish. Let every man of what soeur craft or
occupacio^ he be of, whether bruer baker, How the cra ftesma^ ought to live
godly and according to the gospel.
tailer, vitailer, merchant, or husband man refer his craft and occupacion
unto the commune wealth, and serve his brethren as he would do Christ him
slefe. Let him bye and sell truly and not set dice on his brethren, and so
shows he mercy, and his occupacion pleases God.

And when thou receyuest money for thy labor or ware thou receiuest thy duty.
For wherein so ever thou minister to thy brethren, thy brether are detters to
give the where with to maintene the self and thy household. And let your
superf^uites succoure the poor, of which sort shall ever be some in all towns
cities, and vil lages, and that I suppose the greatest nombre. Remember that
we are members of one body and ought to minyster one to an other mercyfully.
And remember that what so ever we have, it is given us of God to bestow it on
our brethren. Let him that eatethe eat and give God thanks, only let not
thy meat pulle thine heart from God. And let him that drynketh do like wise.
Let him that has a wife give God thanks for his liberty, only let not thy
wife with draw thine heart from God and then ple sest thou God and have the
word of god for the. And in all things look on ye word of God and there in put
thy trust, and not in a visure in a disgysed garment and ^ cut sho^.

Seek the word of God in all things, and with out the word of God do
nothing, though it appear never so gloryouse. What so ever is done with out
the word of God, that count ydolatrye. The kingdom of heaven is with in us.
Luc. xvii. Wonder therefore at no monstrous shappne^ at any outward thing
whyth The world was never deceived but with outward appearaunce.
out, that word. For the world was never drawn from God, but with an outward
show and glorious appearaunce and shininge of hypocrisy and of fained and
visured fasting, praing, watchinge offeringe sacrificinge, halowinge of
supersti^^ous ceremonies and monstrouse disgising. Take this for an exe^ple.
John baptist which had testimony of Christ and of the Gospel, that their
never rose a greatter among wymennes chyldern, with his fasting, watching,
praing, raiment and strait living deceived ye jews and brought the^ in doubt,
whether John John deceyueth ye Jews opinion.
were very Christ or not and yet no scrip ture or miracle testif^ing it, so
greatly the blind nature of man looks on the outward shining of works, and
regards not the inward word which speaks to the heart. When they sent to
John axinge him whether he ware Christ, he denied it. Wha^ they axed him what
he was and what he said of him self. He answered not. I am he that watches,
prays, drinks no wine nor strong drike, eats ^other fysh nor flesh, but
live with wild honey and grashopers and wear a cote of camels hear and a
girdle of a skin: but said I am a voice of a criar. My voice only pertains
to you. Those outward things which ye wonder at, pertayne to my self only
unto the taminge of my body To you am I a voice only The straygh^ nes of life
pe tayneth to John only b^ the voice to Jews.
and that which I preach. My preachinge (if it be received in to a penitent or
repentinge heart) shall teach you how to live and please God, according as
God shall shed out his grace on every man. John preached repentance, saying
prepare the Lords way and make his paths straigh^ The lords way is
repentance and not It is impossible for Christ to come with out the sin be
knoledged truly with repentance.
hypocrisy of man's imagynacion and in uencion. It is not possible that the
Lord Christ should come to a man, except he know him self and his sin
and truly repent. Make his paths straight: the paths are the law, if thou
understand it aryght as God has given it.

Christ says in. xvii. of Mat. Helyas shall first come, that is shall come
before Christ and restore all things meaning of Io. bap. Io. bap. did restore
the law and the scriptur unto ye right sense and understanding, which the
pharyseis part li had darkened and made of none effect, through their own
tradicions Math. xv. where Christ rebukes them sainge: why transgress ye the
commandments of God through your tradicions: and partly had corrupt it with
gloses and false interpretatio^s, that no man could under stand it. Wherefore
Christ rebukes them Math xxiii. sainge: woo ^e to you pharisees hypocrites
which shut up the kingdom of heaven before men: ye enter not your selves,
nether suffer them that come, to enter in: and partli did begile the people and
blind there eyes in disgisinge them selves, as thou redest in that same. xxiii.
Cha. how they made broad and large philatries, and ded all there works to be
seen of men, that the people should won der at there disgisinges and visuringe
of them selves other wise then God had made the^: and partly mocked them with
hypocrisy of false holiness in fasting, pra inge and alms giuinge Mat. vi. and
this did they for luker to be in authorite, to sit in ye consciences of ye
people and to be cou^ ted as God him self, yt the people should trust in there
holiness and not in God, as thou redeste in the place a boue rehearsed Mat.
xxiii. woe be to you phareses hypocrites which devour wydowes houses under a
color of long prayer. Cou^terfet therefore nothing without the word of God
when thou vnderstandeste that, it shall teach the all things how to apply
outward things, and where unto refer them. Beware of thy good enten^, good
Beware of en terpriseynge ought of a good intent.
mind, good affection or zele as they call it. Peter of a good mind and of a
good affection or zele chode Christ Math. xvi. be^cause he said that he must
go to Hie rusalem and there be slain.

But Christ called him satan for his labor a name that belongs to the
devil. And say that he perceived not godly things but worldly. Of a good
e^tent and of a fervent affection to Christ the sons of zebedei would have
hade fire to come down from heaven to consume the Samaritanes Lu ix. But
Christ rebuked them saienge that they wist no^ (...) what spirit they were:
that is, that the^ understand not how that they were altogether worldly and
fleshly minded.

Peter smo^e malchus of a good zele: but Christ condemned his deed. The ve ry
Jews of a good entente and of a good zele: slew Christ and persecuted the
apostles as Paull vereth them record To. x. I bear them record (says he)
that they have a feruente mind to God ward but not accordnge to knowelege. It
is a another thing the^, to do of a good mind and to do of knoweledge.

Labor for knoweledge that thou may know gods will and what he would have
the to do. Our mind, intent, and affection or zele are blind, and all that we
do of them is damned of God, and for that cause has God made a testamente
between him and us where in is contay God has made an everlasting covenant
with us that we should no more go astraye after our good intent
ned boeth what he would have us to do, and what he would have us to axe of
him. Se therefore that thou do no thing to please God with all but that he
commands, nether are any thing of him but that he has promised the.

The Jews also (as it appears Act. vii) s^ewe Steven of a good zele. Because
he proved by the scripture, that God dwellethe not in Churches or templs made
with hands. The churches at the beginning were ordained, yt the people should
thither resort to here the word of God The use of temples or churches.
there preached only, and not for the use where in they now are. The temple
where in God will be worshipped is the h^rte of man. For God is a spirit
(says Christ Io. iiii.) and wylbe worshipped in the spirit and in truth:
That is, when a penitent heart consents unto the law of God, and with a
strong faith longs for the pormyses of God. So is God ho nored on al sides
in that we count him The honor of God.
rightuous in all his laws and ordinances and also true in all his promyses.
Other worshipping of God is there none, except we make an yd^le of him.

IT shall be recompensed the at the risinge a gain of the ryghtuous Lu. xiiii.
Read the terte before and thou shall perceive yt Christ does here that same
that he does Mathe. v. that is he puts us in remenbraunce of our duty,
that we be to ye pore as Christ is to us, and also he teaches us how that we
can never know wether our love be right, and whether it spring of Christ or
no as long as we are but kind to the^ only which do as much for us a gain.
But and we be merciful to the ^ore, for conscience to God and of compassion
and hertie love, which compassion and love spring of the love we have to God
in Christ for the pure mercy and love that he has showed on us: then have we
a sure token, that we are be loved of God and washed in Christ's blood and
elect by Christ's deserving unto eternal life. The scripture speaks as a
father does to his young son, do this or that and then will I love the, yet
the father loves his son first and studieth with all his power and wit to
overcome his child with love and with kindness to make him do that which is
comely honest and good for it self, A kind father and mother love there
chylder even when they are evil, that they would shede there own blood to
make the^ better, and to bring them in to the right way. And a natural
child studieth not to obtain his fathers love with works, but considers
with what love his father loves him with all, and therefore loves again, is
glade to do his fathers will. And stu^ith to be thank^ull.

The spirit of the world understands Esaie xxix. I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, And vndersta^ dynge of the learned men shall ^eryshe.
not the speaking of God, nether the spirit of the wise of this world, nether
the spirit of Philosophers nether ye spi, rite of Socrates, of Plato or of
Aristoles Ethikes, as thou may se in the first and second Chapter of the
first to the Corint. Though that many are not ashamed to rail and blaspheme
saying, how should he understand the scripture seeing he is no philosopher
nether has seen his metaphisike? More over they blaspheme saying how can he
be a divine and wotteth not what is subiec tum in theologia? Never ye less as
a man with out the spirit of Aristotell or philosophy, may by the spirit of
God understand scripture: Even so by the spirit of God understands he that
God is to be sought in all the scripture, and in all things and yet wotteth
not what means Subiectum in theologia, because it is a term of there own
making. If thou Love of God Love of my neyboure.
should say to him that has the spirit of God, the love of God is the
kepinge of the commandments, and to love a man's neyboure* is to show
mercy, be would with out arguinge or disputinge understand, how that of the
love of God springs the kepinge of his command mentes and of the love to
thy neyboure springs mercy. Now would Aristotell deny such spakynge and
a Duns man would make. xx. distinctio^s. If thou should say (as says
saint John in the fourth of his epistle) how can he that loves not his
neyboure whom he sees love God whom he sees not? Aristotell would say lo a
man must first love his neyboure and then God and out of the love to thy
neyboure sprinketh the love to God. But he that fealeth the working of the
spirit of God, and also from what vengeance the blood of Christ has
delivered him, understands how that it is impossible to love othere fathere
or mother, sister, brother, neyboure, or his The love of a man's neybour is a
sign of ye love of God.
own self a rygh, except it spring out of the love to God, and perceyuethe
that the love to a man's neyboure is a sign of the love to God as good fruit
declares a good tree, and that the love to a man's neyboure acco^panieth and
follows the love of God as heat accompaneth and follows fire.

Like wise when the scripture says. Christ shall reward every man at the
resurrection or vprising again according to his deades, the scripture of
Aristoles Ethikes would say, lo with the multitude of good works may thou,
and must thou obtain everlasting life, and also a place in heaven hye or
low acordinge as thou have many or few good works, and yet wotteth not what a
good work mea neth as Christ speaks of good works as he yt says not the
heart* but out ward things only. But he that has gods spirit understands
it. He fealeth that good What good works be.
works are no thing but, fruits of love, compassion mercifulnes, and of a
tender nes of heart which a Christen has to his neiboure, and that love
springs of that love which he has to God, to his will and commandments,
and understands also that the love which man has to God springs of that
infinite love and boto^lesse mercy which god in Christ Whence spr^^ ^^th the
love of God.
showed first to us, as says John in the pistle and Chap. above rehearsed. In
this says he) appeared the love of God to us ward, because that God sent his
only begoten son in to the world that we might live through him. Here in is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to make a
grement for our sins. In conclusion a Christian man fealeth that that
unspeakable love and mercy which God has to us, and that spirit which
works all things are wroughte according to the will of God, and that love
where wy the we love God, and that love which we have to our neybour, and
that mercy and com passion which we show on him, and also that eternalll
life which is laid by in store for us in Christ are all together the gift of
God through Christ's purchasinge. If the scripture said always Christ shall
reward the according to thy faith, or accordnge to thy hope and trust thou
have in God, or according to the love thou haste to God and thy neyboure so
were it true also as thou seyst. i.

Pe. i. receiuinge the end or reward of your faith, the health or saluaciou
of your souls. But the spiritual things could not be known save by their
worcester kes, as a tree can not be known, but by her fruit. How could I know that
I lo ued my neyboure, if never occasiou were True faith and love be known by
works
given me to show mercy unto him? how should I know that I loved God, if I
never suffered for his sake? how should I know that God loved me, if there were
no infirmite, temptacion, perell and Ieop^rdye whence God should deliver me.

THere is no man that forsakes house, other father, or mother* other brethern
or sisterne, or wife, or childerne for the kingdom of haue^s sake, which shall
not receive much more in this world, and in the world to come everlasting
life. Luc. xviii.

Here see thou that a Christen man in all his works has respect to
nothing A christian has respect to nothing else but the glory of God.
but unto the glory of God only and to the maynteinynge of the truth of God,
and does and leaves undone all things of love to ye glory and honor of God
only, as Christ teaches in the pater noster.

More over when he says he shall receive much more in this world, of a truth
yea, he has received much more al redi. For except he had felt the infinite
mercy, goodness, love and kyndnes of God and the feloweshyppe of the blood of
Christ and the comfort of the spirit of Christ in his heart, he could never
have forsaken any thing for Gods sake. Not withsta^dinge (as says Mark in
the. x. Chapter) Who soever for Christ's sake and ye Gospels forsakes house,
brethern or systers etc. He shall receive an hu^drede fold houses, brethren
etc, That is spiritually. How it is to be understand He shall receive an
hundred fold.
For Christ shall be all things un to the. The angels, all Christen and who so
ever does the will of the father, shall be father mother, sister and brother
unto, the, and all theirs shall be thine. And God shall take the cure of the and
minister all things unto the* as long as thou ^ekyft but his honor only.
More over if thou were Lord over all the world, yea of ten Gods spirit slake
the all worldly desyr
worlds before thou knewiste God: yet was not thine appetite quenched, thou
thurstedeste for more. But if thou seek his honor only, then shall he slake
thy thirst and thou shall have all that thou desyrest, and shall be con^e^te:
if thou dwell among infydeles, and among the most eruelest nation of the
world, yet shall he be a father unto the and shall defend the, as he did
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all saints whose lives thou read in the
scripture. For all that are past and gone before are but ensamples to strength
our faith and trust in the word of God. All yt is written, is written to our
instruc tion.


It is the same God and has sworn to us all that he swear unto them, and is
as true as ever he was and therefore can not but fulfill his promyses to us as
well as he did to them, if we believe as thy did.

The hour shall come when al they that are in the garues shall hear his voice,
How it is to be understand. The dead in the grave shall hear the voice.
that is to say Christ's voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good
in to the resurcection of life and they that have done evil in to the
resurrection of damnacion, Jhon. v.

This and al like textes declare what follows good works, and that our deeds
shall testify with us or against us at that day, and puts us in
remembrance to be diligente and ferue^te in doing good.

Here by may thou not understand that we obtain the favor of God and the
enheritaunce of life through the meri tes of good works, as hirelinges their
wages. For then should thou rob Christ, of whose fulness we have received
favor for favor, as affirms also Paul Ephe. i. he loved us in his
beloved by whom we have (says Paul) rede^cion through his blood, and
forgeuenes of sins. The forgeuenes of sins then is our redemcion in
Christ* and not the reward of works.

In whom (says he in the same place) he chose us before the making of the
world, that is long before we did good works. Through faith in Christ are we
Also the sons of God, as thou read Jo. i. in that they believed on his name
he gave the^ powere to be the sons of God. God with all his fulness and riches
dwell leth in Christ, and out of Christ must we feach all things. Thou read
also. Jo. iii. he that believes on the son has eternal life. And he that
believes not shall se no life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Here
seeste thou yt the wrath and vengeance of God possesses every Faith and
trust^ in Christ expel leth ye wrath ^ brings favor.
man till faith come. Faith and trust in Christ expels the wrath of God,
and brings favor, the spirit, power to do good, and the everlasting life.
Moreover until Christ have given the light thou know not where in stands
the goodness of thy works, and till his spirit has loosed thine heart thou
canste not co^sente unto good works. All that is good in us both will and
works comes of the favor of God through Christ, to whom be the laud and
thanks Amen.

IF any man will do his will (he means the will of the doctrine whether it be
of God or whether I speak of myself. Jo. vii. This text means not yt any man
of his own strength power and fre will (as they call it) can do the will of God,
before he has received ye spirit and strength of Christ through faith. But
here is meant yt which is spoken in the third of Jhon when Nicodemus maruayled
how it were possible that a man should be borne again, Christ answered, that
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit as who should say, he that has ye spirit through faith,
and is borne again and made a new in Christ, understands the things of the
spirit and what he that is spiritual mea neth. But he that is flesh and as
Paul says. i. Cor. ii. a natural man and led of his blind reason only, can
never asce^de to the capacite of the spirit. And he gives and ensample
saying. The wynd blows where he lists and thou herest his voice and
wottest not whence he co^eth nor whyder he will. So is every man that is borne
of the spirit, he that speaks of ye spirit can never be understand of the
natural man which is but flesh and sauereth no more then things of the
flesh. So here means Christ if any man have the spirit, and consents unto
the will of God, the same at ones wotteth what I mean.

IF ye understand these things, happy are ye if ye do them John. xiii. A
christen man's heart is with the will of God, with the law and commandments of
God, and ho^greth and thursteth after strength to fulfill the^ and morneth day
and night desyringe God according to his promyses, for to give him power to
fulfill the will of God with love and lust: then testifies his dead that he is
blessed and that the spirit which blesses us in Christ is in him and
ministers such strength. The outward deed The works testify.
testifies what is with in us, as thou rea dest John. v. The deades which I
do, testifyeth of me says Christ. And John. xiii. hereby shall al men know
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one an other. And John. xiiii. he that
has my commandments and keapeth the^ the same it is that loves me. And
again, he that loves me keeps my commandments, and he that loves me not
keeps not my commandments, the outward dead testifiynge of the inward
heart. And John. xv. If ye shall keep my commandments ye shall continue in my
love, as I keep my fathers commandment* and continue in his love. That is,
as ye se the love yt I have to my father in that I keep his commau^ dementes,
so shall ye se the love that, ye have to me in that ye keep my
commandments. Thou may not think that our deades bless us first and
that we prevent God and his grace in Christ, as thought we in our natural
gifts, and Our deeds pre uent not God des grace nor make us just
being as we were borne in Adam, looked on the law of God and of our own
strength fulfilled it and so became ryghtuos and the^ with that righteousness
obtained ye favor of God. As philosophers writ of righteousness, and as the
rytuousnes of temporal law is, where ye law is satisfied with ye ypocrisie of the
outward deed. For con trary to ye read thou. Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, yt ye go, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remayn.
And in the same Cha. I am a vine and ye the branches and without me can ye do
nothing. With us therefore so goes it. In Ada^ are we al as it were wild
crabtres* We are all crabtres in Adam.
of which God choseth who^ he will and plucketh them out of Adam and planteth
them in the garden of his mercy and stocketh the^ and graffeth the spirit of
Christ in them which brings forth the fruit of the will During our life we
are yet partly carnal.
of God, which fruit testifies that God has blessed us in Christ. Note this
also yt as long as we live we are yet partlye carnal and fleshly (not
withstandyng yt we are in Christ, and though it be not imputed unto us for
Christ's sake) for there abides and remains in us yet of the old Ada^ as it
were the stock of the crabtre and ever a mong when occasion is given him,
shoteth forth his, branches and leaves, bud, blosom and fruit. Against whom we
must fight and subdue him change all his nature by a little with prayer,
fasting, watchinge, with virtuous meditacion and holy works, until we be
altogether spirit. The kingdom of heaven says Christ, is like leaven, Matthew.
xiii.
which a woman takes and hides in.iii. peckes of meal till al be leuened.
The leven is the spirit and we the meal which must Romans. ii. What leue^ is*
What is meal
be seasoned with the spirit a little and a little till we be throughout
spiritual. Which shall reward every man according to his deed, yt is
according as the deeds are so shall every man's reward be, the deeds declare
what we are, as the fruit the tree according to the frut shall the tree be pray
sed. The reward is given of the mercy and truth of God, and by the deserving
and merytes of Christ. Wosoeuer repe^teth, believes the Gospel and puts his
trust in Christ merits, ye same is heir with Christ of eternal life, for
assurance where of ye spirit, of God is poured into his heart as an ernest,
which louseth him from the bo^ des of satan, and gives him lust and strength
every day more and more according as he is dilligent to axe of God for Christ's
sake. And eternal life foloeth good living. I suppose (says Paul in the
same Epistle) yt the offlictions of this world are Romans. viii.
not worthy of the glory which shall be showed on us, yt is to say, that which
we here suffer can never deserve ye reward which there shall be given us.
Moreover, if ye* reward should depend and hang of ye worcester kes no man should be
saved. Forasmuch as our best deades, compared to the law, are damnable
sin. By ye deades of the law is no flesh justified, as it is written in the
third Chap to the Romans The law justifies not, but utters the sin only and
compels and dryueth the penitent or repentinge sinner to fle unto the seyn
tory of mercy in the blood of Christ. Al so repe^te we never so much, be we
never so well willinge unto the law of God: yet are we so weak, and the
snares and occasions so innumerable that we fall daily and hourly. So that
we could not but dispere, if the reward hanged of the work. Whosoever
ascribes eternal life He that ascribethe eternal life unto meri tes is other
a pharise or else he must despair.
unto the deserving and merit of works, must fall in one of two
inconuenie^ces, either must he be a blind pharise not saying that the law is
spiritual and he carnal, and look and reiose in the outward shynynge of his
deades, despysynge the weak, and in respect of the^ Justify him self. Or else
if he se how that the law is spiritual and he unable to asc^nde unto that
which the law requirethe he must needs despair. Let every Christen man
therefore rejoice in Christ our hope, trust and righteousness, in whom we are lo
ued, chosen and accept unto the enheritau^ce of eternal life, nether presumynge
in our perfectnes, nether dispering in our weak nes. The perfecter a man is,
the clerer is his sight, and seyth a thousand things which desplease him and
also perfectenes that can not be obtained in this life. And therefore desires
to be with Christ, where is no more sin. Let him that is Let not him yt is
weak despair nor him that is perfect boast him self.
weak and can not do yt he would feign do not despeare, but turn to him that
is strong and has promised to give strength to all that axe of him in
Christ's name, and complain to God and desire him to fulfill his promises, and
to God commit him self. And he shall of his mercy and truth strength him
and make him feale* with what love he is beloved for Christ's sake, thought he
be never so weak.

THey are not rightuous before God which hear the law, but they which do the
law shall be iu stified. To. ii. This text is plain ner than that it neadeth to
be expounded In this chapter before, Paull proves that the law natural help
not the Gentiles. The law natu rall was writton in ye ge^tils
For the law of God was written in the hertes of Gentiles (as it appears by the
laws, statutes, and ordinances which they made in their cities) yet kept they
the^ not. The great keep the small under for their own profit with the
violence of the law. Every man praises the law as fa^ forth as it is
profitable and pleasant un to himself. But when his own appetites should be
refrained, then grudgeth he against the law. Moreover he proves that no
knowledge help ye gentyles. For though the larned men (as the philosophers)
came to the knowledge of God, by the creatures of the world, yet had they no
power to worship God. In this second. Chapt. proves he that the Jews
(though they had the law written) yet it help the^ not: they could not keep
it, but were ydolaters and were also murderers, adulters and what so ever the
law forbade. He concludes therefore that the Jew is as well damned as the
gentyle. If hearing of ye law only might have justified, then had the* Jews
ben rightuous. Not haeynge but doeynge ye law makes ryghtuose.
But it is required that a man do the law, if he will be rightuous. Which
because the Jew did not, he is no less dam ned the^ the gentyle. The
publishinge and declarinnge of the law does but utter a man's sin, and gives
nether strength nor healpe to fulfill the law.

The law kills thy co^sciens and gives ye no lust to fulfill the law. Faith
in Christ gives lust and power to do ye law. Now is it true that he which
does ye law is rightuous, but yt does no man save he that believes and
puts his trust in Christ.

IF any man's work that he has bylde upon abide, he shall receive a reward.
i. Corint. ii. The circu^staunce of the same Chapter, that is to wete, that
which goes before and that which follows, declares plainly what is mente.
Paul talks of lerning doctrine or peachinge. He says that he him self
has laid the fundacion, which is Jesus Christ: and that no man can lay any
other. He exhorts therefore every man to take head what he byldeth upon, and
boroweth a similitude of ye goldsmith which tries his metalles with fire
saienge that the fire (that is) the iud gement of the scripture, shall try
every man's work, that is every man's preach: inge and doctrine. If any bylde
upon the The fire is ye judgment of scripture
fundacion laid of Paul, I mean Jesus Christ, gold silver or precious stone
which are all one thing and signifye true doctrine, which when it is
examinined the scripture aloweth, then shall Gold, silver, and preciouse
stones, is true doctrine.
he have his reward, that is he shall be sure that his lerning is of God, and
that Gods spirit is in him and that he shall have the reward that Christ
has purchased for him. On the other side if any man bylde thereon tymbre, heye
or stubble, Timber, hey, stubble, are men's doctrine
which are alone and signify doctrine of man's ymaginacion, tradicyons and
fantasics which stands not with Christ when they are examyned and judged by
the scripture, he shall suffer damage, but shall be saved him self, yet as it
were tho row fire, that is, it shall be paynefull unto him, that he has lost
his labor, and He shall be saved never the less through fire.
to se his byldinge perish, notwythstandinge if he repent and enbrace the
truth in Christ, he shall obtain mercy and be saved. But if Paul were now a
live and would defend his own learnige, he should be tried through fire,
not through fire of the judgment of scripture (for ye iyght men now utterly
refuse) but by the popes law and with fire of fagottes.

WE must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, for to receive every
man according to the deades of his body. ii. Corin. v. As thy deades testify
of the so shall thy reward be. Thy deades be evil, then is the wrath of God
upon the and thine heart is evil and so shall thy reward be if thou repent
not. Fear therefore and cry to god for grace, that thou may love his laws
And when thou love them cease not till thou have optayned power of God to
fulfill them: so shall thou be sure that a good reward shall follow. Which
reward not thye deades, but Christ's has purchaised for the, whose
purchasinge also is that lust which thou haste to Gods law, and that might
where with you fulfyllest them Remember also, that a reward is rather called
that which is given freely, the^ that which is deserved. That which is deser
ued, is called (if thou will give him his tyght name) heir or wages. A reward
What reward is and what hyre.
is given freely to provoke unto love and to make friends. Remenbre that whatso
ever good thing any man does, that shall he receive of ye Lord. Ephesians. vi.
Remembering that ye shall receive of the Lord the The Lord shall reward every
man according to his deeds.
reward of enheritaunce, Collossens. iii.

These tow textes are exceeding plain. Paul. means as Peter does. i. Peter.
ii. yt servants should obey their masters with all there hertes and with good
will though they were never so evil. Yea he will that all that are under power
obey, even of heart and of conscience to God, be cause God will have it so, be
ye rulers never so wicked. The childerne must obey father and mother be they
never so We must obe^ our superioures, be they ^euer so yu^ll.
cruel or unkind, like wise the wife her husbonde, the servant his master,
the subjects and communes their Lord or king. Why? For ye serve the Lord
say th he in the thryde to the Coll. We are Christ's and Christ has bought
us, as thou read To. xiiii. i. Cori. vi. i. Peter. i. Christ is our Lord
and we hts possion, and his also is the commandment. Now ought not the
crueluesse and churlishness of father and mother, of husboud, master, Lord or
king, cause us to hate the commandment of our so kind a Lord Christ.
Which spared not his blood for our sakes which also has purchaysed for us
with his blood, the reward of eternal life which life shall follow the
patience of good leuinge and where unto our good deades testify that we are
chosen. Forthermor we are so carnal, that if the rulers be good, we can not
know whether we keep the commandment for ye love that we have to Christ and
to God through him or no. But and if thou canste find in thine heart to do
good unto him that rewards the evyll again, then art thou sure that the same
spirit is in the that is in Christ. And it follows in the same Chap to the
Clolossians. He yt does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has done.
That is God shall avenge the abundantly, which sees what wrong is doene
unto the and yet suf^reth it for a time, that thou myghtest feale thy pacyence
and the workynge of his spirit in the* and be made perfet. Therefore see that
thou not once desire vengeance but remitte all vengaunce unto God as Christ
did.

Which (Says Peter. i. Pet. ii.) when he was reviled, reviled not again
nether thretned when he suffered. Unto such obedience, unto such patience,
unto such a pore heart, and unto such fealyuge, is Paul's meaning to bring
all men, and not unto the vain disputinge of them that ascribe so hye a place
in heaven unto Our spiritual tiwyl not ob^^ rulers but curse them for doeynge
right
their pylde merits. Which as they feale not the workinge of Gods spirit,
so obey they no man. If the king do unto them but right, they will interdite
the hole realm, curse, excomunycate and send down far beneth ye botome of
hell, as they have brought the peole out of their wits, and made them mad
to believe.

THy prayers and alms are come up in to remeraunce in the presence of God. (in
the tenth Chap* of ye Acts) That is God forgeteth the not, thought he come not
at the first calling, he looks on and beholds thy prayer and alms. Prayer
comes from the heart. God looks first on God looks first on the heart.
the heart. As thou readist Genesis. iiii. God beheld or looked first on Abell,
and then on his offering. If the heart be un pure, the dead verily playseth
not, as thou see in Cain, Mark the order. In the beginnynge of the Chap.
thou redest there was a certain man named Corn^lius which feared god, gave much
alms, and prayed God always. He feared God, that is he tremblede and quakede
to break Prayer.
the commandments of God. Then prayed he all way. Prayer is the fruit
affecte, dead or act of faith and is no thing but the longing of the heart
for tho things which a man lacks and which god has promised to give him.
He does also alms. Alms is the fruit, effect or Alms.
dead of compassiou and pity which we have to our neibour. Oh what a glorious
faith and a right is yt which so trusts God and believes his promises, that
she fea reth to break his commandments and is also merciful unto her
neiboure. This is that faith where of thou read name ly in Peter, Paul and
John, that we are there by bouth justified and saved. And who so ever ymageneth
any other faith, deceyueth him self and is a vain disputer and a brauler a
boute words, and, has no fealinge in his heart.

Thought thou co^se^te to the law, that it is good rightuous and holy,
soroweste and repentest because thou haste broken it, mornest because thou have
no strength to fulfill it: yet art not thou there by at one with God. Yea thou
should shortli despair and blaspheme God if the promises of forgeuenes and
help were not there by, and faith in thine heart to believe them. Faith
therefore seteth y^ at one with God. Faith prays always. For she has always
her infirmites and weaknesses before her eyes, and also Gods promises, for
which she always longs and in all The manner of prayeyuge of misbeleuers.
places. But blind unbelief prays not always nor in all places, but in the
church only, and that in such a church, where it is not lawful to preach gods
promises, nether to teach men to trust therein. Faith when she prays sets
not her good dea des before her sainge: Lord for my good deades do this or
that. Nor bergeneth with God saying Lord grant me this or do this or that,
and I will do this or that for the, as mumble so much dayli, go The prayer of
fayeth.
so far or fast this or that fast, enter in this religion or yt, with such
other points of infidelite, yea rather ydolatry. But she sets her
infirmyties and her lack before her face and Gods promises saying: Lord for
thy mercy and truth which thou haste sworn be merciful unto me, out of this
prison and out of this hell. And lose the bonds of Satan and give me power to
gloryfye thy name. Faith therefore Fayeth iustifi eth.
justifies in ye heart and before God, and the deades justify outwardly
before the world, that is, testify only before men what we are inwardly before
God.

Whosoever looks in the perfect law of liberty and continues there in (If he
be not a forget full hearer but a doer of the work) he shall be happy in his
dead. The law of liberty.
James. i. The law of liberte yt is, which requires a fre heart, or (if thou
fulfill it) declares a free heart lowesed from, the bonds of satan. The
preachinge of the The preaching of the law binds but ye preaching of ye
gospel opens.
law makes no man free, but byndeth.

For it is the keye that byndeth all consciences unto eternal damnacion, when
it is preached: as the promyses or Gospel is the keye that lowseth all
consciences that repent when they are bound through preachinge of the law. He
shall be happy in his dead, that is, by his dead shall he know that he is
happy and blessed of God which has given him a good heart Not the hearing
but ye do yng of ye law declares blessedness.
and power to fulfill the law. By hearing the law thou shall not know that
thou art blessed but if thou do it, it declares that thou art happy and
blessed.

WAs not Abraham justified of his deades, when he offered his ^onne* Isaac upon
the altar? James. iii. his dead justified him before the world, that is it
declared and uttered the faith which boeth iustifyeth him before God, and
wrought that wonderful work as James also affermeth.

Was not Raab the harlot justified when she received the messengers and sent
the^ out an other way? Iam. iii. that is like wise outwardli, but before God
she was justified by faith which wrought that outward dead, as thou may se
Iosue. ii. She had herd what God had done in Egipte, in the redd see, in the
deserte, and unto the two kings of the Amorreans, Sion, and Og. And she
confessed seeing: your Lord God, he is God in heaven, a boue and in earth
beneth. She also believed that God as he had promised the chil derne of Israel
would g^ue the^ the land where in she dwelt, and consented there un to,
submytted her self unto the will of God, and help God (as mouch as in her
was) and saved his spies and messingers.

The other feared that which she believed but resysted* God with all there might
and had no power to submit them self unto the will of God. And therefore
perished they, and she was saved and that tho row faith, as we read Hebre.
xi. where thou may se how the holy fathers were saved thorou faith, and how
faith wrought in them. Faith is the goodness of all the deades that are done
with in the law of God and makes the^ good and glorious, Faith is the goodness
of ye deeds done in law.
seem they never so vile, and un beleuefe makes them damnable seem they never
so glorious.

AS pertaninge to that which James in this. iii. Chapter. fayeth. What a
vayleth though a man say that he has faith, if he have no deades? can faith
save him? and again. Faith without deades is dead in it self. And the devils
believe and tremble. And as the body without the spirit is dead, even so faith
without deades is dead. It is manifest and clear that he means not of that
faith where of Peter and Paul speak in their epistles, Iho^ in his Gospel and
first Epistle, and Christ in the Gospel when he says, thy faith has made the
safe, be it to the according to thy faith, or great is thy faith etc and of
which James himself speaks.i. Cha. saying. Of his own will begat he us with
ye word of life, yt is in believing ye promises where In beleueyng the word are
we made ye sons of God.
in is life, at we made the sons of God.

Which thing I also this wise prove. Paul says, how shall or can they
believe with out apreacher? Now I pray you when was it heard that God sent any
man to preach unto ye diuyls, or that he made the^ any good promise? He threat
neth them often, but never sent ambassadors to preach any atonement betewene him
and them. Take an ensample that thou may understand. Let there be two pore
men both destitude of raymente in a Example of ye beleueynge of Deuels.
winter, the one strong that he fealeth no grefe the other grievously, morning
for pain of the cold. I then come by and moved with pitye and compassyon say
unto him that fealeth his disease, come to such a place and I will give the
raymente sufficyente. He believes, comes, and obtayneth that which I have
promised. That other sees all this and knows it, but is partaker of naught.
For he has no faith, and yt is because there is no promise made him. So is it
of the devils The devils have no faith. For fayeth is but ernest beleuinge of
Gods promises. Now are there no promises made unto ye diuyls, but ^ore
thretninges. The old Phi losophers knew that there was one God but yet had no
faith, for they had no pow er to seek his will nether to worship him The turks
and the saresons know that have no power to worship God in spirit to seek his
pleasure, and to submit the^ unto his will. They made an Idol of God (as we do
for ye most part) and worshipped him every man after his own imaginacio^ and
for a sundry purpose. What we will have done, that must God do, and to do our
will worship we him and pray unto him: but what God will have done that will
another turk nor saresonne nor the must part of us do. What so ever we
ymagin ryghtuous, that must God admytte. But Gods ryghtuousnes, will not our
heart admytte. Take an other en An other exem ple.
sample Let there be to such as I speak of before and I promise both, and the
one because he fealeth not his disease comes not. So is it of Gods promyses.
No man is help by them but sinners that feale there sins, morn and sorrow
for John Baptist shewe^ ye people their dise^ ses by the law and then sent
them to Christ to be healed,
them and r^pente with at there heart For John Baptiste went before Christ and
preached repentance, that is, he preached the law of God right, and brought
the people in to knowledge of them selves, and unto the fear of God, and then
sent them unto Christ to be healed. For in Christ and for his sake only has
God promised to receive, us unto mercy, to forgyne us and to give us power to
resist sin* How shall God save the, when thou know not thie damnacion? How
shall Christ deliver the from sin, when thou wylt not knowledge thy sin?
Now I pray the how many thowsa^des ar there of them that say I believe that
Christ was borne of a virgin, that he dyed, that he rose again and so forth,
and thou canste not bring the^ in belefe, that they have any sin at all?
How many are there of the same sort which thou can not make believe that a
thousand things are sin which God damneth for sin all the scripture
through out? As to bye as good chepe as he can, and to Sins forbo den.
sell as dear as he can, to raise the market of corn and vitaile, for his
own vau^ntage, without respect of his ueyboure or of the poor or of the
commune wealth and such like. Moreover how mani hun dread thousands are there
which when they have sinned, and knowledge there sins: yet trust in a bald
ceremonye or in a lousy freris cocte and merits or in the prayers of the^
that devour widows howses and eat the poor out of house and herboure, in a
thing of his own ymaginacion, in a folish dream and a false vision, and not
in Christ's blood and in How they yt are disobedie^^ unto the ryghtuousnes of
ye law and the truth of God* are faythlesse.
the truth yt God has sworn? All these are faith^lesse, for they follow there
own ryghtuousnes and are disobediente unto all manner ryghtousnes of God: boeth
un to the ryghtuousnes of gods law where with he da^neth al our deeds for
though some of them se there sins for fear of pain, yet had they lever that
such deades were no sin (and also unto the righteousness of the truth of God
in his promyses where by he says all that repent and believe them. For though
they believe that Christ did, yet believe the not that he dyed for threir
sins and that his death is a suffcie^te satisfacion for there sins and that
God for his sake will be a father unto them and give them powere to resist sin.

Paul says (to the Romans in the. x. Chapter.) if thou confess with thy
mouth that Jesus is the lord and believe with thine heart that god raised him
up from death, thou shall be safe

That is if thou believe yt he raised him God raised Christ for our sauation.
up again for thy salvation. Many believe that God is rich and almyghtye, but
not unto them selves and that he welbe good to them and defend them and be
their God. Phara^ for pain of ye plage was compelled to confess his sins,
but had yet no powere to submytte him self unto the will of God and to let
the chylder of Israel go and to loose so great porfet for Gods pleasur. As
our prelates confess there sins saying: though we be never so evil, yet
have we the power.

And again, the scribes and the pharisees, say they, sat in Moises seat, do
as they teach but not as they do. Thus confess they that they are
abhomynnable. But to the second I answer, if they sat on Christ's seat they
would preachr Christ's doctrine, now preach they their own tradicions and
therefore not to be heard If they preached Christ we ought to here them thought
they were never, so The preachars or the true gos pell ought to be herd though
they live naughtyly.
abominable, as they of them selves confess and have yet no power to a mende
nether to let lowese Christ's flock to serve God in the spirit which they
hold captive compellinge them to serve their false lies. The diuils fealte the
power of Christ and were compelled against their wylles to confess that he
was the son of God, but had no power to be content therewith nether to
consent unto the or dinaunce and eternal cowncell of the everlasting God, as
our prelates feale the power of God against them but yet have no grace to give
rowme unto Christ, because that they (as the diuils nature is) will them
selves sit in his only temple, that is to wete, the consciences of men. Simo^
magus believed, Acts. viii. with such a faith as the diuils confessed Christ,
Simon Magus.
but had no right faith, as thou seyst in the said Chapter. For he repented
not consentinge unto the law of God. Nether believed the promyses or longed for
them, but wondered only at the miracles which Philippe wroughte and because
that he him self, in Philippes presence, had no power to use his wychcrafte,
sorcery and art magike, where with he mocked and deluded the wytes of the
people: he would have bought the gift of God to have sold it much dearer, as
his successiours now do and not ye succestoures of. Simon Peter.

For were they. Simon, Peter's successors, Our spiritual tie are the successors
of Simon not Peter.
they would pre^che Christ as hedyd, but they are. Simon magusses
successiours, of which Simon Peter well prophesied in the second Chapter of
his second Epistle sainge, there were falls prophettes among the people
(meaning of the. Ieues) even as there shall be false teachers or doctors a
monge you which privily shall bring in sects damnable. Sects is partetakyng
as one holds of frauces a another of domynyck which thing also Paul
rebukes. i. Corinthi. i* and* iii. Even denienge the Lord that bought them,
for they will not be saved by Christ nether suffer any man to preach him to
other. And mani shall follow their damnable ways. Thou wylt say shall God
suffer so mani to go out of the right ways so long? I answer many must
follow their damnble ways or else must Peter be a false prophet, by which
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, as it is now at this present time.
For it is heresye to preach ye truth and through couetuousnes shall they with
feigned words make merchaundyse of you, of their merchaundyse and couetuousnes
it neadeth not to make rehersall, for they that be blind se it evidently.

Thus see thou that James when he What faith James speaks.
says, faith without deades is dead, and as the body with out the spirit
is dead, so is faith without deades, and the deuyls believe: that he means
not of the faith and trust that we have in the treueth of Gods promises and
in his holy testamente made unto us in Christ's blood, which faith follows
repenttaunce and the consent of the heart, unto the law of God, and makes a
man safe, and sets him at peace with God.

^ut speaks of that false opinion and ymagynacyon where with some say, I
believe that Christ was borne of a virgin, and that he dyed and so forth. That
believe they verily, and so strongely that they are ready to sley whosoever
would say the contraye.

But they believe not that Christ dyed for their sins, and that his death
has pleased the wrath of God and has obtained for them all that God has
promised in the scriptuer. For how can they believe that Christ died for their
sins and that he is their only and sufficient savior, seeing that they
seek othre saviors of there own ymaginacion and seeing that they feale not
their sins neither repent, except that some repe^te as I above said) for
fear of pain* but for no love nor consent unto the law of God nor lo^ging
that they have for those good promises which he has made the^ in Christ's
blood.

If they repented and loved the law of God and longed for that help which
God has promised to give to all that call on him for Christ's sake, then
v^tily must Gods tries give them powere to do good works when so ever
occasion were given, either must God be a falls God. But let God be true and
every man a liar as scripture says. For the truth of God lasts ever, to
whom only be all honor and glory for ever

Amen.
A short rehearsal or su^me of this present treatise of justification by faith
Faith the mother of all good works justifies us, before we can bring forth
any good work: as the husbond marieth his wife before he can have any lawful
children by her. Forther more the husbonde maryeth not his wife, that she
should continue unfruitful as before, and as she was in the state of
virginity (wherein it was impossyble for hyre to bear fruit) but contrary
wise to make her fruitful: even so faith justifies us not, that is to say,
maryeth us not to God, that we should continue unfruitful as before, but that
he should put the sede of his holy spirit in us (as Saint John in his first
epistle caleth it) and to make us fruitful.

For Paul says Ephesi. ii. By grace are ye made safe through faith, and that
not of your selves: for it is the gift of God and comes not of the works,
lest any man should boast him self. For we are his workman ship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in
them (^)

BE not offended most dear Reader that diverse things are ouersene through
negligence in this little treatise. For verily the chance was such, that I
maruayle yt it is so well as it is Moreover it becomes the book e u^n so to
come as a morner and in vile apparayle to wait on h^s master which shows him
self now again not in honor and glory, as between Moses and H^ly as: but
in rebuke and shame as between two mortherars, to try his true friends and to
prove whether there by any faith on the earth.


