A DEMONSTRATION OF the truth of that Discipline which Christ has prescribed
in his word for the government of his Church, in all times and places, until
the end of the world.

Wherein are gathered into a plain form of reasoning, the proofs thereof;
out of the scriptures, the evidence of it by the light of reason rightly ruled,
and the testimonies that have been given thereunto, by the course of the
Church certain hundreths of years after the Apostles time; and the general
consent of the Churches rightly reformed in these latter times: according as
they are alleged and maintained, in those several books that have bin
written concerning the same.

MATTHEW. 21. 38. The husbandmen said among themselves, this is the heir; come
let us kill him, and let us take his inheritance. LVKE. 19. 27. Those mine
enemies which would not that I should reign over, them, bring hither, and
slay them before me. TO THE SVPPOSED Governors of the Church of England, the
Archbyshops, lord Bishops, Archdeacons and the rest of that order.
Many and most evident have our declarations bin concerning the truth of that
government, which Christ has prescribed in his word for the ruling of the
Church; which we have manifested unto you, both by our writings and speches,
as occasion has bin offered: never has any one of you taken in hand to say
any thing against it, but it has made his eyes to dazzle, as the clearest
sun-shining; whereby he has been driven to wander hither and thither, groping
for euasions, and yet could not escape, but has fallen into infinite most
monstrous absurdities, and blasphemous assertions, (as by their writings yet
extant it may appear) so forcible is the truth, to amaze the gainesayers
thereof, and so pregnant is falsehood to beget and bring forth thousands of
absurdities, and every one worse then other. And will you still continue in
your damnable, and most deuellish course? Have you sold your selves unto
Satan, to fight for him until you be dampened in Hell with him? Have you
morgaged the salvation of your souls and bodies, for the present fruition of
your pomp and pleasure, is it because you see not what you should do? It may be
so, for many are so blind, that they grope even at noone day; but me thinks
it can hardly be so, unless you be they that have eyes and see not, for the
cause has been (by the blessing of God) so managed, that many ploughmen,
artificers, and children do see it, and know it, and are able by the word of
God to justify it, and condemn you to be adversaries unto the gospel in
resisting it. But you think that government not so needful, and your fault but
small (if it be any) in continuing your course begone. The necessity of the
thing is many ways apparent, both in that it has so plentiful warrant from
Gods own word, (as the course of this book does evidently declare,) and
also in that the gospel can take no root, nor have any free passage, for want
of it: and the greatness of your fault appears by this, that in so doing, you
are the cause, of all the ignorance, Atheism, schisms, treasons, popery and
ungodliness, that is to be found in this land, which we challenge to prove to
your faces, if we may indifferently be heard, and whereof in the mean while we
will give you a taste: for the first it is clear, that you are the causers of
that damnable ignorance, wherein the people are so generally wrapped, for that
you have from time to time stopped the streams of knowledge, in those places
where the Lord in mercy bestowed the same, and in stead of able and painful
ministers, have pestered the Church, either with presumptuous proud persons,
that are esteemed learned and take no pains to bring the people unto the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, or (which is the greatest number) such ignorant
asses, and filthy swine, as are not worthy to live in a well ordered
commonwealth: and that you are the cause of all atheism, it is plain, for
one may (as in deed many do) profess it, and you say nothing to him for it.
If the most filthy liver will fawn upon you, and bribe your servants, you will
not only favor him, but assiste him against any godly minister or other: but
if any that fear God, refuse to come under the least of your popish
ceremonies, he shall be molested, till his pursse be empty, or else by your
tyrannous dealing, he have made shipwreck of a good conscience. And are not
you the cause of all schisms, that make a hotch-pot of true religion and
poperye, and so give some an occasion to fall into this course, and others into
that? And it is as clear, that you are so far the cause of all treasons, as
without you they had not bin: for if every Church had had her government
according to Christ's institution; our young gentlemen, and students, had not
been (for want of teaching and careful oversight) made a prey unto the
seducers; and consequently to those practices, which have brought the bodies of
so many unto Tyborne, and their souls into hell; and who but you be the cause
of poperye, whilst you use them so well, let them do what they list, yea, and
keep them in office and authority under you, yea (which more is) give them
such offices as none that is not popish can execute: I speak not of the
ignorance which by your means reigns every where, which (as they confess) is
the mother of their devotion, and you are the wretched fathers of that filthye
mother, whereby you must needs be grandfathers (at the least) to al kind of
popery. And who can (without blushing) deny you to be the cause of al
ungodliness, seeing your government is that which gives leave to a man to be
any thing, Omnia cum siceant, non lice^ esse bonum.
saving a sound Christian. For certainly it is more free in these days, to be
a papist, anabaptist, of the family of love, yea any most wicked one
whatsoever, then that which we should be, and I could live these twenty years,
any such in England (yea in a Byshopps house it may be) and never be much
molested for it; so true is that which you are charged with, in a Dialogue
lately come forth against you, and since burned by you, that you care for
nothing but the maintenance of your dignities, be it to the damnation of your
own souls, and infinite millions mo: Enter therefore now at the last, into
the serious consideration of these things: remember that one day, you must be
presented before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, to be arraigned for all
the souls that have gone to hell (seeing you will needs be the rulers of the
Church) since the gospel first appeared in this land, then shall you not be
excused with this; the Queen and Council will have it so: nor with that; our
state cannot bear it. For it shall be said unto you, why do you not infourme
them better of my will, why taught you them not to worship with trembling and
fear, and to kiss the son least he be angry; why did you not tell them,
that all states must be ruled by my word, and not my word by them and their
policies. When these things shall be laid to your charge, your consciences shall
answer; that if you had done so, you should have lost your dignityes, which
you loved and sought for especially: then shall you wish, that the mountains
would fall upon you, and the hills cover you from the presence of the lamb,
and from the presence of him that sits upon the throne. And I am persuaded,
that you are in league with hell, and have made a covenant with death; yea,
you do persuade your selves, that there is no God, neither shall there be any
such day of account; or it were impossible, that you should give your eyes any
sleep, or take any rest in your bedds, until you had unto the Lord by
repentance, and the Church by confession vnburdned your souls of these hellishe
ways, wherein you have so long walked Repent, repent, be not ashamed to amend,
though others have found you out the way, judge your selves while you have
time, least you be made fyrebrandes of hell beyond all time. Let our challenges
that we have made in the name of the Lord, be hearkened unto; Let us be
disputed with before indifferent judges, let the holy word of God be the
touchstone to try our di^^ntations by, and then shall it easily appear, who
has the Lord on his side, and who not. The truth will prevail in spite of
your teeth, and al other adversaries unto it, (for God disdaineth to be
crossed, by dust and ashes;) Therefore be not obstinate so long, as until you
be found fighters with God; but prevent his wrath, lest it break forth
against you like fire that none can quench, because of the wickedness of your
inventions. Venture your byshopprickes upon a disputation, and we will venture
our lives, take the challenge if you dare: if the truth be on your side, you
may hereby, be restored to your dignities, and be no more troubled by us: but
if the truth be against you, what shall it profit you to win the whole world,
and afterward loose your own souls. If you refuse still our offer, then must
you needs be guilty either of this, that you know your cause will not abide
the trial, or of this, that you will take no pains to confute us that keep such
a stir in the Church: do not think that because you have humane authority on
your side, therefore you are safe, for he whose authority is on our side, is
the greatest, to whose voice all the devils in hell shall stoup; much more the
silly arm of sinful flesh. We have sought to advance this cause of God, by
humble suit to the parliamente, by supplication to your Convocation house, by
writing in defense of it, and by challenging to dispute for it, seeing none of
these means used by us have prevailed; If it come in by that means, which will
make all your hearts to ache, blame your selves; for it must preuail, maugre
the malice of all that stand against it, or such a judgment must overtake
this land, as shall cause the cares that hear thereof to tingle, and make us
be a byword to all that pas by us. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see
the confusions whereof you are the cause, and give you true repentance, or
confound you in all your purposes, that be against him and the regiment of
his son Jesus Christ. The same Lord, for the love he bears to his poor
people; open the eyes of her Majesty, and the Honorable Councellers, that they
may see your godless practices, and in pity to Gods people, rid us from you,
and turn away his judgments, which the rejecting of his holy yoke has
deserved, not punnishing them that mourn for the desolation of Sion, with
those that spoil and make hauock of the Lords inheritance.

Amen.
TO THE READER.
INfinite and unspeakable (Christian Reader) are the miseries from which
Jesus Christ our Savior has freed us, and the benefits and blessings,
wherewith in this life he begins, and for ever will continue to adorn us.
The consideration whereof (if our ^^thankfulnes unto his Majesty, were any way
proporcionable, to that which we endeavor unto toward men) should make us
continually to devise, and all the days of our life to study how we might
show our selves (at least in some sort) careful to glorify his blessed name,
above all things that we desire, by how much as his love toward us,
excels whatsoever can else (according to our wish) befall unto us: but if we
do with equal balance (on the other side) look into the course of man's life,
how well this duty is performed; we shall see, that men declare themselves
rather bent to spit in his face, and to defy him, then any way to honor him
as their head and Sovereign: for (to say nothing of the profane life, and
godless couersation, wherewith the general number, that professes Jesus
Christ, is wholly defiled) we see that many nations, people and languages are
very willing to receive Jesus Christ as their priest to sacrifice for their
sins, but that he should become their king, to prescribe laws unto them,
whereby they may be ruled, is of all other things the most unsavory, yea (if
it be offered) the most grievous tydinges, and unreasonable request: wherein,
albeit many nations that have renounced that whore of Rome, are heynously
sinful against his glorious majesty: yet is there none in the whole world
so far out of square as England, in reteyning that popish hierarchy, first
coined in the midst of the mystery of iniquity, and that filthy sinck of the
Canon law, which was invented and patched together, for the confirming and
increasing of the kingdom of Antichrist: Wherein as great indignity is
offered unto Jesus Christ, in committing his Church unto the government of the
same, as can be, by mean underlings unto a king; in committing his beloved
spouse unto the direction of the mistress of the Stews, and enforcing her to
live after the orders of a brothelhouse. For the reformation whereof, while some
have written, and others according to their callinges, carefully stood, how
heynously it has been taken, how hardly they have been used, and what
shameful reproaches have been offered (even unto the course of the Gospel)
for spyte that has been borne unto reformation, almost by all estates and
degrees, lamentable experience has taught many of us: but our posterity shall
know it more particulerly, and the Church thoroughout the world shall discern
and judge of it more evidently, when their bodies are rotten in the dust, and
their souls (if they repent not) in eternal and intolerable torments; who
have rejected a request so holy, profitable and reasonable; yea, and handled
the intreaters for the same so cruelly, unchristianly, and unlawfully: but they
would gladly persuade themselves (if their conscience would let them) that they
have only executed justice upon us as malefactors, and they persuade men that
we desire a thing, not warranted by the word, not heard of in the Church of
God, until within this few years, nor tolerable in any christian commonweal
whatsoever: The which monstrous slanders, albeit they have been many ways,
and by many men of most worthy gifts detected, and made known in those
several books that have been published concerning the same: yet have I
thought it necessary (in another course) to write also of it. The course of my
enterprise, is first in respect of the favorers of the desired reformation;
secondly of the adversaries of the same, the favorers of it, are also of two
sorts; ministers of the word, and private persons, and both I hope, may have
profit by it. Concerning the former, when these woeful troubles that were
renewed upon us (by that wretched subscription, that was every where urged) did
begin to increase, I thought it meet to betake my self unto that which I had
read, or might any way by study find out, concerning the cause, and collected
all into a brief sum, and referred every thing unto some head; which being
ever present with me, might furnish me to answer in the defense of the truth,
though it were of a sodden, by which (through the blessing of God) I found such
profit in my several troubles, that I thought it a course not altogether
unprofitable for others also, and upon that occasion betook my self unto a
more serious meditation about the matter, and communicating the thing with
diverse very worthy men; I found encouragement and hartening on, generally by
all whom I made acquainted therewith: so that I trust (the judgments, yea and
wishes also of others, so iumping with mine) many ministers that love the
cause, and have not so thoroughly studied it as were meet they should, may reap
some profit thereby. Now concerning private men that love the cause, some have
great affairs in hand, and have no leisure to read the several books of this
argument: some when they read, are not of sufficient capacity to conceive the
force of a reason, or to make use of it, to enform themselves in the grounded
knowledge of the cause thereby: some (which is the general falt of our
religious gentlemen) will take no pains to read, some are poor and not able
to buie the books which might let them see the cause, al these (I hope) may
find help in some measure hereby. Now concerning the adversaries unto the
cause, they are of two sorts also, they that know it, and they that are
ignorant of it: the former, if they write any thing against it, are contented
to deal in so rouing a course as may rather arise unto great volumes, then
soundly to say any thing against the cause: Wherein D. Whitgifte, but
especially D. Bridges, have given us an evident example: and these with others
of their judgment (though non in these latter days, have written more
unlearnedly then they, of any argument of divinity whatsoever) are contented to
make the world believe (if me^ will be so wilfully seduced) that our arguments
be no arguments, that they be grounded upon false foundations, and that we are
not able to conclude our cause in any form of reasoning. The course that is
here taken (I trust) shall show that they are liars: the other sort of
adversaries be they that be merely ignorant of any thing, either for it or
against it; and persuading themselves that the sway and show of the world must
needs carry the truth with it, do (like blind bayardes) boldly venture to say
any thing against it, and think they do well. Now of all these sorts of people,
I have to request some thing; I hope I shall obtain my request (at the least)
at the hands of some of the^. The first sort of favorers (which be the
ministers) I entreat, that as they tender the glory of God, and honor of the
cause which they stand in; so they would diligently employ themselves in this,
that they may be found able to defend the same by sound and evident grounds
out of the word, and so much the rather, for that the adversaries do greatly
triumph, when they meet with one that professes the cause, and is not able to
defend it, and confute the gainsayers of it. The secoud sort of favorers, be
the private persons that love the cause, whom I beseech to be careful (as of
all other points of religion) of this, that they grow in the knowledge of the
word of God, whereby they may be able, upon their own knowledge to defend the
truth, and not give the enemy any occasion to think or say, that they be of
that mind, because such and such ministers, whom they do affect, do think
so. Now concerning the former sort of adversaries, to wit, they that know it, I
pray them to look into their own hearts, and they shall find they mislike it;
either because it corrects their excessive pomp and maintenance, or
requires more travail in their ministry, then they are willing to undergo,
or at the least, controlleth that dissolutnes of behauior, wherein they
willingly wallow: and if it would please god to bring them to a serious
meditation of this, that it is the will of the mighty God (before who^ they
must be called to give an account) which they do resist, they would (I doubt
not) more carefully look about the^. And lastly for them that being ignorant
of the cause, speak evil of that they know not: let them (if they will be
admonished) vouchsafe to read this little book, and wey the reasons with an
upright judgment, which shall cause the^ (at the least) to suspend their sharp
censures, which so usually appear in their ordinary communication: and
concerning us al, let us know (for one day we shall be sure to feel it) that the
controversy is not about goats woolle (as the proverb says) neither light
and trifling matters, which may safely be followed or rejected (as in deed the
enemies of this cause do confidently affirm) but about no les matter the^
this, whether Jesus Christ shall be king or no; For if none is said to be a king,
but he that rules by the scepter of his laws, then the turning out of these
orders which christ has prescribed in his word, for the ruling of the Church,
is to give him the title, and deny him the authority belonging to the same,
and so (in truth) to make him an Idol, making him to carry a show of that which
he is not, and (with the crucifiers of him) to put a reed in his hand, in
stead of his iron rod; and crowning him with thorns, in stead of the crown of
greatest glory; which is the cause that so many Atheists spit in his face, and
so many godles persons, do make but a jest of him: but when he comes to show
himself in his glorious majesty; it shall be said unto all these sorts of
adversaries: Those mine enemies which would not that I should raigue over
them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Luke 19. 27. The which fearful
sentence, that we may avoid, let every one of us (as may stand with our
several callings) carefully endeavor, to advance this kingdom here, which
(among other assurances given us from the Lord shall be a testimony unto us,
that we shall have part in that glory, which shall be revealed herafter. Now
concerning the order of this book; to direct thee (good reader) unto thy
further instruction, in the points thereof. Thou have in every chapter, diverse
proofs out of the holy word of God, which must be the things wherewith thou
may safely inform thy conscience: then shall thou find (also arguments
drawn from reason rightly ruled by the same word: and lastly, (because our
adversaries charge us, that we desire a thing not known unto the old writers,
nor agreed upon among the new) thou have here the witness of them both in so
plentiful and uniform wise, as may plainly declare, that al godly learned men
of al times, have given testimony unto the truth of it. The most of the
things that are here expressed, I acknowledge to be gathered out of the books
that have been published, and are extant (purposely) concerning this argument;
as may appear in the several points, wherein thou art sent unto the^. Now,
lest either thou should be deceived with a diverse impression, or think me to
missealleadge the authors, I am to show thee what books I have followed. The 1.
book of T. C. twice printed, I follow the latter; of Ecclesiast. discip. I follow
the latin, printed 1574. and the last book of D. Whitgift, which contains
all the former in it. The rest (as I take it) have been but once printed, and
therefore carry no doubt in them. If thou be satisfied herewith, give God the
glory: and promote the cause by prayer, and all other good means that thy
calling may afford: and pray for us, that we may never shrink, nor be
overthrown by the strength of them that fight against it.

FINIS.
A Table of Discipline, the particular heads whereof, are handled in the
several chapters, according to the number wherevvith they are noted: as
follovveth.
The Discipline of the Church is, the order that GOD has prescribed in his
word, for the ruling of the same: cap. 1 The offices and officers of which,
are to be considered in General, the calling, whereunto to wit, to A certain
office, Chap. 2. Execute his office faithfully, Chap. 3.
how it must be by Election which must be done by The people, chap. 4.
Examination, chap. 5.
Consent (only) to a man fit for the place, Chap. 6.
ordination By whom it must be: by the eldership. Chap. 7. The manner how, by
public prayer with the people, chap. 8. laying on of hands, cap. 9.



Particular, the officers and offices, Simple by themselves, Bishops Pastors,
chap. 10. Doctors, chap 11.
Deacons or Church servants, Ouerse^^^, chap. 1^. Distributers, chap. 13.

compound the Synod Ecclesiastical, What Be the parties: Pastors, Doctors,
and Elders, Chap. 14. Is the authority thereof, chap. 15.
wherein it consists: in placing and displacing; chap. 16. Censures by Word,
chap. 17. deed Suspention, cap. 1^ Excommunication Chap. 19.






A DEMONSTRATION of Discipline
CHAP. 1.
The diffinition of Discipline, contains this proposition holden by us.

THe word of God describ^th perfectly unto us, that form of governing the
Church which is Iawfull, and the officers that are to execute the same; from
the which no Christian Church ought to swerve. Admonition in the praeface:
Ecclesiastical Discip. fol. 5. T. C. first book, page 26. Counterpoyson page
8. Discourse of government, page 1. etc.

The Assertion of the BB. and their adherents.

THe word of God describes not any exact form of Discipline, neither are
the offices and officers, namely, and particularly expressed in the Scriptures,
but in some points left to the discretion and liberty of the Church.
Whitgift in praeface, and page. 14. answer to the Abstract page 33.

The proof of the former is the disproofe of the latter, which is thus
declared.

1. These things write I unto thee, 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
etc. out of which place I reason thus. That end which Paul respected in
writing unto Timothy, does the holy ghost direct al ministers unto for ever;
for it must be kept. 1. Tim. 6. 14. But he wrote to direct him in the
establishing and building of the Church. Therefore that word must direct
ministers for ever: and consequently they neither may add to, nor take from it,
but govern it only by the rules that be there prescribed.

2 Every house ought to be ruled by the orders of the skillful, wise, and
careful householder only: But the Church is the house of God, and God is such
a householder: Therefore the Church ought to be ruled by the orders of God
only, which are no where to be had, but in his word.

3 That which teaches every good way, teaches also how the Church must be
governed: But the word of God teaches every good way: Proverb. 2. 9.
pro. 2. 9. therefore it teaches how the Church must be governed.

4 We cannot glorify God, but by obedience to his word; in all that we do, we
must glorify God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Therefore in all that we do, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
there must be obedience to the word; and consequently in governing his Church.

5 If meat and drink be not sanctified unto us, 1. Tim. 4. 5.
but by the word and prayer, then much less is any thing holy which is done in
the government of the Church besides the word: But the former is true by the
testimony of the Apostle 1. Tim. 4. 5: therefore the latter must be true also.

6 All lawful things are of faith. Romans 14 23. Romans 14. 23.
All lawful things that are of faith, have a warrant from the word, for the
word is the foundation of faith; therefore all things lawful, have their
warrant from the word: and consequently every lawful action in the government
of the Church.

7 Either has God left a prescript form of government for the Church, under
the new testament: or he is less careful for it now, then he was under the
law; for his care is in guyding it: But he is as careful now for his church as
he was then: Therefore has he left a prescript form to govern it.

8 He that was as faithful as Moses, Heb. 3. 2.
left as clear instruction, both for the buylding of faith, and government of
the Church, as Moses did: But Christ was as faithful in Gods house. Heb. 3.
2: therefore he left as clear instruction for them both as Moses; but Moses
gave direction even for every particular, as appears in the buylding of the
Tabernacle, and order of the priesthood. Therefore has Christ also given
particular direction for the government of the Church.

9 If the word of God have described sufficient ministers and ministeries, for
the buylding of the Church, and keeping it in good order, then is our assertion
true: But it has set down sufficient for doctrine, Rom 12. 5. 6. 7. 1. Cor.
1^. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. etc. See Countery. page 11.
exhortation, ouerseeing, distributing, and ordering of every particular
Church or general Synod: Therefore is our assertion true.

10 That government which the Apostles taught and planted, is expressed in the
word of God: But the Apostles taught and planted, pastors and teachers for
instruction, elders for oversight, and deacons to distribute, and that
uniformly in every Church, as appears by their writings and practices:
Therefore a certain form of government is expressed in the word.

11 Every lawful office and action in the building of the Church, Matthew. 21.
25. 26
is from heaven. Matthew. 21. 25. 26. Every thing that is (in the ordinary
building) from heaven, is reveled in the word: Therefore every lawful office
and action is revealed in the word.

12 If God continued (in regard of the substance) the Church administration,
as well as the things to be administered, then is the form of Discipline
described in the word. But the former is true, as appears by the particulars;
for priests, pastors; for teaching Levites, or doctors of the law, Teachers;
for rulers of the Synagogue, Elders; for Leuiticall lookers to the treasury,
Deacons; for the Saned^rim, the Eldershipp: therefore the form of government
is prescribed in the word.

13 Every wise king that is careful for his subjects, sets down Laws for
the government of the same, and will have them tied to no other: But Christ is
such a king unto his church: Therefore has he prescribed Laws unto his
Church, which none therein can alter or disobey; and consequently, the certain
form of government of the Church is described in the word.

14 That which the ministers must teach the people to observe, is set down in
the word of god, for they may teach nothing but that which is there, Matthew. 28
20:
Matthew. 28. 20: But they are to teach, them to observe, and be obedient unto,
the particular form of the Church government: Therefore the particular form
is set down in the word.

15 Every government consists in the governors, matter wherabout they are to
be employed, and manner of doing it: But in the word are described all these
particulars, as it is showed in the 9. reason: Therefore the word prescribes a
prescript form of government.

16 The Christian religion shall find, Cyprian in sermon de baptismo Christi.
that out of this Scripture, rules of all doctrine have sprung, and that from
hence does spring, and hither does return, whatsoever, the Ecclesiastical
Discipline does contain.

17 We may not give our selves the liberty to bring in any thing that other
men bring of their will; Cyprian de prescrip^^duer^us ha^t^
we have the Apostles for authors, which themselves brought nothing of their
own will, but the Discipline which they received of Christ, they delivered
saythfully to the people.

18 It is adulterous, Cyprian lib 1. Epist. 8.
it is sacriledgious, whatsoever is ordained by humane fury, that the divine
disposition should be violated.

Therefore if Timothy was written unto, The Conclusion
that he might be directed by the word, in disposing of the Churches; if the
Laws of God only being the householder, must be followed in the Church, his
House; if the word of God teach us in every good way, whereof the government
of the Church is one; if God must be glorified in the ruling of his Church,
which cannot be, but by obedience to his word; if nothing be lawful, but that
which i^ of faith, warranted by the word; if God have showed himself as
careful for his Church under the Gospel, as under the law; if Christ was as
faithful to give direction as Moses; if in the word be described sufficient
ministers and ministeries, to build up the Church; if that government, which
the Apostles taught and practiced, be in the word; if every lawful office and
action in an ordinary building, be from heaven, and revealed thence by the
word; if God continued the same form (in respect of the substance) in the
time of the Gospel, that was under the law; if every wise careful king, do
set down laws for the direction of his subjects; if the Apostles have taught
us to obey that which Christ commanded; if both the governors, matter of
government, and manner of doing it, be set down in the word; if all that
pertayneth to Ecclesiastical Discipline, spring from the scriptures; if we
may bring nothing into the Discipline of the Church, but that which the
Apostles have delivered us; lastly, if that be adulterous and sacriligious,
that is not according to the word: th^n it must needs follow, that God does
describe perfectly unto us out of his word, that form of government which is
lawful, and the officers that are to execute the same: from the which it is
not lawful for any Christian Church to swerve. And contrariwise, that is a most
untrue assertion to say, that the officers and offices are not particularly
expressed, but left to the discretion of the Church. The reasons that they
allege against this, are in effect none, and their objections to these
reasons, not worthy to be mentioned.

CHAP. 2.
EVery officer in the Church, must be placed in some calling warraunted by the
word of God, and some congregation must have need of such a one, before he be
called to any function. Wherein are these propositions.

1 No calling is lawful in the Church, The first proposition.
but that which is directly warraunted out of the word, unto him that
executes it.

The BB. and their adherentes think otherwise, as their practice in ordeyning
Archbysh. L. Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chauncellors, officialls, etc. does
plainly declare.

2 The name and office of an Archb. The second proposition.
is contrary to the word of God.

3 No man may be ordained unto any office in the Church, until there be such a
place void as he is fit for: T. C. 1. book, page 61.

They think otherwise, as their making of so many ministers at once proves,
and as is holden, VVhitgist page 222.

1 The first is proved thus: Reason for the first proposition John. 1. 23. 25.
If John was constrained to prove his ministry out of the Scriptures when
the Priests accused him; then is no calling lawful, that has not his warrant
in the word, for if any be privileged, the extraordinarye ministers (whereof
he was one) are specially excepted: But he proved his ministry by the word,
as appears by his answer unto them, in the 23. verse. Therefore no calling
is lawful in the Church, that has not his warrant in the word.

2 The callings under the Gospel must have as good warrant as they had under
the law, because the light of the Gospel is (at the least) as clear as that
of the law: But there was never any lawful calling under the law (excepting
those that were by miraculous manner confirmed from heaven) which had not his
direct warrant out of the word. Therefore no calling is lawful in the
Church, which is not directly warranted in the word.

3 If Corath Dathan and Abiram (though they were Levites) were punished for
that they Numb. 16.
had no warrant for that which they presumed to take in hand, then is every
lawful calling, both in general warranted out of the word, and particularly
laid upon the parties from the Lord: But the former is true, as the history
teaches us: Therefore must the latter needs be true also.

4 That which gives comfort unto a man in the time of his troubles, must have
a warraunt out of Gods word: But every lawful calling gives comfort unto a
man in the time of his troubles: Therefore every lawful calling has a warrant
out of Gods word.

5 That which helps Gods people forward in godliness, must have a warraunt out
of Gods word: for God has promised a blessing to his own ordinance only: But
every lawful calling in the Church, helps Gods people forward in godliness:
Therefore every lawful calling has a warrant out of Gods word.

Therefore if John did prove his calling out of the Scriptures; The conclusion
if every calling under the law, was warraunted out of the Scriptures; if
Corath, etc. were punnished for enterprising that which they had no warrant
for, out of the Scriptures; if comfort in troubles comes only from the
Scriptures; and lastly, if every help to godliness is warraunted in the
Scriptures; then, etc.

They confess all these reasons to be true, but do deny that the Archbish. L.
B. etc. be distinct ministers from others. VVhigift page 303. which we hold T.
C. 1. book page 438 and prove it thus.

1 Those things that have diverse efficient causes, are diverse: Our BB. and the
ministers of the word have diverse efficient causes, for the one is the
ordinance of God, the other the constitution of humane policy, as themselves
do confess: Therefore they are distinct ministers from others.

2 A diverse form makes diverse things: the minister^ of the word, and the L.
Bishops have diverse forms: for their ordination (even in the Church of
England) is diverse, seeing one L. B. may ordain a minister: But there must be
three to ordain one of them: Therefore they are distinct ministers.

3 Members of one division are distinct one from another: the L. BB. and
ordinary ministers be members of one division: for usually the ministers be
divided into the rulers, and them that are to be ruled: therefore they are
distinct ministers.

4 The things that have diverse effects, are diverse in themselves one from
another: the L. BB. and other ministers have diverse effects; for the one
effects rule and government, the other subjection and obedience: Therefore
they are diverse and distinct ministers.

5 They that be employed about diverse things are diverse one from another: The
L. Bb. and the ordinary ministers, be employed about diverse things, for the one
is exercised in general view of many congregations, and the other in the
particular direction of one: Therefore they be distinct ministers.

6 That which is perpetual, and that which may be taken away by men, are
distinct one from another: The office of the minister is perpetual, Ephesians. 4.
13. and the Bb. may be taken away as themselves do confess: Therefore they are
diverse, and distinct ministers.

Therefore if the ministers of the word, The Conclusion
and L. Bb. proceed from diverse causes; if they have their being by diverse
forms; if they be members of one division, which (in nature) cannot be one; if
they produce diverse effects; if they be exercized about diverse subjects:
lastly, if the one be perpetual, and the other but for a time, then must it
needs follow, that they are diverse and distinct ministers one from another.
The name of an Archb. and also the office that he executes, The 2. proposition
and reasons for the proof of it.
is contrary to the word of God.

First, That the name of archb. may be given no man.
the reasons that prove it unlawful to give the name unto any man in the
Church, are these.

1 No man may have the name given him, 1. Peter. 5. 4. Hebr. 13. 20. Acts 3.
15. 5. 31. Hebr. 12. 2.
which is proper to our Savior Jesus Christ: But the name of Archb. is proper
unto our Savior Jesus Christ, as appears in the places quoted: Therefore no
man may have the name of Archb. given unto him.

2 If the name Pope be therefore odious, because of that Antichrist, who is
entitled therewith, then must also the name of Archb. when it is ascribed unto
any mortal man; for so much as it is the title of a special member of that
kingdom of Antichrist: But the former is true even by their own confession.
Whitgift page 300. Therefore must the latter be true also.

But they object diverse things against this, Objections for the name of Archb.
and answers thereunto
for the proouing of the name Archb. to be lawfully given unto some men, which
together with their answers do briefly follow.

1 Objection Clemens aloweth of those names, Whitgift page 318.
as Polydor reports, lib. 4. cap. 12.

Answer Polydor is but the reporter, and M. Jewel has proved evidently
against Harding that Clemens is countefeite, and worthy of no credit.

2 Objection Erasmus says that Titus was an Archbishop.

Answer He spoke as the times were wherein he lived: but that proves not
that he held him one in deed, no more then our naming of the Archb. of
Canterburye, when we speak of him, proves that we like and allow his
authority.

3 Objection Anacletus says that James was the first Archb. of Jerusalem.

Answer He is forged (as our aunswers to the papists have showed) but a
witness of better credit calls him only a bishop, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23. and
Simon bishop after him, lib. 3. cap. 22. and Iraeneus says lib. 4. cap. 63.
that the Apostles ordained bishops every where, making no mention of Archb.

4 Objection The Council of Nice Canon 6. mentions a Metropolitan bishop.

Answer That proves nothing, for it was only as much as to say, the Bish.
of the chief City.

Secondly the reasons that prove the office of the Archb. That the office of
Archb. is unlawful.
unlawful be these.

1 Every ministry that is lawful, must be of God: The office of the Archb. is
not of God, for that he is not described in the word, and themselves confess
that he is of humane policy: Therefore the office of the Archb. is unlawful.

2 That ministry whose original is unknown, has no warrant from Gods word,
and consequently is unlawful: The original of the Arch. is unknown as they
confess; Whitgift page 351. Therefore it is unlawful.

3 That office which is needles in the church is also unlawful to be exercised
in the same: The office of the Archb. is needless, for the ministry is
perfect without it, as the Apostle proves, Ephesians. 4. 13. Therefore the office
of an Archb. is unlawful.

4 If all the gifts needful for the perfecting of the Church, be appropriated
unto other ministeries, then is his ministry unlawful: But all the needful
gifts, are appropriated unto pastors doctors, elders and deacons, whereof he is
none* Therefore his office is unlawful.

5 That office is unlawful, which none may lawfully give: But none may lawfully
bestow the office of an Archb. because none can give any new gifts to adorn
him withal: Therefore his office is unlawful.

This reason being used of all sound divines against the pope, is of the same
valewe against the Archb.

6 If the office of an Archb. be lawful, then it is either in respect of his
excellency above other men, or the place whereof he is above other places: But
neither of these have ever been, neither hereafter can be: Therefore that
office is unlawful.

Therefore if the office of the Archb. The conclusion
be not of God; if the original of it be unknown; if in the Church it be
needless; if all the gifts that God has bestowed upon his ministry be
appropriated unto those Church officers, whereof he is none; if none may
lawfully bestow such an office upon any; if it can neither be incident unto
any one man for his excellency, nor his place for pre-eminence: then must it
needs follow, that his office is unlawful.

Calvin in his Institut. book 4. cap. 11. sect. 7. alleges diverse reasons
to this purpose, and Beza in his book of diuorcements, stretches the same to
all the inferior officers under him saying: Officials, proctors, promotours,
and all that swinish filth, now of long time has wasted the Church. So does
Peter Martyr upon the Romans 13. speaking against civil Jurisdiction in
Bishops, does by the same reasons condemn it in their substitutes.

But this being the corner stone of their building, they labor to support it
with many props the most special whereof are these.

1 Objection Cyprian says, lib. 1. Epist. 3. ad Cornelium, Objections for the
office of the Archb: and answers thereunto.
Neither have haeresies and schisms risen of any other occasion, then of
that, that the priest of God is not obeyed, neither one priest for the time,
and one judge for the time in the stead of Christ thought upon, to whom if the
whole brotherhood would be obedient according to Gods teaching, no man would
move any thing against the College of priests

Answer This place is alleged for the pope and the answer that M. Jewel and
others make to it, serves our turn: only let this be noted, that Cyprian
speaks of the people at Rome, that had received another bishop (besides
Cornelius) who was an haeretike; for all the course of his writings, condemns
this superiority. It is expounded by M. Jewel, book 1. sect. 4. division 5.
of every bishop: and so is it by M. Nowell against Dorman, book 1. page 25.
and also by M. Fox, tom. 1. fol. 93. See T. C. in his 1. reply page 98. etc.

2 Objection The authority of the Archb. preserves unity.

Answer Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 9. says that unity is reserved by the
agreement of bishopps, that is of ministers, one with another.

3 Objection It compoundeth controversies, that else would grow to many heads
without any special remedy.

Answer Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 13. says that the plentiful body and company
of Elders, are (as it were) the glewe of mutual concord, that if any of our
company be author of haeresie, the rest should help.

4 Objection (...) Jerome upon Tit. 1. says that in the beginning a bishop and
priest (meaning a teaching Elder) were all one: but when men began to say, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollo, etc. It was decreed that one should be chosen to
bear rule over the rest.

Answer From the beginning it was not so: the saying of Tertull. Contra
Prax. is fit for this: that is true whatsoever is first, and that is false
whatsoever is latter: and Jerome says in the place alleged, that this
authority is by custom and not by any institution of God; if it had been the
best way to take away divisions, the Apostles (in whose times the controversies
did arise) would have taken the same order.

5 Objection Calvin says that the Apostles had one among them to govern the
rest.

Answer That was not in superiority, but for order to propound the matters,
gather the voices and such like; which is meet to be in every well ordered
meeting: but his authority is no more over the rest, the^ the speaker in the
Parliament has over the other knights and Burgesses.

6 Objection Paul was superior to Timothy and Titus.

Answer Paul and they had diverse offices, whereof the Apostles office was
the chief, the like is to be said of Timothy and Titus, having superiority
over the other ministers, for that they were Evangelists, a degree above
ordinary ministers.

Therefore if the place alleged out of Cyprian, The conclusion
make nothing for Archb. if unity be not preserved by him, but by the Bishops
among themselves; if his authority make nothing to the taking away of
controversies; if it be merely invented by man, and not from the beginning; if
it be by custom, and not by any ordinance of God; if neither one Apostle over
the rest, nor any of them over the Evangelists, nor of the Evangelists over
the pastors and teachers, will serve to prove their authority: then must it
needs follow, that it is utterly unlawful.

Non man may be ordained unto any office in the Church, The 3. proposition and
reasons for it.
until there be such a place void as he is fit for, T. C. book 1. page 61.
VVhitgist, page 222.

1 As was the 12. place for Matthias, so is a certain Church, to every Church
officer: But Matthias was not ordained unto the place of an Apostle, Act. 1. 20
until Judas by hanging himself, had made it void, Act. 1. 20. Therefore may
none be ordained unto any office in the Church, before the place where he may
be employed, be destitute of such a one.

2 As the Apostles did in planting of the Churches, so must it be done in the
buyldinge thereof for ever: But they ordained neither pastor, teacher, elder
or deacon, but to some certain Church that had need thereof: Therefore may none
be ordained unto any office, until a place be void that has need of him.

3 Those things that be of one beginning, continuance and ending, cannot be
one, before or after another: But a minister, and the execution of his
ministry in a lawful standing be so; for they be relatiues, and have
reference one unto the other: Therefore a minister ought not be ordained before
there be a ministry whereunto he is to be allotted.

4 If non ought to be called to be a shepherd, that has no flock of sheep to
keep: neither any watchman, that is not allotted to some place to watch: then
may none be ordained to any office, before there be a place void for him: for
ministers are in this sense termed shepherds and watchmen: But the former is
true, as every simple man can easily perceive: Therefore the latter is true
also.

5 To do contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles is unlawful:
But to ordain any officer, without a certain place wherein he may be employed,
is contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles, as it appears, Tit.
1. 5. Act. 14. 23. Therefore to ordain any officer of the Church, without a
certain place whereunto he is to be allotted, is unlawful.

6 It was ordained that no Elder, Council Calc^don cap. 6. art. 15.
Deacon, or any other Ecclesiastical officer, should be ordained a
Apolelymenos, that is loosely, or let at randone (but as afterward is
expounded) specially in a Church of city or town.

7 The ordination that is made without a title, Council. Vrbanum test* Gratuum
did. 70.
let it be void: and in what Church one is entitled, let him there remain.

8 He complains that ministers were ordained, Ierom ad Nepolita^
being chosen by no Church, and so went here and there, having no certain
place.

9 That action, which never is read to be practiced, but by idolators is
unlawful: To have wandering officers, is only found to be in idolaters, as
appears Judge. 17. 8. Therefore it is unlawful.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if the Apostles ordained not Mathias, until the place was void; if in
planting of Churches, they ever allotted officers to their proper places; if
minister and ministry be of one beginning, continuance and ending; if it be
with a minister, and his ministry, as with a shepherd and his flock, that he
cannot be the one, but in respect of having the other; if it be unlawful to
transgress the precepts and practice of the Apostles; if no minister in the
Church, be ordained at randone; if the ordination that is without a title be
void; if Jerome complained of it, as a great fault in his time; if no example
be found of it, but in Idolaters: then must it needs follow, that to ordain
any Church officer, until there be such a place void as he is fit for, is
utterly unlawful: and so the Bb. making of many ministers at once, and
licencing of wandering preachers, is contrary to the word of God.

They will have some thing to say for every action they do, An objection.
be it never so shameful: that which they allege for this, is, that Paul and
Barnabas did wander.

The Apostles office (and so the Evangelists as assistants unto them) was to
prech the word, The answer.
and plant Churches in every part of the world: but the order that they left,
is a president for us, which is that every Church have their proper officers,
and that there be no other elsewhere to be found.

CHAP. 3.
EVery Church Officer, Our assertion.
ought to execute the office committed unto him, with all faithful diligence,
and consequently be continually resident upon his charge, T. C. book 1. page
65.

They deny not the proposition, Their assertion.
but the consequent that is inferred upon it, as appears by their writings,
VVhitgist page 246. and by their daily practice in giving di^pensations for
many benefices. The reasons we allege to prove the necessity of perpetual
residence, and the unlawfulness of nonresidence be these that follow.

1 A shepherd has a flock to the end to feed it continually: The minister
is a shepherd, and his charge a flock: Therefore he ought to feed it
continually, and consequently to be perpetually resident, for how can he feed
them from whom he is absent.

2 Where God does place any man, there his continual travail is needful,
for God is most wise in disposing every thing: But God places every right
minister over that people, which is his charge: Therefore his continual
travail is needful there, and consequently he may not discontinue.

3 Flocks that are in danger, are (by careful shepeards) watched night and
day, Luke 2. 8. Every congregation is a flock in danger, for the enemy goes
about like a roaring lion, 1. Pet. 5. 8. and sows tares whilst men sleep.
Math. 13. 25. Therefore every congregation is to be watched night and day by
the minister thereof, and consenquently he may not be nonresident.

4 If his duty to them requires so much travail, as may continually set him
on wor^^, then may he not be nonresident: But it is evident (that it does so)
to all them that either know by the word of God, what study, prayer,
doctrine, exhortation, etc. be required of him, or makes any conscience of
giving account for the souls committed to their charge: Therefore may not they
be nonresident.

5 If the minister cannot apply himself fruitfully, to the capacity of his
people, unless he have particular knowledge of their disposition, and
capacity, then is it not lawful for him to be nonresident: for by continual
residence among them, he may know them and not else: But the former is true,
as the small knowledge that the people get by general teaching, does evidently
declare: Therefore it is not lawful for him to be nonresident.

6 If the ministers of the Gospel, be as narrowly tied to their charges, as
the priests under the law, then may they not be nonresident: For they were
always ready in the Temple, to answer the doubts, 1. Sam. 1. 9: But it is
clear that they are, because men are now as hardly trained unto godliness, and
the enemy is as wrathful as he was then: Therefore they may not be
nonresident.

7 If the minister must be an example to his people; then must he be daily
present with the^, that they may behold him: But the former is true, 1. Tim.
4. 12. Therefore is the latter true also.

8 He whom the sheep are to follow in and out, and must know by the voice,
ought to be continually among them: A good minister of the word is such a
one, John. 10. 4. Therefore he must be resident among them.

9 None can be always ready to feed his flock, that is absent from it:
Every minister must be always ready to feed his flock, because it
depends upon him. 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore every minister is to be resident
with his flock.

10 He that must take heed to his flock, watch over it, and feed it, must be
resident continually with it: Every minister must do so, Act. 20. 28.
Therefore, etc.

11 If Satan be the cause of nonresidence, the^ is it utterly unlawful: But
Satan is the cause of it, 1. these. 2. 17. 18. Therefore it is utterly unlawful.

12 That which abridgeth the love of God to his people, and comfort to the
minister, that same is unlawful: But not to be resident does both: Therefore
it is unlawful.

13 That which hinders the loving familiarity that should be betwixt the
minister and his people, that same is unlawful: But nonresidence does so, for
it makes them strange one to another, and argues small love in him toward
them: Therefore it is unlawful.

14 To be absent from them that have interest in us, and continual need of us
is unlawful, which we can see to be true in our servants, etc: But the
congregation has an interest in the minister, and continual need of him:
Therefore it is unlawful for him to be absent from them.

15 If the priests might not dwell far from the temple, then may not
ministers be nonresident: But the former is true, as appears by this; that
they had houses builded close to the Temple. 1. Chron. 28. 13. Therefore the
latter is true also, seeing the residence of the one is as needful as the
other, as appears in the sixth reason.

16 Let no Clarke be placed in two charges, Council Nice canon 15.
for it is filthy merchaundize, and no man can serve two masters, and every
one must tarry in that place whereunto he is called.

17 Damas^us compares them that set over their charges to others, Council. tom.
2.
to harlots that put out their children, that they may give themselves to lust
the sooner.

18 It was ordained that none, Theoderet lib. 1. cap. 19.
either B. or Elder, should go from city to city.

Therefore, The conclusion
if a minister have the charge of a flock committed unto him, to the end to
feed it; if God place men, to the end to have them there employed; if flocks in
danger have need of continual watch; if the ministers duty to his flock
requires all that travail that he can perform; if he cannot be fruitfully
profitable unto them, without continual residence; if his residence be as
strictly required as theirs under the law; if he cannot be a pattern unto them
without he be resident; if they cannot follow him, nor know him if he be
absent; if he cannot be always ready to feed his flock, unless he be there;
if he cannot take heed to them, feed them, and watch over them, without his
presence; if Satan be the author of nonresidencie; if his absence abridge Gods
love to them, and comfort from himself; if absence be an hinderance to the
loving familiarity that should be betwixt him and them; if they have interest
in him, and continual need of him; if he may no more be absent, then the
priests dwell from the Temple; if the Council of Nice did upon good grounds
forbid it; if absence be like to the practice of an harlot; if it be not
lawful to go from place to place; then is nonresidence unlawful, and the
practice thereof contrary to the word of God.

The belly (for which nonresidencie is defended and practiced) has no ears,
therefore it is that they hear not the evident sounds; yet have they very
little to say for it, so gross is the error thereof; so much as has any
show of reason, is here set down and answered.

1 Objection Two parrishes may be united, why then may not one have charge of
them both before, when they be two.

Answer Because one shepherd may keep one flock though it be great, but
he cannot keep two, being very little, and going in diverse pastures; again,
one man may have so many flocks as he can lead in and out every Sabbath, to
the exercises of religion, which is very plain that he cannot do, to more
then one congregation.

2 Objection Parishes were divided by men, as especially by Denis the Monk,
Pope of Rome

Answer That is untrue, for the Apostles divided the Church into
congregations, and placed elders over every one of them, as the whole course of
the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles proves: and Whitgift confesses page
250. Therefore these mistes, notwithstanding nonresidencie, must needs be
unlawful: and certainly those that have any sparkle of conscience, fear of
God, or love to their flocks, will never defend it, much less enter into the
practice of it.

CHAP. 4.
IT belongs to the Church, Our affertion.
to make choice of those officers which Christ would have placed in the same:
T. C. 2. book 1. part page 193. Ecclesiast. Discip. fol. 40. and Whitgift
confesses it page 164.

They deny this, as their denying of all the arguments that be brought for it
does prove, Whitgift page 154. 166. etc. and their practice of allowing
patrons, and also being such themselves does evidently declare.

If the former be proved true, then the latter must return to Antichriste,
which is thus declared.

1 That which was the continual and constant practice of the Church in the
time of the Apostles, Act. 1. 2^.
that same is to be followed for ever, which appears by this, that the
ordinances given from God by Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 14. are enjoined to be kept
until Christ come to judgment: But it was the constant, and the continual
practice of the Churches, them to have a stroke in the choice of their own
ecclesiastical officers, Act. 1. and 6. where the Apostles presented two, to
the peoples liking: whereof God was to be prayed unto, to make one an Apostle.
Act 6. 3. where the Church is willed to choose their Deacons, and Act. 14. 25.
where they gave their consent in the choosing of their elders, by the
stretching forth of their hands: Therefore it belongs to the Church to
choose their own Church officers.

2 If the people had an interest in the liking of their teaching Levites, Numb
8. ^.
(which were of the tribe of Aaron) then much more must the people now, for
there was greater likelihood, that they were sent of God, then any of the
common sort of men: But the former is true, as appears by the manner of the
setting of them a side unto that office in the law: Therefore must the latter
needs be true also.

3 That which pertayneth unto all, ought to be approved of all the
congregation: But every ministry in the Church, pertayneth to all the
congregation: Therefore, authority to approve of them, pertayneth to all the
congregation.

4 That election which is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, is
of all other the best, and to abridge it, is unlawful: But election by common
consent, is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, when they shall
see him teach or rule, whom they themselves have chosen: Therefore election by
the Church is the best, and all other kinds of elections unlawful.

5 That election which procures greatest reverence of the people to their
teachers and rulers is meetest, and all others unlawful: But for the people to
consent in the election of their governors, procures greatest reverence, in
their hearts toward them: Therefore election by the people is the best, and
all others be unlawful.

Testimonies of the ancient vvriters.
6 The minister should be chosen (the people being present) in the eyes of all,
and should be by the common judgment, Cyprian book 1. Epist. 3.
and testimony approved worthy and fit: etc. Therefore this is the lawful
vocation by the word of God, where those which are chosen, be appointed by the
consent and approbation of the people. For which also, he brings diverse
authorities out of the Scriptures.

7. That is truly and certainly a divine election of a Bishop, Ambrose Epist:
82.
which is made by the whole Church.

8 Let the people have authority to choose their Clerks and ministers. Jerome
ad Ruffinum.


9 They run (speaking of the life of the Clerks) to Bishops suffragans
certain times of the year, Ad Nepotianum
and bringing some sum of money, they are anointed and ordained, This is right
our English fashion.
being chosen of none, and afterward the Bishop without any lawful election,
is chosen in huggermuger of the canons, or prebendaries only, without the
knowledge of the people.

10 In the Oration of the death of his Father, Nazianzen.
approoueth the election by the people, at large, and confuteth them that would
hinder it

11 When he appointed Eradius to succeed him, Augustine.
says, it was the approved right and custom, that the whole Church should
either choose or consent unto their Bishop.

12 Anthimius choosing a Bishopp without the peoples consent, Basil. Epist. 58.
filled all Armenia with sedition.

13 Why did Peter communicate the election with the disciples? Chrisost. in
act. 1
lest the matter should have turned to a braule, and have fallen to a
contention.

Testimonies of gennerall Counsels.
14 It is meet that you should have power, Council. Nicen^ test Theo^doret.
both to choose, and to give their names that are worthy to be among the
clergy, and to do all things absolutely according to the laws and decrees of
the Church, and if it happen any to dye in the Church, then those which were
last taken, are to be promoted, to the honor of him that is dead, if they be
worthy, and if the people choose them.

15 Let the people choose, The same Contest. hist tripart lib. 2.
and the Bishop approve, and seal up the election with them.

16 In an Epistle to Damas^us, Ambrose etc. says, we have ordained Nectarius
Bishopp of Constantinople, etc. Council. constantest. tripart. hist. lib. 9.
cap. 14.
the whole city decreeing the same; and Flauianus was appointed Bishop of
Antioch, the whole city appoynting him.

17 When he has bin examined in all these and found fully instructed, Council.
Carthag can. 1.
then let him be ordained Bishop, by the common consent of the Clerks and lay
people.

18 Let not him be counted a priest in the Church, Conci. Toletantest. did.
5^.
whom the clergy, and people of that city where he is, do not choose.

19 If any Bishop after the death of his predecessor, Council: Gabil. canon 10.
be chosen of any, but of the Bishops of the same province, and of the clergy
and citizens* let another be chosen: and if it be otherwise, let the ordination
be void and of none effect.

Testimonies out of the Emperors laws.
20 Following the doctrine of the holy Apostles, Justinian in cod
etc. we ordain, that as often as it shall fall out, that the ministers place
shall be void in any city, that voices be given of the inhabiters of that
city, that he (of three which for their right faith, holiness of life, and
other things, are most approved) be chosen to the Bishopprick which is most
meet of them.

21 Being not ignorant of the holy canons: Carolus Magnus di^t. 63 sacro rum
canonum.
that the holy Church should use her honor the more freely, we assent unto
the ecclesiastical order, that the Bishops be chosen, by the election of the
clergy and people.

22 He decreed, Lodouicus Caroli silius.
that he should be Bishop of Rome, whom all the people of Rome should consent
to choose.

23 Lodouicke the second, Platina in vita Andriam secundi.
commanded by his letters, the Romans to choose their own Bishopp, not
looking for other men's voices, which (being strangers) could not so well tell
what was done in the commonwealth, where they were strangers, and that it
appertayned to the citizens.

24 Let the people (says Otho the Emperor) choose and I will approve it. Idem
in vita Leonis octaui.


The testimonies of the nevve vvriters.
25 The new writers, as Muscu^us, in his Common places, in the title of
Magistrates: Bullinger upon 1. Tim. 4. Calume Institut. book 4. chap. 3. sect.
15. Harmon. confess. Heluet. cap. 18. and many others are on our side in this
behalf.

26 If there be none that write against it, but the papists, and no arguments
used against it, but those which be borrowed out of the popish writers: then
does it belong to the Church to choose their own Church officers: But the
former is true, as all that do read them, that write of this argument do
know* and as is manifest, by comparing Pighius, Hosius, etc. with Whitgift:
Therefore the latter is true also.

Therefore seeing the interest of the Church in choosing of their Church
officers, The Conclusion T. C. 2. book ^. part. page 212.
is grounded upon the word of God, both in commandment, and continual
practice, both in the old and new Testament; seeing it is warranted by the
light of common reason; seeing it is commended unto us, by the manifold
practice of all ancient times, so long as any sincerity remained, not only in
the time of persecution, but also of peace; seeing it has been confirmed by
so many general Councels and ratified by the decrees of so many Emperors;
seeing it has such a cloud of witnesses, both of ancient and latter times, of
the best approved writers; seeing none do set themselves against it, but the
papists, or they that invade it only with the same weapons that are fetched
out of the popes Armory: it must needs follow, that it belongs unto the
Church to choose their Church officers: and that the taking away of this
freedom, abridgeth the liberty that Christ has endowed his Church withal,
and brings her into great bondage, as Musculus truly affirms.

Their objections against those things are these
1 Objection They were then under the cross, few in number, and therefore it
was easily known who were fit.

Answer The Gospel was dispersed through out all Asia, Africa, and much of
Europe, and they could less keep together, or meet, and therefore that
makes rather for us.

2 Objection We have many hypocrites, to whom it were dangerous to committ
such weighty actions.

Answer It is true, that we have many: but it is a principle in hypocrisy,
to be forwardst in such public actions, that they may get fame thereby.

3 Objection They had knowledge to do it, but our people be ignorante^.

Answer We should also find our people to have knowledge, if they had
teaching: but howsoever they choose, they cannot have worse then ordinarily are
chosen by the ^ishops and patrons.

4 Objection The Church was not then established.

Answer That is untrue, for though it wanted the help of Magistrates, yet
the Apostles could and did better establish without them, then we can with the
help of them: but if this order might be altered, it had been fitter then, for
now the magistracy may compounde tho differences of the Elders, which help
then they lacked.

5 Objection Drunkards, papists, etc. will choose them that be like themselves,
and we know the best disposed be always the fewest.

Answer Such are not of the Church, but without, 1. Cor. 5. 12. and
therefore are not to meddle in any holy action: but if the people should
choose an unmeet man, the eldershippe that governs the action, is to reform
them: besides this, if Gods order had her place, the schools of the prophets
would send them none, (for the ministers especially) to make choice of, but
meet men, that whomsoever they took, he should be found sufficient.

6 Objection Paul commands 1. Tim. 5. 22 to lay his hands on no man rashly:
therefore one did it.

Answer He teaches what to do for his part, and though others would be
rash, yet he should not join with them in it, as appears in the latter end
of that same verse, for that is ascribed unto him, which also belonged unto
others, because he was the director: Calvin and Musculus expound the place so.

7 Objection The Council of Laodicea, decreed that the people should not elect.

Answer That is, as Calvin takes it upon Acts 16. they might not elect
alone, without the direction of some grave and good minister, which should be
the manner in the elections, that (according to Gods word) we desire.

CHAP. 5.
NOne is to be admitted unto any public office in the Church until he be
thoroughly examined by the eldership, both concerning his state of Christianity,
and ability to that place where to he is to be called, T. C. 1. book: page 38.
Disci. Ecclesiast fol. 46: They think one may do it, as appears by the book
of ordering, etc. VVhitgist page 134. and 135. and their slight passing it
over, through the Archdeacons hands.

The former is proved, and the latter disprooued thus.

1 Those that are to ordain, must have particular knowledge of the parties to
be ordained, (or else they break the rule prescribed them, 1. Tim. 5. 22)
which cannot be without examination: But the Eldership is to ordayneeuerye
Church officer, as shall appear in the Chap. of Ordination: Therefore it
belongs to the Eldership to examine, etc.

2 The matter of greatest importance in the government of the Church, must be
done by the most able governors of the same: The approouing or disproouing of
Church officers, is the matter of greatest importance, because the consequence
of ruling well is the best, or ill the worst: and the Eldership is the Senate
of most able governors in the Church, as shall appear in the Chap. of
Eldership: Therefore the Eldership is to examine, etc.

3 The way whereby a man's insufficiency is best espied, and his ability
discerned, is the fittest to examine them that are to be admitted: But by the
eldership (consisting of diverse) his insufficiency is best espied, and his
ability best discerned, for the common proverb tells us that many eyes do
see more then one: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

4 They are to examine Church officers, that are least subject to be blinded
with partiallitie: But the Eldership is least subject to partiallitie, both for
that they be many, who are not so easily over ruled by affection or favor, as
one, as also (and that especially) for that it being the Lords own ordinance
(as shall appear) we are to persuade our selves, that his spirit shall guide
them: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

5 The way that was used in the Apostles time in examining, is of us to be
followed, unless some reason out of the word to persuade the conscience, can be
alleged to the contrary, which none have ever yet done: But many used in the
Apostles time to examine, as appears in chosing out one to be in the place of
Judas, Act. 1. 22. 23. and fit men for Deacons, Act. 6, 5. whereof the
governors especially were some, for that they were to ordayn upon knowledge,
as is said in the first reason: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership. etc.

6 They whose testimony the people may best credit, are to examine them that
are to be admitted: But the people may best credit the judgment of a company
of able and sufficient men, which the Eldershipp rightly established must
needs be: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership. etc.

7 Examination belongs unto them which may most persuade the people of his
sufficiency, and so procure gretest reverence unto him in his place: But the
examination by the Eldership is such: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership,
etc.

Therefore if they that are to ordain, must examine: The Conclusion
if it be a matter of grerest weight in the government of the Church, and they
the most able to dispatch it; if by them his sufficiency or insufficiency be
best found out; if they be hardliest carried away with affection or
parciallitie; if the examination was such in the Apostles time; if the people
may (in reason) give most credit to the examination that is by such; if that
kind of examination persuade the people best of his sufficiency, and procure
him greatest reverence in his place: then must it needs follow, that it
pertains to the Eldership to examine those that are to be admitted to any
office in the Church.

There is nothing objected against this, that has any show of reason in it,
and therefore it were needles to set any thing down.

CHAP. 6.
BEfore consent be given to any man unto any calling in the Church, it must
appear (by sufficient trial, and due examination) that he is quallified with
those gifts, that the word of God requires in one of that place, Discipl.
Ecclesiast fol. 44. T. C. 2. book: 1. part page 368. and in many other places.

They gainsay this in two points: first in mainteining their reading ministry:
secondly, in governing the Church, by their commissaries and officialls: which
both shall be ouerthrown, if we prove these two propositions following, to be
true by the word of God.

No man ought to be received unto the ministry, The 1. Proposition.
but such as be able to teach the truth and convince the gainsayers.

The Church ought not to be governed by commissaries officialls and
chauncellors. The 2. proposition.


1 He that may be received into the ministry, The 1. proposition is thus
proved.
must be able to teach the people, whatsoever Christ has commanded. Matthew.
28. 20. Only he that is able to teach the truth, and convince the
gainsayers, can teach the people whatsoever Christ has commanded: Therefore
none must be received into the ministry, but such as be able to teach, etc.

2 That which is to be done conditionally, may not be done, if that condition
be not kept: Men are to be received into the ministry conditionally, that is,
if they be vnrepro^^eable, Tit. 1. 5. 6. Therefore if they be not such as be
there discribed, they may not be received: and consequently, none may be
received, but such as be able to teach. etc.

3 That which cannot be done without the manifest brech of Gods commandment,
may not be done at all: To receive any that be not able to teach, is a manifest
breach of Gods commandment. 1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. 1. 9. Therefore no man ought
to be received into the ministerye, that is not able to teach, etc.

4 They whom the Lord refuses to be his ministers, may not be received into
the ministry: for the ministry being the Lords harvest, we may admit none to
labor therein, but only such, as he has given liking of, by the rules of his
word: The Lord refuses to be his ministers, all those that cannot teach:
Hosea 4. 6. Therefore such as are not able to teach, may not be received, and
consequently none may be received, but those that be able to teach, etc.

5 He that may be admitted into the ministry, must be able to divide the word
of God aright, 2. Tim. 2. 15. Only he that is able to teach and convince the
gainesayers, can divide the word of God aright: Therefore none may be admitted
into the ministry, but he that is able to teach, etc.

6 He that may be admitted into the ministry, must have a treasury, furnished
with old things and new, and must be able to bring it forth as occasion shall
serve: Matthew. 13. 52. Only he that is able to teach, etc. is such a one:
Therefore only he may be admitted, etc.

7 He that can espy the enemy, and give warning aforehand how to resist him,
may be received into the ministry, Ezekiel. 33. 7. None can espy the enemy, and
give warning aforehande how to resist him, but he that is able to teach: etc.
Therefore none may be admitted into the ministry, but he that is able to
teach, etc.

8 He that leads himself, and his people into hell, may not be admitted into
the ministry: He that is not able to teach and convince the gainsayer,
leads himself and his people into hell. Matthew. 15. 14. Therefore he that is
not able to teach, etc. may not be admitted into the ministry.

9 He that preaches not, but holds his peace, August. lib depa^^.
murdereth.

10 He that preaches not, Gregor. 1. epist. 33
is not sent, and so he begets no faith in man.

11 In that S. Paul requires that a bishop should be wise, Jerome ad
Oecumenium.
he barreth those, that under the name of simplicitye, excuse the follye of
ministers.

12 We condemn all unmeet ministers, Confess. Helues.
not endued with gifts necessary for a shepherd that should seed his flock.

Therefore, if a minister must teach unto his people all that Christ has
commanded; if none may be made ministers, but conditionally, if they be
quallified with gifts meet for the same; if unpreaching ministers cannot be
made without the manifest breach of the commandment of God; if they may not
be made ministers, whom the Lord refuses to have; if every minister must have
a treasury well furnished, and be able to bring forth of it when need
requires; if every minister must have skill to see the enemy, and to give
warning aforehand how to resist him; if unlearned ministers draw their people
to hell after them; if he that preaches not, be a murderer; if he be not
sent, and so do no good: if he be barred from the ministry: lastly, if he be
condemned, as not to be in such a place: then must it needs follow, that none
may be received into the ministry, but such as be able to teach the truth,
and to convince the gainsayer.

Many are the arguments that be alleged to this purpose, and many more may be
alleged, (for the whole course of the scriptures tend thereunto) the
testimony of all sorts of writers, is very plentiful for this purpose: yea of
the very Canon law, (as the author of the Abstracte has learnedly proved)
and yet do not our prelates rest in the same, but have set themselves (though
in a silly manner) against it, in this sort that follows.

1 Objection There must be reading in the Church, therefore a reading
ministry, Whitgift page 252.

Answer By that reason we must have an officer for every particular action,
for there must be breaking of bread in the Church, and pouring of water; but it
follows not, that therefore there must be one, whose office must be only
to break bread, or to power water.

2 Objection It is better to have readers then none, for preachers cannot be
had for every congregation.

Answer It is not better, for if they had non, they would seek for him that
they should have; whereas now, they that have a reader only, think
themselves in case good enough: but if there be such want of prechers, why are
so many of the most diligent and able ones turned out.

3 Objection It is impossible to have prechers every where, and such as can be
had, must be taken.

Answer Sometimes you say all is well: and is it now impossible that our
state should obey the Lords ordinance; this is the greatest disgrace to it
that can be: and yet i^ follows not, for no necessity may warrant us, to
violate the decrees of the highest.

4 Objection It were uncharitableness to turn them out that be bare readers,
for so they, their wives and children might beg.

Answer This is to sell men's souls for morsels of bread: shall we rather
fear the begging of 3. or 4. then the damnation of 1000. but they may be
otherwise provided for; they need not beg, many of them may return to their
occupations again.

So that al these objections notwithstanding, the conclusion remains sure,
which is grounded upon so many certain and immovable foundations.

The Church ought not to be governed by Commissaries, and officialls, and
Chauncellors. The ^. propo^^tion is thus proved.


1 They which are no Elders of the Church, have nothing to do in the
government of the same, 1. Tim 5. 17. These chauncellors, commissaries and
officialls, are no Elders in the Church; whether we expound Elder for a
minister, and him also, that is assistant unto the minister in ouerseeing the
Church, or for a minister only as they do: for none of them be ministers, and
if they be, they do not rule in this respect, that they are ministers:
Therefore the Church ought not to be governed by them.

2 They that must govern the Church of God, must have a warraunt for their so
doing, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: But Chauncellors, etc. have no
warraunt so to do, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: Therefore the
Church ought not to be governed by them.

3 Those whose names offices and practice, be derived from Antichrist, may have
nothing to do in the government of the Church: for who will suffer his wife
to be governed by the Master of a brothelhouse: But the names, offices, and
practice of Chauncellors, officialls and commissaries be such, which is plain
by this, that they have their ground in that filthy dunghill the cannon law:
Therefore they may have nothing to do in the government of the Church.

4 They that being iuferiours, do proudly tyrannize over their superiors,
ought not to rule the Church of God, for it is meet it should be ruled by
modest, humble and orderly men: But such are they (for being inferiors to the
ministers of the word, as our adversaries do confess, and is plain also by
the cannon law they crow over the^ as if they were their slaves:) and if they
do not so, they can do nothing: Therefore they ought not to rule the Church
of God.

5 They that live by the faults of men, are not fit to rule the Church of God:
for they wi^^ rather increase offenses (that their gain may increase) then
orderly lessen them, as experience (also) proves: But such are all
Chauncellors, commissaries and officials: Therefore they ought not to rule the
Church of God.

Therefore, if chauncellors, commissaries and officialls be no Elders of the
Church; if they have no warraunt from Jesus Christ, the head of the Church;
if their names, offices and practice, be derived from Antichrist; if their
office compel them (being inferiors) to tyrannize over their superiors; if
they live only by the faults and offenses of men: then it must needs follow,
that the Church of God ought not to be governed by them.

CHAP. 7.
EVery officer of the Church must be ordained by the laying on of the hands of
the Eldershipp, T. C. 2. book, 1. part page 274. Discip. Ecclesiast. fol. 53.

They say it ought to be done by the bishopp alone, Whitgift page 196. their
daily practice does likewise show it.

The former is proved, and the latter disprooued by these reasons following.

1 As Church officers were ordained in the Apostles time, so must they be
continually, for they did lay the plot, according whereunto the Church must be
built unto the end: but they were ordained in the Apostles time by the laying
on of the hands of the Eldership, Act. 6. 6. and 13. 3. Therefore the Church
officers must be ordained by laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

2 Church officers must be ordained by them that have warrant from the word,
to assure the parties ordained, that they are called of God: Only the
Eldership has such a warrant, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Therefore they ought to be
ordained by the Eldership.

3 Many of the sentences alleged before, out of Counsels, Emperors, laws,
histories, and sound writers both old and new, for election not to be by one,
but by diverse; speak also of ordination, and so are forcible to this purpose.

4 Euagrius came to the office of a Bishopp unlawfully, Theo^oret book 5. cap.
23
because only Paulmus ordained him, contrary to the tenure of many Cannons,
which provide, that they should not be ordained, but by all the Bishops of the
province, or (at the least) by three.

5 When a Bishop is to be ordained, etc. one bishop shall pronounce the
blessing, 4. Council. Carthag. cap. 23.
and the rest of the bishops with the Elders present, shall all lay on their
hands.

6 When a bishopp was to be ordained, Cyprian lib. 1 ^pist. 4.
the bishops adjoining did ordain him. The Conclusion.


Therefore if Church officers were ordained in the Apostles time, not by one,
but by the Eldershipp, consisting of many; if they be to ordain, that have
warrant out of the word, to assure the parties ordained, that they are called
of God; if ordination by one bishop be unlawful and contrary to many canons of
Counsels; if the bishops and Elders were to lay on their hands: lastly, if
the bishops adjoining were to ordain; then must it needs follow, that Church
officers are not to be ordained by one man, but by the laying on of the hands
of the Eldership.

But they fight hard against this, because it strikes at a maine pillar of
their kingdom, their chief grounds be these.

1 Objection Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, where is no mention of any
Eldership.

Answer They are said to ordain, because they being the chief procured it;
so is Joshua, 5. 3. said to circumcise, which was the Levites office, so say
we, the Queen has made a law, and yet not she alone makes any.

2 Objection Though it were so then, yet is it not so required now, no more
then the community in the Apostles time.

Answer There was no more community then (for they that think otherwise,
are in that point Anabaptists) then is to be required now, so that instance
makes for us.

3 Objection Examples are no general rules to be followed.

Answer Examples not contrarying any rule, or reason of the Scripture, be to
be followed, as if they were commandments, so that notwithstanding any thing
aledged to the contrary, it remains upon the former grounds most steadfast,
that it belongs to the Eldership to ordain those Church officers that are
to be employed in the public service of God.

CHAP. 8.
THe ordaining of Church officers must be done with humble prayer of the
Eldership, and the congregation, Discipl. Ecclesiast. fol 50.

Their vnreuerent beginning and proceedding therewith in a corner, is contrary
to this: which is condemned by the proof of our assertion by these reasons.

1 We are to behave our selves in these actions, as they by whom we have
direction to do them, have set us an example: But the Apostles and Elders,
when they ordained Church officers, did always commend the action to God by
prayer, together with those congregations, over which they placed them, Act. 6.
6. and 14. 23. Therefore the ordeyning of Church officers must be done by
humble prayer of the Eldership, and congregation.

2 The greater the action is that is in hand, the more careful must they be
that have it in hand, to humble themselves by prayer, for the Lords assistance
therein: But the ordeyning of Church officers, is an action of most weighty
importance: Therefore they that have it in hand (which be the Eldershipp to
ordain him, and congregation to receive him) ought to humble themselves in
earnest prayer before hand.

3 They that shall have part in the comfort or discomfort of the action, are to
join together in prayer unto God for the better event, and against the worse:
But the Eldershipp and people, shall both have part in the event of the action:
Therefore they are to join together in humble prayer before hand, etc.

CHAP. 9.
Church officers must be ordained by laying on of hands; in this they agree
with us, concerning the ceremony it self, albeit neither in the parties by
whom, nor on whom it must be conferred. The profit of this ceremony
appears in the reasons following.

1 That which stirs up every party, to pray with more feruencie, is
profitable to be used: But such is this ceremony, for it affects the
ordeyners, when they feel him for whom they pray; and the ordained when he
feels a calling and charge from God (as it were) sensibly coming upon him,
and the congregation, when they see him separated from the rest, by whom they
shall reap much comfort or grief: Therefore the use of it is very profitable.

2 That which helps forward the party ordained in his care, to walk with a
good conscience in his calling, is profitable to be used: Such is the
imposition of hands, for both it declares unto him, that he is separated of
God for that purpose, and also gives him hope, that his hand who allotted him
thereunto, will always assist him in the course of that calling: Therefore it
is of a profitable use.

3 That which works a more acknowledgment of Gods ordinance in the hearts of
the people, is profitable to be used: Such is the laying on of hands, for it
declares unto them, that the Lord has placed him in that calling over them:
Therefore it is profitable to be used.

Therefore seeing the ceremony of layinge on hands is forcible, The conclusion
to increase the feruencie of every party, when they pray; seeing it assures
the calling to the party ordained, and gives him an argument of good hope,
for the blessing of God upon him in the course of the same; and seeing it
procures a more persuasion in the people, that he is allotted unto them from
the Lord himself; it is evident that it is not a vain and idle ceremony (as
many do imagine) but of good and profitable use, in all ordinations.

CHAP. 10.
THe Lord has ordained that there should be one bishop or pastor (at the
least) president over every congregation, who are of equal authority in their
several charges, and in the general government of the Church, T. C. 1.
book, page 22. and 2. book, 1. part, page 515.

They maintain contrary unto this, these two.

1 That one may have two or mo chardges, and be absent from them, as their
dispensations and practice do prove.

2 That one minister may have a sovereignty and Lordshipp over his fellow
ministers, which both being disprooued, the former assertion will remain still
sure.

1 One man may not have mo charges then he is able in any measure to discharge:
Reasons against the 1. proposition.
No man is able in any measure, to discharge the duty that is belonging unto
mo flocks then one, seeing he cannot preach unto them, both in season and out
of season: Therefore no man may have mo charges then one.

2 That which makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil, cannot be
lawful: for one to have mo charges then one, makes open entrance for the
enemy to spoil, for the wolffe watches to devour, whilst the shepherd is
absent: Therefore no man may have mo charges then one.

3 That which has neither precepte, nor president for it, either in Gods
word, or any approved writer, but only from Antichriste, is unlawful: But
such is the having of mo charges then one: Therefore it is unlawful.

4 That which declares a minister to be more desirous of the fleece, then to
profit the flock, that same is unlawful: But such is the having of mo
charges then one, for were it not for the gain, they would think one a burden
as heavy as they could bear: Therefore it is unlawful.

5 All the reasons that be alleged in the third chapter, against
nonresidence, are forcible to this purpose, for if he may not be nonresident,
he may not have mo charges, unless he be willing to be quartered, that every
chardge may have a piece of him.

He reckons them among thieves, Hooper upon 8. command.
and their action to be the every, condemned by that commandment.

Therefore, The conclusion
if one man cannot in any tolerable measure discharge mo charges then one; if
to have mo makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil; if it have neither
precept, nor president for it, but only in the kingdom of Antichrist; if it
declare the practice to be more desirous of the fleece, then to feed the
flock; if all the reasons that condemn nonresidency be against it; lastly if
it be plain the every: then must it needs follow, that one may not have two,
or mo charges.

Their objections (such as they be) are set down in the 3. chapter, and the
answers unto them. The second proposition that they hold, and reasons against
it.


The second proposition that they hold is thus.
One minister may have a sovereign authority, and Lordshipp over his fellow
ministers: which is thus disprooued.

1 They that have their commission indifferently given them, without difference
between one and another, are of equal authority, and may not be one over
another: But such is the commission of all Gods ministers indifferently, as
appears, Matthew. 28. 19. 20. Therefore they are of equal authority, and may
not have any dominion one over another.

2 That which Christ has directly forbidden, that may not in any case be
allowed, but is ever unlawful: But Christ has directly forbidden, that one
minister should have dominion over another. Matthew. 20. 25. Luke 22. 25.
Therefore one minister may not have superiority or dominion over another.

3 They that may not be Lords over the people of God, may much less be
Lords over the ministers, for the ministers be (in respect of the ministry)
above the people: But a minister may not be Lordly over Gods people (as is
testified by him on whom they would father the greatest lordlines) 1. Pet. 5.
3. Therefore one minister may not be Lord, or have superiority over another.

4 It is ordained, Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 3.
and is equal and right, that every man's cause be heard, where the fault was
committed: and it is meet to handle the matter there, where they may have both
the accusers, and witnesses of the fault; which shows that every minister had
authority over his own flock, and no other to meddle.

5 Bishopps, wheresoever they be in all the world, are equal to our bishops,
Luther aduersus papat a Satana fundat.
or parrishe ministers and preachers; of none it can be said one is Lord,
another is servant: whatsoever belongs to the Church, belongs equally to
all, saving that some are of better gifts then others, howbeit such gifts
cause no inequallitie or Lordship in the Church.

6 In the Apostoilke Church, Muscul. loc. com de minist. verbi
the ministers of the word, were none above another, and were subject to no
head or president, etc.

7 The honor of a bishopp, The same upon 2. These. ^. 2.
being taken from the rest of the ministers, and given to one, was the first
step to papacy.

8 Christ did most severely forbid unto the Apostles and their successors,
Confess. Heluet. cap. 17.
primacie and dominion.

9 Equal power and function is given to all ministers of the Church, The same
cap. 18.
and that from the beginning, no one preferred himself before another, saving
only that for order, some one did call them together, propounded the matters
that were to be consulted off, and gathered the voices.

Therefore, The conclusion
if all ministers have their commission indifferently given unto them; if
Christ have forbidden, that one minister should have dominion over another; if
no minister may exercise dominion over Gods people; if authority to handle
controversies, belonged to every several congregation; if a bishopp and
parrish minister be all one; if in the Apostles time, no minister was above
another; if the superiority of one above another, was the first step to the
papacy; lastly, if they have equal power and function from the beginning:
then must it needs follow, that no minister may have superiority, or exercise
dominion over another.

Their objections hereunto (so many as are worthy any answer) be these.

1 Objection Christ Matthew. 20. 25. forbids only ambition, and not dominion,
as Musculus expounds it.

Answer Musculus his judgment appears in the 6. and 7. reasons, the place
is expounded against superiority by Calvin, Bullinger, Zwinglius, Gualter,
Hemingius, etc. But let it be so expounded: that dominion is ambition, because
it causes a man to aspire above his fellow ministers.

2 Objection The Greek word signifies rule with oppression, which is the
thing that is forbidden.

Answer That is not so, for Luke 22. 25. uses the single verb Keurieuem,
which signifies simply to rule: the sons of Zebedeus desired not to
oppress but to rule, which desire he reproved.

3 Objection Christ says not, no man shall be so, but he that will be so,
desiring it.

Answer But Luke says, let the greatest be as your servant, and therefore
that is but a silly shifte.

So that their assertions beeinge ouerthrown, and their objections answered, A
bishop should be in every congregation.
it remains, that we prove yet more directly, that the Lord has ordained,
that there should be a bishop resident over every congregation; which is thus
proved:

1 If a bishop and minister be all one, then must there be a bishop in every
congregation, for every man will confess that every congregation ought to have
a minister: But a bishopp and a minister is all one, as appears by this that
S. Paul discribeth not one quallity for the bishop, but it is also the
quallitie of every good minister; and also in that he describes no other
minister but the bishop: Therefore there ought to be a bishop in every
congregation.

2 S. Paul's bishopps and his deacons, were appointed to one place, as
appears both in the description of them, and the practice of the Apostles:
But the deacons were in every congregation, which appears Phil. 1. 1. Acts.
6. ^. that office being needful every where; and in that it continued so,
longer then the office of bishops, Athanasius Apol. 2. Jerome Contra
Luciferianos. etc. Therefore there ought to be a bishop in every congregation.

3 That which Paul enjoined to Titus, is also to be practiced always in the
like case: But he commanded him to ordain Elders in every city, Tit. 1. 5.
which are expounded in the next verse to be bishops: Therefore there must be a
bishop in every congregation.

4 Every Church should have her Communion table, Ignatius ad Philadelp.
and every Church her bishop.

5 Where there was found any worthy to be a bishopp, Epiphan. lib. 3. tom. 1.
haeres. 75.
there a bishopp was appointed, and where there was not to furnish both bishop
and preaching elder (he means the doctor) there the Apostles made a bishop,
and left the elder.

6 If a bishop run into a slander, 2 Council. Carthag tom. 1. cap. 10.
and many bishops cannot suddenly be gathered; his cause shall be heard of
twelve bishops, etc.

7 If an elder be accused, 3. Council. tom. 1 cap. 8.
he may call six bishops from the places hard by.

8 Stories make mention of bishops of little towns, as Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16.
Solicus bish, of the village Cuman: Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Mares, bishop of a small town called Solicha: Socrat. 4. 26.
Gregory bishop of a small city, called Nazianzum: Quest. 16. did. 50.
The bishop of a Castle.

9 A minister, that is to say, a bishopp, and (a little after) the Apostle does
plainly teach, Jerome ad Euagrium.
that a minister and a bishop is all one, and (upon Titus) a bishopp and a
minister are the same: and ( ad Occanum) with the ancient fathers, bishopps and
Elders were all one.

10 D. Barnes (in his sixth article) says, Acts and Monuments. fol. 116.
I will never believe, neither can I ever believe, that one man may by the law
of God, be a bishop of two or three cities, yea of a whole country, for that
it is contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul, who writing to Titus, commands that
he should ordain a bishop in every town.

11 It is pity to see how far the office of a bishop is degenerated from
the original in the Scripture; Hooper upon 8. command. page 90.
it was not so in the beginning, when bishops were at the best, as the Epistle
to Titus testifies, that wills him, to ordain in every city, etc. They
know the primitive Church had no such bishops as we have, until the time of
Siluester the first.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if a bishopp and a minister be all one; if bishops were to be where Deacons
are, who were in every congregation; if Paul enjoined Titus to ordain bishops
in every city; and if every church had her bishop a long time after the
Apostles, as appears by the testimonies of Councels, Histories and learned
writers, both old and new: then must it needs follow, that there ought to be
a bishop in every congregation.

CHAP. 11.
FOr the further revealing of the truth, God has ordained, that there should
be in the Church Doctors, whose office is to be employed in teaching of
doctrine, and is an office different from that of the Pastor.

The latter part of this proposition, is the thing which especially they do
deny, which is thus proved to be true.

1 Those which the Apostle (in speaking of distinct officers) do distinguish
one from another, are several and distinct one from another: But the Apostle
distinguishe the Pastoure and teacher, one from another, Rom 12. 7. 8. and
Ephesians. 4. 11. even as he distinguishes man and woman. Gal. 3. 28. See the
Greek of them both: Therefore the office of pastor and Doctor are distinct one
from another.

2 As are the gifts that adorn offices, so are the officers themselves, for
the execution of the office, consists in the employing of the gifts: But the
gifts of the pastor and Doctor are diverse, as appears 1. Cor. 12. 8. and by
experience, for some has an excellent gift in doctrine, and not in
application, and others excel in application and exhortation, that are very
mean, in delivering of doctrine: Therefore the office of a pastor and teacher,
are distinct one from another.

3 Those that are to take a diverse course in teaching are diverse, and different
in their functions, for else why should they be enjoined to take a diverse
course: But the pastor is to take one course, and the Doctor another, for the
one is to direct himself principally to exhort, and the other to attend upon
doctrine: Romans 12. 7. 8. Therefore the office of pastor and Doctor, be
distinct offices the one from the other.

4 The Ecclesiastical stories (especially speaking of the Church of Alexandria)
do usually make a difference betwixt the bishopp and the Doctor.

5 Cathedral Churches have yet some show thereof left in them, who (besides the
bishopp) have also one that reads a Lecture in divinity,

6 If the distinguishing of them, make more for the buylding of the Church,
then the uniting of them; then are they to be distinguished, and not made all
one: But the former is true, as appears by this, that hardly is a people
brought to a sound knowledge of godliness, by him that instructs in doctrine
continually, and as hardly are we stirred up to a zealous care of our duty,
though we be exhorted continually; which both should be with less
continuance, if one man were to perform all: Therefore they are to be esteemed
distinct offices, and not parts of one office, which one is to perform.

Therefore, The conclusion
if the Apostle Paul distinguishes them one from another; if God do usually
bebestow doctrine and exhortation upon several persons, wherein each is found
to excel, and to be no body in the other; if the pastor be commanded to take
one course in teaching, and the Doctor another; if Ecclesiastical stories do
usually distinguish them; if Cathedral Churches have yet some steps left of
the distinction; if to distinguish them, makes more to the building of the
Church, then to unite them: then must it needs follow, that the office of
pastor, and Doctor be distinct, and different the one from the other.

CHAP. 12.
EVery congregation ought to have Elders to see into the manners of the people,
and to be assistaunt unto the ministers, in the government Ecclesiastical. T.
C. book 1. page 174. Disc. fol. 120. which they deny, Whitgift p. 627. and
their practice in keeping them out of the Church: but it is proved to be true,
by these reasons following.

1 That which the Apostles established in every congregation, ought still to
continue, seeing the Church must be ruled by the same laws that it was ruled
by then, and needs as great furtherance now, as it did then: But the Apostles
established Elders in every congregation, Act 14 23. which cannot be understood
of preaching Elders only; considering that the scarcity of them was such, as
Paul was constrained to send Timothy and Titus to great cities, which he
could hardly spare, as he often testifies: Therefore there ought to be such
Elders, as are only to assiste in gouerrment in every congregation.

2 Those which God has ordained to help forward the building of the Church,
ought to be in every congregation, unless it may appear that some
congregation needs not so much help as Christ has appointed: But Christ
has ordained Elders in the Church, for the helping forward of the building
of the Church. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore such Elders ought to be in every
congregation.

3 That which being wanting, the body can not be entire, that same must be in
every congregation: But the Elders cannot be wanting, and the Church be an
entire body, Romans 12. 8. which every congregation should be, Romans 12. 4
Therefore there ought to be such Elders in every congregation.

4 If the word of God do describe such Elders in the Church, then ought they
to be in every congregation, which is clear by this, that every congregation
has need of them, as well as any: and that every congregation must have all
the other officers of the Church: and that every congregation is of equal
dignity in the body of Christ: But the word of God describes unto us such
Elders. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

5 There is no Church that can stand without her Eldership or council. Ignat.
ad Trall.


6 It be longs only to the bishopp to baptize, Tertul. de Baptist.
and the Elder and Deacon may not do it, but upon the bishops license.

7 Neither Elder nor deacon have right, Jerome contra Lucif.
but upon the bishops commandment (so much as) to baptize.

8 Elders fell away through the ambition of the teachers. Ambros. upon 1 Timothy 5.


9 Valerius the bishopp did contrary to the custom of the Apostolical
Churches, Possidonins in vita Augustini
in appoynting Augustine to preach, being but an Elder.

10 After that Arrius was convicted of haeresie, Socrat. libr. 5. cap. 22.
it was decreed that elders should no more preach.

11 The number of the Elders of every Church, Bucer de regno Christi book 1.
ought to be increased, according to the multitude of the people.

12 Speaking of the Elders that were to assist the minister, P. Martyr upon
Romans 12.
he lamenteth that it is so fallen out of the church, that the name does scarce
remain.

13 Certain of the people were joined with the pastor, The same upon 1. Cor. 12.
in the government of the Church, because the pastor was not able to do all
himself.

14 There were elders (...) did assist the minister, Calvin Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 3. sect. 8.
in the government of (...) Church. etc.

15 Whitgift confesses, that in the primitive Church, they had in every
Church certain Seniors, page 638. Let it then appear out of the word, to
satisfy the conscience how it may be left out.

16 If the platform set down to Timothy and Titus be for all Churches, then
must Elders be in all; for these Elders are there described: But it is a
platform for all Churches, and that to the end of the world, 1. Tim. 6. 14.
Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

17 That which is contained in every ministers commission to teach and
practice, must be in every congregation: but the ordination and practice of
that office, is in every ministers commission, Matthew. 28. 20. or else they
ordained Elders without warrant from Christ, which none dare affirm: Therefore
there must be Elders in every congregation.

18 Wheresoever a bishop must be, there must also the Elders be, which
appears by this, that where the one is described, there is the other also:
But a bishopp must be in every congregation, as I have proved sufficiently in
the 10. Chap. Therefore there ought to be elders in every congregation.

19 If the Apostles labored for uniformity in the least things, and
established in all Churches one order, then must there be Elders in every
congregation, for they were in some, as al men do confess: But the former is
true, as not only the view of their practice declares, but also the Apostles
express words; Thus I teach in all Churches: Therefore the latter is true
also, that in every congregation there must be such Elders.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if the Apostles established Elders in every congregation; if Christ has
esteemed their help needful to further the buylding of his Church; if without
them a congregation cannot be entire; if the word of God say that they ought
to be in the Church; if it was continued so long after the Apostles time: and
be approved by the testimony of many very learned, both old and new
writers, and confessed by the greatest adversary unto them; if they be within
the compass of every ministers commission; if they are to be, wheresoever a
bishopp must be; if the Apostles established uniformity, even in the meanest
things; then must it needs follow, that there ought to be such Elders in
every congregation, as are to assiste the minister in the government of the
same.

They confess it was so in the Apostles time, but seem to say somewhat that
it cannot be under a christian magistrate thus: 1 Objection God has given the
sovereign authority over his Church to the Christian magistrate, which these
Elders would abridge.

Answer No more then the eldership abridged the sovereignty of David over
Israel, for his government is temporal, and theirs spiritual.

2 Objection Gualter upon the 1. Cor. 5. denies it to be needful under a
christian magistrate.

Answer Gualter denies excommunication under a christian magistrate, he is
as partial in this argument as Whitgift.

3 Objection The prince has the authority that the Elders had.

Answer That is no truer, then to say the prince has authority to preach
the word, etc. for these be things, that his high authority must see done,
but he may do none of them himself. Reasons proouing Elders as necessary
under a christian magistrate, as in the Apostles time.


But there be many reasons which may be alleged, to prove that they are (at
the least) as necessary under a Christian magistrate in these days, as they
were in the time of the Apostles, as namely these:

1 The less able that ministers are to direct their people in the ways of
godliness, the more need they have of the assistaunce that God has allowed
them in his word: But ministers are now less able (especially under Christian
magistrates, when men are overtaken with ease and peace, which quench good
things) the^ they were in the time of the Apostles: Therefore there is as great
(if not greater) need of Elders now, then was in the time of the Apostles.

2 If christian magistrates be to maintain the order that Christ has set down
for the government of his Church, then must there be Elders in it under a
Christian magistrate, for Elders are approved of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 8. But
Christian magistrates are to mayntaine the order that Christ has set down
for the ruling of his Church, Isai. 49. 23. Therefore there must be Elders in
the Church, under a christian magistrate.

3 If the rule of Christ cannot be perpetually observed, tell the Church,
unless there be Elders; then must there be such under a christian magistrate:
But the former is true, for by the Church is there meant the Senate of
ministers and Elders, as shall be proved in the chapter of Excommunication:
Therefore there must be Elders under a Christian magistrate.

4 If the whole government of the Church described in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, be to be observed until the end, then must there be
Elders under Christian magistrates, for they are contained in those Epistles:
But the former is true. 1. Tim. 6. 14. Therefore there must be Elders under a
christian magistrate.

5 Where sinners are more outrageous, and the best most subject to wax cold,
there is greatest need of all the helps that God has ordained to punish
sin, and to cherish well doing: But so it is under a christian magistrate,
especially in the peace of the Church, as Whitgift confesses, page 643.
Therefore there is (at the least) as great need of Elders (seeing they are
helpers appointed of God) under a Christian magistrate, as at any other time.

Therefore if ministers be less able now, The Conclusion
then in the Apostles time; if Christian magistrates must maintain the order
prescribed by Christ; if else the rule of Christ, (tell the church) cannot be
still observed; if the whole government described by S. Paul, must be kept for
ever; lastly if there be, (at the least) as great need of all the helps that
can be, as ever there was: then must it needs follow, that Elders are as
necessary in the Church under a christian magistrate, as in the time of
persecution.

CHAP. 13.
THere ought to be in every congregation certain Deacons, endued with those
quallities, which the word of God describes; whose office is only in
receiuinge the liberallitie of the Saints, and distributing it unto the needy,
T. C. 1. book, page 190. Discip. Eccles. fol. 119.

This assertion has two branches, The 1. proposition.
which both are gain said by our adversaries, the first whereof is this. The
office of the Deacon, consists only in receiving and dist^ibuting unto the
poor, the liberallitie of the saints, which they deny, Whitgift page 582.
The book of ordering, etc. that makes it a degree of the ministry: but the
proposition being proved true, makes their opinion and practice appear
false, which is thus:

1 That wherein Steven and the rest were employed, is the office of a Deacon:
for the first institution of them by the Apostles, is in that example: But they
were only to attend upon the provision for the poor: Act. 6. 4. etc Therefore
the office of the Deacon, is only to attend upon the distributing unto the
poor, from the liberallitie of the saints.

2 That which the Apostle makes an ordinarye and distinct office from others
in the Church, must be attended upon by them that are in the same office, and
not be mingled with any other: But the Apostle Romans 12. 8. makes distributing
in simplicity, such an office as it is expounded by M. Calvin, Beza, Bucer,
Martyr. etc. Therefore the Deacons office must be attended upon, and
consequently, it consists only in distributing, etc.

3 That which the Apostles found themselves insufficient for, that can no man
now discharge in any tolerable measure, for they were more adorned with gifts
then any be now: But they found themselves insufficient for the ministry of
the word, and distributing unto the poor also, Act. 6. 2. Therefore no man
can in any tolerable measure, discharge the office of a minister and Deacon
also, and consequently, the Deacon is to attend upon distributing only.

4 If the ministeries of the word be perfect, without the Deacon, then may he
not meddle in the same, for how may one lawfully labor, in that wherein there
is no need of him: But such is the ministry of the word, where the several
ministers thereof are named, Ephesians. 4. 11. wherein the Deacon is not contained,
as VVhitgifte confesses, page 308. and 309. Therefore the Deacon may not
meddle with the ministry of the word, and consequently must be employed only
in distributing, etc.

5 If there be no quallitie required in the perfect description of the deacon,
which is proper to the ministry of the word, then is not he to meddle with the
same: But the former is true, as appears, 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore the latter
is true also, and consequently, he must attend only upon distributing, etc.

6 If it belong to the deacons office, to meddle with the ministry of the
word and Sacraments, then is it greater, then that of the pastor, for that
the doing of both, requires greater gifts then the one: But it is not a
greater, but inferior office to the pastor, as appears by all those places
wherein they are described, that the Deacon is described after the bishopp:
Therefore his office is not to meddle with both, and consequently he must
attend upon distributing etc.

7 Deacons are ministers of tables, 6 Council. Constant. cap. 16.
and not of holy things.

8 In the ministers sickness, ^. Council. vasens. Can. 4.
the Deacons shall read the Homilies of the Fathers.

9 The Deacons have need of great wisdom, Chrisost. upon Act. 6.
although the preaching of the word be not committed unto them: and further,
it is absurd that they should do both the office of preaching, and caring for
the poor, considering that they be not able to do both thoroughly.

10 Although (the goods of the Church increasing) there were besides the
Deacons, subdeacons, Bulli^g. decad 5 sermon. 2.
and Archdeacons, yet the Deacons remained still in their charge for the poor,
and were not as yet mingled with the bishopps or priests, and with the order
of them which taught.

11 The office of Deaconship, Bueer de reg. Christ. 14.
was religiously kept in the Church, until it was driven out by Antichrist.

12 This office must of necessity be restored as it is described. The same de
reg. etc. and upon Ephesians. 4.
Act. 6. if England (for he speaks it in the behalf of our Church) will
receive the Discipline of Christ.

13 Speaking of these Deacons, lamenteth that this order, P. Mart. romans 12.
is so fallen out of the Church that the name does scarce remain.

14 Describing the Deacons of the Apostles time, Calvin Insti. lib. 4. cap. 3.
sect. 9.
says, that we after their example, ought to have the like.

15 The office of distributing the goods of the church, Beza Confess. cap. 5.
sect. 23.
is an ordinary function in a church lawfully constituted; the which, sect.
30. he calls the Deaconship.

Therefore if Steven and the rest were employed, The conclusion
only in distributing the goods of the Church; if the Apostle makes the
Deacons office, an ordinary and distinct office from al others in the Church;
if the Apostles were not sufficient for the ministry of the word, and
distributing; if the ministeries of the word be perfect without the deacon; if
in the description of the Deacon, no quallitie be required, that is proper to
a minister of the word; if to deal in both would make the Deacon a greater
officer then the pastor; if the Councels, ancient writers, and the sound
writers of latter times, do declare that the Deacons were to be wholly employed
in the distributing of the goods of the Church; then must it needs follow, that
his office is not to meddle with any part of the ministry of the word and
sacraments, but to attend only upon the distributing of the liberallitie of
the Church, unto them that stand in need thereof.

Their objections hereunto, be these two that follow.

1 Objection Phillip one of the seven deacons did preach, Acts 8. 8.
therefore Deacons may preach the word.

Answer Phillip was a deacon of the church at Jerusalem, while they abode
together, but now he was not any more so, but an Evangelist, as he is ever
termed after, by virtue of which office he did preach.

2 Objection Steven, being a Deacon, preached, Act. 7. 2.

Answer He preached not; for all that is there, was but his Apology at the
seat of judgment, which every man in the like case may do, and which many of
the martyrs have done.

So that the former proposition being true, upon the grounds alleged,
notwithstanding these objections, we are to proceed to the second, which is
this.

There ought to be such Deacons (as are described in the former proposition) in
every congregation, The ^. proposition.
which is thus proved.

1 That office which every congregation has need of, ought to be in every
congregation: But every congregation has need of the Deacons office, which
appears by this, that they have poor to provide for, (or else they must
regard the necessity of others) and the liberallitie of others to distribute:
Therefore Deacons ought to be in every congregation.

2 That which is indefinitely appointed for the good of the Church, belongs
unto every congregatton, as well as to any one: But such is the appointment of
the Deacons. 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore there must be deacons in every congregation.

3 Every Church ought to have their office of Deaconship. Ignat. ad Philadelph.


4 All the reasons (or the most of them) that are alleged chap. 10. for a
bishopp in every congregation, and chap. 12. for Elders in every congregation;
are forcible here unto.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if there be the like need of Deacons in one congregation, that is in another;
if they be appointed indefinitely for the good of the Church; if every Church
must have their office of Deaconship; and lastly, if there be like resons to
prove the^ belong to every Church, that be for bishopps and Elders: then must
it needs follow, that there ought to be Deacons in every congregation.

CHAP. 14.
THere ought to be in every congregation, an eldership, consisting of a pastor
or pastors, doctor (if there be any) and elders, whose authority Christ has
ordained to be perpetual in his church, to govern the same only by the rules
of Gods word: T. C. 1. book, page 175. Discip. Ecclesiast. 123. which
contains these 3. particular propositions, defended by us, and gain said by
the BB. and their adherents.

1 The Eldership ought to be in every congregation.

2 The office of the Eldership is perpetual.

3 The Church must be governed, only by the rules of Gods word.

The first is denied by them, The prose of the 1. proposition.
Whitgift page 627. and by their practice, in tying the government of many
Churches to the BB. sea, it is thus proved.

1 Whatsoever Christ has ordained, as a means, to keep men in obedience to
the gospel, that same must be in every congregation, for particular men are in
particular congregations: But Christ has ordained the Eldership for that end,
as appears, Matthew. 18. 15. etc. where Chrisost. expounds: Tell the Church:
that is says he, the governors of the Church: Therefore the Eldershipp ought
to be in every Church.

2 Where all sorts of Elders ought to be, there must be also the joining of
their offices in one, for the good of that congregation over which they are
placed: But all sorts of Elders ought to be in every congregation, as is
proved in the 10. chap. for bishopps, the 12. for Elders, etc. Therefore there
must be an Eldership in every congregation.

3 If no particular congregation have greater privileges given there unto by
the word of God then others have, then must there either be no Eldership at all
(which is false, in that Elders are proved to be by the word of God in the
Church) or else it must be in every congregation: But every congregation is of
like privilege, which appears by this, that it is a perfect body of it
self: Therefore there must be an Eldership in every congregation.

4 The same warrant that is in the word of God, for to have an Eldership in
one place, is a warrant for it in all; for the word of God tyeth it, not to
Churches in cities, but indefinitely to the church: But there is warraunt for
it out of the word to be some where, as appears by this, that the Apostles
are said to establish it, and make mention of it: Therefore it must be in every
congregation.

Therefore, if the Eldershipp be ordained by Christ, The conclusion
as a means to keep men in obedience unto the Gospel; if all sorts of Elders
must be in every Church; if every congregation be of equal privileges; lastly
if there be the like warraunt for it in every Church, that is in any: then
must it needs follow, that there ought to be an Eldership in every
congregation.

Whatsoever is objected against this, that has any show in it, is answered
in the 12. chap. of Elders.

The office of the Eldershipp is ordained by Christ to be perpetual, The 2.
proposition.
and ordinary for the government of his church, T. C. 1. book 177 denied by
them, Whitgift 1. and by their practice in keeping it out: but the truth of
it appears by these reasons that do follow.

1 If the causes why Christ would have an Eldershipp in his Church be
perpetual, then must also the thing it self be perpetual: See the answer^ to
D. Bridges page 132.
But the causes are perpetual, which be to govern the Church by the rules of
his word, and that ecclesiastically: Therefore the Eldership is perpetual.

2 If Christ be the author of the Eldership, and left it by the Apostles to be
established in the Church, then it is perpetual; for his commission given to
the Apostles, is to be observed unto the end of the world: But Christ is the
author of it, as appears both by his giving of the gifts for the particular
members thereof, and the whole body of it; as also in that the Apostles did
establish it in the Church, who went not from their commission, 1. cor. 11. 12.
Therefore the Eldership is perpetual.

3 Whatsoever is the commandment of God, once delivered by him, is never
repealed again, and to be acknowledged of every spiritual man; that same is
to be received by the Church of God to be perpetual: But such is the
government of the Church by pastors, doctors and Elders, and so of the whole
Eldership, as appears in that they are all mentioned in the writings of S.
Paul, which are so esteemed: 1. cor. 14. 37. Therefore the government of the
Church by an Eldership is perpetual.

4 That whose several parts is perpetual, and which has perpetual gifts
given, for the furnishing thereof for ever; that same must needs be perpetual:
But the several parts of the Eldership, as pastor, doctor and Elders, be
perpetual, as is proved in the 10. and 12. chap. Therefore the Eldership is
perpetual.

5 Whatsoever is grounded upon the general commandments, and rules of the
scriptures, that same is perpetual: But the governing of the Church by the
Eldership, is such, as has partly been proved in election and ordination, and
execution of the several Church offices, which is the greatest part of
government, and shall further appear, in the censures of the Church
hereafter: Therefore the government of the Church by the Eldership, is
perpetual.

6 Whatsoever manner of government has sufficient power, and that from God, to
begin, continue, and strengthen, both the governors of the Church in their
callings, and the people in the course of obedience unto Christ; that same
government is to be perpetual: But such is the government by the Eldershipp, as
appears by this, that the Apostles used no other: Therefore the Eldership is
to be perpetual.

7 That government which the 12. Apostles, and Paul, before they consulted
together, did uniformly agree in, that same must needs be of God, and
consequently perpetual, unless the repealing of it do appear: but such is
the government by the Eldership, (for all the adversaries thereunto, confess
that it was in the Apostles time:) Therefore it is perpetual.

8 Whatsoever has the same grounds, that the preaching of the word and
ministration of the sacraments have, the same is perpetual: But such is the
government of the Eldershipp, for it is grounded upon the commandments of
Christ, and practice of the Apostles: Therefore it is perpetual.

9 That which has the like grounds to be perpetual, that the Apostles,
prophets, and Evangelists, had to be for a time, the same is perpetual: But
such is the government of the Church by an Eldershipp, which appears by
this, that they are therefore ceased, because their gifts of imediate calling,
etc. be gone, and the gifts of these, jointly and severally do remain:
Therefore it is perpetual.

10 Whatsoever is the perpetual and ordinary remedy to cure diseases of the
Church, and strengthen the health of the same, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the eldershipp, as appears by the necessity, and
profit of the several offices thereof, and of this, that we are still to
observe in causes of extremities: Tell the Church, Matthew. 18. 17. Therefore it
is perpetual.

11 That government which was in the Church appointed of God under the Law,
and continued (in respect of the substance) by christ and his Apostles, and
bettered (in respect of the accedents) by them, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the Eldership, as appears in the 12. reason of the
1. chap: Therefore it is perpetual.

12 If there be any reason why this government should be alterable (being once
set in the Church by Christ) it is either in respect of the extraordinary
offices ceased, or the addition of the magistrate: But not of the former,
because the Church has never had any need of extraordinary gifts, but God
has given them, and so will he ever: nor of the latter, for that the
magistrates office is to defend the buylding of the Church by that order which
Christ has set down, and not to alter any thing therein: Therefore it is
perpetual.

13 Either this government is the best and perpetual, or else there is none,
and so Christ should be thought to have left his Church with out a
government, which is disprooued in the 7. and 8. reasons in the 1. chap. for
this was once established by Christ, and so was no other: But some government
must needs be the best and and perpetual: Therefore this is perpetual.

14 No man may justly forbidd (speaking of the church government) to return to
the old constitution of the church of God, Confess. Heluet. Tigur. Bern.
Geneua, Polonia, Hungaria, Scotland, cap. 18.
and to receive it before the custom of men.

15 Experience teaches this order (speaking of the church government) was not
for on age, Calvin Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8.
but necessary to all ages.

16 Though the common wealth change her government, P. Martyr upon Romans 3.
yet the church must keep hirs still.

17 Lamenteth, that some were found among the^ that are esteemed forwardest,
Bucer de reg. Christ. 15.
which would not have the same discipline used now a days, that was in the
Apostles times, obiecting the difference of times and men.

18 The Apostles have written these laws, M. Whitaker against Duraeus.
(speaking of Discipline) not for a day, or for the first age, but to endure
for all times to come; and therefore have ^atified them with a most earnest
obtestation: 1. Tim. 6. 14. that these commandments should be kept until the
day of the Lord.

Therefore, The Conclusion*
if the causes of once or dayning an Eldership, be perpetual; if Christ be the
author of it, and left it in the Church by the Apostles; if it be Gods
commandment, not yet repealed; if the parts of it, and gifts for it be
perpetual; if it be grounded upon the general commandments and rules of
the scriptures; if it have sufficient power from God, to begin, continue and
confirm a church; if it was agreed upon by the 12. Apostles, and Paul before
they met together; if it have the same grounds with the preaching of the word;
if it have as good grounds to be perpetual as the Apostles, etc. to be for a
time; if it be the perpetual remedy against all the diseases of the Church;
if it was under the law, and enriched by Christ and his Apostles under the
Gospel; if it be neither alterable in respect of the extraordinary offices
ceased, nor the magistrate added to the Church; if it be the only
government, that challenges authority from God; if no man may justly forbidd
it; if it be necessary for all times; if the common wealth may change her
government, but not the Church; if the difference of times and men be nothing
against it; lastly, if the rules that the Apostles gave for it, be confirmed
with a charge, to be kept until the coming of Christ: then must it needs
follow, that the government of the Church by an Eldership, ought to be
perpetual.

They obiecte that many inconveniences would follow upon this government,
Objections against the perpetuity of the Eldership, and answers to the same.
which are severally to be answered.

1 Objection By this every parrish shall follow their Seniors, and then there
will be so many Elderships, so many diverse fashions, seeing one may not meddle
with another.

Answer The government desired is uniform for every Church, and admits
no change, no not in outward ceremonies, without a synod of the choice men of
several Elderships.

2 Objection If they being al mean men, choose an Earl, he may not refuse, but
be at their beck and commandment.

Answer No man that is chosen is compelled to an office against his will, but
he that despises to consult with others in Gods matters, because they be
poor, reprocheth God that made them, Pro. 17. 5.

3 Objection It ouerburdeneth the parrish, to provide for the norishment of so
many church officers.

Answer It is not necessary that they should provide for any more of them,
saving those that are exercised in the ministry of the word, vnvnlesse any of
the rest may need the liberallity of the Church.

4 Objection It brings in a new popedom and tyranny into the Church.

Answer It is blasphemy to term the government of Christ so, because we
refuse the tyranny of the pope, shall we therefore do what we list, and not
yield obedience to the scepter of Christ.

5 Objection It is a kind of Donatisme to challenge such authority over
princes.

Answer And it is flattery to suffer princes to do what they list; this is
the objection of Gualter, who is a professed enemy to discipline

6 Objection It takes away princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical.

Answer No more then it did from David in his time, nor so much as the Bb. do
now, for the prince requires but this, to see the church well ordered, which
the Eldership aloweth and craves.

7 Objection It transformeth the state of the common wealth, into a mere
popularitie, and will alter the government thereof.

Answer It neither transformeth nor alters any thing in it, for let it be
showed what damage would come by this discipline to any magistracy, from the
princes throne, to the office of the headborow.

8 Objection It will breed contention and partiallity in judgment.

Answer Where can be greater contention then the Bb. maintain for their
kingdom, or greater partiallitie then in them, to their kinsfolks, servants,
Sycophants, etc.

9 Objection It will be contemned, and so good order neglected.

Aunsvvere None ever deserved more contempt, then the BB. and their officers
do, for all their pomp: but God whose ordinance it is, will procure
sufficient awe unto it; mark how these objections stand together, in the 4. it
was tyranny, and here it is too contemptible, these be contrary.

10 Objection All alterations be dangerous.

Answer Never (where we change from the obedience of Antichriste, to the
service of the living God) was it ever dangerous to amend things amiss, by
that course which is described of God: if it were, let the particular of it
appear, this might well have bin Steven Gardiners reason for popery, in the time
of king H. the eight.

The Church must be governed only by the rules of Gods word, this is in
effect, The 3. proposition.
the proposition of the first chap. whereunto all those reasons there alleged
may be referred; there is aduouched generally, the certain grounds of the
whole discipline, against the imagined liberty left to the Church: here is
affirmed the particular direction of the Church government, by the authority
of the Eldershipp, to proceed according to the rules of Gods revealed will, and
not by that cursed and monstrous cannon law, which is made manifest unto us by
these reasons.

1 All governors are to execute their authority, by the same warrant from
which they have it: But the governors of the Church of God, have their warrant
to be governors only from the word, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore they must
govern the Church only by the word.

2 The Church is to be governed by that which the ministers may teach unto the
same, for they are taught to the end that they may obey, and so be governed by
the same: But the ministers may teach nothing but the word of God, 1. Cor. 11.
23. Therefore the Church is to be governed only by the word of God.

3 That which makes the Church obedient unto Christ, must be the direction
whereby it is to be governed: Only the word of God makes the church obedient
unto christ: Therefore it is to be governed by the rules of Gods word.

4 Every kingdom or household, must be governed only by the laws of the king,
or orders of the householder: The Church is the kingdom and house of God, and
his word is the only law that he has given for the same: Therefore it must
be governed only by the word of God.

5 That which was ordained to destroy the Church of God, cannot be a good rule
to govern the same by: But such is the cannon law, for it was ordained to
strengthen the kingdom of Antichrist: Abstract. Therefore it cannot be a good
rule to direct the church by, and consequently, it must be governed by the
word, for no other rule is offered unto us, but the one of these twain.

6 That which was invented by the dragon, that persecuteth the woman and her
child, that same cannot be good for the church, which is that woman: But such
is the cannon law, for it was invented by Antichriste, which is that dragon:
Therefore it cannot be good for the ruling of the church, and consequently,
etc.

7 That which strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, cannot be good
to guide them, that must walk in light and knowledge: But the cannon law
strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, for it increases popery, as
appears by this, that there is scarce an officer toward it, in these days
of knowledge, but he is a papist: Therefore it cannot be good to guide the
church of God.

8 That which destroieth the church of God cannot be good to rule the same: But
the cannon law destroieth it, for it crosses every faithful minister in the
discharge of his duty, and every good christian, walking in the ways of
godliness, and nippeth in the head every good action, as experience teaches us:
Therefore it cannot be a good rule to govern the church by.

9 That which has bred more traiterous papists in England, then the Seminaries
at Rome and Rhemes, that same cannot be good to govern the church of God: But
such is the cannon law, for it has kept cut discipline, nourished ignorance,
and fostered superstition and popery, in all estates of people, that never came
at those Seminaries: Therefore it cannot be a good rule to govern the church
of God by.

10 That which nourishes the hope of Antichriste to return hither again,
cannot be good to direct in the government of the church: But such is the
cannon law, for it keeps the cages for those unclean byrds; as Archb. and
L. BB. seas, arches, cathedral churches, etc: therefore it cannot be a good rule
for the direction of the Church.

11 That which all the Churches have cast off, as unfit for the government of
the Church, cannot be good for the same: But all the churches, that have
forsaken the pope (yea they that have not received the discipline of Christ
wholly) have cast of the cannon law: Therefore it cannot be good for the same.

12 Yea, we our selves mislike it, as appears by a statute made under Ed. 6.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if governors are to rule by the same authority whereby they are governors;
if the Church must be governed, by that which the ministers may teach; if the
word of God only, make the Church obedient unto Christ; if every kingdom
must be ruled by the laws of their king; and if the cannon law be ordained to
destroy the Church; if it was invented to persecute the church; if it
strengthen the power of darkness and ignorance, if it kill the Church of
God; if it breed more traitorous papists, then the Seminaries at Rome and
Rhemes; if it nowrishe the hope of Antichrists return: lastly if all the
Churches that have forsaken the pope, have cast it of also; yea if we our
selves do mislike it: then must it needs follow, that the Church ought to be
governed, only by that golden rule of Gods word, and not by that leaden lump
of the cannon law.

CHAP. 15.
THe office of the Church government, is mere Ecclesiastical, and therefore
the governors of the church may not meddle, but only in church matters, as for
example, vocation, and abeycation, deciding of controversies, in doctrine and
manners, so far as appertains to consience, and the church censures, T. C.
book 1. page 206 Discipl. Eccle. 126. but they think that church-gouernours,
may also meddle in civil causes: VVhitgifte page 749: and their practice, that
take upon them to be Counselors of state, to judge ciuilly, as punish with
imprisonment, etc. But this is disprooued, and so the former proved by these
reasons.

1 That which our savior Christ refused, because it belonged not unto him,
ruling and teaching the church, that same is not lawful for any Ecclesiast.
person to do: But christ refused to divide the inheritance, Luke. 12. 14. only
because he came to build a spiritual kingdom, for otherwise he being God,
had authority over all things: Therefore it is not lawful for
Ecclesiastical persons to be judges of civil causes.

2 That which was forbidden the Apostles, is unlawful for every
Ecclesiastical officer, for they were the chief under christ, and had (after
a sort) all offices in themselves, until they could plant them in others: But
such dominion was forbidden them, as the kings of the nations, and other
civil magistrates have, Luke 22. 28. which is, to rule ciuilly: Therefore they
may not exercise any civil authority.

3 If necessary duties are to be left, rather then our duties to the Church
should not be thoroughly discharged, then may not a church officer deal in
civil jurisdiction, which is less necessary unto him: But the former is true,
as appears by the words of Christ, to him that would have buried his father,
Luke. 6. 59. 60. Therefore they may not exercise any civil authority.

4 If he that has an office must attend upon it, then may he not meddle in
another, for he cannot attend them both at once: But the former is true, Romans
12. 7. Therefore may no church officer, meddle with temporal jurisdiction.

5 As the Soldier is in his warfare, so are church officers, in the ruling of
Gods church: But the Soldior entangleth not himself in the things of this
life, because they are of another nature to his warfare; which place Cyprian
alleges against a minister, that became an executour to his friends will:
Therefore church officers may not meddle with civil offices, because they are
of another nature, then his calling.

6 Those things that in themselves are of contrary quallitie, cannot concur
in one subject: But the governments of the church and common wealth be such,
not only in this, that they are the next special members of one general, but
also, in that the one is spiritual, and the other temporal, the one
respects the soul, and the other the body. Therefore they cannot be in one
man together, and consequently, etc.

7 If the government of the church, both in every particular man's office, and
in the general Eldership, be a matter of great weight, and the ability of man,
very small in every good action, then may not a church officer meddle in
another calling, whereby he is made less able to discharge his duty: But the
former is true, as all men may see, that look into the word of God, what is
required of such men, and know by the same word, the manifold infirmities
and untowardness of man: Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

8 If the Apostles (who were the most able of all others) found themselves
unfit for two offices, which were both Ecclesiastical; then is the best
church-gouernour unfit for two, which be of more difference one from another,
as be the government of the church and commonwelth: But the former is true, as
appears, Acts 6. 2. Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

9 That which we justly reprove in the papists, must needs (if we do like) be
found more unlawful and intolerable in our selves: But we justly reprove
the papists, for having in their hands both the swords, that is, the
Ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction: Therefore it is more intolerable,
being found in any of us.

10 If it be lawful for an ecclesiastical person, to exercise the office of
the civil magistrate, then (on the contrary) it is lawful for the civil
magistrate, to exercise the offices of Ecclesiastical persons, for there is as
good reason for the one, as the other: But the latter is unlawful; for who
would like of any L. Mayor, to step into the pulpit and preach, etc. Therefore
the first is unlawful also.

11 They may not entangle themselves with worldly offices, but attend upon
their Ecclesiastical affairs. Canon. Apost. cap. 80.


12 None of the Clerks or clergy, Council. Calced. cap. 3. and 7.
shall receive any charge of those which are under age, the cause of that
decree, is there said to be, for that there were certain ministers, that were
stuards to noble men; and in the 7. cannon, that none of them should receive
any secular honors.

13 The BB. shall only attend unto prayer, 4. Council. Carth. cap. 20.
reading and preaching.

14 He brings diverse reasons to prove, Calvin Institut. lib. 4 cap. 11.
sect. 9.
that BB. may neither usurp, nor take (being offered unto them) any civil
office.

15 He shows how the offices are to be distinguished, Beza. confess. cap. 5.
sect. 32. and 42.
and in what sort it is said, that the fathers dealt in the things of this
life, and how the corporal punishments by the Apostles were particular and
extraordinary.

16 When both the offices meet in one man, P. Martyr. upon ^om. 13.
the one hinders the other, so that he that exercises the one, cannot
minister the other.

17 There is no man so wise and holy, Bucer upon. Matthew. 5.
which is able to exercize both the civil, and Ecclesiastical power, and
therefore he that will exercize the one, must leave the other.

Therefore, if Christ refused to judge in temporal causes, The Conclusion
because it belonged not to his office; if civil dominion was forbidden the
Apostles; if necessary duties are rather to be left undone, then our diligence
in the matters of the Church should be lessened; if he that has an office,
must attend upon it; if we may not be entangled with any hinderance; if the
civil and Ecclesiastical functions, be of contrary natures; if every office
in the Church, be more then any one can perfectly discharge; if the Apostles
found themselves unfit for two offices of like nature; if we justly reprove
the papists for their two swords; if a magistrate may not preach; if they may
not meddle with worldly offices, nor be tutors to Orphans, but attend only unto
the ministry of the word, etc; if they may neither usurp, nor take (being
offered) any ciuill-office; if they be to be distinguished to several persons,
or else one hinders the other; lastly, if none be able to execute both, then
must it needs follow, that Ecclesiastical officers may not bear civil
offices: and consequently the office of the Church-gouernment, is mere
ecclesiastical.

Their objections hereunto be these.
1 Objection It countenanceth and maintayneth religion, Objections for civil
offices in ecclesiastical persons.
to have civil authority.

Answer It is (in deed) the papists reason for their two swords, which M.
Calvin confuteth: Institut, book 4. cap. 11. sect. 9.

2 Objection It is good to punish vice by corporal punishment, that Gods word
may be the better obeyed.

Answer It is good to preach Gods word to men, that they may obey their
prince for conscience sake; may the magistrate therefore preach? we may not
do every thing that is good, but only that which is agreeable to our
callings.

3 Objection Eli and Samuel, were both priests and Judges.

Answer They were extraordinary (for God separated those two offices in
Moses, and gave the one unto Aaron) and so was Eliahs killing of the false
prophets, and Christ's whipping of the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

4 Objection Peter killed Ananias, therefore ^B. may have prisons.

Answer It was by his word only, and not by any civil punishment, if they
can do the like, Peter's example will serve their turns, if not, then must it
be (with the former) extraordinary.

CHAP. 16.
THe placing and displacing of Church Officers, appertains unto the
Eldership. This is proved in the 7. chap. and their objections are there
answered for the first part, which is the placing: but the latter part is to
be cleared by some mo reasons, because the BB. do displace the best ministers
at their pleasure, which is proved to be a most wicked action, by these resons.

1 Those that are called unto the ministry by the Lord from heaven, and
outwardly by the means of men, so long as they are blameles in doctrine and
conversation, 1. Tim. 3. 10. cannot be displaced, without heinous wikednes
against the manifest will of God: But such are the ministers that the BB. do
daily displace, as they confess themselves, when (even) in their sermons they
justify their doctrine, in saying that they differ only in outward rites; and
as their greatest enemies will say, when they are asked of such men's lives:
Therefore they cannot be displaced without great wickedness.

2 Those that are careful to discharge the duty of Gods ministers, both in
teaching, and giving example to their flocks, cannot be displaced without
great impiety: Such are these ministers, that are daily displaced, as
appears by this, that they preach more diligently then any other, and that
they follow not the course of the world, in adding living unto living, but
many of them (being as worthy for their gifts, as the worthiest) live poorly,
rather then they will want the comfort of a good conscience: Therefore they
cannot be put to silence without great sin.

3 To deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort, is a grievous and
horrible wickedness: To put such to silence as are before mentioned is to
deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort: which if any man will deny,
all the godly where such a one dwells, shall tell him he lies: Therefore to
displace such ministers, is a heinous and horrible wickedness.

4 That which gives occasion to the weak to stumble and fall away from the
Gospel, is a heinous and horrible sin: But such is the displacing of those
ministers, as appears by this, that many doubt whether that which he has
taught be true, whom the professors of the gospel do displace, and by this,
that many who had made good beginnings, by the discontinuance of their
teachers, do fall away: Therefore to displace those ministers, is a heinous
and horrible sin.

5 Those whose labors God does bless, can not be displaced without fighting
against God, and consequently great impiety: But such are these ministers that
the BB. do daily displace, as all that love the Gospel in every country can
witness: Therefore to displace them is great impiety.

6 That action which gives the common enemy just cause to rejoice, and hope to
get the victory, is a heinous and horrible offense: But such is the displacing
of those ministers, as appears in every country, where such ministers are
displaced, and such enemies do dwell: Therefore to displace such, is a heinous
and horrible offense.

7 That action that causes the doers thereof to be esteemed enemies to the
gospel, must needs be a heinous sin: But such is the putting of those
ministers to silence, for it makes the people that have any love to religion,
think that they are not of God in so doing, for say they he that loves Christ
cannot cross the course of the Gospel as these men do: Therefore the
displacing of them is a heinous sin.

8 That which lets in more wickedness at once, then the diligent preaching of
the word could drive out in diverse years, must needs be a heinous sin: but
such is the displacing of these ministers: for, profaning of the Saboth, and
all disorder, comes into a congregation the same day that such a minister,
that has long labored against it is displaced, as experience in such places
proves: Therefore to displace such ministers is a heinous sin.

9 That which interrupteth the course of the Gospel, without warraunt either
from Gods word, or the laws of the land, is a heinous and horrible sin: Such
is the displacing of those ministers, as is proved in all the writings on our
side; and lastly, in the answer to D. Bridges: therefore to displace such
ministers, is a heinous and horrible sin.

Therefore if the ministers that be usually displaced, The Conclusion
be called of God; if they discharge the duty of good ministers, both in
doctrine and life; if the displacing of them, be to deprive Gods people of
their spiritual comfort; if it give occasion to some to doubt of the Gospel,
and to fall away; if God give a blessing unto their labors; if the displacing
of them give the enemy matter to rejoice, and hope to overcome; if it cause the
displacers to be esteemed enemies to the Gospel; if it let in more wickedness
in one day, then preaching can throw out in many years; if it interrupt the
course of the gospel, without warrant either from the word of God, or laws of
the land; then must it needs follow, that the displacing of those ministers is
a most heinous, and horrible sin against the Lord.

CHAP. 17.
THe Eldership is to admonish every one, by whom offense appears unto them
to grow in the Church: There is no question between us, about admonition it
self; but this they deny, that the execution of any discipline (and therefore
of this point) belongs unto the Eldership; which point is proved in the
several chapters going before: so that I need not say any thing of this,
saving with (a reason or twain) to show the necessity and benefit of it in
the Church of God.

1 That which private men offended, are commanded to seek unto for the
redress of the offender, is a necessary, and an ordinary way for the
amendment of them that do offend in the Church of God: But such is the
admonition of those that are in authority, and carry the name of the Church,
Matthew. 18. 15. see chap. 14. and the 1. proposition of the same: Therefore
admonition in such cases by the Eldership, is a necessary and ordinary way, for
their amendment that do offend.

2 That which is more auaylable to bring the offender to repentance, then
private admonition, either by one, or more, that same is very profitable and
necessary in the Church of God: But such is the public admonition by the
governors of the Church, as appears by this, that Christ makes it a
remedy, when the other two will not prevail, Mat. 18. 15. Therefore it is very
profitable and necessary in the church of God.

3 That which makes men more afraid to offend, then any admonition that
private men can give, is profitable and necessary in the church of God: But
such is the Eldership, before whom men know they shall be brought if they do not
amend: Therefore it is very profitable and necessary in the Church of God.

4 That which has a greater promise to do good, then private admonition, is
very necessary in the Church of God: But such is the admonition that is given
by the Eldership, because it preuayleth when the former does not: Therefore it
is profitable in the Church of God.

5 That without which, all duties of charity cannot be exercised toward
sinners, is needful to be in the Church of God: But without admonition by the
Eldershipp, all duties of charity cannot be exercised toward sinners:
Therefore it is needful to be in the Church of God.

6 That which would bridle the outrageous sins of some, and keep in the
derision and mockery, that private admonitions do receive, is needful to be in
the Church of God: But this would admonition by the Eldershipp do; for if men
knew that they should answer unto the Church for their ill demeanor, to
them that rebuke them for sinning; they would refrain (at least for fear)
from such kind of outrage: Therefore it is needful to be in the Church of God.

Therefore seeing public admonition before the Eldership is to be sought, The
Conclusion
by those that are offended, and cannot be satisfied; seeing it is more
auayleable then private admonition; seeing it makes men more afraid to offend;
seeing it has a greater promise; seeing without it all duties of charity,
cannot be exercized toward the sinner; lastly seeing it would bridle the
outrageous sins of many; Therefore it must needs follow, that it is very
profitable, and necessary to be in the Church of God.

CHAP. 18.
THose that be not reclaimed from their faults by admonition, are by the
Eldership to be suspended from the Lords supper, or being officers of the
church, from the execution of their office, until they do either give good
testimony of their amendment, or just cause to be further proceeded against.
Neither is there any controversy betwixt them and us, about this point; saving
that (as in the former) they will deny it to appertain to the Eldership,
which is proved before. I will therefore (for their understanding that desire
direction in the truth) first, show that it is a course that has warrant in
the scriptures; secondly, that it is of very profitable use in the Church of
God: the first is thus proved.

1 Whatsoever is enjoined, Suspention warranted by the word, being upon such
grounds as the word sets down.
as a duty to be done by every christian, if he leave it undone, he is to be
compelled by the governors of the Church to do it, Luke. 14. 17. 23. But if a
man's brother have any thing against him, and he make no conscience to leave his
gift there, and be first reconciled, Matthew. 5. 24. he is to be compelled to do
it: Therefore separation from the Lords supper, is warranted by the word.

2 If that commandment of Christ, Matthew. 7. 6. give not that which is holy
unto dogs, can neither be properly understood of them, that were never of the
Church, nor them that be excommunicated; then is it a warraunt for such
separation of the unworthy, and consequently, that separation is warranted in
the word: But the former is true, as appears by this, that the meanest of the
Jews did know, that holy things belonged to neither of them, and so the
commandment had been needless: Therefore suspention is warranted by the word.

3 If there be sinners that are not to be excommunicated, and yet it were
offensive to give the^ the Lords supper, then is this course warranted by the
word, for else should Christ have left his Church destitute of direction, in
common and usual difficulties, which is proved in the first chap. to be
otherwise: But such sinners there are as the notorious sinner repenting; men
mainly suspected of notorious transgressions, etc. Therefore suspention has his
warrant in the word.

4 The course that God prescribed in the shadow, for corporal purifyings, must
in the body (in respect of the substance) be observed in the spiritual
clensing of every member of the Church: But many were separated from the
public sacrifices for a season, by reason of their corporal uncleanness, who,
yet were not worthy to be excommunicated: Therefore must also some be kept from
the Lords supper for a season, who yet appear not so haynously to have
sinned, as to deserve excommunication.

5 The church cannot without great offense, suffer one that has fallen into
some open sin, or that is vehemently suspected, to have haynously offended,
continue in the administration of any public function: But the Church cannot
justly displace such a man at the first, making show of repentance, or
standing upon his purgation: Therefore he must be separated for a time.

6 That which was commanded under the law to be done to the priest, that was
unclean in body, or suspected to be a leaper; that same must much more under
the Gospel, be done unto the minister, or other Church officer, that has
sinned, or is suspected to have committed a great sin: But such a priest was
to be separated from offering of sacrifices for a certain time: Therefore much
more must the like be done to a Church officer in the like case.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if the Church be to compel a private man to do his duty; if, give not
holy things to dogs, be understood of them within the church; if there be
sinners that cannot with out offense be admitted to the Lords supper, and yet
deserve not excommunication; if for corporal uncleanness under the law, they
were to abstain a certain time; and if the Church can not without great
offense, suffer him that has committed an open sin (though he repent) or
that is vehemently suspected of a notorious sin, continue in the execution of
his office, until the congregation be satisfied; Lastly, if the priest that was
unclean, or suspected of leprosy, might not offer sacrifices: then is it
plain, that both the separation of some men from the Lords supper, and other
from the execution of their publik function for a time; is a thing warranted by
the word of God.

The latter part, The use o^ suspention profitable in the Church.
which is that this kind of suspention has a profitable use in the church of
God, is thus proved.

1 That which keeps the godly in more careful obedience, and keeps in the
hypocrites, that they break not out, is very profitable for the Church of God:
But such is the use of the separation from the Lords supper, and from
executing public function in the church: Therefore it is profitable in the
church of God.

2 That which remooueth (even) the appearance of offense, from the Church of
God, is very profitable for the same: But such is the separation: Therefore it
is profitable for the Church of God.

3 That which declares unto the world, that the Church of God is careful to
practice that which it professes, is very profitable: But such is this
separation, for it shows that they cannot away with ungodly life; no, not
among themselves: Therefore it is profitable for the church of God.

4 That which gives occasion to the church, to be exercised in the actions of
religion, with more sound comfort, is profitable for the same: ^ut such is this
separation, for every one shall see thereby, the unworthy (for whose sakes, God
might be angry with them all, Josh. 7. 11.) weeded from among them: Therefore
it is profitable for the Church of God.

5 That which is a special means to procure the Lord (in mercy) to continue
his word unto his Church, is profitable for the same: such is this separation;
for it is a notable means to keep men in obedience to that which they
profess: Therefore it is profitable for the churh of God.

Therefore, The Conclusion
if separation of the known, or suspected sinner, from the Lords supper, and
such a church officer from the execution of his public function, do keep men
in obedience that be godly, and restrayneth hypocrites from outrage; if it
remove the very appearance of evil; if it let the world see, that the Church
labors to practice that which it does profess; if it make every member of
the Church to be exercized in the actions of religion, with greater comfort;
lastly, if it be a special mean to procure the Lord in mercy, to continue his
word; then must it needs follow, that it is of very profitable use unto the
Church of God.

CHAP. 19.
WHen neither admonition, nor suspention will serve to reclaym the offender,
but that it does appear, that he abides in impenitencie, and is incorrigible,
the Eldership, after mature deliberation, and commending of the party unto the
prayers of the Church (he yet remaining obstinate) is to proceed to
excommunication: which contains these propositions in question betwixt us and
the BB.

1 It may not be done, but upon great and vvayghtie occasion.

2 It may not be done by any one man, but by the Eldership, the whole Church
consenting thereunto.

The former is holden by us, T. C. 1. book, page 183. Discipl. Eccles. 130. and
denied by them in their practice, that send it out (many times) for not paying
of six pence. But our assertion is thus proved, and their godless practice
disprooued.

1 That which Christ has ordained for the The proof of the 1. proposition.
last remedy against sin, and only to be used when neither admonition,
reprehension, nor separation from the external communion of the saints for a
time will serve; that same is not to be used, but upon great extremity: But
such is excommunication, as appears, Math. 18. 15. Therefore it may not be
used, but upon most wayghtie occasion, that is in the case (only) of
extremity, when no other means will serve the turn.

2 That which cutteth a man of from the Church of God, and gives him over
unto Satan, as one in a desperate case, that same may not be used but in
greatest extremity: But such is excommunication, being used according as God
has left it unto his Church, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore it may not be used, but
in greatest extremity.

3 That which a man will do in the cutting off, of his hand or his foot, that
same must the Church do, in excommunication; for it is the cutting off, of a
member: But a man will try all other ways, and will never cut of his hand or
his foot, until he see it incurable, and ready to infect the other parts of
his body: Therefore excommunication may not be used, but in case of greatest
extremity.

4 That which is contrary to natural affection, and works that which a
loving heart does tremble to think of; that same may not be done but in
greatest extremity: But such is the excommunication, for it depriueth the
party excommunicated of our love, and throws him into the most wretched case,
that can befall unto man in this life: Therefore it may not be done, but in
cases of greatest extremity.

Therefore if excommunication be ordained of Christ, The Conclusion
as a remedy, only when all other helps will not serve; if it cut the party
from Gods Church, and give him over unto Satan; if it must be proceeded unto,
as a man does to the cutting off of his hand or foot; lastly, if it be a work
contrary unto the natural affection of man, and effects that which a loving
heart does tremble to think upon: then must it needs follow, that it is to be
proceeded unto, only in the cases of greatest extremity, and after that all
other means have been used, and do appear not to prevail.

The latter point (which is, that excommunication may not be done by one man,
The proof of the 2. proposiion.
but by the Eldership, the whole Church consenting thereunto) is holden by us,
T. C. book 1. page 183. Discipl. Ecclesiast: 130. etc. and denied by them,
Whitgift, page 662. and their continual practice; But our assertion is thus
proved* and their opinion and practice, found to be ^rroneous and ungodly.

1 That which Christ commanded to be done by the Church, may not be done by one
man, unless you take my L. Grace for the Church, as VVhitgifte does, page, 662.
which needs no confutation: But Christ commanded that excommunication should
be done by the church, Matthew. 18. 15. Therefore it may not be done by one man.

2 That which Paul enjoined the Church, when they were met together, to do,
may not be done by one man: But he commanded them to excommunicate the
incestuous person, when they were met together, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore it may
not be done by one man.

3 That which has need of greatest advice, and greatest authority, may not be
done by one man: But such is the matter of excommunication, being the
denouncing of that against a man, which he will most hardly believe, and being
the wayghtiest point of discipline: Therefore it may not be done by one man.

4 Those must excommunicate, that are to deal in the other parts of
discipline, as shall appear in the resons following, and (as I think) no man
will deny: But the other parts of discipline are exercized not by one, but by
the Church, as has been proved: Therefore not one, but the Church is to
excommunicate.

5 As it was ministered among the Jews, so must it be in the Church for ever;
which appears by this, that it is translated unto us from them (as the Greek
word Synedrion, being by a corrupt imitation, called Sanedrim, by the Rabbis,
does import) and had nothing ceremonial in it: But it was executed among them
by the Church, and not any one, John 9. 22. Therefore the Church is to
excommunicate, and not one man.

6 Says, Cyprian lib. 3. epist. 10.
he would never do any thing in his charge, without the counsel of his Elders,
and consent of the people.

7 The elders, Epist. 14.
and other church officers, have as well power to obsolue, as the bishop.

8 For so much as absolution belongs unto all, Epist. 19.
I alone dare not do it.

9 If there be any that have committed such a fault, Tertul. Apol cap. 39.
that he is to be put away from the partaking of the prayers of the Church,
etc. There do be are rule, certain of the most approved ancients or elders
of the Church, which have obtained this honor, not by money, but by good
report.

10 It helps much to make the party more ashamed, August. lib. 3. cont. epist
pe^men.
that he be excommunicated by the whole Church: also in his books of Bapti^me,
against the Donatists often.

11 The Elders have interest in other censures of the Church, Ierom ad
Demetriad. Epist. 1.
and the Church it self in excommunication.

12 S. Paul accuses the Corinthians, Bucer de regn^ Bhristi lib. 1. cap. 9.
for that the whole Church had not excommunicated the incestuous person.

13 The Elders had the government in excommunication. P. Martyr in 1. Cor. 5.


14 It is very dangerous to permit so weighty a matter to one man, The same
upon the same place.
and therefore that tyranny may be avoided, and this censure executed with
greater fruit and gravity, the order that the Apostle there uses, is still
to be observed.

15 He shows that it pertayneth not to one man, that it is a wicked fact
that one should take the authority to himself, Calvin Institut. lib. 4. cap.
11. sect. 6.
that is common to others; that it opens a way to tyranny; takes from the
Church their right, and abrogateth the Ecclesiastical senate, ordained by
Jesus Christ.

16 The bishops, Chap. 12. sect. 6.
when they excommunicated of themselves alone, did it ambitiously, contrary to
the decrees of godly cannons: See Bucer against Groppet, and upon Ephesians. 4. De
animi Cura, also Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.

17 It is plentifully forbidden (even) by that filthy puddle, See Abstract
page 165.
the cannon law, and therefore it must needs be a heinous sin, when it
finds fault with it.

Therefore if excommunication be to be executed (by the commandment of
Christ) of the Church; The Conclusion
if S. Paul enjoined it unto the Church; if it have need of greatest advice
and authority; if it belong to them that may execute the other parts of
Discipline; if it was so executed among the Jews; if to absolve, be as well in
the Elders power, as the Bishops; if Cyprian durst not do it alone; if it was
the action (in Tertulians time) of the most approved Elders; if to be by the
whole Church, helps much to make the party more ashamed; if the whole
Church have interest in it; if the whole Church at Corinth was reproved, for
not doing it; if it be too weighty a matter for one man; if the executing of it
by one, ouerturneth the order appointed by Christ; brings in tyranny;
maintayneth ambition; and lastly, be forbidden by the cannon law it self. Then
must it needs follow, that it belongs not unto one man to excommunicate,
but unto the Eldershipp, and that with the consent of the whole Church.

Their objections hereunto in defense of their own practice be these.

1 Objection The right of excommunication, was in S. Paul and not in the rest.

Answer He gave only direction in that, as in all other matters, which he
wrote of unto them, but if they had not thrown out the incestuous person, he
had remained still vnexcommunicated, for all that which S. Paul had said unto
them.

2 Objection Christ gave Peter and every Apostle power to bind, and lose in
earth and in heaven, which interpreters expound by Matthew. 18. 15.

Answer That power was of denouncinge Gods judgments, or pronouncing his
mercy in preaching, and not of this action: they are expounded one by another,
because of the ratifying of them both in heaven alike.

3 Objection Paul did excommunicate Hymeneus and Philetus.

Answer That is, being moderator of the action, he pronounced it, not that
he did it alone; The same answer, is to be made unto the fathers, as Ambrose,
etc. who are said to excommunicate.

Therefore upon these grounds of Scriptures, The Conclusion of the whole book.
Fathers, Councels, Emperors, Laws, Histories, new writers, and clear light
of reason. I conclude, that Chap. 1.
Christ has prescribed unto us an exact, and perfect platform of governing
his church at all times, and in all places; which is this, Chap. 10. and 11
that there ought to be no ministers of the the word, but pastors and teachers,
which are to be Chap. 4.
called by the people, and Chap. 7.
ordained by the Eldership, are of Chap. 10.
equal authority in their several congregations, must Chap. 10.
with all faithful diligence imploye themselves, in the ministry of the word
and sacraments, Chap. 12.
that there are to be in every congregation certain elders, whose office is to
ouersee the behavior of the people, and assist their pastor, in the
government of the church; Chap. 13.
also Deacons, who are to be employed only in receiving, and bestowing the
liberallity and goods of the church to the relief of the poor, and other
necessary uses: Chap. 14
Lastly, that there must be in every congregation an eldershipp of pastor,
teacher (if they can have any) and elders, who are in common, to see that the
church be well governed, not only in maintayning the profession and practice
of the word in general, Chap. 17.
but also in admonishing, reprehending, or Chap. 18.
seperating from the Lords supper, them that walk offensiuely, and Chap. 19.
lastly in excommunicating them, that by no other means can be reclaimed. So
that all and every government, contrary or besides this, whether in part or in
whole, swarueth from that order, which Christ has set down in his word, and
therefore is unlawful.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line 21. for 14. read 84. p. 4. l. 16. for Sa^edori^ read Sanedrim, p.
9. l. 11. for 43. read 43 8. l. 20 for ministry, read ministers, p. 15. l. 3.
blot out also, p. 17. in the margent, for Nepolitan read Nepotian, page 22. l.
16. for Damascus read Damasus and so page 27. l. 24. pa. 23. l. 18. for the,
these, p. 25. l. 2 for and 6. read 26. p. 27. margent, for Nicene Nicen, for
Theordoret Theodoret, and for dis. 50. dis. 51. p. 30. l. 21. blot out d. pa.
32, l. 16. for 12. read 22 p. 47. l. 24. for practice, read practisers, p. 49.
the marg. l. 7. blot out 8. p. 52. l. 6. for Solicus read Soticus, in the marg.
for did. 50. read did. 80. pa. 53. l. 18. for do, does and 20. after
(Apostles) add does. pa. 60. l. 17 for approved read appointed. page 80. line
6. red abdication. p. 81. l. 8. for Luk 6. read 9.


