The Garlande of Godly Flowers, Bewtifully adorned as most freshly they
flourish in the Gardens of right faithful Christian writers. Yeeldyng forth
a very comfortable savor to the afflicted Soul, whereby he is salfly
transported unto the merciful throne of the most glorious God.

Carefully collected, and diligently digested into order, by Tho. Twyne,
Gentleman. 1574.

I will take it on my shoulder, and as a Garland bind it about my head.

Job. 11. Imprinted at London, by William How.

blazon or coat of arms MEDIOCRIA FIRMA.

To the Right honorable sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, one of the Queens Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, and Lord keeper of the great seal of
England. And to the Right honorable and most verteous Lady, Anne, his wife, my
very good Lord and Master: Lady and Maystresse.
WALKING in this vale of Misery, checked with the choakynge cares of this
mortal life, mated with the manifold calamities whereunto the whole
posterity of our first Father Adam is subject: I find nothing (right
honorable my good Lord, and Lady) wherein the heart of man can take more quiet
and cast forth a surer anchor of stabilitie to ride salfe from the uncertain
surges of this wicked world, or enter into a calmer Haven: then into the
undoubted harbor, and comfortable port of Prayer. Herein, although we be
never so mutche tossed with troubles, weeried with vexations, affrighted with
afflictions, pinched with pains, oppressed with miseries, girded with greifes,
and slain with persecutions: yet we may find assured releife, certain
succor, constant comfort, and speedy deliverance. And no meruell. For
although it sumtimes so unhappily fall out, that eeuen the most expert and
wisest Mariners, when they have attained the Rode after boisterous storms on
the open sea, thinkyng themselves then past all danger, are notwithstanding
cast a way in the Haven: yet in the midst of our miseries, and very depth of
our dangers, if we turn about the helm of our contemplations, and arrive
once with in this Rode: we need to fear no foul weather, we weigh no
Shippewracke, we dread no drowninge. The flittinge of our bark, may aptly
represent our distracted conscience: the Cable thereof, our Faith, the Anchor,
fruit of good works fast linked to the same: the Ankeradge, is Christ our
savior: on whom if our cable do strike, and our Anchor take hold: the ground
never fails us, for it is a firm rock, it yields not at the rage of wind
nor weather, for it is not settled upon the sand. In such like sort, it pleased
sumtime our sweet Savior, the divine wisdom of God the father, by gross and
base term to figure himself, the better to be conceived by our blinded
understanding, that knowing the nature and disposition of the thing: we might
likewise in all our troubles and afflictions stay, and repose (...) and our
prayer to be effectual. Then shall we feel immediately a woonderful operation
of the holy ghost within our hearts, assuryng us of the great, and tender
mercy of God toward us, wherein we are eftsoons emboldned to cry unto him,
Abba father, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This is the means
whereby the ancient heroical personages of the old testament beecame, as it
were, familiar with God. For by this he was felt in a combat of wrestlyng al
night seen in the burning busshe, heard in a calm after a windy tempest, and
daily co^muned withal in the mount. By faithful prayer, God preserves the
righteous in the true way, brings back such as go astray, stays up
those that stand, helps up such as fall, comfort the weak conscience,
lighteneth the sorrowful heart, cheereth the heavy, refressheth the laden,
erecteth the afflicted from the deep dungeon of black desperation, and
crowns him with immortallitie.

I need not in this place to call now to record the privy experimentes, and
trial herein of many other men, since that I my poor self, for the short time
that God has led forth my days in this life, have most sharply tasted the
sower of the one, and most comfortably tried the sweet of the other. Not that
I have bin a great eye sore unto Fortune, as we daily see there be diverse,
as by her grievously envied at, assaulted, beaten, cast down, trodden, spurned,
driven to dust, consumed to no thing, for I never possessed the occasion of any
such storming casualities. Yet in my slendre Boat has she shipped her
bitter Oar, she has blown a contrary gale in my hoysed sail, she has
soused my Sugar with Salt, and seasoned my sweet Syrup with unpleasant Aloes,
she has frowned upon my felicity, and done her best to bring me to naught,
and now she triu^pheth for the victory, where to I must of force have yielded,
had I not sustained my self only with this most worthy benefit, whereby I have
bin sufficiently instructed how to estee me the frownings, or fawnings of this
wicked world. As for the use of Prayer it is expedient in our youth: and
necessary in our old age. By this the poor wretches do tolerate their
need, and the ritche obtain power to enjoy their wealth. Both the prince and
the subject, whatsoever be the puisance of the one, or the condition of the
other: have continual need of recourse unto prayer, whereby they become humble
sueters to th'omnipotent God in respect of their imperfections and
unrighteousness, wherein he has included the suns of men as witnesses S.
John, saying: If we say that we have no sin: we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us.

And Job likewise speaks of all men in his own person: If I will iustefie my
self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I will be a perfect man, God
shall prove me a wicked doer: and also in another place, he fitly layth
forth the miseries of our nature, where he says: Man that is borne of a
woman has but a short date of life, and is replenished with many miseries. The
secret assaults whereof, when they shall, as daily they do, with remorse of
conscience, withdraw your honorable personages a while from the accustomable
conversation in ordinary affairs, privately to profess your guilt, and
heartily to humble your selves before the majesty of God, with fervent
affection in lowly prayer: if you shall take into your hands this little book,
which I have termed a Garland, eftsoons selecting some one or two Flowers
therein contained, as occasion shall serve from your profounder meditations: I
do not distrust, but that happily your honors may conceive sum such
sootenesse of savor therein, as shall not offend your sense, mutchlesse the
majesty of God, as to the good liking of the one, and the glory of the other:
I have bin so bold to employ the small travail of gathering these few Flowers
into order of your honorable names, and to offer them unto you, knitting them
up in one Garland, expressing thereby, as was mine endeavor, the absolute circle
of commendable Graces and Virtues, apparent to the world, jointly couched in
your Right honorable persons.

A most certain president whereof may be, the one of you by our most prudent
Prince, doubtless at the secret motion of GOD, raised unto such highness in
Honor as match with the best, inferior to none: I need seek for no farther
occasions of commendation, or ancient titles of worship or honor, the
siluered hears giving evident token of the golden wit, and the honorable age*
of the verteous forepassed life, and the many years of the blessing of the most
highest God. On the other side bewtified with a loving Lady, the ofspringe of
an excellent race, Nice to rightwoorship full Grandsiers, daughter to a worthy
Knight, Scholar to a learned scholemaister, Sister to a right honorable Lady,
Moother of mutch hoped impes, Aunt to a peerless countess, Wife to a noble
Counselor, Lady of a Godly Famely, Subject to a louinge Prince, a true
woorshipper of Almighty God. Unto whose good pleasure, for the prolonging and
continuance of both your lives in increse of godly Honor, and all other
delights apperteininge, whereby the race of this transitory life may be made
less irksome to the body, or prejudicial to the soul: I am bownden daily to
pray, the effect whereof he grant, who tendreth our just requests, and is
the only giver of all goodness.

At London this first day of January. 1574. Your honors ever at commaundment.
T. Twine.

blazon or coat of arms FATIS VOLENTIBVS. VIRTVTE DVCE.

No worldly pelf, see thee from God do call.
Incline thine heart to do the thing is just.
Confirm thy Faith that thou do never fall.
Hold fast on GOD, in him repose thy trust.
Observe thy ways, amend what is a miss.
Lay up thy wealth where rust may do no harm.
Amend thy crimes while vacant time there is.
Submit thy cause unto Gods mighty arm.
Avenge thee not when thou can well repay,
Never let vices harbor in thine heart.
Needs urgent law consider thou always.
Eke to the poor do of thy goods impart.
Beware of Pride, by Glory set no price.
Away from giltlesse blood turn back thy face.
Consider suits, weigh causes once or twice,
Open thy mouth on wydowes woeful case.
Nothing from Prayer let thee once disseuer.
Ensue this lore: and thou shall live for ever.
(...) there consists life and welfare unto my soul, and by breatch and
violation, nothing else but severe sentence of final dampnation:

Therefore I cannot tell, most miserable wretch as I am, how I should presume to
approach thee for mercy, I dare not show my self before thee, but if it were
possible, I would gladly hide my self from thy sight, where thou mighst not
find me out, that by such means I might escape thy dreadful judgment.

Howbeit, O Lord, thou art the mighty God, to whom all things in heaven and
earth are known, whose eyes beeholde what is done in the top of the highest,
and in the bottom of the deapest places in the world.

In thy sight Lord, the most secret thoughts of the heart are open, and from
thee there are no cogitations, pretenses, practices, devises, nor the smallest
motions of the mind, hidden.

Unto thee therefore, with tremblinge and tears I return, appealing from thy
high, dread, and terryble throne of just judgment, remoouing my cause to thy
most sweet, amiable, pleasant, and comfortable court of thy manifold mercies.

Even there, Lord, thou have laid up such store and abundance of graces,
pardons, and forgiveness of sins: that they do surmounte the number, and
ouers^read the greatness of al thy wonderful works.

Here then it is, O my God, that I dare to appear before thy divine
Majesty, a filthy sinner before a merciful God, a very lump of wickedness
before the eternal creator of all things, of inestimable wisdom, that
take mercy upon our weakness, and infirmity: because thou wotest well the
stuff, and substance whereof thou have made us.

Beeholde, Lord, I call unto me, thy dearelybeeloued son, my most loving
redeemer and savior Ihesus Christ to be mine advocate, according unto his
own freewil and voluntary offering, in whom, and through whom, by his most
precious blouddeshed unto thee, upon the acceptable altar of the Cross, in
liew of the double death that we should al have died for our-most horrible
offenses:

Pardon I beeseech thee, O god, my grievous iniquities, forgive me all my
wickedness, release my necligences, remit mine ignorances, abandon the
lothsomenes of my sins, which from my mothers womb unto this present day, I
have committed or shall do hereafter unto my lives end.

That being so cleansed, and purified from all contagion of sinful impuritie:
let me obtayn a lively and fervent faith at thy hands, steadfastly to call
upon thee in most hearty prayer.

Lord, in all my necessities, adversities, troubles, and afflictions: confirm
my heart that I may put my whole trust and affiance in thy majesty, and seek
none other means, nor take none other comfort: but in reading thy worthy
word, or in recourse to thee in most faithful, and effectual supplications.

If at any time, Lord, as is the frailty of our corruptible nature, and the
incessant suggestions of Satan our ancient enemy, I feel in my self any
faintnes or failing of feruencie, in calling continually upon thee: kindle
thou then my heart with the heavenly heat of thy holy spirit.

Grant me grace, to cry with thy hollie Apostle for increase of faith, that
being awaked and stirred up through thee: I may enjoy the effect of my godly
desiers, which thou have promised to yield unto me, through thy son Jesus
Christ, my savior.

Perform, my God, that which thou have indented with thy selly servant, who
with anguishe of mind seeks after the comfort of thy face, continue in me
the custom to call upon thee in prayer, and all the powers of my body shall not
cease to sing thy sacred praise. Amen.

J.
If ye being evil, know to give your children good gifts: how mutch more
will your Father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask them?
The second Flower.
IN most hearty hope of thy manyfold mercies, and with lowly reverence, O
everlasting God, lo, thus I draw nighe unto thee, being sore laden with
th'infinite number of my sins, trusting in thy fatherly goodness, and entier
love, which thou bear unto mankind: thou will discharge me of mine
unrighteousness, and wash away al mine infirmities.

Thy loving kindenes has been inestimable, which thou have borne unto me since
my simple conception in the tender intrailes of my mother, within whose body
thou did lay forth the platform of my body, and gave unto me the
representatio^ of a man, thy bestbeeloued and cumliest creature.

After this, in due maturitie of time according to the established and
ordinary season, assigned by thy heavenly wisdom: thou broughtest me forth
into this world, my first tune giuyng proof of the unhappy condition, that I
should enjoy therein.

Lord, thou know how that so soon as I was delivered from my mothers
womb: even then I beegan my life in feeblenes and sorrow, and the (...) my
thought, keep mine eyes from seeing it, mine ears from hearing it, and my
sense of feeling from conceauing delight in it.

But cause me to take a singular delectation in all things that may please
thee, put away from me al erring from thy ways, all weerines of thy will, all
lothsomnes of thy love.

Take from me all pride and self liking, that I may conceive no good opinion
of my self for that which is none of mine own, let me not think I am rich in
thee when I am poor, that I see when I am blind, that I am hid when I am
naked, that I am just when I am unrighteous, that I am something when I am
nothing.

As for the infinity of my offenses, which in number surpas the sands of the
sea: give unto me a clear sparcle of thy heavenly light, O my god, that I
may beehold them, a penitent heart that I may confess them, plentiful tears
that I may be wail the^, a wonderful mislikinge that I may abhor them.

O Lord, is there any thing that flesh an Blood may glory of in thy sight? no
truly, for thou have asked us what we have which we have not received? from
the fountain of thy fulness we have drawn all that we have enjoyed, and of
our selves there is not one that does good, no Lord, not one.

Create in me therefore, O gracious Lord, a new heart, and a new soul,
confirm me in thy faith that I may not fall, erect me in all good works
that be acceptable in thy sight, then cannot my mouth cease but always be
showing thy peerless praises, and mild mercies.

Amen.
C.
Come not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked.
Cast all your care upon God, for he cares for you.
The third Flower.
COme unto me all ye that travel and be heavy laden, criest thou, O my
most sweet savior, and I will refresh you. Here now I come unto thee, offryng
my self before thy heavenly majesty, lowly falling down upon the knees of
my heart, holding up the hands of my Faith, whereby I may take most assured
hope of thee, and come unto thee.

Draw me unto thee for else I am not able to come, I can do nothing thereto of
my self, not so mutche as think one good thought, mutchlesse merit or
deserve to presume unto thee, upon respect of any mine own worthiness.

As for my worthiness, it is unworthiness before thee, my thoughts be
sinful, my deeds be damnable, and if thou have reguard unto my merits: then
am I sure to have damnation for my desert, and Hell for mine hier.

O thou almighty, before whom the Angels tremble at their impuritie, the
Son is foul, the Moon is filthy, the Stars unclean, and the heavens are
corrupt: what can I have to boast of, but of mine own natural vnclenlinesse,
and that I am the child of perdition?

Supply thou my defects, O God, and what is wantyng in me: make it perfect
through thee, which art the sum of all goodness, and perfection unto the
righteous, let me not depart destitute from thee, for in thee is the fullness
of felicity.

Here where I am Lord, I am laden sore and grievously ouerpressed with the
burden of my sins, they weigh me grievously down to the ground, I cannot
look up, and my crusshed bones do ache with extreme weariness.

Come, O Lord, O come speedely, and set to thy helpyng hand, take from me
this wright of wickedness, clear me from this clogge of corruption, and severe
me from this sink of sin.

Humble my Heart, that I may have no vain likyng of my self, and that my
freindes, neighbors, and acquaintnance, finally the world fall into no
displeasure against me therefore, but especially thy majesty, for it is a
grievous offense.

Fortify my mind with the strongest armor of patience, that I may take in
good part all mockes, scoffs, reproaches, and persecutions for thy truethes
sake, and when I am proved: let me be found faithful.

Confirm me fully, O my creator, in thy Truth and al godliness, let no
shininge of promotions, nor thundre of threatninges, nor windy puffes of
wordlie vanity, pluck me from that which is right, but let thy will be my
way, and thy law my delight.

Drive away all dimnesse from mine eyes, and sluggishnesse from my feet, that
I may speedely beeholde, and diligently fulfill to my ability, the least point
and jot of thy precepts, whereto when I have applied my self: yet am I to to
mutch an unprofitable servant, notwithstanding let thy tender mercy always
prevent me, O my most sweetest God.

Thou have lified me up alost in the sight of thy people, and haste endued me
with great honor above my peers and equalles, grant unto me likewise so
mutche to excel them in virtue and godliness, make me a worthy minister and
steward of thy gifts, considering that all power and authority comes from
thee, and that thou raisest the ungodly on high to cast him down low, and the
loftier his seat is: the more great, and grievous is his fall.

Engendre in me, good Lord, a greedy desire to do Justice, that having thee
always before mine eyes, and printyng thy judgments within my heart: I may
be free from all affection, and pure from all partiality, having no respect
to the persons, but uprightly weighyng the causes, that thereby the truth may
be advanced, and injustice condemned.

Remove from me all corruption in judgment, and unrighteousness in dealyng,
keep my mouth from lesinges, and my hands from blood, remembryng that thou
art the searcher of the heart and raines, that shall come to judge the quick
and ye dead, repaying unto every man according unto the woorks of his own
hands.

Forgive me, O my Lord, and my God, the wickedness of my fore passed life,
remember not mine offenses, neither the offenses of my predicessours to lay
them unto my charge, lay forth the direct line of thy law before my feet,
that I may walk therein with out erryng, regenerate a new will within me to
persevere in thy way, hold me up therein that I do not fall, prick me
forth that I do not fainte, and my toongue shall talk continually of thy
most glorious goodness.

Amen.
H.
Happy are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find wakyng.
Verily I say unto you, that he shall girde himself, and make them to sit down
to meat, and will come forth, and ministre unto them.
The fourth Flower.
HArken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, O my feely soul, and hear what
cheerful promises he has reposed in store for thee, namely that when soever
thou repentest thee of thy sins from the bottom of thy heart: he will blotte
out the remembrance of them for evermore so that they shall never be imputed
unto thee.

O come then with speed, and with all submission cast forth the intolerable
burden of thy most loathsome lusts before the Lord, call unto him that he
would set open the gates of his manifold mercies unto thee, give thee a
perfect penitent heart, and the spirit of constancy to persevere in the same.

Bend down thine heauely eyes, O Lord, from the celestial throne of thy
glory, and beeholde the state and condition of me that lie here in the earth
beelow, waltrynge in this vale of wickedness, drenched in this dungeon of
darkness, martired in millians of miseries, couched in this cloak of
calamities, lost in this laberinth of lusts, smoultred in this smoke of
sensuality, greatly growyng from grace, and void of virtue.

Wherefore, as thou haste at this present time: so continue with daily
increasing in me, a lothyng of my self in respect of sin, a desire unto thee
by mean of faithful prayer, hearty contrition, possible satisfaction,
innovation of life, continuation of Grace, tendynge unto the preservation both
of my body, and soul.

Send down unto me, Lord, the clear lookyng glass of thy wisdoome, that I
may beeholde therein the ouglesomenesse and deformity of mine unrighteousness,
give me a Viale full of the water of unfeigned repentance, that sprincklyng my
self therewith, although I were with sins more read then scarlet: I may be
made more white then snow.

Wash away the filthiness of my sins with a branche of bitter I sop, wherein
is figured the unpleasant fast of afflictions, troubles, and persecutions sent
unto us by thy hand, most righteous God, in liew of our offenses, and I shall
beecome passing pure.

Nevertheless ouercharge me not, O sweet Lord, I beeseeche thee, nor lay not
more upon my back then I am able to carry, for thou know best th'infirmitie
of my frail fleash, and the weakness of our kind, since we all be thine,
and the work of thy holly hands.

O my God, what is there in this world that men should be so greedy to
continue therein, and so loathe to forgo the fruition of this transitory life?
while we remain here we are all touched with troubles, those that have
wealth at will are checked with calamities, yea Princes themselves are not
always at ease, beesides that we heap up daily the desert of thy judgment.

Whilst my days be prolonged within this dark den of mortallitie: lighten
the Lantern of thy divine word before my feet, that I stumble not against
the heap of my heinous offenses, and fall down head long into the deep
Dungeon of desperation.

Likewise, pluck from me the fond Feathers of saucie presumption, least
taking an hautie conceit in my self to be that which (alas) I am not: thou
reveal my filthiness, and cast me down thither where there is no redemption.

Graciously grant unto me, O my Lord, and King, that I may never take my
self to be other then in deed I am, make me to be such one as I ought,
and let me be he that I would, the^ shall I never dwell in error, thy favor
should never fail me, and hereafter (which notwithstanding I hope) be an
inheritour of thy heavenly kingdom.

Lord, I beeseeche thee keep me that I never fall into reprobate sense and
let me not be seduced by any false doctrine, let the lines of thy law be
printed in the bowels of my belly, lighten, inflame, and confirm the hearts
of thy chosen people, that they may have one mind, one will, all a like seek
thee, find thee, see thee, and magnify thy glorious name.

Prevent all my dooinges with thy most favorable kyndenes, O father of
mercies, and so direct my ways in thy Faith, and fear of thy majesty: that I
may commit no wickedness, nor consent thereto, let there be found no guilt in
my hands, nor guile in my heart, preserve my lips from lies, from
incontinencie mine eyes, my fleash from filth, my soul from sin, and the
whole course of my life from offense, and transgression.

O Lord, hear my prayers, let mine ernest cry come into thy presence and
enter into thine Ears, which I yield here unto thee from the very deapth of
my Heart, with a wounded conscience, and a bleedyng soul, with broken sighs,
and weepyng eyes, bended knees, and stretched hands, but which most is: with
ardent affection, and fervent Faith.

Bend down thy self, O bend down unto my piteous playntes, thou God of our
Fathers, and according as thou have spoken: let it so be done unto thy
servant. Great is thy grace: O grant me thy grace, manifold are thy mercies:
O show me thy mercy, puisant is thy power: O send me thy power, that I may
turn from sin and turn to thee, leave my old life and lead a new, that I
may always be thy servant, and thou likewise eternally be mine eternal God.

Amen.
O.
O thou Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord. Of a truth GOD
has no reguarde of persons, but in every nation, he that fears him, and
woorketh righteousness: is accepted with him.
The fifth Flower.
O Everlasting GOD, and most loving Father, maker of all the world, king of
Bliss, Lord of Life, giver of peace, and continuer of concord, look down
into the bottom and deapth of my conscience, and consider the perpetual
afflictions which daily I sustain therein, to the dangerous distress, and
wonderful woundyng of the same.

Strengthen me, O Lord, against the furious invasions of three my most
mortal foes, the Fleash, the World, and the Devil, which to the intent they
might suppress me: cease not continually withal their force, to assail the
seely spirit which thou have lent unto me, the work of thy wisdom, and
the image of thy substance.

My most sweet God, keep me with the wings of thy virtue, asist me with
thy holy ghost, that I may heedfully withholde my feet from all snares, and
trappes, which may any way entangle me, and withdraw me from due obedience
toward thee and thy will, staying me from walkyng forward in thy heavenly
heastes that lead to life.

For Satan mine ancient enemy, seeks out a thousand means to beguile me,
he excels in subteltie, he abounds in crafts, he passes in wiliness,
in so mutch that he transformeth his loathsome shape into the likeness of an
Angel of light, thereby to supplant thine elect, but defend thou me from him,
O my most mighty God.

Pondre the nature and disposition of my frail fleash, how it is nothing else
but the grave of my ghost, a farthell of infirmities, a lump of lothesomnesse,
a prison of perdition, a sink of sin, and a frame of froward moulde,
contrary to that which is good, and always promptly pressed to the worse.

As for this world: it is the vale of wilfulness, the way of wicked
conversation, a journey fraught with ioperdie, a pilgrimage fully pight with
pitious pininges, a deep dungeon of destruction, an infectious soil with
sinfulness, a lake of unlawful lusts and a tree of traitorous fruits,
repugnant, O God, to thy most sacred will.

The Devil is ye deerlyng of damnation, the Prince of dreadful darkness, the
King of calamities, the wicked woorker of woes, the Fend of final
destruction, the greedy gaper for man's procured perdition, the poisoned puddle
of lies, the sneaking Snake of sin, the serpent of troublesome temptations,
the minger of all mischeifes, and the ouerthrower of virtues.

But, O thou most glorious God, as thou have lightened my understanding and
perseverance in these, to discern what is hurtful to me, and displeasant to
thee: dispose even so the heart of thy servant with the daily influence of thy
grace, that I may be acquit from al such sharp assaults as may win me
from thee, but confirm me in all Godliness, truth, and faithfulness.

Make my heart the undefiled instrument of pure, and perfect thoughts, and my
tungue the Trump of thine eternal praise, my body the habitation of the holly
Ghost, mine eyes the windows to behold the worthy way that leads unto thee,
my legs the supporters of my body and soul, toward th'attainment of thy
heavenly kingdom.

Incline mine ears, that I may give diligent attendance unto thy most blessed
will, and commandments, expressed in thy most sacred word, mollify the
hardness of my heart that it may easily enter in, and firmly take root, to
the increase of semblant seeds of virtue and godliness in me, grant this, O
Lord for my delight is in thy service.

Knock hard, O Lord God, O knock hard at the door of my conscience, with
the ringle of thy most holly will, awake me out of the snorkyng sleep of
security in sinnynge, whereout many do never rise again but utterly perish,
put me in mind of my duty toward thy divine majesty, let me have the
wisdom to know my self, and that thou only art my good Lord and God.

I confess with grievous gronyng of heart, that I have manifoldly transgressed
thy commandments, in seeking thee I have embraced that which I should have
refused, I have stragled long whilst I should have walked in thy ways, and
trod in thy paths, I have gone back when I should have pursued thy pleasure,
and have trained my self in the trauerse of thy teachynges.

Lead me, O Lord, with thy heavenly hand and I shall be truly lead, dirext
me with the spirit of understanding and I shall be saulfly directed, let ye
bright burning lamp of thy wonderful word still shine before mine eyes,
and pearce into my heart, so shall I be sure not to tread one step amiss,
be thou always my most merciful God, and make me continually thy most
obedient child.

Blot the beadroule of my misdeedes out of thy remembrance, O thou king of
mercy, and indorse the records of my transgressions with a discharge of thy
great compassion, set thy holly hand upon my heart in token that I am thy
child, and write the words of thy pleasure in my breast, make me assured
that I am one whom thou haste predestined unto life.

Glorify thy self in me, Lord, for I am thy woork, and let me be glorified
in thee, for thou art my GOD, my strength, my salvation, and glory, purify my
soul that thou may dwell in me, and grant I may be made worthy to dwell
in thee, for thou art in althinges, and althinges are in thee, to thee therefore
be praise and honor for ever and ever.

Amen.
L.
Learn to do well, apply your selves to equatie, deliver the oppressed, help
the Fatherless to his right, let the widows complaint come before you.
The sixth Flower.
LORD, in thy most loving mercies, have I always put my whole trust and
confidence, wherefore thou haste assured me that I shall come to no reproach
nor shame, there shall no ignominy nor confusion take hold upon me, and
although there should rise whole thousands of wicked conspiratours against
me: yet should they not prevail, for thou art the portion of my hope.

According unto which most sweetest couenantes of thine: so let thy
kindness more then fatherly compass me always, like the garment wherewith
I am covered, let thy mercies be unto me a shield of defense, and a buckler
of assured protection, that I may never dread the fury of any foe, strive he
to overthrow my body or soul.

O turn the hearts of those that hate me without a cause, or be offended
with me for thy blessings sake wherewith thou have blessed me, either
because thou have increased me with wealth, or advanced me to honor, or
lifted me into the favor of my gracious Sovereign, wherein I yield thy
majesty most hearty thanks.

Make me, O Lord, a meet member for the vocation whereunto thou have called
me, grant me the gift of godliness: as thou haste planted me in
prehemine^ce of place, let virtue flowrish and vice be suppressed, the
righteous cause of the Orphane, widow, and such as are destitute prevail,
and the oppressor receive his deserved foil.

Bring it thou to effect, O almighty God, from whom proceeds the motion of
all good thoughts, that as thou have made thine only Son, our Savior
Christ, the sole sheapheard of thy faithful flock: so we may all know his
voice, and follow him in sincerity of life, and purity of doctrine, all the
days of our life.

I hartly beeseeche thee, Lord, that in consideration of mine
unrighteousness: thou give me not over into the hands of mine enemies, and
such as feign would see my fall, and rejoice at my final destruction, and
especially deliver me from false prophets, and preachers, which seek only
their own commodity, and not the edefication of thy hungry peoples souls.

Cause me to take a most singular delight in the reading, and hearing of
thy holly Gospel, to frame my life according unto the sacred institutions of
thy worthy word, without which: all other doctrine concerning the
woorshipping of thee, is deuilish and ungodly, and that by all means I may
seek the setting forth of the same.

Let the enemies of thy truth be enemies unto me, that embrasinge their
persons with laudable charity: I may persecute their offenses unto
th'amendement of their lives and conversation, and that they may understand at
length, that thou art a ielous God, and wilt not give thine honor to another.

O most mighty king, and giver of all gracious goodness, convert the hearts
of all such as persecute thy Christ in his members thine elect, open their
eyes I beeseeche thee that they may beehold their errors, and repent them of
their misdeedes, and confirm the hearts of the afflicted, that they may
persist in confessing thy name.

Mercifully call me back, for I acknowledge that for my part I have walked
wrong, thou have given me understanding to perceive mine own imperfections,
the multitude of them lies heaped before mine eyes, and my heart is sore
grieved therewith, O comfort me, good Lord, and quicken me oftsoonesin thee.

I have bin continually more ready to offend thy majesty, then to execute
thy heavenly will, there is no manner of means wherein a man may displease thee
that I am guiltless, take mercy upon me and forgive me therefore, for I am
determined never again to commit the like, strengthen me with thy spirit
that I never sin hereafter.

Most loving Father, and merciful God, I heartily require thee, for my Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, grant me that I may covet with a prudent mind those
things that be pleasant and acceptable unto thee, that I may find them
easily, search them wisely, know them truly, and exercise them effectually,
to the worthy praise of thy glorious name.

Dispose the whole course of my life in such order, that it may accomplish
that which thy godly pleasure requires at my hands, that I may perfectly
know it, have a willing mind to do it, and power from thee to fulfill it,
whereby I may obtain those things, that be most convenient for my
necessities, and appertaynyng to my salvation.

Cheer up my heart, O my most dear God, with the hope of thy plenteous
promises, and make me always as merry as it beecommeth a Christian, and one
that fears God, give me grace ever to rejoice in thee and thy godly will,
and that I may be sorry for nothing: but only in dooyng those things that
draw me away from thee, to eeuell.

O Lord God of infinite wisdom, inspire my heart, and direct my voice that I
may not think, nor utter any thing before thee: then that which thou
know to be expedient for me to ask, and glorious for thee to give, turn
not my prayer into perdition, nor my suit into sin, for thou art my God, on
whom I wholly depend, save me for thy mercies sake, O save me, according as
I have always repoased my confidence in thee.

Amen.
A.
A man's alms is as a purse with him, and shall keep a man's favor as the
apple of an eye: and afterward shall it arise, and pay every man his reward
upon his head.
The seventh Flower.
According unto the incomprehe^sible number of thy manifold mercies, O Lord,
take pity and compassion upon me, discharge me of the importable fraught of
mine in firmities, for thou art he that losest and none can bind, and that
bindest and none can lose, lose me therefore I beeseeche thee, from the
lothesome burden of my sin, and bind me that I may not depart from thy
statutes.

O thou God of my power, make my heart to resemble the driest towe, and let the
most fervent love of thy laws, kindle, as it were, a flaminge fire within my
breast, that I may so be consumed with a greedy zeal in fulfillyng thy
heastes, let no coal of conscience in aniwise extinguish this burning: nor yet
likewarmenesse aswage this heat.

Let others see this in me, that they may take example thereat and be
confirmed in Godliness, for I am privily grieved that I have bin
vnacquayne(...) death in dread of thy driry judgment lookyng for deliverance,
and running for refuge to the redoubted rampire of thy mild mercies.

Pardon me, Lord, if at any time I have sought the aid of any creature,
neclecting thee that art the creator of all things, without whom there is no
health nor salvation, if I have drunken of the loathsome lakes, and refused thee
that art the Fountain of Life, if I have fully fead on wicked weeds, and
passed by the wholesome herbs of divine doctrine.

I have erred, Lord, and gone astray like a wilful sheep, and harkned unto
the voice of feigned sheapheards that had no part with thee, I have bin lost in
the wilderness of wicked superstition and Idolatry, and torn in the briars
of such as sought my fleece and cared not for my soul but to destroy it, I
have tasted of the deadly dew, and the rotte is entered into my veins.

I am extreme sick that I cannot stand upon my legs, I am not able to lift
up my voice for my lungues are infected, my threat is horce with criyng, I am
vexed with a cough, and the terrible stitche assaulteth me so sore within my
ribs: that I am nothing but a carcas fraught with care, and a wretch
wrapped in sinful sickenesses.

O come, thou God of my salvation come visit thy poor servant, bring me home
which am lost, and direct me that have gone astray, teach me to know the
lively sound of thy most holly word, that I may wholly harken thereto, and to
the voice of none other that shall happen to call unto me, saying: lo here is
Christ, or there is Christ.

Save me, Lord, from the unsavory smell of pharasaicall superstition, that
my heart never be defiled therewith, and for thy mercy sake: asist me most
graciously that I fall not into any dotage of deuilish Idolatry, for thou art
a ielous God, and wilt not suffer thine honor to be given to other, and
beesides thee there is none that can help.

I have fead, O Lord, to mutche at full upon the sugared delights of this
wicked world, which indeed are sauced with most bitter woormewood, the taste
of them is pleasant: but the tail is abominable tarte, I have chawed them
with pleasure: but they have choked me with cares, they seemed unto me as
toothesome Triacles: but I have found them pestilent poisons.

Deliver me, gracious GOD, through thy great goodness, say unto me I wilbee
thy comfort, and unto my soul I will be thy physician, then shall there no
danger daunt my heart, nor ghostly grief procure mine anoy, but that I may
always cheerfully singe forth thy noble praise for ever.

Amen.
S.
Say not unto thy neighbor, go thy way and come again, tomorow I will give
thee, whereas thou have now to give him.
The eight Flower.
Salvation, immortality, and unspeakable pleasures, O God, are prepared
bountifully to embrace those that put their trust in thee, and without all
doubleness of heart, or contagion of sin: lead forth the lingrynge
steps of their loathsome life, in the ways of truth and obedience toward
thy commandments.

Thy ways, most sweet Lord, are the ways of wealth, and thy
commandments conducte unto heavenly honor, thou haste laid forth a
streigth pathe unto those that have grace to walk therein, and thou have
promised most singular rewards, unto such as obey thy most worthy will.

As for thy will: it is the welspring of welfare, the pathe of peace, the sea of
security, the port of perfection, and the fountain of all felicity.

Wherefore, I would feign be cleansed, that I might tread forth ye time of
this dangerous pilgrimage, in accomplishing thy heavenly heastes, and
fulfilling thy statutes full of consolation.

O thou, yt art the God of al truth, which in purity do pass the Angels,
and exceedest the saints in perfection, in respect of whose hollinesse: all
things are vile and sinful, my poor pantyng ghost sore longs after thee,
for that thou art the consummation of all goodness, and in the sight of thy
glory: I am ashamed of mine own unrighteousness.

Lord, feign would I entreat thy majesty, and I do most heartily request
the same, that thou would beeholde the woeful afflictions, greifs miseries,
stripes, sores, and wounds, which my soul sustayneth through the continual
surprise of my cancred sins, and in the large abundance of thy mild mercies:
heal them with thy holly hand.

Woe am I, my God, that I appear before thee thus covered quight in a sack
of sin, my filthiness makes me stand in fear of thee, and horror of my
self, I tremble to think what one thou see of me, if possible thou may
see me for the number of my sins that exceed the flowers of the spring, or
leaves (...) thy fatherly pity, and forgiveness.

Turn not away from me, poor wretch, thy woonted benignity, forasmutch as I
confess my daily iniquity, and although my sins be mo in number then is
for me meet and sittinge: yet let thy mercy be no less then it is decent
for so gentle and pitiful a god, O god the god of al fauourablenes.

How mutch the more abominable my sins are in thy sight, yeeldinge forth a
loathsome smell of displeasure in thy presence O god: so mutch the more do they
stand in need of wholesome cure, which of necessity proceeds from thee and
none other, to requite the same with such integrity and newness of life: as
may be acceptable unto thee.

Heal therefore, O most singular good Lord, my grievous infirmity, and so
shall thou rid me of that which offends thee my woeful deformity,
acquit me from my contagious sickness: and thou shall smell no more my most
horrible lothsomnesse, pardon within me this bitter calamity: and nothing
shall longer offend thy sincerity.

Create in me, O Lord God, a most godly zeal, and fervent desire to
persevere always within the compass of thy heavenly will, and never to commit
any thing that is repugnant unto the same, asistyng me also with thy holly
spirit, that I fail not in this most godly purpose, but steadfastly pursue it
unto the last day of my life, so shall I be assuredly salf from sin and my
toongue shall always be telling thy perelesse praises.

Amen.
A.
A gracious woman gets honor, an huswifely woman is a crown unto her
husband: but she that beehaueth her self unhonestly, is a corruption in his
bones.
The ninthe Flower.
AS a child that has transgressed the commandment of his master, stands
in awe of the rod: even so, O lord, am I in great dread of thy judgment,
for that is the hier of such as observe not thy heastes, because I have not
walked after thy will, nor harckned unto the voice of thy word, but run
forth on the reign of mine own sensuality.

But thou haste made a covenant with me, that when so ever I convert myself
unto thee: thou will favorably turn thy self unto me, and if I repent:
thou will forgive, if I be sorry: thou will remember mine offenses no longer,
see then, Lord, for I bring with me now the branch of sorrow, and here I hold
it up unto thee for a monument of thy remembrance.

Save me, good Lord, as hitherto thou have done, deliver me in the day of
distress, for thou art the horn of my health, and the shield of my salvation,
and the gain of my glory, I have no power at all but it proceeds from thee,
and thou bear up the feeblenes of mine infirmity, and thy mercy is my
staff to lean upon.

From the dangers of death, and from the snares of Satan, and from the
cheines of Hell, and when I was swallowed up: thou did deliver my soul from
destruction, I was wrapped in woe but I am set at liberty, as a bird that was
fallen into the fowlers lyme, and at length is losed by some good body.

For these thy bountiful benefits, O god, take from me the vice of
unthankfulness that I may think and thank thee therefore, and graciously
dispose the ways of thy servant, that I may continue in thy pleasure, but if
thou would so direct me that I might offend thee no more: there should no
joy be comparable unto mine.

They are hated of thee that do turn thy plentiful blessings into scarcity,
and they are partakers of their wickedness that are in authority saying it,
and do not redress it, open their eyes, sweet god, that they may see it, and
endeavor their hearts to amend it, that thy people perish not through the
iniquity of a few, that have heaped up a great sin.

I have praid unto thee with an ernest heart for all my imperfections, to be
delivered of them, and now I humbly sue, good Lord, that thou would
vouchsalfe to preserve me from the deed that may provoke the bitterness of any
man's soul against me, for I am assured that thou will repay it with vengeance.

There be some that have laid wait to entrap me, and they would be exceeding
glad of my fall, but my trust is in thee, that thou will not give me over as a
pray to mine ennemies, make their desiers void, let them be confounded in
their own drifts, and fail of their purpose that they wickedly have invented.

Pardon me, O god, in all my presumptions, forgive them that persecute me,
make me love them that hate me, and heartily to pray for them that wish my
final destruction, how beeit, I beeseech thee, Lord, to save me from their
hands, lest if thou should forsake me: I fall into their power, and there
be none to defend me from their malice.

Truly, Lord, I am fully determined to make thy precepts a gardeyne of
pleasure, and thy laws an alley of delight to take my recreation therein during
the days of my flesh, only I request thee of thy goodness to grant me thy
grace, with the continuance of this good work which thou have beegun in me.

Since thou lothest, Lord, an ungodly life: give me power, I pray thee, to
fly the works of the flesh which thou do hate, and to embrace the deeds
of righteousenes which thou do love, and in them to seek thy glory,
incline my mind always to meditate on thy law, and to cast all the cares of
my heart upon thee.

The death and burial, the resurrection and ascension of thee, my sweet
savior Christ, I humbly adore, and give hearty thanks for them, for in them
there rises unto me a savor of life, through the quickenyng smell of all
these: raise up my soul, I pray thee, good Lord, from the dreadful death of
sin.

O dust and ashes, why do thou walk with a proud heart, and stretched out
neck, and why art thou moved with impacience against every trifling
adversity? Beeholde the meekness and humility of thy redeemer, and learn
to be humble of heart, and low of courage, be ashamed of pride, and blush for
want of patience.

Lord, if I could give unto thee Heaven and Earth, and all the glory thereof
for hier, from the top of my reward: I could not sufficiently recompense
the deapth of thy desert, yet give me that grace, that so far as mine
ability extends: I may requite thy bounty with thanks, and show how mutch
I am bettered by thy heavenly liberality.

Give me thy peace which the world cannot give, grant me the joy which
thine elect do possess, sustain me with the comfort that never shall be
void, erect me with hope that shall always persist, instruct me with thy
word that ever shall endure, advance me to thy kingdom that never shall
end, and thy glory shall still live in me, for I shall never die.

Amen.
N.
No thought may escape God, neither may any word be hid from him, he has
garnished the high excellent works of his wisdom and he is from everlasting
to everlasting.
The.x. Flower.
Newness of life, and singleness of heart, and an undefiled way, are the very
offringes of soote incense unto thee, O thou most righteous God, and thou
acceptest the sorrowful suit of a martyred mind, in what time soever he
powers forth his playnt unto thee, so harken unto me I beeseeche thee, for
heaviness has builded his bower within my breast.

I come unto thee beetimes in the morning, and late in the night, and at high
noone, and when I go to rest and when I rise again, when I am alone, and when
I am in company, whether I be in thy holly church, or in my secret chamber,
and all is for thy mercy, O Lord, for thou haste no respect of the person,
time, or place.

Multiply in me the gifts of thy grace, and convert thy foes through my
force, make my body an instrument of all goodness, which shall come to
pass: if thou cleanse the uncleanness of my soul, scour the unseemly spots
of my stained conscience, examine my thoughts, and innouate a new degree of
desiers within my heart.

Lord, grant I beseech thee, that whether I be in wealth or woe, in health
or in sickness, whether I eat or drink, sleep or wake, travail or take my
rest, or what ever I do: I may do it in thee, and for thee, and by thee, and
nothing without thee, for my defier is always, if it be possible to be with
thee, and never to be from thee.

Plant fast thy pleasure in the bottom of my breast, for thy will, O God, is
the worker of my wealth, and my will is the weauer of my wothy law is the
leader unto light, and my law is the loser of my life, thy heastes are the
healpers unto health, and my heastes are the heapers up of my heaviness, thy
precepts are the port of peace, and my precepts are the passedge to perdition.

This world where I am, Lord, may well be termed the vale of wickedness,
for here is nothing else but pride, malice, partiality, trouble, envy,
vexation, strife, carfulness, ambition, covetousness, briberie, extorcion,
usury, idle oaths, and abominable periuirie, whoredom, hypocrisy, and all
vnclenlinesse, bitter contention for the truth of thy word: and no man
cares to follow it.

O Lord, that it might please thee to quench the thirst of this worldly
vanity that biteth so sharp within the breast of mortal men, that they might
see what it is that they seek for, and learn to look after that which they
lose, that by due conference of the twain: they may beeholde their folly, and
heartily repent them while they have respite.

The gain of thy grace, O thou great God, shall evermore be the brightness
of my beauty, for I will request nothing but thy mercy, and put my confidence
in no creature but in thee only, if I have that: then am I happy, and if I be
with thee: I am blessed, and I will singe forth thy praises in the congregation
of thy faithful people.

Lord, thou know how little the righteousness is which I have, and yet
that which I have is altogether to be reputed thine, for it is evident that I
can alonely do no good deed, but not so mutche as name GOD, were it not
through the holly ghost, and unless thou give the power, which say that
without thee we can do nothing.

Open my mouth, that withal my soul I may make humble supplications unto
thee, and confess my self unto thy majesty, saying: thou have wrought all
our good works in us, and therefore in respect of them we may sing with thy
princely prophet David, not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
the glory.

So far as in me lies, I will endeavor, that thy most worthy fame shall
streatche unto the ends of the world, unto Turks, and infidels, that have no
knowledge of thee, or such as live in misbeeleef of thy truth and I beeseech
thee to arm the preachers of thy word with boldness, and understanding, that
they may fail for no fear, to tell the truth, nor be corrupt with ignorance,
nor heresy.

Thou art most worthy, O lord God, to be loved and honored, f^r thy great
goodness and unsearchable wisdom, and all other perfections without number or
end, that art very perfection it self, and all that ever we can yield unto
thee, in faith, or fear, or love: is too too little and very nothing in
respect of that which thou have deserved.

If thou should lay unto our charge, the grievous default of innocence, and
righteousness, which is required to be in us, by thy commandments: O
Lord, how could we endure the sharpness of thy judgment? for we were
assured to perish eternally, but lend me the shield of thy mercy, to defend
me against the stroke of thy just wrath.

Reveal unto mine eyes the bewty and coomlinesse of virtues, and the
fowlenesse and deformity of vices, that I may fall in love with the one, and
mislikyng with the other, taking a special reguarde which I should harbor
in my heart, submittyng my self unto thy heavenly disposition, as I may be made
meetest to serve thee.

I will laud thee, O Lord my strength, with my lips, and I will magnify
thy might with my mouth, I will love thy laws as my life, and walk in thy will
as my way, I will singe forth thy salvation in my song, and muse on thy mercies
in my mind, I will hang up thy hope in my heart, and bury thy bounty in my
bosom.

Amen.
N.
Now I see that they which fear God have the right spirit, for their hope
stands in him that can help them: and the eyes of the Lord are on them that
love him.
The.xj. Flower.
Never let me do the thing, O Lord, that is displeasant in thy sight, but
make thou my steps right unto thee, and clear my paths in thy presence,
that there be no iniquity found in my heart, nor guile in my mouth, nor
unrighteousness in my hands, nor any thing about me that may provoke
offense against thee, that thou should turn from me, and forsake me.

It is thy wisdom that is unto me more precious then gold, and I desire it
above althynges be they never so fayer, I am inflamed with the love of it,
lend it unto me, my dear God, for it is that which teaches thy will, and
shows what is most acceptable unto thy sight, and it leads the way unto the
true worshippynge of thee.

O my God, I have gone astray, I have done amiss, I have committed
wickedness, I am sinful, call me home, and pardon my misdooynges, pluck me
away from my heinous offenses, heal my soul that is oppressed with harms,
for I acknowledge my manifold iniquities, and I am heartily sorry for my sins.

I am woe that ever I went awrie, thou see, Lord, the contrition of my heart,
and my sighing is not hid from thee, take no reguarde to my crimes that are
past, but harken how I purpose to amend, only guide me with thy grace, shun
not the suit of a sinner, but hear the prayer of him that puts his trust in
thee, as thou most lovingly have promised.

Thou art almighty, O Lord my God, and can grant whatsoever is asked, give
unto my soul an hearty feelyng of true devotion, fulfill me with the
Charity, and loving kindness of thy dear sun, which he expressed when
most humbly he offered himself upon the Cross, died the bitter death, and
shed his precious blood for the sins of me, and many.

Lord, if my tears were in quantity match to the deep sea, and my sighs
were as the smoke of a Furnace, and my sobbes could break the hard Diamonde,
and my waylynges were equal unto the noise of thundre, and my sorrow were such
as no tongue can express: yet could I not sufficiently lament for the guilt of
my grievous offenses.

Thou have given me an heart to understand thee, and eyes to beehold thee in
thy worthy works, give me also, I pray thee, a desire to walk in thy
will, and then I am certain I shall want nothing that is needful for the
good estate of my body or soul, above all, give me the quietness of a calm
conscience, and separate me not from the hope of thy health.

I have prayed unto thee, my sweet God, for perfection of mind, so I beeseeche
thee also, send me the strength and firmitude of body, with all the powers
thereof to thy pleasure, preserve the corporal life of my sovereign, thy
faithful servant, our gracious gouerner: likewise of my parents, friends,
and kinsefolke, vouchesaulfe to be favorable unto my feere whom thou have
sent me in thy fear, and stand good father unto my poor remainder, the
beeloued moitie of my life.

If thou grant not my petitions, thou art true notwithstanding, for God
hears not sinners, and if thou give ear unto my prayers, thou art merciful,
for thou commaundest me to ask and I shall receive, and if I obtain: it is
only thy mere liberality no desert of mine, show me thy mercy that I may
be heard, and make me worthy, O Lord, to receive.

Thou have taught me to pray, O deliver me from the great eeuill, save me
from the mouth of the monstrous Dragon which continually prosecuteth me, and
with the shield of thy might deliver me from his perilous horns, for his most
greedy desire is to entrappe my life, and to devour my soul which thou haste
created.

Wherefore, O Lord, incessantly I cry unto thee, acquit me from my daily
adversary, which, whether I sleep or wake, whether I eat or drink, or
whatsoever I do: by all means both day and night, lies in wait privily or
openly to shoot his venomous shaftes against me, and to sley my soul, but
be thou my gracious protector.

If thou, Lord, be on my side: I esteem not the force of any foe, there is
nothing to hurt where thou art to help, there can no fend of darcknesse
impugn, where the Lord of light does defend, let me not perish, Lord,
through lack of thy succor, for in my heart I have made thee the full refuge
of my hope, and the rampire of my health.

Confess I must needs, that the devises of my heart have driven me from my
duty, and the imaginations of my mind have augmented my mischief, but I
trust, Lord, that in the ritchnesse of thy mercies thou will think on my
poverty, and in the plenty of thy goodness thou will remember my scarcity
of perfectio^s, and take favorable compassion upon me.

O eternal Lord, I power not forth my prayers before thy presence,
trusting in the strength of mine own righteousness: but in thy great and
manifold mercies, save me, Lord, for thy dear sons sake, preserve me
from slaundrous tungues, and hateful hearts, defend me from mishappe,
pestilence, famine, murder, and sudden death I beeseeche thee.

I will singe with my mouth, and give thanks with my heart, and set forth thy
glory, most glorious God, and I will conform all the members of my body that
they shall do thy will, I will be wholly the Lords and the Lord shall be the
portion of my patrimony, refuse me not, for my will shall always be with
thee.

Amen.
E.
Every man's work shalbeo made manifest, the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work what
it is.
The.xij. Flower.
EVerlastyng God, and most merciful Father, thou haste stirred me up with the
lively feelyng of an unfeigned faith, this day to call upon thy most holly name,
increase, I beeseethe thee, continually that godly desire within my breast, for
I know thou have guiftes enough in store for us all, and thou will hear the
humility of an hearty prayer.

Hear me now therefore, O my Lord, for I stand a far of criynge with the
Publican, Lord have mercy upon me which am a sinner, and with the Leaper,
Lord if it be thy will: thou can cleanse me, and with the faithful
Centurian, Lord my servant is very sick and like to die, but say thou the
word and he shall be made whole.

What do these words signify other, O Lord, but that I am in misery and
feign would be relieved, I am in sorrow and feign would be comforted, I am in
distress and feign would be succored, I am in sin and feign would be
pardoned, and I come unto thee, for thou art the only woorker of wealth, and
Lord of mercy, and I hope thou will help me.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me, for I had never so mutche
need, my offenses are increased, and my force is diminished and if I would
take in hand to write the millians of my misdeedes, that daily do burden my
body, and sink my soul: it were needeful that thou should create in me a
thousand new toongues.

I can hide nothing from thee, that which I have committed in secret: lies
manifest before thy celestial eyes, for at the dooynge of all things thou
art present, and thou art the perpetual be holder of my heart, and all my
delights, deeds, and devises of mind, are as clear in thy sight: as is the
light of the nooneday, and more clearer.

But harken now awhile, O my soul, forsake thy worldly business, and careful
cogitations for a season, be at leisure unto God, and take thy rest in him,
enter into the secret closet of thy heart, and shut forth all other
occupations, and when thou art there alone: then seek for the lord, and he
will seek for thee, and if thou list: thou shall surely find him.

And when thou have found him: say then unto him, O lord, my heart has
sought thy face, teach me, I beeseeche thee, how I may seek thee aright, and
where I may find thee readely, if thou be absent where I may have thee
present, if I cannot se thee, for darkness of my understanding: bring me
into the inaccessible light, where I may always behold thee.

Lord, what shall thy servant do which languisheth for the love of thee, and
pineth for pain that he is so long from thy presence? he would gladly find
thee: and he woteth not the place of thy abode, he would willyngly seek
thee: and he knows not thy face, yet art thou my Lord, and my God, and I
the work of thy worthy hands.

O mighty God, thou haste made me, and preserved me, and thou did create
me that I should beeholde thee, and yet have I not fulfilled that for which I
was ordained. O how miserable is the state, and condition of mankind, if he
lose that through his own wilfulness, for which he was made? let me never
Lord, see that day, but show me the light of thy glory.

Make me recompt, O Lord, through thee, the misery of mine own
transgressions, and with wonderful affection to desire redress at thy
deity, how all the children of Adam should have fead on the bread of Angels at
pleasure, which now they do want, and now they break the bread of sorrow,
whereon they feed at full with all bitterness.

Forget not thy poor creature, O most merciful God, that is buried up in
mountains of misery, and swallowed up in the sea of sorrow, turn thy face
unto me which was turned away from me, and hear me whom thou would not
beeholde, lighten my dimmed eyes, and show me thy cheerful countenance.

Restore thy self unto me, that it may go well with me in thee, with whom
it goes so ill without thee, repayer my decayed parts, take pity upon my
afflictions and traueiles, help mine endeavors, for I can do nothing without
thee, sweeten my bitter potion with thy celestial sugar, suffer me not to die
in despayrynge: but to have life in hopyng.

In heart and contemplation, Lord, I draw near unto thee, a careful castaway
pining with poverty: unto thee the Lord of light waltrynge in wealth, a
miserable wretch: to a merciful God, an hungry soul to the fountain of
food, Lord, I have sought thee hungrynge, let me not leave thee fasting, nor
depart from thee fayntyng.

Teach me the way, sweet God, wherein I may walk to seek thee, and show thy
self unto me, I beeseeche thee, that feign would find thee, for I cannot
seek thee unless thou instruct me, nor I cannot find thee: unless thou
discrie thy self, let me seek thee in desieryng, and desire thee in seeking,
let me find thee in loving, and love thee in findyng.

As I am thine Image: so make me remember my self, to think on thee with
love, love thee with desire, desire thee with fear, fear thee with faith,
seek thee with wisdom, find thee with truth and singleness of heart, and
abide with thee in thine eternal glory, which thou have prepared for them
that serve thee.

Amen.
B
Bless them which persecute you, bless, and curse not, rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, being of like affection one unto
another, not high minded, but matching your selves to the lower sort.
The.xiij. Flower.
BLessed are they, as thou have taught us, O my sweet savior Jesus Christ,
which diligently do hear thy most worthy word: and keep the same, yea
thrice blessed are they that spend their time in the search of thy right
sacred will, expressing it in their life and conversation, for thy holly
spirit shall never be absent from them.

I would to God it might please thee, so to address my ways, that I might in
no wise wander awrie, and that thou would take away all stumblinge blocks
from my feet that I might not fall, and prevent all dangers that I might not
miscarie, but that thy paths were made so plain: that I might never commit
offense against thee.

O Lord, so it irketh me that ever I went astray, it greeueth me to the
heart, insomutch that I can receive no comfort when I think on thy heavy
wrath, and due indignation wherewith thou do prosecute the sins of the
ungodly, eeuen unto the third and fouerth generation of such as have not
fulfilled thy commandments.

But be thou, good Lord, unto me a most special comforter, that although I
be already laid very low: yet I may not be utterly brought to ruin, turn
the bitter scourge of thy welwoorthie vengeance, least I perish in the sharp
execution of thy deserved punishment, and so that be lost which thou did
make, and buie full dear.

Thy property it is, most blessed God, to save and not to spil, thou did
create and not consume, thy works are wondrous, and they seemed al good unto
thee, when thou did make nothing of spite, nor spite at nothing that
thou did make, whereby increases my comfort, that I shall not be left
quight destitute, and forsaken.

It is affliction enough for me, that I have forsaken thy ways, and not
looked after the Lord of my life, let confession of the fault be sufficient
punishment for an offender yt transgresses not of set purpose, but only
through the imperfection of frail nature, and want of thy most gracious
goodness.

I have broken thy statutes like a proud rebel, I have contemned thy
precepts like a naughty servant, I have violated thy will like a disobedient
child, I have wandered from thy fold like a lost sheep, I have disobeyed the
good pleasure of my most sweet and loving God: like a most wicked, and
wretched creature.

Deal not with me, O Lord, according unto my deserts but thy kindness,
not having respect unto severe justice, but tender mercies: that I may live
longer to amend my misdeedes, and other by mine example may endeavor to do the
like, and so thy most noble name may be magnified both in them and me, with
right worthy commendation.

Let not that be laid unto my charge, I hartly beeseeche thee, wherein
unwitting, unwilling, or unadvisedly I have provoked thy anger, but forget the
follies of my forepassed years, when I was young and rash by course of kind,
when sin is accoumpted but a play, and but very small reguarde is had unto
thy ways.

Purify me from my secret sins whereof there is none privy but thou
alonely, that sit on high, and searchest the priuities of each man's heart
beelow in the earth, to judge every one in his own devise, and repaye them
according unto their inventions, beewraying their filthiness unto the world,
that erst lay secret in covert.

O Lord, for thy names sake, let no custom of sinnyng take hold upon me,
nor let me never take pleasure in dooynge wickedness, for the one were hard
to be eschewed with out special help, and the other is a manifest sign of
want of grace, but be thou always my succor, O thou the God of my strength,
and fortitude.

Suffer us not to go a whoorynge with strange things, whilst we seek after
thee, as for thee: thou art within us if we wilbee within thee, we need not
to search thee far of: for thou art with us in our faith, until such time
as we deserve that thou may be with us in personal appearance, which grant
that I may beeholde.

For we know, as says the holly Apostle, that Christ through faith does
dwell within our hearts. For why? Christ is within our Faith, the faith within
our mind, ye mind within our heart, the heart within our breast, but cleanse
thou them all, most gracious God, that my body may be made a meet temple for
thee to dwell in.

Thou have fasshioned me after thine own image, conform me therefore my
God, most likely unto thy similitude, in all virtue, and hollinesse, in desire
of peace, in contemplation of verity, in love of charity, let me evermore
retain thee in memory, carry thee in my conscience hold thee in my heart,
and honor thee as present.

Hear me, O God, in thy goodness, and turn not thy merciful ear from my
sorrowful cry, O let the uncleanness of my soul be purified, the darckenesse
of my mind lightened, the warmenesse of my heart heatened, the coldenesse of my
conscience warmed, and the sleepiness of my body wakened, and I my self by
all means prepared, that I may be thy servant to do thy heavenly pleasure,
as I am already the work of thy cunninge fingers.

Amen.
A
A man that bears hatred against another, how dare he desire forgiveness of
God? forgive then thy neighbor the hurt that he has done thee, and so shall
thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou praiest.
The.xiiij. Flower.
Advance thyself, O Lord, in thine eternal power, and draw thee near to
deliver me from the snares of the Devil, that have intrapped me, and thrown
me almost unto the grownd, I have bin plunged a long time in the sea of
sensuality, and I perceive my deliverance comes only from thee, wherefore
deliver me, O Lord, of my salvation.

Thy power is above all powers, thou have made althynges subject unto thee, for
through thee Death has no stinge, nor Hell has victory, eternal thanks be
unto God, who in our good Lord, and savior Jesus Christ: has given unto us
a noble conquest ever our enemies, for which while I live: I will give most
worthy praise, as it best beeseemeth.

Henceforward look thou carefully unto the course of my life, and hold fast
my heart always in thy fear, that I be not found unworthy of thy most
bountiful benefittes, increase in me a care to continue in thy
commandments, erecte a fervent faith and assured hope of thy promises, and
mercy, within the tender intrayles of my breast.

Sprinckle my heart with a dreadge of thy compassion and precepts mingled
together, that I may not wander aside, nor fall into the gulf of thy wrath, but
thy favor may sustain me, and thy love may lift me up, bryngyng my feet
into thy roomthe of rest, where I may not choose but fulfill thy godly heastes.

O, how happy were I, if I might never hereafter in thought, word, nor
deed, commit the thing that should displease thy majesty? that life is the
longyng of my soul, and the effect of my desire, my heart mutch wishes to see
that blessed time, and my joys then should be such as no toongue can tell.

Truly, to know thee, with the Sun, and the holly ghost: is the true
perfection of eternal life, the end of blissefulnesse, the sum of all
delights, no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor has it pierced into the
deapth of any man's understanding, to value the inesteemable charity,
delectation, and pleasures of the same felicity, when we shall beehold the
majesty of God face to face.

Verily, most glorious king, I have reposed this hope in my bosom, and my
heart daunceth within my breast for joy thereof, and I do assure my self,
through faith in thee, that these eyes wherewith I read these lines: shall see
that glory, and this fleash wherewith I am cloked in corruption, and meashed in
mortality: shall be a membre of that immortal kingdom.

This world is farst with wickedness, and there are many stays that stop
a man from righteousnesses, blindyng him that he may not see, and hampryng him
that he may not stir to do the thing that is acceptable unto God,
sequestring his mind from all thoughts, studies, and labors that may incite
him unto thee.

But my trust is in thee, O God, that thou will not suffer me to fall into any
outrageous offense, that may demerite thy hot indignation, O turn away mine
eyes, least I beeholde vanity, and guide my hands that I tutche no unjust
thing, lift up my mind unto contemplation of heavenly sightes, and pull me
from terrestrial cogitations that are but transitory.

I have prayed for one thing, and I request the same most heartily, that you
would preserve my youth from flatterers, and mine old age from
slaunderers, for the one sort of them would devour me before I am ripe, and
the other would bury me before I am dead, and I have always hated them
both utterly.

Power down upon me, O my loving God, the blessed dew of thy divine and
incomparable wisdom, which is always resident about thy heavenly seat, that
I may know my self thoroughly, and honor thee woorthely, considering the frame
of mine own infirmity, and that there is no goodness but it descends from
thee that art above.

When, through the perverse, and froward inclination of my nature, I fall into
any wicked, and ungodly imaginations: leave me not, good Lord, unto them,
acquit me from the disordinate lusts of the body, let no desire of
uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over unto an unshamefast,
impious, and obstinate mind.

Set a sure bridle upon my mouth, that I speak no proud things against thee,
suffer not my toongue to be acquaincted with swearyng, and let not the namyng
of God be continually in my lips, for in it are many falls, but mercifully
give thou me aduisement what I shall speak, ere ever I open my mouth.

Call not the words that I have vaynely spoken unto accoumpt, impute them not
unto me for sin, give me understanding to keep prudent silence, and when
I speak let it either be for temporal necessity, either to edefie others,
or else to bear righteous testimony of the truth, let the verity of my
assertion consist in yea yea, or nay nay.

Lord, here stand I vile wretch before the throne of thy drad presence,
hopyng that I shall be heard, not in the faintness of my faith: but in the
power of thy promises. O weigh my weakness, and grant my desire, as thou
know most meet for me, then can I want no wealth, and my conscience
shall be replenished with all spiritual consolation.

Amen.
C
Cast not thine eyes aside from the poor, that thou give him no occasion to
speak evil of thee. For if he complain in the bitterness of his soul: his
prayer shall be heard, even he that made him, shall hear him.
The.xv. Flower.
CHasten me, O God, howbeeit, not in the consumyng rage of thy ielous wrath,
for then shall I utterly perish, but temper, I beeseeche thee, thy fury with
compassion, to the redress of my life, not confusion of my soul, for if thou
should deal so severely with sinners: alas, what should beecome of them?
for there is no fleash righteous in thy sight.

O, think mercifully upon the ancient sore of our sins, how that
vnwittyngly we are coneaued and borne in iniquity, and be thou ready to
apply the salve of thy mercy, the only remedy of Adams infected fruit,
whereby our wekned bones are made strong, and we are eftsoons erected into
thy favor.

Thou have laid thine heavy displeasure upon me, which I know well my
wickedness has deserved, namely a careless conscience, and necligent calling
upon thee for grace and thou have opened mine eyes that I might beeholde my
misery, and how far I am carried from thee, that art the port of my salvation.

Notwithstanding thy rods, and thy staves, O Lord, wherewith thou have beaten
me have brought me comfort, thy correction is full of compassion, and in the
midst of the miseries which deservedly thou heapest upon our heads: thou
gronest at our (...) plagues, what due damnation deserves such demeanure?

Again, O most unspeakable mercy of thy divine goodness, that beeholdest
us daily turnynge away our unhappy ears, shutting our foolish eyes, hardening
our stubburne hearts, and yet notwithstanding criest unto us, O ye sinners,
incline unto wisdom, and beeholde, for I am the Lord your God.

Merciful God, if at any time I have bin such one: I heartily beeseeche thee
not to impute it unto me, forgive me all my fond negligences, and gross
ignorancies which I have left undone, let them come no more into thy sight to
be objected against me.

O, how well were I, if it might please thee to draw me a direct line in thy
laws, that I might go right, and lead me in the light of thy truth that I
might not trippe, and hold me by the hand that I might not fall, but
especially if thou would take me unto thee, that whereas thou art, I might
be ever there also?

I have meruelously offended thee, and there are many occasions of offense,
which if thou would take from me: then should not my sins be so
burdenous unto my soul, nor so grievous unto thy sight, which I confess are
manifold, but, Lord, I know thy mercy, and saving health are infinite, and
thou art prone unto forgiveness.

The ripeness of my perfection: shall be the greenesse of thy glory, the
Summer of my suits: shall be the spryng of thy praise, the harvest of my
righteousness: shall be the seed of thy commendation, the winter of my
wickedness: shall be the earyng of thy honor, the fruits of my faith: shall be
the flower of thy worthiness the top of my tranquillity: shall be the root
of thy renown.

I will walk in thy ways, O Lord, and obey thy will, I will keep thy
commandments and take care of thy couenantes, I will hold thy heastes as my
life and reguarde thy precepts as mine own soul, there shall nothing thrust
me from thy truth, nor fray me from thy fear, nor allure me from thy love,
and then am I as certain that I shall live: as I am sure thy praises shall not
die.

Amen.
O
O give ear unto good counsel, and be content to be reformed, that thou
may be wise hereafter: for there are many devises in a man's heart,
nevertheless the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever.
The.xvj. Flower.
O Lord, thou Father and GOD of my life, I beeseeche thee, for thy sun
Christ's sake, bend down thine eyes of compassion upon me that am thine humble
servant, but at this present woefully oppressed with careful encumbrances of
sin, so that I want power to lift up my hands, and with my tongue I am not
able to express the sorrows that I sustain.

I am deeply wounded that my life languisheth away, I am broken that I cannot
recover, I am sore that I cannot be cured, I am sick that I cannot be saved,
I am so nighe death that I cannot live, I am so pined: that I am past al help,
unless that thou, O Lord, come with speedy releeife, the worker of my wealth
and curer of all infirmities.

For, if thou put forth thy hollie hand: I shall be helped, if thou do
tutche me: I shall be saved, if thou do but say the word: my lothsomnesse
shall be relieved. O Lord, I pray thee heartily come ease me of my greeifes,
come cure me of my care, come save me from my sickness, come assure me from
my sores restore me to my health, and prolonge the days of my life to thy
pleasure.

In weakness of body and infirmity of mind, in feebleness of flesh and
crasinesse of conscience, in adversity of the world and all miseries of
mankind: I have made mine ernest complaynt unto thee, O Lord, and thou have
graciously heard me, thou did never turn from me in prosperity, nor
disdain me in trouble, and I trust thou will never forsake me.

Lord, this world is subject unto marvelous mutabilitie, the state of men is
variable, for thou enritchest the poor, and empouerishest the rich, thou
pullest down the lofty, and raysest up the base, yet grant unto me, that I
may with all meekenes of mind be well contented with the calling whereunto
thou have allotted me, and yield unto thee most duetifull thanks therefore.

Give not unto me, O God, the great heaps of worldly wealth, nor cast not
upon me the gnawyng pains of pininge poverty, for riches make a man not
know himself, mutchelesse God, and poverty, many times, is an enemy unto
verteous manners and godliness, but mercifully grant unto me a reasonable
competent living.

There are many that have fallen by abundance, and diverse by lack, but, O
thou heavenly Father, that art only the ritche God: vouchsaulf, I beeseeche
thee, to give me always a sufficient relieuynge both for my body and soul,
and for the charge of householde which thou have given unto me, and in
althynges to avoid most vain superfluity.

Sweet Lord, fix my mind firmly upon thee and nothing else, as for worldly
things let them seem vile unto me in respect of thee, let me take comfort in
thee and not in them, suffer no mirth to remain in my mind, nor joy to
harbor in my heart, nor pleasure to rest in my thought, nor desire to abide in
my breast: that is not in thee, and for thee only.

If it be thy will, O eternal king, that I shall live in thy love, and
continue in thy favor: take away from me the means of ordinary offending
thee, make me angry without sinning, humble without faynynge, merry without
lightness, sad without out mistrust, sobre without dullness, and trusty
without doubleness.

Strike into my heart a true fear of thee, yet that I do not dispayer, and a
fervent love unto thee, but yet that I may not presume, give me understanding
to amend mine own unrighteousness with discretion, and admonish my
neighbors of their faults without dissimulation, and that by my words and
example they may take a pattern of doctrine, and living.

Establish me in a right trade of well pleasing thee, that my life may be
conformable unto thy worthy will, reveal unto th'eies of my soul by
inspiration of the holly spirit, some sight or taste of thy heavenly joys,
that I may be carried with delight to accomplish that which is pleasant unto
thee: and profitable for mine own self.

A drop of thy grace: shall be the sea of my salvation, a sparcle of thy love:
shall be the flame of my faith, a mote of thy mercy: shall be the heap of my
health, a sand of thy sight: shall be the bank of my beauty, a grain of thy
goodness: shall be the weight of my worthiness, one favor of thy celestial
face: shall be the fullness of mine eternal felicity.

O Lord God, and holly Father, cast down thine eyes from thy sacred
sainctuarie, and from thy heavenly habitation, and beeholde the most acceptable
sacrafice which our high bishop Jesus Christ, thy dear sun our Lord,
offreth up unto thy majesty for our manifold sins, and be merciful unto
the multitude of our misdeedes.

Beeholde, the precious blood of our most sweet Savior cries yet unto thee
from the altar of the Cross, he hangs yet there, and still is he dying
unto thee, who see althynge in present that be past, and before whose eyes
the effects of all times done do ever abide as now in doing, consider him, O
merciful God, and for his sake take pity upon us.

I must needs love thee, O my most dear redeemer Jesus Christ, with all my
heart, with all my soul, and with all my power, that did vouchsaulf to die
for my sins, my soul cleaves fast unto thee, for thou art her strength and
fortitude, grant unto me, that I may ensue thy worthy steps, and be
partaker of thy heavenly kingdom, according as I have shown my sighinges unto
thee and put my whole trust in thee, that art the portion of mine inheritance.

Amen.
N
Naked as we came forth of our moothers womb: even so go we hence again,
and carry nothing away with us of all our labor. Consider this wonderful
work of God, and how that no man can make the thing straight which he
makes crooked.
The.xvij. Flower.
NO creature under heaven may bring me comfort but thou, O Lord of eternal
glory, that art the healpe of man's health, and surgeon of his soul, thou
strikest and healest, thou bring a man nigh unto death and anon restores
him to life again, to the intent he may know his own weakness and
imbecillitie: and cleave the more firmly unto thy strength and virtue.

As for man, he is nothing else but a show of simple seed, and a slip of
slender strength, and a bubble of boylyng brothe, and a branche of fading
flowers, and an handful of goodly grass that to day flourishes in the
field, and to morrow is flunge into the fire, a frame of most frail fleash,
in whom is no perpetuity nor endurance.

Lord, let me evermore bear this portrature in my mind of mine own
infirmity, considering still what I am, remembryng always what I would be,
then shall I leese likyng of my self: and long after the love of thee, for I
am the image of thy substance, although the looking back from thy laws has
soyled me sore with sin.

As I am full of imperfection of my self: so supply thou my wantes in thee, for
when I have endeavored al I may, my righteousness is thine, and thou crownest
me with endless honor for that which proceeds only from thee, and is so
little agreeable unto my corrupt nature: that it is rather quight, alas,
repugnant.

My sins, O Lord, lie forth in plenty before my face, I can turn no way
but they overtake me, I would feign entreat thee to pardon them and I dare
not draw near thee for dread of them, consider my necessity most mighty God,
and deliver me, and grant most graciously unto thy sinful servant: the
participation of thy most glorious majesty.

What though my sins be as the sands of the sea, and my wickedness
surmount the leaves of the woodde, and my transgressions strive in number with
the flowers of the spring? yet take thou no reguarde, O Lord, unto the
frowardness of my heart, but like as thou have many times showed mercy: so now
be pitiful, and forgive me.

I have hungered, my sovereign Lord and God, to feed upon thee that art the
bread of life, not with the jaws of my fleash: but with the mouth of my
faith, until it may please thee to feed me at full with the entire
contemplation of thy substance, which I shall see face to face, and also be
seen in thy celestial glory, when I am discharged of this farthel of
frailty, this hope is the harbor of my delight, and the assured lookynge for
it is the chiefest flower of my Garlande.

Most gracious gouerner, give me to drink of that water, whereof who so
drinks: shall thirst the more, as after the sweetness of heavenly things,
whose taste is unspeakable pleasant, and give me also to drink of that water
the drinkers whereof shall thirst no more for ever, for it flows forth from
thee, the fountain of immortality.

Truly Lord, there is no cause, why I should long to abide in this life, if
I were of such perfection as was thy Apostle Paul: I should perceive the
wickedness of this world, and the glory of thy kyngedome, and wish ernestly
as he did, to be dissolved from this body, and to be with Christ, where as
he reigns in eternity.

O Lord, thou know my hearty desire is always to serve thee, grant unto
me of thy gracious goodness, that I may live in thy law, and run in thy rule,
and walk in thy way, and die in thy faith, and that I may be clearly
delivered of the bondage of sin, and be wholly out of dread of death and
dampnation.

Execute these things upon me, O my most loving God, and as it shall seem
best unto thy pleasure, and most sittyng for my soul: abridge the days of
this Pilgrimage, and commence the term of my true life, call me from this
Clay, and clothe me in the weed of everlasting wealth, where thou art
resident with thy saynctes in eternal glory.

Lord, if it so be, that the destruction day of all fleash be at hand, as
it is heartily hoped: then have we great cause to yield thee most humble
thanks for shortning the time of our trouble and taking away the occasions of
offendyng, that thine elect may possess the longer fruit of their joys, and
yield up the sums of a shorter accoumpt.

O God, what a joyful day shall that same be, when we shall beeholde with
our eyes those things which we have often recorded in our hearts, and hear
with our ears which we have read with our eyes, and feel with our sense
that which we have manifoldly conceived in our minds, but all as it were in
a cloud, or veyle, but then to enjoy them in express, and perfect kind?

Mortefie the man of sin, I pray thee good Lord, which reigns with in my
mortal body, that always rebelleth against my spirit, depressinge me down
ever in ignorance, and enuiyng me the fruition of thy noble beauty, let no
fear of any corporal death deter me from the most heavenly feelynge of
such a ghostly contemplation.

If once the fullness of this effect were brought unto wisshed end: we should
not need with such desire to make suit for our sins, for in thy kingdom,
O most pure god, there diuelleth no wickedness nor infirmity, but each
toongue is busy in singyng thy praise, all laud and honor be unto thee, O
most mighty God, for ever and ever, world without end.

Amen.
A COMPLAINT TO ALMIGHTY GOD in bitterness of soul, of one wrapped in
aduerfitie.
TOu art my creator for thou haste made me, thou art my god for I do honor
thee, O Lord God of Hosts, show unto me thy saving health in the midst of
the adversities that have ouerta ken me, for whilst I am oppresied with woes,
and erie unto thee from the deapth of my heart, and would feign aspire with my
voice unto the top of thy mercy: I am waxed faint with feebleness, my
throat is become sore, and I am nothing the near of help.

Have thou forgotten me, my lord? am not I thy wretched servant, and sun of
thy handmaiden? Sumtime ways, in the tendrenesse of thy most mild mercies
withdraw thy scourges, for I am already feebled, laid wast, and utterly
forlorn.

Show me, Lord, are my sins more heinous in thy sight, then any man's else,
that thou have singularly plagued me above the rest? And have I not bought
dear enough my secret offenses? Are they all pure that flow in gold, that
walk in silks, that feed on deinties, that sleep on down, that abound in
possessions, that keep company with princes, that live in all worldly wealth,
and am I made poor, abject, conte^ptible, forsaken, and castaway because I am
only sinful?

Turn thee, O Lord, into my comfort, and remember that I am but fleash and
blood, set not thy might against the infirmity of my mould, for I acknowledge
that I have aggrauated the fruits of thy wrath, and the daily deeds of my
neclected duty ly forth before my face, I cannot excuse my self of the
greatest sin, there is no punishment that may be made match unto my
maliciousness, it is to light which thou have laid upon me for mine
offenses.

Weigh my sorrows, O God, I call unto thee from the botome of a broken heart,
and a sighynge soul, and a tormented mind, cease of the sowernesse of thy
pretense, and mollify thy mood into mercy, convert my poverty into
sufficiency, my contempt into some reguarde, take from me thy descrued plague
that I cannot prosper, which some term eeuell fortune, and erect me into a
place where the good gifts may be seen which thou have beestowed upon me.

It is, Lord, a grievous wound to my heart, when I beehold the good hap that
some men have: and how every thing goes awrie with me that I take in hand,
not that I am sorry at their good success, but it irketh me that I find not
the like. They live in good case in whom there is not that which rests in
me, they square in abundance, and I lurk in want, they take their ease and
gain I labor and live by the loss, they sleep and wax ritche, I toil and
ever am poor, they stand still and it comes unto them, I run after it and
still it flies from me, I have bin fayerly promised, but I see no
perfourmance at all that ensues, and they that should do me good: either they
cannot, or they will not, either I come to rathe, or to late unto them or else
they feed me with shales and another enjoys the fruit, either they put me
of with delays, and, O Lord, I perish in the mean season.

Note, my sweet God, how discourteously I have bin dealt withal, for my
friendship I have found hatred, such as I have bin principal to procure them
releife: have bin the chief causers to cast me out of my living, I have bin
accused without cause for that I never meant, I am supposed to be other then I
am, I am hit in the teeth with other men's faults, and hard borne for things I
can not mend, I am heauelie friended of such as should favor me, they are
ready to take from me that which I have: which of duty should give me that
which I lack, and, O God, thou know mine innocence, and how undeservedly
they do it. I have bin obedient to my power, but my portion is allotted as I
had bin otherwise: I was borne as of thy servant Sara, but I am reputed as one
of the suns of Agar, it were almost infinite to show how I have bin
afflicted, and I am now oppressed with a burden that I cannot sustain stayne,
unless thou be my singular good God, and I hope herein thou will have a
special reguarde unto me.

Ever hitherto, thou have stirred up worthy vessels, to relieve the woes, and
cure the cares of such as were wrapped in adversity, and have thou raised
none to help me, O Lord? Surely, I do constantly beeleeue that thou will not
leave me unlooked to, although at this present I see almost no sign of
succor, and the welspringes of my blood be waxed dry toward me, and thou
have multiplied the number of my kinnesfolkes above my freeinds, and slender
be the twyne whereon the stay of my simple living depends. Suffer then not
to want I beeseeche thee that have freeindly looked upon my penury, stand
thou good Father unto them that have dealt with me as their natural child,
let not their barnes be ye emptier, nor their bags the lighter, nor their
houses the desolater, nor their hearts the heavier, nor their heirs the
poorer, and when it shall please thee: then have me also in remembrance, as I
stand not in doubt of thy gracious goodness. Lord, let my hope take effect,
as the lookyng for that day hitherto: has bin chief cause of the lengthnynge
of this my lingrynge lothed life.

FJNIS.
Imprinted at London, in Fleetstreete by William How, dwelling at Temple Bar.


