A GOLDEN BELL. AND A POMGRANATE.

A Sermon Preached, at the Visitation in Canterbury. 7. of April. 1624.

By Mr. ALEXANDER VDNY, Bachelor in Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty in
Ordinary, and Minister of Hanking in Kent.

Labor till I come. LVKE 19.13. GREGO. lib. 2. Epist. 39. Quod pr^fecto
negotium, tunc vere ^^s agi^^^^, si viuendo and loquendo proxi^^^um (...).
LONDON, Printed by A. M. and I. N. for* Anthony Vphill, and are to be sold at
the sign of the white Lion, in Paul's Churchyard. 1625.

REVERENDISSIMO PATRI ET DOMINO, SVO VNICE, COLENDO GEORGIO CANTVariensi
Archiepiscopo totius Angli^ Primati.
QVas animi Dono faetus (Amplissime Praesul)
Pignora perpetui Debita amoris erunt.
Tu modo quae voueo, facili cape munera Dextra,
Nil meruere vltra, in meliora forent.
Celsitudini vestrae Humillime addictus. ALEXANDER VDNEYVS.

A GOLDEN BELL, AND A POMGRANATE.
COL. 4.17. And say to Archippus, the Ministry which thou have received of
the Lord, see that thou fulfill it.
GReat is the Mystery of godliness, which is, God is manifest in the flesh 1.
Tim. 3.16.
, Great, because the Mystery hid since the beginning of the World, and from
all Ages; but now is made manifest unto his Saints Col. 1.26. Luke 24.^^.
: This manifestation was and is by the Spirit in the Word; then opened he
their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, which is a
Lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths Psalm. 119.105.
; without this light, we dwell in the land of the shadow of death, Mat. 4.16.
both in sin and ignorance; therefore Paul says, awake thou that sleep,
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light Ephesians. 5.14.
; This light does shine to him, whose name is in the white stone, which no man
knows, saving he that receives it Reu. 2 17.
; This knowledge is given to him, that can take the little book out of the
Angels hand, and eat it up, hereby able to Prophecy among the people, and
Nations, and Tongues, and to many Kings Reu. 10.11.
; For this cause it is, that David prays, open mine eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
that I may see the wonders of thy Law.

Therefore it is the Commandment of the chief Apostle of our profession, and
Bishop of our souls the Lord Jesus (beloved in him) 1. Pet. 2.2^.
that we should search the Scriptures for his Testimony, and our own
salvation John 39.5. Non repostores aut serriui colosos vel superstit^sos
murmurateres, sed ^ram hum^lem and vni^^r cognoscendae and ample ^ande
veritatis cupidaeus. Mui^^ lus in 5. Ioh.
: we should not then negligently, or superstitiously search the Scriptures to
cauell thereby, but with a holy, and humble desire, to know and embrace the
simple truth

And now being my course to Preach at this time, before this solemn assembly,
and public Convocation of the Ministry, I have sought, and red in the Book
of the Lord, where I might find a Text, short, sententious, and sitting,
principally for the Ministeri^, exhorting all in a word, and every one as it
were by his own name, to holy, and full knowledge, faith, and diligence in his
vocation, and I have found these words, (...) Holiness to the Lord Exodus 2^.^^.
Kodeth la Jehovah ^agias^era ^urion.
, which was graven on the high Priests Miter, as signets are graven* for in the
man of God, what is required but Holiness in spirit, in soul, in speech, in
action, in all things, Holiness to the Lord, and upon the bridels of the
horses, holiness to the Lord, yea, the very pots in Jerusalem and Judah, shall
be holiness unto the Lord of hosts, Zach. 14. ^. ^1.
holiness is Christ's mark, like the sign Thau, upon the foreheads of them
that mourn, for the abominations, that he done in the midst of the City
^ach. 8.4.
.

And I have found a line, and a golden reed, wherewith I intend to mete the
Temple of God, and to measure the City withal Revel. 11. ^ ^1.15. The^^ l^nes
were ^^lled ^hacte ^idda suu^ mensores.
. In the Epistle to the Collossians these words, ( And say to Archippus) for as
the first Scripture comprehended all the work of the Ministry in one word,
Holiness; so this Text, comprehends the same in one word, of power, and
authority, commanding every one, in one, fulfill this dispensation of God,
which is given me unto you ward, to fulfill the word of God Col. 1.^5.
.

For what is it, to be a good Minister of the Lord, but to fulfill, and end
perfectly, the work of ministration, and dispensation of the Gospel of his
graces, that we may be bold before God, and man, Angels, and our conscience,
Micha 3.8.
with Micha to say, I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of
judgment, and of strength, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to the
house of Israel their sin; Act. 23.^.
And with Paul, I have lived in all good conscience before God, until this
day, that we may all say so, I say, O generation, see ye the word of the Lord
Iere. 2.31.
.

The holy and perfect work of the Ministry, Holiness.
and manner thereof, are by these two Scriptures comprehended in two words,
Holiness, and Fullness, or Holy Fullness, or Full Holiness; would y^ then
desire a better Scripture for this time, which may be called the Ministers
Text, then one of those two, or both in one, making so sweet an harmony, like
two parts of Music set together, to praise the Lord, in whom dwells all
fullness, whereupon I shall descant God willing, according to the commandment
of Scripture, without any discord; and that it may found also well in your
ears, as it did to the Collossians, and their Ministers, let me crave of you,
as he of them, that ye would pray for me, that God would open unto me the
door of utterance, that I may speak the Mystery of Christ fully.

The Apostle having laid down the foundation of Christian religion, by Christ
in his person and office, Cohesion.
Colo. 1.14. Colo. 2.1.
whereby we are reconsciled, then he does diswade from Eronious Doctrine, he
does exhort unto Christian conversation, Colo. 3.1.2.
that we set our affections on things which are above, and having added
salutations to his friends in love, in the end does exhort the Collossians,
that they should admonish Archippus to be faithful in the work of the Lord.

The argument of this Text, is this; in a short sum, Paul and Timothy, after
Epaphras his declaration, what state and condition the Collossians and their
Ministers were in, in respect of Christian Religion, writ their admonition, and
exhortation from Rome, to them both, that they should stand fast, and grow
still in the knowledge, and use of the Gospel against all corruption, to the
Ministry indirectly, and to all under the name of one, that the Collossians
earnestly, and yet gentlely in these words, admonish Archippus to hold his eye,
and his hand, upon the Ministration of the Gospel faithfully toward them,
which he has received of the Lord, a worthy thing, in credit whereof he must
give an account as Minister, by whom they must grow from faith, to faith, who
has called him, and given him an eye to see, and a hand to feel, and who will
reward him according to his service, Damnation, or Salvation.

Two parts of this T^^t
The order and method of this Text, is in too principal parts.

First an admonition.

Secondly, the reason of the same.

1. Admonition.
The admonition that Archippus, and in him other Ministers of the City, be
wise, and faithful in doing their office, in testifying the Gospel of Gods
grace fully.

2. Reason.
The reason, because the Lord Jesus has made him a Minister and disposer of the
same, to whom he must give an account of his Ministration, and be rewarded
accordingly.

In the admon^tion there is si^e parti^ulars
In the admonition, we have six grounds to consider: First, who gives it,
Paul, and Timothy by writing, Epaphras being privy to the same, whom they
commend as faithful: Chap. 4.13. and the Collossians by the word, at their
commandment.

Archippus, one of the ordinary Ministers, resident among them.







Tichicus, and Onessimus, their credit is to declare Paul's estate, and to know
theirs, and to comfort their Ministers, and people in the Lord. Chap. 4.7, 8, 9.

In the reason, every word contains a most strong and mighty argument, arguing
the faithful execution of the Ministry in the right manner, all worthy by
themselves to be remembered; in general is this;

If Archippus be allowed, to have committed unto him in credit, the
ministration of the Gospel of Gods grace unto his Church; upon condition, that
beholding, and fulfilling the same, to receive an everlasting crown of glory,
if not, to have no part with him; then he must See, and fulfill his
ministration.

But he is allowed of the Lord, The sum of the reason.
to have committed unto him, the ministration of Gods grace to his Church; upon
condition, that seeing, and fulfilling his Ministry, to receive an
everlasting Crown of Glory, if not, to have no part with him; therefore
Archippus must See, and fulfill his ministration fully.

The particular arguments are these. The particulars are six,


First, the consideration of Archippus, his insufficiency,

Secondly, the authority of the Lord, the deliverer.

Thirdly, the incomprehensible worthiness, of the glorious

Fourthly, the word of office, ministration, or dispensation.

Fifthly, the consideration of the Church, bought with the

Sixthly, the reward of his ministration, at the Lords hand,

The Lord open our eyes to See, and strengthen our hands to feel the
dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, whereof we are Ministers.

T^se ence.
Paul was at this time in Rome an old man, and in bands, which commendes his
admonition the more, and had not visited them of Collosse, and Laodicea; which
makes him the more careful of them. Chap. 2.1. And namely, praying for them
continually: verse 3. and in writing to them, and their Ministers in doing
their duty toward God, and one another; It is profitable for us to consider
Paul's age, and that which is more, his bonds and captiuiti^ Ch ists prisoner;
for in the next verse, he bids remember his bonds, and he requests Philemon to
receive Onossimus again, because it is old Paul, and Christ's prisoner that
exhorts him.

viz. they that are caref^ll, zealous, devout, old, grave, constant unto bonds,
suffering as well the heat, as the cold of the day, in the labor of the Lords
vineyarde.

Certainly, the Church is more bound to Paul's bonds, then to his liberty; not
only in respect of his writing, but also in respect of the example of his
famous bonds, even in Cesaeres Palace, and all other places, which made many
of brethr n in the Lord, Phil. 1.1^.
to preach the Gospel boldly.

Paul joins with him Timothy, a man greatly commended in the Scriptures, and
not to be despised for his youth; Epaphras was privy to this admonition,
being resident in the City, to the end it might be the more willingly obeyed,
being by many, and that so worthily, given first in writing, and then in words
by his own congregation.

Here we may learn ^he more, and the more worthy they be that admonish the
greater is their admonition, and ought to be the more acceptable, such as is
the admonition of a general Assembly, S^nod, Presb^terie, or as by this
Visitation.

Of Co^^si.
Moreover, it is the Collossians, that must give this admonition to their
Minister, that they may be faithful in the ministration of the Go^pel
toward them: Collosse is a City of Phrigia, not far from La^dicus, and
Hierapolis, and therefore, Epaphras might the more conveniently declare his
love, for all three.

In that the Collossians are required to admonish their

First, as there should be knowledge in the Priests lipes, and practice in his
hands, so there should be zeal in the peoples hearts, to seek it at his
mouth, and if he be negligent, to desire him to be diligent in the work of the
Lord: but alas, if we have an evil will to preach, Note.
they have a worse will ^o hear; for they think God is beholding to them, if
they come to the Sermon in the forenoone, albeit they serve the devil in the
afternoon, and all the week following.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 17.1^.
the people must not contend with their Minister, for reproouing of them for
their sins; Hos^. 4.4.
like the people that reproved, and contended with the Priest of God, 1. Sam.
8.7.
therefore God said unto Samuel, they have not cast thee away, but they have
cast me away: Therefore Moses says, Exodus 16.1^.
the Lord has heard your murmurings which ye murmr against him; therefore
Moses says, Korah, Number 16.11. verse 33. 2. King. 2.14. 2. Chro. 26.12
thou and thy company are gathered against the Lord, and in the end were
swallowed up quick into hell: two Bears came out of the Forest, and slew
forty and two children that mocked Elisha; so was the Captains with their
fifties, destroyed with fire from the heavens: and while King Vzziah was wroth
with the Priests, the Lord struck him with Leprosy: This example of the
Collossians admonishing their Ministers, makes against the flocks, that think
it is not good manners to admonish their Pastors, and yet they are not
scrupulus, to traduce him behind his back to others.

Thirdly, Paul writ not directly to Archippus himself, to behold, and fulfill
his Ministry, as he did at the same time to him and Philemon, about a matter
of less moment; namely, the receiving again of Onessimus, The reason.
bearer hereof, because of their faith, love, ord^r, and steadfastness in all
good works: as Chap. 1.4. and 2. chap. 5.

Moreover, would prevail with him, and that Pastor, and flock, might mutually
admonish one another, as they must pray one for another, proceeding of love.



Collossians had truly heard, and learned the grace of God, yet Paul, and
Timothy, and Epaphras, ceased not to pray for them, and exhorted them, to
require Archippus, to be diligent in his Ministry: other virtues without
perseverance, avails nothing.

Collossians were at this time: Numb. 8.24.
Chap. 2.8. The more careful the Minister must be, Ad militandum militiam in
Ministeri^, like the Levites in the Ministry of the Tabernacle; but we are
most careless in the greatest danger, who sees not, but we see not.

Collossians had the Scriptures of the old and new Testaments exstant, this
Epistle, and that from Laodicea, which they are commanded to read, and cause to
be read unto others; Yet they must say to Archippus, See and fulfill thy
ministration: would to God, this admonition were taken to heart, in these days
wherein we live.

^. The person admonished.
Now we come to the second point, to wit, who is the Person admonished, that is
Archippus, a Phrigian, an ordinary Minister among the Collossians, and Paul's
fellow laborer.

Upon this we work first, that particular admonition of Ministers is needful,
that they that do well, may better do, and they that do evil, may amend;
for the Harvest is great, and besides that, the laborers are few, and amongst
these few, there be few faithful, beholding, and fulfilling their Ministry.

Secondly, as there is nothing hid, that shall not be revealed, but more the
neglect of duty in the Ministry, Paul was in Italy, at Rome in prison,
Archippus in Phrigia, at Collosse, so great a space of Sea and Land betwixt;
yet Paul knew that Archippus had need of this admonition, a Minister is like a
City upon a hill, and like a candle in a candlestick, and as Plato says,
Truth, the daughter of God, and of Time, has sworn to detect all vice and
sin, and specially in the Ministry, who are negligent in the ministration,
which they have received of the Lord.

Now follows the third point to be considered, The third point in the
admonition. Wherein is three things.
and that is the form, and manner of this admonition.

First, short; secondly, gentle; thirdly, public: Short, because a word to a
wiseman is sufficient, few things are be remembered, he referres the particular
admonition, to the Epistle written from Laodicca, that is, the first to
Timothy, which he commanded them to read, and leaves the ample declaration
thereof to the Collossians.

Secondly, Gentle, because he did well: for they that Paul be-sought Timothy,
1. Tim. 1.3.
but Timothy, must command with power, and reprove them that have need of
severity.

Thirdly, Public, Tims 2.3.15.
because it must be read in the Church of Collosse, and Laodicca, verse 16. We
observe, if Archippus, Timothy, and Titus, received public admonition, and
willingly learned: it becomes us much more, who live in this last declining
age of the World, where the power of the Gospel is almost turned to the
liberty of sin.

Fourthly, Paul sent this admonition with Tichicus, The fourth point in the
admonition.
a faithful Minister, and fellow servant in the Lord, and Onessimus a beloved
brother to comfort their hearts, and to declare his estate, and to know theirs,
as in all his Epistles he chooses godly, and honest messengers.

First, observe prayer, writing, and lively voice, is too

Secondly, that we give not so much, as the bearing, or exsperience does let
us see this day, yet precious are they unto God, and must be in our eyes whose
they are.

The fifth admonition.
F^tly, what time this admonition was given, when false teachers were entered in
amongst them: as the 2. Chap. 8. verse. By this is a true Minister known, if
he be faithful in the greatest danger, when Gods people are like to be
carried into captivity, either of the body or mind. I pray God make us thus
faithful, for I fear the time is at hand, that a faithful Minister shall be
known from an hireling.

The fifth point in two parts.
Now follows the last thing in the admonition, in two words, behold, and
fulfill, which are actions of the eye, and hand, of the body properly two
members, principally in Gods house: Ministers, and Pastors, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, must be whole, sound, and able, the eye, and the hand; the
eye to see, and foresee, what things are profitable, and what are hurtful for
the flock, the arm to save and defend the same, for they that want them, or
have them unable, or mutilate, are unmeet for the office of ministration,
defending, or governing of others; but these are borrowed and translated
words, from the body to the mind; by the eye is understood wisdom, and
knowledge; by the arm, might, strength, and power; in the same sense it is
taken. Zach. 11.17. O i^oll shepherd that leaves the flock, Zach. 11.17.
the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be
dried, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened; Archippus th^n is
admonished by Paul, Timothy and his flock, that he be faithful in his
calling, with the power of godly wisdom, which he has now received of the
Lord.

To see, it is taken four ways.
By seeing, is understood four things.

First, we see by our fleshly eyes. 2 Cor. 4.18.

Paul says, behold the goodness and s^ueritie of God. Romans 11.22.

Psalm. 77. The waters saw thee. Mal. 3.

Mar. 13.36.

The reason why Paul uses these words, of the eye, arm, and hand, seeing, and
fulfilling, The reason why the Apostle uses these figurative words.
when they would have any thing well done: Is, because we remember better the
things we see, then the things we hear, and because the sight is more divine,
and likest to the understanding, and when both our eye, and hand, are upon our
work together, it prospers and proceeds well.

But that we may see, The sense of seeing excels all the rest in six
degree.
by this borrowed speech which is worthy to be considered, what excellent
practice, and use of wisdom, and strength is required in a Minister of the
Gospel; and that this admonition may be the better imprinted in our minds,
which for our minds sake is written; let us consider, that the sense of
seeing, is the most noble of all our wits, and senses, which outwardly
perceive, and how? even by the true trial of our own exsperience, and use of
our outward senses; and therefore the Lord desired Thomas who was hard of
belief, to see, and handle his wounds, and print of the miles; consider thou
that the sight excels all our other senses, in six several causes, or
degrees. Musculi in oculi, Galen.
sunt sex secundum vtrunque oculorum habentes, substractam pinguedinem quibus,
actus commotionis spiritus commissus est, perficientis motus etus, per ipsos
facti sunt autem, vt facile circumducantur oculi, quando volumus hue mouere.

First, that our sight perceives things far off.

Secondly, and more of them.

Thirdly, and more exquisitely.

Fourthly, and more swiftly.

Fifthly, and under no difference.

Sixthly, and more divinely.

1. Farther off, because we see the stars of heaven.

2. Many things, because there is nothing almost, that wants light, and color;
which are the first objects of the eye.

3. More exquisitely, because there is no sense, that perceiues to little, and
so small differences of things.

4. Swift, or sooner, because we see only incontinent; we hezie not, before
the sound come to our ears; and smell not, but by blowing out and in our
breath.

5. Manifest differences, as all kind of colors, and a^ ^he five common
sensible things, Magnitudo, immerus, motus, quies, forma, which it attaines
unto perfectly, for the hand or feeling, attaines not unto them so perfectly;
for the hand discenres them only in darkness, when we may not see them with
our eyes; but when we may see them, the hand or feeling, is content with it
own objects, as calidum, frigidum, humidum, siccum, grave, leave, molle, durum,
lentum fragile, leave, asperum; when the eye and the hand work together, it
deceiues all the common sensible things, either only, or chiefly.

6. More divinely, because it feels no pain, nor labor in seeing, and only
is like the understanding of the mind; what subtle and deceitful things are
these? But yet as Saint Augustine, Confessionem lib. 11. cap. 22.
disputing of the spaces of time, and greatly prizing, and praising God, says,
Vsitata and abdita, usual, and yet hid things, therefore we should all pray
with him, Per Christum obsecro Noli claudere, we use them continually, but
know not how, the greater part; but if we knew, we would remember this
admonition the better, and praise the Lord the more; the eye of the mind is
knowledge, and the hand practice.

1. The eyes.
The eye of the mortal body sees far off, and shall the eye of the immortal
soul be purblinde, that it cannot see far off?

2. The mind.
The eye of the mortal body, sees all things almost, because God has given
all things almost, light, and color to be seen; and shall the eye of the
immortal soul see nothing, or few things of many, all visible by light,
without change of darkness, and color without blot of staining?



Phil. 1.10.

The eye of the mortal body is not pained, nor pining in seeing, and shall the
eye of the immortal soul think it a pain and labor to see, till there bono
more time to see in? the eye of the immortal body has many things to see,
that it helps the hand when it may not feel, albeit the sense of seeing be
most excellent, yet there is some defect to be noted of in our sight; for when
the thing we see is opposed to our sight directly, then the quality of that
comes upon the lines falling into the Center of our eyes, Note.
the which lines all directly from every part, makes up one Pyramides, Cuius
conus est in pupills, and basis in re visa ex quo pates, quod talis Pyramid ex
parteres in so habet latitudinem, ex part vero occuli artitudinem: even so
when we do contemplate on heavenly things, we cannot comprehend them, by
reason of weakness. Therefore God said unto Moses, thou shall see my back
parts, but my face thou can not see and live: in the sight of the face,
Noticia est perfecta, but in seeing the back parts, our knowledge is but
modica and confusa, our knowledge is but in part and confused; therefore a
distance must be from our sight, Secundum aliquam proportionem intra quam non
subqualiter, sed magis et minus videtur secundum modum distantiae: unto the
Saints heavenly things are occuli propinqui, to the wicked remoti, as the
Glutton saw Lazarus a far off.

Secondly, the Hand has many things to handle, we heard that it helps the Eye
in darkness, when it may not see; and shall the Eye and Hand of the immortal
Soul, be against other, or not help one another in need, in one thing only
needful, the common salvation of soul and body eternally. Is not the Soul
more worth then the Body? Is not the sight of the Soul more worth then the
sight of the Body? Is not spiritual things more worth then bodily things? if
the Eye of the Body be so excellent, and the more if it be joined with the
hand, how excellent is the Eye of the Soul, well exercised together in the
work of the Ministry, and of our own salvation? If natural gifts be so
excellent, What is required of the hand.
how excellent are the divine gifts of Gods holy Spirit? What shall all the
outward senses profit us? If the windows of the Soul be blind, what shall the
knowledge of God and of his Creatures profit the soul if there be no
practice, but to be beaten with many stripes? does not the salvation of the
body depend upon the salvation of the soul? does not all the steadfast standing
of eternity, depend upon a moment of transitory; time well spent, in
knowledge, and doing the will of the Lord? and namely to us of the Ministry,
that must thereby save our selves and others; must our eye be tied to see, and
our hand to fill the ministration we have received of the Lord; what shall we
do then to obey this admonition? behold with our eyes, fill with our hands,
the ministry we have received of the Lord; join practice and use, with
knowledge and strength continually, we must never turn our eye from our work
to behold vanity, with Lots wife; but like Paul, have our eyes on the work
before, and not on things behind; we must not take our hand from our work till
it be full and complete like Bazaleel and Aholiab building the Tabernacle
that did not take away eye, Numb. 3.24.
hand, or foot, till the Tabernacle was ended* the Leuits are compared to
Soldiers serving as in warfare in the Ministry, Sam. 1.9 9.
that they might see, and fulfill the same; the Prophets were named Seers, from
seeing, and Gods, from doing the work of the Lord; Isaiah was made a Watchman,
Isai. 31.6. Isai. 62 6. Isai. 27.6.12.6
to tell the things that they should see, concerning the destruction of
Babylon, and to stand continually upon his watch Tower, both day and night, and
did see but the figures of the armies, whereby Cyrus, and Darius overcame
Babylon, how much more, must we stand on our watch tower, to see Babylon fall,
that Romish idol; enemy unto Christ, and the children of God, gathered
together in the holy City. Exodus 31.1.
Moses must behold the form of the Tabernacle, and to whom it is to be
committed; and like Zerubabel, his beholding, till the last stone be laid in
the second Temple. In despite of enemies, Zach. 4.9. Genes. 41.41.
shall Joseph behold and see, that black polluted Country of ignorance, and
foresee, as he did, what things were profitable, and what were hurtful: and
shall not we behold, and fulfill the Ministration of the Holy, and lightsome
Land of Judah, ^od dwelling in the midst thereof. Zach. 2.11.12.
The Lord speaking after the manner of men, declares that his Church is ever
before his eyes, watching, and looking upon it, and in this respect, it is
sweet unto us, and in this place he commands, that it should never be out of
our sight; like Paul in spirit at Collosse, in Phrigia beholding their ordour:
Chap. 2.3. Albeit, in body in Italy, at Rome in bonds; Isai. 21.21.
O Lord I how sweet a sight should it be unto us, sleeping, and waking, when
we see the image, and care of Gods holy Church before our eyes, in her garments
of beauty; the glory of the Lord shining upon her, rather then in her mourning
weed, covered with the thick cloud of his wrath: O Lord God, if we would see,
and fill our Ministry, how might the Church be edified, and her enemies
destroyed? like Moab dispairing of their men and gods. Thus much for the
admonition in general: the Lord open our eyes to see, and our hands to fill
the Ministration, which we have received of the Lord

The reason follows in these words: Which thou have received of the Lord.

The Lord Jesus, the Author of the glorious Gospel, Six points in the reason.
has opened thine eyes, and silled thee with his holy Spirit, and committed
unto thee a part of the work of his Ministry, and grathering together of his
Saints; upon condition, that beholding, and fulfilling the same, thou may
receive an everlasting Crown of Glory, if not, to be banished from his
presence for ever; therefore see, and fulfill thy Ministry.

The general reason, is full of singular arguments, all arguing, and proouing
necessarily our faithfulness, in the work of the Ministry.

The arguments are six.

Archippus himself, to whom this work is committed; 1. Tim. 1.12.
Thou (...) but an carthen vessel, unable of thy self to think a good
thought, and yet allowed, and put in credit, and made powerful by the grace
of God in thee, then stir up, and neglect not the gift that is in thee; but
see, and consider, fulfill, an lend thy Ministration: Paul thanks the Lord,
that he made him strong, and put him in the Ministry; Amos 7.1^, 14, 15, 16,
17.
Amos considering that it was not himself, nor of man's institution that he
Prophesied, but of the Lord that had taken him from the sheep; Was bold to
see, and fulfill his Ministry, in despite of all his enemies at Bethel, in
the Kings Chapel.

Archippus in the Ministry, albeit, not immediately, but me^iatly, by the
ordination of the Church: Paul uses this argument to move Timothy to be
faithful, as we should all be, because the Lord Jesus is the Author
thereof; therefore let us see, and fulfill our Ministration, which we have
received of the Lord.

2. Tim. 1.14.
that is the glorious Gospel of the blessed God; thou has^ received this great
Mystery of godliness, and the Gospel of Gods grace, to declare it perfectly,
and fully to the world

But let v^ see, and consider the glory of the Gospel, by Paul's own comparison
of a treasure; and David's golden treasure: Gold has six properties, wherefore
the word of God is compared to it.

First, gold of all other mettelles, has not only a Gold compared to the
Gospel in su^e properties.
even so the word of God is sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb.

Secondly, gold takes no soil, neither does it foul 2. Cor. 4.7. Psalm.
19.72. 1. Pet. 1.7. Pro. 8.10.15.
as all that are mixed therewith: so Gods word is purer then the gold, seven
times tried in the fire, and makes our soulos clean from the stain of sin.

Thirdly, gold is the heauiest of all mettalles, so the

Fourthly and fifthly gold, is i^tenisissimum; and tenacissimum, Isai. 40.5.
and therefore is drawn in greatest length, and in greatest breadth; so Gods
Word, is as long, and as broad, as Eternity it self.

Lastly, gold is not consumed by fire, yea, although it time to time, cunning,
and crafty Alchimistes in this behalf, in melting brimstone with it, which in
deed consumes gold into dross; consider then, the inesteem^able worthiness
of the Treasure, which is the Gospel of Gods grace, and thou shall never cease
to see, and fill, the Ministration, and dispensation of this glad tidings of
salvation. Paul knowing the greatness of this work, and the worth of it, did
endeavor himself to fill the same, for he ioynes these thre^ arguments
together.

1. It is allowed of God, that the Gospel should be committed unto us; so we
speak not as they that please men, but God, which approoueth our hearts, for
exhortation was not by disceit. 1. These. ^.1. 4, 5, 6.


2. Nor by uncleanness.

3. No^ by guile, but as we are allowed of God.

4. Ar^^ment. Math. 24 50.
The fourth argument in this reason, is the word Ministration, thus amplified in
the 1. Cor. 9.16. to the 24. The vocation of Pastors, is a service, and a
stewardship, wherein wisdom, and faithfulness is required; Archippus is as
Christ's serua t, and steward of his Ministry, working with him in his
husbandry, with fear and trembling, doing the will of the Lord, not with eye
service, Zach. 3.9.
although with eye service; for God sees perfectly, with the al-seeing eyes of
his providence, but cheifely his holy Church, which is ever before his eyes;
and therefore thou must do in thy Ministry, as always in the presence of
the Lord, and this duty is taught us by our name: for we read in a dialogue
where it is demanded, who excels in feeding a stock of sheep? Answer is
made, Plato in Minist. Note Psalm. 21.1, 2.
(...) a shepherd, for the name is taken from the office, he therefore that
fulfilleth not the one, cannot challeng the other; and the necessity of this
consequent, was to David an occation of great comfort, for calling him his
shepherd, he triumphs in it, and gives a reason, why he can lack nothing^s
God will seed him in green pastures: therefore Christ says to Peter, feed my
sheep; whereupon Saint Bernard says, Pasc^ mente, pasce ore, pasce opere,
feed with prayer, feed with preaching, feed with a good life, these do well
together, but being a sunder profits little.

The fifth argument, S. Argument.
is the consideration of the Church of Christ, bought with his own blood,
whereof thou art made a Minister, for slocke, and ouerseer, Church, and
Ministry, are relatiues: Act. 20.28.
Archippus thou art Pastor over the slocke, and Minister of the Congregation,
therefore see and fulfill thy Ministry: Colos. 1.25.
Paul uses the same reason in his admonition to the Ministers of Ephesus face
to face, and he puts all these reasons together in his own person, saying,
whereof I am a Minister, to wit, of the Church, according to the dispensation
of God, which is given to me, to you ward, to fulfill the Word of God, even
the Mystery hid since the beginning of the world, yea, 1. These. 2.8.
we must loose our lives for our slockes, if that the Lord bring us to that
Christian trial.

The sixth and last particular argument, 6. Argument
is the reward to them that have received this Ministration, honor, or
dishonor, salvation, or perdition, according as we see, and not see, fulfill,
or not fulfill the same in the right manner, which doing, the reward shall be
the Crown of glory: This argument is not expressed, but understood; for Paul
seems in this short admonition, to commend the Epistle written from La^dicea,
and commnds the Collossians and Archippus, to read the verse before my Text,
understanding namely, the first Epistle to Timothy, where in all the duties of
Pastors are laid open. This argument made Paul say, woe unto me, if I preach
not the Gospel: if glory be an argument to move servants to be faithful;
much more us of the Ministry; if it do move all Christians to be faithful,
and to be where Christ is, how much more, should it move the Ministry to be
faithful in their calling, for it shall be nothing at the day of judgment,
Collos. 3.25. John 12.26.
albeit, some have preached and cast out devils in the name of Christ, except
it be done in the right manner fully.

In a word then, would be a Minister of Christ, then thou must first see
far off, and see all things, see exquisitely, see incontinent, see and
discern all things: See divine without pain; and that which is more, the eye
must see thy self and God that is invisible, thy hand must handle all things,
and try all things with the touchstone of truth, and hold fast that which is
good because the Lord holds the Saints, Revel. ^.1.
like the Startes in his right hand.

Archippus must then see, and fulfill his Ministry, because he is made
sufficient of the Lord, as a Minister to manifest the secrets of Go^s Kingdom,
and that in great wisdom, and faithfulness; and if he see, and fulfill his
Ministry, the Lord will be with him, here and hence forth he shall be with
the Lord for ever: this is Paul's admonition to Archippus and all Ministers, let
this admonition and reason thereof, be as a stoneth betwixt our eyes, like the
precepts of the Law, let it be written in capital letters, that a man that
runs by may read it; A^^^. 2.2.
like Abak^^es vision, let it be written as deep as wickedness was written,
with the pen of Irone, Isa. 5^, 10, 11.
and point of a Diamond upon the tables of the Jews hearts, and horns of
their Altars: Let us consider what joy, or sorrow, shall be at the last day,
and till that day come, Gods mercy is upon good Ministers, seeing, and
fulfilling their Ministry, and Gods judgments upon idol shepherds, Hebr.
11.17.
thieves, and murderers, robbers, and hi^elings, and negligent Ministers, with
darkened eyes, and withered hands, without Ministration, and if they have it,
it were better for them to be without it; if we did consider these things
sincerely, would we not behold and fill our ministry better then we do,
albeit many do well: Would we faint or be broken with evils as the original
word signifies, proceeding of the people, or of our selves; the people are
commanded to obey us that watch over their souls, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
which were good for both; ye are commanded to give us double honor, but ye
give us not single; ye are commanded to reverence our persons for our
workessake, but we are contemned; and some are respected, not so much for
their works, as for their personage sake. The people should have order and
discipline, Coloss. 2.5.
like the Collossians, for the which Paul rejoices to behold their order, and
steadfast faith in Christ; Note.
but some have no order, but do refuse wholesome doctrine: Yet we must not
faint, Tu, ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito, what, shall we give over,
for the euels that proceed of our selves, against our selves? albeit we are
cast down, yet we perish not: In all these a afflictions, we must be more
then conquerours, for eueriewhere we must bear about, the dying of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that the life also of Jesus, may be made manifest in our mortal
bodies, as the Poet says,

Sepe Jouis telo quercus adusta viret. Would the Priests of Bethel, Ovid.
Tris^. lib. 4. Eleg. 9.
in the Kings Chapel and house of the Kingdom, labor to bring Amos in
disgrace, would wicked Shemaiah call Jeremy a rauer, Ierem. 29.
or one out of his wits; shall we by evil example, cause the people to
contemn the service of God; like the sons of hell? 1 Samuel 2.17.24.
shall we let the false Apostles excel us, for Labor, Learning, Zeal,
Free-preaching, Grace of speech, Diligence in season and out of season?
Wherefore should the Ministry, which is greater then greatness it self,
appear unto us, as little as Zoar unto Lot, and yet his great place of refuge?
Who would make account of honor, Note.
or dishonor, honor, life, or death, poverty, or riches, so that we may
see, and fill, our Ministry with joy.

Thus beloved, I have run over the interpretation of this text bri^fely, with
the language of Canan, with some intermixed observations: And fearing, my
former interpretation should seem somewhat obscure, I will now draw to a
populer exhortation, which is most conu^nient for these times wherein we line;
where there is mo^e knowledge then sanctification.

According to my ordinary form, I shall first gather a general observation.

Secondly, I shall s^t down three positive grounds of Divinity, a^sing from
my text, for information of your understanding.

Thirdly, I shall come to the doctrine, which shall be done in form of
proposition only.

The Ministry that Paul requires Archippus to see, and fill, Acts 20.24.
is even the same he speaks of, where he takes this admonition unto himself;
But I pass not at all, neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may fulfill
my course with joy, and the Ministration I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

General Observations.
Two things then, according to Paul's own example this admonition requires in
Archippus, and all Ministers in their Ministry, the work do^e, and the right
manner of doing; the work, to testify the Gospel of Gods grace: 1 Cor. 2.13.
The right manner is in two points, first, the speech, next, the affection of
the mind; whence ^e proce^ds, 1. Cor. 4.19, 20
speech, not in the words of man's wisdom, but in the wisdom of the holy
Ghost, comparing spiritual things, 1 These 2.5.
with spiritual things; not in swallowing speeches, 2 Timothy 1.3.
but in spiritual power, to speak not as they that please men, 2 Pet. 1.1^.
but God that tries the hearts, not in sos^tie ^ll fables, but in wholesome
words; for this cause, Paul desires the Collossians to pray for him, that God
would open unto him the door of speech and utterance.

^ Cor. 2.2.
The general disposition of the mind, is, that we lay aside all desire and
show, of humane wisdom and purpose, only to rejoice in the knowledge of Christ
crucified.

The particular affections of the mind, are commanded, 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. Care of
the flock, willingness, and readiness of mind, desire by example to edify,
boldness of heart, confidence in God, love of Christ and his Sheep: to give
freely without respect of silthy lucre; with loss of life to persevere unto
the end, to approve our Ministry unto Christ to our conscience, and unto the
conscience of the flock. The Prophets and Apostles put these Precepts in use
and practice: for Paul and his fellows in affection and good will toward
them, they preach to us not only to deliver unto them the Gospel of God, but
their own lives also. 1 Cor. 9.16.
This pattern for speech and affection Paul committed to Timothy. The Levites
in their Ministry, 2 Cor. 4.1.
which were to serve the Priest in the Tabernacle, 2 Timothy 1.1^
and to bear the same from place to place, which lasted but for a while, had
Overseers and Watchmen, Numb. 8.26. that they might see and fill their
Ministry: the Levites had five years Apprentiship, when they came first to
serve; but when they came to five and twenty years of age, they were numbered
with the rest, and were bound but to soru^ till thirty years only. Then they
must begin to execute their Office fully, 2 Samuel 3.1, 3.
that they might see and fill their Ministry. The Priests and Prophets had
their celles near unto the Tabernacle, that they might see and fill their
Ministry: but yet the Levites must not look upon the holy things, before the
Priest had consecrated them, under the pain of death: but Archippus must
uncover and behold the holy things of God, Tremel. in Numb. 5.20.
and cause others ^o behold them also, under pain of death. Must his eye be
satisfied with seeing, and his hand with filling his Ministry. I think not.
Must we forget Saint Cyprians admonition, Sit Lectio assidua vel oration, be
ever reading or praying? Must not he have his eye, looking upon Paul's pattern
to Timothy, Of wholesome words with faith and love in Jesus Christ. The
Prophets that were called Seers, from seeing, had not the light and sight to
see and handle as we: for Jsaiah prophesied that the Sun should be made
seven times brighter; which is now in the Christian Church fulfilled, which
Sun shall never go down: how must we see, how must we fill the
ministration of things so excellent and visible, that even the difficulties and
magnificence are public? praised be the name of our God for the same
continually.

Three grounds of divinity.
Now I come to the positive grounds of Divinity, and then to the Doctrine
briefly.

Cui.
We have here three things to mark: first, Cui, to whom is this Ministry
given and concredite, to dispose often fully.

In qua.
Secondly, in qua, wherein this Ministry does consist, and the limits of it.

A quo.
Thirdly, a quo, from whom is this our Ministry. Je is, says the Text from the
Lord.

Fyhe^ 4.^.
This Ministry was given to man: for when God ascended upon hye, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto man, and that to four sorts of men:
First, Prophets. 2. Evangelists. 3. Apostles. 4. Pastors and Ministers now
under the Gospel, which shall continue unto the end. I thought to have stood
upon this last Order. I p^sse them over.

The second thing is, to see wherein this Ministry consists; you heard it was
in seeing and filling, that is, knowledge and practice.

First, thou must know God, Creator of all things. 2 Christ ^s R^deemer. 3. The
Holy ghost as S^n^tifier, both in essence, 1 ^^antae.
^face, and ^ttr^butes; Quantae maiestati^ vt timea^, quamae dignitates vt
adores, quanta be^^ satis vt in se speres.

Secondly, Know thy self in three things.
thou must know thy self to be a good Christian, and first quantae
fragilitatis, Secondly, quanta vilitatis. Thirdly, quantae Iniquitatis: Thou
must also be learned, which learning must have these virtues. First, Sapientia
coniunctiua: Secondly, Six things.
Iustitia distributius: Thirdly, Patientia charitatiua: Fourthly, Penitentia
sanetiua: Fifthly, Temperantia regulatiua: Sixthly, Perseuerantia perfectiua:
Thou must also be a good Minister, for if thou be not a good Christian first,
Math. 6.8. Act. 15.9.
thou shall never be a good Minister of the Gospel, which is thy ministration;
to be a good Pastor thou must be able to stand before God; now there is no
standing before God, but in purity of heart; mark then that the heart is only
purified by faith; To stand before God.
therefore thou must labor by sense and feeling to know the course of Gods
dealing with thy self, for if thou can not preach by experience, thou shall
never preach with power, for the conversion of Gods people.

The second thing thou must do, Nam secunda capacitatem, audientiu^, decenda
sunt alia, and pro^und and subti^lia, and (...) p^ana, and simpli^^.
is to present thy work before God: First, thou must know the nature of
people, if they be in the Family of Faith or not: Secondly, if they be
ignorant with knowledge, as Heretics, thy dut^ is told then in the third to
Titus: If they be Apost^^es, thy duty is to^d thee in the person of Himineus
and Philetus, to these extreamities: Fourthly, if they be simple and ignorant,
then thou must be, first meek, secondly gentle, thirdly patient; so thou must
be all to all men, Gregor p^lo^^ (...) (...). 9.
that thou may win some to Christ: therefroe Gregory salth, alliter monendi
sunt proterui, at qu^ alliter pusillanimus, the one in severity, the other in
judgment.

The third things is this, that we m^st know our Ministry to be^^ work, for
when we know the disposition of n^n thou we must work^ and labou^ ^ ^our
Ministry according^y: That this oat Ministry is a work, Paal says, 1 The^ ^.
W^ beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord.

Our work in two things. 1 Timothy 3.17. The description of a good minister. John.
7.16. 1 Cor 11.23. Ier. 14.1. To rule well^ three things. Ier. 1.17. 1 King.
22.14.
This work is in two things, First doctrine; Seondly government, Let the
Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and doctrine: So, to be a good workman, is to rule, and to
labor well in the Word, and not to preach our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord.

To rule in the Lord thou must do three things; first thou must deliver
nothing but that thou have received of the Lord, for Christ says, my doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me.

Secondly, thou must deliver his whole message, withholding n^thing; therefore
God says to Jeremie, Speak unto them, all that I command thee, be not
dismayed at their faces, least I confound thee before them.

Thirdly, in delivering his m^ssage as Gods Word, therefore Peter says, 2 Pet.
4 21.
If any man speaks let him speak as the Orracles of God: to do this, is first
required gravity, as Titus 2.17.

Secondly, Authority. Tit. 2.25.

Thirdly, Sincerity: therefore Saint Paul says, for we are not as many, 2
Cor. 2.17.
which corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God, speak we in Christ.

A quo.
The third general point is, to know from whom we have this ministration, my
Text says, it is from the Lord: Let us first consider if this power be from
the Father only, or the Son only, or from the Holy Ghost, Christ Lord of his
Church.
or from all conioynctiue; that this Ministry is not from the Father as
Creator, neither from the Son as ab aterno cum Patre, or the Holy Ghost; but
this our Ministry under the Gospel is only from Christ, Isa. 9.6.7.
as redeemer of the World, God and Man, manifest in the flesh: for this Isaiah
says of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end; L^k.
1.11.32.1.
more particularly see Luke, who says and he shall reign over thee house of
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end: Ioh. 18.
therefore he says, my Kingdom is not in this world, thereby signifying unto
us the spiritual government that is in Christ and his members the Church, to
the end of the world.

In this Monarchy of Christ, consider these things; 9 Points to be considered
in Christ's Monarchiall government.
First, his Throane; Secondly, his Kingdom, wherein ye shall see the King in
his Kingdom; Thirdly, ye shall see his enemies; Fourthly, his Subjects;
Fifthly, his Laws; Sixthly, his Authority; Seventhly, the place of his
Kingdom; Eighthly, the difference betwixt his Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of
this world, the last point is of the continuance of Christ's Kingdom.

First then we have to consider these two general grounds: First, temporal
governors have the custody of external conctiue jurisdiction, and matters
belonging thereto.

The second is, that the power of the Church is immediately from Christ the
Mediator, given unto all, Bonauenture in 4. sent. d. 17.9.1. August Triumphus
lib. de potest Eccles. Ioh. Gerson lib. de potest. Eccles. Consid. 1. Cardinal
Cusanus l b. de Cathol. 2 Cap 13. Cardinal Cantarenus tract de Eccles. potest.
pontificis Be^. lib. 4. de Romans pont. Cap. 22.

First then we have to consider, The nature of Christ's Kingdom.
what this Throne is; Secondly who has it; Thirdly, who gives it to Christ the
Lord. First, this Throne is the Throne of David, not that material Throne,
wherein David fate in Judgment, but a Typical Throne; for David himself was
a Figure of the Messiah, King of the Church, but they shall serve the Lord,
Ier. 30 9. Ezec. 34.23.24
and David their King: David's Kingdom was a Figure of Christ's Kingdom, which
was revealed by his Law from heaven, and not by men; much more then is there a
full revelation of Christ's government; Hose ^ 4. Note. Hose. 9.7.
for as none had power to give Laws to David, much less has any man power to
give Laws to Christ, to rule his Kingdom: Who shall learn him wisdom? Col.
1.16.
it is to pull from his Throne, by the imperfection of his Laws; he is King
over all by Creation, Psalm. 27.5.
but King of David's Throne by donation: to make this plain, the Kingdom of
God is taken for the universal government over all his Creatures; Mat. 18.17.
the Kingdom of God in particular* Act 14.16.
is that manner of government which the Father uses by the Son in the flesh,
toward his Church, in gathering together of his Saints, fully by his blood and
spirit, 1 Timothy 4 14.
defends his Church, and subdueth all his enemies: this Kingdom is
distinguished in two sorts of government, the one is in the Kingdom of grace,
the other in the Kingdom of glory; In the first, it is by his word and spirit;
in the other we shall have immediate glory: in the Kingdom of grace we shall
have our conjunction with the Father through the Son, by faith wrought by the
spirit in the Word, and Sacraments, as the instruments thereof, Ephesians 1.1^. 1
John 3.2. Heb. 20.23. Col 3.3.
and discipline, which is the band and hedge about the Vineyard, given by the
King to his Church, in the Kingdom of Glory we shall have communion with God,
by the essential word.

This matter I thought to have stood upon, by reason it has not bin handled by
many, which would take me many Sermons to vnforld; This matter shall be handled
elsewhere.
therefore seeing the time has overtaken me, I Will leave this matter to your
further consideration: And now to the Doctrine.

The Apostle in the former voise, inioyneth the reading of this Epistle, that
it should be read in the Church of Colosse and Laodicea, yet here he adds,
that Archippus must be put in mind of his duty, that he should seq, and
fulfill his Ministry, by his diligence in practice and preaching the word of
the Lord.

Whereupon I gather this first ground of doctrine; 2 Doctr.
to wit, that howsoever the Scriptures of God ^e to be read by thy self, or
others; yet the reading of them is ^ot sufficient to cast down the proud
^^inded, or to inform the ignorant, ^rea hing was the practice of all the ^^st
(...) of the ^ata^is.
or to comfort the troubled conscience: but if we would profit by the Word, it
must be taught, preached, and expounded by lively voice in the public
Ministry. Therefore let no m n think that Reading is sufficient in this great
work; for Christ was offended to see the people without a Shepherd, Aug de
Doct. Christ.
and yet we cannot say but they had the Law and the Prophets read amongst
them: and if it ha^ been sufficient to have the Law of God read, Math. 9 ^6.
Acts 13.
why did not the Jews know and believe in Christ, whom they had crucified: Not.
for Moses and the Scriptures did testify, that Christ was to come, (...) ^.39.
which Christ confirms. This was the form of old: for the Law was not only
read but expounded to the p ople. Nehem. ^.^. Aug C^ntess. lib. ^. cap. 13.
This we may see clear in Saint Augustine, who coming to hear Saint Ambrose
preach, not for the truth sake, yet by Saint Ambrose preaching he was
converted to the truth, as he does confess, Ad eum autem ducebar abs te
nesciens, vt per cum ad te sciens duceret.

The reason of the Doctrine is, Ratio. Romans 10.14.
because the Lord has appointed the preaching of the Gosp ll, to be the means
of our salvation. Mark then, as we must have faith, which comes by
preaching: so must our faith be grounded on the true sense and meaning of the
same. Philip said to the Eunuch, Acts 8.3 2.35.
Understand thou what thou read? And how can I except some man should
guide me? Then Phil^p opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and
preached unto him Jesus. The Word must be applied with power, Hebr. 4.12.
for it is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, and does
discern of the thoughts and intentions of the heart. Deuteronomy. 17.11.
Therefore Moses says, According to the Sentence of the Law which they shall
teach thee, thou shall do.

The use of this Doctrine, is to reprove those that think reading of
Scripture to be sufficient. If reading be suffc^ent, then why did Christ
close the book and make application at Nazareth? Luke 4.^0, 28. 1 Cor. 14.13.
If this opinion be in a Minister, it is a token, thou never did see nor
fill thy Ministry, but is stone blind. If this opinion be in you that are
the people, it is a token you are yet in the way of Reprobation, because you
cannot abide your sins ripped up, and your consciences awakened from the
sleep of sin. Therefore Paul says, If thou pray with the Spirit, thou must
pray with understanding also. Let us mark one thing, albeit thou have never so
great learning, yet thou may be overtaken with passions and infirmities,
and then of thy self thou shall not be able to see the danger, without it be
told thee by others. Did not David know he had committed murder, and yet the
child of God, yet he did not rise from his security, until Nathan did apply
the Sword of the Word to his sleeping conscience, Note
saying, Thou art the man. By this we may see how needful it is to have
Ministers, not only to read, but to apply the Word with power to the
consciences of men and women; and especially at this time, and in this dead age
wherein we live.

I told you in the opening up of this Text by way of observation, that the
people should admonish the Pastor of his duty; but now Paul gives the
admonition himself.

1 Timothy (...)
which most be done in lou^* Therefore Paul says, rebuke not an Elder but
reprove him as a Father: assure thy self* whatsoever be thy dignity in the
Church, I say to thee in the name of Christ, Note.
that no place of dignity or honor, worldly, should hin^er thee in the work
of the ministry; all antiquity before corruption entered in, does clear this
point.

The reason is, because our nature being corrupted,

Secondly, the Authority of the Minister from God,

The use in a word, is to exhort those whom God

Secondly, I request you in the fear of God, that Note
and that ye would have the courage of the Apostles, of making election of
Mathias in the place of Judas; and that ye would thrust to the door the
profane Sons of Eli, that makes the sacrifice and service of God to be
contemned, and had in derision daily, as woeful experience does let us see,
that will see, the Lord amend it.

The Apostle desires the Colossians to admonish Archippus, that he take heed
to the Ministry that he fulfill it, and leave no part thereof unperformed.

Whereupon I gather this third ground of doctrine, 3 Doctrine
that it is not sufficient for a Minister to begin, and continue in doing
some part of his Calling; but he must accomplish all things belonging to the
same: he must not only Read but preach, and Catechize, yet live without blame
in this present world, 2 Timothy 4.
which Saint Gregory says, we perform, if by our preaching and living we
gain the souls of men; Ezech. 34.6.
if we rebuke and reprove, such as are obstinate; if we comfort the penitent;
John. 17.9.
if we strengthen the weak; heal the infirm; bind up the broken; seek what
is lost; and bring again what was driven away; Ephesians. 3.14.
by example of the good Sheapheard: as we must be the mouth of God to speak to
the people, Romans 1.9.
so must we be the peoples mouth to pray unto the Lord; example we have of this
in Christ, albeit Lord of all power, and had power to make his Preaching
profitable; yet he prays to his Father for himself and his people; ^ T^m. 1.3.
thus did Paul bend his knees for the Ephesians, for the Romans, yea night and
day did he pray for his Scholar Timothy.





V^^^
The use is, to reprove those Ministers that are negligent in any part of their
calling; some do preach and live well; some well, and are not able to preach;
some live absent for their pleasure, when they have sufficient means to live
by their Ministry; some place others for them, V^de (...).
but often it falls out as it did with the Jews, that when Moses was with the
Lord, Aaron suffered the people to commit Idolatry, ere he returned b^cke
again; some so live, as not having respect to God nor man, o^ their Calling,
and yet can speak and prate, a^ if ^here were some goodness in them: it may
be said of them, a^ Plutarch tells a story of an old man amongst the Grecians
at the Games of Olympus, and finding no place ^or favor amongst them, went to
the La^^demonians, where he found things to his mind; the old man cries out,
all the Grecians do know what is honest, but the Lacedaemonians only practice:
we sometimes prove Grecians, Ier. 2.8.
and the people practice: for God says, they that should minister the Law know
not; we are the Salt of the Earth, yet not sauorie; the light of the World, yet
darkness: Seneca says, Epist. 37
make choice of such a Teacher as thou may admire, more having seen him,
then when thou have heard him; for as a Godly life does persuade the people
unto good; Lib. past. Greg.
so an evil life persuades the people to evil: therefore Gregory says,
there is no man more dangerous in the Church, then he that lives lewdly and
carries a name of sanctity; Agustine.
therefore Augustine says, Omnis qui m^l^ viuit in conspectam little quibus
propositus est, quantum in ipso est occidit. Amongst all the dangers of the
world, what is in more danger then the soul, yea what is more precious then
the same? yea all the world is nothing to the souls h^alth: this should move
us to faithfulness in our Calling, which if we do, 1 Pet 3.4.
God shall give us an incorruptible Crown of glory.

Now the argument the Apostle would have to be used to persuade Archippus to
fulfill his Ministry, is, because he has received from the Lord: 4 Doctrine.
hence I gather this fourth ground of Doctrine. It should be a powerful and
very effectual argument, to move a Minister to be faithful in his Calling, in
that we have it from God, and not from man; therefore Paul says, 1 Timo. 1.2 1.
I thank him that has made me strong, that is, Christ Jesus, for he counted
me faithful, and put me in his service.

The reason of this Doctrine is, Ratio.
that we having received this Ministry from the Lord, therefore the Lord will
uphold us in all temptations that may befall us, in body or soul: I^^. 1.19.
What made Michaiah so confident with Ahab, Jeremy so plain with Amos; So
powerful John the Baptist, and all true Ministers, ^ bold only, because we
have this our Ministry from the Lord.





Secondly, upon trial and examination, if thou be foun^ ^i^ for that Office,
be appointed thereto by the Church, to serve in the work of the Lord.

Three things are ^^^^ired in a Minister
Thirdly, upon the faithful discharge of thy duty, according to the
dispensation bestowed upon thee, the Lo^d g^^e a blessing upon thy labor,
having withal a testimony in thy conscience that God has sent thee, assure
thy self thou art the Messenger of God.

Vs^^.
The use is to teach us, that no man should undertake the Office of a Minister,
except it be given him from the Lord: therefore every one of you try your
selves in your gifts and conversation, then judge of thy self accordingly; if
thou be sent to preach boldly the Word of truth, Romans 10.13.
or if thou preach to the world for thy self, thou art a hyreling, and not
sent of God.

Secondly, the Ministry is Gods, and not man's: if thou have not this assurance
of God, thou have no warrant that God will bless thee in thy Ministry, but
thou must look for double torment in hell.

5. D^cts.
The Text says, that we have this our Ministry from the Lord; then let us
learn this last ground of Doctrine, that Ministers have no ^bilitie or
strength of themselves to perform the work of the Lord in their Ministerial
Function, ^^ C^^. 3.^.
except it be given them of the Lord. Therefore Paul says, that of our selves
we are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God, who has made us able Ministers. ^^^ys. Ho^. 6.
Whereupon Chrysostom says, Quid est (...) fecit us nos prestare possimus
ciqua munere gerendo ess^ciremur accommods. Therefore Christ says, Without me
ye can do nothing. John 15.^.
Paul took more pains then others in executing his Ministry, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but God that gives the increase.

The reason is, in that the work of the Ministry is a divine work, and
Ministers are but men; and therefore* Paul says, who are sufficient for these
things. This difficulty is in respect of the work, and secondly, of the
persons who are deputed to that work. The Function of a Minister is to quicken
such as are dead in sin, to raise up such as are fallen, to comfort those
that are troubled in conscience, to strengthen the weak, to encourage the
faint-hearted, to confound the obstinate; all which are above humane strength,
yea, Acts 4.15. Exodus 3.4. Ierem. 1.6. Jonah 1.3. Math. 4.1. Zach. 3.1.
more then flesh and blood can do, and yet subject to the like common passions
as other men are: In consideration whereof many have sought to give over their
Ministry, because Ministers are opposed by Satan, and this profane world.

The use of the former Doctrine is diverse, Vsus.
and first to move and incite all people to pray for the Ministry: for
without Gods blessing they are able to do nothing, but mighty through God, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5.
to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every
high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Secondly, Math. 9.37, 38
to pray that the Lord would send out faithful Laborers into this his
Harvest, for the ingathering of his Saints, unto the great day of the Lord: and
therefore the Lord says, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers
are few, at least, few faithful: Acts 12.5.
pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth Laborers
into his harvest.

The second use is, to teach you who have gifts or ability, 2. Vsus.
not to be insolent to presume above your brethren; 1 Cor. 4.7.
for thou have nothing whi h thou have not received of the Lord. Now it thou
did^est receive it, why do thou glory, as thou did'est not receive i^.
Brethren, 3. Epistle of John 9.10.
do not follow the example of Diotrephes, who lo^eth to have pr^heminence
amongst the brethren and does not receive them, and forbids them that would,
and casts them out of the Church. Then we see that this excellent work is
not committed to Ministers for th^^ own take only, not for their honor,
their wealth to exalt them, but that we be diligent in the work of the Lord.

3. Vsu^. Eph^^ 6.20. Luke 10.16 1 Cor 4 13. 1 Samuel ^ 7.
The third use is, to teach you that are the people, to learn you to respect
the Ministers of God; for we are Christ's Ambassadors: for we exhort you in
Christ's stead, ^^end your judgment, them that are worldly minded people: let
not your respect be to the Ministry for any earthly prerogative, as honor,
wealth, dignity, friendship, but respect us for our Master the Lord Jesus, and
our works sake; for it is the power of God to salvation to all them that
believe.

4. Vsu^.
The last use is to all in general; Let the world judge of us as it will,
notwithstanding we must have our eyes fixed on ou^ Master that sent us; let the
excellency of the one, and the dignity of the other, swallow up all ignominy
and injury the world can lay against us; and that we may be able so to do, let
us always be diligent in praying for the assistance of Gods Spirit, that we
may fulfill our course with joy.

Exhortation.
Now to draw to a conclusion, I exhort you all, but especially I direct my
speech to you in the Ministry, that in the fear and love ye have to Jesus
your Lord, who sent you, ye would endeavor your selves, that all your
exhortations and preaching to others, be written down in the lines of your
own life, that men seeing your good works, may glorify your heavenly Father;
for we must have two sorts of garments a Bre^st-plate and an Ephod; the one
shows, Exodus 28.4.
tha^ thou must have knowledge; the other, that thou must have Conscience to
do: and in this Breast Plate must not only be written Vrim, that is, Light; but
also Thummim, Exodus ^8.10.
which is perfection; n t only light of direction, but a pattern of good
works; as the Snuffers were made of Gold, so we must not only shine our
selves, but purge others: we must not only have Belles, Exodus 25.38.
but Pom^graners: also, we must not only say w^ll, but do well; as the Pillars
of the Taberna le, ouerlaid with Gold, but inward of Shittim wood: Exodus 39.^^.
therefore Isaiah says, we must lift up our voice like a Trumpet, for he
winds it with his mouth, Is^. ^3.1.
and holds it with his hand; we must not only Preach but practice, then we
lift up our voice like a Trumpet, if we do not see this, and fulfill our
Ministry: What shall we say when the Prophets, Apostles, Fathers, yea all the
faithful Pastors, present their flocks before the Lord Jesus, at the last
judgment: who is to be blamed think you, that there is a negligent Minister?
A good Pastor, has the (...) of edificati^n. Act. 17.^.
Is the fault in Laick Patrons, which Father Lattimer did see and reprove in
his days? or is it Nabals in the congregation that will not help faithful
Ministers to live, or is the fault in the Clearg^, by giving ordination to the
unworthy? or as Patrons for their friends, as the verse says.

Mos est Prelatis prebendas non dari gratis,
Sed been nummatis vel eorum sanguine natis.
Or is the cause in the People that will not obey, Son of man thou must cry,
if they hear or hear not; Isa. 5.11. Ier. 5 7. Ezech. 23.9.
reprove the Drunkard with Isaiah, the Adulterer with Jeremiah, the Swearer
with EZekiel, the Usurer with Moses the Hypocrite with Christ, Leui. 25.36.
the profane world with John, and with Peter, let all know there shall be a
Judgment, that the people may turn from their evil ways; this must not be
done without sense, feeling, or motion; using Doctrine without application,
Application without zeal, like a man without a soul; or as an Image on a
wall: If thus we do, it is an evident token that some are ignorant, We must
not fear as Ezech. 3.8.9.
and cannot powerfully preach; being ignorant, some are so negligent in their
Ministry and will not; some are so fearful to offend their Benefactors, Note
and dare not; some are so wicked, and should not; alas, a guilty Conscience
stays the power of our Ministry, and therefore the people are not converted:
for this cause the Lord says to wicked Ministers, Ie^ 23.22.
If ye had stood in my counsel, then should ye have turned my people from
their evil ways: therefore Brethren, we may blame our selves, that neither
our persons, nor our calling is regarded, Cu^us vita a^spicitur resta^ vt ^^
pr^edicatio contaminatur.
but abused and d sgraced; and thought to be the off scouring of the world,
and refuse of mankind; and by our unfaithful walking in our Calling, God has
justly made us base, and vile, and contemptible in the sight of the people; for
we are called the troublers of the State, as Ahab did Flias, a troubler of
Israel; but on the other part, are we faithful in our Calling, that thought
b^s^ in our persons? poor be our livings, and disp^sed in this world; yet the
Lord from w^^^^ we (...) our M^nistery, shall revenge our cause to is glory and
our comfort, and their ^^cil^sting sorrow: therefore l t v^ re^^u^ all offense
on our part that we preach not sa^uat on to oath rs, and damn ^o^ to ^n^ selves;
for as a de^^ P^lical^s the p^^pe to hear^, but h ate^ nothing in self
Siegretants accedat aegretus, si carboni extincto, adij^iator ^^rbo extinctas,
vel si ^aeto praesictatur caecus, what shall they profit one another? Praetes
mortem, ciuerem famum, foneam; therefore Gregory says, complaining of
himself, Vsurpaus mihi, cotis officium qui f^rrum reddit ac^ntum, cum sit in
^^^lis ad secundum, l'ule brum depinxe hominem, Pre^or ^^^s aliosque redigo ^ed
perfectionis littus qui ad huc ver^^r in delictorum finelibus: who then is to
be rep^oued? the Ignorant, Negligent, Timotus, Covetous, Profane Pastors; but
especially those that appear to be ^tarres, Reu. 13.3.4.
who are drawn from Heaven and cast unto the Earth, by that great red Dragon;
this did appear to be a wonder in Heaven, Note.
but it is no wonder now upon Earth; I say then with Saint Bernard to ^ugenius,
Mostrosa res est gradus sums, and animus ^ifimus, seeds prima, and vita Ima,
Bernard lib 2. de considerat
lingua magni loqua and manus otrosa. Sermo multus, and fructus nullus, vult^^
grauis, and actus leuis, caput canum, and corvanum, faci^^ rugosa, and lingua
nugosa, ingens authoritas, and nutan^ stabilitas. I cannot pass by you that
are our flock, there is not only amongst you, Foxes, yea little ones, who
makes their profession of the Gospel, a shelter and cover to their
hypocrisy; who serve the Gospel so far as the Gospel may serve your turn,
for the accomplishing of your worldly pleasures: there is also Wolves among
you, in sheeps clothing, who kill their Shepherds, Quo hierophyphyco notatur
hereticos sub ^iten solendit a principib^^ quod si adolesi etur graetusuterit
^it fututum in emtui facilius Iesuitae suff^cabuntur. Isa. 50.14.15.
wounding them in their good name opprobriously, in their bodies dangerously,
in their state, injuriously, renting both their persons, and their Parsonages
from them; for now Religion is hated amongst many, true Godliness despised,
zeal abhored, sincerity scoffed at, uprightness loathed, and almost all good
men had in derision. And therefore we may say that Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands afar, for Truth is fa^ne in the street, and
Equity cannot enter; and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey;
yet the Lord saw it, and was angry.

Albeit ye will do no duty, neither for our Master nor message sake, yea,
hardly for your own salvation, 2 Cor. 3.11, 2.
yet we knowing the terror of the Lord, w^ p^rswade men, and being
Ambassador for Christ, as though Christ did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled unto God. For this cause Saint Augustine
says, That the Word of God must be to the faithful, Tanquam pis^s hamus
capit, quando capitur; ye must, vese topposcis, as Nineueh repented at Jonas
Sermon. Marie sat all the night at Christ's feet, Acts 17.
hearing the Word* Ye should say with the good Athenians, Let us hear thee of
this matter again: And with the converted Christians, who being pricked in
their hearts, said, Acts ^.^7.
What shall we do men and brethren? I say unto you, as Peter unto them, I
pray God it may work the like effect, Repent and be baptized, in the Name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gifts of
the Holy Ghost. This if you do, how beautiful upon the Mountains will the
feet of them be that brings glad tidings unto you. And then at the last day
of account, we shall say with our Master the Lord Jesus, in great joy, Those
that thou have given me, I have kept them, and none of them is lost. Then we
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many unto
righteousness, John 17.12.
as the Stars for ever and ever. If thus we would shine, obey Paul's
Exhortation, that seeing we have this our Ministry as we have received
mercy, w^e faint not, but having cast from us the cloakes of shame, Dan 1^.^.
not walking in craftiness, or h^n^ling the Word of God deceitfully, but in
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience, 2
Cor. 4 1, 2.
in the sight of God. Seeing then that both Pastor and people do look for
the Kingdom of Heaven, where shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. Let us
all labor for the testimony of a good Conscience, and Christian resolution:
In life, or death, and glory with Paul, saying, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.
I have fought a good fight, and am now ready to be offered, and the time of
my departure is at hand. I have finished my course. I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.
but to them also that loves his appearance. And that both Pastor and people
may be partaker of this joy unspeakable and glorious, I bid you farewell in
the Lord: and I pray with Paul, that the very God of Peace sanctify you
wholly; and I pray God, your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and praise, both now, and for ever
and ever.

Amen.
FINIS

