God save the King. A SERMON PREACHED IN St. PAVLS CHVRCH the 27th. of March.
1639. BEING THE DAY OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST happy Inauguration, and of His
Northern Expedition. BY HENRY VALENTINE, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN MARRIOTT; and are to be sold at his Shop in
St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1639.

God save the King.
1 SAMUEL 10.24. And all the people shouted, and said, God save the King.


THe Text is verbum diei in die sue; and a word spoken in due season is like
apples of gold in pictures of silver. This is the Kings Day, and this is the
Kings Text; and I will use the words of a King for my Introduction: My heart
has indicted a good matter, and I will speak of the things which I have made
touching the King. God make my tongue the pen of a ready writer, and tune your
tongues to the Duty of the Day, and Ditty of the Text, which is, God save the
King: And all the people shouted, and said, God save the King.

The Text presents you with two fair pieces.

First, the Acclamation of the people, And all the people shouted; and this I
call Vox populi, the Voice of the people.

Apprecation of the people; it was not Vox and praeterea nihil, voice and
nothing else, as we say of the Nightingale; but as they shouted, so they said
something, and what was it? God save the King; and this I call Votum populi,
the Vote of the people.

In the first of these, three things are observable.

1. The ground and occasion of their joy, They had a King, that was one: and
such a King as the like was not among the people, that was another. Both
expressed in the beginning of the Verse.

2. The greatness and vehemence of their joy. They did not gaudere in sinu,
their breasts were too narrow to contain it; but like Jordan in the time of
Harvest, it overflowes the banks, and breaks out at their lips, so that
heaven and earth rings, and resounds with the echoes of it, for they shouted.

3. The generality, and universality of their joy. The young men did not shout,
and the old men weep, as at the building of the second Temple; but all the
people shouted, the Quire is full, the joy universal.

In the second, that is, the Apprecation of the people, two things are
considerable.

1. Their Fa^, they prayed for the King. For as he that prays not at all
cannot be a good man; so he that prays not for the King, cannot be a good
Subject.

2. Their Form of prayer, God save the King. For they knew that if God did not
save their King, their King could not save them out of the hands of their
enemies.

These are the several parts of the Text, wherein at this time I shall
exercise your patience and attention: and first of the grounds, and occasions
of their joy; They had a King, and such a King as the like was not among all
the people, and hence their shouting and ovations. And all the people shouted,
and said, God save the King.

King. Governors they had, Captains they had, Judges they had, but a King
they had not till now; and now they have him, they rejoice in him, for they
shouted.

Shouting is an expression of joy, and joy is a passion and affection of the
mind, arifing from the sense and presence of some good. And that Kings are to
be ranked in this Predicament, and enrolled in the number of Good Things, is
most manifest from that promise which God made unto Abraham: I will (says God)
make thee exceeding fruitful, Genes. 17.6.
I will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. In which
promise you may observe as it were three degrees of Comparison. First, God
promises that he should be a Father; then, that he should be a Father of
Nations; then, a Father of Kings, which is the superlative Blessing, and the
very Crown and Crest of the Promise.

Again, God is good, and so are all things that come from him; now there is no
power but of God, says the Apostle: and how is it of him? not by way of
permission, but of commission; not by way of Deficiency, but of Efficiency; not
by way of sufferance, Rom 13.1.
but of ordinance: for the powers that are, are ordained of God, and whosoever
resists the power, Inde illis potestas, unde spiritus. Tertul. Apol. 30 Cujus
jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur Principes. Iren.
resists the Ordinance of God. Thence have they their power, from whence they
have their spirit, says Tertul. And he that made them men, makes them Princes,
and that after the same manner, says Irenaeus. Hence is it that their Crown
is said to be Gods, their Scepter Gods, their Throne Gods, their anointing
Gods: for he is the Master of the substance, whosoever be the Master of the
Ceremony.

I confess that the children of Israel are charged by Samuel to have committed
grande malum, 1 Samuel 12.17.
a great evil in asking a King, and God attested it by thunder from heaven.
The truth is, they did not ask malum, a thing in its self, and simply evil;
but they asked Bonum male, a good thing in an ill manner; For they asked a King
to the prejudice, and apparent injury of Father Samuel; they asked him out of
wantonness, and pride of heart, that they might be like unto other Nations;
and they were resolved to have a King, whether God and his Prophet would or no.
Vide Abulens: in locum. Et Latimers 5. Sermon. before K. Edw.
Nay (say they) but we will have a King. Now if malum be ex quolibet defectu,
this must needs be grande malum, that had so many defects in it, though the
thing they asked was Grande bonum, a great blessing and a precious treasure, as
Latimer calls it, and it will appear by these particulars to be so.

1. A King is Decus Israelis, the Beauty, and Ornament of Israel: when Saul was
slain, 2 Samuel 1.19.
David lamented over him with this Lamentation, The Beauty of Israel is slain
upon thy high places. For the King is the Fountain of Government, Government of
Order, and Order of Beauty; so that a King governing his people with good and
just Laws, makes the Commonwealth a Naomi, and the excellency of Beauty,
which otherwise would be but rudis indigestaque moles, and monstrum inform; A
mass of confusion, and ugly and deformed Monster.

2. A King is Lucerna Israelis, the Light and Lamp of Israel. 2 Samuel 21.17.
David being rescued from a great danger, the people swore that he should go
no more out with them to battle, lest the Light of Israel should be quenched.
The King by his Laws, as the Sun by his Beams, dispels and scatters those
deeds of Darkness which otherwise would cover the face of the Commonwealth:
so that his subjects live in Goshen and have light in their dwellings; and the
light is good, for he that made it, said it: and if there be any that rejoices
not in this Light, I dare say his deeds are evil.

3. A King is Imago Dei, the bright Image of God, and the most magnificent and
conspicuous representation of the Divine Majesty; Nec alio animo rectorem suum
intuetur, quam si Dii immortales potestatem visendi sui faciant. Senec. l. 1.
de clem. cap. 20.
and we joy in the Pictures of our friends, when we cannot behold their
Persons.

All Governors (says Greg. Naz.) are Gods Pictures. Inferior and subordinate
Magistrates are half pieces drawn from the head to the shoulders, or middle;
but Kings are the Pictures of God at length, and represent him in such due
proportions, that as God is our invisible King, so the King is our visible God.
One has said it that cannot flatter, Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are gods,
and if he have said it, we may say it after him.

Pastor populi, the Shepherd of the people, so Cyrus is called, and so David
whom God took from feeding of sheep, to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. And no expression more frequent in profane Authors. The people
then that have no King are like a flock of sheep that have no shepherd; and
sheep that have no shepherd will be scattered: 1 King. 22.17.
I saw (says the Prophet) all Israel scattered upon the hills as sheep that
have no shepherd. And sheep that are scattered are easily devoured, according
to that of Ezech. They were scattered because they had no shepherd, Ezech.
34.5.
and they became meat unto all the beasts of the field when they were
scattered. So then with a King we are Oves pascuae, sheep of the Pasture
feeding by still waters: but without a King we are Oves occisionis, sheep of
the shambles, and appointed to be slain. And therefore good reason that we
should hear the voice of our shepherd, and rejoice in him when he goes in and
out before us.

Benefactours, according to that of our Savior, Luke 22.25.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise
authority upon them are called Benefactours. And if we look into the Catalogue
of the Egyptian Kings, we shall find two of them so surnamed. And well may
the King be called a Benefactour, for he is the Minister of God to thee for
good, (says the Apostle.) He conserves thy life and body which is thy natural
good; he cherishes virtue, and punishes vice, which is thy moral good; he
secures thy estate and possessions, which is thy civil good; he defends the
faith, and maintains Gods true Religion, and worship, which is thy spiritual
good. So that (...), A King is the best Benefactour, and the greatest friend we
have upon earth; for we may say of him as Solomon did of wisdom, when he
comes, all good things whatsoever come together with him.

Now recollect and lay all these together, that a King is the Beauty of a
Nation, the Light of the Commonwealth, the Image of God, the Pastor of his
people, and the best Benefactour to his subjects; and we cannot but acknowledge
that the oil of anointing is Oleum laetitiae, the oil of gladness. For I
dare say, that next to Christus Dominus the Lord Christ, Christus Domini the
Lords anointed is to be preferred in our mirth as the chief of our joy, and
the Crown of our rejoyceing. And therefore the children of Israel had good
reason to be joyful in their King, especially in such a King as the like was
not among all the people, and that is the other ground and occasion of their
rejoicing.

Solomon, the most glorious King that ever wore a Crown, or bare a Scepter,
Wisd. 7.1, 2, 3.
confesses that he was but Mortalis a mortal, and similis omnibus like unto
all; conceived alike, borne alike, nursed alike, and there is no King (says
he) that is otherwise. There are a generation of men in the world which like
the frogs in Egypt swarm in Kings Chambers, who poison unwary Princes with the
breath of flattery, blowing them up with monstrous and prodigious conceits of a
supposed Divinity. If Alexander be victorious, he has them about him will say
and swear too that he is the son of Jupiter, and decree him divine honors.
If Demitian send out a Decree, Mart.
it is Edictum Demini Deique nostri: If Herod sit on the Throne and make an
elegant Oration, it is the voice of God and not of man. And when once the
spirit of Princes is infected with this poison, they think they may thunder
with Jupiter, and command the Sea, For -- Quid credere de se
Non possit, Juven.
cum laudatur Diis aequapotestas:
The truth is, that he that sits upon the Throne is but a man, and (...),
subject to the same passions that others are, and Morietur sicut home, he
shall dye like a man, and his pomp shall not follow him: so that the
difference betwixt Saul and the rest of the people is not to be sought for in
his natural principles, or essential properties: but either in the Ornaments
of his Body, or in the endowments and accomplishments of his mind, or in both.

ornaments of his body, there was none like him among all the children of
Israel, for he was a goodly person, and from his shoulders upward higher then
any of the people.

It pleased the wisdom of God to make choice of such an one for his first
King, that the eminence of his stature, and procerity of his person might
speak him Dignum imperio, and conciliate reverence, and obedience from the
people. Xenophon reports of the Lacedaemonians that they fined their King
Archidamus because he married a little woman, fearing least they should have
(...), not Kings but Kinglings; which might prove a blemish to their State, and
a diminution to Majesty.

When Samuel was sent to anoint one of the sons of Iesse, no sooner did he see
Eliab the eldest, but he concluded that the Lords anointed was before him, and
the reason was, because he looked upon his countenance, and the height of his
stature.

Pliny reports of the Bees, Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 16, 17. Insignis regis
forma est, dissimilisque caeter is tum magnitudine, tum nitore. Sen. l. 1. de
clement. cap. 19.
that esse utique sine Rege non possunt, they cannot be without a King: yet the
Be which they choose is duplo caeter is major, twice as big as any of the
other.

Or it may be God made choice of such an one, that the eminency of his stature
might be an Emblem of the sovereignty and supremacy of his office. Kings in
the Scripture are called the Higher powers, the Heads of the Tribes, the
children of the most High, the high Hills, and tall Cedars. A King (says
Tertull:) is a Deo primus, post Deum secundus: count not God, and he is the
first; count God, and he is the second. Honor the King (says Ignat:) for
there is nothing more great, Ep. ad Smyrn.
or excellent (...), in all created nature.

So then the Priest, yea though he be the High Priest must not measure with the
King, or think to hold up his head as high as his Sovereign. Abimelech was
High Priest, 1 Samuel 22.15.
yet confesses himself twice in one verse to be Saul's servant. Abiathar was
high Priest, yet Solomon deposed him, and invested Zadok with his office. To
see a Bishop tread upon the neck of an Emperor, and mount his Steed whilst a
King holds his stirrup, are as prodigious and portentuous spectacles as the
Eclypses of the great Luminaries of heaven.

S. Bernard writing to an Archbishop in France, Siomnis anima, and vestra: quis
ves excepit ab universit te? si quis tentat excipere, tentat decipare. Bern.
Epist. 42. Acts 25.10.
presses him with omnis anima, let every soul be subject, and if every soul,
then yours, for he that goes about to exempt you, does but deceive you.

S. Paul that great Doctor of the Gentiles stands at Caesar's Judgment seat,
where (...), I ought (says he) to be judged, and submit my self to his
sentence.

Nay, Christ himself, the High Priest of our profession, and great Bishop of
our souls paid tribute unto Caesar, and acknowledged the power of Pilate a
subordinate Minister to be given from Heaven.

And surely if the Doctrine of the Conclave which advances the Miter above the
Crown be new and naught: that of the Consistory cannot be good, for it
advances the Thistle above the Cedar, the people above the Prince, witness
these, and the like dangerous and seditious positions. Populus Rege est
praestantior, and melior, the people are better than the King, Lib de jure
regni.
and of greater authority. The collective body has the same power over the
King, that the King has over any one person. The people may arraigne their
Prince, and the Ministers excommunicate him; so far Buchanan. And another of
the same stamp affirms that the power of the people over the King, is the same
that the power of a general Council is over the Pope, and as the Council may
displace the one if he be an Heretic, so the people may depose the other if
he be a Tyrant And a Tyrant he is (says another of them) if he hinder the
bringing in of their discipline.
. Thus Herod and Pilate, mortal enemies, become sworn brothers in persecuting
the Lords anointed, and like Sampsons foxes though they look contrary ways,
yet are joined by the tails, and both carry the firebrands of sedition. But
return we again to Saul who was not so eminent for the stature of his body,
as he was for the gifts, and accomplishments of his mind, for in this respect
also there was none like him among all the people.

vulgar latin reads it non erat vir melior illo, there was not a better then
he among all the children of Israel. A Senuisti, was objected against Samuel, a
David as yet was too young to come into competition with him. Or as Abulen:
satisfies the doubt, persona loquens intelligitur excepta, the person speaking
which was Samuel, must be excepted from the comparison.

When our Savior Christ gave this honorable testimony of John the Baptist,
that among them that were born of women there was not a greater then he, it is
manifest that Christ himself was excepted, for John was not worthy to loose the
latchet of his shoe.

The ordinary gloss says that Saul at the time of his election was in statu
praesentis justitiae, in the state of present righteousness. Lyra says that
he was not only vir bonus, but excellentis bonitatis, a good man, but of
excellent, and exemplary goodness. S. Bernard speaking of perseverance says
that bonus erat Saul, and optimus: sed cecidit, and reprobus factus est, Saul
was a good man, yea the best in Israel, but he fell away and became a reprobate.

As for humility, the Scripture gives him this testimony, that he was parvulus
in oculis suis, little in his own eyes. And magna and rara virtus honorata
humilitas, humility in robes is a rare and admirable virtue.

As for piety, no sooner was he invested with the Kingdom but he accompanies
Samuel unto Gilgal, and there sacrifices peace offerings unto the Lord. And so
zealous was he of the Law of God that he would not suffer a witch to live.

As for Clemency, he would not suffer those sons of Belial to be put to death
who despised him in their hearts, and said, shall Saul reign over us?

This was Saul; but to resume the words of S. Bernard, Cecidit, cecidit, he
fell, he fell: His humility degenerated into pride: his piety into
profaneness, his clemency into cruelty, for he that spared the sons of Belial,
did not spare the Priests of the Lord. Let him therefore that stands take
heed left he fall, and whosoever thou art, work out thy salvation with fear
and trembling, and be not high-minded but fear. Look upon Saul in the New
Testament, and thou will not despair; look upon Saul in the Old Testament,
and thou will not presume: The one of the chiefest sinner became a Saint, and
the other of the best man in Israel became a reprobate. And so we discharge the
first circumstance, the ground and occasion of their joy, they had a King, and
such a King as both in respect of the ornaments of his body, and the indowments
of his mind there was none like him among all the people, and come to the
second circumstance, which is the greatness and vehemence of their joy, they
shouted. And all the people shouted, and said, God save the King.

laughing, so did Sarahs joy at the tidings of a Son; sometimes into singing,
so did the Angels joy at the birth of our Savior; sometimes into shouting, so
did the peoples joy at the inauguration of their King, and this of all other is
the loudest, and shrillest accent of jubilation. 1 King. 1.40.
At the Coronation of King Solomon the people rejoiced with great joy, so that
the earth (says the Text) rent with the sound of them.

It fares with Kings as with all other blessings, carende magis quam fruendo,
their worth and excellency is better known by wanting, then having them.

We read in the book of Judges that there was no King in Israel, and how went
the squares then? why every man did that which was right in his own eyes. And
what was that? Micah a private man sets up an Idol, and consecrates a Priest.
Gibeah a City ravishes a woman to death. Dan a Tribe falls to robbing of houses,
and cutting of Throats. Families, Cities, and Tribes all out of course, and no
soundness at all in the body politic.

The cause of all which disorder was the want of some body: Not of a Priest to
teach them, but of a King to govern them. A Priest there was in Israel, but a
King there was not, and hence it was that every one did that which was right in
his own eyes, and no body did that which was right in Gods eyes.

God be thanked, a bad King is a Thing which the oldest man here cannot
remember, yet let me tell you that Tyranny is rather to be chosen then
Anarchie, and praestat sub malo principe esse quam nullo, better a bad King
then no King at all, says Tacitus. Better it is to fear one then many, better
one Lion, then all the Bears, and Bores, and wild beasts of the Forest. If
the Trees cannot prevail with the Vine, or Olive to be their King, yet a King
they will have though it be but the Bramble. I gave them says God a King in my
anger, and took him away in my wrath. A bad King is the testimony of Gods
anger, but no King at all an argument of his wrath, and indignation; and wrath
is the dregs, and lees of the cup, anger but the top of it.

So then, the greatness of the evil which redounds to a Nation by the want of
a King, sufficiently commends the greatness of the blessing, and great
blessings must be entertained with suitable affections. It was truly said of
Balaam a false Prophet, that the shout of a King was amongst them, for all
other expressions are too low, and flat for it.

But these latter times have produced a generation of Vipers called
Anabaptists, who instead of rejoicing in their King, rail at him, and their
devise is only how they may cast him down whom God has exalted: for they
affirm as impudently, as ignorantly, that Christian liberty makes the office
of a Magistrate utterly unlawful, and Evangelical perfection makes it
altogether useless and superfluous: and if it be unlawful it is not a
blessing, but a curse; if useless, not a benefit, but a burden.

There is I confess a glorious privilege purchased for us by the death of
Christ, which we call Christian liberty, but it consists only in a freedom
from the ceremonies, the curse, and rigor of the Law, the power of Satan, and
dominion of sin; not in a freedom from the Doctrine and Obedience of the
Moral Law, or the yoke of lawful authority, Civil, or Ecclesiastical. For
they that so understand it, and apply it (says S. Peter) use their liberty for
a cloak of maliciousness. And S. Paul tells us that though we be called to
liberty, Gol. 5.13.
yet we must not use our liberty for an occasion to the flesh.

As for Evangelicall perfection, in their sense it is but an Idea, a dream, a
mere chimaera. For good and bad, wheat and chafe are mingled together in the
floor, and sic fuit ab initio, thus it was from the beginning, and thus it
will be unto the end, till Christ come with his fan in his hand and thoroughly
purge his floor. They that are good are but imperfectly good, and so long as
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the law of the members fights against
the law of the mind, offenses must needs come; and Christians may do things
punishable by the civil Magistrate. Moses the Magistrate of Gods own people
had need have a rod in his hand, and he shall meet with those in the
congregation that deserve to be beat with it: Else S. Paul had said in vain
(writing to Christians) si male egeris, if thou do that which is evil be
afraid. And S. Peter's exhortation had been to no purpose; 1. Pet. 4.17.
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or
as a busie-body in other men's matters.

Sergius Paulus when he was converted to the Faith; did not abjure his
authority as a thing Antichristian. Cornelius was made a Christian, yet ceased
not to be a Centurion. The Eunuch was baptized, yet did not relinquish his
office and authority under the Queen of the Aethiopians Christ and Caesar may
dwell together; we may give unto God the things that are Gods, and yet give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; we may fear God, and yet honor the
King; and as they sinned that said we will have no King but Caesar, so do they
also that say, we will have no King but Christ, no law but that of the Spirit.
And therefore S. Peter has marked those out to be chiefly reserved to the day
of Judgment to be punished, 1 Pet. 2.10.
who despise so great a blessing as Government.

For Non minor est usus Magistratus quam panis, aquae, solis, and aeris;
Magistracy is no less needful and necessary amongst men then bread and water,
the sun and the air, says M. Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.
All which are blessings so great, and general, that men cannot live without
them but by Miracle, which brings me to the third circumstance, the generality
and universality of their joy, All shouted.

commune bonum, a common good; and good the more common it is, the better it
is; and the better it is the more joy it occasions. The Magistrate (says S.
Paul) is the Minister of God to thee for good, to thee whosoever thou art. To
thee Nobleman, to thee Churchman, to thee Gentleman, to thee Tradesman, to thee
Husbandman, to thee Merchant, to thee Mariner.

Seneca tells Nero, Anima Reipublicae tu es, Lib. 1. de Clem.
illa corpus tuum; thou art the soul of the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth
is thy Body. Now the soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, whole
in the whole body, and whole in every part of it: Even so the King inanimates
and informs the whole collective body of the people, and every particular man
of it, of what degree, quality, or profession soever, so that to say we have
no part in David is the voice of a rebel; for young men and maids, old men and
children have all a part in him, and profit by him.

Again, as a King is the soul, so also he is the Sun of the Commonwealth,
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 89.36.
His Throne shall be as the Sun. The Sun is Sponsus naturae, the beauty and
Bridegroom of Nature, appointed by God to rule the Day, and it runs from one
end of the Heavens unto the other, so that nothing is hid from the heat and
light of it, but every creature from the Cedar to the Shrub receives benign
and propitious influences from it: so a King (as before I told you) is Decus
Israelis, the beauty of Israel, the supreme Magistrate, the effects and
influences of whose government, as peace, justice, and religion extend over the
whole Kingdom, and reach from Dan even to Beersheba, from Aarons head to the
skirts of his clothing; so that high and low, rich and poor, one with
another, and all together owe their been esse unto him.

And for this cause (it may be) amongst many others, Kings were of old Crowned
near some Fountain, because they are Fountains and common blessings, the
streams of whose government do glad the City of God, and refresh his
inheritance. For Rogis vigilia omnium domos, illius labor omnium etia, illius
industria omnium delicias, illius occupatio omnium vacationem tuetur, When the
King watches we may all sleep, when he labors we may all rest, his Term is
our Vacation, and when he works every man may keep holy day.

And now when I look upon this congregation of Israel, I cannot but break out
into the words of the Psalmist, Ecce quam bonum, and quam jucundum, behold how
good and pleasant a thing it was to see so many men of one mind, and one
mouth! for all shouted, and all said the same thing, Gaudium omnium gaudium
singulorum, and gaudium singulorum gaudium omnium. The joy of all was the joy
of every one, and the joy of every one the joy of all. Thus it is in heaven,
and thus it was here, and I would to God it was thus in all places.

But oh the strife of tongues! Oh the great thoughts and divisions of heart
that are amongst us! Contempt of Authority is become the character of a
Christian, the cognizance of a sincere professor; libelling and speaking evil
of dignities the language and dialect of God people; preaching Obedience to the
Magistrate civil, and Ecclesiastical, is interpreted down right flattery,
and gaping after preferment. Prejudice and faction has so shuffled and
confounded all things, that a man can come into no parish, nor congregation but
he shall find some Mutes, some but half Vowels, some not doing their duty at
all, others doing it so faintly, that a man may perceive their hearts are not
right in this matter.

Well fare this Congregation of Israel, Men's omnibus una, and vox omnibus una,
they were all of one mind, and one mouth; they all thought the same thing, and
spoke the same thing; every one in the Quire was a loud Cymball, for all
shouted; and a well tuned Cymball too, for all prayed; which brings me to the
second part of the Text; the Vote and Apprecation of the people: And all the
people, etc.

First, I exhort (says the Apostle) that supplications, and prayers, and
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, and first for Kings,
and such as be in Authority. And what manner of Kings were there in those
days? Idolaters, Infidels, Tyrants, Persecutors, those of whom David long
before had prophesied; Psalm. 2.2.
The Kings of the earth have set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
against the Lord, and his anointed. Nero the Roman Emperor, and supreme
Magistrate was a Lion, so S. Paul calls him; he was Dedicator damnationis
nostrae, the first that drew out the sword of persecution, so Tertull. He was
so profligately, and desperately wicked and tyrannical, that many thought he
should rise again, Lib. 20. de civ. Dei cap. 19.
and be that Antichrist and man of sin which was to be revealed, so S. August.
and yet as bad as he was, S. Paul enjoynes prayers for him, and so does S.
Peter for the Emperor Claudius one not much better. For Suetonius reports of
him that he was so merciless, and given to bloodshed that he would have
tortures, and punishments executed in his own presence, and delighted to look
upon the faces of Fencers as they lay gasping, and yielding up their last
breath; besides he was a man inordinately given to the wanton love of women;
yet for all this the Christians of those times must honor him. And this these
blessed Apostles did not to curry favor with the Emperors, or to flatter
themselves into preferment, but to copy out their Masters lesson, and to show
that they were his Disciples, who said, Pray for them that persecute you. And
that this was the constant practice of the Primitive Church, Justin Martyr in
his Apol. 2. Origin in his 8. book cont. Celsum. Arnob. in his 3. book cont.
Gentes. Tertull. in his Apol. 30. besides the ancient Liturgies, are my
witnesses.

Of all Christian duties Prayer is the best; the Apostle has given it the
chief seat, and set it at the upper end of the Table. And of all kind of
prayers Intercession is the best; for necessity (says Chrysostom:) enforces us
to pray for our selves, but charity invites us to pray for others. And charity
is that which gives a tincture, and relish to all our prayers, for without it
the tongues of men and Angels are but as sounding brass, and a tinkling
Cymball. And surely the best kind of Intercession is that which is made for
the best, namely, for Kings, and such as be in Authority. Hence is it that our
Mother the Church of England is so copious in it. For in her Liturgy she
prays for the King four or five several times, and yet I dare say commits no
Tautologie, or idle repetition. For his several capacities as a man, as a
Christian, as a Magistrate, as the Supreme Magistrate, upon whom lies the care
of the Church and Commonwealth, require it of us. Those then that do curtaile
divine Service as Hanun did the garments of David's Ambassadors, and use the
prayers of the Church as a noise of Music at a Play to entertain the company
till the Actors be ready, are not only disobedient to the Church in not
observing her order, but injurious also to the King in depriving him of the
benefit of those prayers which the Church has appointed for him. And this is
no small injury, for Preces subditorum vires Regum, the prayers of the people
are the power of the King: Kings are the heads of the people, but the prayers
of the people are those locks of hair wherein their strength principally
consists.

Sure I am that none stand so much in need of prayers as Kings, and such as be
in Authority. For such is the weight and multitude of their employments; that
many times they cannot pray for themselves. Well might S. Ambrose wonder at
David's septies in die, seven times a day do I praise thee, and make this
inference upon it: Si David septies regni licet necessitatibus occupatus, etc.
If David notwithstanding the affairs of a Kingdom could do it seven times,
private men may do it seaventy times seven.

But besides this, Kings and such as are in Authority are most assaulted with
temptations. That which Christ said of his Disciples is true of Kings, Satanas
appetiit vos, Satan desires to have you, and like the King of Syria bends his
power especially against the King of Israel. So that were it not that cor Regis
in manu Domini, the heart of the King was in the hands of the Lord, I should
wonder with S. Chrysostom if any of the Rulers could be saved. For the devil
opens his envenomed Quiver, and shootes all his fiery darts at such persons, as
well knowing that Regis ad exemplum, the example of a King brings vice into
fashion, and gangrenes the whole body. For says Siracides, Eccles. 10.2.
As the Judge of the people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner
of man the Ruler of the City is, such are they that dwell therein. For the
people like Jacobs sheep conceive by the eye, and like the inferior Orbs
follow the motion of the primum mobile, contrary to their own natural
inclinations. If Jeroboam sin he makes Israel sin too, and if he set up Calves
at Dan and Bethel, all Israel will be such Calves as to go up and worship them.

But suppose Kings stood not in need of our prayers, yet sure I am we our
selves stand in need to pray for them, for as Jacobs life was bound up in the
life of Benjamin, so is the good of the subject in the prosperity of the
Prince. Hence the Jews were commanded to pray for the life of Nebuchadnezzar,
and the peace of Babylon, because in the peace thereof they should have peace.
And S. Paul exhorting us to pray for Kings and such as be in Authority, draws
his motive ab utili, for by this means we shall live a quiet and a peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty. Kings and Queens are nursing Fathers, and
nursing Mothers, and if the nurse be ill, the child that suckes the breast
cannot thrive and prosper. Nay the Lords anointed is Spiramentum nariam, Lam.
4.20.
the breath of our nostrils; stop and extinguish that, and death ensues
immediately. So that in praying for Kings we pray for our selves, our prayers
return into our own bosoms, for the blessings powered upon them like the
ointment powered on the head of Aaron stays not there, but runs down to the
beard, yea to the very skirts of the clothing. Or as the rain falls first
upon the hills, but stays not there, but descends into the valleys from whose
vapors at first it was engendered. When the sons of Jacob went into Egypt to
fetch corn for their Father, did they not fetch it for themselves and their
Families? When the members of the body feed the belly, do they not feed
themselves, and provide for their own nourishment? When we pray for the King,
what do we else but pray for our selves, and provide for the welfare of our
own Families and posterities, for under his shadow we live, and like the ivy
cannot grow without his supportance? Acts 12.20.
So that as they of Tire and Sidon saw a necessity of making a peace with King
Herod because their Country was nourished by the Kings Country: So a
necessity of praying for the King lies upon every one of us, not only because
Dominus opus habet; but because we our selves have need of it, for our welfare
is nourished by the Kings welfare, our honor by the Kings honor, our peace by
the Kings peace, our safety by the Kings safety, and therefore God save the
King, which is the Form of their prayer, and the last circumstance in the
Text. And all the people shouted, and said, God save the King.

2. Pineda observes that it was the custom of all Nations at the inauguration
of their Kings, Lib. 2. de reb. Salom. cap. 6.
to use solemn Apprecations, boni ominis ergo. As sometimes foeliciter,
sometimes De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos. Sometimes Augusto
foelicior, Trajano probior. Sometimes Dii te servent, and the like: all which
(says he) were doubtless derived from this sacred and ancient form in the
Text, Vivat Rex, let the King live, for so it is in the Hebrew, and the
Septuagint renders it, (...), and our old English Bible reads it, God lend the
King life; and no form of Apprecation more full, or fit then this. For the
blessing of life, is the life of all blessings, it being the foundation of
whatsoever we have or hope for. Hence pellem pro pelle, skin for skin, and all
that ever a man has will he give for his life, and a living dog is better then
a dead Lion.

And as none more full, so none more fit; for Vita omnium brevis, Regum
plerumque brevissima, the lives of all men are short, but the lives of Kings
for the most part shortest. It was a King that complained, My soul is
continually in my hands; Psalm. 119.109.
and in another place, Fear is on every side, for they take counsel together
against me, and devise how they may take away my life. Darius did wisely to
allow money for the building of the Temple, Ezra 6.9, 10.
and bullockes and rams for the burnt offerings, that so the Jews might offer
sacrifices of sweet savor unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the
King, and of his sons. If we reflect and look back upon former ages, we shall
find Shimeis and Shebai, Absaloms and Achitophels, Tereshes, and Bigthans, all
sons of Belial flying in the face of sacred Majesty, and seeking to lay violent
hands upon the Lords Anointed. And howsoever these spirits were once well laid,
and walked not in the Primitive Church, yet in these latter times they have
been conjured up by the seditious Doctrine of the Jesuits, and are become
familiar spirits in all parts of Christendom. Haec est salutaris meditatio
says Mariana, this is a wholesome meditation for Kings next their heart, to
think, se ea condition vivere, that they live in that case and condition, ut
non solum jure, sed cum laud and gloria perimi possint, that they may not only
be slain lawfully, but to the praise and glory of them that do it. And I
would to God this was the doctrine of the Jesuits only, for we know the men,
and we know their communication; but this leaven has spread further, and even
sowred them that take upon them to be reformers of the reformed Churches. And
whereas Mariana says it may be done cum laud, Buchanan goes further, and
would have it done cum praemio too. For if I (says he) had power to make a
law, I would award recompense to be given for killing of Tyrants, as men use to
reward them for their pains who kill wolves or bears, and destroy their young
ones. Surely (beloved) this Doctrine deserves to be the Inprimis in the black
Catalogue of the Doctrine of the devils, it is the doctrine of Beelzebub the
Prince of devils, it is the bane of men's souls, the blemish of Christian
religion, and the breach of all common tranquillity. And is it not high time to
pray for the lives of Kings, when ambition, envy, faction, and all
discontented humors are thus clapped on the back, and set on to offer violence to
their persons whom God would have accounted sacred and inviolable, and has
therefore hedged them in as he did the Tree in the Garden, with a nolite
tangere, touch them not? Saul was a barbarous Tyrant, for he hunted the life,
and sought after the soul of David who was most faithful among all his
servants; he commanded Doeg to fall upon the Priests of the Lord, and to slay
fourscore and five persons which did wear a linen Ephod; and not satisfied
therewith, commands him further to smite Nob the City of the Priests, both man
and woman, child and suckling, ox and ass with the edge of the sword.
Besides, he neglected the care of Gods public Worship and Service, for the
Ark of God was not enquired at in the days of Saul; besides he was rejected
of God, and traditus Satanae, delivered into the actual possession of the
devil; yet notwithstanding all this, yea notwithstanding a concurrence of all
desirable circumstances of opportunity, yea, notwithstanding David was the man
that was anointed by Samuel, and appointed by God to the Kingdom, yet he
durst not lay his hands upon the Lords anointed, but reverenced the Unction,
and spared his enemy, saying, Who can lay hands upon the Lords anointed and be
guiltless?

Rodolph Duke of Suevia endeavoring to take away the Empire from Henry the
Fourth, whom Hildebrand had excommunicated, lost his right hand in the battle,
and being ready to breath out his distressed soul, looking on the stumpe of
his arm and fetching a deep sigh, he said to the Bishops that were about him,
behold this is the hand wherewith I did swear allegiance to my Sovereign Lord
Henry. And therefore Vivat Rex, let the King live, be he an Infidel, an
Heretic, a Tyrant, an Apostate, a Persecutor, or deposed and excommunicate by
the Pope, for none of all these can unloose the bonds of allegiance, evacuate
Gods ordinance, or cut in sunder the sinews of the subjects obedience.

But because, Mart.
as the Poet says truly, Nonest vivere, sed valere, vita; this apprecation
must reach further than a bare life, and simple subsistence; namely, to the
health of his body, the quiet of his mind, the prosperity of his affairs, the
success of his government, the victory of his Armies: and the Hebrew word is
of that latitude to bear it, and the Caldee paraphrases it, Let the King live,
i.e. Sit Rex foelix, cedant omnia regi foeliciter, Let the King live happy, let
all things succeed fortunately, and whatsoever he does let it prosper. Then
Solomon lived indeed when he sat not only in the Throne of God, 1 Chronicles. 29.23
as King in stead of David his Father, but prospered, and all Israel obeyed
him. Apolog. 30.
And Tertullian is my witness, that the Primitive Christians prayed not only
for the life of the Emperor, but for his happiness and prosperity also. His
words are these; we wish the Emperor a long life, a secure Empire, valiant
armies, a faithful Council, a loyal people, a quiet government; Et
quaecunque Hominis and Caesaris vota sunt; whatsoever good things else, either
Man or Caesar can desire. And who was this Emperor for whom they thus prayed?
It was Severus, for in his time (says St. Jerome) Tertullian flourirished; and
Severus was an Infidel, a Tyrant, and the author of the fifth persecution, and
yet they wish him prosperity in the name of the Lord. And if it was thus done
for the dry tree, what shall be done for the green? if thus for the bramble,
what for the Olive? if thus for persecutors of the Faith, what for the
defendors of it? O pray for the peace and prosperity of such, they shall
prosper that do it. Pity it is but that man's tongue should for ever cleave
unto the roose of his mouth, that lives under a gracious and religious
government, and yet says not so much as, God save the King, and so our last
translation renders it, and departs not from the original, for the Septuagint
in several places renders the Hebrew word by (...), which signifies to save.

There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an host. I will not
trust in my how, neither shall my sword save me says King David. Salvation
belongs unto the Lord, he alone is the Master of the Salvation Office; I am,
and besides me there is no Savior. And therefore the people did well to
address their devotions to the God of Israel, for the King of Israel. For his
arm of protection cannot wither, nor his wings of salvation molt their
feathers. Besides, it is the observation of Josephus upon a danger which Titus
escaped when he came to view the City of Jerusalem, Imperatorum pericula Deum
curare, De Bell. Jud. lib. 6. cap. 2.
that God takes the persons and perils of Princes into his special care and
cognizance. To God then they go, and they go for that which of all other
things is most behoofefull, safety and salvation.

There is a twofold salvation; one of the soul, the other of the body; one
from sin, the other from danger; and Kings stand in need of the first as
well as others, and of the second more then others, so that salvation is that
Vnu^ necessarium, that one and only thing which is necessary for them.

Oves perditae, lost sheep, the sin of our first parents was commune
naufragium, an universal shipwreck: for in Adam all sinned, yea the blessed
virgin her self, for her soul rejoiced in God her Savior. Now howsoever
Kings in respect of Office, as they are Filii altissimi, the sons of the most
High are Transcendents: yet in respect of Nature, as they are Filii Adam,
sons of men, they are in the same predicament with others, i. e. sinners. So
that without salvation, Tophet is ordained of old, and prepared for the King,
as well as for the people.

Foes abroad, and Traitors at home. There be enemies to do them violence, and
sons of wickedness to hurt them. Hence is it that they walk in danger, eat
in danger, sleep in danger. Solomon's bed must have threescore valiant men
about it, Cant. 3.7, 8.
of the valiant of Israel, every man having his sword girt upon his thigh for
fear in the night; and surely it is the mercy of the most High that they do
not miscarry; so that nothing so fit for them as salvation, without which their
lives will be trodden down, and their Honor laid in the dust. Which our Church
rightly understanding, uses this Suffrage in her Liturgy, O Lord save the King.
And again, in the prayer for the state of Christ's Church militant here on
earth, prays in this manner; We beseech thee also to save and defend all
Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors, and especially thy servant Charles
our King; and now that we are come to him, we are come to the business of the
day: and as you have lent me your patience hitherto for a Survey of my text, so
the Kings name may command it a little longer for a review, and application,
which I shall dispatch with all convenient brevitie, and so dismiss you.

No sooner was our Sun set in the death of King James of blessed memory, but
it rose again in the happy inauguration of King Charles, so that no night
followed, for Regem habemus, a King we have, and such a one as the like is not
among the people, nay such an one I dare say as the like is not among the Kings
of the earth; whether we respect the beauty of his person, or the graces of his
foul: God has blessed him with a strong and healthful constitution, a comely
and Majesticall presence, an active and a vigorous body; and yet this is is but
the Cabinet, the jewels that are locked up in it are of inestimable value.

As for his Humility, you may read it in his apparel, especially in the
passages of these times, wherein he has condescended as low to accommodate
causlesse discontentments, and to remove offenses taken, not given, as the
respects of Majesty would well suffer.

As for his Piety, I challenge envy and malice it self to speak their worst.
Is he not constant to his devotions, and reverent in them? Has he desired or
endeavored any thing more then a Conformity and Uniformity in Gods Service,
that there might be but via una, and cor unum, one way, and so one heart? Has
he not been zealous of the glory of God, and the public places of his worship?
If I should hold my peace, these stones would speak, I mean the stones that
are brought to this Temple, to beautify and vindicate it from a long and
intolerable profanation.

As for his Clemency, do we not all sit under our own Vines, and cate the
fruit of them without any trembling, or palpitation, lest we should be arrested
with the message of death or confiscation? Has he inflicted any punishments
but such, as the offense impartially considered, mercy it self might have
been both the Judge and Executioner? Or to express it in his own royal
language; Has he not now for a long time together endeavored by all calm and
fair ways to appease the disorders, and tumultuous carriages, raised by some
evil affected persons, and fomented by some factious and turbulent spirits?
and now that his patience is abused, and the sword in his hand, does he not
call God and the world to witness that he is forced and constrained thereto? A
King then we have, and such a King as this, show me a better among the people.
I may say of him and the people, as the Epigrammatist does of Trajane and the
Senate; Mart. lib. 11. Epig. 5.
Moribus hic viv at principis, ille suis: Let them live after his manners, and
he after his own. And if it be thus, how much are they to blame, who (though
rebus sic stantibus, they dare not rail at the King as Shimei did, or throw
stones at him) yet in their Sermons, Conferences, Libels, and Pamphlets they
mis-interpret his actions, for his piety with them is Popery and Innovation,
his clemency with them is cruelty and persecution. And thus the people are
brought into a dislike and detestation of the present government, and both the
Person and Authority of the King cunningly undermined. If the Serpent can but
buzze a jealousy and suspicion into the heads of our first Parents that God
envies their happiness, the Apple will go down without chewing. If Absalom
can possess the people that justice is not administered, nor matters well
carried, it is an easy matter to steal away their hearts from their
Allegiance to his Father. And well it is that the holy Ghost gives it no better
a title then stealth, for it is a theft of the highest nature; they rob not a
private man, but a King; and that not of his Plate, his Jewels, or apparel,
but of the ^ts of the people, and consequently they rob him of the Arms of his
people, of the purses of his people, of the prayers of his people, and make him
as much as in them lies Lodovicus ^i^, Jews no body.
as sometimes an Emperor of Germany was called; and for this stealth was
Absalom justly and deservedly hanged. And Solomon copied out this lesson from
his ruin; My son, sear God, Prove. 24.22, 22.
and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their
calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ^ of them both? Let as then,
seeing we have a King, rejoice in him; and seeing we have such a King as the
like is not, rejoice, yea I say againt rejoice. Let our joy be as great, and as
full as we can make it. For the blessing is great, and ought to be celebrated
with as great solemnity as is possible.

And that our joy may not be as the crackling of thorns under a pot, but long
and lasting; let us not only rejoice in him, but pray for him. Pray for his
life, Vivat Rex, let the King live; Let the soul of our Lord be bound up in
the bandie of life; 1 Samuel 25.29.
but as for the souls of his enemies, sting them out O God, as out of the
middle of a sting. Prolong O God the Kings life, Psalm. 61.6, 7.
and his years as many generations; Let him abide before thee for ever: O
prepare thy loving mercy, and faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

And as for his life, so pray also for his prosperity. Sit Rex f^lix, let the
King prosper and flourish. Give him O Lord the desire of his heart, and deny
him not the request of his lips; prevent him with the blessings of goodness
and set a crown of pure gold upon his head: Let his glory be great in thy
salvation. Honor and Majesty do them lay upon him: Psalm. 2.^.
give him everlasting felicity, and make him glad with the joy of thy
co^enance. As for his enemies, Psalm. 132.18.
clothe them with shame, but upon himself let his Crown flourish. Good ^ke
have be with his honor, and let him ride on prosperously, that they that hate
him may bow before him, and lick up the ^st of his fe^e.

And because both these depends upon the safety of his Person; Let us pray
also, Domine salvum fac Regem, God save the King. And never was this prayer
more seasonable, for Lord how are they increased that trouble him, many they
are that rise up against him! They that have eaten of his bread, have lift up
their heels against him: Psalm. 83.2.5.
His enemies make a tumult, and they that hate him have lift up their heads,
they have consulted together against him with one consent, and are confederate
(or, as the word signifies) entered into Covenant against him. Be thou therefore
O Lord a shield for him, Psalm. 3.3.
his glory and the lifter up of his head: Psalm. 20.1.2.
Hear him O Lord in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
him; send him help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Zion. Psalm.
91.4.
Defend him under thy wings, and let him be safe under thy feathers, let thy
faithfulness and truth be his shield, and buckler. Psalm. 121.7, 8.
Preserve him from all evil, preserve his going out and his coming in from
this time forth, and even for evermore.

But as for his enemies, destroy them O God, let them fall by their own
counsels; cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have
rebelled against him. Psalm. 3.10.
Let them melt and consume away as the fat of Lambs. Psalm. 83. Deuteronomy. 33.11.
Make them as a wheel, and as the stubble before the wind. Smite thor^w the
loins of them that rise against him, that they rise not again. Beat down his
foes before his face, and plague them that hate him, and let him see his desire
upon his enemies. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture will give thee
thanks for ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

THO: WYKES.
March 28. 1639.

