TWO TREATISES: The first, OF THE LIVES OF THE POPES, AND THEIR DOCTRINE.

The second, OF THE MASS: THE ONE and the other collected of that, which the
Doctors, and ancient Councels, and the sacred Scripture do teach.

Also, A Swarm of false Miracles, wherewith Marie de la Visitacion, Prioresse
de la Annuntiada of Lisbon, deceived very many: and how she was discovered, and
condemned.

Revelation 17. 1.

Come, and I will show thee the condemnation af the great Whore, which fitteth
upon many waters. And verse. 15. The waters which thou saw, where the Whore
sits, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

The second edition in Spanish augmented by the Author himself, M. Cyprian
Valera, and translated into English by John Golburne. 1600.

Printed at London by John Harison, and are to be sold at the Greyhound in
Pater noster row. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON, KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF the great
Seal of England, Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester, and of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Council: I. G. wishes all health, increase of
honor, and everlasting happiness.
SOlons law to the Athenians (right Honorable) adiuged him to die, and unworthy
to live, that in time of civil garboyles, as careless of the weal public,
withdrew himself and became a neuter. Which law, albeit proceeding from a
Pagan, yet holding affinity with holy writ, I cannot but approve, and wish the
same were also of force among Christians. Professed Christians I mean, which
(in these factious broils in the common wealth of Israel, wherein Religion
seems to be rent (as it were) in two, each part challenging the truth as his
own proper, whereas but one Truth there is, and the same indivisible) are
either careless and negligent in the Lords work, and so accursed: or else
become lukewarm, awaiting only occasion to run with the stream, and
cleave to time and stronger part for their better safety. Both which, as
abominable to God, are to be spued out of his sacred mouth: and to be shunned
of men as the Apostle wills. Since hated then of God, and detested of men, I
conculde with Solon, such Foxes not worthy to live among Christians, and would
God they were cut off from destroying the Lords vineyard. The consideration
whereof, and that my self (albeit simple and most unworthy of many thousands,
secluded from the world, and cut off from the society of men, or means of
employment to benefit (as of right it claims) my native country) am also a
member of this Christian common wealth: has made me charie to be taxed with
the guilt of like crime: and careful to avoid the note of both the one and the
other, pricked therefore with the spur of duty, zeal, and hearty desire to
good the Region, wherein I first took breath (though little careful of my
good) to the utmost stretch of my poor ability, I bring here my endeavor, and
translation into our vulgar tongue, for the help and instruction of the
simple. The due commendations of the Author and Subject far exceeds my
reach, and therefore do leave them to the censure of the learned. And taught by
long experience, your Lordships godly zeal for the advancement of true
religion and due execution of justice (the having or wanting whereof, is the
glory and surety, or maime and ruin of all sttates and kingdoms) and seeing
your Lordship by divine goodness placed, and by Regal power deputed in this
self same commonwealth, for a light unto others, and a Shepherd to feed the
people with justice and judgment. These (my good Lord) with the worthiness of
the work, best beseeming so worthy a Patron, together with humble
acknowledgment of duty to your Lordship have caused me make choice of your
honorable self, the better emboldened thereunto by your good acceptance of my
former book. And so I humbly commend this my travel to your like view and
protection: not doubting but your Lordship, after your wonted honorable
disposition will vouchsafe to take in worth my simple present, and pardon my
presumption proceeding from an affectionate desire to do your honor service,
whereunto before all men, I acknowledge my self bounden, and my daily study
shall be employed: I beseech the eternal Deity, to increase his graces in your
Lordship, that his glory may more thereby appear, and multiply your days as
the days of heaven, to pull the pray from the Spoylers jaws, and relieve the
oppressed. And so in all humility I take leave. Fleet my miserable prison
this 24. of October. 1600,

Your Lordships most bounden in all affectionate duty. JOHN GOLBVRNE.

The Translator to the Reader.
I Have pained my self (gentle Reader) to do thee pleasure, and therefore
crave but that courtesy of thee, which in common right is my due: namely, thy
good conceit and favorable censure of my travel: which albeit not pollished
with finenesse of phrase yet it is beautified with truth of matter, as God gave
ability, my small knowledge in the tongue, and the misery of the place
aforded. If any will charge me with folly and presumption in attempting this
translation, better beseeming some of riper judgment. I grant there is cause:
yet thou forward taxer of faults, in others, why do thou not rather judge
and condemn thy self? that having a better talent, have worse employed it, nay
have buried the same: and in ten years space since this worthy work was
first published, have not bettered thy country by thy pains taking, nor
benefited others by translating it thy self. For my part, I hold it fitter,
that the body rather brook a mean repast then starve for want of food: And
had rather my rash ignorance should be published in print, and so noted of thee
(for of better minds I expect better thoughts) then that so heavenly a light of
Christian knowledge, should rest obscured in the mysty darkness of a strange
language: and so precious a treasure be buried in rustie silence, without
comfort or commodity to my country. For among so many worthy laborers in the
Lords vineyard, raised up by God in this latter age, there is none (pardon me
good Reader if my simple judgment fail me) that has exceeded, nay few or
none that has equalled this Author, in the matter and method of this book.
Wherein by way of Antithesis, are lively set forth Christ and Antichrist. To
the end that two contraries opposed, Christ the true light may appear more
glorious: and Antichrist the child of darkness may be viewed in his proper
color, that the one may be embraced with all obedience, and the other
abandoned with all detestation and horror. For if thou would know by the
word of God, and be assured by the testimony of his holy Spirit that Ancichrist
foretold by the Prophets and Apostles, is already come, and the son of
perdition renealed, if thou would know the certain time, the place, the
manner and marks of his revelation. If thou would know and be acertained by
the same Spirit, that the Pope is a false Priest, and that very same
Antichrist, so proved by his abominable life and doctrine, by the testimony of
Gods sacred word, and vnrefutable arguments drawn from the same. If thou
would know and be assured likewise, that the Mass is a devilish
profanation of the holy Supper of the Lord, a most blasphemous, idolatrous,
and false sacrifice, derogating from the most precious blood, death and passion
of Jesus Christ. If thou would know and by the same Spirit be assured that
the same Jesus Christ, true God and true man is the only Lord, Savior and
redeemer of the world: the only advocate, Intercessor and Mediator between
God and man: the only and alone king Prophet, and true high Priest, which
entered into the holy place once for all, and found eternal redemption. If thou
would know that his body and blood once offered upon the altar of the cross,
is the only and alone true sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor in the
nosethrils of God his Father, for the remission of sins: whereby only Gods
wrath is appeased, we obtain pardon, peace and reconciliation with God, grace,
favor and everlasting life. If thou would know and be likewise assured, that
this most holy sacrifice of Christ one only time offered is all sufficient for
the sins of all men, and that no place remains for any other reiteration of
the same sacrifice. If thou would know the true meaning, use and practice of
the holy Supper of the Lord Jesus, and the benfit thereof to the Faithful. If
thou would certainly know, and be fully assured by the same Spirit of
Grace, which is the ancient doctrine of God, leading to all bliss and true
blessedness, confirmed with his sacred word, contained in the books of the
old and new Testament, and penned by the finger of the holy Ghost: and which is
the new doctrine of men, pointing the pathway to hell, death and destruction,
confirmed with vain apparitions, dreams, false miracles, and illusions of the
devil. Come and see, and except the god of this world has blinded thy mind,
that the light of Christ's glorious Gospel should not shine unto thee: except
thou list to grope at noone day, and wilfully say, I will not see: except thou
have shaken hands with death, and made a covenant with hell: except God for thy
wilful obstinacy, has given thee over unto a reprobate sense, to oppose thy
self against him and his known truth. In reading this book without partial
preiudication, thou can not but see, exactly perceive and taste to thine
unspeakable comfort, how sweet are the mercies of the Lord, in revealing to
thee (dust and ashes) the mystery both of the one and the other, which the
wise of this world neither have understood, nor can comprehend: but is revealed
unto babes, his Saints, to whom he would make known the riches of his glory
to confound and make foolishnes the wisdom of the wise. Which if thou shall
find (as if in singleness of heart thou seek, thou can not but find.) Then
praise Jehovah, the author of all goodness be thankful to this Author, the
means of thy good, and take in worth my simple travel, an inferior
furtherance thereunto, who heartily wish thee no less comfort and joy in
reading, then my miserable self received in translating of this book. And
because it seems a thing difficult to translate the Proverbs, wherein not the
letter, but the sense is to be followed: that course have I observed, and set
down withal the proper phrase of the Spanish and Portugal tongues, both in
them and some other hard and doubtful words: that thou (gentle Reader) endued
with better gifts may judge, and courteously amend by thy knowledge, what my
unskillfulness has missed: hoping that my desire herein to do well, may excuse
in thy Chistian conceit, whatsoever is (if any thing) misdone. And so I leave
thee to him that is able to keep thee.

Thine in the Lord, I. G.

THE EPISTLE TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
HAd it not been for the great necessity, which our country of Spain has to
know the lives of the Popes, that knowing them, it may beware them, and naught
esteem their authority, which against all right divine and humane, they have
usurped over the consciences which Jesus Christ our redeemer, with his death
and passion has freed, I should never (Christian Reader) have entered a
labyrinth so confused, and rugged, as is to write the lives of Popes. For thou
must know, that the Romists themselves concord not nor agree in the number of
the Popes. Some set down more, and others less. And hence it comes that so
little they agree, touching the time that they poped (Let it be lawful for me,
as of a king, he is said to reign to say of a Pope to Pope) Some of these
self same also, that all confess to have been Popes of some of them say great
Lauds and praises, extolling them to the heavens. Of these self same, say
others filthy things, casting them down to hell. An example of the first S.
Gregory (As says Friar John de Pineda 3. part cap. 8. 1. of his
Ecclesiastical Monarchy) was the 66. Pope, etc. And not the 63. As says
Matthew Palmer. Nor the 64. As says Panuinus. Nor the 65. As says Marianus.
nor less. 62. As says S. Antoninus, This far Pineda.

Gelasius 1. after Platina, is the 51. Pope. After Panuinus, the 50. And after
George Cassander, and Caranca the 49. Also Paul the second, after Platina is
the 220. Caranca counts him for the 219. Pero Mexia for 218. and Panuinus:
For 215. five less then Platina. According to this account. Sistus 5. which in
the year 1588. tyrannizeth in the Church, should be after Platina the 236.
Pope: after Caranca 235. After Per^ Mexia 234. and after Panuinus 231. Most
Popish authors be all these. Some Spaniards, and others Italians. And had we
alleged more authors, more disagreement and contrariety should we have found.
Of this diversity springs the disorder, which is in the time that some Popes
Poped. For they which reckon least Popes put the years which they take from 4
or 5 Popes (whom they reckon not) to other Popes. Caranca in his Summa
conciliorum, speaking of Boniface 3. (this was the first Pope as in his life
shall be showed) says these words. There is diversity among writers how long
time Boniface 3. was Pope. For of Platina is it gathered, that he was nine
months. Others say 8 months and a half: others a year, and 25 days:
Others a year, 5 months, and 28 days. Others say, that he died, having been
Pope 8 months and 22 days. This far Caranca. The same might we say of many
other Popes. For example of the second, will we put Liberius and Formosus,
besides many others that we might set down. Liberius and Formosus some of the
papists themselves, do cannonize, and others do curse them. Platina says:
that Liberius was an Arian Panuinus says: that he was holy. Read his life,
which of diverse authors we have gathered. As touching Formosus Stephen 6 or 7.
condemned him. So did also a Council holden in the time of this Stephen
condemn him. But Romanus successor of Stephen and Theodorus. And John 10 or 9
condemned Stephen, and justified sn Formosus. And this did not these 3 Popes
only, but a general Council of 74. Bishops, holden in the time of John 10.
did also the same. But all this notwithstanding, the third time, that Sergius
was Pope, he took part with Stepben against Formosus Condemding that which 3
Popes, and the Council had done, and was most cruel, against the body of
Formosus, vntombing it, and doing that unto it, which upon his life, we will
declare. Read their lives (Christian Reader) Dogs shall thou see that tear
in pieces, and eat one another: Not men shall thou see: but devils incarnate.
Thou must also understand, that in the names of some Popes, there is great
disagreement. Pope John the last, Platina calls the 24. and in order 214.
Caranca calls him 24. But the 213. in order, Pero Mexia calls him the 24.
Another way carries Panuinus 22. he calls him, or 23. and says: that he is
the 209. in order. Thus takes he from out the Catalogue. Five Popes: two
whereof be John's: And it is also to be noted, that from John 8. which was a
wicked woman. All the John's almost, have been pestilent fellows Read their
lives.

Three causes there be, why some do number less Popes. The first is, because
some Popes a very small time Poped. The 2. is, because many reckon not for
Popes, all those that were not cannonically elected. The 3. is, because some
will not hold them for Popes, who albeit they were connonically elected, yet in
there Popedom wickedly governed. For the first reason, many reckon not for
Pope, Stephen 2. who but three, or as some say, 4 days Poped. For the 2.
reason exclude they all those, whom they call Antipopes, chosen in the time of
Schism. 30: Schisms counts Panuinus to have been, wherein at one time were
4 Popes, another time 3. another 2. Herehence is it, that they count not John
18. Whom others call 17. nor Clement nor Clement 8. And therefore Clement 9.
they call 7. nor Benedict 5 nor Benedict 7. called they 6. nor Benedict 13. For
these 2 reasons exclude they al the^ that by wicked arts, deceit, force,
gifts, or promises were made Popes. Such do the Councels and decrees of the
Popes themselves not hold for Popes. Read that which the Council of Lateran
holden in the time of Nicholas 2. ordained touching this matter. And so many
hold not for pope, Constantine 2. Who being a layman and without any orders,
was by force made Pope. Should this decree be observed. neither Siluester 2.
the great inchau^ter, nor Boniface 8. nor Gregory 7 nor an infinite number of
Popes, which by wicked arts, etc. Were made Popes should be called Popes and so
very few should remain in the catalogue of the Popes. The 3. reason why some be
not counted Popes, is that albeit they were cannonically chosen, yet, during
their Popedom, either in life, or in Doctrine, or both in life and Doctrine were
they abominable. For this cause some count not Lando. Read his life. For the
same cause, some reckon not John 8. a whore before, and when she was Pope. Were
this reason ought worth, very few should be counted for Popes. For all the
Popes ingenerall from Boniface 3. until Sistus 5. who now tyrannizeth, have
either in life or Doctrine been wicked. And so, ought not to be connted.
Boniface 8. Of whom say all, that he entered like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and
died like a Dog. And alone was not he, that did this: he had many companions.
These be the causes, why some reckon less Popes, then others. And in these
names, Stephen, John, Clement, Benedict, Constantine, and Felix, shall be found
this abridgement of Popes. There are no lives of kings nor Emperors, were they
Christians, pagans, Jews, Turks, Scithians; or of whatsoever other nation, so
confusedly and diversely written, as are the lives of the Popes. And that which
is more to be maruailed, written, imprinted, and approved by the papists
themselves. The holy Ghost it seems, has purposely cast into the writing of
their lives, this confusion. For the Popes being kings and Lords of Rome. And
Rome as say Saint Ierom, Petrark, Laurentius Valla, and many others) is
Babylon. And Babylon, as much to say, as confusion, all whatsoever, the Popes
have done, do, and shall do, is and shall be confusion: And so can no order be
held in counting of them. And with what more proper name then Babylon, or
confusion, can that Church be called, wherein they so pray and sing in strange
and confused Language, that one understands not another. And that yet which
is worse he, him self that prays of sings, understands not often times
that which is said. My desire is (friendly Reader) to advise thee of this
confusion: That if thou shall read in one author that Pope John 24. for the
great villainies and heresies which in his presence, and to his face were
proved, was condemned in the Council of Constance: and others say this
happened to Pope John 23. and others, to Pope John 22. then nothing marvel:
For these 3 John's 22. 23. and 24. be one self same Pope John. Concerning the
concurrences of the kings of Spain, which I place with the Pope, I have
followed Don Alonso de Carthagena Bishop of Burgos in his Latin History of
the kings of Spain, which he calls Anacephalaeosis, as much to say, as a
Recapitulation. No other has been the purpose and motive me moving to write
these 2. Treatises of the Pope, and of the Mass. But the great desire I have
that they of my nation, might enjoy the same mercies, which the Lord in these
last times has showed to many nations in Europe, giving them liberty of
conscience (and this not to let loose the raynes to serve the lusts of the
flesh, but in spirit and truth to serve the living God, whom to serve, is to
reign) I very much sorrow, that my nation to whom the Lord God, for the things
of this world, has given so much wit, hability and understanding (which other
nations cannot deny) In things pertaining to God, in the things concerning the
salvation of their souls, or going to heaven or hell, is so blockish and
blind, that it suffers it self to be carried by the Mass, that it suffers
it self to be governed, trodden under foot and tyrannized of the Pope, of the
man of sin, of the son of perdition, of Antichrist, whom as God, sits in
the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. And that moreover which S.
Paul 2 Thessalonians 2. says. All the evil of the Spaniards comes unto them of a
false persuasion which they have conceived of the authority of the Pope. The
Pope, they believe to be the successor of Saint Peter, the Vicar of Christ, God
upon earth. They believe, that all whatsoever the pope does on earth, God does
it in heaven and what soever he undoes in earth, God undoes in heaven. This
first Treatise, shall serve to open the deceit unto them: very palpably and
plainly will it show the pope, not to be the successor of S. Peter. But of
Judas. Not to be the Vicar of Christ, but of Satan (whom the holy scripture
calls prince and God of this world) And that we therefore ought not to obey
the pope, nor make more reckoning of him, nor of that, he shall command, then
we do of that which our mortal enemy commands us. Mine hearts desire and
prayer to God is, for my nation, that they may be saved: that his Majesty
deliver them from the power of darkness, and transfer them into the kingdom
of his beloved son. I would if I might by any means provoke my nation. I
would they had an holy envy at other nations. Why do they (and not the
Spaniards) read and hear the word of God, in their own Language, as in the
holy Bible it is written? Why do they (and not the Spaniards) receive the holy
sacraments with the simplicity that Jesus Christ did institute and celebrate
them. Wherewith, without any humane inventions, superstitions, and Idolatries,
he commanded his Church to administer them? This testimony give I of my
nation, that they have the zeal of God: and so shall you see few Spaniards to
be Atheists, which have no religion. But this their zeal, is not according to
knowledge: for by the word of God is it not ruled: but by that which Antichrist
of Rome commands. Who has taken from them, and forbidden them the reading
of holy scripture. For well knows Antichrist, that if the Spaniards should
read it, then would they fall into account, and know the abominable life of
the popes, and their wicked Doctrine: And so would forsake and detest them. And
should Spain once forsake the pope, the pope would reckon (as they say) with
the Oleados or anointed, of whom there is no hope of life: O that if God
please, I may see this day. And if the pope should fall, then also in a moment,
would fall the Mass, and all the other Idolatries which the pope has
invented. This is the cause why our adversaries so greatly fight, to
intertaine, and mainetaine the authority of the Pope. For very well they know
that the Pope once fallen, the popish religion of necessity must fall to the
earth. Very well did Pedro de la Fuente (or Fontidonio, as others call him) a
divine of Seuill understand this: who in a sermon which he made, the last day
of September in the Council of Trent, greatly inueied against the protestants,
calling them heretics, saying: that they sought to cast down the 2 pillars
of the Church. To wit, the sacrifice of the Mass and the Pope, This Divine
said moreover: that the Council ought to employ all it force, to sustain and
uphold them. The pillar (said he) of the seat papal once pulled down, that
the whole Church would fall to the earth. The reason which he gave was, because
the funerals and obsequies of the Church went jointly, and accompanied with
those of the Pope. There is nothing (said he) that the adversaries with
deliberate purpose more endeavor to do, then to put down the Pope, etc. Our
adversaries have fallen in the reckoning, and this is the cause, why they
maintain and adore (and many of them do it, against their own conscience)
The Pope, howsoever abominable, wicked, and great an Atheist he be. I humbly
beseech his majesty to send the true Sampson, which is Christ, who with one
pluck, may wholly pull down these two pillars, and so the house of Dagon may
fall utterly to the earth. Judge. 16. 29. I know that were the Pope, and his
Mass pillars built upon the rock, upon the cornerstone Christ, that neither
the gates of hell, nor whatsoever men could imagine, should ever prevail
against them. But because they be not founded upon this firm foundation: but
rather upon humane inventions, any small thing whatsoever, that carries any
reason, makes them easily to stagger. The thing which wholly overthrows them,
is the word of God. As by the Lords assistaunce in these two Treatises shall be
seen. His Majesty I hope, whose cause we here maintain, will draw some fruit
out of this my travail. To him I commit the charge thereof. For as says his
Apostle 1. Cor. 3. 7. Neither he that pla^teth is any thing, nor he that
waters, but God, which gives the increase. His cause it is, to him I commend
it. That which in the mean time Christian Reader, I beseech thee, for that
which thou owe to the health of thy soul (the which if thou loosest, what
shall it profit thee to have gained the whole world) is that thou read, consider
and weigh the reasons which we give in these two Treatises, for confirmation of
that which we say* and see which more agrees with the word of God, with that
which the ancient Doctors and Councels, and which natural reason, teach: that
which we have said, or that which our adversaries say. The holy, and true, who
has the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, which shuts, and
no man opens; Open unto thee the gate, that thou may consider and adore
his holy law. He ever bewith thee, Amen. The 25. of June 1588.

Your most affectionate brother in the Lord. C. V.

The first Treatise: of the Pope and his authority.
Idolatry.
Idolatry (which is to give the honor, worship and service only due to God, to
a creature, whether good or bad, holy or profane) is the most grievous sin
that is, or ca^be imagined. For the Idolater, like a traitor to him that made
him, directly and manifestly commits high treason against his God. He
endeavors, what in him lies, to cast God from his throne, and therein to
place that which himself worshippeth, albeit the work of his own hand. To
show the grieuousnesse of this sin, very severely has God punished it: as he
plagued the Israelites (we see) when they made the Calfe. For the which the
Lord had wholly destroyed them, had not Moses stepped in, a very good Mediator.
Notwithstanding there died of them in one day by the sword about three thousand
men. And it is to be noted, Exodus 32.
that neither Aaron, nor the Israelits were so blockish, nor foolish, Deuteronomy. 9.
14.
to think the calfe which they had made to be God. That which they supposed
was this, that the honor done to the calfe they did it unto God. And so Aaron
when he saw the calfe he built an Altar before it: and proclaimed, saying: To
morrow shall be a feast unto Jehovah, This he said, for the representation of
God, which he and they supposed they had made in the calf. This manner of
Idolatry had the people of Israel seen in Egypt. For the Egyptians, The
cause why the Israelites worshipped the molten calfe.
besides infinite other things, adored the figure of Apis, which they also
called Sirapis, being the name of an Ox. The Israelites applied to their
religion, the manner of worship which they had seen in Egypt: and coveting
visible things by which they might represent and worship God, they made of set
purpose, a Calfe of metal, as is read in Exodus.. 32. 4. And Aaron formed it
with the grauing tool, and made thereof a Calfe of metal, and they said,
These be thy Gods o Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc.
The same says God in the eight verse, complaining of the people to Moses. And
David, Psalm. 106. 19. They made (says he) a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipped a
molten Image. and turned their glory to the similitude of a bullock that
eats grass.

And Jeroboam renewing this Idolatry, 1. king. 12. 28.
made two calves of gold, one whereof he placed in Bethel, the other in Dan,
and said as his predecessors in the wilderness had said, These be thy Gods
which brought thee, etc. Exodus 32. 4. And it is not to be thought (as before we
have said) that either Aaron, or the Israelites, or after them Jeroboam, or his
people were so senseless to think that the Calfe, or calves (which they
themselves with their hands a little before had made) was God, whose being is
from everlasting. That which they thought was this: that God which had brought
them out of Egypt, representing himself in the Calfe, had poured thereinto, a
certain divinity, and therefore would be worshipped in the same: as they did
worship him. This doing, they took quite away the worship which they only owed
to God, and gave it to the creature. For this cause (says David) that the
Israelites turned the glory of God into the similitude of a Bullock, etc.
etc. Psalm. 106. 20. The same say we to our adversaries. They believe not (will
they say) that the image of our Lady of Guadalupe, nor that of Mountserrat, is
the same virgin Marie, which is in heaven. They believe not (say they) that the
wooden Crucifixe of Burgos, is the same Christ, which sits at the right
hand of his Father. That which they believe is this, that God has infused into
these, and such other Images, a certain divinity, to represent the Virgin
Marie or Christ crucified, etc. And thereupon (say they) work they miracles:
and therefore do they reverence and adore them. And so fix they their eyes,
and settle their whole minds to honor and worship these visible Images: that
they take away the honor which is only due to God, and give it to a wooden
image that is made with men's hands. And being in any affliction, in steed of
seeking help at God, by the means of his son Christ Jesus. One cries out,
O my Lady of Guadalupe, another: O my Lady of Mountferrat, another: O my Lady
of Walsinhham, another: Lord Saint Elmus, Lord Saint Blase, Lady saint Lucie,
etc. Of God or his son Christ none has remembrance, except here and there
one in a corner: and if the others hear him, they call him a Lutherane
heretic, that inuocateth not the Saints, but God only and his son Christ
Jesus. But God commands us to call upon him in the time of trouble, and has
promised to hear us, Psalm. 50. 15. Christ says, All whatsoever ye shall ask
in my name shall be done unto you, Mat. 7. 7. Mar. 11. 24. Ioh. 14. 13. and.
16. 23. But of this will we speak more at large, entreating of invocation of
the Saints, in the Treatise of the Mass. Let us now return to the Calfe.

The Jews endeavor what they can to excuse their forefathers, and so lay the
fault of this sin upon the poor base people of the Egyptians, which, together
with the Israelits went out of Egypt. But that which the Lord says to Moses,
casts wholly the fault upon the Israelites, not once naming the poor people:
and says also, that it is a sti^ffe-necked people, and as such would consume
them, Exodus 32. 8. 9. 10. The Jews cannot then excuse their forefathers: their
own Rabbis do witness that the sin of the Calfe is not wholly yet cleansed.
This said Moses Gerunden, speaking to the Jews. No punishment has happened to
thee, o Israel, wherein there has not been some ounce of the iniquity of the
calfe: But in crucifying their Messiah the Lord of glory (as in Esa. 53.
through the whole chap. Dan. 9. 20. and other places was prophesied) the Jews
afterward committed another no less wickedness. For which so enormious a
sin, God cut them off, being the natural branches, from the euergreene olive
tree, which is his Church, and in their place graffed in us Gentiles, branches
of the wild olive tree. Romans 11. And note that the manner wherein we are
ingraffed, is far different from the common and natural graffing. For we are
not ingraffed, the the wild Olive into the Olive tree, nor the wild pear into
the pear tree: but contrariwise, the olive into the wild olive tree, and the
pear into the wild pear tree: and so our ingraffing into the Church and into
Christ her head, supernatural. For which benefit received he says to the
Ge^tils, Praise the Lord al ye Ge^tils, etc

Three great Captiuities (besides others not so great) have the Jews suffered.
The first captivity of 400. years.
The first in Egypt: the second in Babylon: the third, that which now they
suffer, scattered like chafe, or straw through the world. Concerning the first
and second, God foretold them how long they should be captives. So he said to
Abraham: Genesis 15. 13. Act. 7. 6.
Know thou for certain, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is
not theirs, and shall serve them, and shall be afflicted four hundred years.
But the nation which they shall serve, will I also judge: and then shall they
come forth with great riches, as in Exodus 12. 36. 37. appears.

As touching the second captivity, 2. Captivity of 70. years. Ierem. 25. 12.
Ca. 29. 10..
God says by Jeremy, And it shall come to pass that when seventy years
shall be fulfilled, I will visit the king of Babylon, etc. Again, Thus says
the Lord, when seventy years in Babylon shall be fulfilled, I will visit
you, and perform my good promise toward you, and cause you to return to this
place. Of the accomplishment of these setie years speaks Daniel, chap. 9. 2.
2. Chron. 36. 22. and Ezra. chapter 1. 1.

Concerning the third captivity, 3. Captivity of infinite years.
wherein above these fifteen hundred years they have been, and yet are, and
shall be scattered throughout the world, without king, without high priest,
without sacrifice, without Pesah (that is, the Paschall lamb) without
Prophets, and many other things by God commanded, subject to strange nations,
and not (in some sort) but as slaves, no word in the Scriptures mentioning how
many years this captivity shall endure. But contrariwise, says the Angel to
Daniel, chap. 9. 27. that Jerusalem shall be destroyed, and that the Moysaicall
worship and Temple should never more return. This third captivity for three
respects is worse then the second. First, for the time: That endured seventy
years: This has endured above fifteen hundred years. 2. In the second, the
Jews had Prophtes, and miracles, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Daniel, etc. the three
children were delivered from the fire, and Daniel from the Lions: In this have
they had neither Prophet nor miracle. The third respect: In the second they had
great dignity and riches: as Ioachin the king Jeremy the last. Daniel and his
three companions, Mardocheus, Zerubbabel: but in this they are much dejected.
True it is, that this general promise they have made them by God: That
whenever they shall repent them of their wickedness committed, and turn
unto God, that he will pardon them, and gather them from all parts of the
world where they shall be scattered and afflicted.

And seeing that God does not gather, nor deliver them from so long and
painful captivity, as is that which they suffer: it follows, that they are
wholly obstinate in their sins, and turn not truly unto God. For if they
would turn, God being true in his promises, would gather them. But we see the
contrary, that they still be scattered, and abide in captivity, therefore
they repent not. And so it pleases God to chastise them, as he said unto
Moses, Deuteronomy. chap. 28. 63. 64. And it shall come to pass (says he, speaking
of the Jews) that as the Lord did rejoice over you to do you good, and to
multiply you, so shall the Lord rejoice over you to confound and destroy you:
and ye shall be plucked out of the land, into the which ye now enter to
possess it. And God will seatter thee through all nations, from the one end of
the earth to the other. And there shall thou serve strange Gods wood and stone,
God for unbelief punishes the Jews until this day.
etc. whom thou nor thy fathers have not known. Their obstinacy, and
unbelief, not knowing the day of their visitation, and contemning and killing
their Messiah, is the cause of this so miserable captivity: wherein they shall
continue, until they cease to be incredulous, and acknowledge God, and Christ
or Messiah whom he has sent, and so they shall be saved.

Moreover, concerning that which we have said, Judges. 2. 19. 20
the book of Judges is full of Gods punishments upon the Israelities for their
idolatry, whom he delivered over into the hands of their enemies. But as a
good God, and merciful father, when they repented, he restored or delivered
them. And eftsoon they returned to idolatry, and God eftsoons did punish
them. We read also that the Israelites turned away, and corrupted themselves
more then their fathers, following strange gods, serving them, and bowing down
before them, and nothing diminished their works and wicked ways. And the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel. And Deborah in her song
conceiving them said: Judges. 5. 8.
In choosing new Gods, war was at the gates. So greatly did God abhore
Idolatry, that oftenne commandments which he gave; the two first be against
Idolatry. First. Thou shall not have (says he) any strange Cod before me.

Second. Thou shall not make to thy self any Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water, Two
kind of Idolatry.
etc. And then, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I am
the Lord thy God, a jealous God, etc. In the first commandment, internal,
and mental, and in the second external and visible Idolatry are forbidden.
So horrible and enormious is the sin of Idolatry that God who is a just
Judge, does punish it with most severe punishment that can be in this world.
God gives up Idolaters into a reprobate sense; so that forsaken of God, and by
his just Judgment, delivered over, and made slaves to Satan, they may do
that which is not convenient, as says Saint Paul, Romans 1. 25. concerning
Idolaters, which turned the truth of God into a lie, honoring and serving the
creature, before (or more) then God. And in the twenty eight verse, mentioning
the punishment, he says; that God gave them up unto a perverse mind (which we
call a reprobate sense) to do that which is not convenient: namely, the
abohmination there mentioned. The answer which the Romists make, in defense of
their Images, is frivolous, They adore not, nor honor (say they) the Images,
but that which they represent. Whereunto I answer; that as little did the
Pagans worship their Images, but that which they represented. For they believed
not the Image of Jupiter to be Jupiter, but to present Jupiter. Much more do
the Romists, not only command Images to be made, but to be reverenced, and
which is more, worship them themselves. And in the second Action also of the
Neccen Council (not of that holy and good first Council of Niece) but of the
second, assembled by that ceuell Empress Hirena, it is said: We do worship
the pictures of Images. And in the third Action, The invisible divine nature is
not permitted to be pictured, nor figured. For no man ever saw God at any
time: but we worship the Image of his humanity pictured with colors. So also
do we reverence and adore the Image of our Lady the mother of God, etc. See
here, how the Romists do contradict themselves, on the one side, they say;
they worship not Images. And on the other part, in their general Councels,
they command them to be worshipped. Answerable to this Doctrine of the
Council do they sing in their hymn. O Crux aue, spes vnica hoc passionis
tempore: auge pijs Iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. That is to say. O Cross
only hope, in this time of passion, increase righteousness in the Godly, and
grant pardon to offenders. Also in showing the Cross, they say: Ecce lignum
Crucis, venite adoremus. That is, Behold here the wood of the Cross: Come and
let us worship it. Also Crucem tuam adoramus domine. Thy Cross do we worship,
O Lord. Thomas Aquinus in his Brieffes or parts, speaking of Adoration, says.
That the Cross ought to be worshipped with the same Gods honor, as God
himself. And so they do: and upon good friday chiefly, prostrate on the
ground, do they adore the Cross, and offer gifts unto it: which adoration
(say they) Saint Gregory ordained. But how can this be truth, which they say
of Saint Gregory, when the said Gregory writing to Seremus Bishop of
Marsella, who had caused Images to be pulled down, broken, and burned, uses
these words, had thou forbidden to worship the Images, we should have
praised thee. S. Gregory forbad the Image worship.
And a little lower: Which were placed in the Temple, not to be worshipped, but
for instruction only of the simple. See here how untrue it is that they say,
Saint Gregory instituted the adoration of the Cross. True it is, he says,
that Images were the books of the simple and ignorant people. But let him
pardon us, if in this we dissent from him, to yield unto that, Habakuk. 2. 18.
19.
which the word of God does teach us. Habakuk says, what profits the Image;
for the maker thereof has made it an Image, and a teacher of lies, though he
that made it, trust therein, when he makes dumb Idols. woe unto him, that
says to the wood, awake, and to the dumb stone, arise, it shall teach thee:
behold it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath in it. In
like manner. The stock, says Jeremy, is a doctrine of vanity. Again: Every
man is a beast by his own knowledge: Every founder is confounded by his graven
Image: for his melting is but falsehood, and there is no breath therein. They
are vanity and the work of errors, etc. wherefore well said Athanasius: When
a living man cannot move thee to know God, how shall a man made of wood cause
thee to know him? Epiphanius Epist. ad Hieron.
Epiphanius Bishop of Cypres coming into a Church, and seeing a veyle, wherein
the Image of Christ, or some other Saint was pictured, commanded to take it
thence, and that the veyle should be employed for the burial of some poor,
using these words: To see in the Temples of Christians, the Image of Christ,
or any Saint pictured, is horrible abomination. Of this moreover wrote he to
John Bishop of Jerusalem, under whose Jurisdiction was that people of
Anablatha, where the veyle was, to provide that no such veyles which be
contrary to that which Religion permits, should thenceforth be had in the
Church of Christ. So greatly did this epistle please Saint Jerome, that he
translated the same out of Greek into Latin. The same Epiphanius said,
Remember my beloved sons, that you place no Images in the Church, nor
churchyardes, but carry God ever in your hearts; and yet say I further, permit
them not in your houses: For to be fixed by the eyes, but by meditation of the
mind, etc. is unlawful for a Christian, etc. The most ancient Council of
Eliberis holden in Spain (as now we will declare) and many other ancient
Councels condemned Images: and many Christian Emperors have forbidden them.
And for that purpose wrote Valens, Petrus Crinilib. 9. de hone. sta disciplina.
and Thedosius to the chief Governor of the Council house saying: As our care
is in and by all means to maintain the religion of the most high God: so
permit we none to purtrayt engraue, or picture in colors, stone, or any other
matter whatsoever, the Image of our Savior: Moreover we command that
wheresoever such an Image can be found, it be taken away; and all those to be
chastised with most grievous punshment that attempt ought against our decrees
and command. Seeing then, the Christian Emperors, Doctors and ancient
Councels, yea and that which is all, the scripture it self to forbid Images;
let not our Adversaries be obstinate. Let them not think it to be now, as in
time passed, when the blind led the blind, and so both fell into the ditch.
Blessed be God, we now see, and need not them which be more blind, to guide
us.

Where or when (I demand) has God commanded to do that which they do? Let
them give me one only example of the old or new Testament, that any of the
Patriarchs, Propetes, Apostles, or Martyrs of Jesus Christ did that which they
do? adored or honored God, or his saints, in their Images? They will not give
it. Then let them not be more wise then they. Esa. 1. 12.
Let them take heed least God say unto them, Who required these things at
your hands? This is not the worship by God appointed, but humane and devilish
invention. And so shall God punish them as he punished Nadab and Abihu Leuit.
Exodus 20. 4.
chap. 10. ver. 1. that offered strange fire, which he never commanded them.
Deuteronomy. 5. 8.
Hold we fast that which God has commanded: Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, etc. And so shall we not err. The Church of Rome has taken
away the second commandment, and has but nine commandments. But to fill up
the number of ten; of the tenth commandment which forbids lust in
general, and afterward the chief kind and parts thereof, A true division of
te ten Commandments.
has she made two. But the Hebrews and ancient Doctors Greek, and Latin do
not so; who place that of Images, for the second commandment Some think
(says Origin hom. 8. upon Exodus) that all this together (meaning the first and
second commandments) is one commandment: which, if it so should be taken,
there would want of the number of ten commandments; and where then should be
the tenth of the Decalog of ten commaundments? but dividing it, as before we
have distinguished; the full number of the ten commandments, will appear. So
that the first commandments is; Thou shallt have no other Gods but me. And
the second, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. hitherto
Origin. Chrysostom hom. 49. upon Saint Math. Exposition. 2. Athanasius in
Synopsi Seripturarum; Saint Ambrose upon the sixth chapter of the epistle to the
Ephesians, and Saint Jerome upon the same place, all these Fathers place (as we
do) that against Images for the second commandment. And for the third, Thou
shall not take the name of the lord etc. For the 4. Remember thou keep holy
etc. for the 5. Honor thy father, and thy Mother, etc. and for the tenth, that
we shall not covet any thing of our neighbors, etc. Iesephus in his 3. book of
Antiquites chap. 6. and Philo in his book, which he made of the ten
comandements, divide them in like manner with us. If this be the true division
of the Decalogue (as it is) and by the express word of God, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image (as by the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Doctors
we have proved. The Church of Rome is accursed of God, and the cause.
) Hereupon it follows, that the Church of Rome is accursed of God, because
she has dared to diminish, and add any thing to the most holy eternal, and
inviolable law of God: whereunto (being perfect, full and entire) no man ought
to add or take away: according to that which the same God says, Thou shall
add nothing to the word which I command thee, neither shall thou take ought
therefro: but keep the commandments of the Lord your god which I command
you. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Proverb. 30. 6. If the Church of Rome here in a
thing so clear, so notable, and of so great importance, has so apparently,
and without shame, dared to add and diminish; what will they not dare? Let us
look more nearly. The belly (say they) has no cares: These things will not
the Romists hear. Images in the Popedom fill the bellies, and the chests:
Great is the treasure that is given to Images, Oil, wax, perfumes, silk,
silver, gold, cloth of gold and precious stones: wherein Thieves, and wicked
women are most liberal. The Pirestes and friars, do clothe and deck their
Images with the gifts of strumpets: wherein they transgress the commandment
of God, Deuteronomy. 23. 18.
which commands; that none shall bring the hier of an whore into the house of
the Lord, etc. because God, who is just and pure, abhors robbery, and
detesteth that which with sin and filthiness is evil gotten. And the Gloss
in Decret. did. 90. Cap. Oblationis. determines; that no gain of a whore be
offered in the Church. And that the suprestitious vulgar sort may give the
more, they make them believe, that the Images do weep, laugh, Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
sweat, and do other great Miracles. Moses declares, that when God spoke
with his people, the people hard the voice of his words, but they saw no
figure, saving only a voice: what God would have us to understand hereby, the
same Moses there declares. Take good heed then to your Souls: for ye saw no
figure, etc. and then: That ye corrupt not your selves nor make you any graue^
Image or representation of any figure, whether it be the likeness of Male or
female. The common edition which the Roman church allows says: Ne forte
decepti, faciatis vobis sculptam similitudinem aut Imaginem masculi vel
feminae: That is to say, least being deceived, ye make to your selves a graven
similitude or Image of man or woman. Let our adversaries behold if they make to
themselves Images of he and she Saints, which be of men and women. And
suppose, that the making of Images were not against the express comanndement
of God; The duty of a good magistrate to forbid idolatry.
but that to make the^ or not to make them were a thing indifferent: yet ought
the good magistrate (seeing the superstition and Idolatry which the ignorant
common people commit) to forbid Images, and break them notwithstanding:
imitating therein the holy king Ezechiah, Numb. 21. 8.
that brake the brazen serpent which Moses had made, when he saw the
Israelites to burn incense unto it, as in the 2. Kings. 18. 4. appears. Read
the chapter. See if our adversaries adorn their Images with flowers, with
garlandes, with crowns, deck them, cloth them, girde them, hang upon them
purses, light tapers, candles and lamps before them, perfume, incense, carry
them upon men's shoulders in procession, kneel before them, and in their
necessities crave help and succor of them. Read for this purpose, the epistle
of Jeremy recited to Baruc in his 6. chap. and thou shall fully see the same
that now is done in Spain, Italy, and many other places of the world
besides. If this be not Idolatry, and superstition, what shall be? If that
good king Ezechiah now lived, what would he do to these Images? That which he
did to the brazen Serpent: break and bray them in pieces. Our Adversaries
excuse the matter. The same might the Israelites also, The brazen serpent was
the image and figure of Christ.
and it may be they did so, yet for all their excuses, the good king brake it.
And think not that this Serpent, set up on high, which Ezechias brake, was of
small signification. Know thou, that it was a figure of the same Christ, that
was to be lift up, and placed as an Ensign, which all those might follow,
that should believe in him, believing in him might have everlasting life: even
as those which beheld the Brazen serpent were cuted of their bodily
infirmities. So they which behold Christ, believe in him, and follow him, are
no less healed of their spiritual infirmities. This is not mine but Saint
John's interpretation, whose words be these: And as Moses lift up the serpent in
the wilderness: so must the Son of man be lifted up, that all that believe
in him, etc. Ioh. 3. 14. Although this Serpent was made by Moses, and by the
commandment of God, and with so high a signification as Saint John gives it,
making it the image and figure of Christ. And albeit it had so many years
remained among the people of God, from the Israelites being in the wilderness,
until the reign of Ezekiah: all this notwithstanding, this good king (seeing
the superstition of the people that burned incense to it) cast it to the earth,
and brake it. This good zeal of his is commended in the Scripture. And in the
second book of Kings chap. 18. 3. these words are used. He did that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord, according to all that his father David had done.
He took away the high places, and brake the Images, and cut down the groves,
and brake in pieces the brazen serpent which Moses had made. For until that
time, the children of Israel burned incense unto it, and he called it Nehustan
(as much to say) as a piece of brass. Would God the Christian and Catholic
kings would imitate the holy zeal of this good king. Would God they would
seek to be truly informed, and see with their eyes, what be the relikes and
Images which they have in their kingdoms, and their miracles, and the truth or
falsehood of them. But (o grief) that the old proverb in our days is
verified: Sease Milagro, y hagado el diablo.
A miracle it is, and the devil does it.
Would God they would take count of the great riches that is offered unto
images. Oh what should be found.

The Romistes excuse them, A Popish distinction between Idol and Image.
by a distinction which they make: An idol (say they) is one thing, and an
image is another. That the law of God forbideth Idols and permittteh images:
that the Idol is an abomination, but not an image. That they detest Idols, and
honor Images. Let us now prove this their distinction of Idols and Images, to
be vain. God, Exodus 20. 4. Pesel, what it signifies.
and Deuteronomy. 5, 8. says; Thou shall not make to thy self Pesel. All the
difficulty is, to know what this word Pesel is. Pesel is an Hebrewe word,
derived of the verb Pasal, that is, to engraue, carue and hew. And lest we
should think (as thought the Grecians) that only Pesel, (which is, a carved
picture, statue or graven Image) is only forbidden; God presently adds,
Temuna: that is, any figure, form, shape, or painted Image. He then
forbids, graven, carved, hewed or painted Images. And commands us not to
worship, nor do reverence to them, Call them as you will, Idols or Images. Idol
is a Greek word, and is the same which in Latin is Simulachrum or Imago:
Simulachrum or Imago is that which in Spanish we called Imagen. These four
words, Pesel, Eidolon, Simulachrum and Imagen, be all one thing, and of one
self signification: but that the first is Hebrewe, the second Greek, the
third Latin, and the fourth Spanish. Ambrose. Erasmus Lactancius Instit. lib.
2. cap. 19.
And Saint Ambrose (as notes Erasmus in his Annotations upon the 1. Cor. 8.
chap.) for Idolum ever reads Simulachrum. Lactantius deriueth Simulachru^ of
Simulando, Eidolon of Eidos, as much to say, as appearance or show. It appears
to be a person, and is none: It has eyes, and sees not: ears, and hears
not: feet and walks not. David in the 115. Psalm, does lively depaint them,
let our adversaries behold, if their Images have eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, etc.

Saint Augustine. lib. 4. de Ciuitate Dei. cap. 9. and 31. Origin. lib. 8.
contra Celsum. S. Ciprian Tract. contra Demetrianum, and S. Epiphanius and S.
Ambrose make no difference between an Idol and an Image. Aquinus.
Thomas Aquinus that great captain of the Dominickes, puts this difference
between Idolum and Simulachrum (as notes Erasmus in the place a little before
alleged) Simulachrum (says he) is a thing made to the likeness of some
natural thing, but Idolum is, Si corpori humano addatur caput equinum (to wit)
If the head of an horse be put to a humane body. A distinction truly very
rediculous. Conclude we this matter with that, which was ordained in the
Council of Eliberis in Spain, holden about the year of the Lord. 335. whose.
36. Cannon was (as Carranza notes in his Summa Conciliariorum) Placuit
picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere: ne quod colitur aut odoratur, in
parietibus depingatur. It pleases us that pictures ought not to be in the
Church: lest that be worshipped or adored which is painted on the walls,
Eliberis, where was celebrated this ancient Council, was a City near unto
that place where is now Granada. Eliberis was destroyed, and of the ruins
thereof, was Granada builded, or augmented.

And there is one gate in Granada even to this day, called the gate Deluira,
corrupting the word in steed of Elibera, The gate is so called, because men
go that way to Elibera. Had this Cannon, made in our country of Spain, 1263.
years past, been observed in Spain, there had not been such Idolatry in
Spain, as now there is. Up Lord, regard thine own honor. Convert or confound
(not being of thine elect) all such as worship Pesel, graven or carved Images:
or Temuna, picttures, or patterns. All that whatsoever we have said against
Images, is meant of those that are made for religion, service, and worship, and
to honor, serve and adore them. Such Images are forbidden by the law of God.
And so the Art of caruing, grauing, painting and pattern making, not done to
this end, is not forbidden, but lawful. The superstition and Idolatry taken
away, the Art is good. If there be any people or nation that have, and do
commit inward, and outward Idolatry it is the Popish Church. For what else
see we in their Temples, houses, streets and crosse-streetes, but Idolles, and
Images made, and worshipped, against the express commandment of God. Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image. No nation has been so barbarous,
to think, that which they outwardly beheld with their eyes to be God. They
supposed as before we have said, their Jupiter, Juno, Mars, and Venus to be in
Heaven, whom they worshipped in the Images that did represent them.

Many of the Moors, Turks, and Jews, would convert unto Christ, were it not
for the offense and scandal of Images in the Churches. Therefore said Paulus
Pricius a most learned Hebrew, which became in a Christian Paue, that it was
very meet Images should be taken out of the Temple, for they were the cause
that many Jews became not Christians.

The Popish Church, does not only commit the Idolatry of the Gentiles, but
far exceed them also. One Idolatry it commits, which never Pagan, nor
Gentile ever committed. It believes, the bread and wine in the Mass (called a
sacrifice) celebrated by her Pope, The argum^ of both Tre^tises.
or a Priest made by the authority of the Pope, to be no representation, nor
commemoration of the Lords death: but his very body and blood, the same Jesus
Christ, as big, and great as he was upon the cross. And so as very God does
worship it. We will then in this first Treatise prove (by the Lords assistance,
whose cause we now maintain) the Pope to be a false Priest, and very
Antichrist, and that such Idolatry, and other much more, he has invented in
the Church.

In the second Treatise, we will also prove, by the same assistance, the Mass
to be a false Sacrifice, and great Idolatry. And because our chief purpose is
not so much to beat down falsehood, The argument of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
as to advance the truth: after we have showed the Pope to be a false Priest,
And the Mass, a false Sacrifice, we will show also (which is the argument of
the Apostle in the Epistle written to the Hebrews) Jesus Christ, to be the
true, and only Priest, and his most holy body and blood which he offered unto
his father upon the Cross, to be the true, and only sacrifice, where with the
eternal father is well pleased, and receives us into his favor and
friendship, justifying us by faith, and giving us his holy spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba father, and live in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life. And so be glorified of him, to reign 'with him for ever.

Many will wonder that we with so great constancy (or as they call it)
sawsinesse reject, condemn, and abhore the Pope and his Mass: And therefore
do slander, and defame us, not among the common people only, but amongst
the Nobles also and great Lords, Kings, and Monarchs that we are:
fantastic, heady, arrogant, sedicious, rebellious, partial, and many other
false reports they raise against us; wherewith they fill, and break the ears
of the ignorant, and of all those, that take pleasure to hear them.

To show them then, that it is no foolish opinion nor fantasy, which does lead
us, neither any ambition, vain glory, nor other passion, that does alter,
move, or transport our minds, but a good zeal rather of the glory of God, and
fervent desire of the health of our own souls. A reason will we give in this
first Treatise unto all that desire to hear and understand it, of that which
we believe and hold concerning the Pope, and his authority. And chiefly, if
we be asked, because (as says Saint Peter) we ought to be ready with
meekness and reverence to make answer to every one that demands a reason
of the hope which we hold. The reason then, which we give for rejecting,
condemning, and abhorring the Pope, and flying from him, as from the
pestilence, is his evil life, and wicked doctrine. Note also what the Doctors
and ancient Councels, and the holy Scriptures, in three wonderful places
chiefly for that purpose say concerning him. In the second Treatise, we will
declare what we think of the Mass, and the holiness thereof.

The Pope and Mass, two pillars of the Popish church, be very ancient, For it
is now a thousand years past, since they first began to be builded. Their
beginnings were very small: but they daily increased, adorning and decking
themselves, until they attained to the estate wherein we now see them; For
as well the Pope, as the Mass, is holden and called God. Without are they made
very beautiful, covered over with silk, gold, silver, cloth of gold, rich
stones: but within is superstition, hypocrisy, and Idolatry. I have often
pondred with my self, whether of these two pillars, the Pope, or the Mass,
were strongest, and more esteemed. The virtues, excellency, holiness and
divinity, which they say, is in the Mass, who can declare? How profitable it
is for all things living, and not living, quick and dead? By consideration
hereof, the Mass I supposed was chiefest, The reason proving the Pope to be of
greater authotie then the Mass.
and therefore ought to begin with it. But the Pope upon better aduisement, me
seemed notwithstanding to be the chiefest pillar. The reasons moving me so to
believe, are these, that the cause in dignity is before the effect, the
creator before the creature; the master before the servant, the Priest before
the sacrifice which he offers. The Pope is he that made and created the
Mass: as afterward (God willing) we will prove. Read the book Ceremon.
Pontifie. 1. Sect. cap. 3. also Sect. 12. cap. 10. and 4.
Therefore is the Pope of greater dignity then the Mass. This proves the
Pope to be master, and the sacrament his servant: because, when the Pope goes
from one people to another, he sends before him, yea and some time a day or
two days Journey, his sacrament upon a horse carrying at his neck a little
bell, accompained with the scumme and baggage of the Roman court. Thither go
the dishes and spits, old shoes, caldrons and kettels, and all the sculery of
the Court of Rome, whores and Iesters. Thus, the sacrament arrived with this
honorable train, at the place whither the Pope is to come, it there awayeth
his coming. And when the master is known to approach near the people, it
goes forth to receive him. Open thine eyes O Spain: or which is better. God
open them, and behold what account the Pope makes of the sacrament, which he
himself (saying it is thy God) for thy money, sells unto thee.

Friar John de Pineda, in the third part of his Ecclesiastical Monarchy, lib.
23. 2. says. That the first Pope, which caused the Sacrament to be carried
before him, was Benedict. 13. (a Spaniard) when for fear, he fled from France
into Aragon: and from that time remained it in custom, that the Pope carried
the most holy Sacrament, for his guard before him.

The Popes in this carrying of the Sacrament before them, do imitate the
kings of Persia, before whom went a horse, carrying a little Altar upon him:
whereupon, among a few ashes shone a small flame of holy fire: which they
called Orismada. This fire, as a certain divinity, did the Persians reverence
and adore. So that the King, to seem more then a man, and to be jointly
worshipped with the divinity, which did accompany him, with this pomp went he
publicly. Read for this purpose, the Emblem of Alciatus. Non tibi, sed
Religioni, page 17. where he treats of a little ass, that went laden with
mysteries.

He also that sacrifices, is of more dignity and estimation, then the
sacrifice which he offers. For God regards not so much the gift, or
sacrifice to him offered and presented, as the person that offers it. The
Lord, says the scripture, had respect to Abell, Genesis 4. 4.
and his present: and: to Caine and his present he had no regard. Hebrew, 11. 4.
The Apostle gives a reason saying. By says Abell offered to God a better
sacrifice then Caine. The Pope is the Priest, the Mass is the sacrifice which
he offers; Therefore is the Pope of more dignity then the Mass. By these
reasons, and others that may be drawn, I conclude, the Pope to be chief
pillar that susteyneth the Popish Church Of it we will first take hold: not to
support it, but to cast it down: and then we will after entreat of the Mass.
And this by the help of the almighty God, the Father son, and holy Ghost,
whose cause we here defend.

To this name Papa, Pope.
the like as to some other words has happened: Many words in old time taken
in good part, which are now taken in evil.
which in old time, were taken in good part, and were honorable titles, but
after, with the time, have been ill taken. For example Tyrannis was in old time
a King, and so King Latinus (as says Virgill Aeneid. 7.) called Aenaeas, whose
friendship he desired. Tyrant Sophista, was taken for a man of wisdom; now
for a deceiuer or a flatterer. Hostis did signify a stanger, now taken for an
enemy. Even so in old time, was Papa taken in good part, and given for a title
to Bishops, or ministers of Gods word: for in the Primitive Church, the Bishop,
Every Bishop or Minister in old time was called Pope.
Minister and Pastor were all one. Riches have since made the difference, as
now we see. Read to this purpose, the Epistle of Saint Jerome to Euagr. tom. 2.
That Papa was so taken as a foresaid, by the Epistle of the ancient Doctors as
namely, Ciprian, Dionysius, Alexandrinus, Jerome, Ambrose, Auguistine,
Sidonius, Appolinarius, and Gregory, and by the Acts of the Councels is
proved. The Grecians until this day, call their Priests, Papaous, the
Germanies call them Psaffen, and Flemings call them Papen, names which be
derined of this name Papa, Tome 2.
which in the Sicilian tongue (after Suidas signifies Father) Of all these
authors, I will allege here but only two. Jerome writing to Augustine, says,
Most heartily commend me I pray thee, to our holy and venerable, brother Pope
Alipius.

And writing to Pamachius, he says unto him: hold Pope Epiphanius: And writing
to Augustine, calls him Pope. In another place he says: Except Pope
Athanasius and Paulinus: yet neither Alipius, nor Pamachius, nor Epiphanius,
nor Aunor nor Athanasius nor Paulinus were ever Bishops of the Church of Rome.

Among the Epistles of Saint Ciprian, Epist. 7. lib. ^
there is one thus entitled: The Presbiters and Deacons abiding at Rome, send
greeting to Pope Ciprian. And this is to be noted, that the Church of Rome,
gives this title to Saint Ciprian, who was Bishop of Carthage, and never of
Rome. But when the couetuousnesse and ambition of the Bishop of Rome had so
increased, that he made himself a Prince, The Bishop of Rome seeks nothing
more then to be called Pope.
and universal Bishop, and therefore Antichrist, as Saint Gregory calls
him; then took he from other Bishops, the title of Pope, and reserved it only
to himself: So that none but the Bishop of Rome is now Pope: and being Bishop
of Rome, Antichrist.

Hence comes it, that to all the Godly, the name of Pope, is so horrible and
wicked: because it is only given to Antichrist. That which hereafter we will
say shall not be against the ancient and first taking of the name of Pope, but
against the second.

Which name, well agrees with him: for the Pope Popely all to himself: that
is to say, he deuonreth and glutteth it up: as he himself says, All power is
given me in heaven and in earth. And so the late writers take this name Papa,
pro Ingluuie, that is to say, gluttony, As Anthony de Lebrixa in his
dictionary does note it.

Jesus Christ, our Master, whose voice the Father commands us to hear, and
thereby, to govern our selves, has given us a sure mark, and infallible
token, to discern the good tree from the bad, the true Christian from the
false, the good shepherd from the hierling. A good tree (says he) brings
forth good fruit. Matthew. chap. 7. 17. This he says, that we may know the
hypocrites, by their fruits, or works; Speaking also of himself, he says,
The works which I do they bear witness of me, Ioh. chap. 5. verse. 30. The
same Lord says, that the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, and not
the hierling, but rather flies, Ioh. chap. 10. 11. Me^ cannot judge but that
which they see God only knows the heart. Following then the counsel which
the Lord has given us, let us see what has bin the life and doctrine of the
Popes until this day: and so will hold them, either for good or bad, for the
true ministers of Christ, Division of the Bishops of Rome into, 3. orders.
or of the devil. And to make that more manifest whereof we entreat, let us
divide into three parts or orders all the Bishops that have been in Rome. The
first shall conteyne, all those, that from the beginning, were Bishops, until
the time of Saint Siluester. The second, all those which were from Siluester,
unto Boniface. 3. The third, all those that have been from Boniface. 3. unto
Clement. 8. who this year of the Lord, 1600. does tyrannize in the Church.

Come we now to the first order. The first order.
The common opinion has been, that S. Peter was the first Bishop of Rome, the
which by holy scripture can no way, Saint Peter was not Bishop of Rome.
but the contrary rather, be proved. Many have handled this argument: to whom I
refer those that would know it. For my part, that which our adversaries say,
concerning this matter, to me seems impossible. First they soy, that S. Peter
^^ued after after Christ passion, 38. years. which they count in this manner.
That he was for a time in Iudaea and after at Antioch, where he was Bishop, 7.
years. So says Bartholmew Caranza, in his summa Conciliorum. But if that be
true which they say, that S. Peter lived but 38. years after Christ, the
Epistle of S. Paul to the Gal. shows this to be impossible.

Saint Paul also, in 1. chap. of his said Epistle declares, that after his
conversion, he went not to Jerusalem: but into Arabia, and thence turned to
Damascus; and that, 3. years after he came to Jerusalem; where he found Peter,
with whom he abode 15. days; not to learn ought of him, but to confer with
him. 14. years after this (as he says in the chapter following) he came
again to Jerusalem: where those that were pillars of the Church, James Cephas,
which is Peter, and John gave him the right hand of fellowship. These years
were, 18. at the least, 3. (says he) and afterward, 14. and the time which
passed from the Passion of Christ, Gal. 2. (...).
until S. Paul's going to Arabia. After this, they both were at Antioch: where
S. Paul reproved S. Peter for his dissimulation. If there he was seven years,
and twenty five years afterward at Rome, joined with the eighteen years,
before mentioned, shall make fifty years, at the least. Then shall it be
untrue which they say, that Saint Peper lived thirty eight years after the
death of Christ (as says Caranza in his summa Conciliorum) And much more
untrue shall be that, which Humfridus Panuinus, in the Chronicle of the Roman
Bishops, and in his annotation upon Platina, in the life of Saint Peter, says,
that Saint Peter was martyred 34. years, 3. moueths and 4. days, after the
passion of Christ. Count thus the years the S. Peter lived after Christ.

From the death of Christ, until the 2. year of the death of Claudius, were
10. years, all which time, Saint Peter abode in and departed not once from
Judea. This time passed, he came to Rome, where he abode 4. years, from
whence, by Claudius Edict against the Jews, he departed, and returned to
Jerusalem: from Jerusalem, he went to Antioch, and there abode, 7. years: in
which time died Claudius, and Nero succeeded him in the Empire. In the
beginning of Neros reign, S. Peter returned to Rome: whence, after some time,
he departed, and traveled almost throughout all Europe: which peregrination
being ended, he returned the third time to Rome. From Saint Peter's first
entrance into Rome, until his death were, 24. years, 5. months, and 12.
days, which joined with the 10. years before passed in Judea, make 34.
years, three months, and 4. days. All this says Panuinus. Herein, he
contraieth his own authors, which affirm Peter to have been 7. years in
Antioch, and 25. after at Rome. And Gracian, in a certain decree says, that
Saint Peter by revelation passed (or translated) his seat from Antioch to
Rome. And so Friar John de Pineda in the 3. part. book 20. chap. 5. Sect. 1,
following this opinion, says. In Antioch (before Rome) had S. Peter his seat
Papal. Caranza in his summa Conciliorum, speaking of S. Peter, counts thus.
He sat (says he) in the bishops chair at Antioch 7. years: and departing
thence, came to Rome in the time of the Emperor Claudius; where he sat in the
Bishops chair 25. years, 2. months, and 3. days. We see now the count of
Caranza and Panuinus to be false. In this they agree, that he was crucified at
Rome. Between the death of the Lord and the death of Nero, were 37. years.
The said Panuinus says, that S. Peter was crucified in the the last year of
Nero, then shall it be 37. years, and not as he says, 34. years, after the
death of Christ. The Legend, and Cannon say, that Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
were in one self same year, day, and hour beheaded at Rome. Saint Jerome
says, that Paul was killed with a sword, and Peter crucified: Eusebius says,
that the one was beheaded, and the other crucified. We demand, and chiefly of
our Spaniardes, which so much beeleeue these things. when came Saint Peter to
Rome, how long there stayed he, This proves S. Peter was nduep at Rome.
when, and of what kind of death, and where dyed he, who was his successor
(for some say Linus, others Clement) we shall find great confusion, and
disorder amongst them: as already we have seen? and how deal they so with
Christians whose faith is to be founded upon the word of God. The Popes
Supremacy, to be Peter's successor, they sell for an Article of our faith,
insomuch (as says Boniface. 8.) it was de necessitate salutis necessary to
salvation, and who so believed it not, could not be saved: behold upon what
holy scriptures it is founded? upon a legend of men's sayings disagreeing among
themselves. The cause taken away, the effect cease. If Saint Peter were not
Bishop of Rome, it follows, that all whatsoever is said touching the
succession, and Primacie of the Pope, is mere lies, and fashood. Also Saint
Peter's Commission was to be Apostle of the circumcision among the Jews, and
that of Saint Paul of the uncircumcision among the Gentiles. Gal. 2. 7. Saint
Paul to the Romans themselves, also says, Romans 15. 20.
that he preached the Gospel, where none had once made mention thereof: and
gives a reason. Beast he should seem to build upon a strange foundation.
Whereupon it follows, that Saint Peter was not at Rome. Also in the Epistles
which he wrote, being prisoner in Rome, he sent salutations from the faithful,
which were then in Rome, without any mention made of Saint Peter. And had he
been in Rome, it is to be thought, he would have named him. Read the 4. chapter
of the Epistle to the Colossians. from the 10. verse unto the 14. where he
says. Salute Aristareus, and Mark, and Jesus, called Iustus, which be of the
circumcision. These only be they, that assisted me in the kingdom of God and
were a comfort unto me. Whereupon it follows, that Saint Peter was not at
Rome, seeing he neither did assist, nor comfort him. This Epistle was written
from Rome. And in the 2. to Timoth. cap. 4. 1. 2 which some what before his
martyrdom he wrote the second time being prisoner in Rome: and in the Epistle
to Philemon, verse 23. and 24. Also in the Epistle which he wrote to the
Romans, he not once makes mention of Saint Peter, to whom no doubt he would
have sent salutations, had he been in Rome: and which is more: Saint Peter,
being Bishop at Rome (as they say) 25. years. Read the last chap. of this
epistle, and thou shall see the catalogue which S. Paul makes from the fifth
verse to the fifteenth, he says only: Salute such a one, salute such a one,
etc. without naming of Saint Peter. Because he neither was Bishop of Rome, nor
yet was in Rome. Also, the Jews which dwelled in Rome (as recites S. Luke,
Act. 28. 21. 22.) said to S. Paul, when he came prisoner to Rome, that they
had not heard nor understood any thing concerning him: and prayed him to
declare his opinion touching that sect, which was gainsayd and evil spoken of
in all places, understanding by this sect the Gospel which Saint Paul
preached. Who will believe that S. Peter which (as they say) was before come to
Rome, and a Minister of the Circumcision, had not taught nor spoken ought unto
them of the Gospel? These reasons taken out of holy Scripture, are me seems
(as they be) very sufficient to prove the common opinion holden of S. Peter's
being Bishop of Rome, and that 25. years, to be false. Whereupon that of the
Papists appears plainly to be mere ignorance, or (which is worse) extreme
malice, when they call the Pope Saint Peter's successor, Vicar of Jesus Christ,
as though he were Saint Peter, and therefore universal Bishop. Against the
Primacie of the Pope, we will speak in the end of this Treatise.

Seeing then Saint Peter was not Bishop of Rome, Linus.
we place Linus for the first. All the Bishops of Rome that were from Linus to
Syluester (who was in the time of the Emperor Constantine the great) whom we
will put in the first order, were in general truly Bishops and holy men, who
with their good doctrine, and holy life and conversation, wrought great fruit
in the Church of God: They were the salt of the earth, the light of the world,
a City built upon a mountain, a candle light, and set upon a candlestick.
These be the titles wherewith Christ adorneth his apostles and ministers, Math.
5. These were the Angels of God according to the saying of Malachie; Mal. 2.
6. 7.
speaking of Levy, and consequently, of the good Ministers: The law of truth
(says he) was in his mouth, and no iniquity was found in his lips: In peace
and equity he walked with me, and turned away from iniquity: For the priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth:
for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. Many more titles are comprised in
the holy scriptures, wherewith the true ministers are adorned: which I will
pass over, to avoid tediousnes. In the end, these good bishops of Rome,
sealed the Gospel which they had preached with their blood: and so were
Martyrs of Jesus Christ. Men they were, poor in spirit, and simple of heart,
strangers to couetosnes and ambition. they were true bishops for the space of
almost three hundred years: 300 years good bishops in Rome.
And so the Church of the Lord having such ministers, was then happy, and rich
in the sight of God: albeit in the eyes of men, contemptible and miserable;
such as the Apostle in the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
from the 36. to the 38. verse describes. Others (says he) have benetryed by
mocking, and scourgings, yea, moreover by bonds and imprisonment. 37. Others
were stoned; others were hewn asunder. Others were tempted. others slain with
the sword. Others wandered up and down in sheep skins, and in goats
skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented 38. whom the world was
unworthy of: they wandered in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves
of the earth, etc. These Bishops carried on their heads, not Miters, but coifes,
not honor, but dishonor: not riches, but poverty: following herein their
Master, as Esaias the Prophet in his chapter 53. 3. does lively describe him.
Despised and forsaken of men: a man full of sorrows, having experience of
infirmities, and we hid (as it were) our faces from him; he was despised, and
we esteemed him not. This was the outward appearance of the Primitive Church;
and so has it been in our time: since the reformation of the Church began
these 70. or 80. years unto this time, how many have bin burned, drowned,
beheaded, hanged, banished, shamefully disgraced and died of hunger. Truly
innumerable; and that which is more admirable, the more they burned and killed,
the more they increased and multiplied. For the blood of the Martyrs (as says
Tertullian) is the seed of the Gospel. From the passion of the Lord, unto
Saint Siluester, which is the time of the first order, were almost three
hundred years: wherein the Emperors of Rome became Lords of Spain. The
Romans in two hundred and so many years, that they conquered Spain, until
the time of Augustus Caesar, were never absolute Lords thereof. Augustus was
the first that vanquished the Montanists and Biscayes, and made himself
absolute Lord of all Spain.

The Romists, as those (say they) that have held the command and staff for
many years, to give antiquity and authority to their ceremonies, and humane
traditions, have falsely reported, that many of these good Bishops of Rome
(whom we place in the first order) ordained them. Clement the fourth Bishop of
Rome (say they) ordained the confirmation of young children, the Mass, and
holy garments wherewith the Priests are clothed. They do not consider that he
was a a man poor, and for preaching of the Gospel banished into mines, where
he hewed Marble stones, and tied in the end to an anchor, they cast him into
the sea.

D. Illescas, speaking of Pope Caius in his Pontifical history says: He
ordained that no lay man might bring a Clearke to judgment: That no pagan nor
heretic might make accusation against a Christian, etc. How can this be true,
since Caius lived and died in the time of the tenth persecution: which (as
Illescas himself says) was of all the most cruel, and lasted many years?
Let the Romists be ashamed, and cease with lies to confirm their religion. Now
is it not the time that was wont to be, when the blind led the blind, etc. So
say they also, that Euaristus, Alexander and Sistus, fifth, sixth and seventh
Bishops of Rome, made the popish decrees; namely, the ordering of the Clergy:
holy water, and holy garments. Telesphorus (say they) that was the eighth
Bishop of Rome, ordained three Masses to be said on the day of the Natituitie.
These good Bishops had other cares, and embraced not such childish and
superstitious toys. Saciety and idleness brought them forth. O what evils
have riches wrought to the Church of God? Wisely therefore said Frederick the
Emperor: Detrahamus illis nocentes diuitias: hoc enim facere, opus est
charitatis: Let us take away, (speaking of the Pope and clergy) the riches,
which so much hurt them, for this to do is a work of charity.

Here it is to be noted (as recites Panuinus in his chronicle) 30 Sismes to
have bin; 1. Sisme.
and that which happened in the year 252. between Cornelius and Nouatus, is
counted for the first: and the same only happened in the first order: wherein were
good all the Roman Bishops, except Marcellinus, who offered incense to Idols:
but touched by God, he greatly repented, so came into the Council holden at
Sessa, in the kingdom of Naples; where were present (as says D. Illescas)
three hundred Bishops and thirty Presbiters, or (as says Platina) 180.
Bishops, and there asked he with tears, God and them pardon, of the most
grievous sin which he had committed. From Sessa he went to Rome and there did
chide Dioclesian for compelling him to sacrifice to Idolles: wherefore
Dioclesian commanded to kill him. When Marcellinus was dead, the seat was
void 7. years and a half; as says Illescas, and 25. days, or (as says
Platina) 25. days.

The second order contains the bishops of Rome from Siluester 1. The 2. order.
unto Boniface the 3. These neither in life, nor doctrine agreed by far with the
bishops of the first order. For persecution now ceassing, they gave themselves
to idleness and pleasure and made Cannons, and Decrees, whereby they prepared
the seat of great Antichrist. Those of the second order were called for the
space of 200. Archbishops.
years Archbishops. It is to be understood, that from the year 320. unto that
of 520. afterward, from the year 520. unto that of 605. they were called
Patriarks. Patriarks. Liberius an Arrian.
S. Siluester was then the first Archbishop, whom Marcus, Julius. 1. and
Liberius succeeded: Liberius in the beginning of his Bishopdome thought well of
the divinity of the son of God; and for ought the Arian Emperor Constantius
did, would not be drawn to condemn Athanasius: for which cause he was
banished Rome. Theodoretus lib. 2. ca. 16. of his history, recites the
conference that passed between him and Constantins, when he was banished;
wherein Liberius showed himself very constant. Three years (says Platina)
and others say less, was Liberius banished. The Romans at this time held a
Council, Felix. 2.
wherein they chose for bishop Felix second. This Felix (as says Platina) was
a very good man: and so by his liking, and consent of 48. bishops, Vrsacius,
and Valens, which held part with Constantius the Arrian Emperor, were deposed.
These two went to Constantius and complained upon Felix, praying the Emperor
to restore again Liberius, who wearied with the trouble of his banishment, and
now changed his opinion, through ambition, and the counsel of Fortunatus,
Bishop of Aquilea. His banishment pardoned, and Liberius restored to his
Bishoprike, in and by all things (as says Platina) he agreed with the
heretics. This restoring of Liberius, and deposing of Felix caused great
tumult in Rome, so that the matter came to blows, and many Priests and
Ecclesiastical men, even in the Churches were murdered. This was the second
Sisme. 2. Sisme.


In that which I have said of Liberius and Felix, I have followwed Platina, who
upon the life of Felix says, that faulting in nothing which became a true and
good Christian, he was caught with many more good Christians, and so by the
adversaries murdered. Athanasius, in an Epistle written to such as led a
solitary life, says plainly, that Liberius after two years of his banishment
passed, being threatened wrth death, changed his opinion: and subscribed
against Athanasius. Jerome in his Chronicle says, that Liberius overcome with
disdain of banishment, subscribed to that wicked heresy Tome 1. Council. It is
said, that when Liberius was entered Rome, he agreed with the heretic
Constantius. The same says Damasus in his book de Pontif. And Platina, and
Alonso venero, in his Enchiridion of times, and John Stella, and others. Bale
says, With ambition Gigas says, that Liberius moved with the martyrdom of
Felix, and fearing the like agreed with the Arrians, and approved their
doctrine. No mention is made of Liberius repentance, and therefore he is
counted among the Arrian Popes. Damasus his successor for this cause condemned
Liberius, That which one Pope does another undoes.
and all that he did. But Gregory 7. that abominable Pope, as afterward in his
life shall appear, canonized notwithstanding this Arrian Liberius, and
commanded (says Card. Benon) his feast to be celebrated. Panuinus the Popes
great parasite, in his chronicle of Bish. calls him S. Liberius. The Pope erreth
in faith.
Behold, if that which is said be true, that many be holden for Saints, whose
souls are burning in hell. Behold if the Pope may err in ^aith.

To write the life of this Liberius has cost me some travel, and diversity of
opinions, the cause. Some hold him for a Catholic, others for an Arrian, and
both the one and the other say truth. For in the beginning of his Bishopdome he
was (as we have said) a Catholic, but after without repentance, an obstinate
Arrian. Note we here what an evil beast is ambition. He that stands, let him
take heed lest he fall. It suffices not to begin well, but to end well is
needful. He that continues to the end (says the Lord) shall be saved. God
give us grace to tame our ambition, which we all have need of. For there is
none which reputeth not himself for a demi-God: and give us strength in
afflictions, which for his name we suffer. Remember we Liberius. But what
speak I of Liberius? Remember we Solomon, that so well began, but how
proceeded he afterward? The Lord govern us unto the end.

In the time of this Liberius, and in the city of Tagasta in Affrike, was
borne the great Doctor and light in the Church, Saint Augustine: and on the
same day (they say) that Pelagius the heretic was borne in great Britain. Oh
the great mercy of God, that provided an Antidote against the poison of
Pelagius!

Damasus, Damasus.
a Portugal (as we have said) condemned Liberius. Damasus was very devout and
ceremonious. Panuinus in his Chronicle notes, that all the Bishops of Rome
until Damasus, were chosen and consecrated upon one self same day. But
afterward (says he) this was not so observed. Upon the day of Consecration,
now called coronation, is a solemn triumph holden in Rome. So much have
increased the riches, power, ambition, and pride of those which call themselves
the Fishers successors. In this time flourished Saint Jerome, and was a dear
friend of Damasus, as by their writings appears. Between Damasus and Vrsinus
was the third Sisme. The 3. Sisme. 384.


But in the 367. year Vrsinus renounced, and was made Bishop of Naples.
Damasus died in the 384. year, and Siricius succeeded him.

Siricius (as says Gracianus, Siricius. Concerning the forbidding of marriage,
read afterward in Gregory.
did. 82.) was he that first forbad marriage to the Western priests: which
ordination many nations, and chiefly our country of Spain, nothing esteemed.
Wherefore Hymerius, then Bishop of Tarragona, wrote to Siricius, that the
priests of Spain would not obey the law which commanded them to leave their
wives. At the hearing whereof Siricius was angry, and said, That such as were
in the flesh could not please God, Romans 8. 8. The same Siricius alleges this
authority in the fourth epistle which he wrote to the Bishops of Africa.
Siricius understanding this place, of married folks, writhed and wrested the
scripture. So also was this place wrested by Innocent the first. But S. Paul
by this (in the flesh) meant not married folks, for thereby should he condemn
the estate of matrimony, instituted by God in Paradise, Genesis 3. 24. and
sanctified by his son Jesus Christ with his presence working there his first
miracle, Ioh. 2. 11. Very well knew the Apostle, Marriage to be honorable among
all men, and the bed undefiled. Very well did he know, that God would chastise
fornicators and adulterers. Heb. 13. 4. Wherefore he commands, that they which
had not the gift of chastity should marie. 1. Cor. 7. 2 9. And he himself
defends the liberty, which he and Barnabas, being Apostles, had, to have
their wives, and to carry them with them. Or have not we authority (says he,
1. Cor. 9. 5.) to lead about a sister (that is to say, faithful) as well as the
other Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, etc. Paul then (with favor of
Siricius, and Innoncent 1.) by being in the flesh, understands not the married
but carnal men, and unregenerate by the Spirit of God. Such (says he, be they
single, married, or widows) cannot please God. And that this is so, appears
by that which the same Apostle, speaking to the Romans, of whom many were
married, says, But you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, because the
Spirit of God dwells in you, etc. Romans 8. 9. By this interpretation which
Siricius and Pope Innocent 1. The Pope erreth in the interpretation of the
Scripture.
made of the place of S. Paul, shall our adversaries see, albeit they deny
it, that the Pope may err and that in the interpretation of the Scriptures.
Siricius after Platina having been Pope almost 16. years, died and Anastasius
the first, Innocentius the first, Zozimus the first, and Bonifacius the first
succeeded him.

Between Boniface and Eulalius, Boniface. 1. Sisme. 4. 420.
was the 4. Sisme in the year 420. Eulalius very unwillingly renounced: but
yet was made Bishop in Campania. Celestine succeeded Boniface: Sistus 3.
succeeded Celestine; who being falsely accused, made answer for himself in an
open Sinod, and Bassus his adversary, was condemned. The councels were then
above the Pope.

Leo 1. Gelasius. 1.
Hilarious, Simplicius, Felix 3. Gelasius succeeded Sistus. To this Gelasius,
that notable saying, of communicating in both kinds is attributed; which we
will allege in the Treatise of the Mass. After Gelasius 1. Anastasius 2
succeeded.

Anastasius 2. Anastasius 2. an heretic.
took part with the Eutichians, and other heretics, and communicated with
them* For confirmation hereof, read Gracian in the decree did. 19. Cap.
Secundum ecclesiae Catholicae: And Cap. Anastasius. And the 2. Tome of the
Councels: and Platina. Believe not the Popes Parasites, (as be D. Illescas, and
the two late writers, Albertus Pighius, and Diego de Couarrunias whom he
alleges) Anastasius in doing his needs, Anno 417. the Goths began to reign
in Spain.
voided (say Volateramus and Platina) his guts into the draught. At this time
in Spain the Goths reigned: who began there to reign in the year of the
Lord. 417. where expelling the Roamanes, and other nations, they reigned three
hundred years. After Anastasius succeeded Symachus.

Between Symachus and Laurencius, Symachus. The 5. Sisme. 498
was the 5. Sisme But Laurencius renounced; and in the 498. year (as says
Panuinus) was made Bishop of Nucesino after Symachus, succeeded Hormisda.

Hormisda Campanus, Hormisda the the first Patriarch. 520
was the first (as says S. Isidor) that by means of Justin the Emperor in the
520. year, of an Archbishop was made Patriarch, by little and little they
proceeded, they will shortly be Popes, He excommunicated the Emperor.
I would say perfect Antichrists. He excommunicated the Emperor Anastasius:
because he said the Emperor was to command, Anno. 523.
and the Bishop to obey. At this time began Antichrist to appear. John 1.
Ambassador.
Hormisda died, in the 523. year, Genselaricus reigning in Spain and John 1.
succeeded Hormisda. John. 1. a Tuscan, being made Patriark was jointly with
others sent Ambassador for Theodoricus king of Italy, unto Justinius the
Emperor. The Bishops of Rome had not as yet that absolute, or to speak better,
that dissolute power which now they hold. He died a Martyr. in the 527. year.
I cannot omit a ridiculous history, which Friar John de Pineda, speaking of
this John the first, reports for a miracle. About to go (says he) to the
Emperor, he took a borrowed horse, which when Pope John was mounted upon him,
would not permit his masters wife to ride. Felix the third called the fourth
succeeded John: and Boniface the second succeeded Felix.

In the 530. 6. Sisme. Boniface 2. 530.
year was the 6. Sisme between Boniface the second and Dioscorus. After
Boniface, John the 2. Agapetus, Siluerius, Vigilius succeeded.

Vigilius a Roman, Vigilius
and a crafty accuser of his predecessor Siluerius, by deceit aspired to the
Bishopdome: whereunto he was advanced by means of Theodora Augusta, and of
Antonina, the wife of Belisarius. But God who is just, gave them both their
reward. Vigilius by subtilty, and Siluerius (the son of Pope Hormisda) by
force, The 7. Sisme.
obtained the Bishopdome. This was the seventh Sisme. And Theudiselo or
Theodisco in Spain at this time reigned.

Pelagius a Roman, Pelagius.
was the first that affirmed the primacie of the Church of Rome to depend
neither of the Councels, The Primacie of Rome.
nor men, but of Christ himself, did. 21. But the Cannonists are against him
saying: The Cannonists agree not with the Pope.
that Omnis maioritas and minoritas, etiam Papatus est de iure positiuo: that
is, all maioritie and minority, yea the Popedom it self, is of the positive
law. He ordained that Ecclesiastical persons should pray (or mumble up) the
seven Canonical hours, which be the Mattens, Prime, Third, Sixth, Tenth, the
Euenings and Completes.

Pelagius ordained (says D. Illescas) that the Priests should each day pray
over the seven hours, The 7. Canonical hours.
which we call Canonical. And the same Illescas upon the life of Sabinianus,
says: Sabinianus was the first that set an order in prayer, dividing the
Office into seven hours, which we call Canonical. How can Sabinia^^us be the
first that ordained the 7. Canonical hours, if Pelagius had first ordained
them? This institution was an occasion that Ecclesiastical persons should not
read the Bible. And so we see that very few Churchmen in Spain have the Bible
in their houses: but none of them is with his Breuiarie, which all of them do
hold for a very Catholic book* but the Bible in general, do they call a
book of heresies. One day will God punish this blasphemy. In the time of this
Pelagius, Agila reigned in Spain, and in the 561. year, John 3. suc^eded
Pelagius. John 3. contrary to his predecessor.
John 3. made a contrary decree, to that which his predecessor Pelagius had
made; and Did. 99. commanded; that none should call him high priest, nor
universal bishop. So one Pope did that, which another undid: one commanded
that another forbad: In his time the Armenians became Christians* and
Athanagilda now reigned in Spain. After John. 3 succeeded Benedict, and
Pelagius 2.

Pelagius 2. Pelagius 2. sa^^sfieth the ^mperour.
a Roman (the city being environed contray to the wonted custom, and without
the Emperors command) was made chief Bishop. For which cause he sent
Gregory, who after him was Bishop, to Constantinople, to satisfy and appease
the wrath of the Emperor. 590.
In the 590. year died Pelagius, and then Leonogildo reigned in Spain.

Gregory 1. a Roman, was of best life, and more learned then any of the
Patriarchs his predecessors: yet very ceremonious: as by so many suprestitions
by him brought into the Church, The first pardons and indulgences.
appears. He was the first that granted Indulgences to such, as at certain
times would come to the church: Pardons he granted: The soul of Traia^ brought
out of Hell.
but sold them not (as his successors) for money He brought back from Hell
(says Damascen) the Soul of the unfaithful Emprour Traian; (O horrible lie!)
Pero Mexia upon the life of Traian says; that which is said of the soul of
Traian to be a fabulons Jest Illescas upon the life of Gregory 1. holds it
for a very truth, and condemns Pero Mexia: In the following treatise of the
Mass, will we speak of this matter. This good did Gregory; Gregory 1. a
great enemy to the Primacy
that both by words and deeds, he was mortal enemy to the Primacie: and so
wrote against the name of universal bishop (as we will afterward declare)
against which, Servant of Gods servant.
he called himself the servant of Gods servants; which title have his
successors (but hypocritically) holden; seeing that calling themselves
seruanth, they have made themselves lords of the world, and kings, Emperors
and Monarkes kiss their feet, and if the Pope will do them that grace and
favor, they hold themselves happy.

Gregory much complained that in the world were so many Priests, and so few
prachers of the Gospel. Of this S. Gregory, Marriage forbidden, and again
permitted to priests.
Huldricke Bishop of Augusta, in an Epistle sent to Pope Nicholas 1. recites a
notable history, the sum whereof is this. That Saint Gregory commanded,
priests should not marry: but afterward understanding they secretle
committed great filthiness; and for that cause much murder ensued, by
command he disanulled his decree: affirming it better to marry, then to give
occasion of murder. Wherefore sending upon a time to fish, 6000. heads of
young children in a pond.
they found in a fish poole, or pond, 6000. heads of young children, that had
there been drowned. Which Gregory seeing to proceed of constrained single
life, sorowing and sighing from his heart, The fruits of Popish single life.
he then revoked his decree. For that not only (as says the same Huldricke)
they had not abstayned from maids, and married women, but defiled themselves
also with their kindred, with males, and brute beasts. Such are the fruits of
Popish chastity, The saying of Pope Pius. 2. agsing constrained single life.
and their Angelical life. These things considered by Pope Pius 2. with great
reason (said he) he forbad Priests marriage, but with much more reason he
ought to restore it them again. And in another place: It shall not happily be
worst, Note before upon Siritius and after in Paul 2.
that the greater part of priests do marry: for many are saved in their
marry priesthood, which in their barren priesthood are condemned. The same Pius
2. (as witnesses Celius. 2.) supressed certain Monasteries of Nuns of Saint
Bridgit and S. Clares order; 604.
commanding them thence to depart, and no longer to burn in lust, lest they
shrouded a whore under a religions habit. In the 604. years dyed Saint
Gregory, at this time Leonigildo the Arrian that martyred Herminigildo his
son, Sabinianus.
reigned in Spain.

Sabinianus, successor of Gregory 1. was the last Patriarch of Rome, a man
very simple, and so much hated Gregory his predecessor, that he caused his
books to be burned. Only will I here set down a fable of the death of this
Sabinian. reported by Bergomenso, for a very truth. Saint Gregory (says he)
being dead, three times appeared to Sabinianus, and sharply reproved him for
seeking to defame him; One Pope being dead killed another.
but his speech could nothing a mend Sabinianus (which seeing S. Gregory) he
gave such a blow upon the head of Sabinianus that he made him die miserably.
Mon. eccl. part. 3. lib. 17. cap. 10. 1. hereof is made mention. 605.
If this be true then one Pope killed another. In the 605. year dyed
Sabinianus. This Sabinianus (says Illescas) was the first that set an order in
prayer, dividing the Office into the 7. Canonical hours: the same said he of
of Pelagius 1. At this time reigned in Spain Recaredo king the Goths, who
destroyed the Aryan heresy, which most part of the Goths maintained.

The third and last order conteyneth those Bishops, The 3. order
which we properly call Popes, and be very Antichrists. As Boniface 3. began
this order until Clement, 8. who now tyranizeth, has continewed, and in the
last Pope shall take end. Whom Christ will destroy with the spirit of his
mouth, 2. These. 2. 8.
as he destroyed his prodecessours. And so shall the end come. The Bishops of
the first order were the Angels of God, holy in life and Doctrine. These of the
second, were men, subject to falling: but these truly of the 3. are devils
incarnate. Not by any figure Hiperbole, or exaggeratio^: but plainly do I
speak this, I know it to be so, as by their lives we will afterward prove.

Boniface 3. Boniface 3. the 1. Pope.
and first in this Catalogue, was a most ambitious devil: And being Patriarch
of Rome, was made Pope by means of Phocas the Emperor, who was an adulterer,
murderer and tyrant. A murderer I call him, for that to make himself Emperor
(as he did) he murdered Mauricius his Lord and Christian Emperor.

This Boniface 3. Phocas granted Rome to be head of the Churches.
(by many requests and gifts, which break the very rocks much more Phocas)
obtained of Phocas, that the Roman seat should be called the head of all
Churches. Three miserable things at this time happened: the most noble Empire
began to fall: the Popedom to arise and Mahometisme to spring up. The fall of
the Empire.
Of the ruins of the empire, these two beasts arose, which so much have
harmed the Church of Christ. The Pope and Mahomet arise.
And by how much the more the Empier decayed, by so much the more these two
beasts increased. It is now almost 1000. years since, that by superstition and
false Doctrine, the light of the Gospel began to be darkened. This miserable
first Pope, before a year of his Popedom was fully ended, went to visit the
Devil the Father of ambition, and with him there remains. And albeit this
first Pope was so ambitious and, in his Ambition obstinately dyed. Yet Panuinus
calls him Saint Boniface notwithstanding. At this time in Spain, the most
Catholic Recaredo 1. reigned.

Boniface 4. Boniface 4.
succeeded Boniface 3. who (as says Platina) obtained of Phocas the Emperor
the Temple which they called Pantheon (to wit of all the Gods, because it was
dedicated to Sibylla, and all the others Gods. This Temple did Boniface
dedicate unto the blessed virgin, and all the Martyrs, which now is called S.
Mary's the round. And thus far Platina.

Don Alonso of Carthagena Bishop of Burgos, upon the life of King Recaredo,
says these words: Phocas granted to the blessed Boniface 4. Bishop of Rome,
the Temple called Pantheon, to be consecrated in the honor of the blessed
virgin Mary, and of all the saints: as in the legend of that feast, celebrated
the first day of November, more largely is contained thus far the Bishop.

Here is to be noted the saying of the Bishop, Platina and many others. That
the Pope demanded of the Emperor this Temple, and that the Emperor did
grant it. Doctor Illescas, as a flatterer of the Pope, in his Hist. Pontif.
says, that Boniface did consecrate the Temple, etc. the which (says he) well
pleased the Emperor Phocas: and says not: that he demanded it of the
Emperor, least he he should seem to impeach the authority of the Pope. Of
that which we have said it follows; that the Pope was not then Lord of Rome:
For had he so been, The false donation of Constantine.
he would not have requested the Temple of the Emperor. This only reason
(were there no other) suffices to prove the donatio^ of Constantine (as they
call it) to be false, which was almost 300. years before: wherein he made the
Pope (says they) absolute Lord of Rome, and of many other lands which they
call S. Peter's patrimony. The Pope, as a thief, has either stolen it from the
Emperor, Anno. 613.
or as tyrant by force has life himself up with him. In the 613, year dyed
Boniface. At which time in Spain the great Catholic Recaredo 1 reigned. Deus
dedit.
Theodatus, or Deus dedit, Godfathers The G^dfather should not marry with the
Godmother.
ordained Godfathers and Godmothers to be had in baptism: and that the
godfather should not marry with the Godmother, nor the goddaughter with the son
of the Godfather. This Pope died in the 616 year, and at that time in Spain
Huiterico reigned. Boniface 5. ordained, thieves and murderers, which fled to
the Churches or Churchyardes, might not be drawn from thence, Boniface. 5.
which has emboldened many to commit great villainies, The Church a refuge for
evil doers.
and flying to a Church have freely escaped without any punishment. And these
they call sanctuary men. He dyed in 622. year. In which time reigned Sesibuto
in Spain. After Boniface. 5. succeeded Honorius 1. A Monothelite heretic he
was, and for such a one (as says Friar John de Pineda. part. 3. lib. 17. cap
34. 1.) in the 13. 16. and 17. Acts, of the 6. Anno. 622.
Council of Constantinople, coneemned. The which by a letter of the Emperor,
and by a another from Leo. 1. to the Emperor, is confirmed. D. Illescas, as he
which could not believe that any Pope could err, calls Honorius a holy and
commendable Bishop. Panuinus to excuse Honorius says, that the copies of the
6. Council of Constantinople be corrupted: he gives his excuse. Seuerinus
succeeded Honorius. John. 4. Theodorus, and Martinus.

Martine. Martinus. 1. Crowns.
1. ordained that Priests should carry Crowns, to wit, the head shaued,
leaving a circle upon it, which they call a Crown. The Pope this commanding,
did not imitate Christ, nor his Apostles, who never had shaven Crowns: but the
Priests of the Idols, which (as says Baruc) had their heads and beardes
shaven, Baruc 6. 30.
and sat bare headed in the houses of their Gods. Let our adversaries see, if
their Priests do not the like. Wherein they imitate doutlesse, the Priests
of the Idols. He commanded, that bishops every year should consecrate holy
ointment, Holy ointment Vow of Chasttitie.
and send it through their Dioses. He imposed upon Priests the vow of
Chastity, a very hard yoke, and borne but of a few, as in Gregory 1. we have
noted. In the. 653. year dyed Martinus 1. Anno. 653.
Sisenando then reigning in Spain, and Eugeniup, and Vitelianus succeeded
Martinus. Vitelanus.


Vitelianus ordained the song, Divine service in Latin.
and organs in the Church. He commanded, the hours, singinges, ceremonies,
and Masses should be celebrated in the Latin tongue: contrary to that which
says the Apostle: the use of strange tongues is unprofitable, and therefore
without interpretation of that which is said, not to be used. Anno. 672.
1. Cor. 14. Vitelianus dyed in the 672. year in whose time Tulga reigned in
Spain, after Vitelianus succeeded Adeodatus, Agathus. 1.
Donus, and Agathus.

Agathus commanded, Popish constitutions be Apostolical
that the constitutions of the chief Bishop should be holden for Apostolical,
as pronounced by the mouth of God (O grievous blasphemy!) In this time was
celebrated the sixth general Council in Canstantinople, where marriage to the
Grecian priests was permitted but to the Latin priests forbidden. Marriage to
the Greek priests permitted.
This Agathus sent to the 6. Council an Epistle, wherein he condemned Honorius
1. for a Monothelite. In the 682. Anno. 682.
year dyed Agathus, and Leo 2 Benedict. 2. and John 5. succeeded him

John. Sisme 8.
5. being dead, then arose the 8. Sisme, and 2. Popes were elected, Petrus and
Theodoretus: which being deposed, in the 606. The 9. Sisme.
year was Cunon chosen. Cunon dying in the 687. year was the 9. Sisme and 2.
Popes Theodor and Pascall, were elected. Both which deposed, Sergius who was
Pope thirteen years, eight months, and thirteen days, was chosen. After
Sergius succeeded John. the 6. John the 7. Sisimus and Constantine the first.
Constantine 1.


Constantine 1. The first Pope that gave his feet to be kissed.
was called of the Emperor Iustinianus to go to Constantinople: He was the
first that gave his feet to the Emperor his Lord to be kissed. And against
the first commandment of God, Images.
Thou shall not make to thy self any Image, etc. Anno. 716. dissipation of
Spain.
he commanded Images to be placed in the Temples and worshipped. He dyed in
the 716. year. At this time was the miserable dissipation of Spain, made by
the Moors of Affrik with the aid of the Count Don Julian. Don Rodrigo then
king, Gregory. 2.
the last of Goths, end the first unfortunate.

Gregory 2. Gregory. 3.
and Gregory 3. continewed the commandment of Image Worship, Leo the Emperor
excommunicated. 731. 741.
contrary to the commandment of God. And Leo the Emperor for not allowing
them, was excommunicate. In the 731. year dyed Gregory 2. and in the 741.
year Gregory 3. In the time of Gregory 2. Don Pelayo reigned in Spain, and
in the time of Gregory the third Don Fasila. Zacharias.


Zacharias, The Church vestments decked with gold, etc.
was the first that invented to adorn the Church vestiments with gold and
precious stones. He was also the first that attributed to himself, Making and
vnmaking of Kings.
a certain divine power: concontemptuously took upon him to make and depose
kings. He was the first that absolved vassals of their oath made to their
Lords: which Childerick King of France (whom the foresaid Zachary deposed at
the instance of Pipin the little bastard son of Charles Martell, vassal of
Childericke) tried. In this Zachary and Pipin, the old proverb was verified.
Un mulo rasca a otro, y Hazme la barua, y hazer tehe el copete. One mule
rubbeth another, and do thou form and I Will do thee.

The Pope had need of Pipins aid, to exempt himself from the subjection of
the Emperor of Greece, his Lord. Saint Gregory writing to the Emperor,
called him Lord. Pipin and and his successors the kings of France, mindful of
this benefit, did great service to the sea Apostolic. The king of France most
Chrsten and why.
And for being such loyal servants, he gave unto them, the name of Most
Christen. All that which the Pope holds, and all that almost which was the
Kings of France (for that which they say of Constantines donation is mockery
and lies, The donation of Constantine.
as Laurencius Valla, and other learned men have proved) it may be, and is so
to be thought, that God will raise up some of France, which will take it from
him, seeing by himself it is so il used. Zachary dyed in the 752. Anno. 752.
year, In his time Don Alonso the first called Catholic reigned in Spain.
The king of Spain Catholic.


Stephen 2. (or as some call him, 3. because Stephen 2. was before him,
Stephen. 2.
which was not Pope, but 3. or 4. days) being invaded by Astolpho king of
Lombardie, sent with great instance, to demand aid of Pipin; who was very
diligent to serve him, and taking Exarcado from the Emperor, gave it to the
Pope. The donation of Constantine.
This is the black donation which they falsely call Constantines. Pipin
prostrate on the ground before the Pope kissed his feet, Pipin kissed the
Popes feet, etc.
held his stirrup with one hand, and his bridle with the other. Thus the king
of France made the Pope rich, and the Pope seeing himself rich, made himself
mighty, high, presumptuous, a tyrant, God in the earth, over all Christian
Princes, and them his vassalls, and feodaries. In the 757. year dyed this
Stephen, Anno. 757.
In his time in Spain reigned Froila.

Paul 1. Paul 1.
excommunicated the Emperor Constantine 5. who nothing regarding the foolish
excommunication, perseuered to forbid that, which God in his holy law
forbids. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, Exodus 20.
etc. This Paul (as says Vicelius, the Popes notable parasite) exceeding much
reverenced the body of Saint Petronilla, daughter of Saint Peter: upon whose
marble tomb (as says Carsulano) he found this Epitaph written with the proper
hand of Saint Peter (a lie qualified with supersticion) To Petronilla made of
gold, A notable lie.
most sweet daughter. Anno. 767.
Paul dyed in the 767. year and Aurilio, in his time reined in Spain. The 10.
Sisme.
Great Sisme, which was the 10. arose in the Roman Church, wherein Theophilatus,
which renounced, and Constantine, Constantine. 2. a lay man without any order
was made.
that was deposed, were chosen.

Constantine 2. by means of his brothee Desiderius King of Lumbardy, albeit he
had many competitors, was made Pope. In this Pope a very rare thing happened,
that he being a lay or or secular man, Pope.
was imediately made Pope. And therefore of many, not reckened among the Popes.
One year very pontifically he executed the Popes office In whose time, The
Council deposes the Pope.
a Council was holden, wherein he was deposed. And it was commanded, that all
whatsoever Constantine 2. had done and ordained (Baptism and holy ointment
excepted) should be void, and of no vallewe. I demand now of our adversaries,
what think they of the Bishops and priests in this Popes time, and that which
they did by his authority? What: say they of the Masses which the, celebrated,
did they consecrate, or no? If they did not consecrate, then the Pope that
ordained them, was not Pope, nor they priests. And so both Pope, and they were
disgraded, and by the same reason, all those that heard their Masses did commit
Idolatry according to their own Cannons, which say: that he cosnecrateth not
which is no Priest. And moreover it is meet the priest have an intent to
consecrate; which wanting, there is no consecration at all. Constantine thus
deprived, was put into a monastery, and his eyes, pulled out: but king
Desiderius his brother revenged this injury, by pulling out their eyes that
pulled out the eyes of his brother Cestantine. The 11. Sisme.
Silo at this time reigned in Spain. Now also was the eleventh Sisme. wherein
Phillip was chosen; but at the endeoffiue he days was deposed, Stephen 3.
and Stephen elected.

Stephen 3. or after others 4. demanded aid of Charles the great, against
Desiderius king of Lumbardie. This Stephen, condemned the acts of his
predecessor Constantine. Adoration and censing of images.
He condemned the 7. Council of Constantinople, against Images; commanded
they should be worshipped, and censed, after the manner of the Gods of the
Gentiles. Anno 772.
In the 772. year he died, and Silo then reigned in Spain.

In this business touching Images insisted Adrian 1. Adrian. 1. Images.
he wrote a book of the adoration of them: and condemned Felix, and all the
enemies of Images, Charles the great, the son of Pipine (for the great
benefit received of Pope Adrian, who took part with him, against the sons
of Charles Manno his brothers right heirs of the kingdom, and made him king)
delivered the Pope from all vexation. This Adrian, called Charles the great
Most Christian, Most Christian Anno. 795.
and gave him power to choose the Pope. When Adrian had bin Pope almost 24.
years, in the 795. year he died. Maugaretto at this time reigned in Spain. In
the time of this Adrian (Constantine, and his mother Hirena ruling the Empire)
was holden the second Council of Niece, called the seventh general Council:
The second Council of Niece.
wherein, it was decreed, that Images ought to be adored etc. and the relics
of saints, Images worshipped.
worshipped. This Constantine (as says Rodrigo Sanchez bishop of Palencia, in
the third part of his Spanish history) was in name 10. years Emperor with
Irena his mother who ruled all: but 10 years expired, he reigned alone without
his mother. Herein says he, did he Imitate Ninus; who deprived Simiramis his
mother of the kingdom of Babylon. But Irena took the Empire from Constantine
her son, and incited with infernal rancor, put out his eyes; and so deprived
him both of life and Empire. The cruelty of a mother.
Wherefore, and for that she sought to marry with Charles the Great, the
Grecians shut her up in a Monastery, and made Nicephorus Emperor. Thus far
Rodrigo Sanchez. Terrible was this cruelty: when was it heard, that a mother
(to rule) pulled out the eyes, and took away the life of her son? and
chiefly, being of age to inherit and rule the Empire of his deceased father?

Friar John de Pineda lib. 18 Cap. 13. of his Ecclesiastical Monarchy
sufficiently speaks against the wickedness, cruelty and ambition of this
Irena. Leo 3. in an oration which he made, to make Charles the Great, Emperor
in the West, among other reasons for that purpose, gives this: Seeing (says
he) that by the renunciation of Augustus the Empire, (at least in the west) was
void: and strictly examining the business, as well may it also be said, that
the Empire of Greece was void, since a woman held it almost by tyranny. These
self same words recites Illescas upon the life of Leo the third. And
notwithstanding holds Irena for most holy: and so upon the life of Adrian
the first, these words says he of her: Most fair was Irena, and one of the
most excellent and famous women in all kind of virtues and of all Christendom
the most renowned. And a little lower. Irena as a holy and Catholic woman
which she was and ever had been, Irena an Idolater and a murderer.
etc. Thou see here what a one was Irena, the great Patroness and
Defendresse of Images. In causing images to be adored, she sinned against the
second commandment of the first Table, which says, Thou shall not make to thy
self any Image, etc. And in murdering her son, she sinned against the
second Table, which says, Thou shall not kill. This is that holy Irena, so
much celebrated of the Papists.

Leo 3. Leo 3.
acknowledging the benefits of Charles the great, gave him the title, Two
Emperors one in the East another in the West*
and crowned him Emperor: but with this condition, that the Emperor with an
oath should promise him obedience. This Leo commanded that the Decrees of the
Pope should be of more authority then the writings of all the Doctors. The*
Popes decrees of more authority then the writings of all the Doctors
In Mantua at this time a city of Italy, was a wooden Crucifixe, which, they
affirmed did sweat blood. When Pope Leo the third heard this news, he went to
Mantua, and there seeing (as he said) the miracle, commanded this blood to be
holden for the true blood of Christ. The Crucifixe of Mantua.
And to this day at Mantua is this Crucifixe seen and worshipped. Of this
blood makes mention Baptista Mantuanus, saying:

Et quae purpureus sanguis faciebat in horas,
Mira opera intuitus, credi debere putauit
Effusum nostra pro liberate cruorem.
Which signifies the Idolatry before mentioned. A most subtle craft to
advance Images.
What devil could more invent to raise up and authorize images, which in
Greece were utterly abolished. In the 816. year died Leo the third, Anno. 816.
having been Pope more then 20 years. At this time in Spain reigned Don
Bermudo.

Stephen the fourth (or the fifth) who succeeded Leo, Stephen 4.
was chosen without consent of the Emperor wherefore, to excuse himself to
the Emperor Lodouicus pius, after 3 months, he went into France, Lewis
answered, that what was past, was past, but they should afterward beware of
doing the like. Behold here, how the Popes observe their own Decrees. Adrian
and Leo imediate predecessors of Stephen, made this decree: but Stephen did
nothing regard it. The Pope considering, that this decree, which gave such
authority to the Emperor, might cause great evil to the Sea Apostolic,
returned from France to Rome, and perceiving the Emperor to be of gentle and
mild nature, he attempted to disanull it, saying: that the election of the
chief Bishop pertained to the Clergy, Senate and people of Rome. The Popes
excuse for not seeking the consent of the Emperor.
And not to provoke the Emperor, he smothed this abrogation, saying: that they
above named without license of the Emperor, might choose the chief Bishop:
but consecrate or (as they call it) crown him without the presence of the
Emperor, or his vicar they could not. Anno 817
In the 817. year died Stephen, and Don Alonso the 2. surnamed the chaste, then
reigned in Spain.

Pascall the first following the steps of Stephen, Pascal 1. was Pope without
consent of the Emperor.
without consent of the Emperor was elected Pope: and when the Emperor
complained of this election, he craftily cleared himself. Pascal died in the
824. Anno 824.
year. Don Alonso the^ reigning in Spain.

Eugenius 2. Eugenius. 2.
succeeded Pascal, in whose time the 12. Sisme between Eugenius and Zinzinus
arose. The 12. Sisme.
After Eugenius succeeded Valentinus. Gregory 4.
And after Valentinus Gregory the fourth.

Gregory 4. Confirmation of the Emperor.
would not be Pope until the Emperor had confirmed his election. He died in
the 844. year. And D. Ramiro the first then reigned in Spain. Anno 844.


Sergius 2. Sergius 2. first changed his name.
was the first Pope that changed his name: before he was Pope he was called
Swines-mouth. Lotharius the Emperor sen^* Lewis his son to Rome, to confirm
the election of this Pope. This confirmation the Popes expected until Adria^ 3.
Anno 847.
ordained, that it should not be respected. Sergius 2. died in the 847. year,
and Don Ordono then reigned in Spain.

Leo the fourth was the first that promised Paradise to such as in defense of
the sea Apostolic, Leo 4. promises paradise*
would fight against the infidels. He made a Decree that the Bishop should not
be condemned but by the testimony of 72 witnesses. He was the first that
against the Cannon of the Council of Aquisgrana, 72 witnesses to condemn a
Bishop.
adorned with precious stones his Cross Papal, and caused it to be borne
before him. The Papal cross.
He gave his feet to be kissed of the people, and in the 847. year he
dispensed with Ethelulpheus, of a Monk to be made king of England. A Monk
made king.
For this benefit commanded the king, S. Peter's pence in England.
that each house in England should pay every year to the Pope a penie, which
they called Saint Peter's penie: Anno 855.
six of which pence make a Spanish Ryall. In the 855. year he died, and Don
Alonso the third then reigned in Spain.

John the eight, John 8. a whore
an English woman, or to speak better, Ione alone of that name, before called
Gilbert, succeeded Leo the 4. In her is plainly fulfilled without figure or
allegory, that which Saint John in the 17. chap. of his Revelation says of
the whore of Babylon: for she was a woman and a whore. Such as list to know her
life, let them read Platina upon the life of John the eight. Sabel. En. 8.
lib. Volat. libr. 22. Berg. lib. 11. Boccace of famous women. Fascic. tempor.
Mant. upon Alphonsus lib. 3. Enchiridion of times. Rodrigo Sanchez upon Don
Alonso 3. and Pero Mexia upon the lives of the Emperors, and in his Sylua
variarum lection. where of her he makes one whole chapter. This Pero Mexia
was a man very superstitious, and wholly a Papist, who procured what he might
to quench the light of the Gospel, which at his time in S^uill was kindled. He
greatly persecuted the good Doctor Egidius, Adout the year 1550.
or to say better, Christ in Egidius and other his members. Notwithstanding
that he was so great a Papist, yet could he not but speak, and note so so
great an infamy and blow to the Church of Rome. For authors of that he says
concerning this woman Pope, he cites in his histories Martin, Platina,
Sabellicus, S. Antonino. In the 9. chapter of his Sylua thus speaks Pero Mexia.
There is none almost but knows, or has read, or hard, that there was a woman
Pope, which went in man's apparel, but because all men know not how this thing
happened; and for that it was one of the wonderful chances that ever happened in
the world, I will here declare, as in faithful authors I find it written.
There was a woman borne in England, who with a man greatly learned lived in her
youth a dishonest life, of whom being well-beloved, and he of her, taking man's
habit, and calling her self John, she left her native country, and went
with him to the city of Athens in Grecia, wherein at that time, was a great
University, and general study. With her excellent wit, and great study,
she there so much learned, and attained such knowledge, that some years after
she came to the city of Rome, always in the habit of a man, took the
Chair, and taught openly in which, and in public disputations, she carried
such estimation, that she was holden for the most learned man of that time: and
such favor and authority among all men obtained, that the seat Apostolic by
the death of Leo, the fourth of that name being void, in the year of the Lord
852. supposed to be a man, An. 852. Pope Ione was chosen.
she was chosen for chief Bishop of Rome, and Pope universal in the Church of
God: and in that seat ruled two years, and thirty and so many days. And
albeit placed in this throne, yet lived she not chastely, but used private
familiarity with her slave, in whom she much trusted, and by whom she was
great with child, yet so diligently she cloaked it, that no other but himself
knew it. And as God would not suffer so great wickedness to rest any longer
unpunished: so it happened, that upon a day (being the time of her
childbirth) as she went with accustomed pomp to visit Saint John de Lateran:
of a secret sin it pleased God to show an open punishment: and coming to a
certain place between the Church of Saint Clement, and the Theater, which
they call improperly Coliseo, with extreme pain she brought forth a creature,
to the wonderful amazement of those that were present: and therewithal
suddenly died: and without honor, or pomp was buried. For this so strange
accident, in this place happened, it is commonly said, that when the chief
Bishops go sithence to the Church of Lateran, The Pope turns aside, and the
cause.
coming near unto it, they turn aside and go not that way, in detestation of
so horrible a chance. And lest happily another such like woman might work the
like deceit, A seat and for what cause.
there is now in the sacred palace a seat, open below, that it may secretly be
seen if it be a man that is chosen.

The Romans now ashamed at the ceremony for which his seat was invented, call
it a dunghill, and employ it to other purpose. Another like seat there is, or
was if it be not thence taken, in the Monastery de Monte Cassino, where in
old time they chose many Popes. The same Author proceeds. In that way (says
he) is also a statue of stone, A statue in Rome of Pope Ione.
representing the childbirth and death of this bold woman. Thus far Pero
Mexia. That which he says of the statue, and the cause of it there being, is
most true. The ceremony of the seat now not used, and the couse.
But it is to be understood, that the ceremony of the seat, to know whether
it be man or woman, is not now used: because those which are chosen for Popes,
have so honestly lived, that (wanting lawful wives) amongst their concubines,
whores, and strumpets which they keep, and by whom they have had he or she
bastards, they have showed themselves to be men. A rare example the father,
son, and Grandchild Popes, and none of them either good or honest.
Sergius had a bastared by a notable strumpet called Marozia, as says
Luithprandus an ancient Writer, in his secend book and thirteenth chapter, and
in his third book and twelfth chapter. This son of the Pope was Pope also
called John the twelfth. This John the twelfth had a bastard which also was
Pope, called John the fourteenth. Innocentius 8. had 8. sons, and as many
daughters. But leaving out the ancient let us come to our later Popes. How
many he and she bastards had our Spanish Alexander the sixth? Of Leo the
tenth it is said, that he had bastardes, and that Clement the seventh was his
son, of whom the Bishop Paulus Iouius counts many abominations. Paul the
third had bastardes, among whom was one, and Pero Lewis his name, the most
abominable Sodomite of his time, and for the same was put to death. Pope
Gregory the thirteenth, not long since deceased, before and when he was Pope,
had also bastardes. John Pannonius gives the like reason with us in these
verses: Non poterat quisquam resorantes aethera claues
Non exploratis sumere testiculis.
Cur igitur nostro mos hic iam tempore cessat?
Ante probat sese quilibet esse marem.


The Church of Rome then having such certain proofs, a seat now is not
needful: Friar Alonso venero in his Enchiridion of times, speaking of the
unhappiness of these times, says thus: What greater evil the^ a woman by her
subtlety, and worldly learning dissembling her sex and nature, to usurp the
Pontifical seat of Christ? Friar John de Pineda par. 3. lib: 18. cap. 23.. 6
says: This deed caused great admiration, that a woman did dare to be the
vicar of God, since the holy virgin Marie for being a woman, is held irregular
for any ecclesiastical act or holy government soever, etc. So long have I
dwelled upon this history of Pope Ione, and with so many, to wit, 12 authors
at the least confirmed it to confound some papists of our time; which seeing the
disorder of this Pope (this she Pope I say) because the Pope is often of the
common of two genders, The Pope is of the common of two genders, or else that is
worse the boubtfull.
to avoid the same, very maliciously deny any such Pope to have bin: and the
more to fortify their untruth, they are not contented to speak but also to
write, and print the same. Amongst whom Onuphrius Panuinus of Saint Augustins
order, as they call it, is one, who among many other notes upon Platina,
concerning the lives of the chief Bishops, speaking of this Pope Ione, makes
one very large note: wherein he absolutely, or rather dissolutely denies any
such Pope to have been. And his chiefest argument drawn to confirm his
opinion, is, that such a one, and such, etc. writing of the lives of the chief
Oishops, do not once mention this Pope John. 8. whereupon it follows as he
concludes, that there was never any such Pope. To this I answer, that the
Authors by him alleged, either by forgetfulness; or ignorance, or which is
more credible, malice, or else at least for shame, have made no mention of
him. As a Logitian, I further answer: that an argument taken ab authoritate
negando, is nothing worth. For example, Cicero used not this word: therefore it
is not Latin: but if any other Latin author, as Caesar, Liuius, Salust, etc.
used it, it shall be Latin, though not used by Cicero. I now likewise answer,
that albeit those Authors by him alleged, make no mention of this John the
eight: others and many more, such also as Pero Mexia calls faithful
Authors, have done it. An argument taken not ab authoritate negando, but
affirmando is good. Of this Pope Mautuan in his third book upon Alphonsus,
speaking of hell, thither says he John the eight descended.

Hic pendebat adhuc sexum mentita virilem
Foemina cuitriplici Phrygiam diademate mitram,
Et tollebat apex, and pontificalis adulter.
Here will we make to the Papists, and with much more reason, the same
demands, that we did, speaking of Constantine the second. What will they say
of those Bishops, Archbishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, by her or her
authority ordained? Take away the cause, and the effect cease. As she by
their own Cannons was not Pope: so all those that she ordained were not
Priests, nor did celebrate, nor consecrate. And all the people in hearing
their Mass committed idolatry. Who then was head and universal Bishop of the
Church? Who Saint Peter's successor? Who the Vicar of Christ? A woman, and that
a whore, both before she was Pope, and after. Pero Mexia hereof aduising,
answers: that albeit neither she, nor any other woman, be capable to receive
any character of ordination, nor to ordain, nor absolve any, and those which
were so ordained, ought to be again ordained; yet the grace of the Sacrament
did she obtain for those that with a good faith, by an invincible ignorance
did receive it. I answer, he deceiues himself: for those are not Sacraments,
which are not administered by those whom God has ordained, albeit they have
many imperfections; yea although they be hypocrites, as by the Priests that
lived in the time of Jesus Christ, appears: which, albeit they were wicked,
yet because they were of the tribe of Leui, and so outwardly called, their
Sacrifices were Sacrifices, and their Sacraments were Sacraments. And so the
Lord and his Apostles, when they found them sacrificing and celebrating in the
Temple, held them for such. Contrariwise the Sacrifices which the Priests of
Ierohoam did offer, and the Sacraments by them administered, were no Sacrifices,
nor Sacraments, because they were not administered by those of the Tribe of
Levy, whom God himself had ordained. Ione then, being a woman (I say) was no
Priest, and being no Priest, had authority neither to ordeine nor yet to
consecrate and therefore the Priests by her authority ordained, were not the
Priests of God, but of Jeroboam, or of Baal. And (these I say) that received
their sacrament, had no sound faith, for Faith is founded upon the word of
God. Faith (says the Apostle) comes by hearing, and heariing by the word of
Christ. Romans 20. 17.
Other manner of consolation and quietness of conscience have they, which believe
that Jesus Christ, ever was, is, and shall be the head and foundation of his
Church, and that there is no other head, nor foundation but he alone: as says
Saint Paul 1. Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation (says he) then that which is Jesus
Christ, can no man lay, he only is the foundation, he only is the head of his
Church, whose Vicar general is his Spirit, as he himself witnesses: Ioh. 14.
26.
That Comforter, the holy Spirit, whom the Father shall send in my name, he
shall teach you all thing^s, and bring to your remembrance all that,
whatsoever I have said unto you. Pero Mexia by a good faith, means that faith
(as they call it) of the Collier. The faith of the Colliar.
This Collier being at point to die, a learned man (the devil, say some others
came to tempt him) demanding of him what he believed. I believe (answered he)
that which the holy mother the church believes. The devil replying, and what
believes the Church? That (answered the Collier) which I believe. And so often
as the diuill demanded, the veri^ same did the collier answer: For the poor
man knew not what he believed, much less what the Church believed. Of that
sort was he, which not knowing what they believe, said they believe in God, a
pies Iuntillos, fully. Hosius Bishop of Varmiens entreating in his third book
of, or against the authority of holy scripture; does hold it a very safe thing
to follow the example of this Colliar. Oh fearful ignorance, which shall not
excuse sin! God commands to read, and search the scriptures; and they
will neither read, nor search the^* what excuse will they have with their
ignorance? Saint Peter exhorts, 1. Pet. 3. 15.
eu^rie faithful Christian to be ready to yield account of his hope: And who
shall give account of his hope or faith that neither reads, nor hears the
word of God? Faith is compared to a lamp, and why.
For know this, that as the wyke in a candle or Lamp no longer burns then
oil continues, no more also can faith live, but whiles it is nourished with
the word of God. He that neither reads nor hears, nor meditateth upon the
word of God, what faith can he have? that which they call fully to bele^ued in
God: and that of the Colliar, which neither knew what the Church, nor he
himself believed. But return we now to our Pope Ione. The Emperor Jews 2.
son of Lotharius, in the time of this Ione, came to Rome; and at her hands,
received his septer, and crown Imperial, together (as they call it) with
Saint Peter's blessing. In her time also Don Alonso the third reigned in Spain,
as Don Rodrigo Sanchez Bishop of Palencia describing the life of Don Alonso the
third, says: In his time (says he) at Rome sat Leo the fourth, John the
eight, Benedict the third, and Nicholas the first. And Don Alonso of
Carthagena, speaking in his Concurrence of this Don Alonso the third, says:
there was Leo the fourth, and John the English.

Pope Ione dying in sort as before said, Benedict. 3.
Benedict the third was chosen. He was the first that sat in holed seat, etc.
The cause why, upon the life of Ione we have before declared. Jews the Emperor
sent his Ambassadors, to confirm this election. At this time Don Alonso the
third reigned in Spain^. The thirteenth Sisme was between this Benedict. and
Anastasius: but Anasta^sius renounced. The 13. Sisme.


In the the presence of Jews the Emperor, Nicholas 1.
Nicholas the first was chosen: The whole dri^t of this Pope to free himself,
and the Clergy from obedience to the Magistrate.
but when the Emperor was departed out of Italy, the Pope made many
^^nstitutions, and among others, these. That the life of the Clergy should not
be judged by the Laytie: that none should any way dispute of the Popes
authority: That the Christian magistrate had no authority over the chief
Bishop: because the chief Bishop (say they) is called God. The Pope called God.
Anton. tit. 16. The constitution, that the divine office should be celebrate
in Latin he renewed. Yet dispensed with them of Slauonia, The divine office in
Latin. Blasphemy.
and Polonia, which did celebrate it in their vulgar tongue. He ordained that
the constitutions of the Popes should be equal in authority with those of the
Apostles. The Beasts horns grow: Read above Siricius.
very severe was this beast, against married Priests. To which impiety,
Huldricke Bishop of Augusta, oposed himself, Gregory 1. and afterward Paul
2. and Pius 2.
and wrote an Epistle which excellently showed the cursed fruits of
constrained single life. The sum whereof, speaking of Gregory the first, we
have before declared. This Nicholas with other Bishops forbad all faithful
Christians to hear Mass said by a wenching Priest. The Mass of a we^ching
priest not be heard.
If this were observed, few Masses would be heard, because the greatest part
of priests, Anno 867.
be wenchers. In the 867. year, dyed Nicholas. In whose time in Spain reigned
Don Alonso 3. and Don Garcia his son. After Nicholas succeeded Adrian 2. and
after Adrian, John 9. whom others (omitting Ione) call John 8.

Martin 2. Martin 2. without consent of the Emperor.
by deceit, and wicked arts was made Pope, with the ceremony of the seat, etc.
and confirmed without any autho^itie or consent of the Emperor. For now the
horns of the Popes were grown, and of the Emperor they nothing esteemed, he
dyed in the year 884. Anno. 884.


Adcian 3. Adrian 3.
being Pope made a decree, that in the election of the chief Bishop, the
Emperor should not be regarded: but that the Clergy and people of Rome, might
freely make choice, without any confirmation at all of the Emperor. Thus lost
the Emperor his right in Rome. The Emperor lost his right in Rome.
and in the choice of the chief Bishop. And by reason of the Emperors then
wars with the Normans, the Pope swayed the matter. Adrian dyed in the 885.
885.
year. In whose time Don Garcia reigned in Spain.

Stephen the 5. Stephen. 5.
(or 6.) was the first (says Gracian dict. 16. cap. Enimuero) that commanded
al men of necessity to observe the statute of the Roman Church. The statutes
of the Church of Rome necessary to salvation.
In the 891. year he died. In whose time Don Alonso 4. reigned in Spain.

Formosus being Bishop, Anno 891.
was deposed, and sworn never to be so again, Formosus. Money is the holy
spirit that chooses the Pope.
of which oath made to John 9. Martin 2. for m^ney absolved him. Stephen 6.
being dead, Formosus by gifts obtained the Popedom; albeit Sergius, who
sought to have had it, did greatly withstand him: but Formosus with his fair
gifts prevailed. This was the holy spirit that did choice him. In the 895.
Anno 895.
year dyed Formosus, Don Alonso 4. then reigning in Spain. The 14. Sisme.
Sergius 3.
The 14. Sisme wherein Sirgius 3. was elected against Formosus. But unable to
strive further, renounced, and was banished. Formosus being dead, Boniface 6.
Boniface 6. was chosen, who continewed Pope 15 days. Don Alonso 4. reigned in
Spain.

Stephen 6. Stephen 6.
(or 7.) was ungrateful to Formosus, that had made him Bishop, whom he so much
abhorred, that being Pope, he not contented himself to disanull and make void
all whatsoever Formosus had done, saying: that he was not lawful nor truly
Pope: but afterward condemned him in a Council which he held. A cruel Pope.
After he was condemned; he caused him to be unburied, and being vntombed,
taking from him all his pontifical ornaments, and clothing him in secular
habit, did disgrade him: he caused the 2 fingers of his right hand, Sergius 3.
did yet entreat him worse.
which the priests use chiefly in consecration, to be cut off, and cast into
Tyber. The very same almost, did Pascal 2. to the body of Clement 3. Herein did
he not imitate Christ, who commanded to pardon injuries, and to do good to them
that hate us; but Silla, who for the great hatred he bare him, caused Marius to
be vnto^bed. Platina upon the life of this Stephen, says: that he raised
hereby an evil slander and example to his successors: Pope against Pope, and
Council against Council.
for the Popes afterward, did usually disanul that, which their predecessors
dad ordained: yea albeit by a Council confirmed, by authority of another
Council they made it frustrate. Romanus.
And so did Romanus successor of Stephen condemn all whatsoever Stephen had
done, and restored to his honor Formosus. The same did Theodor 2. and John 10.
or 9. These Popes says Platina, were monsters, or to speak better devils in
carnate. John 10. held a Council of 74. bishop, wherein he justified Formosus,
and condemned Stephen 7. Note here, that from the 891. year to the 903. which
was 12. years were 10 Popes. 10. Popes in 1 years.
Formosus, Sergius 3. Boniface 6. Stephen 7. Romanus Theodorus 2. John 10.
Sergius 3. again. Benedict 4. Leo 5* Christopher. Sergius was 3 times Pope. S^
also was afterward Benedic^. 9.
And lastly Sergius 3. whom in this catalogue have we three times named. For
thrice was he Pope, the 1. and 2. time deposed, but the third time truly,
because he carried away the matter. In the first time that Sergius was Pope, was
the 14. Sisme, and in the second, The 15. Sisme.
the 15. Sisme in the 897. year dyed Stephen 7. Anno 897.
And Don Alonso 4. reigned in Spain. Plati^a speaking of Benedict. Benedict. 4.
4. says: that when the Church through wealth began to wax wanton, Platina
calls the Popes monsters.
and wanted a Prince to bridle the villainies of the Clergy, then liberty to
sin brought forth these monsters, and intolerable burdens. This honorable
testimony of him gives Platina.

Leo 5. Leo 5.
being Pope lived in great troubles. For one Christopher who^ he had brought up
and advanced, Christopher.
not without great bloodshed, as notes Platina, took and cast him into
prison, and by that means made himself Pope, whose violence, ingratitude, and
wicked arts, were the holy spirit that did chose him. But Sergius 3. aided by
Marozia his strumpet, of whom he had a son, Sergius 3.
that after his father was Pope (as Luithprandus in his history, Lib. 2. cap.
13.
does witness) deposed the Pope, put him into a monastery, and by the help
of his Marozia, Lib. 3. cap. 12.
a famous and notable whore, made himself Pope. This Sergius 3: was competitor
with Formosus in the Popedom: but Formosus (as upon Formosus we have said)
prevailing, Sergius went into France. From whence returning, he so entreated
Christopher as before is declared.

When Sergius was made Pope he called to mind the injuries received of
Formosus, A cruel Pope.
and thirsting for revenge, vntombed his body, that had eight years been
buried, made show to kill him as though he had been living, cut off the three
fingers which Stephen had left, and moreover, his body as unworthy of Christian
burial, he cast into Tyber. And notwithstanding that Formosus had by three
Popes been approved: yet did he condemn whatsoever Formosus had done, and
ordained a new all those by Formosus ordained. Behold here, how Stephen and
Sergius condemned Pope Formosus: That which 3.
Romanus, Theodorus and John approved him, Popes approve 2. Popes condemn.
and all that he did. In these Popes time, Don Ramiro 2. reigned in Spain.

Anastasius 3. 897.
succeeded Sergius 3. in whose time histories report, that certain fishermen
in Tyber, Anastasius.
found the body of Formosus: they say further, that when his body was buried in
the Church of S. Peter, the Images of the Church did salute him and doing him
certain reverence, gave him the welcome. Monstrous is this lie: or if it be
true, the devil, the more to blind the people with superstition, ^. These. 2 9.
Anno. 913. Lando.
and deceit, caused that motion: For Antichrist (as says S. Paul) shall come
with lying wonders. In the 913. year died Anastasius, and D. Ordono 3. reigned
in Spain.

Lando as says Petrus Premostratensis had a son in adultry before he was
Pope, which also was Pope, and called ^ohn 11. or 10. of wicked life was this
Lando, he was Pope but 6. months and 22. days, and therefore by some not
counted among the Popes.

John 11. John 11.
(or 10. succeeded his father Lando; another such or rather worse then he, for
he was Pope 14. years. Platina says that he was the son of Sergius 3. whose
life, Luithprandus which then lived, notes to be wicked. At this time
Theodora, a shameless strumpet, is said to have commanded in Rome: two
daughters she had, Marozia, and Theodora; and if the mother were a notable
whore, the daughters were more notable. Of this John, before he was Pope, was
the mother enamored, and by his strumpets means, was he first made Bish. of
Bologna, and afterward Archbishop of Rauenna: during which time, the Pope
dyed. A whore makes her lover Pope.
Now Theodora seeing this occasion, and unwilling to remain so far remote from
her lover, for that Reuenna, was 200 miles distant from Rome, she caused him to
leave his Archbishopric, and made him Pope. The same Luithprandus in the 12.
chap. of his 3. book, recites the miserable end of this John. And thus it is,
Marozia his daughter in law (say we) the daughter of Theodora, intending to
make Pope his son John 12. the son also of Pope Sergius 3. caused him to be
taken, and with a pillow laid over his mouth, to be murdered. But as the^
could it not be; Leo 6.
for Leo 6. was chosen, who lived but 7. months, and dyed (as they say) of
poison given him by Marozia, Poison.
to make her bastard to be Pope. Yet failed he at this time also, and Stephen
the 7. Stephen 7.
(or the 8.) was elected, 930.
who many years enjoyed not his bishopdom. poisoned.
In the 930. year, not without suspicion of poison, he dyed. And D. Sancho 1.
then reigned in Spain.

John 12. John 12.
(or 11.) was the bastard son of Sergius 3. and of Marozia that shameless whore,
Lib. 3. cap. 12.
as Luithprandus calls her. Platina supposes that this John and John 11.
were brothers, the sons of Sergius 3. The Church of Rome governed by a whore
Marozia, the mother of this Pope in her sons time also, as before, both in
the temporalty, and spiritualty (as notes Luithprandus) governed the Roman
Church. In the 935. 935.
year he dyed. And Ra^iro 3. then reigned in Spain. After John, Leo 7.
Stephen 9. Martin 3. Agapetus and John 13. succeeded.

John 13. John 13. a most filthy and wicked man.
(or 11.) of all the Popes before his time, was the greatest villain. Friar
John de Peneda in his ecclesiastical monarchy page 3. lib. 19 calls him
John the sinner, and in the 1. he says: An infernal monster in his living,
the son of Alberto a mighty Roman, succeeded Agapeto, who with requests,
money and threats, caused his son called Octauian to be chosen, and after
being Pope he was called John. And a little lower, he was of cursed life, in
cruelties and huntings, and most dishonest lusts, etc. who lists to know his
villainies, let him read Luithprandus from the 6. chapter of the 6. book unto the
11. In a Synod at Rome, and presence of the Emperor Otho 4, he was accused for
not recititing his hours: The Pope accused in the Council of enormious
abominations.
that saying Mass he did not communicate: that he ordained Deacons in a
stable, that he had committed incest with two sisters: to make him win at
dice-play, that he had inuocated devils: that for money he made younglings
Bishops, defloured maidens: turned his sacred palace to a stews: lain with
Stephana his fathers concubi^e: and with the widow Reynera, and with another
widow called Anna, and with his niece: that he had made his Confessor blind:
that he went publicly a hunting: that he went armed, that he had caused fire
to be kindled: that he had broken down doors and windows in the night
season: that in wine he had drunk to the devil. etc. for these and other like
abhominatious he was deposed in the Roman Council, John 13. deposed in the
Counsel at Rome. Leo. 8.
and Leo 8. chosen. But when the Emperor was departed, those wicked women,
with whom he accompanied, incited the Nobility of Rome, by promising the^ the
treasures of Rome, to receive John for Pope, and (which they did) to thrust out
Le^. The Emperor to be crowned in Rome.
This Pope John ordained that the Emperor thence forth should be crowned by the
Pope in Rome. The end of this cursed Pope was this. Anno 964.
In the year 964. and 10. year of his bishopdom, he was stabbed to death by
the husband of one, with who^ he was taken in adultery. The devil (says
Luithprandus in his 6. book and 11. ch.) did so wound him, in the very act of
adultery, that within 8 days after he died. The husband found the Pope in the
act of adultery and killed him.
It may be that the husband was arrayed in figure of a devil to kill the Pope.
Read this history, o ye Spaniards, and behold what a one is the Pope, for whom
ye wontedly hazard your goods, honors and lives. God for his mercies sake, and
the honor of his son Christ Jesus give you the grace to know him. In the time
of this dissolute and carnal Pope, the married Priests in England were cast
out of the Cathedral Churches: and Don Bermudo reigned in Spain. In the year
963. between Leo and Benedict was the 16. Sisme.

John 13. The 16. Cisme. Benedict. 5.
being dead, through partiality Benedict 5. was elected: but Otho the Emperor
came to Rome, and compelled the Romans to deliver up Benedict 5. Leo 8. once
again Pope.
and receive again Leo, whom they had cast from the Popedom. Which benefit
received of the Emperor, Leo eftsoons Pope acknowledging, made a synodall
decree wherein he took away from the Clergy and people of Rome, the authority
to make the Pope, given the^ (as says Gracian) by Charles the great, and gave
it to the Emperor, and adnulled the Law, The Emperor chooses the Pope.
made by Adrian against him. This did Leo to avoid seditions that wontedly
happened, in the elections of the Popes: and the Emperor restored unto him that
which Constantine (they say) had given to the Pope, Pope against Pope.
or rather that which Pipin and Charles (taking it from the Lombards) gave
the^. In the 965. year died Leo. At what time in Spain reigned Alonso 5. Anno
965.
who wounded with an arrow which was shot by a Moore, at thesiege of Viseo,
died.

John 14. or 13. son of Pope John 12. was against his enemies extremely cruel,
John 14. a cruel tyrant
as by one Peter, a chief Magistrate in Rome appears. Friar Ioh. de Pin.
par. 3. lib. 19. cap. 11.. 1. concerning him, says: The Pope caused a certain
governor to be hanged one day by the hairs, set naked upon a horse of the Emp.
Constastantine, and afterward set him to tide upon an ass, with his face
backward, and a beasts skin upon his head, to be whipped through the city:
afterward to be put in prison, and lastly banished into Almaine. He more
resembled Phalaris, Dionysius, Nero, and other such tyrants, The bell of S.
John de Laterane was the first that was baptized.
the^ Christ, who commands us to love and do good to our enemies. He it was
that baptized the great bell of S. John de Lateran, and gave it his name: from
whence sprang the custom to baptize and give names unto bells. In the 972 year
he died.

Donus 2. Anno 972.
succeeded John 14. he was Pope only 3 months who^ Benedict 6. Donus 2.
or 5. not counting the 5. which was made in the Sisme, Benedict 6. a notable
villain Anno 954.
succeeded. For his villainies was he cast into prison, where he was strangled:
or (as say his friends) at commandment of his successor Boniface he died of
hunger. Alonso 5. then reigning in Spain. The 17. Sisme.
Between Boniface and Benedict 6 or 7. was the 17. Sisme.

Boniface 7. Boniface 7. a cruel Pope.
through wicked arts made himself Pope, but a small time continued; for the
Romans co^spired against him, who seeing himself unable to prevail, robbed all the treasure found in the church of S. Peter, and therwithal went to
Constantinople whereof making sale, after some months, with much silver he
returned to Rome: whiles he was absent from Rome, the Romans made pope John
15. John 15.
or 14. but Boniface with his money corrupted the Romans, and so they turned to
receive him for Pope, who eftsoons being Pope, Cruelty.
imprisoned John the fifteenth, pulled out his eyes, Anno 976.
and famished him to death. In the 976. year died Boniface, after he had been
Pope 9 years and more. Of him says Friar John de Pineda part. 3. lib. 19.
cap. 15.. 1. Boniface but a while lived after that he returned to the seat,
and suddenly died; toward whom, the Romans showed the love which they bare
him, taking his dead body, and giving it a thousand blows and wounds, they
drew it, tied by the heels to the street of Saint John de lateran, and there
left it to the dogs, etc. Quien tal haze, q^ talpague. Such deed (says the
spanish proverb) such payment. Benedict 6. or 7. succeeded him, and then
reigned in Spain Bermudo 3.

Such were the deeds of Pope John. John. 16
(or. 15.) that he was abhorred of the Clergy and people of Rome. He gave
without discretion, all to his kindred, which error (say Platina and Estella)
we see unto our time continues. Anno 995.
He died in the 995 year: at what time Don Bermudo 3. reigned in Spain. John
17. John 17.
succeeded John 16. and the same year, after he had been pope only 4.
months, died.

Gregory 5. being an Alman, by authority of the Emperor Otho 3. Gregory 5.
was made Pope. But when the Emperor was returned into Almaine, the Clergy
and people of Rome deposing Gregory made John 18. 18 Sisme.
(or. 17.) Pope. Gregory retired to the Emperor, Anno 996
who offended with the Romans, came against them and took Rome: John. 18.
he took also Pope John, pulled out his eyes, and so the Pope which with his
store of money had corrupted the Romans to make him pope, The Popes eyes pulled
out.
died, Mantuan. 3. Calamitatum lib. thus speaks:

Pernicies mercantur equos, Venalia Romae
Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, Coronae
Ignes, thura, preces, coelum est venale, deusque.
As much to say, as all things are sold at Rome, be they holy or profane, and
even God himself. Platina calls this John a thief who dying as before is
said, Gregory returned to be Pope: he appointed that thenceforth the Princes
of Germany (namely the 3 Archbishops of Maguntia, 7. Electors of the Empire.
Treuir and Cullen, the County Palatine of Rhine, the duke of Saxony, the
Marquis of Brandenburg, and the king of Boheme, who then also was not king,
should choose the Emperor, and so the Empire was translated into Germany. Anno
998.
In the 998 (or after some 997) year Pope Gregory died. And some count not
John 18. for Pope.

Syluester 2. even from his youth gave himself to incha^tments and witcherie,
Syluester 2. an inchanter.
who understanding that in Seuill dwelled a Moore and great master in that
Art; with the great desire he had to be perfect also therein himself, he left
France, his native country went to Seuil, and there abode with the Moore. And
now seeing himself skillful he returned into France, carrieng with him a book
wonderful in that art; which by the means of the Moors daughter with whom
Syluester had abused himself he stole from his Master. This Syluester the
better to effect his Enchantments, made a covenant with the devil offering him
his body and Soul, conditionally; that the devil should help him to attain
to great dignities, returned into France: with great applause taught he the
liberal Arts, notable disciples he had, by whose means he was made bishop of
Remes, and afterward by wicked arts, Archbishop of Rauenna: In the end, by
the aid of the devil, in the 999. year, he came to be Pope. who lists to
know his holy life, let him read Platina, Sabel. En. 9 lib. 2. Volat. lib. 22.
Berg. lib. 12. Fascic. Temp. Pet. Premostrat. and Benon. And particularly Friar
John de Pineda, par. 3. lib. 19. cap. 15.. 5. and 6* a very late writer, and he
shall see, if I speak truly or no. Whiles he was Pope, he concealed his art:
but in private he could not forget his old friendship which he had with the
devil. A copper head had he in secret, which always gave him answer of that he
demanded of the devil. This Pope upon a time, lusting to know how long he
should be Pope, demanded the same of the devil: who doubtfully answering (as
he wontedly does) told him he should not die, until he had said Mass in
Jerusalem. This history reports S. Antonino, Friar John de Pineda, and
others. At this answer the Pope much reioiced: and never purposed to go to the
city of Jerusalem. It was a custom in Rome, that on a certain day in Lent,
The devil deceives the Pope with the Mass.
the Pope should say Mass in the church of the holy Cross, called Jerusalem:
where Syluester forgetful of the devils deceits, did celebrate his Mass: and
was forth with taken with a great fever. The Pope then (says Petrus
Premostratensis) by the roaring of the devils, knowing his end to be come: being
in these sorrows, he besought them (says Benon) to cut off his hands, and
tongue, etc. Behold here if the Pope can err. Note what manner of vicaredge is
that of the Pope, seeing many attained it by wicked, and deuillish arts. Learn
here (o Spainards) what a thing is the Mass seeing with it the devil mo^keth
and deceives, as in this Syluester we have seen. Be wise now ye Spainards: For
long time upon earth have the Pope and Mass been your god. Nowithstanding that
such a one was Syluester 2. one Julius Roceus, Genebrardus, Panuinus and
Illescas, the Popes great parasites affirm, that he was no Magitian, but a
most wise Mathematitian, etc. Speak the truth although it be bitter: God, to
advance his holy catholic faith, has no need of your lies. Don Bermudo 3. at
this time reigned in Spain.

John Siccus 19. or after some (who count not of John 8. being a woman, John 19.
nor John 18. being Antipope) the 17. by the same means and help of the devil,
that had his predecessor, succeeded Siluester in the Popedom: and as the
disciple of such a master, commanded that the feast of the souls in
Purgatory, The feast of the souls in purgatory instituted by John 19.
the day following the feast of all Saints, should be celebrated. This Pope
affirmed, that he hard the groans, which the devils gave when by virtue of the
Masses, and prayers for the dead, the souls snatched at the^. At this time
(says Baconthorpius) began the name of Cardinal to be had in estimation.
Cardinals.
This John. 19. took away the voice of the Roman people in the election of the
Pope, The people of Rome lost their voice.
saying, that the people were to be taught, and not to be followed: and that of
greater dignity is the law which by the holy spirit is governed, then that of
the secular law. Anno 1003.
In the year 1003. not having five months been Pope, he died, and Don Bermudo
3. then reigned in Spain.

John 20. John 20.
(or 18.) by wicked Arts was made Pope. And it is to be noted (as also notes
Cardinal Benon) that all the Popes being 18. successively from Syluester 2.
until Gregory 7. (no less a villain then an Inchanter) were Inchanters. The
doctrine of Purgatory in the time of this John 20. 18 Popes inchanters, in
whose time the doctrine of Purgatory increased.
(by means of false apparitions of wicked spirits, which cried, groned
shriked, and complained of the great torments they endured in Purgatory:
saying they were the Souls of such and such, and desiring so many Masses, and
so many trentals to be said for them) did grely increase. The simple poor
people believed that which they said, to be truth and drew the money from
their purses, wheat from their barnes, the wine from their cellars, and the
wax from their hiues, Purgatory.
and offered them for the souls in Purgatory. But who eats and drinks the
same? not the souls; but the Priests, and Friars, their concubines and
children. A poor old woman watched early and late to spinne, and ad farthing
to farthing, for a Mass to be said for the soul of her husband, brother or
son: she forbear to eat, and gave it unto knaves. All these visions or
apparitions they made by the Art of the devil. Judge (Lord) thine own cause:
deliver the poor people from the hands of these Inchaunters, false prophets
and deceivers. Open thine eyes (o Spain) and see, believe him that with great
love does advise thee. Behold whether this that I say be true or no: Anno 1009.
John 20. of poison (as some say) in the 1009. Poison.
year died. and Don Fernando 1. then reigned in Castile and Leons. Sergius 4.
an inchanter.
Sergius 4. a Roman by the accustomed ways in his time had the Bishopdome:
albeit Platina and Estella, the Popes parasites, Prognostications.
affirm him to have been a holy man. The Sun in his time was darkened, the
Moon in show like blood, famine and pestilence were in Italy, and the water of
a certain fountain in Lorena was turned into blood. All these were
prognostications and most certain signs of Gods wrath, for the idolatry which
then reigned. Anno 1012.
Sergius died in the 1012. year. Benedict 7. or 8. son of Gregory Bishop of
Porta, Benedict 8. an inchanter.
a lay man, by the aid of his nephew Theophilact, a great inchanter, and
disciple of Syluester 2. which learned his nigromancy in Seuill (as in his life
before we have declared) was made Pope. This Theophilact proved very expert in
his art: Theophilact. an inchanter.
so that sacrificing to the devil in woods and mountains, he caused by his
sorcery (says Cardinal Benon) that women enamored of him, left their houses
and followed him: such a one as he was, he was afterwad Pope. Whilst Henry
Banare the Emperor lived, this Benedict was Pope quietly; but the Emperor
once dead, the Cardinals dispoped him, and placed another in his room, but
afterward appeased with money, which Benedict gave them, they inthronized him
again, and cast out the Antipope. This was the 19 Sisme. The 19. Sisme.
Of this Benedict reports Pet. Damianus. and the same also recites
Antoninus, Anno 1024.
Friar John de Pinedapar. 3. lib. 19. cap. 17.. 3. and others, that a horseman
on a blacke^horse (after his death) appeared to a Bishop his very friend. The
Bishop appalled with the vision, demanded, saying: What, art not thou Pope
Benedict, that lately died? I am the same that thou say, said Benedict. The
Bishop demanded: Father how do thou? Grievously tormented, answered the
pope, but I may well be helped. Go then and tell my brother, the now pope, that
he give to the poor the treasure in such a place hidden. Moreover he appeared
to the pope his brother, saying: I hope I shall be delivered. Purgatory
confirmed with false apparitio^s.
Oh would God Odilus Cluniacensis would pray for me. See here how the devil
dalied with men, to confirm their Mass and purgatory. Benedict in the 1024.
year died, and Fernando 1. Anno 1024.
reigned in Castile and Lions.

John 21. John. ^21. an inchanter.
or 19. was pope by the same means that his brother was: The Pope a lay man.
to wit, by the means of Theophilact his nephue, the great inchanter. This John
being a lay man without any orders received was made pope. In the 1032. year
he died. And Don Fernando 1. Anno. 1032.
in Castile and Lions reigned.

Theophilact the great inchanter, Benedict. 9. an inchanter.
of who^ we have made mention, after the death of his two uncles, Benedict 8.
and John 21. by his wicked arts was made Pope, and called himself Benedict 9.
or 8. The Popesold his popedom for 1500. ^.
The Cardinals Laurentius and Ioh. Gracianus his disciples, and great
nigromancers, he made great account. So skilful were they in Nigromancie, that
they knew what passed in the East, West, North and South. Many thought
themselves happy to be their disciples. Out of this cursed school issued that
cursed Hildebrand (who being Pope called himself Gregory 7.) and as says
Cardinal Benon, wrought so great mischief. This Benedict 9. fearing Henry the
Emperor, for 1500. ^. sold his Popedom to l. Gracian. his companion, who
called himself Gregory 6. For this sale (says Platina) was Benedict of all
accused, Gregory 6.
and by divine judgment condemned. And why was he not so, for his
fornications, adulteries, idolatries, nigromancies, inchantme^ts, exorcismes,
inuocations of devils, and other abominations? Thus was his end, he was
stra^gled by a devil. Histories report, namely Martiniana, John de Col. S.
Anthonin. Ioh. de Pineda and others, that this Theophilact or Benedict appeared
after his death to a certain Hermit, in a very fearful figure: for in his body
was he like a bear: and his tail and head like an ass, A fearful figure
and being demanded of the Hermit, how he became so fearful? he answered (say
they) because in my popedo^ I lived without law, without God, and for defiling
the Roman seat with all kind of filthiness. Cardinals.
The name of Cardinal in his time very highly climbed. Anno 1034.
In the 1034. or after others 1032. died Benedict 9. of whom note more upon
Syluester 3. Don Fernando 1. then reigned in Spain.

After that Benedict 9. had sold his Popedom. Syluester 3. by bribes was made
Pope: Syluester. 3.
albeit others labored for Johannes Gracianus, unto who^ for money, Benedict had
renounced the Popedom: in the end was Syluester Pope, albeit no more but 49.
days. For to such a state (says Platina) the Bishopdome then came, that who
so could do most with money and ambition (I say not with holiness of life and
doctrine, the good being suppressed and cast aside) he only obtained the
Popedom. Would God such customs were not in our time used. But this is nothing
worse things then those shall we see, if God put not to his hand. Hitherto
Platina. Otho Frinsingensis, Godfridus Viterbiensis, and other Anthours report
three Popes to have been in the time of Benedict. The 20. Sisme of three Popes
together in Rome.
9. and all of them in Rome Benedict 9. Syluester 3. Gregory 6. Benedict held
his seat in the Palace of Lateran, the other held his in S. Peter's, Gregory.
6.
and the third held his in S. Mary's the great. Henry the Emperor hearing of
these seditions, The Emperor called a Counsel wherein three Popes are deposed.
came to Rome, and held a Council, wherein the said three Popes were
condemned, and a fourth chosen whom they called Clement the second. These three
great villains did not the Emperor punish as he ought, Clement 2.
but only (as says Bennon) chased Theophilact from Rome, cast Gregory into
prison, whom jointly with Hildebrand he banished into Germany: and caused
Syluester to return to his Bishopric of Sabina. Note that this Bendict 9.
was three times Pope: Benedict 9. was 3. times Pope as was also before him
Sergius 3.
the first, he cast out Syluester, and was deprived: the second, Clement 2.
being dead, and was deprived: the third, after the death of Damasus the second:
he was Pope by times (as writes Platina) the space often years, four months,
and nine days. The like happened to Sergius 3. who in the year 897. Anno 1045.
was three times Pope. In the 1045. year was Syluester deprived, and Don
Fernando 1. reigned in Spain.

In the Council of Rome after the said three Popes were deposed, Clement. 2.
Clement 2. an Almaine, by commandment of the Emperor was chosen. He crowned
the Emperor Henry, and caused the Romans by an oath to renounce their right in
election of the Pope. For cofirmation of this renunciation, I will here declare
what Friar John de Pin. pa. 3. lib. 19. cap. 24 2. Blundus (says he) holds,
that Clement 2. for the avoiding of Sismes, deprived the Romans of the election
of the Popes. But Crancius and Saxus say, that in the Sutrian Council it was
forbidden them, and granted to the Emperor. And Naucterus and Sigebertus write
that Henry the Emperor bound the Romans by an oath, not to intermeddle with
the Popes elections. Thus far Pineda. The Romans not regarding their oath,
after the Emperors departure from Rome, poisoned the Pope: whereof, having
been Pope nine months, Poison.
he died. Stephen (they say) who succeeded him in the Bishopdome, and called
himself Damasus the second, prepared for him the poison. Don Fernando 1.
reigned in Spain.

Damasus the second of Bauara, Damasus 2.
without consent either of the Clergy, or people of Rome, by force held the
Popedom. For then (as says Platina) was the custom, The custom to make
Popes.
that he which most could, he had the Popedom. But he enjoyed not his
bishopprick, so ambitiously gotten, but 23 days, for he was poisoned. The
cause thereof was, Poison.
that there was the^ in Rome a man called Gerardo Brazuto, Six Popes one after
another poisoned.
who using a certain deceitful kind of friend ship, in the space of 13 years
dispatched with poison 6 Popes, whose names be these, Clement 2. Damasus 2. Leo
9. Victor 2. Stephen 9. Nicholas. 2. The Romans, seeing themselves in such
Sismes and seditions by the black elections of the Popes, sent their
Ambassadors, The Emperor makes the Pope.
and besought the Emperor Henry to give them a pope: who sent unto them Leo 9.

Leo 9. Leo 9.
coming to Rome, encountered by the way with the the Abbot of Clunia, and
Hildebrand, that afterward was Pope, who seeing him Bishop-like attired,
persuaded him by no means so to enter Rome, because not the Emperor but the
Clergy and people of Rome had authority to make a pope. Brunon, before so
called, did as they advised him, came to Rome confessed his offense, and so
they made him pope. When he was pope Hildrbraud he made Cardinal, and was with
him very familiar, granting all whatsoever, he demanded: And so was
Hildebrande of a poor Monk, made a rich Cardinal Hildebrand reconciled with
Pope Leo his old Lord and master Theophilact, before deposed from the
popedom, and now hipocritically reconciled. In Verceles held Leo a Council,
wherein he condemned the doctrine of Beringarius, The doctrine of Beringarius.
because he would not worship the consecrate bread, for that it was bread, and
not God. Friar Ioh. de Pineda par. 3. lib. 19. ca. 26.. 2 of Berengarius
(albeit an enemy touching doctrine) reports great virtues: Beringarius
(says he) was a man of good learning, quick and merciful: and S. Antoninus
adds humbled: whereof I much marvel, etc. And a little lower: Most chaste was
he also, so that he would not enter where any woman was. This Leo 9. and partly
at the instigation of that good piece Hildebrandus, wholly forbad marriage to to
ecclesiastical persons. Of this Leo 9. reports Carrion lib. 4 of his
history, that being Pope, he went with the Emperor into Almaine: And when the
Emperor had called a Synod, which was held in Maguncia, the Pope being in the
Council, would have preferred himself to the Bishop of Maguntia. But the
Bishop (alleging his right defended the same: and so was the Pope constrained
to give place. For albeit the Popes had oftentimes attempted the tyranny to be
preferred before other Bishops: yet had they not prevailed. The which in the
time of Henry the fifth they obtained. Poison.
Five years was he Pope, Anno 1054.
and the 1054 year of poison which Brazuto gave him he died. Victor 2.
Don Fernando 1. then reigned in Castile. Victor 2. was Pope two years and
somewhat more, Poison.
but Brazuto with poison dispatched him. Don Sancho 2. reigned in Castile.

Stephen 10 (or 9. Stephen 10.
) fulfilled not one whole year. For Brazuto dispatched him quickly in the
1058. Poison.
year. Don Sancho 2. reigned in Castile. Anno 1058.
In the absence of Hildebrand, was Benedict 10. (or 9. Benedict. 10
) But Hildehrand, who then was the holy Spirit which ruled the Court of Rome,
did much stomach this election, and accusing him that by force and bribes he
had attained the Popedom, so wrought that Benedict was deposed. Wretched
Hildebrand and how was he afterward, and his predecessors before him? The old
saying in this Benedict was fulfilled: Para los desdichados se hizo la horca.
For the unhappy was the gallows prepared. In the 1059. Anno 1059.
year, Benedict unwillingly renounced. And Don Sancho 2. reigned in Castile.

Benedict deposed, Hildebrand labored the Clergy to choose Gerrard, Nicholas
2.
whom they called Nicholas 2. But (unable with his safety to make him in Rome)
they went to Sena, and elected him there.

Nicholas seeing himself Pope, called against Benedict the 10. The 21. Sisme.
a Synod in Sutrio. This was the 21. Sisme: which Benedict perceiving, who was
a peaceable man, leaving the Popedom he fled from Rome, and so died not of
poison. This Nicholas 2. held another Council in Rome, which they called the
Council of Lateran: Can. Si quis pecunia. 76. did.
wherein he commanded, that whosoever, either by money, favor, popular tumult,
or war, without the mutual consent of the Cardinals, A decree euilly observed.
attained to the seat of S. Peter, should not be holden for Apostolical, but
Apostaticall. To the Cardinals, Clergy, and Laity he gave power to
excommunicate and curse as a thief such a chief bishop, and to call a
Council for deposing of such a Pope. And if they could not in Rome, yet in
some other place they should call it. Behold if his successors kept this
decree. 1061. Poison.
Nicholas 2. poisoned by Brazuto, in the 1061 year dyed. Don Sancho 2. then
reigned in Castile.

By the crafty subtlety of Hildebrand, and without consent of the Emperor,
was Alexander 2. made Pope: for which cause the Lombards in the Diet holden at
Basil, Alexander 2.
where the Emperor was present, Honorius 2. 22 Sisme. 1061
elected Honorius Cadolus. This was the 22. Sisme. Honorius came with a great
host, and besieged Rome: but he and his were destroyed, and so Alexander 2.
got possession. This Alexander commanded that the Cardinals only should
choose the Pope. The Cardinals only choose the Pope, and none but the Cardinals
are in election.
Great alterations have been in choosing of the Pope. First by the Senate,
Clergy and people of Rome, with consent of the Emperor he was chosen: then was
he chosen of the Clergy and people of Rome: one while with the Emperors
consent, another while without: afterward he was chosen by the Clergy: now
only by the Cardinals: and is not to be chosen, except he be Cardinal, present
in the Conclaue when the election is made. The holy Spirit that governs in
the Popes election, is every day more wise, and better advised. Hildebrand cast
this Pope Alexander into prison, advancing himself with the papal rents, and
not giving to the Pope but only five shillings a day. Thus did Hildebrand
enrich himself greatly. Alexander by Hildebrand so tyranically handled, in the
1074. year dyed, Poison.
and of poison as it is presumed, which Hildebrande gave him. Don Sancho 2.
reigned in Castile.

Alexander being dead, Gregory 7. a cursed inchanter.
Hildebrand fearing that if he foreslowed it, another would be chosen, aided by
his soldiers, without consent either of the Clergy or people, enthronized
himself. To his election none of the Cardinals subscribed. A tyrannical
enthronization.
And as the Abbot of Cassina was coming to this election (already made)
Hildebrand said unto him: Thou have much slacked brother. To whom the Abbot
answered, and thou Hildebrand have too much hastened; which before the Pope thy
Lord was buried, have contrary to the commons, usurped the seat Apostolic.
Hildebrand thus enthronized, The Pope a seditious heretic. etc.
how he lived, how he cast from him the Cardinals, which ought to have been
witnesses of his life and doctrine; how miserably he tormented the world; with
how many heresies he corrupted it; how many were his periuries; and what great
treasons he practiced, hardly could many describe. The blood of Christians,
which has miserably beneshed, whereof he was the author and procurer cries
unto the Lord. This tyrannical history recites Cardinal Bennon. Hildebrand
being Pope, called himself Gregory 7. In brief he was a notable villain, and
terrible inchanter: which art he learned of Lawrence, who was disciple of
Siluester 2. Between the Cardinals, Lawrence, Theophilact, John Gracian and
Hildebrand, was a most staight league of familiarity. Of this Pope, Cardinal
Bennon, recites a notable history. A notable villainy and impiety of the
Pope against Henry the Emperor.
The Emperor (says Bennon) did usually repair to S. Mary's church, which is
in mount Auentino to pray; and as Hildebrand by his espials, diligently
enquired of all that Henry the Emperor did, he caused the place where the
Emperor prayed, to be marked; and persuaded a certain man with great promise
of reward, to place secretly certain great stones over the beams of the
Temple; so that they might fall from an high upon the head of the Emperor
praying, and bruise him to pieces: which thing as this minister of so notable a
villainy hastened to effect, and would have placed over the beams a stone of
great poise, the stone with it weight, fell backward upon him, and breaking a
table that was amongst the beams, the stone and the miserable man by Gods just
judgment, fell from an high to the floor of the Church, and so was he crushed
in pieces. Thus far Cardinal Bennon. This Hildebrand demanding answer of
the Sacrament against the Emperor; and it not answering, he cast the sacrament
into the fire, The Pope burns the Sacrament.
albeit the Cardinals present did gainesay him. He left not for all this, to
persecute the Emperor; he excommunicated him, deprived him, and named another
Emperor, to whom he wrote this verse:

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho.
The Rock gave to Peter, Peter gives the crown to Rodulph. This Rodulph, was
Duke of Sueuia. Henry here with disquieted, left his Imperial ornaments, and
with his wife and little son in the middle of winter, came to Canusium, where
the pope remained. The Emperor clothed in linen, and barefooted, made a
spectacle (as says Cardinal Bennon) to Angels and men, came to the gates of
Canusium: There continued he fasting from morning to night, humbly craving
mercy. The beast must be cut off; his horn has very much increased. Somewhat
long is the history, but we will make it short. Thus abode there the Emperor
for three days space: and when he instantly craved license to enter. The
Bishop (he was answered) as yet was busied, and could not speak with him. In
the end, the fourth day, at request of the Countess Mathilda, (who says the
history much loved the Pope) and others, the Pope commanded he should enter.
Forasmuch as this Maud is one of the chief benefactors of the Popes, I will
here declare that which says Pineda. lib. 16. cap. 26. 4. There was (says
he) in Italy, one Beatriee, sister of the Emperor Henry the second, and wife
of Boniface Lord of Luna, of whom was borne the famous Maude wife of the Count
Gofredo, which inherited her fathers possessions, and Gofredo governed the
lands of Luca, This Maud left S. Peter's Patrimony to the Pope.
Parma, Regio, Mantua, and others of Italy, which came by the Testament of Maud
to the power of the Popes, and called them S. Peter's patrimony. When the
Emperor was entered, he demanded pardon, and gave him his crown, but the
Pope would not pardon, nor absolve him of the excommunication; Read the like
history in Alexander 3. of the Emperor Frederick.
until he promised to purge himself in the Council; with other unlawful
conditions as the Pope should command. All which the Emperor promised: yet for all this was he not restored to his Empire. After (says the history) that Henry
vanquished Rodulph: and that Rodulph was dead, the Pope made Emperor Herman
County of Luce^burg (who^ a woman slew with a stone.) And yet for all this,
this cruel Pope did not cease; but a third Emperor named against this good
Henry: who being newly named, by the hand also of the Emperials, as miserably
ended. By how much the more adulterous and filthy was this pope; by so much the
more, pure marriage he forbade to his Clergy. Friar John de Pineda part. 3.
lib. 16. cap. 29. 5. of him says: He deprived married Priests from the divine
office, and forbade lay men to hear Masses of such and public wenchers: and
they mortally sin that of such hear Masses: although they remain without
Mass hearing upon Easter day, except the Council of Constance do free them,
etc. And a little lower: This evil happened, that lay men contemned the most
holy Sacrament of the body of our Redeemer consecrated by Priests openly
married, or concubine keepers, and turned the blood of Christ, as if it were no
Sacrament: but let this be holden for an undoubted truth, that the Sacraments
of Baptism, and the Eucharist, loose nothing of their virtues by the
wickedness of the Ministers, which that crew believed they did.

Thus far Pineda. All Germany (as says Carrion lib. 5.) withstoode this
wicked forbidding of matrimony: the which when Maguntino propounded it, those
that were present were so greatly provoked, that they almost killed Maguntino.
To this purpose, read above the lives of Siricius and Gregory. 1. Pope
Liberius an Arrian he canonized, and commanded (as says Cardinal Bennon) that
his feast should be celebrated. Behold if the Pope erred; The Pope erred.
one heretic did canonize another. Pope Damasus, which lived in the 366. The
Pope an heretic.
year, for an Arrian condemned this Liberius. And S. Jerome, who at the same
time lived, held him for an Arian: but Gregory 7. did sanctify and canonize
him: Pope Urban 2. One Pope an heretic canonized another heretic Pope, by
another Pope condemned.
who in the 1088. year lived, confirmed all that which Gregory the seventh had
done, this Gregory condemned the doctrine of Beringarius touching the
Sacrament. This Pope was the first (as is said) that put in practice
Transubstantiation. Gregory in the end wickedly ended: for the Emperor
celebrated the Council of Brixa, Transubstant.
wherein Pope Gregory was condemned, Clement. 3.
and a new Pope made, who was called Clement 3 Read a little lower, The 23.
sisme.
in Pascual. 2. (this was the 23. Sisme) whom the Emperor placed in the church
of S. Peter in Rome, and put Rome to such a straight, Anno 1080.
that forced it was to demand peace. Gregory seeing himself forsaken, fled to
Salernum, where in the 1086 year, Anno 1086.
he miserably ended his life. Albeit that this Gregory was so abominable,
there wanted not papists that said he wrought miracles after his death.

D. Illescas upon the life of this Gregory 7. as a great flatterer of the
Popes, of him says: The Cardinals without much dispute joining in one, gave
their mutual and willing consents to the most excellent, and no less valerous
S. Hildebrande: and somewhat lower. And this in particular was due to the holy
and most prudent Hildebrand: one of the most famous chief bishops, the Church
of God has had etc. Mon. Ecclesiastic. he calls him the great servant of God.

Against this deuillish beast, wrote Hugo Candido the Cardinal Walramus bishop
of Neburgo, Venericus bishop of Vercelle, Rolandus a priest of Parma, and many
others; Cardinal Bennon does witness. 13. Cardinals to have been against him.
Should we recount all the villainies of this Pope, we should never make an end:
let what is said suffice. When Gregory 7. was deposed, Clement 3. 1101
was made Pope. He was pope 21 years, after whose death those of his part, in
the 1101 year, elected Albertus. Pascal. 2. Pascal. 2. a cruel Pope, who burned
another Pope.
caused the body of Clement to be vntombed and burned. The same which happened
to Clement 3. happened also to Formosus as before we have said, upon Stephen 6.
or 7. and Sergius 3. In the time of this Pope Gregory 7. reigned Don Alonso 6.
This Alonso wan Toledo, in whose time and presence the miracle in Toledo, Lib.
6. cap. 26.
recited by Don Rodrigo, Archbishop of Toledo, in his history of Romish and
Gothish offices, The Romish office but not the Gothish burned.
which both were cast into the fire, happened. The Romish was burned, and not
the Gothish. Which history in the treatise of the Mass we will afterward
declare.

Victor 3. Victor. 3.
not by the Cardinals, nor the people of Rome, but by Maud the adulteress, and
whore of Pope Gregory 7. was made pope. This Victor took part against the
Emperor, and Clement 3. but that which he would he did not: for in the 1088.
year of poison which his subdeacon, Poison in the Chalice.
in saying of Mass, cast into the Chalice, he quickly died. Don Alonso, of
Cartagena bishop of Burgos, speaking of Don Alonso the king in his time makes
mention hereof.

By Maud also, Urban 2. an heretic.
was Urban 2. made Pope. He was the disciple of Hildebrand, whom Cardinal
Benon in contempt calls Turbano. One Pope exco^municateth another.
He was a Sismatike, an heretic, an Arrian. He excommunicated Clement 3. and
the Emperor that did choose Clement. This Clement also (as says Vicencius) did
excommunicate Urban and when Urban would not absolve any of those whom
Hildebrand had excommunicated, he secretly departed from Rome. Many Counsels
did this pope celebrate. 1. in Melphis. 2. in Troya in Pull. 3. in Placencia,
4. in Clarmont. 5. in Turon: wherein he approved and confirmed that which
Gregory 7. (that good piece, did. In that of Claremont, a voyage into the holy
land was concluded: and so went there 3000. men; and with them Petrus
Hermitanus. From this Petrus Hermitanus, say many, (as notes Friar John de
Pineda) issued praying by count, which we call the Rosaries. But I demand
what word of God; or what example taken out of the old or new Testament have
they to confirm this manner of praying. It is then a humane invention and by
consequence abominable in the sight of God. This Urban made the Archbishop of
Toledo Primate of all Spain. The Archbishop of Toledo Primate of Spain.
Two years was this Pope hidden in the house of Peter Leo, for fear of John
Paganus a citizen of Rome, where in the 1099 year he died. His adversary Pope
Clement 3. who being Pope, Anno 1099.
saw 3 Popes the same year, died. Don Alonso 6. reigned in Castile.

Pascal 2. a Thuscan, was the disciple of Hildebrand. This Pascal seeing they
would make him Pope, would not ascend to the Papal seat, Pascal 2.
before the people had three times said, S. Peter has chosen a most good man
Reinerus. In wars and seditions he consumed his life. In a Council which he
held, he renewed the excommunication against the Emperor Henry 4. and such was
his hate toward him, The son against the father by the instigation of the
Pope.
that with deceits and subtilties he incited Henry 5. against his own father.
What thing more cruel and horrible can be, then to cause an only son not
only causeless to despise, forsake, and abandon his father: but also with
war to persecute him, take him by deceit, and so taken, Cruelty.
to suffer him die a most miserable death? And who incited him to this? Even
the Pope himself, who being a Priest (as he calls himself) was to have
exhorted the son to love and honor his father, as God in th fifth
Commandment of his holy law commands. And yet after the fathers death ceased
not the Pope to show his malice: He commanded to vntombe him, cast him out of
the Church, and his body to remain five years without Christian burial. A
cruel Pope.
Otherwise commands Saint Peter (whose successor he says that he is) that
kings should be honored. Be subject (says he, 1. Pet. 2. 13.) to every
ordinance of man, for Gods cause: be it to the king as superior. Otherwise
commands S. Paul, that we should honor them. Let every soul (says he, Romans
13. 1.) be subject to higher powers, for there is no power but of God, etc. And
to Titus, chap. 3. 1. he says, Warn them that they be subject to Princes and
potentates, that they obey etc. But he is shameless, all the earth is his, he
may do all whatsoever he lists, without reckoning of God, his son Jesus
Christ, or his holy Apostles, who command us to honor kings and be subject
to them. And as Pascal was an unquiet and seditious man: so began he also with
the son, and denied to confirm the Bishops which Henry the fifth had
nominated. But the Emperor gave him his payment, who (dissembling) came to the
Pope, The Emperor takes the Pope.
and after he had kissed his feet, caused him to be taken, and would not
release him out of Prison, vnill he had confirmed the said bishops, and crowned
him. But as the Emperor turned his back to return into Germany, then
revoked the Pope (perjured as he was) all whatsoever he had promised: and
excommunicated the Emperor. In Campania of France held this Pope a Council:
Wherein he took away the lawful wives from the priests of France: as
Hildebrand his master took them from those of Germany. Templars.
In his time the Templars began. This Pope (as in Gregory the seventh we have
said) caused the body of Clement the third to be vntombed and burned. A cruel
Pope.
Pascal died in the 1118. year. and Don Alonso the seventh reigned in Castile.

Gelasius Gaietanus the second, Anno 1118.
with great tumult, and without consent of the Emperor was made Pope.
Gelasius. 2.
The Emperor levied a great host against Rome. Gelasius fearing him, went
with his partakers to Gaeta. When the Emperor was come to Rome he made
another Pope, whom they called Gregory the eight. Two Popes.
Archbishop of Braga, which done the Emperor departed from Rome. Gregory 8.
Gelasius hearing the same, came secretly to Rome, and boldly went to say
Mass in the Church of S. Prax^idis: where those of the contrary faction did so
assault him, that he hardly escaped their hands, and so fled to Pisa, and from
thence into France: The 24. Sisme.
where, after he had a year and some days been Pope, he died. In Colonia he
held a Council, albeit not present there himself, where the Emperor was
excommunicated. He ordained in this Council that his successors the chief
Bishops of Rome, The privilege of the Pope.
neither might nor ought to be judged of any. In the 1119. 1119.
year he died: and Don Alonso reigned in Castile.

In the place where Gelasius died, Calistus 2.
was Calistus the second, a Burgoignian, by some of the Cardinals that went
with him chosen: which election some Cardinals abiding in Rome and Italy did
also approve. He (thus made Pope) went to Rome, where most honorably he was
received, and thence sent to command his Legate, as then at the Council, to
continue the excommunication against the Emperor. Who fearing the like should
happen to himself as did to his father, admitted (albeit wicked) the
conditions of peace, Gregory as yet living, whom he had made Pope. This peace
concluded, Calistus bent himself to persecute Gregory. Gregory seeing his
part ouerthrown fled from Rome to Sutrio, whither followed Calistus: took him,
and with great ignominy brought him to Rome, and put him into a Monastery.
Compostella an Archbishoppricke.
This Calistus the more to confirm idolatry, and the better to intertaine
superstition, made the Church of S. James of Galicia an Archbishoppricke, and a
book also of S. James his miracles. Anno 1124.
In the 1124. year he died: and Don Alonso 7. reigned in Castile.

Honorius the second, Honorius 2.
a Bullonist, entered not (says Platina) rightly into the Popedom. For more
by ambition then the consent of good men, he obtained it. The Cardinals chose
for Pope Theobald, Celestine 2.
Cardinal of S. Anastasia, whom they called Celestine the second. The 25.
Sisme.
This was the 25. Sisme. The people sought to have the Cardinal of Saint
Stephen to be Pope. There was the^ in Rome a very rich man called Leo, who so
much wrought both with the Cardinals and people, that neither the Cardinal of
S. Anastasia, nor he of Saint Stephen, but whom he himself listed, called
Honorius 2. was Pope. Honorius sent into England John of Crema, Cardinal of S.
Grison his Legate: which Cardinal in a Council by him held in London,
condemned married Priests, and was taken the night following with the theft in
his hands: with a wicked woman they caught him, A notable example of
hypocrisy.
which (as says Matthew Paris) gave no small scandal to the Church. Such be
these, as were the Pharisees, of whom the Lord says: that they bind heavy
burdens, Matthew. 13. 4
and hard to bear, and put them upon the shoulders of men, but they themselves
will not move them with one of their fingers. Anno 1130.
Honorius died in the 1130. year, and Don Alonso 7. reigned in Castile.

Innocent being Pope, Innocent. 2.
showed great hatred to Rogero king of Sicilia, against whom he went forth in
battle. And as he carried him away vanquished, behold, the son of the king
came, and took the Pope and his Cardinals. Anacletus.
Now did the Romans make another Pope, Two Popes.
whom they called Anacletus the second (this was the 26. The 26. Sisme.
Sisme) which Innocent hearing, compounded with the king, and minding to go to
Rome, but durst not attempt it. He went into France, and in Claremount held a
Council, where he condemned Anacletus: and went to see Philip king of France:
then Henry the first, king of England: and afterward Lotharius king of
Almaine; to the end they should restore him to his Popedom. Lotharius with a
great camp came upon Rome, put to flight Anacletus, and in his seat placed
Innocent, which Pope to show himself grateful, crowned Lotharius Emperor.
This Innocent ordained, that whosoever wounded any Priest or ecclesiastical
person, should ipso facto, be excommunicate, and none might absolve him but the
Pope himself, Anno 1143.
Council. 17. q. 4. Siquis. In the 1143. year he died: and Don Alonso the
seventh reigned in Castile.

Lucius 2. Lucius 2.
was made Pope. In whose time the Romans (unable to bear longer the violence
and tyranny of the Popes) elected one Patricio a noble man of Rome called
Jordan. This Patricio demanding the rights of the city of Rome, as well within
as without the walls, said: that this right by reason of his office perteined
to him: which the Pope, by means of Charles the Great suppressing all the
Patricios, had so long time usurped to himself. He commanded that the Pope
(as his predecessors had done) should content himself with the first fruits;
The Romans limit the Pope.
tenths and oblations. The Pope seeing himself so disquieted by the Romans,
sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor Conrado, requesting him to come into Italy
and aid him, which Conrado could not do. The Pope seeing there was no remedy
to be expected by the Emperor, A Popish subtilty.
used this subtlety. He awayted his time, when all the Snators of Rome and the
Patricio with them were together in the Capitol. This opportunity found, the
Pope like a good Captain, utterly to destroy that Senate, went with many
soldiers in person to the Capitol. The bruit of the Popes pretense flue
presently through Rome: the Romans took arms and fought bravely against the
Pope: The Pope stoned for his tyranny. 1145.
who received in the battle so many blows with stones, that thereof shortly
after, in the 1145. year, not having yet fulfilled a year in his Popedom, he
died, Don Alonso 7. reigned in Castile. In the time of this Don Alonso 7.
Eugenius 3.
and whiles Eugenius 3. successor of Lucius was Pope, Don Alonso 1. The first
king of Portugal,
after he had 27. years been Earl of Portugal, having conquered five Moorish
kings, was made king of Portugal, and so continued king 46 years.

Anastasius 4. Anastasius 4.
was not so wicked as his predecessors: In the second year of his Bishopdome
he died. In his time (says Matthew Paris) was William restored to his
Archbishopricke of York in England, who the same year (of poison, which in
saying Mass they put into the Chalice) died. Poison in the chalice.
Don Alonso 7. then reigned in Castile.

When Adrian an Englishman, Adrian 4.
and son of Robert a Monk of Saint Albons, was chosen, he would not be
consecrated until Arnold Bishop of Brixta was cast out of Rome. This Arnold
had persuaded the Romans to recover their liberty of choosing their magistrates,
and governing their commonwealth: but the people would not grant what the
Pope demanded: for which cause the Pope did excommunicate them. Arnold in the
end was expulsed Rome, and the Consuls renounced their office. At this time
came Frederick the Emperor to Rome; the Pope and clergy met him in Sutrio.
The Emperor then lighting from his horse, led the horse of the Pope, and held
his left stirrope, for the Pope to alight: The Pope derided the Emperor,
because he held not the right stirrup: with this dirision was the Emperor
somewhat angry, The insolency of the Pope because the Emperor held not the
stirrope as he ought.
and smilingly answering him, said: That he never had bin horse boie. The day
following, came the Pope to the Camp of the Emperor, who corrected with his
former reproof, by holding the right stirrope, better performed his office.
This done, the Emperor would be crowned: but the Pope would not crown him till
he had cast from Pulla Willam king of Sicilia: and this at the proper charge of
the Emperor. The Popes resolution understood, the princes answered; that a
greater Camp was needful: that then he should crown the Emperor, who would
return with a greater host, and perform that which he commanded; and so was
he crowned the day following* when the Emperor was departed, the Pope seeing
himself destitute of his assistance, excomunicated the king of Sicilia, and
absolved all his vassals of their oath and allegiance; but seeing this nothing
prevailed, he incited against William, Manuel Emperor of Grecia: William seeing
himself so greatly straighted, demanded peace; promising to make full
restitution: but by the counsel of some Cardinals, which gained by the
wars, the Pope would not grant it: William seeing the cause to be desperate;
levied a great army, wherewith he put to flight the Emperor: he besieged
Beneuente where was the Pope with his Cardinals, and put them to such a
strait, that they craved peace: which William granted: and so the Pope
declared him king of both Sicils. At this time commanded the German Emperor,
that if the Pope sent his Legates into Almaine, they should not be received, but
commanded to return. The Emperor also commanded that none should appeal to
Rome, The Emperor commands that none should appeal to Rome.
and in letters placed his own name before the name of the Pope: wherewith the
Pope was highly offended: as by a letter which he sent, co^plaining of these
things which the Emperor had commanded, appears. Whereunto the Emperor very
Christianlike, among other things answered, saying, that Jesus Christ comanded
to give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's: and that the Pope being his vicar,
should do the like. He showed the cause why his Cardinals were not admitted:
for that they were (says he) not preachers but robbers: but when they perform
their duty and office, then will we not let to aid them. D. Illescas in his
hist. Pontif. upon the life of this Adrian 4. sets down the letter of the
Pope: but (crafty as he was) he set not down the answer of the Emperor,
recited by Nauclerus. In the end he excommunicated the Emperor: The Pope killed
with a fly.
but no further could the Pope show his malice: for that he swallowed a fly:
Ireland.
and in the 1159 year thereof died. Anno 1159.
This Pope granted the Henry 2. king of England, the seignory of Ireland. In
this year 1159. died Don Alonso 7. who reigned 51 year in Castile.

Alexander 3. Alexander 3.
was made pope with great sedition: for 9 Cardinals, which took part with the
Emperor, A Devilish Pope.
made the Cardinal of S. Clement, Victor 4.
who^ they called Victor 4. Pope. Victor being dead, in his place was chosen
Pascal, then Calistus, and afterward Innocentius. All these one after another
opposed themselves to Alexander. This was a much greater Sisme then the 27 was.
The 27. Sisme.
The last (which was Innocent) unwillingly renounced. Anno 1159.
All the time that Alexander was Pope, which was 22 years, endured this sisme
Frederick the Emperor in the time of this Sisme, held a Diet in Pauia, where he
commanded that Alexander, and the Pope his adversary, should appear, that the
cause might be examined, and he Pope alone, which had most right to be Pope.
Alexander scorning the messe^gers of the Emperor, proudly answered: The Bishop
of Rome ought not to be judged of any: and the^ wrote his letters to the
christian Princes, and excommunicated the Emperor and Victor the Pope. To the
Cardinal his vicegerent in Rome sent he great presents, to gain the good wills
of the Romans, that they might choose such Consuls as should take part with him.
To him Philip king of France gave great assistance. The Emperor seeing the
obstinacy of Alex. levied a great host and came into Italy: when the Emperor
was come to Brixia, Harma^ Bish. of that city, who had bin Secretary to the
Emperor, persuaded him (and that by the counsel of Alex. who^ he feared) to
pass with this great host into the holy land, and there make war with the
Turk. The Emp. moved with this exhortation of Herma^, supposing al waters were
clear, and that there was no deceit, departed to make wars with the Turks:
of whom he had many victories, and gained many cities, and among them the city
of Jerusalem: Aelexander hearing of such, and so great victories, began newly
to fear, lest the Emperor at his return into Italy, would newly assail
him. To prevent so great a mischief, by all possible means he practiced to
destroy, The Pope a murderer.
and cause him to be killed. Then sent he for a painter, which should picture
the lively purtrait of the Emperor, A stratagem of the Pope.
which picture or purtraite the Pope sent to the Souldan, aduising him by his
letters, that if he coueted to live in peace, he should kill him by deceit whom
that picture represented. The Souldan taking the counsel of this devilish
Pope, sought all ways possible to kill him: and unable by force of arms, by
fraud and subtlety. The Emperor and his camp then marching in Armenia, and
the season being very hot, he resolved to go bathe in the river, and none to
accompany him but one of his Chaplains: being thus alone, he was taken by
such as the Souldan sent to watch him: and taken, was through the woods and
groves carried to the Souldan, without the knowledge or suspicion of any of
his followers. His people on horseback all that day and the next sought him,
and not finding him, it was bruited through the host, that the Emperor was
drowned. And supposing that he was drowned, they returned to their own
countries. When the Emperor was presented to the Souldan, he fained himself
to be the porter of the Emperor: but the Souldan well knowing him by the
picture, which the good Pope had sent him, commanded the purtrait and letters
sent by the Pope to be brought forth, which in his presence he caused to be
read. Then was the Emperor apalled: and seeing that his denial nothing
auailed, confessed whom he was, and craved mercy. The Souldan seeing the great
goodness and wiseof the Emperor, with great gentleness used him: and so it
happened, that he gave him liberty, with this condition, that an everlasting
peace should be between them, and that he should pay an hundred thousand
ducats for his ransom: for the which his Chaplain (taken with him) should
remain until it were paid. The Couenantes thus being made, the Sultan
dismissed the Emperor, and giving him many presents, and providing all things
necessary for his journey, he caused 34 horsemen to attend him, and so came he
to Brixia, where he abode. The Gemane Princes hearing of the Emperors
arrival, came to kiss his hands, and give him the welcome-home. The Emperor
rewarded the Souldans people that had attended on him, and sent them back to
their Lord again. This done the Emperor held a Diet in Norinberge: where he
recou^ted that which had happened, the great treason of the Pope, and read the
letter sent by the Pope to the Souldan: which seen, the Princes promised their
aid both for performance of his promise to the Souldan: and also for the
chastising of Pope Alexander. A great camp he levied, without any let passed
through Italy, and went toward Rome. The Emperor sent Ambassadors to Rome, by
whom he required (without mentioning the received villainies and injuries by
Pope Alexander) that the cause of the Popes might be heard and examined, that
he which had most right might be Pope: and so the Sisme cease. Alexander seeing
his part unfurnished, fled by night to Gaeta, and from thence to Beneuente: and
there attiring himself in the habit of his Cook, The Pope flies in a Cooks
habit.
in the 17. year of his Bishodome came to Venice, where he was made Gardener
of a Monastery: from whence by commandment of Sebastian Duke of Venice; with
great pome he was taken and very pontifically carried to the Church of Saint
Mark. This history is cited by Nauclerus, Barnus, Funcius, and others. The
Emperor hearing that the Pope was in Venice, requested the Venetians to
deliver so pernicious a man his enemy unto him: which denied by the Venetians,
the Emperor with an Army sent Otho his son: and commanded him not to fight
before his coming. The young Prince desirous of fame, sought with the
Venetians against the commandment of his father, of whom he was vanquished,
and carried prisoner to Venice. This was a notable victory: for the General
of the Venetians, called Ciano, brought but thirie Galleys and Otho 75. I will
here recite that which Friar John de Pineda lib. 25. cap. 7.. 3. says:
Glorious Ciano entered into Venice, etc. and somewhat lower. The Pope gave him
the glory of the victory: a little gold ring he also delivered him: saying:
he gave him that, in token he granted him the segniorie of the sea, which he
had gotten; and would, he should cast it into the sea, The marriage of the Duke
of Venice with the sea.
to bind the sea thenceforth as his wife, to be always kept under the Venetian
Empire. And that all the after Dukes should upon some special day, celebrate
this ceremony every year. And somewhat after: the ceremony passed, was upon
the day of the Ascension: and the Pope granted in that Church upon such day,
full remission, etc. for ever. Thus far Pineda. Alexander grown proud with
this victory, would not make peace with Frederick, until he himself should
come to Venice, at such day as the Pope would appoint. The father, for the love
he bare to his son, did all whatsoever he was commanded. He came to Saint
Marks: where the Pope before all the people commanded the Emperor to
prostrate himself, and crave mercy: which the Emperor there did. Then trod
the Pope with his feet upon the neck of the Emperor, who was prostrate on
the ground, The Pope treads in the neck of the Emperor Frederick.
and with his mouth that spoke blasphemies, said: It is written, Thou shall go
upon the Aspe and Basiliske, and upon the Lion and Dragon shall thou tread.
The Emperor herewith ashamed, made answer: Not to thee, but to Peter. Psalm
91. 13.
Whereat the Pope stamping upon the neck of the Emperor, said: Blasphemy and
tyranny.
Both to me and to Peter. Then was the Emperor silent, and so the Pope
absolved him of his excommunication. Another such like thing as this, to the
Emperor Henry (of who^ we have spoken in the life of Gregory 7.) happened. The
conditions of peace were, That the Emperor should hold Alexander for rightful
Pope: and restore all whatsoever, that during the war he had taken. The peace
thus made, the Emperor with his son departed. Robert. Montensis, in his
history, reports, that Lewis king of France, and Henry king of England,
going on foot, and holding the bridle of the horse, whereupon this Alexander
rode, the one with the right hand, and the other with the left, with great
pomp they led him through the city of Boyanci, which is upon the river Luera.
In the time of this Alexander. God to reprove the pride and tyranny of the
Bishop, raised up the Waldenses, Waldenses.
or as other call them, the poor of Lions, in the year of the Lord 1181. Anno
1181.
in which year this beast died: and Don Sancho 3. reigned in Castile.

Lucius 3. Lucius 3.
who purposed to abolish the name of Consuls in Rome, by the common consent of
the Cardinals was chosen. For which the Romans much offended, expelled him from
Rome, disgraced with diverse kinds of reproaches those of his part; and some of
them also they killed. Anno 1185.
In the 1185. year he died: and Don Sancho 3. reigned in Castile.

Urban 3. Urban 3.
(whom for his troublesomenesse they called Turbano, as says Albertus Crantzio
in the 6. book, and 52. chap. of his Saxon history) determined to
excommunicate the Emperor: because he was a let unto him, and would not permit
him to do what he listed: Anno 1187.
but he did it not, because in the 1187. year, he died before he would.
Jerusalem taken by the Moors.
Don Alonso 8. reigned in Castile, and at this time the Moors took Jerusalem.

Gregory 8. Gregory 8.
before he was two months Pope died.

When Clement 3. Clement 3.
was Pope, he incited the Christian Princes (as had done his predecessors) to
war beyond the seas: which did the Popes, not so much for the increase of
Christendom, as for their own peculiar intents and commodities, as upon
Alexander 3. we have already declared: because the Princes being so far
remote, and entangled with wars against the Infidels, the Popes might do, and
did, whatsoever they listed. The Danes this Pope excommunicated, The Danes
would have their priests married.
because they would their Priests should be married, and not concubine
keepers. In this 1191. year he died. Don Alonso the eight then reigned in
Castile. Anno 1191.


The next day after, Celestine 3.
Celestine 3. was made Pope. He crowned Henry 6. and much repining that
Tancred, the bastard son of Roger (whom the Sicilians had chosen for king,
William their king being dead without heir) should be the king of Sicilia. The
Pope married the Emperor with Constantia the daughter of R^gero, A Nun
married with the Popes license.
taking her out of the Monastery of Panormo, where she was a Nun, upon this
condition, that expelling Tancred, who then possessed it. He should demand for
dower the kingdom of both Sicils: and for being king of Sicilia should pay his
fealty to the Pope: Cicilia tributarie to the Pope.
which was the cause of much bloodshed. When this Emperor Henry was dead great
sisme arose in the Empire, and such and so great was the discord, that hardly
one parish agreed with another. By these co^tentions among the priests the Pope
greatly enriched himself; because in Rome they were to be ended, as notes
Conrado Lichtenao, Abbot of Vespurg: whose words, A notable saying of the Abbot
of Vespurg. against the Roman Court.
for that they are worthy of perpetual memory, I will here recite them.
Hardly, says he, remained any bishopric or ecclesiastical dignity which
entertained not strifes; whose cause, but not with empty hand, was carried to
Rome. Be glad mother Rome; because the sluices of treasures do open in the
earth; that the floods and rivers of money, may come to thee in great
abundadnce. Rejoice over the wickedness of the sons of men: because for
recompense of so great wickedness, the price to thee is given: delight thou with
discord thy helper, which issued from the pit infernal, that many rewards of
money might be heaped unto thee. Hold that for which thou have thirsted: Sing
to sing, because by the malice of men, and not their godly religion, thou have
overcome the world: draw men unto thee, not their devotion, but the committing
of great abominations, Anno 1198.
and the deciding of strifes for reward. Hitherto the Abbot; who so now would
say thus should be an heretic, Innecent. 3.
a Lutherane. In the 1198. year died Celestinus. Don Alonso 8. reigned in
Castile.

Innocent 13. (whom the Historians call Nocentissimus) bare so great hatred to
the Emperor Philip, because against his liking, he was chosen by the Germane
Princes, that he said these words: A stout Pope.
Bishop, either take the crown and kingdom from Philip; or Philip take from
the Bishop his Bishopdome. And so stirred he up Otho, a great and rash
warrior, against the Emperor. Much blood he shed for the Popes cause: until
another Otho, The Pope causes the Emperor to be killed by treason.
and great taitor slew Philip: and so his Competitor Otho came to Rome, and for
his good service done to the Pope was crowned. Note that which before we have
said upon Alexander 3. against the Emperor: but long lasted not the friendship
between Innocent and Otho. For Otho willing to recover that which the Popes had
usurped of the Empire, was by the Pope excommunicated: and all whosoever should
call, or hold Otho for Emperor were accursed. And so the Pope procured the
Princes to choose for Emperor Frederike king of Cicil. The Popes be like unto
stumpets, which no longer love their ruffians, then they do them service. In
the time of this Pope, which was in the 1212 year, some of the Nobles of
Alsacia (as Huldericus Mucius reports) condemned the Pope for wicked, because
he suffered not the Priests to be married: And because certain men said: it was
lawful for every Christian to eat flesh and marry at any time of the year;
the bishops burned in one day a hundred persons. If this be heresy, then
Saint Paul was an heretic. 1. Timothy. 4. 3. where he calls them that
forbid marriage, and meats, which God has created, etc. apostatates from the
faith. This Innocent 3. under color to recover the holy land, did celebrate
the Council of Laeteran: but his principal intent was, to excommunicate and
depose the Emperor, because he had taken some cities of the Patrimony of
Saint Peter. The Pope in this Council, brought forth auricular confession. He
was the first that imposed this charge upon christians He was the first,
Auricular conconfession imposed by Innocent 3.
that forbad the laity (as they call them) the cup in the communion. This
prohibition was confirmed in the Council of Constance. Almericus a learned
man, he condemned for an heretic, The Cup forbidden to the Laytie.
and commanded his bones to be burned in Paris, and all those that held his
opinion. This did the Pope, (says Friar Domingo Soto in one of his sermons;)
because Almericus had taught, that Images should be cast out of the Temple.
Images. That which God forbids the Pope commands.
See thou not o Pope, that God forbids that which thou command; and
comandeth that thou forbiddest; with great reason do men call thee Antichrist.
The Council of Eliberis, celebrated in Spain, at the same time almost with
the first Council of Nice, comaundeth; that that which is reverenced, or
adored, should not upon the walls be pictured, as in the beginning of this
Treatise, we have said. This Pope ordained, that when the princes disagreed in
election of the Emperor; such election should remain to the arbitrament of
the pope. Concerning the election of the Emperor, and the authority of the 7
electors, The Sacrament in the Churches.
read Carrion. lib. 5. fol. 3. and 5. Therewith has the Pope nothing to do.
He commanded the God Pan, the wheaten God, should in the Churches be kept. A
littlebell and light carried before the sacrament.
And that when they carried it to any sick person, a little bell and light
should be borne before it. He ordained that the Pope ought to correct the
Princes of the whole world. And that none be holden for Emperor, which shall
not be crowned by the Pope. If this be true, it follows, that Don Fernando
in our Country of Spain, nor Maximilian his son, nor Rodulph his nephewe,
that now is Emperor; were no Emperors: seeing, that none of these three
besides other more were crowned by the Pope. Anno 1216.
In the 1216. year he dyed, Thomas Cantipratensis, a Dominican (as recounteth
Friar John de Pineda lib. 21. cap. 26. 7.) writes that this Innocent, after
his death burning in cruel flames, appeared to the holy Virgin Lutgarda, and
said unto her, that so should he go unto the end of the world: and that for
three sins he had deserved everlastingly to be condemned, but that the
glorious mother of God, and of mercy favored him because he had built a
Church in honor of her holy and sweet name. And this Author says, that
Saint Lutgarda told him what sins they were, but that he for the Popes
honor would not write them. O ye Churchmen that for true prelates confound
the Churches, God grant ye become not worse then Innocent. Thus far Pineda.
Open thine eyes (o Spain) and understand at last, what a one is the Pope,
whom as a God on earth thou adorest. Don Alonso the ninth then reigned in
Castile. Honorius 3.


Honorius the third against the excommunicated Otho the fourth and Henry the
first, crowned Frederick second son of Constantia the Nun (of whom we have
spoken in the life of Celestinus the third) which Frederick, because he sought
that which was his in Sicilia and Pulla, the Pope did afterward excommunicate.
This Honorius forbad the Civil law to be read in Paris. The civil law not to
be read in Paris.
In the time of this Pope, and the 1223. year, did one Adam Bishop of Cathan
in Scotland, excommunicate certain men, The Bishop burned in his kitchen.
for not paying their tithes, against whom the citizens were so much
offended, that they burned him in his kitchen. So much did the Pope stomach
this matter, that he stayed not (till the king of Scotland called Alexander did
it: The great cruelty of the pope.
) but 400. of them he caused to be hanged, and their sons to be gelded; that
their name should not remain in the earth. Cruel and reuengefull is this
beast. Anno 1227.
In the 1227. year he died. Don Fernando, surnamed the Holy; which wan Seuill,
Cordoua, and a great part of Andalusia, Gregory. 9.
reigned in Castile.

Gregory 9. the Nephew, or to speak better, the son of Innocent 3. bare
great hatred against Frederick, and so he confirmed the sentence of
excommunication, which Honorius had given against him. The Ambassadors, which
the Emperor sent for his excuse, he would not hear. He incited many Princes
against him, which thing the Emperor seeing, to avoid the fury of the Pope, he
went to Palestina to make war with the Souldan, as the pope commanded. But
when the Emperor was passed the sea, then the Pope made himself Master of
Pulla, and would not consent that the crossed soldiers, which were to go and
serve the Emperor, should pass the sea. The Emperor went thither, where so
valiantly he behaved himself, that he wan Jerusalem and other cities, and made
truce with the Souldan for ten years. All which, by his Ambassadors he
signified to the Pope, supposing that the Pope would have rejoiced: But so
far off was the Pope from rejoicing at the news, A cruel and lying Pope.
that he commanded those which brought them to be slain, lest they should tell
them to others, and bruted it abroad, that the Emperor was dead. This did the
Pope, that those certain cities of Pulla, which were not yet rendered,
hearing of the Emperors death might yield themselves unto him. Herein the Pope
showed himself a murderer and liar, the very son of the devil. And that
the Emperor might not return, the Pope by letteres requested the Sultan not
to deliver the holy land unto him. But the Emperor set all things in good
order, returned into Italy, and recovered again that which the Pope had
usurped in Pulla. The Pope seeing this, did excommunicate him again, obiecting
against him, that he had made truce with the Souldan: yet in the end by the
mediatiation of the Princes the Pope absolved the Emperor, provided that he
paid for his absolution an hundred thousand ounces of gold, or as says Hist.
Pontific. upon the life of this Gregory the ninth, a hundred twenty five
thousand ounces. But Nauclerus, Friar John de Pineda, Rerum Germanicarum
Epitome: and Carrion lib. 5. say, 120000. ounces of gold. How dearly the Pope
sells his vile merchandise here appears. There is no Mercer, chapman, nor
Peddler, which sell so dear their wares, as the Pope sells his ink, paper,
wax, and lead. When the Emperor was departed out of Italy, he understood
that the Pope and his confederates sought to deprive him of the Empire:
whereupon he returned into Italy and chastised the rebels. The Pope hearing
thereof, did eftsoons excommunicate the Emperor as then in Pauia, who now
unable any longer to endure the covetousness, sausinesse and tyranny of the
Pope, resolved to make them known to all faithful Christians, that they might
fly from the error and false religion of the Popes. For this cause he
commanded a man well exercised in the Scripture, to preach in his presence,
wherein he should entreat of Excommunication, and the Roman Church. And so it
was. The Sermon being ended, the errors of the Roman Church were so
discovered and the craft and subtlety of the Popes so manifested, that the
Emperor wrote to the Pope these verses.

Roma diu titubans longis erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
To wit Rome, that long time has stumbled, shall fall, and cease to be the
head of the world. The which we see daily more and more to be verified. How
many kingdoms have cast off the Roman tyranny? Tolling of the bell at the Aue
Maria, and elevation.
This Pope commanded, that at the Aue Maria, the Salve Regina: (that so
blasphemous Antheme against Christ, which this Pope first commanded to be sung
in the Churches) and also at the elevation of his pasted God the bell should be
tolled. To Saint Fraunces was this Pope very much devoted: and so commanded,
that the faithful should believe, Saint Fraunces to have had the five wounds.
Friar John de Pineda (as a Friar Franciscan) libr. 22. cap. 23.. 3. handles
this matter at large. And in the 39. cap.. 3 he entreats of the Saints, which
he says had the wounds, as had Saint Fraunces: which history, among the
swarm of false miracles you shall find in the end of this book. This Pope (as
notes Friar John de Pineda, lib. 21. cap. 33.. 3.) compiled and ordained the
Decretals. Decretals.
The laws of the Popes whereby the Cannonists be governed, some are called
Decretals which be (as Pineda in the place alleged does note it) determinatiue
Epistles of some doubtful causes which the Pope alone, or with the opinion of
the Cardinals and consultation of some makes. A Decree is called that, Decree.
which the Pope establishes by advise of the Cardinals, Cannon.
without request of any. A Cannon is that which in an universal Council is
established. And this is a distinction of the Gloss. Cann. Omnis. Did. 3. upon
a Decree. He adds, Dogma.
that the statute in matter of faith is called Dogma: and that which consists
in matters of vices or virtues, Mandatum.
Mandatum. And if it be prohibitiue, an Interdiction it is called without
punishment assigned: Sancion.
and Sancion is the member of the law, that appoints the punishment to
transgressors, etc. And somewhat lower: Other constitutions, which other popes
have since invented remain in another volume, which we call Liber Sextus,
Sextus.
compiled and authorized by Pop Boniface the eight and in the Council of Lions
in France by him published. And Clement the fifth made afterward many others,
which are called Clementines, Clementines.
etc. Other Extrauagants many Popes made, Extrauagants.
etc. Extrauagants be they called, because they are not put in the titles of
the Law, as other ordinary ones be, but each one apart by it self, every one
entreating of it distinct matter: even as Quodlibets are so called, Quodlibets.
because they be put amongst divine questions, handled apart by themselves,
every one according to it matter. I thought good (seeing in this book is
handled the authority of the Pope) to set down here the names of the laws
wherewith the Pope governs his Church. Jesus Christ the only universal head
of his universal Church, with the word of God contained in the old and new
Testament (which we call the Bible, and our adversaries so much abhor and
detest as the pestilence, and doctrine of devils) governs his Church: and
therefore under such rigorous pain forbid they the reading thereof: calling it
a book of heresies. Arise o Lord, sleep not, disperse thine enemies, and
drive those away that abhor thy holy law which thy Majesty has published
by the mouth and writing of thine holy Prophets and Apostles. In the 1241.
Anno 1241.
year this Gregory 9. died. Don Fernando 3. reigned in Castile.

Celestinus the fourth, Celestinus 4.
a Milanist, assayed what he might, to secute the good Emperor Frederick:
but, for that he was Pope but eighteen days, Poison.
and (as is said) poisoned: he could not perform it. In the election of this
Celestine the fourth (says the history,) an English Cardinal called Robert
Somerton, lest he should have succeeded Gregory the ninth, Poison.
was poisoned. Celestine being dead, because the Emperor took the Cardinals,
the popedom was void almost 21 months, but in the end, at the request of
Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople and others, he let them go. Don Fenando 3.
reigned in Spain. Innocent 4.


When Innocent the fourth, a Genoway, was Pope, of a most dear friend to the
Emperor Frederick he beam a mortal enemy. I will here recite what says
Ieronymus Marius, concerning this Pope, of him says he: that being Pope he
held a Council against the Emperor at Lyous in France: in which Council the
Pope himself cited the Emperor. The Ambassadors of the Emperor besought the
Pope to give him time to come to the Council: this time the Pope refused to
grant, but there, like a mad man, excommunicated and deposed the Emperor:
commanding that none should obey him, and the Princes to choose another
Emperor: whom he so solicited, and with promises deceived, that they chose
for Emperor Henry, Lantgraue of Turingia. Frederick the second understanding
hereof, against the Pope and the rest defended himself valiantly, until being
in Pulla, he could not escape the snares of the Pope, where a certain man by
the Pope corrupted, did poison him. Yet began he notwithstanding to recover,
The Pope caused the Emperor to be poisoned.
until a young man called Manfredo with money also (as some say) by the pope
corrupted, strangled him with a towell. Concerning this good Emperor, no
credit is to be given either to Blundus, Platina, Estella, nor Sabellicus,
because they wrote the sayings of the Pope and his flatterers to stir up the
world, if they might against this good Emperor. Petr. de Vinea.
Who lists to know the truth, let him read Petrus de Vinea in his six
books of Epistles. Hitherto Marius. Preachers preach against the Pope.
In Sueuia at this time were preachers, that with great liberty preached the
truth, against the Pope and his Cardinals, they justified the cause of the
Emperor Frederick the second and Conrad his son: and boldly affirmed, that
neithe the Pope, Cardinals, nor Bishops had any authority, because they were
stained with Simony, and that they held no power which Christ had given them.
The Priests (said they) being in mortal sin, did neither bind nor loose, nor
yet consecrate at al, etc. At the end of their sermons, they said, that the
indulge^ces which they preached, were not feigned of the Pope, nor invented of
his Prelates, but granted by the omnipotent God. In the foresaid Council of
Lugdanum, Hats clokes and trapped horses.
Innocent ordained, that the Cardinals should use red shadows (which they call
hattes) and cloakes, and ride upon trapped horses: and this (says Platina) to
adorn his order of Cardinals. Note for this purpose, concerning the Cardinals,
that which Pero Mexia upon the life of the Emperor Henry the fourth says:
where to paint Saint Jerome with a hat is made a mockery: for Saint Jerome
died above 850 years before Innocent invented the hattes. This Pope Innocent
the fourth had many bastards; whom, after the popish custom he called
Nephews. Until the time of this Pope (as notes Bibliander) there was no
article of faith, Transnbstantiation and adoration of the bread and wine.
nor law of the Church, that men should worship the bread and wine in the
Eucharist. This Pope was the first that created a new God by his
transubstantiation: albeit true it is, that Honorius 3. began this building.
This Pope offered to Henry 3. king of England, the kingdom of both Sicils,
Anno 1254.
if he would buy it. In the 1254. year he died: and Don Alonso 10. called the
wise, which was Emperor, reigned in Castile.

Alexander 4. an Italian was the first that persecuted and excommunicated
Manfred king of Sicilia. Alexander.
By reason whereof, many reuolts happened in Italy. William de Amor against
the begging Friars.
William de S. Amor, a learned man, who wrote against the feigned poverty of
the begging Friars, was in the time of this Pope, which books, with a terrible
edict the Pope prohibited. This good man affirmed these idle poor and lazy
fellows, which lived by alms, were not in the state of salvation. This
Alexander 4. secretly favored Richard the son of king John of England, A
double hearted Pope.
for money which he had promised, if he would make him Emperor, but publicly
he made show to favor Don Alonso 10. king of Spain, of whom he had
received very much money.

A double hearted man, is never good. In the 1262. year, or after others 1261.
he died: and Don Alonso the tenth reigned in Castile. Anno 1262.


Urban 4. Urban. 4.
a Frenchman, was Pope, he took against Manfred, as his predecessor Alexander
the fourth had done. And the better to be enabled for his own revenge, he
prayed Lewis king of France, to send Charles his brother, Earl of Province and
Aniou, whom he called king of both Sicils, with a great camp into Italy.
Charles in the end, after many warlike conflicts, overcame and slew Manfred,
near unto Benauente: and so took he under fealty, the kingdoms of Sicilia,
with Dukedom of Calabria and Pulla (the pope against all right, as he that
faulteth in whatsoever he does, giving the same unto him) This manifest roberie
was the cause of many ensuing murders. This Urban the fourth at the instance
of a certain woman called Eua, The feast of Corpus Christi at request of a
woman instituted.
a Recluse in the land of Leege (familiarly by him known before he was Pope)
did institute the great feast of the breaden God, called Corpus Christi. This
woman Arnoldus Bostius, and Petrus Premostratensis report, Anno 1264.
had a revelation (a devilish one no doubt) upon the celebration of the feast
of the Sacrament, which she by her letters signified to the Pope, requesting
him by his papal authority to cause it to be celebrated: Which thing the pope
granted, as by a letter in answer thereof appears. This letter thus
begins: Vrbanus Episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei, dilectae in Christo filiae
Euae, salutem, etc. Urban Bishop, the servant of Gods servants, to Euah his
beloved daughter in Christ, health and Apostolic blessing: We know o
daughter, that with great desire has thy soul desired the solemn feast of
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ to be instituted in the Church of God, and
for ever celebrated of all faithful Christians, etc. The Letter is long, and
therefore contenting my self to have put down the sum, I have spared here
to recite it. Behold here, my brethren the cause of this solemn feast, with
so many daunces, Castles, Maygames, plays, maids borne upon men's shoulders,
streets strowed with boughs and decked with Tapistrie. A day it is of most
great superstition and Idolatry: a day wherein more villainies then virtues are
committed. For who, (he or she) upon this day, will not see, and be seen; and
that beside which passes, more to be lamented then laughed at. True it is,
that Pope Honorius the third laid the foundation, and made the groundwork of
this building. In the 1265. or after some others, Anno 1265.
1264. year died Urban: and Don Alonso 10. reigned in Castile.

Clement 4. Clement. 5. a cruel Pope.
a Frenchman was like his predecessors, cruel, and a great bloodshedder. He
called into Italy against Manfred king of Cicill, Charles Earl of Aniou:
Charles vanquished and killed Manfred, whom this ungentle Clement made king of
Sicilia, and Jerusalem, Sicilia prays to Pope 40000. ducats for tribute.
with this condition to pay him yearly 40000. ducats. This caused infinite
numbers of men to be murdered. For Conradino, the son and heir of Conrade,
king of Sicilia, sought to defend his right: but Charles overcame and took him
prisoner, together with Frederick Duke of Austria near unto Naples; and by
the counsel of the pope did behead them. For Charles wrote to the Pope what he
should do with Conradino his prisoner? The Pope answered, The life of Charles,
the death of Conradino etc. After him, Adrian 5. against this Charles, Naples
French.
demanded aid of Rodolph the Emperor. The kingdom of Naples, by means of
this cursed Pope, came to the French, Anno 1270.
and the Dukedom of Sueuia took end. In the 1270. year, A most great
vacation.
this butcher died. The seat of Satan was long time, to wit, two years and
nine months, and two days, void. And Don Alonso 10. then reigned in Castile.

Clement the fourth being dead, Cregorie 10.
the Cardinals which were 17. number, to choose a new pope assembled together;
Amongst whom so great discord arose, that in almost three years space, they
could not agree: for every of them pretended to be pope. Philip king of France,
and Charles king of Sicill, hearing of this great discord, came to Viterbo
where the Cardinals were, and prayed them to dispatch and choose a chief
bishop; but so great was the ambition of the Cardinals, that all this travel
and suit of the two kings, were to no purpose: and so they returned without any
thing done. When they were in the election, inuocating the holy spirit, bishop
John Cardinal Portuensis, seeing the great forwardness of the Cardinals, said
unto them: My Lords, let us uncover this chamber: for the holy spirit through
so great roofes cannot enter unto us. When the same Cardinal understood that
Gregory was Pope, he co^piled these two verses: Papatus munus tulit
Archidiaconus vnus:
Quem patrem patrum, fecit discordia fratrum.


To wit, an Archdeacon attained to the Popedom, whom the discord of brothers,
made father of fathers. All this reports Panuinus an Augustine Friar. Behold
here what the Romists themselves report, of the elections of their Popes:
behold here Ambition the holy spirit, which in their election governs.
Gregory 10. Anno 1273.
thus elected, in the year 1273. at Lions in France did celebrate a Council:
where Michael Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople, who approved the doctrine
of the Roman church, his predecessors having 12 times done the like, The
Grecians 12. times approved, and as often revoked the popish doctrine.
and as many times more revoked the same, was present. In this council it was
ordained, that the Pope being dead, the Cardinals should shut themselves in the
Conclaue. And that moreover which Panuinus in the note upon Platina, upon the
life of this Gregory 10. says. He renewed a fresh the war of the holy land.
And in 5 years that he poped, Anno 1276.
never saw Rome. In the 1276. year he died, and Don Alonso 10. Innocent 5. the
first begging friar that was made Pope.
reigned in Castile. Innocent 5. a Burgonion, was the first begging friar that
was made pope: for which cause, he much favored his dominicks. And having poped
6. months and 2. days, the same year with his predecessor he died. Adrian 5.
Adria^ 5. a Genoway was the nephew, or as is thought the son of Innocent 4.
when he was Pope, he went from Rome to Viterbo: from whence he wrote to
Rodulph, the Emperor to aid him against Charles king of Sicilia: which
Charles, had the former popes against all right made king of Sicil, as in the
life of Clement 4. we have noted: but the Emperor occupied in the wars of
Bohemia, could not succor him. He poped but one month, and 7 days and then
died. John 22. (or 21 or 20) before he was pope called in latin Petrus
Hispanus, John 12.
was born at Lisbon, and by profession a Physician. Albeit this man was holden
for very learned; yet was he very unskillful to govern. And as says Platina
wrought more damage the^ profit to the popedom. Many things he did, which show
his folly and lightness. One good property he had, that when he saw a young man
inclined to study, with benefits and money he would aid him. This man (foolish
as he was) promised by the stars long life to himself: and so would tell it to
all men. But it far otherwise happened to him: for a certain chamber which
Valerius calls a sporting chamber, and Estella calls it a precious bed
chamber, which he had builded for his pleasure, in the palace of Viterbo, at
the end of 4. days, fell suddenly to the ground: and the Pope was found
between the timber and the stones: who (having poped 8. months, and 8. days)
at 7. Anno 1277.
days end, in the 1277. year died.

Six months after the death of his predecessor, Nichalas 3.
was Nicholas 3. chosen: for the Cardinals could not agree: at the end of which
time, The Senator of Rome was president in the Conclaue.
Charles king of Sicilia ruling as a Senator in the Conclaue: Nicholas 3. was
chosen: who after he was pope began the^ to persecute Charles: he took from
him the vicaredge of Hetruria: he took from him also the power of Senator,
given him by Clement 4. he forbad, that no king or prince thenceforth should
dare to demand or administer that office, and took it to himself. But Martin
the 4. What one Pope did, another undid.
his successor, did restore it unto him. For so agree the Popes, that that
which one does, another undoes. This Nicholas with great wars vexed Italy.
And the better to effect his purposes, he persuaded Don Pedro king of Arragon,
to demand the kingdom of Sicilia: seeing it was his in the right of his wife
Constance. This counsel much pleased Don Pedro: which was afterward the cause
of much bloodshed: Anno 1281.
In the year 1381. died Nic.

Martin 4. Martin 4.
a Frenchman (Panninus calls him 2.) with great humanity received Charles king
of Sicilia, and restored him to the dignity of Senator; and that moreover,
which his predecessor had taken from him. Don Pedro excommunicated.
He excommunicated Don Pedro king of Arragon; who levied a great army to
invade Charles in Sicilia: gave his kingdom for a prey, to the first that
could take it: absolved all his vassals from their oath to him made, as their
king etc. yet Don Pedro of all this made no reckoning, but passed into Italy,
and aided by Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople wan Sicilia. The Sicilians
for their pride and luxuritie, bare great hatred to the French, so that they
conspired against Charles and his frenchmen, and toulling the bells, they issued
out, and killed all; nor sex nor age regarded; young and old, men and women,
albeit great with child they destroyed. The Sicilians Euensong.
These be the Euensongs, which the Sicilians call so famous. After this,
Charles with his army coming to Naples was vanquished, taken, and (as says
Platina) sent into Arragon. This Pope Martin took the concubine of his
predecessor Nicholas 3. Anno 1215.
when Martin had 4. years and one month poped, in the 1285. year he died, of
whom (says Platina) that after his death, he wrought great miracles. Don
Alonso 10. then reigned in Castile. Honorius 4.
Honorius the fourth following the steps of his predecessor Martin 4. confirmed
the excommunication, and interdiction against Don Pedro, which held the
kingdom of Sicilia. Anno 1288.
In the 1288. year, and the second year of his popedom, died Honorius. Don
Sancho the brave reigned in Castile. When ten months and eight days of the
vacation were expired: Nicholas the fourth was chosen. Nicholas. 4.
In this time were great tumults in Rome. So that in the 1292 year, Anno 1292.
for very grief and sorrow (say they) he died. When Nicholas was dead, the
Cardinals for more quiet election of a new Pope, went from Rome, to Perusio.
But notwithstanding so great were the discordes among them: A great vacation of
the Popedom.
that in two years, three months, and two days, they could not agree
together. Don Sancho 5. reigned in Castile. After so great a vacation Celestine
5. by the favor of Charles king of Naples, Celestine 5.
and of Cardinal Latinus was made pope. This pope in his first Consistory,
(as says Christianus Masseus) willing to reform the church for example unto
others, The Pope that shall speak of reformation shall not long live.
began the reformation of the ecclesiastical persons, resident in Rome: for
which the church men were so offended with him, that they called him block,
and fool: among whom was a Cardinal named Benedict, or to speak better
Maledict, which after being Pope was called Boniface 8. Boniface 8.
He I say, placed a certain person in a chamber of the pope: A notable
history declaring what religion have the Popes.
which person many nights thorough a trunk, should say these words: Celestine,
Celestine, renounce: for the burden is greater then thou art able to bear:
Celestine being a good man, without deceit, and not malicious as Maledict was,
supposed it was an Angel, that spoke to him by night: and so for discharge of
his conscience, began to treat of renouncing: which heard of king Charles, he
besought him with great instance, in no wise to renounce. And all the people
did the same: but Celestine answered, he would do that which God wills. In
the end being exhorted by many of the Cardinals, and chiefly by Maledict that
succeeded him, having first made a decree by consent of all the Cardinals that
the pope might renounce after he had 6. months been Pope; he renounced, and
so Boniface was made Pope: who when he was Pope, fearing (as says Colemucius
in his Neapolitaine history) the holiness of Celestine, laid hand on, and took
Celestine, after he had renounced, and in the way to Yermo, where before he was
Pope, he had lived. Celestine thus taken, in the thousand two hundred ninety
five year died. Anno 1295.
Boniface like a subtle and crafty man yielded (albeit but frivolous) his
excuses. Be it as it will be (says Platina) this is notorius; that very
ungrateful and crafty was Boniface; seeing by his ambition he deceived so
holy a man, caused him to renounce his Popedom, and going to Yermo, took
him, and put him into a Castle; where before the time of a year, and five
months, after he was made Pope he caused him to die. Of this Celestine (says
Genebrardus) by authority of some hiostories, (as Pineda lib. 22. cap. 7. 5.
3. reports it) that this holy Pope commanded, that thenceforth neither Popes
nor Cardinals should ride, but on Asses, as rode Jesus Christ, and he him
self, whiles he was Pope; as writes Papirus, etc. Don Sancho the brave
reigned in Castille.

Boniface 8. Boniface 8. cursed, and proud.
of the Spanish race, through his great ambition and deceit, was pope: as in
the life of his predecessor we have declared. So arrogant he was (says
Platina) that he no man regarded: some of the Cardinals complained of him, to
the kings and Christian princes, accusing him of Ambition, that against all
right and reason, by deceauing, and causing Celestine to be taken, with that
moreover which before we have recited, he had made himself pope. So greatly
this pope hated the Gibilins, The history shows, what account the Popes make
of their religion.
that upon a time, being the first wednesdaie in lent, Prochetus, Archbishop of
Genoa, kneeling at his feet to take ashes, the pope, in steed of saying,
Remember that thou art dust o man, and to dust thou shall return, he said,
Remember man that thou art a Gibiline, and with the Gibilins into ashes shall
return: and in stead of putting ashes upon his head, he cast them into his
eyes: and deprived him of his Archbishoppricke, albeit afterward again he
restored him. This Pope excommunicated Philip king of France, because he
would not suffer him to draw money out of France, and banned him and his race,
unto the fourth generation. He would not confirm Albertus the Emperor, albeit
two or three times he had requested him, except (Philip deposed) he would make
him king of France. And so on a time, as by overmuch ambition and pride, he was
besides himself, he girt unto him a sword, put a crown upon his head, and
gloried that he was Emperor and chief Bishop: and so denied the
confirmation of the Emperor. But of himself afterward for the hate he bare
to the French king, did he offer it. The cause of this hate recounteth Carrion.
lib. 5. He adunaced the excommunication, to Don Peter king of Arragon: One Pope
does that another Pope undoes.
ever sought to entertain discord in Italy: gloried that he was porter of
heaven: and that he might be adjudged of no man: he was the first that
appointed the Iubile, promising full pardon and remission of sins to such as
should visit Rome. The Fraticellians which said that the Clergy ought to
imitate the Apostles, The first Iubile
he condemned. He compyled the Sexto of the Decretals, Indulgences.
and commanded them publicly to be read in all Universities. Of the
Decretals read above upon Gregory the ninth. The Pope cannonizeth and
vnca^nonizeth.
He canonized Saint Jews king of France, and vncanonized Harmon of Ferrara;
commanded him to be vntombed, and after he had been buried thirty years,
to be burned. Of this Hermanus (says Histor. Pontific. upon the life of
Boniface the eight) that more then twenty years they held him for holy in
Ferrara, and then was he verified to have been an heretic, of those which
were called Fraticellians. Of this Boniface (says Cornelius Agrippa, lib. de
vanitate scientiarum, cap. 62. This is that Boniface the great, which did three
great and wonderful things. The first that with deceit and a false Oracle, he
persuaded Celestine to renounce the popedom: The second he compyled the Sexto
of the Decretals, and affirmed the Pope to be Lord of all; The third he
instituted the Iubile, and market of Indulgences, and he, the first that
stretched them out even unto Purgatory. Thus far Agrippa. Of the Iubile,
afterward upon Nicholas the fifth, and Alexander the sixth, Boniface stretched
his pardons to purgatory.
and Carrion lib. 5. The end of this beast was thus; some which for fear of
him, had hid themselves in the mountains and woods, holding the wild beasts,
not so cruel as he that was Pope, came to Anagnia, where secure was the Pope
in the house of his father, and breaking the gates, they took, and carried him
to Rome, where five and thirty days he remained; after which time, having
poped eight years, nine months, and seventeen days, in the 1304. year of
very grief and sorrow he died. Anno 1304.
Friar John de Pineda, speaking of this Boniface 8. lib. 22. cap. 11. 3.
says: he added that, which to many others seemed mere novelty; namely, that
he, (as wrote also Papyrus Saonensis) was Lord of all the world; which thing
Philip king of France did deny him etc. And a little lower, says the same
Pineda: Crantzio says, that on a solemn day to declare himself Lord, as well
of the temporaltie as of the spiritualitie: pontifically arrayed as a Pope he
showed him self to, and blessed the people; and another day clothed as an
Emperor, carrying before him a sword naked showed himself, and cried out,
saying, Ecce duo gladij hic, etc. Behold here two swords etc. wherein he would
say; that he was Lord of both swords, civil and spiritual. This is that Pope,
of whom say the Historians, that he entered like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and
died like a dog: Entered like a Fox, etc.
Thus died that Boniface (says Platina) that more endeavored to terrify
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations, and people, then make them religious. He
attempted to give and take away kingdoms, dispatch men and eftsoons call them
back, even as he listed himself, much thirsting after gold. seeking for it
on all sides more then can be spoken. Pandulphus Calenucius, in the fifth book
of his Neapolitane history, recounteth many great villainies of this Pope.
With Boniface the eight will I conclude, saying that which Friar John de Pineda
in his twenty and two book, chapter 12. 1. says. Let ambitious men (says
he) note the life and death of Boniface, so openly practiced in his popedom:
and who coueteth more (says Friar John de Pineda) let him read Johannes
Vilaneus in the eight book of his history.

And notwithstanding he was such a one as many men worthy of credit, do
paint him out, yet did Clement the fifth for all this celebrate a Council in
Vienna, where were present (as says Friar John de Pineda) three hundred
Bishops, with very many other Prelates: and it was there determined, that
Pope Baniface had been most Catholic, a Christian and true Pope and Vicar of
God. Woe unto you, that call good evil, and evil good. Behold here if the Pope
and Council may err. Don Fernando 4. the son of Don Sancho reigned in
Castile.

Benedict 11. Benedict. 11.
or after others, the 9. a Dominican was very liberal to entertain Idolatry.
When he was Pope, he cited those that had taken Boniface his predecessor: and
for not appearing before him, he excommunicated them for their contempt. He
absolved of the excommunication the king of France, and received into favor
John and James Cardinals of Colen, whom Boniface so much abhorred. This good is
reported of him, that he would not see his mother poor, but poorly clothed.
Anno 1305.
In the 1305. year, 9 months of his popedom not fully complete, he died, and
of poison (as is thought) given him in certain figs sent him by an Abbess:
Poison.
Don Fernando 4. then reigning in Castile.

After great differences, Clement 5.
who should be Pope, Clement 5. a Gascon, was chosen being absent. His election
being known, he departed from Burdeux, where he was Archbishop, and came to
Lions in France, whither he commanded (and they so did) all the Cardinals to
come, In the 1305. year the Court of Rome passed into France and there remained
almost 74. years.
and so the Court of Rome in the 1305. year passed into France, and there
continued almost 74. years. At the coronation of this Clement, Philip king of
France, Charles his brother, and John Duke of Britain were present: upon
whom, and other twelve also, fell a wall, whereof they all there died. The king
also himself received some part of the evil; and the pope saw himself in so
great a strait, that he fell from his horse, and lost a Carbuncle, which he
bare in his Miter, or as they call it Reyno, worth 6000. Florences. How could
he say with Saint Peter, whose successor (says he) he is, Gold and silver
have I none? The pomp of this coronation ended, many Cardinals he made, and
all were French men. To Rome he sent three Cardinals, with authority of
Senators which should govern the same, and Italy also. He made a decree that
to the elected Caesar's in Almaine (albeit they were called kings of the
Romans) the pope notwithstanding should give both authority and name: a
Brotheller was this Clement, and Patron of whores, and so for his pleasure and
delight, settled his Court at Auignon. At Vienna in the 1311. year, The
Templars dissolved.
he celebrated a Council: in which (for their goods sake, wherewith he enriched
those of S. John's order of the Rhodes) most cruelly he dissolved the Templars,
which were more rich then the French king himself. The great master of the
Templars, and one of his companions in the presence of the Cardinals he burned
at Paris. The Fraticellians Begardians and Begninians condemned.
Against the Fraticellians, Begardians, and Begninians, that denied to adore
the bread in the Sacrament, he published a Bull. He excommunicated the
Venetians, Florentines and Lucquesians. The feast of the Recluses dream in the
life of Urban 4. before mentioned, which feast is called Corpus Christi, he
confirmed. Celestine 5. he cannonized. But why condemned he not Boniface 8. who
was a traitor to his Pope and Lord Celestine? Anno 1314.
In the 1314. year Clement died. In which same year, as the Emperor Henry
from Lucemberg meant to come into Sicilia, offered and given him by the
Sicilians themselves, a cursed man called Bernardus de Monte Policiano, a
Dominick Friar, Poison in the Sacrament, wherewith the Emperor dies
who fained of set purpose great service to the Emperor, gave him poison in the
Sacrament. And when the good Emperor perceived that he had given him poison, he
said unto him: Sir, depart hence: for if the Almaines perceive what thou have
done thou shall die an evil death. The cursed Dominick fled to Sena, where like
another Judas, he received the money promised for his treason. But his fellow
Dominickes could he not deliver: for in Tuscan, The Dominicans and their
monasteries destroyed, and the cause.
Lombardie and diverse other parts, many of them were murdered, and they and
their monasteries by fire and sword perished. Friar John de Pineda lib. 22.
cap. 24. 4. of this Clement speaks these words; Saint Antoninus Johannes
Villaneus and Papirius say: that he was very covetous of money and thence it
happened, that he suffered Simony in matter of benefices, to go so openly
through his court: merely ignorant be they, which say the Pope cannot be a
Simonist: seeing we know by divine law, The Pope a Simonist.
that to buy or sell things holy and spiritual, is called sin, and is that
of Simony etc. It is no marvel (being such) though he approved that good
piece Boniface 8. A great vacatio^
Two years, 3 months, and 17. days the Sea was void. In the time of this
Pope, Don Alonso 11. reigned in Castile. After many contentions among the 23
Cardinals, John 23, John 23. au heretic and cruel
or 22. or 21 was chosen. The Cardinals (as says Saint Antoninus whom Friar
John de Pineda alleges) disagreeing, they yielded the court to this John's
disposing, and whomsoever he should name, was to be holden for Pope, etc. and
he named himself. And somewhat lower says Pineda, John 23. elected himself.
Titus, Liuius says, that the Romans were offended, because Apius Claudius had
chosen himself of the Decemuiri, and Lucius Furius Camillus to be Consul, and
they were pagans; and to be named Pope he being a Christian, held it no let,
etc. Such like unto him was this John 24. The terrible cruelty of the Pope.
that elected himself. This Pope deprived Hugh, Bishop of Catura, disgraded,
and delivered him to secular power to be tormented, embowelled, and burned till
he were dead. The cause of his great cruelty was this, that the said Bishop
(he said) had conspired against the Pope. This John much affected novelties, of
one Bishopric he made 2, and contrariwise of 2, one. Of an Abotship, he made
a bishopric: and of a bishopric, he made an Abbotship. Caragoca an
Archbishoppricke.
Caragoca he made an Archbishopric; and five bishoprics of 11, in the
Province of Taracona he gave it for suffraganes. The knights of the order of
Christ in Portugal.
The Knights of Christ's order (as they call it) to fight against the Moors, he
instituted in Portugale: and by consent of Don Alonso king of Portugal, gave
them the goods of the Templars. Those he condemned for heretics, which said,
Christ and his Apostles had nothing proper. He forbad this question in the
universities, to be disputed. He condemned one Peter a Franciscan Friar,
because he exhorted men to follow Christ's poverty. Note why the Pope
commanded men to be burned.
For which cause, many were condemned, and burned. This Pope so cruel against
such as he called heretics, erred in the faith, and was an heretic: For he
taught that the souls, The Pope erreth in faith touching the estate of souls
departed.
separated from the bodies, saw not God, nor rejoiced with him before the day
of judgment. For so (as says Masseus) deceived by the visions of one Tundall
an Irishman, had his father taught him. By that saying of the Lord to the
thief upon the Cross (This day shall thou be with me in Paradise Luke 22.
The heresy of the Pope confuted.
43.) and by the speech which he uttered concerning Lazarus, whose soul (says
he) was in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. Luke 24. 46.
22. by that which says S. Stephen Act. 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit,
imitating therein, his master, who being upon the cross, said, Father Into
thy hands I commend my spirit. And by the saying of S. Paul Phil. 1. 21. To me
Christ is gain, whether in life or death. and verse 23. I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, and that (he says) is better for him. Also
Eccle. 12. 7. And dust return to the earth etc. and the spirit return to God
that gave it. Also Matthew. 22, 23. the Lord speaking of Abraham, Isack and
Jacob, (who were dead as touching the body) says, that God is not a God of the
dead, but of the living. And Luke 16. 9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous
Mammon: that when ye shall have need, to wit, when ye shall die. They may
receive you into everlasting habitation. And 2. Cor. 5. 8. (we love to be out
of the body, and to be with the Lord) is this heresy confuted. Whereupon it
follows that the souls of the faithful which die in the Lord, True happiness
consists in seeing of God, and enjoying his presence.
see God; and at the parting from their bodies, enjoy his presence, in these
two things, to see God, and enjoy his presence, our happiness consists. To,
teach and preach this heresy, this Pope sent 2 Friars to Parris the one a
Dominican, the other a Franciscan, unto whom Thomas Vales an English Dominicke
opposed himself, for which the Pope cast him into prison: many others likewise
opposed themselves. In conclusion, the university of Paris aided by the favor
of their king Phillip the fair, who had withdrawn himself, and all his
kingdom from the Popes obedience; compelled the Pope (as he did) to recant:
and not without sound of trumpet, for fear of loosing his Popedom: as John
Gerson in the sermon of Easter, does witness. The errors of this Pope which now
we will reckon are according to the papists, Pope John 23. disalowed Images,
errors; but according to Christian religion perfect truth. He commanded the
Nuns, called Beguinas, to marry. He could not abide to see pictures, nor
Images. He affirmed that Jesus Christ gave no other rule to his Apostles, then
that which he had given to all faithful Chistians. The Apostles (said he)
never vowed Chastity; And that vows make not them perfect, which vow them;
nor put them in the state of perfection. We will now return to his wonders.
John Mandeuell lib. 1. cap. 7. reports this Pope to have written a large
Epistle to the Grecia^s, The Grecians answer to the Pope is well to be noted.
saying, That there was but one church, whose head he was, and the vicar of
Christ. Whereunto the Grecians in few words answered, thy power over thy
subjects we verily believe to be great, thy excaeding pride we cannot suffer thy
covetousness we cannot satisfy; the devil be with thee: for the Lord is with
us. In this Laconismo, or brevity, well declared the Grecians the whole state
of the Pope. This Pope John proclaimed the Emperor Lodowicke of Bauiera for a
Rebel, Sismatique, and heretic. The cause was (as says Ieronymus Marius)
for that the Emperor being elected by the Princes, without oath of subjection
to the Pope, as Clement 5. had commanded, took upon him the administration of
the Empire. The Emperor to avoid contention, sent his Ambassadors to the
Pope, being then at Auignon: requesting at his hands the authority and title of
the Emperor. But so far of was the Pope from granting this, that he sent
home with a mischief, and very evil entreated the Ambassadors; Nothing is
given by the Pope to the Emperor.
peremptorily cyting the Emperor himself, personally to appear in Auignon,
and submit himself to the decrees of the Church: But the Emperor knowing the
tyranny which the Pope usurped in the Church, and perceiving that he had
received only of God his Imperial Majesty, would not, as a servant, subject
himself, nor come to Auignon. Affecting peace notwithstanding, he eftsoons by
Ambassadors did gently request him to grant what he demanded. The Pope was
still obstinate, and for the hate which he bare to the Emperor, excommunicated
the Vicounts, whom the Emperor had placed to govern Millan. When the Emperor
saw his obstinacy, he came to Rome: where he was very magnifically received:
and demanded of the Romans that which the Pope had denied him: The Nobles of
Rome hearing this, sent their messengers to the Pope, beseeching him to come to
Rome, and grant that which the Emperor desired: which if he denied to do,
they would do (said they) according to the law and ancient custom of the
Romans: yet for all this was the Pope nothing moved, but rather much more
incensed, and cast them from his presence, with many injuries and threatenings.
When the people of Rome saw this, they determined to grant that which the
Emperor demanded: and so the Senators Stephen and Nicholas, by commandment
of the Clergy and people crowned the Emperor, with his wife the Emperesse.
This known to Pope John; he made great process against the Emperor calling
him heretic, and saying he had committed high treason: he deprived him of all
that he had, excommunicating him a new, with a most cruel excommunication.
Thus far Ieronymus Marius. Divines and lawyers in those times were not
wanting that affirmed Christ and his Apostles to have had nothing in proper,
and that the Emperor in temperall things was not subject to the Pope. The
Emperor and Nobles of Rome well perceiving the villainies of the Pope; and the
Romans much stomacking their messengers bad entreaty with the Pope; all with
one consent determined that the ancient custom of choosing the Roman Bishop,
should be eftsoons observed: The ancient custom of Pope choosing renewed.
namely, that the Pope being chosen by the people of Rome, should be confirmed
by the Emperor. And so declaring John to be an heretic, tyrant, and no
pastor, but a perturber of the peace public of the Church, they chose Petrus
Corbarensis, a Minorite, Nicholas 5. Sisme 28.
whom they called Nicholas 5. This Pope granted tenthes to Charles the fair,
king of France for the conquest of the holy land; and willing them against the
Emperor Lodwicke Bauare. The king was ill thought of, and worse also the Pope,
when it was known (which was a scandalous theft) that to the halfes they were
granted: as says Friar John de Pineda lib 22. cap. 25. 6. In this Popes time
(says Carrion lib. 5.) was the question handled, if the Emperor ought to depose
the Pope, when he shall not do his duty in his office, and put another in his
place: as did Otho 1. who deposed the Pope after that his cause had been heard
in the Council. Anno 1335.
In this time, and the 1335. year, dyed Pope John, being 90. years old. He
left so much treasure, as none of his predecessors had done, to wit, 205000.
dragmes of gold: or as says Friar John de Pineda lib. 22. cap 26. 4. a millyon
he left in money and 700000 ducats: and in the margin, he says: some say 25.
millions, how shall he say with Saint Peter whose successor he boasts to be.
Silver and gold have I none. The Bull of this Popes recantation, The Pope
recanted.
touching the heresy of the Souls; in the History of Petrus Premostratensis
appears. In the time of this John, Don Alonso 11. reigned in Castille. Don
Alonso the son of James 2. in Aragon, and another Don Alonso in Portugale.

Benedict. Benedict 12.
12. (or 10.) was no better to Lodowick the Emperor then was John 23. his
predecessor. He confirmed the excommunication, and that moreover which John had
done. For which cause the Emperor assembled in Almaine all the Electors, Dukes,
Earls, Bishops, and learned men. In whose presence he showed, that the
Electors of the Empire, and none others, ought to choose the king of the Romans;
who being so elected (as Emperor) without the Popes confirmation, The Emperor
is Emperor without confirmation of the Pope.
might exercise, and administer the office of the Emperor. This good Emperor
showed further, that saying of the Pope to be false, that the Imperial seat
being void, the Pope was the governor of the Empire. He showed, that this was
against the liberty, The County Palatine, and not the Pope governor of the
Empire.
dignity, law, and Majesty of the sacred Empire, and that the good and
approved custom, which hitherto had been observed, was, that the County
Palatine of Rhin, in the time of such vacation, should govern the Empire,
grant the fees, and (the Clementine notwithstanding) further dispose of the
affairs of the Empire. In conclusion, so great was the goodness of this
Lodowicke, that Benedict received him into friendship, and absolved him of the
excommunication. Albeit, in very deed, the Pope did this, not so much for the
goodness of the Emperor, as that he might aid him against the King of
France, whom he feared: and so by public edict, One Pope vndoth that another
has done
ad^ulled and made void, all whatsoever his predecessors had done against the
Emperor, saying: that John had exceeded his duty in excommunicating of the
Emperor, The sister of Petrarca the Popes minion.
etc. And that which in his defense the Emperor had done like a good Christian
he had done it. In the time of this Pope lived Franciscus Petrarca, who had to
sister a beautiful woman: whom this old lecher the Pope, with great sums of
money bought, Anno 1342.
for his pleasure, of her other brother called Gerrard. For the Popes abhor
to have lawful wives, and love to embrace strumpets. Clement 6.
In the 1342. year, dyed Benedict 12. Don Alonso 11. reigning in Castile.

Clement 6. (as says Ieronymus Marius Eusebiocatiuo) was was much given to
women; very ambitious, desirous of honor, and power, and with a deuillish
fury furious. He caused writings to be fixed upon the doors of the Churches,
wherein, with terrible threats and punishments, menaced the Emperor
Lodowicke, if within three days he did did not that which he commanded The
Eemperour being a peaceable man, and enemy to blod shed: set his ambassadors
to the Pope, beseeching him, to pardon and receive him into his favor* But the
Pope answered, that by no means he would pardon him, until he should confess
all his errors and heresies, deprive himself of the Empire, put himself, his
children, and all that he had into his hands to do therewithal as he best
pleased and had also promised not to take again these things, without his
favor and good will. To all this that the Pope demanded, for the avoiding of
wars and slaughter, which he saw imminent, if he subjected not himself, the
Emperor yielded: and so swear to observe that which the Pope commanded.
Whereat the Pope himself wondered: and never thought the Emperor would so
have done: yet for all this, was not this unmerciful Clement appeased: The
Pope a Tyrant.
but from day to day, became worse: he confirmed all that which John 23. had
done against Lodowicke the Emperor: commanded the Princes to choose another
Emperor: took the Archbishopricke from the Archbishop of Maguncia: and
because the Archbishop, seeing the innocence of the Emperor, would not be
against him, deprived him of the Electorship. With great sums of money were
the rest of the Electors corrupted by John K. of Boheme, to the end they might
vow for Charles his son: and so they chose him Emperor. Which election this
unmerciful Clement the^ approved. Thus left Lodowike the government of the
Empire. But the Pope not herewith contented, The Pope causes poison to to be
given to the Emperor.
sent one in wine to give him poison, whereof he died. Hasten o Spain to know
this cruel beast. Friar John de Pineda lib. 22. cap. 28. 2. says: Leave we
Pope Clement in his Court at Auignon, where Symony has free passage in the
exchange of benefices, etc. This pope to rake together money, reduced the Iubile
from an hundred to fifty years: which in his absence, and the 1350. year was
celebrated at Rome. Boniface 8 did institute the same from 100 to 100 years.
Iubile from 50 years to 50.
This Clement 6. authorized the Bishop of Bamberg to absolve all such as had
taken part with the Emperor: Anno 1350.
but with 3 conditions. The 1. to swear fealty to him, as to the Vicar of God:
the 2. to believe that the Emperor had no right in the electing or deposing the
Pope: the 3. not to acknowledge any for K. nor Caesar, if he were not by the
Pope confirmed: Evidently showed this Clement 6. the authority he took in
heaven, Purgatory and Hell. For in his Bull of Iubile, speaking of the
Pilgrim, that iornying to Rome to obtain the Iubile, should die in the way:
We grant (says he) that if being truly confessed, he shall die in the way,
he shall be free, and absolutely absolved from all his sins: And moreover,
The Pope commands the Angels.
we command the Angels, to place the soul (wholly freed from purgatory) into
Paradise. And in another Bull, he says: We will not that the pains of hell
shall any way touch him. He grants to such as take the Cruzado to go a
warfare; that they may draw 3 or 4 souls, The Pope speaks blasphemy.
of whom they will, out of Purgatory. The popish Bulls, are very mockeries.
Bulla is a Latin word, What thing a Bull is.
as much to say as a little bubble, which the rain makes in the water; being a
vain thing, and of no continuance. There is also in Latin a proverb, which
says, Homo bulla: man is vanity. The popes purposely (it seems) have put
this name in their Indulgences and pardons; whereby, they signify their
bulls, to be mockeries, and vanity. For such then let us hold them. Anno 1352.
In the 1352. year Clement 6. being alone in his chamber, suddenly died. Don
Alonso 11. then reigned in Castile.

Innocent 6. Innocent 6.
a Frenchmen, was very sparing to give, and very liberal to take, and so gave
he benefices most liberally to such as gave most for them. He sent his Legate
into Italy, Don Gill Carillo of Albornoz a Spanish Cardinal, Don Gill Carillo
of Albornoz.
and Archbishop of Toledo. A great warrier was this Don Gill, and so more
exercised in arms, then in the Bible. In Rome gave he the crown Imperial to
Charles, son of the king of Boheme: But with this condition, that the Emperor
should no longer remain in Rome nor Italy. This Cardinal at his own charge,
builded a notable College for the poor Spanish Students in Bologna. Thus far
Tarapha upon the life of Don Pedro. Friar Alonso venero in his Enchiridion of
times, says, that in the 1351. year, this Cardinal commanded he should after
death, be brought on men's shoulders to the Church of Toledo: and so was he
carried, the Pope giving great Indulge^ces to whom so ever would be partner in
that traueile. For which cause, all the people by whom he came, went out to
receive him, and one people carried him to another, and the other, unto
another, until they came to Toledo. In saying this Don Gill to have been in
the time of Martin 5. Venero is deceived. Platina, and Tarapha place him in the
time of Innocent 6. In the courts which at this time were held in Perpinan, he
commanded, that not at the incarnation, which is the 25. The year began at the
incarnation.
of March: but at the Nativity, the year should begin. This custom to
begin the year at the incarnation, is yet to this day observed in England.
When Innocent heard the difference happened between the king Don Pedro, and
the Queen his wife; Cardinal William, to make friendship between the king
and Queen, and the states of Castile which took part with the Queen: but
seeing the king obstinate, without ought effecting, he returned, and the Queen
for grief and sorrow afew days after died Auignon in the 1362. Anno 136^.
year, this Pope died in.

Urban 5. Urban 5.
being absent, and no Cardinal was chosen Pope. Cardinal Don Gill Carillo he
sent into Italy for his vicar general: which office he had executed, in the
life of his predecessor Innocent 6. as before we have said. In the 4. year of
his Popedom, this Pope with his Cardinals, came from Rome to Auignon. The
institution of the Rose sent by the Pope.
In the Lent time, he sent a Rose to Jane Queen of Sicilia, and made a decree
every year to give this Rose upon that Sunday in Lent which they call Laetare:
and so returned with his court into France. The Archbishop of Colonia married.
In the time of this Urban was the Archbishop of Colonia (as says Petrus
Premostratensis) married. D. Illescas upon the life of this Urban 5. The heads
of S. Peter and Paul lost and found.
says: That when he had forgotten where were the heads of the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul: instantly did the Emperor solicit the pope that they should
be sought for. And at last were they found in a chest, in the Sancto Sanctorum
of S. John de Lateran, and put in the place where now they remain, etc. See
here the assurance which our adversaries have of their so great relikes. Anno
137^. Poison.
In the 1371. year, and not without suspicion of poison, Urban died. Don Henry
2. bastard son of Don Alonso 11. reigned in Castile.

Gregory 11. Gregory 11.
Nephew or son to Clement 6. being 17 years old was made Cardinal. When he was
Pope, seeing all Italy to be mutinous, and almost all fallen from his
obedience: by the counsel of Catalina of Sena (who was afterward canonized)
and of Baldo his master (as says Volateranus. In the 1376. year the Pope
returns to Rome.
) In the 1376. year he left France and with 12 galleyes came to Rome. Clement
5. removed the Court of Rome into France: where it was holden almost 74
years. Others say that Saint Bridget returning from Jerusalem, came to Rome:
and wrote to Gregory, saying: that the Lord would that the Roman Court should
return to Rome. So also says Masseus. Others (among whom is Cra^tzio) say,
that the Pope reproved a certain Bishop, because he followed the Court Papal,
and was not resident upon his Bishopric: to whom answered the Bishop: And
thou Pope of Rome, why give thou not example to others, by returning to thine
own Bishopric. And so the Court of Rome, either by the counsel of one of the
two women, or both, or by the counsel of a Bishop, at the end of 74. years
returned to Rome. This Pope did excommunicate the Floren^ines, which had been
the heads of the Rebellions: against whom he made great wars, because they
naught regarded his excommunication. Anno. 1378.
In the 1378. year died this Gregory. In whose time Don Henry 2. reigned in
Castile.

When Gregory 11. Urban 6. a most cruel Pope.
was dead, the clergy and people of Rome, that the court of Rome should not
eftsoons return into France, ran to the cardinals, and prayed them to make
choice of some Italian; but in no wise of a French man. And as they began to
make the election, between the Cardinals (which were 17. 4 Italians, and 13
Frenchmen) arose great contention. The French being many more in number, might
easily have prevailed, but they durst not, for the Romans were in arms, and
threatened them, except they chose an Italian. For which cause on Friday the 9.
of April made they a Pope, and called him Urban 6. And (as says Platina)
before he was published, and not once suspected to be pope, the French
Cardinals, began a grudge, saying, that this election was unlawful, and nothing
worth: because (the Romans requiring with weapons in their hands, that the Pope
should be an Italia^) by fraud and force it was made. And so the Cardinals de
parted the Conclaue: some retired to the Castle S. Angello: others, to the
mountains, to escape the rage and fury of the people. When Cardinal Vrsinus
saw the great discord among the Cardinals, he well hoped he should be Pope, and
so did he surely pretend it. Thus far Platina. Eight of the French
Cardinals, fearing the severity and cruelty of Urban, went to Fundo: where for
the causes above said, and alleging that the seat was void (and yet there were
18 Cardinals) aided by Jane Queen of Naples, another Pope they elected, Two
Popes.
whom they called Clement 7. This was the most pernicious Sisme, The 27. Sisme
lasted 50 years
and longest lasted of any others. For until the Council of Constance began,
which was 40 years after, and 10 years after that it continued: so that it
endured 50 years. Who lists to know the deceipts, subtilties, periuries,
dissimulations, etc. of those that poped in the time of this Sisme, let him
read Theodoricus de Nyem, who as an ey-witnes, wrote the history of this
Sisme: and Bonin Segino in the Flore^tine history: and Friar John de Pineda
lib. 22. cap. 37.. 3. 4. This Urban (says Estella) was a man subtle and
reuengefull, bearing injuries in mind (not that which he had done, but that he
had received) Crantzio says, that he was fierce, cruel and untreatable: and so
being Pope, he sought not to set peace but wars: and to revenge himself on the
French Cardinals and Queen Jane. For which cause, and to make the^ on his part,
he absolved the Florentins, of the excommunication, which Gregory his
predecessor had given out against them. A cruel Pope.
This Urban caused 5 Cardinals to be put in 5 sacks, and so cast into the sea,
where they were drowned. From this kind of death, but very hardly, escaped Adam
an English Cardinal. The cause why the Pope did this, was, for that these
Cardinals taking part with Clement 7. had conspired against him. After this,
for the better strengthening of his faction, he made in one day 29 Cardinals,
three of them (says Platina) were Romans, and all the rest almost Neapolitans.
Pandulphus Colenucius, a most learned Lawyer, adds in his Latin Neapolitan
history another cruelty, much greater then this we have spoken of. This Urban
(says he) being in Genoa, condemned to death three Cardinals, commanded their
heads to be cut off, their bodies to be roasted in a furnace and being roasted,
to put the^ into sackes, and whensoever he went from one people to another, he
carried them upon 3 horses: and that it might be known they had bin Cardinals,
they placed their red hats upon the sackes. All this he did, to be feared: and
that none should dare to attempt ought against him. Thus far Colenucius. This
Urban unable by force and arts, to be revenged on Queen Jane, sent to entreat
Charles, nephew of the king of Hungary, to come aid him with an host, and he
would make him king of Naples. Charles aided with the counsel and people of the
king his uncle, came and seized the kingdom of Naples: took Queen Jane, who
was retired to Newcastle, a fort in Naples, and so taken, put her to death. The
Pope until this time was a great friend unto Charles: but as peace among the
wicked does not long continue, so this great love of the Pope turned into much
more hatred. And why, deem you, his Diuellishnesse was so much offended? The
cause was, for that Charles refused at the Popes request, to make the Nephew
(or as some think the son) of the Pope Prince Campano. Platina, Colenucius,
and others recite this history. When the Pope could not obtain this, being a
man uncivil, ungentle, and ill beloved, began to threaten. Wherere with the
king was so much offended, that the Pope for certain days durst not go
abroad. But the Pope a while dissembling this injury, for excessive heat, as
he said departed by the Kings consent from Naples to Nocera. The Pope come to
Nocera, there fortified himself, and made new Cardinals. He made process
against the king, and sent to cite him to appear before him: whereunto the
king answered: that he would come quickly to Nocera, not only with words, but
with weapons to justify his cause. The king came, and with a great camp
besieged the city. The Pope seeing himself so besieged, escaped and went to
Genoua, where he acted that, which we have before spoken of the Cardinals. When
Lodowicke king of hungary, and uncle to Charles, was dead, the Nobles of
Hungary sent for Charles king of Naples, to make him king of Hungary: Anno
1385.
whither Charles went, in the year 1385. and by great treason of her that had
been Queen of Hungary was slain. When Urban (as reports Colenucius in his
Neapolitane history) heard of the cruel death of Charles, he took great
pleasure: and when the sword, as yet bloody, wherewith Charles was slain, was
presented unto him, he beheld and did contemplate the same with great joy and
contentment. So did not Julius Caesar being a pagan, no Christian, nor holy
Father, who (says Plutarch) when one presented to him the head of Pompey his
mortal enemy, in detestation of so great an evil, turned away his eyes, and
would not behold it. Note that which the same Plutar. reports of Lycurgus,
who pardoned him which had put out his eye. These examples I draw from pagans,
for his greater shame who calls himself holy Father, and vicar of Jesus
Christ. Vicar of Satan, I call Urban; who was a murderer from the beginning.
A cruel hatred.
With the death of Charles ended not the malice of Urban: it passed further;
for a year after the death of Charles, this Pope practiced to disinherite
Ladislaus and John, sons of Charles, as then but little ones, but those of
Gaeta kept the^ safely. The pope returned to Rome and not without suspicion of
poison, Poison.
having cruelly poped 11 years and eight months in the 1390. Anno 1390.
year, died: whose death (says Platina) very few lamented, because he was a
man rude and untreatable. Gunnes.
In the time of this cruel Pope, was found the cruel invention of gunnes in
Almaine. Don John 1. bastard son of Don Fernando K. of Portugal, at this time
reigned in Portugal. This Don John got the victory of Aliubarota, another Don
John 1. being king of Castile. This is that battle against the Castillians
which the Portugals so much prize, and glory of. And so upon a time as Don
Charles the Emperor almost threatened the Portugal Ambassador, and said unto
him: Behold Ambassador, there are not many rivers to pass from hence, to
Portugal: It is true; answered the Ambassador: because there are now no more
rivers, then were in the time of Aliubarota. The king of Portugal for this
answer, rewarded the Ambassador. Don John 1. and Don Enrique his son reigned in
Castile.

From the election of Clement 7. Clement 7.
fully spoken of in the life of his Antipope Urban 6. the Sisme endured 50.
years. Almaine, Italy and England favored Urban: France, Castile, Aragon,
Navarre and Cathaluna favored Clement 7. and many there were also that were
neuters, and neither favored Urban, nor Clement. This Clement celebrated a
Council in Paris, In his time, and the 1387. Anno 1387. was the question of the
conception
year arose a question between the university of Paris, and the Dominicks
about the conception of the virgin Marie. And afterward was much brawling
between the Dominicans and Franciscans, the question as yet being
undetermined. For the Popes therein have put them to silence, lest the foolish
devotion and superstition of the ignorant common people should be despised.
Anno 1392.
In the 1392. year Clement died. Very many and terrible Bulls sent these
Antipopes into diverse parts of the world: many famous libels cast they one
against the other, where with they did bite, detest, and curse, the one calling
the other Antichrist, The Popes titles.
Sismatike, Heretic, Tyrant, Thief, Traitor, wicked, sower of tares, and
son of Beliall. And verily in this, that the one says against the other do
they not lie: never in their lives spoke they more truly: For as well the son
of Beliall, as the rest, was both one and other. Many holding this Pope for
Antipope, count him not in the Catalogue of the Popes. But certainly he has
wrong: for more canonically was he chosen, then Urban (if there be any election
of the pope canonically made) and was not in his life so great a villain, nor
so cruel as Urban was. Hereby moreover great injury is done to our country
of Spain, and to France, which held Clement for true Pope, and Urban for
Antipope and Antichrist: as Clement called him. And so Don John. 1. king of
Castile; that his kingdom should not be separate from the communion of the
Seat Apostolic caused (as says Don Rodrigo Bishop of Palencia in his
history, speaking of K. John) the Prelates and men most learned in divinity
and humanity, and the estates of his Realm to assemble together: who after
they had well examined and debated the business, declared, that Clement 7. was
to be obeyed. And when Clement was dead, they gave it to his successor Benedict
13. as hereafter we will declare. Boniface 9. Bonif^ce 9. 2 Popes.
(not being as the^ 30 years old, by the parciality and faction of Urban 6.
who (as says Crantzio) entreated the Romans not like a bishop, but like a
cruel Emperor or tyrant was chosen in Rome. And for that he held them
suspected, put many of the^ to death) This Pope made a law, that no Priest
should enjoy his living without paying to the pope the first fruits, First
fruits.
called the Annals, which is one whole years value of his living. The English
only did resist this decree, as Platina, Volateranus, Blundus, Polidorus
Virgilius, Pantaleon, etc. do note. He caused Ladislaus son of Charles to be
crowned king of Naples. Urban 6. (as in his life we have said) for the hatred
which he bare unto his deceased father, endeavored to disinherite and utterly
destroy Ladislaus. A great Simmonist was this Boniface: by his Bulls,
Indulgences, pardons, and the great Iubile, which in the 1400. year he
celebrated at Rome, he gathered much money which against al law and right he
with his kindred prodigally wasted. In the 1404. year he died. And Don Henry
3. reigned in Castile.

Benedict 13. Benedict. 13.
or 11. a Spaniard, for the same causes, as was Clement 7. is not reckened
among the Popes: but since our country of Spain and France held him for Pope,
Two Popes.
we will not displace him. A Spaniard he was, borne in Cataluna, and called
before he was Pope Pedro de Lunae: by 20 Cardinals of Clements faction, he was
chosen in Auignon, a man learned he was and before he was Pope, disputed
against the authority of the Pope: and concluded, that he was not to be
feared. For this so true doctrine, he was by the Pope, which then held the seat
of Antichrist, as an heretic condemned. Pope he was until the Council of
Pisa deposed him. He was afterward deposed by the Council of Constance: who
albeit by two Councels deposed, yet left he not for all this to be called Pope,
Anno 1424.
until the 1424. year, after he had been Pope 30 years and more: he died in
his land of Cataluna. At his death he commanded the Cardinals when he was dead
to choose for pope Gill Nunoz, Cannon of Barcelona, Clement 8. 2 Popes.
whom they called Clement 8. who at the instance of Don Alonso king of Aragon,
created new Cardinals, and did all that the popes were accustomed to do. But
when pope Martin 5. elected in the Council of Constance, joined in friendship
with the king Don Alonso, Nunoz, after he had 4 years poped, by commandment
of the king renounced, and was made Bishop of Mallorca, and his Cardinals of
themselves forsook their functions. In the time of this Sisme lived a learned
and good man, Theodoricus de Nyem.
called Theodoricus of Nyem, bishop of Verda, who (as before we have said)
wrote the history of this Sisme: which history is now hard to be found,
because the papists, for that it manifested the truth, almost cast it out of
the world. But in the 1566. year was it again newly printed, to the popes
great grief, in Basilea. Among other things, this Author said and proved, that
the pope held no politic right over the Emperor: but contrariwise, that the
Emperor ought to chasten wicked Popes: and said moreover, that they which
dissemble such enormious abominations and tyrannies, which the popes commit,
are not worthy to be called Emperors. In the time of Benedict 13. Don Henry
and Don John 2. reigned in Castile.

Innocent 7. Innocent 7. Two Popes.
was chosen in Rome to succeed Boniface 9. whiles he was Cardinal, he reproved
the negligence and fearfulness of Urban and Benedict, saying: that they were
the cause of the Sismes so long continuance, which to al Christendom wrought so
great mischief. But when he was pope he changed his opinion, and not only did
that which before he had so much reproved, but was also much offended, if any
spoke to him thereof. In doing what he would, he tyrannized over the people of
Rome: but his popedom not long endured, and so in the 1407. Anno 1407.
year he died. Don John 2. then reigning in Castile.

Gregory 12. Gregory 12.
whom Thodoricus de Nyen always called Errorius, and his followers Errorians,
was elected at Rome in place of Innocent 7. 2 Popes.
Benedict 13. then living in Auignon. With this condition was Gregory chosen,
that were it for the good of the Church, he should renounce the popedom, which
being pope, he confirmed before witnesses, and Notaries that wrote the same, so
that Benedict 13. would do the like. But as Benedict would not renounce, no
more would Gregory: albeit both the one and the other, being great
dissemblers, and subtle, gave great hope that they would do it. And so they
appointed Sauona whither they should come and agree, yet al was but wind. For
this cause in the 1410 year was holden a great Council in Pisa, where many
Cardinals on the one side and the other, 124 Divines, and almost 300 Lawyers
were present. Both the Popes in this Council were deposed, and Alexander 5. a
Cretian in their place elected. The Council of Pisa deposed both Popes, and
elected Alexander a Cretian.
This did al Christendom approve (Spain, Scotland and the County of
Ameniaco, which claue firmly to Benedict 13. excepted) Gregory and Benedict
naught esteeming the Council of Pisa, yet held themselves for Popes: but
fearing to be caught, Anno 1410.
Gregory went to Arimino, and Benedict to his land of Cataluna. Thus at this
time were there three Popes, Benedict 13. made in Auignon, Gregory 12. made in
Rome, and Alexander the Cretian made in the Council of Pisa. Poets do feign
Cerberus the porter of hell to have three heads: which fable we see now
verified in the Popedom, three Popes.
whose porter (which is the Pope) has three heads, and as touching the
kingdom of Antichrist, as well the one as the other was the head. Gregory
cast Nicholas de Luca down from the pulpit, and for punishment to him, and
example to other, put him in prison: because in his preaching, for the good of
the Church, he exhorted him him to unity. Anno 1415.
The fathers in the end, and the 1415. year, assembled in the Council of
Constance, wrote unto him, to come, or at least to send some in his place to the
Council, who seeing their desire was to have him renounce, forthwith there
renounced: but shortly after, for very grief and sorrow dyed. Petrus de Luna
was always called Benedict 13. against whom John Gerson, a famous divine,
often said in the Council, whiles Luna lives, there shall no peace be in the
Church; but neither the authority of the Council, nor the threats, nor
requests which they used, could cause him renounce, and so till he died, (which
was above thirty years) was Pope, Anno 1424.
In the 1424. year he dyed.

Alexander 5. Alexander 5.
a Cretian was made Pope in the Council of Pisa, as before we have said. An
Alexander he was in giving, and so was he accustomed to say merrily of himself,
that he had been a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a begging Pope. So
haughty was his humor, that being in the Council of Pisa, Ladislaus king of
Naples, of who^ we have made mention in the life of Urban 6. he deprived of his
kingdom. This Pope ordained, that all Christians should believe (as an article
of their faith) that his Saint Frauncis, had the 5 wounds which Christ
imprinted upon him, and commanded solmnely to celebrate the feast of the
wounds of Saint Frauncis. An article of faith, that S. Fraunces bare the five
wounds Gal. 1. 2.
Herein did Alexander show himself to be very Antichrist: seeing he usurped
authority to make new articles of faith; which whosoever would not believe,
should for the same be condemned. Saint Paul does teach us, that if any, albeit
an Angel from heaven, shall preach another Gospel unto us, then that which he
had preached unto us, he should be anathematized, cursed, and excommunicate,
such a one then was Pope Alexander. Libr. 3. Chapter 15.
This Alexander, which before time called himself Petrus de Candia, being (as
reports Theodoricus of Nyem) at the point of death, said: that he never knew
father, nor mother, nor brother, nor any of his kindred, and that when he was
young he lived by begging for Gods sake from door to door. He said: that a
Franciscan Italian Friar, took him from that course of life, and taught him
Grammar, afterward made him Friar of his orders, and carried him with him
into Italic. And that from Italic he went into England, and in Oxeforde
studied, and after he had continewed many years in this university, Lib. 3.
cap. 53.
he went to Paris, where he was made master in divinity: from thence, he went
into Lombardie, where by the means of Duke John Caleaco, he was made bishop of
Vincentium, and afterward Archbishop of Milan, Anno 1411.
then Cardinal, and in the end Pope. In the 1411. year he died. The cause of
his death (as says Baptista Panecius in his 6. Poison.
sermon) was poison, which his Physician Marcillias of Parma, corrupted with
money by Cardinal Baltassar Cossa, who sought to be pope as he was, gave him.
D. John 2. the^ reigned in Castil.

John 24. John 24. a notable villain.
as Platina calls him. or 23. or 22. for the causes before mentioned, with
the poison which he caused to be given to Alexander his predecessor, was made
Pope. He better knew how to manage arms, then books, and so (as notes Friar
John de Pineda lib. 23. cap. 10. 5.) a man he was, notable for matters of the
world, but ignorant in spiritual things (a very good beginning) for
confirmation hereof he aleageth Leonardus Aretinus, Blundus, Flauius and Pius
2. More by violence, the^ free election, A stratagem to be Pope.
as the papists themselves do witness, was he made Pope: For when Alexander was
dead, the Cardinals assembled to choose a Pope in Bologna, he being Legate in
Bologna, and having like a good captain many souldiars, very much threatened
the Cardinals, except they should choose a Pope according to his will. For this
cause named they many, saying: will thou have this? will thou have this other?
but with none of the^ was he pleased. And when they prayed him to name whom he
would have Pope. A notable election of the Pope.
Give me (said he) the mantle of S. Peter, and I will put it upon him that
shall be Pope. And when they had given it, he put it upon himself, and said: I am
Pope. This is like that which is reported of Don Fernando, grandfather of Don
Charles the Emperor, king of Spain, master, for master, this let it be, and
so casting upon him the habit, made himself master of S. James. The like
election to this, was that of Pope John 23. as before we have declared. This
deed of the Pope, displeased the Cardinals: Yet thought they it best to
dissemble with him, and for that he was so terrible a man, to pass with the
election. In this man (says Platina) was more fiercenes and boldness, then
besemed his profession: all his life almost was soulderlike: such were his
customs, that many things, unlawful to be spoken of, he thought it lawful to
do. And such were his abominations, that Platina shamed to speak them. When
he was Pope, he wrote to the Emperor Sigismund that he would crown him. He
began to hold a Council in Rome, whereunto when the Emperor and diverse nations
could not freely come, by reason of the discord, that the Pope had raised in
Italy, at the request of almost all nations, the Pope appointed Constance the 1.
of November in the 1414. The Council of Constance. 1414.
year. In which Council he himself would be present, And albeit, that some
did counsel him, not to go to the Council, lest he thence returned without his
bishopric, yet went he notwithstanding, carrying with him subtle aduocats to
defend him, if ought were objected against him. The^ began the general Counsel,
by consent of pope John, The Emperor is a Deacon.
Sigismu^d the Emp. and other Christian princes. The night of the nativity,
the Emp. as a Deacon, sang the Gospel, which began Exijt edictum a Caesare etc.
When the Counsel was set, and license of free speech to each one given, they
objected, and proved against Pope John, in the presence of the Emp. The Pope by
the Council deposed.
more then 40. heinous offenses, he was then constrained, by the Councils
command, to renounce. The causes were, for that to make himself Pope, he had
caused poison to be given to Alexander 5. because he was an heretic,
Symonist, a liar, an hipocrite, a murderer, a witch, a gamester, an Adulterer,
a Sodomit, etc. Wherefore, John changing his garment, fled from Consta^ce, and
went to Friburg: The Popes customs
but by command of the Counsel, after he had 5. The Pope an heretic
years poped, he was deprived of his Popedom, and every other office. He was
sought for, found, caught, and imprisond in the castle of Hidelberga in
Germany: where he was 3 years prisoner in great affliction: for that his
kepers were Germans, simple and rude, which neither understood Latin, nor yet
Italian, and the miserable Pope, neither spoke nor understood Duch From this
prison, The Counce is above the Pope.
he afterward escaped. The question whether the Pope be above the Counsel, or
the Council above the Pope, was in this Counsel debated. And in the 4. and 5.
Sessio^s concluded (as Caran^a himself says) that a general Council lawfully
assembled, which represe^teth the catholic church millita^t, had it authority
imediatly of Christ, which Council, every person of what estate and dignity
soever, yea the Pope himself, ought to obey in matter concerning the faith
etc. This decre of the Counsel of Co^sta^ce, is confirmed in the 3. Notable
saying of Gerson.
and 18. Sessions of the Council of Basile. In the Council of Constance, was
John Gerson. a famous divine, present; who not only with words, but also with
writing approved and extolled this decree, that the Pope was to be subject to
the Council. This decree, he says, deserved to be fixed in all Churches, and
in all public places, for a perpetual remembrance. He says, that those which
brought this tyranny into the Church, that the chief Bishop ought not to obey
the Council, and that the Council neither ought, nor could Judge the Pope,
were pernicious flatterers. As though the Council received all that power and
dignity of the chief Bishop, and could not be assembled but at the will of the
Pope: As though there were no law for the Pope, nor account to be demanded of
that which he did. Such monstrous words (says he) ought to be far from us: as
those that be contrary to laws, equity and reason. He says: that all
authority whatsoever the Church holds, the same holds the Council, and
that apleales from the Pope ought and may be made to the Council. As the whole
is greater then part. So the Council is greater then the Pope.
He says: that they which demand, whether the Pope or Church be greater? Do
no less then they, that demanded, whether the whole or part be greater? The
Council (says he) has authority and right, to choose, Judge, and depose the
chief Bishop. All which, with the Council of Constance, Gerson confirmed.
This Council Judged the causes of three Popes Gregory 12. Benedict 13. and
John 24. and finding them all there faulty, deposed them and elected Martin 5.
Eneas Siluius, afterward called Pius 2. was present in the Council of
Basil, and wrote all whatsoever was there debated, extolling to the clouds
that was there decreed: but afterward being Pope, he changed his opinion,
saying: that the Council ought to be subject to the Pope. The university of
Paris (a few months before Luther handled the question of Indulgence) from Leo
10. appealed to the Council This decree of the Councels of Constance and
Basil, did not, nor yet does please the Popes flatterers, who against their
own consciences make the Pope God in the earth, and absolute Lord of all. John
Wickeliffe an Englishman before in England deceased, for freely preaching, the
euangelical Doctrine which discovers hypocrisy and false papisticall
doctrine, Historia Bohemia cap. 36.
was in this Council condemned: For the same also were John Hus and Jerome of
Prage, who suffered their Martyrdom with great constancy and ioyfulnes,
condemned and burned. Pius 2. says: that John Hus was greater in age and
authority, but Jerome was greater in learning and eloquence. And a little
before, he says: both suffered death with a constant mind, The Constancy of
John Hus and Jerome of Prage.
and as if they had been invited to some banquet, they prepared themselves to
go to the fire. When the fire began, they sung a Psalm, which the flame and
rushing in of the fire could hardly hinder. None of the Philosophers with such
constancy and fortitude of mind is read to have suffered death, as these men
endured the fire. Eneas Siluius, albeit an enemy, thus speaks of them. Under
safe conduct came these two to dispute and maintain their cause, as they did
in the Council. But neither faith, nor promise regarded, they against all law
and reason were condemned and burned. The reason, which the Papists yield for
this deed doing, is, because no faith is to be kept with heretics. This
faith-breach, was cause of great bloodshed in the great wars which afterward
happened in Bohemia, The Bohemia^s Constancy.
as Siluius himself reports. Great praise worthy are the Bohemians, that
with great constancy, have continewed in the good Doctrine, and reformation,
which these holy martirs of Jesus Christ taught them. And so much the more is
their praise, by how much the more they have suffered troubles and persecutions
for almost 200 years: and yet by the mercy of God do they still use this good
doctrine, and reformation, which from thence has crept to Morauia and Polonia
the bordering regions. In our time, has God stretched the same through
Germany, and from thence spread throughout al Europe, and has further passed
the great Ocean sea, and gone to India, all the lets of Antichrist, by means
of his Inquisitors, notwithstanding: and the more they shall burn, the more
will it spread abroad, because (as before we have said of Tertulian) The blood
of the Martirs, is the seed of the Gospel. Caranca, in his Summa Conciliorum
notes 45 errors (as he calls them) of John Wickelife, John 24. for his
villainies deprived of the Popedom, is made Bishop and Cardinal.
and 30 of John Hus, who lists to know what John Hus taught, let him read
Carrion lib. 5. When John 24. had (as we have said) escaped out of prison, he
came to present himself to Pope Martin 5. who was chosen in the Counsel of
Constance: to Florence came he, and prostrated himself at the feet of Pope
Martin and acknowledging him to be Pope, kissed his feet. Martin moved with
this humility, within few days after made him Cardinal, and Bishop of Tuscan,
read Friar John de Pineda lib. 23. cap. 20. 3. O. what a Cardinal, O what a
Bishop, if that be true (as it was) which was objected and proved against him,
in the Council of Co^stance? But no new thing it is, that the Popes Cardinals,
and bishops should be as he was. But a few months, after, John in his
Cardinalship and of very grief is supposed, in the 1419. Anno 1419.
year died, Friar John de Pineda says: that it was suspcted, they gave him
poison. And says that most solemnly was he buried in the chapel of S. John
Baptist. Don John 2. the^ reigning in Castil. Martin 5.
Martin 5. was made Pope in the Council of Co^sance: of whose election,
Sigismund the Emp. much rejoiced: and so thanked the Council, for choosing such
a Bishop. And prostrating himself before the Pope, kissed his feet. This pope
embraced him as his brother, and gave him thanks, that by his means and
travel the Church was quieted, after so great a Sisme. But for all this
friendship, the Pope secretly departed from Constance: as says Volateranus
against the will of the Emp. and so came to Florence: where taking his
pleasure, he 2 years remained. Before he departed from Constance, the Emp. and
other Princes exhorted him, to give some good order for reformation of the
overmuch liberty and evil customs of the Clergy. Whereunto Martin answered.
That this was with time, nature and consideration to be done, and for
confirmation of his answer, hypocritically aleaged the saying of S. Jerome,
that every province has it customs and manners, which could not suddenly be
abolished, without great trouble and damage. How much better should he have put
his hand to the work, The Popes will hear no man to speak unto them of
reformation.
and begun to reform himself, and his court of Rome? To speak of reformation
to the Popes, is to speak or preach death unto them. And this is the cause,
why they cannot brook to hear tell of a Counsel: because they then know, that
each one, tam in capite, quam in membris: As Well in the head as in the members,
The Councels have deposed Popes and elected others.
will begin to speak of reformation. They remember that the Councels have
deposed Popes, and placed others. They remember that in the Council of Pisa,
celebrated in the 1410. year, 2 Popes were deposed, and Alexander elected:
that in the Council of Constance, in the 1416. year, were 3 deposed, and
Martin chosen: And in the Council of Basil, in the 1432. year, Eugenius was
deposed and Amadeus chosen. The Popes enemies to the Councels.
For this cause would the Popes have willingly no Councels: And albeit for
shame they cannot but grant that a Council shall be, the Pope fears (as to
eat poison) to be present therein; but sends his Legates; which accustomably,
as in the last Trident Council (which buried so many Popes, and none of them
appeared in the Council) was seen. The Popes do fear (as before we have
said) least the like to them (as to the others Popes) should happen in the
Councels. For these causes, made Martin a decree, that no Council, after that
of Constance, before 5 years passed should be holden; and after that Counsel,
ten years should pass, before another Counsel were holden. See here the
reformation, which the Popes desire. If any Pope, in manners be less wicked
(for in Doctrine be they al Antichrists) and in his Roman Court wishes and
practices some reformation: then doubtless ensues some conspiracy against
him, that they give him a morsel wherewith they dispatch him. An example we
have in Celestine 5. who^ his Cardinal that after him was Pope, dispatched: and
in Adrian 6. as afterward we will declare. It is said of this pope Martin, that
he dispensed with one to mary his own sister. After 2 years he went from
Florence to Rome. lib. 23. cap. 20. 4.
The cause of this going was: for that the pages (as says I. de Pineda) sang
in his disgrace a Sonet which began: El Papa Martino no vale un quatrino.
Martin the Pope is not worth a rope.
When he came to Rome (says Pineda) his face showed him to be quite changed:
for before he was pope, he was demed a man gentle, simple and unwise, and
wanting that ge^tlenes that was suposed to be in him, was afterward discovered
to be most wise. And a little lower. So scraping he was and covetous a
mony-gatherer that he gave great cause of slander, chiefly: because what he
euilly got, he worse spent, etc. when he was come to Rome, he gave himself to
repair, not the true Church of Jesus Christ, which is his members: but the
walls of the city and Churches: he adnulled the decrees of the Popes, passed in
the time of the Sisme: he deprived Dex Alonso king of Arragon, of the kingdom
of Naples, and gave it to Jews. Anno 1431.
And in the 1431. year died. D. John 2. reigned in Castile.

Eugenius 4. Eugenius 4.
a Venetian, after the death of Martin his predecessor was elected in Rome. In
so great a strait was seen this Eugenius, that to save his life (being Pope)
be left his own garments, and in a Friars habit, put himself, with his
companion in a fishers boat which he found: certain Romans which perceived
his flight, cast many stones and arrows at him. In the end, he escaped and went
to Florence: Anno 1432.
where some years he abode, and for his better defense, made 16 Cardinals. In
the 1432. year, The Council of Basil.
was the Eugenius cited by the Council of Basil. But he knowing that the
Council would be above the Pope: and that upon appearance he should answer
the exhibited accusations against him, would not appear. Eugenius not
appearing, was deposed by the Council: and Amadeus Duke of Sauoy, who had made
himself an Hermit, Felix. 5. Two Popes.
and now called Felix 5. was elected in his place: yet for all this would not
Eugenius leave to be pope. And so to defeat the Council of Basil, he assembled
another Council in Ferrara, and from thence went to Florence. Don John 2. king
of Castile, albeit he had sent his Ambassadors, and learned men to the Council
of Basil, yet favored this Eugenius. Eugenius incited Jews the Dolphin of
France, with an host to go to Basil and break off the Council, whereof ensued
great mischief. This Eugenius was the cause of the unfortunate death of
Ladislaus king of Hungary, A miserable example, for such as keep not their
faith albeit to an Infidel.
in counselling him to break his faith and word given to the Turk: which
counsel this poor yongling but of 22 years, took: and so set upon the
Turk, when (by reason of the peace between them) he least suspected. The
Turk seeing this unfaithfulness, reinforced himself, and returned upon him. In
which battle the king, with Cardinal Caesarinus the Popes Legate was slain,
and his host destroyed. It has wontedly been argued, whether faith and promise
given to an infidel, might lawfully be broken: whereunto I answer that, which
Friar John de Pineda, lib. 26. cap. 28. 1. to this purpose says. There is no
doubt (says he) but faith is to be kept as well to an enemy, albeit he be an
Infidel, as to a friend and Christian: the reason which he gives is this:
because the bond to observe it, issues from the law of nature, which is
indispensable, God having bin put for witness of the truth that each one
promises to another, etc. So that Eugenius the fourth was wicked indispensing:
and Ladislaus was perjured against God, notwithstanding the Popes dispensation.
Wickedly did the Council of Constance, which brake faith with John Hus and
Jerome of Prage. Much better did the Emperor Don Charles: who being but young,
of 21 years, sent with safe conduct for Luther, who appeared before the
Emperor at Worms, and publicly gave an account of his faith; and the Emperor
(keeping with him his word) sent him back, albeit the Spaniards did incite him
to kill him. Much better did the Captain Mondragon in keeping the faith which
he had promised to the Prince of Orange, Thomas Rendon.
whose prisoner he was. This Eugenius most cruelly burned a Frenchman, called
Thomas Re^don, a Carmelit, for saying, that in Rome were committed great
abominations: that the Church had need of great reformation: and that when
Christ's glory was in question, the Popes excommunication ought not to be
feared. Antoninus part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 10. makes mention of this Thomas. And
Baptista Mantuanus in the last chapter of his book de vita beata, gives him
an honorable testimony, calling him holy and a martyr. This Eugenius (as
reports Platina) was very unconstant in his life. In the beginning of his
popedom, guided by evil counsel, he troubled things divine and humane. This
Eugenius celebrated a Council in Florence, to match with that which was holden
at Basil: He compelled in this Florentine Council, Josephus the good Patriarch
of Constantinople, to translate the bible, after the vulgar latin editio^
(which is that which the Roman Church approves) into Greek: that this
translation might among the Grecians, as the other among the Latins be
esteemed. In many things did the Greeks conform themselves in this Council
with the Latins: but could in no wise be induced to admit of
transubstantiation: notwithstanding did the Council and Pope allow them for
faithful; as speaking of Transubstantiation in the Treatise of the Mass, we
will hereafter declare. After he had been Pope almost 16 years, Anno 1446.
in the 1446. year he died. This Eugenius (as is read in the 16. and 17.
Sessions of the Council of Basil) declared the same Council to have been, and
from the beginning to be lawfully assembled, and so adnulled, and revoked the
Bulls, given out to dissolve it. Don John 2. reigned in Castile. Felix 5.
Felix 5. is not accounted of the Papists for Pope: Two Popes.
In the Council of Basil he was chosen, after that Eugenius (who would not leave
to be Pope) was deposed. The 30. Sisme.
The 30. Sisme was this, Anno 1439.
and 9 years endured: in which time, al Christendom was divided into 3 parts:
some were for Eugenius: others for Felix: and others were Neuters; which
neither took the one part, nor the other: Such as took part with Felix, said
the Council to be above the Pope: and those of Eugenius part, denied it, when
Eugenius was dead, those of his part, chose Nicholas 5. in whose time and the
1447. Anno 1447.
year Felix 5. renounced, and so the Sisme ceased. For this renunciation,
Nicholas 5. to stop his mouth from further barking made him Cardinal of S.
Sabina: and Legate in Almaine and France. Iulianus Taboecius, in the
genealogy of the Dukes of Sauoy, proclaims this Amadeus for a Cannonicall
Pope, and holy man. Two years after he had renounced, and in the 1449. year
died Felix. Don John 2. reigned in Castile.

Eugenius being dead, Anno 1549.
Nicolas 5. was made Pope: who in one self same year, Nicholas 5.
was Bishop, Cardinal and Pope. He gave the Hat to Amadeus, which renounced the
popedom. He celebrated the Iubile, in the year 1450. Boniface (as in his life
we have said) was the first inuenter of this Iubile from 100 to 100 years.
These Jubilees the Popes did willingly celebrate, for the great profit thereof
arising, Platina.
Of this Iubile it is reported that as the people upon a time came from
Vaticano to the city, they encountered a Mule of Cardinal Barbo. And when the
number was very great of co^mers and goers, One Mule the cause of 200 men's
deaths and more.
stumbled upon the unhappy Mule, which with the multitude was fallen to the
ground, over whom fell many more, that it seemed they played the play which
children use, called Crescael monton: more sacks on the Mill, and cast one upon
another, so great was the press, that 200 men were squized and stifled with
the weight. And for that this hap befell (as they call it) on Adrians bridge
others fell into the river. See here the effect of foolish zeal, without
discretion or true religion. For how many of these had it bin better to have
stayed, and wrought in their houses for maintenance of the^, S. P. Q. R.
their wives and children? But S. P. Q. R. Stultus populus quaerit Romam, to
wit, foolish people go to Rome, but the wise abide at home. The Turk in the
time of this Pope took the most noble city of Constantinople. Constantinople
lost.
This Pope was much given to drink, and edify, not souls, but walls. Platina
recounteth his buildings. He approved that which the Basile an Council, and
Felix the fifth had done: and also admitted the Cardinals which Felix had
created. Anno 1455.
In the 1455. year died Nicholas. In which self same year, or a little
before, died Don John 2. king of Castile. In whose time lived John de Mena the
Spanish Poet, as appears by the beginning of his poesy which he dedicated
saying: To the most potent John, etc. Calistus 3.


Calistus 3. a natural Spaniard of Valencia in Aragon, before he was Pope,
called Alonso de Boria, who studied and read the Lecture in Lerida an
University of Spain, was a most learned Cannonist. The Preachers of Bulls
called Carmerants.
When he was Pope, all his care he bent to make war with the Turks. For which
cause he sent many Echacueruos or deceivers (in Spain so commonly called) to
preach his mockeries and pardons: The Pope forbids appellation to the
Council.
and incited against the Turk the Armenians and Persians: he caused certain
countrymen to be strangled: for that they mocked at his mockeries and Bulls: he
commanded that none should appeal from the Pope to the Council: and more of
these things would he have done, had he longer lived. Over much liberty he
gave to his Nephews, and chiefly to Rodrigo de Boria whom he made his
Chancellor, and which afterward was Alexander 6. Anno 1458.
Calistus, for very age in the 1458. year died. In whose time Don Henry 4.
reigned in Castile.

Pius 2. Pius 2.
before called Eneas Syluius was a Notary Apostolic in the Council of Basil:
In his Orations and Epistles he spoke against the authority of Pope Eugenius:
but after he was made Pope, he changed his copy. When he was Pope he treated
of making war against the Turk: but nothing did, because he speedily died.
He wrote two excellent books of that which was debated in the Council of
Basil, which when he was pope he endeavored what he might to hide and obscure:
as unwilling to remember what before he had written: for he pretended
(ambitious as he was) to magnify and greatly advance his authority papal.
Estella Veneto speaking of him says, that they never saw him fear either
kings, The tyranni^^ of Pope Pius.
Captains, or tyrants: he took part with D. Fernado bastard son of D. Alonso,
who^ (dispossessing John the son of king Renato) with force of arms, he made
king of Naples. He excommunicated Sigismund Duke of Austria, because he
chastised for his robberies his Cardinal Nich. Cusanus. He excommunicated
Gregory of Hamburg a most learned lawyer: He took from Dirtherus Enseburgus
the Archbishopricke of Maguncia: and put in his place Adulphus de Nassao;
because he thought evil (as he said) of the Roman Church. The chief causes of
the deposing of Dirtherus was; for that he constantly opposed himself to the
Popes unjust exactions, wherewith they robbed the provinces, under pretense of
war against the Turk. This Pius made a young man bishop: because he was
nephewe of the duke of Burgonie and brother of the duke of Burbon (as notes it
friar John de Pineda) this election was cause of great mischief. He deprived
the Archbishop of Beneuente: He cited George, king of Bohemia, upon pain of
loosing his kingdom, to appear: many bishops deposed he for money: celebrated
a council in Mantua; where he disabled the law Pragmaticall, which was made
in France, as a thing pernicious to the Roman seat: gave himself much to
build: made Corsiniano, the place where he was borne, a city; and after his
own name called it Piencia: imitating therein Alexander, who after his name,
Anno 1464.
called a City, Alexandria; and Constantine, who called Bizantium
Constantinople. In the 1464. year he died. Platina and Sabellicus say, that
Pius 2. was accustomed to say: that matrimony with great reason was forbidden
to the Priests, Note for this purpose, the following life of Paul 2.
but with greater reason it should be restored to them again: dna that
moreover mentioned in the life of Pope Gregory 1. done and said by this Pope,
touching this matter. Don Henry 1. reigned in Castile.

Paul 2. before called Petrus Barbus, hearing that his Uncle Gabriel, Paul 2.
called Eugenius 4. was Pope, he changed his estate of living. For leaving
merchandise, which he professed, he applied himself to learning: but he was of
hard and dull understanding: and so, neither loved learning nor virtue. To Rome
he went to his Uncle, and so was made Cardinal, and afterward Pope. Of him
says Platina, that in Pontifical habit, and chiefly the Miter, he exceeded
all the Bishops his predecessors: wherein he consumed much money, buying
where, and for great price he could Diamondes, Sapphires, Emeralds,
Chrysolites, Pearls, and other most precious stones, furnished and adorned,
The Pope a Simonist.
wherewith, like another Aaron, he went forth to be seen and worshipped. Great
diligence he used to gather gold, The red had.
and sold benefices also. He commanded that none should bear the red hatte,
except he were a Cardinal, In the first year of his bishopdome, he presented
red cloth to the Cardinals, wherewith they might cover their horses or mules
when they rode abroad: Pope against Pope.
he endeavored with arms to entertain his majesty Papal. Very wickedly he
dealt with all the decrees and acts of his predecessor Pius: exceeding
ambitious he was, and (as says Volateranus) gave himself to pleasure.
Estanislaus Reuthenus reports: that this Paul 2. reading certain verses,
compiled against him and his bastard daughter, wept, and complained to his
friends of the cruel law of constrained single life, seeing that he (which
ought to be not only Prelate of the Church, but an example of chastity) saw
his daughter with great shame in the mouths and eyes of all the city: who
although she was most beautiful, yet he grieved (said he) she should be thought
to be a bastard, knowing that by the law, she should have been borne in lawful
matrimony, had not unhappy forced single life hindered it. So that he purposed
(say they to restore marriage to Ecclesiastical persons: which he could not do,
because he died. Against forced single life note that which Paphnucius in the
first Nicen Council, Gregory 1.
and that which we have said upon Siricius, Nicholas 1.
Gregory 1. Nicholas 1. and Pius 2. This Paul 2. Pius 2. and Paul against
forced single life.
promised long life unto himself: but having supped well to his liking, in the
1471. year, unseen of any, he suddenly died. Anno 1471.
D. Illescas Hist. Pontif. of him says: A most great eater he was of fruits,
and chiefly of Melons: and they in the end killed him: for one night finding
in himself a strong appetite he lusted to suppe upon both flesh and fish; and
eat infinitely of all, and afterward did eat two whole Melons, with many
other things of ill disgestion: and a little lower: And half an hour after,
a chamberlain entered, and found him fallen to the ground, and dead, that he
never spoke more. Carrion. lib. 5 of his history says Paul 2. was openly
infamous, and execrable, for his most filthy and vnaturall lust, the report
was public, that he was strangled of the devil; and his neck broken, in the
very act of his abomination. Notwithstanding that such a one was Paul 2., yet
did D. Illescas praise him for most liberal, an almes-giuer, charitable and
pitiful to the diseased, a friend of justice, and very merciful. But who so
lists to know what a one he was, let him read Platina. At him ended Platina
his lives of the chief Bishops: of whom he received notable losses,, and
injuries: he deprived him of his goods and dignities: cast him into prison, and
caused him to be tortured: as Abbot John Tritemio reports, Platina remained
in prison until Paul died. Don Henry 4. reign din Castile.

Sistus 4. a Genowey, on the day of his coronation was in great peril of his
life: for as they carried him in his horslitter to Saint John de Lateran,
Sistus 4.
there arose great tumult against him among the people, that they hurled stones
at him. So liberal he was, that what he had promised to one, he would promise
also to another, and so to many, if many did demand it. He was overmuch
addicted to his kinsfolks, and chiefly to his Nephew Pedro R^irio, a
Franciscan Friar whom he made Cardinal, a cursed, filthy and ryotous person.
This Seraphicall Minorit (consumed with fleshly delight) at the age of 28
years died. Many make mention of this cursed Nephew of the Pope. John Rauisius
Textor says: that when Sistus 4. was chief Bishop, Petro Presbitero
Cardinal, consumed in two years, and that in vanities, three hundred thousand
ducats. 300000 ducats evil spent.
Johannes Riuius, Baptista Mantuanus, and Baptista Fulgosus report fearful
monstrousness of this beast. For he made no reckoning to walk by his house
clothed with cloth of gold: the couerings of his beds were of cloth of gold,
the basens wherein he did his necessaries, were of silver: that he caused the
shoes of his friend Teresa to be covered with precious stones. All this is
nothing. Baptista Mantuanus in his Alphonso, lib. 4. brings in Pluto, that
gave him the welcome to hell. Sistus this Pope much consumed in wars: which to
entertain, he invented and sold new offices. A solemn stews he builded in
Rome, where enormious and wicked sins were committed. What Pope, or what
incarnate devil is this? Every whore in Rome, did pay unto him, (as now also
they do to the Pope) a Iulio, which is every week a ryall, which then came to
20000 ducats. But the re^t (say they) is now increased that it is brought to
40000. 40000 ducats the Pope has yearly of the Curtisans.
ducats of yearly rent. Horrible things of this Sistus and Friar Peter his
Nephew writes Mantuan. A great warrior also was this Pope, and that unjustly
(as Volateranus witnesses) he made wars against Vitellius Tiphernatus,
against the Florentines, Venetians, Colonnists, against Don Fernando king of
Sicillia, and Duke of Callabria, and against nations and Princes. He sought to
hold at his command kings and Christian Princes, whom he advanced or put
down as himself listed. He moved the Swissars to make wars with the Lombards,
whom he had excommunicated. He caused the Iubile to be from 25 years to 25
years: The Iubile from 25 to 25 years.
which Boniface 8. did institute from a hundred to a hundred years. And
Clement 6. from 50 to 50. and this by persuasion of his kindred, which gaped
for gain by him. He invented many offices of Scribes, Solicitors, Breuiaries,
and Apostolic Notaries, which he sold for good money (if that may be called
good, which is euilly gotten. He cursed Laurencio de Medices a Florentine,
because he hanged Raphael the same Popes Nephew: he grievously afflicted the
Florentines: and was a great defender of the Roman seat. The forenamed
Volateranus lib. 5. Geograph. reports a fearful impiety of this Sistus 4.
committed by his command, at the elevation of the sacrament: which when we
speak of the Mass, The Rosary inverted by Saint Dominick. Anno 1200. and after
wards renewed Anno 1470.
we will afterward declare. Leander Tritenius reports, that in the 1470.
year, one Alanus de Rupa a Dominick, moved with certain visions, renewed the
Rosary (as they call it) of our Lady: which (the Gospel of Jesus Christ cast
aside) he preached. And that this Rosarie should the more be esteemed, and of
the common people adored, Iacobus Esprengerus Provincial in Germany did
extol it to the heavens with false miracles and illusions of the devil. And
finally Sistus 4. approved and confirmed it: of which a book was made, in the
beginning whereof it is said: that the blessed Virgin Marie on a time entered
into the shut cell of the said Alanus, who taking of her hair, made a little
ring, where with she was married to Friar Alanus: that she kissed him, and
caused him to handle her teates and dugges: and lastly was so familiar with
Alanus, as the wife wontedly is with her husband. Blasphemous dishonesties.
At such blasphemous dishonesties, and such dishonest blasphemies who can have
patience. Surely I am ashamed to write them: but it is needful to discover
their villainies and shame, that Spain and all the world may hasten to know
them. And for as much as this foolish and superstitious devotion of praying over
the Rosarie, is one of the most principal of the papacy: I will here briefly
set down, what the Papists themselves report of it. The Dominican Breuiarie,
at Lions in France, printed in the 1578. year, says, that in the 1200. year
Saint Dominicke did invent and preach it: and that when so holy a devotion was
put in oblivion, the glorious Virgin did determine to renew it: and so in the
1460. year she appeared (Tritenio says 1470.) to Frie^ Alanus: and commanded
him, that he in her name should publish to all Christians this so needful
manner of praying, promising him to confirm this devotion with signs and
miracles, etc. It says also: that in the 1466. year, the blessed Virgin, the
more to inflame the hearts of all men with this devotion, appeared to the Priot
of the Covent of S. Dominicke at Colonia, commanding him to preach it to the
people, and tell them that very many and great mercies would the Lord show to
all those, that should offer this Psalter devoutly unto her, etc. It says
also, that Sistus the fourth did confirm it, granting many indulgences to them
that should pray it: the which many other chief Bishops did also confirm. It
says: that in the 1572. year, Gregory 13. commanded, that the feast of the
Rosarie should be celebrated the first Sunday in October. There is a Spanish
book, printed at Bilboe by Matthew Mares, in the 1583. year: which at large
recounteth this history of the Rosarie, or Psalter, or Crown of our Lady,
fol. 185. it says, that Pope Clement 4. John 22. and Sistus the fourth
granted 78 years of pardon for every time that they prayed over this Psalter.
Innocent the eight granted also plenarie indulgence, etc. Also Leo the tenth
confirming all the pardons granted by the other Popes, to those that should
pray it, etc. granted newly ten years, and ten times forty days pardon for
every entire Rosarie, etc. Also Pope Alexander 6. granted to whomsoever should
pray this Crown, full remission: and on the Fridayes doubled: and how often
soever on good Friday he should pray it, so many souls out of Purgatory. Also
fol. 187. it says, Pope Paul 3. at the instance of the most reverend
Cardinal, Don Friar John of Toledo. Archbishop of Saint James, If this be not
to make a mock of the death of Christ what shall be.
granted to all them that should pray the Rosarie fifty and six thousand
years, and for every time plenarie Indulgence. Thus far this book. And in two
words to speak all; our adversaries never cease to count the great virtues of
the Rosarie with many miracles confirmed. Behold how much has the superstition
of praying by count, the Paternoster and Aue Mary's crept in, whose first
Inuenter was Petrus Hermitanus, without the word of God, and without any
example, of Saint of the old or new Testament. Behold whether the ignorant
papists have great occasion to esteem their Rosarie, invented with false
miracles and illusions of the devil, and renewed by the means of Friar
Alanus: and what Alanus? The husband of the virgin Mary, preached by James the
prouincicall, and confirmed by Sistus 4. the holy father of Rome. All these
strange wonders, blasphemies, and impieties have I reckoned, that our
adversaries may be ashamed, seeing there be some that understand them: and so
may turn to the Lord, who only is he that pardons sins: and graciously
this for his son Christ's sake. In the 1477. year, Sistus 4. did institute
the Inquisition of Spain: the first Inquisitors general was Friar Thomas of
Torquemada, Pryor Dominican of Segouia: who so list to know more concerning the
Inquisition, let him read the life of Alexander 6. which we will afterward
recount. Albeit such (as we have heard) was this Sistus 4. yet do our
adversaries much esteem him. And so Felix Pireto when he was Pope, called
himself Sistus 5. Onuphrius Panuinus, an Augustine Friar and the Popes great
parasite, The mother of Sistus dream.
reports that the mother of this Sistus 4. being with child of him, she saw
in a dream, that Saint Frauncis, and Saint Anthony gave to this her son the
habit and cord of their order. The mother for this dream, called him Frauncis
at his Baptism. Proceeding in his fable he says: that on a certain day, as
the nurse washed him in a bath, the Infant swounded, and that she carried him
almost dead to his mother. And that the mother seeing her son in that plight,
and remembering her dream, promised and vowed that her son for six months
space should wear the habit of Saint Frauncis; after which time they took
from him the habit: which taking away the child, being now but one year old,
became estsoones infirmed, and much more grievously then before: But the mother
renewed her vow, and then was he cured, who at the age of nine years, was
made Friar in a monstearie of Saint Frauncis. Thus far Panuinus. see here,
Papisticall religion founded upon dreams and false miracles
upon what is the popish religion founded: upon dreams, illusions of the
devil, false miracles, and lies. God by his just judgment does blind them,
and leave them to fall into a reprobate mind: And because they believe not the
truth, written and manifested upon men in the old and new Testament, 2. These.
2. 11.
meet it is (as says Saint Paul) that they should believe lies. The report,
that the Duke of Ferrara against the will and consent of Sistus had made peace
with the Venetians, caused the death of Sistus. For so highly was he offended
thereat, Anno 1484.
that within five days, and in the 1484. year he died. In whose time reigned
in Castile and Aragon, Don Fernando and Dona Isabella.

Innocent 8. Innocent 8. most luxurious
a Genowey, before called Johannes Baptista Cibo, when he was Pope, conspired
against Don Fernando king of Sicill, taking part with the Nobles, that rebelled
against the king: But his enterprise not succeeding, as he supposed, unable to
do more, he made peace with the king, with this condition: that he should have
his tribute, and the rebels, their pardons: but the king performed neither the
one, nor the other. The Pope after this gave himself to pleasure, which
accustomably brings and draws with it vanities, delights, pastimes, pompes,
rio^, glutony, whoredoms, and other such vices, and sins. He was of like
beautiful and fair body (whereof he much esteemed) as was Paul 2. he was also
like unto Paul 2. in hardness of understanding; and not given to learning.
Sixteen sons and daughters of the Pope.
Eight sons, and so many other daughters he had without marriage, as by these
verses of Marcellus appears.

Octorecens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas:
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem.
Spurcities, gula, auaritia, atque ignauia deses,
Hoc octaue iacent, quo tegeris tumulo.
To wit eight sons he begot, and so many other daughters: For this cause with
reason might Rome call him father. Filthiness, gluttony, couetuousnesse and
negligent slothfulnes, lie (o Octaue) in this sepulcher. With riches and
dignities he shamelesly advanced his children. He was the first Pope that
without any circumstance, color, or titles of Nephews or Neeces, as others
had accustomed to do, dared publicly to do this. Wicelius notwithstanding,
does commend him for his holy life, learning, and eloquence. He was much
inclined to lucre, and when neither his plenary Indulgences, nor his Iubile,
nor was against the Turk could suffice to fill his hands; a new invention he
found to draw out money. And this it was, he had found in a wall (said he) the
title of the cross of Christ Jesus, of Nazareth king of the Jews, written in
three tongues, Hebrewe, The Pope found the title of the cross and Iron of the
spear.
Greek, and Latin: and withal the iron of the spear, which pierced the side
of Christ. Friar John de Pineda lib. 26. cap, 3 3. 1. says: that Bajazet sent
him the Iron of the lance, etc. that he should not permit Zizimus his brother
to move wars in Turkey: This is he which now I will show to have been called
Geme, etc. This Geme flying from his brother Bajazet retired to Rhodes:
afterward was he brought to France; then to Pope Innocent 8. and then to
Naples, in the time of Pope Alexander 6. etc. Of this Geme will we make mention
in the life of Alexander 6. Behold what great things can covetousness effect,
A great drinker he was, and in his time all the offices in Rome men might have,
and had for money. In a certain place called Polo, he condemned for
heretics. 8 men 6 women, and the Lord of that people, because they said, that
none of Peter's successors had been Christ's vicar, but those only which had
imitated the poverty of Christ. Anno 1492.
In the 1492. year died. Innocent Don Fernando, and Done Isabella, then
reigning in Spain. Alexander 6. a natural Spaniard, borne at Valencia, was so
abominable and shameless, that his papists themselves do openly speak it.
Alexander 6. abominable*
Panuinus an Augustine Friar, upon his life, and not without cause, says
filthy things of him, and albeit he said much evil of him: yet left he much
unsaid. He says then, that Alexander aided by certain Cardinals, corrupted
with blind ambition, and avarice (a good beginning) attained to such great
dignity: who afterward perceiving the great unfaithfulness of this
ungrateful Pope, received the Chastisement for selling of their suffrages, that
their service deserved: the chief of these Cardinals was Ascanius Esforcia,
who sold it for great gifts and promises which Alexander made: and
principally, that Alexander promised he should be his Chauncellor: which office
very few years he enjoyed. The rest suffered moreover great misery, and
calamities: some lived in banishment, others were imprisoned, others violently
murdered. And that moreover, which of him writes the forenamed Panuinus;
among other things he says: Some fathers there were in that election, which
prophesied (and were not false Prophets) that a Spaniard was foolishly chosen;
who was a man that would smother wickedness, a great dissembler, and one that in
the end would be a total reine to all, etc. The old Spanish proverb in these
miserable Cardinals is verified. Plaze la traycion, mas no eltraydor. The
treason pleases, but not the Traitor. Ieronymus Marius, in his Eusebius,
speaking of this Pope, says: who can reckon the foul, and never heard of
deeds of Alexander 6. Alexander upon condition to be Pope, gauehimselfe to the
devil.
He made a covenant with the devils. He gave and delivered himself wholly unto
them. So that by their means and arts he might attain to the Popedom: which
when the devils had promised, and performed, so holily Alexander ordered his
life, that he never attempted to do any thing, but first he consulted thereof
with the devil. Anno 1500.
In the 1500. year, he granted the Iubile not to such only, as should come
to Rome; but also to those that would not, or could not come thither, provided
that they gave a certain sum of money. Pope Boniface 8. The first Iubile
conditional.
in the 1300. year, granted the Iubile from 100 years to 100 years. Pope
Clement 6. in the 1350 year granted it from 50 years, to 50. years. Pope
Sistus 4. in the 1475. year, granted the fame from 25 years, to 25 years.
But it benefited him nothing, if he came not personally to Rome. Our Alexander
moved with that spirit that made him Pope, did grant it, not to those only,
which should come to Rome: but to those also that abode at home: conditionally
to give money, as before we have said. The ceremony of the year of Iubile.
And seeing we now entreat of the Iubile, it shall be good to recite here the
ceremony which is used in Rome. Among many other Churches which are in Rome,
seven principal there are, where pardons are obtained, every one of these
seven Churches has one gate or wall at the least fast closed so that none can
go in, nor out thereby, but in the year of Iub^le. The Pope set in a chair,
borne on men's shoulders, and clothed with red goes to S. Peter's, the
principal Church there. And being brought to this shut gate, says the 9.
verse of Psalm. 24. Atollite portas principes vestras, 'etc. Lift up your heads
ye gates, etc. and (this saying) with a golden hammer, which he holds in his
hand, he gives a blow; and at the blow giving, in a moment, the earth, brick,
and mortar which murred the gate, fall wholl^y down, and so the people, which
will purchase the Iubile, enter by that gate: for if they enter by another
gate, they shall not obtain it. The matter that murreth the gate, is so within
undermined and prepared, that when the Pope strikes, then falls it down.
And so great is the press of the people to enter, that there is no Iubile
wherein some or more persons be not stiffled. And such is the superstition of
the common people, and foolish and ignorant devotion: that it leaves neither
small stone, nor mortar, nor earth, nor dust of that broken wall. Each one
striving, endeuoreth to take some thing, which they reserve for relikes, and
carry with them to their countries. This gate call they, the holy gate. The
holy gate.
Clement 6. (as in his life we have said) commanded the Angel of Paradise, to
carry into heaven, the soul of the pilgrim, which going to Rome to obtain
the Iubile, should die by the way. What a grement has this Iubile, instituted
by the Pope, The Iubile by God instituted
with that Iubile, which Iehoua who is the true Almighty God, in the 25. chap.
of Leuiticus, did institute. From 50 years, to 50 years, did God institute
the year of Iubile, that therein every servant of the Jewish nation, should
depart out of bondage, and have freedom as the rest, and that the gaged
possessions should return to their first owners. So that the year of Iubile
was a year of freedom generally to all the children of Israel. The papists
are very apes, which imitate and follow, either the Jews or gentiles. But
return we to our Alexander 6. who invented always possible to gather money:
and so made a new College of notaries of writing, which were So in number,
every of which offices he sold for 750 ducats. He created 36 Cardinals, or (as
says Panuinus 43) 18 Whereof were Spaniards. And of these 18 three were his
alyes, very neerekinne, and of his name Boria. Much inclined he was to
building: Comedies, and enterludes, he heard with great pleasures: never in
Rome had sword players, fencers, and baudes more liberty then in his time; and
never the people of Rome had less freedom: A great multitude of promoters
were in his time, and for the least matter, or word, the punishment was death.
All this the devilish father permitted, for the foolish love, that he bare to
his children. For he imitating his predecessor Innocent, put all his felicity
in advancing, and without all shame enriching his bastards: The least of his
sons he made prince in Sicilia the second, called Caesar, he made Cardinal,
the greatest of all made he Duke of Gaudia. This Duke (as says Panuinus) after
both brothers had supped that night together, in the house of their mother
Zanochia, Caesar his own brother murdered, and cast him into Tyber. All this
the Pope his father understood and knew; yet dissembled the same: For this
Caesar, which was the worst of all, did the Pope his father love more then all:
for through ambition and avarice he slew him. The brother being dead, Caesar
esteemed not the hat, but gave himself wholly, to milytary excercises: and
carrying with him great treasure, he went into France, where he married with a
near kinswoman of the King, and was made Duke of Valence. This Caesar, by
means of the king of France, and the Pope his father, came to do what he
would in Italy. So much did king Jews 12. in regard of his bond to the Pope,
for the son of the Pope: who had dispensed with him to forsake his lawful
wife, sister of Charles his predecessor, and to marry with the Duches of
Britain, Charles his widow: as Pineda in his 26. book 38 chap. 1. and 2,
declares. Who lists to know the abominations, and villainies that this Popes
son committed, let him read Panuinus. When Alexander 6. was dead: Caesar his
son fell from the Majesty and power wherein he had lived. For by
commandment of the king Don Fernando, was he taken and carried into Spain:
where he remained prisoner 2 years in the Castile of medina, from which prison
he escaped and fled to the king of Nauare: whom in some wars he served, whereof
an harguebush (as says Carrion) he died: or as says Pineda lib. 27. cap. 4. 4
a young gentlemen of the Garceses of Agreda, with a flew him in Nauare. The
daughter of this Alexander 6. called Lucrceia (whom like a wicked irreligious
man he carnally knew) was 3 times married, the first with John Efforcia Duke
of Epidauro, the 2 having forsaken the Duke her first husband, with Don Jews
of Aragon, bastard son of king Don Alonso: the second husband being dead, the
third time she married with Don Alonso Duke of Ferrara. At whose nuptials (as
declares Panuinus) the father made great mirth and feasting. Note here the
small shame of Pope Alexauder. By an Epitaph made Johannes Iouianus Pontanus,
how holy and chaste was the single life of this Pope, and what was his religion
manifestly appears. Then speaking of Lucretia, he says.

Hic iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sedre,
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
As much to say, as here in this tomb lies in name, Lucretia; but in deed,
Thais, the daughter, Spouse, and nourse of Alexander. Zanazaro, a famous man of
that time, and excellent port, of Alexander says.

Policitus caelum, Romanus, and astra, Sacerdos,
Per scelera, and caedes adstyga pandit iter.
The Roman Bishop, who heavens and stars did promise, by his villainies, and
murders is gone the way to hell, the fame also.

Ergo te semper cupiet, Lucretia sextus?
O Fatum diri numinis: hic pater est.
How then, Lucrrtia, will sextus ever desire thee? Gvnluckie fate: he is thy
father: Of Alexander 6. they say, that he sold the crosses, The Symony and
sacrilege of Alexander.
the Alter, and Christ himself. All this he had bought before, and therefore
might sell the same: So Alexander committed Simonte in buying it, and
sacrilege in selling it. This Alexander is he, that caused Geme, or as others
call him Zazimo brother of the great Turk Bajazet, whom he held prisoner in
Rome, to be poisoned: and this did Alexander for 200000 ducats which the great
Turk sent him: what good example was this to work the Turks conversion? Of
this Geme began we to speak in the life of Innocent 8. and here with him will
we make an end. Charles 8. K. of France made war with Pope Alex. in Rome, the
pope seeing himself unable to resist the Frenchman made peace with him: among
other acords this was one, that the Pope should deliver over to the king, Geme
the Turks brother. This put the Pope into great pe^siuenes: because he should
loose 40000. ducats, which the Turk yearly gave him: that he should not let
Geme go. The Turk in the end promised 200000 Ducats, to cause Geme to die,
as with poison he performed. In Naples Geme died, to the great grief of the
king, as says Guiciardine, and others, or after Iouius, in Goeta: but all
agree that he was poisoned, with yoyson which Alexander caused to be given him.
This is he, that to mainetaine his tyranny, called the great Turk aforenamed,
against the king of France: The Pope calls the Turk against the French king.
wherein he gave example to Frauncis, of France, to call afterward the
Turk, against our king Don Charles the Emperor. This is he, which commanded
both the hands and tongue, of Antonius Mancinellus, a most learned man to be
cut off for an elega^t oration, which he made against his abominable customs,
most filthy life, and not heard of villainies: But God, who is just, gave him
his hire: And thus it was; that being at a banquet, which he made to certain
Cardinals, and Senatos of Rome, of purpose to poison them, with the self same
poison that he poisoned Geme the Turks brother withal, the seruitors ill
advised, mistaking one flaggon for another unwillingly gave drink to the Pope
of that flaggon wherein was the poison, Poison.
and so (after he had 11 years Poped) he and some of the servants, Anno 1503.
and Cardinals, in the 1503. year died. Anno 1499.
In the time of this Pope, and the 1499. year, Ieronymus Sauanarola a
Dominican, Sauanarola his life and doctrine.
that excellent preacher, a man admirable in life, and doctrine, with other his
companions, was burned in Florence. He maintained the communion in both kinds,
condemned Indulgences: sharply reproved the wicked life, and great carlesenesse
of the Pope, Cardinals, and moreover of all the Clergy, in their office:
denied the Popes supremacy, taught, that the keys were not given to Peter
only: but to the whole: Church. He said: that the Pope followed neither the
life, nor doctrine of Christ, seeing he attributed more to his indulgence and
trifling traditions then to the merit of Christ. He affirmed that the Popes
excommunications were not to be feared: and foretold some things which were to
happen, namely the destruction of Florencr, and Rome, and the restoring of the
Church: which in our time have come to pass. For this cause, the Count
Franciscus Picus Mirandula, called him an holy Prophet: and defended him by
writing against the Pope. Marcillius in a certain Epistle, and Philippus
Comineus in his French History say, that he had a prophetical spirit, and
many other learned men defended his Innocence. D. Illescas, in the life of
Alexander 6. speaking of Sauanarola, says these words: Many opinions there
were, and yet wantes there not some which judge of the justification of this
fact. This only rests, to refer the same to the Judgment of God: who
knows the secret of all things. I heard the most learned father and master,
Friar Mancius of the order of Saint Dominicke say, that he heard it affirmed of
a faithful witness and familiar of Bishop Remolinus (which afterward was
Cardinal) that it repented the Bishop all his life time to have pronounced
this sentence. And that for satisfaction thereof before God, he fasted three
days in the week. And verily, who so reads some spiritual things, which he
left us in writing would not deem them to proceed from an hypocritical, but
a true religious man: Hitherto Illescas. In the time of this Alexander Don
Fernando and Dona Isabella reigned in Spain. Six notable things happened to
Spain about the year 1492.
In whose time, about the year of the Lord 1492. somewhat more or less, six
notable things happened in Spain. The 1. the Pope was a Spaniar dthe 2. Grananda
was won. The 3. the discovery of the Indies. The 4. The inquisitio^ of Spain.
The 5. the holy brotherhood. And the 6. 1.
the disease called Bubo. Abominable (as we have seen) was the Spanish Pope
Alexander) never good, A Spanish and abominable Pope.
but great mischief did he to Spain, or any land of the world. The taking of
Granada wrought great good unto Spain in freeing it from continual wars, and
slaughters between the Christians and the Moors, and in banishing out of all
Spain, the false sect of Mahomet. The discovery of the Indies that (being
well considered) has done more hurt then good, The taking of Granado.
to the souls of the Spaniards, 2
that went thither. Casaos the bishop (who was an eye witness, and a natural
Spaniards) wrote a book of the cruelties of the Spaniards toward the poor
Indians, would God those which went thither, had had more zeal to teach, 3
and augment the holy catholic faith, The discovery of the Indies
contained in holy scripture, then to enrich the^ selves, and for the enriching
of themselves, to murder and on all sides rob (as they say) that simple
people, which had reasonable souls, as well as we; and for whom Christ also
dyed. The Indians (as Augustine de carate complaining, reports in his
History of Peru; said that the Spaniardes took from them their Idols, and
gave them the Idols or Images of Spain, crosses, the Virgin Marie etc. to
worship: They said: that the Spaniardes had taken from them their many wives,
telling them that the law of Jesus Christ permitted but one only wife, and
took them for themselves. Had they taught them to worship God in spirit and
truth, as he says that he will be worshipped: John 4. 23.
no mention at all had been made, of Idols or Images: seeing that God, in the
second commandment of his holy law forbideth them. And chiefly the Indians
being so addicted to Idolatry. If the law of Christ permit but one only wife,
Genesis 2. 24.
according to the first institution of marriage, wherefore kept our Spaniardes
many whores and concubines? What manner of Doctrine was this? If the blind
lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. The which to our Spaniards and their
Indians has happened. 4
God send them better teachers. Of good zeal and intention, The Inquisitio^.
was the Inquisition ordained; and after some, it was ordained before the
wars of Granada, by the same Don Fernando, whiles Sistus Poped. But be it as
it was. (...)
In the time of Alexander the fixed, and after the wiuing of Granada, was it
truly executed. Then commanded king Don Fernando, that all the Jews should be
Baptized which would live in Spain: or otherwise depart: and so (as says
Sabellicus) departed a hundred and twenty thousand. The Inquisition then was
instituted, to teach the Christian religion, to Jews, and Moors which were
turned Christians, and yet secretly returned to their old customs. But having
now almost ceased, with the Jews and Moors, from day to day, has it done
more and more tyranny against the faithful, The manner of the Inquisitors
teaching shows the spirit that moves them.
Catholic and true Christians, who detesting Popish Idolatry, and vain
supersticions, confess that only God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost is in
spirit and truth to be worshipped. Their manner or teaching them, whom they
suppose to err, is injuries, disgraces, tortures, whippinges, and evil life,
Sanbenitos galleies, perpetual imprisonmentes, and in the end Fire, wherewith
they burn those, whom God, by his mercy, makes constant in the confession of
his son Christ Jesus. Who so lists to see the crafts, deceites,
stratagemes, and cruelties, which the Lord Inquisitors, or to speak better
Inquinators of the faith use, with the poor sheep of Jesus Christ, appointed
to the slaughter, or furnace, let him read the book entitled Inquisitio
Hispanica, translated into French, English, and Flemish. In this book it is
lively depainted, and with many notable exampeles confirmed. This is to be
noted, that how many soever entered into the Inquisition (for what cause soever)
all came out with confusion, and loss of goods, and many, of their lives, and
none at all instructed. Such is the entreaty wherewith the Fathers of the
faith does entreat them. They have not leisure to teach them, but to rob and
kill them. Would God, that according to the lawdable custom of Spain, in
other Audienecs, Judges of residence should be sent, men learned and void of
passion, which might examine the Inquisitors, and those that be, and have been
prisoners in the Inquisition: O what would then be discovered? Aragon as it
were by force, received afterward the Inquisition: and so they killed the
first Inquisitors. In the 1546. year, Don Pedro of Toledo attempted to place
it in Naples, but could never effect it, (as Doctor Illescas upon Paul 3.
reports. For the Neapolitanes, did vehemently withstand it. Things standing
in these terms, Pope Paul before certified of what passed in Naples,
dispatched forth a writ apostolic, whereby he declared, that the knowledge of
causes, touching the offense, of heresy apperteyned to the ecclesiastical
Court and Jurisdiction apostolic, commanding the viceroy, and all whomsoever
secular Judges, to surcease in them, and not entermedle to proceed against any
heresy, by way of Inquisition, nor any other manner: reserving to himself the
determination of such causes, as of a thing concerning the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. Thus far Doctor Illescas. Some years after, one Sayavedra
Cordoves, persuaded the king of Portugale that he was sent a Nuncio from Paul
3. unto him. And so in the 1545. year, thus brought in the Inquisition into
Portugale. There went out of Portugale 30000. Jews. Time brought it to light,
that the Pope had not sent him, and so was he condemned to the galleys. Another
pleasant conceate have I heard of this Nuncio, an excellent writer he was, and
well knew to counterfeite what handsoeuer. This Nuncio, remaining in the
galleys, came a poor woman to beseech the General of the galleys, to aid her
with some alms, for the marriage of her poor daughter. The General made
answer; that very willingly would he help her: but present want of money, was
the cause he could not. The poor woman with this answer departed weeping; of
whom, when the Nuncio saw her weep, he demanded the cause of her weeping:
She told him, that which she had passed with the General. Then did he comfort
her, saying: that he would effect what she desired. And taking ink and paper,
he wrote these words: Steward, upon sight of these presents, give so many
thousand marmades (the number I remember not) to her that shall give you this
scedule, which scedule the Nuncio subcribed, as if the General himself had
done it. The poor woman departed with her scedule to the Steward. The steward
answered: that he wondered his Lord would in such a time send that scedule. But
since such was his pleasure, he would give her that which he commanded him to
give her: and so gave it indeed. When the day came that the General took
account of the steward, the steward presented the said scedule unto him: which
he read again, and said to the steward. True it is, that such a poor woman
came to me to ask an alms: but I answered her, that I could not help her for
the present. And beholding the subscription said: this is my hand, but I wrote
it not. Wherefore he made inquiry in the gally who had written it: and it was
proved to be the Nuncio. For which cause the general would have caused his
hand to be cut off: but at request of many, his hand cutting was spared and he
put to the oars. For by reason of his wealth, he rowed not-before. D. Illescas
in the life of Clement 6. says: that he saw him in the gally rowing. One of
the chief causes of the low countries revolt: wherein so many thousands of
Spaniards and other nations have died, and so many millions of crowns have
been wasted, y aun el rabo (como dizen) estapor desollar: 4
and yet the tail (as the say) is to be fleyed (for to begin anew is each day
needful) was, The Inquisitio^ is the cause of the revolt of the low countries.
that the Duke d' Oliua sought to bring in the inqusition. You see here the
profit which the Inquisition has brought to Spain. This say I not, as though
I would that there were neither king, nor ruler, but that each one might do,
and believe what he listed. Good laws be necessary in every common wealth,
for this cause committed God the sword to the Magistrate, 1. Pet. 2. 14.
for the chastisement of the wicked and praise of the good; as says the
Apostle Saint Peter. Let them then that do evil be punished; but not
tyrannically. All laws permit the delinquent to know who is his adversary,
and the witnesses that depose, and who they be, that he may except against
them, if they be infamous, or his enemies, etc. In this Inquisitorie Audience,
the Lo. Treasurer, who it may be never knew nor saw the delinquent, is made
party, the witnesses, how infamous, what villains soever, or great enemies
they be, are never named, and so cannot be excepted against. The which is
contrary to all divine and humane Justice. If the witnesses have witnessed
against one, three or four things, the Inquisitors do charge him, as though
the witnesses had spoken of ten or twelve things, much more horrible then the
witnesses have deposed. And so may the Inquisitors do what they list, knowing
that there is no reside^t Judge, which is to take account of that they have
done. Against this tyranny do we speak. May it please the divine Majesty,
which has given to the king the sword, authority, and command over all
whatsoever that live in his kingdoms, be they secular (as they term them) or
ecclesiastical; to put into the kings heart willingness to be informed of the
wrongs and grieuances which the Inquisition does, and to give (as is his
duty) remedy for the same, which one day I hope the Lord will perform, and
revenge the blood of the just, which the Inquisition unjustly has spilled. The
blood of the Just, Apoc. 6 9.
is as the blood of Abell, crying for vengeance. How long (say the dead) for
the word of God etc. 5
Lord holy and true, The Brotherhood.
will thou not judge and avenge our blood. etc. The brotherhood has done, and
does great good to Spain: for it cleanses the ways, and wast places of the
eues, and robbers and so men may walk, and sit safely, under their fig
trees, and at the foot of their vine. The 3 holy sisters of Spain.
A common proverb it is, that in Spain are three holy sisters: the holy
Inquisition, the holy Cross, and the holy brotherhood: from the one, which is
the Inpuisitio^, they pray God to deliver them: from the other, will they keep
themselves. The tyrrany of the Inquisition, in this saying is noted: 6
God of his great love deliver us from it. The Bubos a disease called the
French pockes.
The Bubos (a disease until then unknown in Spain) they brought with them,
which returned from the Indies; wherewith God did punish them, for taking the
wives that were not theirs. This filthy and contagious disease, has spread it
self so greatly throughout all Europe, that they make now almost no reckening
thereof. And he is not holden for a gentleman which has not had two or three
times the bubos (as they call them) Other nations call them, the French evil.
The Frenchmen call them the disease of Naples. A disease it is, wherewith God
punishes such as live in that filthy single life, dispising marriage, which
God in Paradise, John 2. 11.
and the state of innocence ordained; and Jesus Christ with his first miracle
(as says Saint John) at a marriage in Cana of Galile confirmed: albeit the
popish votaries call it filthy, etc. Return we to Alexander 6. Of him says
the Enchiridion of times, that many things in his time did he license, which
neither for his person, his estate, nor for Rome (being that it ought to be)
were lawful and honest. Machauell lib. de Principe, cap. 18. of him says:
Naught else but deceive men did ever Alexander the sixth, nor ever did he
think upon other things: and found means suficient to effect it: and never
had man more efficacy in striving to affirm, and with greater oaths would
promise a thing, and less perform it, notwithstanding his deceit did always
prosper with him, etc. Guicciardine, a grave author and of much credit (as
faith Doctor Illescas) in the life of Alexander 6. 2. lib. 2. of his History
gives this notable testimony of him. The most vile nature (says he) of the
bishop made what wickedness soever in him credible. Who lists to know
further of this abominable Alexander 6. great shame of our country of Spain,
Anno 1503.
let him read Paulus Iouius. In the 1503. year, Alexander with poison, as
before we have said, died. Don Fernando and Dona Isabella, then reigning in
Spain.

Pius 3. Pius 3.
of Sena, nephewe of Pius 2. was thus chosen: when Alexander was dead, Caesar
his son which murdered his brother, etc. advanced with all the treasure, and
jewels of the Pope, and with twelve thousand men, guarded the Vaticano, a place
where the Cardinals use to assemble for a new election. And this he did, that
the Cardinals should make Pope, whom he best pleased. But to another place they
went, called Minerua, which when Caesar understood, he sent thither his people,
and beset the^ about. Then ran the report through Rome that the Cardinals were
prisoners, and that there was nothing but death to be expected throughout all
Rome. So great was the fear, that it only seemed Haniball was eftsonnes to
enter Rome. Caesar in the end, at the request of the Romans, and the
Ambassadors of Spain and France. And for that his purpose he saw would not
prevail, with all his people departed from Rome. And so the Cardinals went to
their Conclaue; where after long contention, they elected Pius 3. who being
Pope, he presently conspired against the French, which occupied a great part of
Italy: But he proceeded not further, for having Poped but 27. days, in the
1503. Anno 1503.
he died.

Julius 2. Julius 2. a warriar.
a Genowey, nephew of Sistus 4. by his great and subtle wit, obtained great
dignties, and in the end, to be Pope. A man he was naturally inclined to
wars: which inclination, albeit he were Pope, yet mortified he not; but
holding rather absolute power (as the Popes feign to have) put the same in
execution. He had great wars with the Venetians, the king of France, the Duke
of Ferrara, the Bentiuolians and other Princes. This Julius, in the space of 7.
years, that he warred with his excommunications, and arms, he took many
things from Christian Princes. In which seven years, through the intolerable
tirany of the Pope, 200000. men slain by occasion of Julius 2.
there died by the sword above 200000 men. And yet nothing at all he grieved,
imitating therein, the cruel Nero, who having caused Rome to be fired,
rejoiced to see it burn, as says the Spanish song.

Mira Nero de Tarpeya,
A Roma como se ardia:
Gritos dan ninos y vieios,
Y el de nada se dolia.
Tarpeyan Nero did behold
Rome City how it burned:
Yield shrikes and cries did young and old,
His heart yet nothing turned.
This Julius was the cause of that so cruel and bloody battle of Rauenna,
between the Spaniards and Frenchmen: wherein both the conquerors and the
conquered remained loosers. He seeing himself unable to vanquish the French
king by arms, attempted another way, and so excommunicated him, and also with
him the king of Navarre, which took part with France, he gave their kingdoms
for a pray, to such as could get them. By virtue of this excommunication, Don
Fernando the king that wanne Granada, entered into Navarre, and in the 1512.
year, Anno 1512.
by force of arms took it. Guicciardine in his 11. book of his history,
Navarre taken.
speaking of this taking of Navarre, says these words: The king of Navarre
being unprepared and hopeles of power to make resistance, fled to Bierna on the
other side of the Piren mountains: The kingdom of Navarre being abandoned
(except certain forts, kept for the fled king) without any cost or difficulty,
and this, more through the reputation and neerenes of the English, then his
own force, came into the power of the king of Aragon, who unable with other
title to avouch his lawful possession, alleged the occupation thereof to be
rightfully for the seat Apostolic. The noble Acts of king D. Fernando, be
summed up in this Sonnet.

Iunte Aragon con Castilla,
Gane a Nauarray Granada,
Puse in Napoles mi silla,
Conquiste desde Sevilla
Otro mundo con miarmada.
Castile with Aragon I joined:
I wanne Navarre and took Granada:
In Naples my seat I placed.
Another world from off Seuilla
I conquered with my Armada.
In this self same year 1512. Anno 1512.
(as Friar Alonso Venero) in his Enchiridion of the times reports) died
Pascall Bishop of Burgos. In this Bishopric he ordained, Vigils prohibited in
Bu^gos.
that no vigils should be kept in Churches, for the dissolute behavior,
dauncings, and other things much offensive to God, which there passed, and often
times whordomes, and other grievous sins. Thus far Venero fol. 117. For the
same causes in all Spain were they also taken away, for Pilgrimages were
commonly turned into whoredoms. Doctor Illesoas upon the life of Eugenius 1.
says: that in the time of this Eugenius was celebrated the Council of
Cabilona, etc. In which it was commanded, that in Churches, hermitages, and
other houses of devotion (where it is accustomed to go on pilgrimage, and to
make watches) no dancing nor vauting should be used, etc. and alittle lower:
This is a thing that requires remedy; and I hold it for good: if the prelates
should command to shut by night, the houses of devotion; and that there should
not be in the^ the cry and small devotion, and the other inconveniences, which
we ordinariely see in such like places, etc. And upon the life of Benedict.
the eight says, the same Illescas: That it should not be amiss for the
prelates to command: that none remain by night in such like hermitages, for
many wicked things which are there committed should be excused, etc. This
Julius with his host, upon a time, issuing out of Rome, hurled the keys of
Saint Peter into the river Tyber, saying. Since the keys of Peter are now of no
force, et, the sword of Paul prevail: and so drew he the sword out of the
scaberd: For like a good captain, he carried the sword at his side. Upon this
so notable a deed, many Poetts made verses, of which I will recite four, that
declare the History.

Inde manustrictum vagina diripit ensem,
Exclamansque truci talia voce refert.
Hic gladius Pauli nos nunc defendet ab host,
Quando quidem clauis nil iuuat ista Petri.
From scaberd then his naked sword he drew.
Exclaming and, with cruel voice he said:
This sword of Paul shall make our foes to rue.
Since Peter's keys naught serve us for our aid.
What religion had this Pope, that so shamelesly mocked with Saint Peter, and
Saint Paul? When he was made Pope, he promised, and that with an oath, that
within 2 years, he would hold a Council. Of this oath makes mention, Friar
Bartholmew Carranca, speaking of the Lateran Council, that in the time of this
Julius was holden. But when the 2 years, and years, and years more passed,
and no hope of a Council was seen, the Pope being far of from any such matter
(for that the Councels are too bitter purges for the Popes: as before in the
Councils of Pisa, Constance and Basile we have seen) 9 Cardinals (whereof
Barnardino Carauaiall a Spaniard was one) together with the procurators of
Maximilian the Emperor, The Council of Pisa.
and of Jews 12 king of France, assembled at Millan and nominated Pisa for the
Council to be holden, which should begin the first day of September, in the
1511 year. Anno 1511.
The causes that moved them so to do, The Pope perjured.
were, that the Pope had broken the oath which he had made: since so many
years passed, yet made he no show of a Counsel: and therefore, to accuse the
Pope of enormious offenses, had they called a Council: Their purpose was, to
deprive him of his Popedom: where unto he had aspired through ambition and
bribes. But Julius understanding hereof commanded under a greiuous pain, that
no person, of what condition, or estate soever, should go to Pisa and that
nothing of that should be obeyed, The Council of Lateran.
which those of Pisa decreed, ordained, and nominated Rome for the celebration
of a Council, the year following; Anno 1512.
which was to begin the 9. of April, 1512. At this time lived in Padua,
Philipus Decius, an excellent lawer: who by writing, defended against the Pope,
the cause of these Cardinals. When the king of France perceived that the Pope
had joined with the Venecians to make war with him; Esaias 5.
he called a Council at Tours, Anno 1513.
and there propounded these 5 questions: whether it were lawful for the Pope
to move wars, and that causeless, against any Prince: whether such a Prince
defending his country, might set upon him that had invaded him, and depart
from his obedience? It was answered, that it is not lawful for the Pope to
move wars, etc. and that it is lawful for such a Prince, in defense of
himself, to do that a foresaid: and that for the kingdom of France, the law
pragmaticall ought to be observed. That no account was to be made of the Popes
censures and excommunications, if then he should pass them. The King
receiving this answer, sent it to the Pope, praying him either to be content
with a peace, or else to call a general Council, purposely to examine and
determine this business: but the Pope admitted, neither the one nor the other.
This wretched Julius, as some authors report, was reputed for a great Sodomite.
Queen Anne of France (say they) sent 2 youths to Cardinal Robertus Nanetensis
to be instructed: whom the Pope abused: the like report, another author makes
of an Almaine youth, and great Lord, with whom he committed the like
wickedness. These be things, which neither honest pen ought to write, nor
chaste ears to hear: yet is it needful to discover the shames of the Roman
Court; that Spain thereby be no longer deceived. And for this, pardon me
good Christian reader. Albeit that such a one was Julius; yet wanted he not
those, that did extol him for very Godly, wise, prudent, and a man of
Counsel. Woe unto you that call evil good, and good evil. When Julius had
Poped 10. years, in the 1513. year, he dyed. In whose time died also Dona
Isabella Queen, and in her place Dona Jane her daughter, which married with
Don Phillip of Austra, son of Maximilian the Emperor reigned. And so the low
countries were joined with Spain. Leo 10.


Leo 10. An Atheist.
a Florentine, was of his own nature, quiet and gentle: but leaving himself
to be ruled by unquiet and cruel men, he suffered many Insolences to be
committed. Much given he was to Idleness. pleasure taking, and carnal delights,
many bastards he had: whom he greatly enriched, making them Dukes, and mighty
Lords, and marrying them with great Ladies. At the age of 13 years, was this
Leo made Cardinal; what age was this to be a pillar of the Church? At this
Coronatio^, were made most great feasts which should be long to recount: Above
100000 ducats (they affirm) were cast among the people, as says D. Illescas
upon the life of Leo, etc. Leo 10. at one time created 13 Cardinals among who^
he would make Raphaell Vrbinas, a most excellent painter, that this way, he
might reco^pe^ce the great sum of money which he owed him for his picturs. See
here wherefore the hats do serve; and yet is this to be passed over, for they
are wontedly given for other abhominatio^s. Liberal he was in granting of
Indulge^ces, and much more in taking money for them, to enrich his children. In
the 1515. year, Leo granted a Iubile to Fra^ucis king of France: which Iubile
passed also, into many other provinces. The comissares Echacueruos deceivers
did preach, that whosoever would give the sum of money which was taxed should
draw one, what soul he would out of Purgatory. They said: that God (according
to the promise made to S. Peter, Mat^h. 16.
whatsoever thou looseston earth shall be loosed in heaven) would do all
whatsoever they would. But not a farthing (said they) must be wanting of that
which was taxed. They pardoned those that took this Iubile, for things done,
and to be done; which gain (as they said) displeased many Godly and learned,
and so they began to debate the question of the authority, and power of the
Pope. Which question, was the ruin of the Popedom. Martin Luther, Martin
Luther
among others, opposed himself to these Insolent Pardons, and preached against
them in Almaigne (as says Bartholomew Caranca a dominican Friar) whose words,
be these: In the time of Leo 1^. Martin Luther an arch heretic, arose up in
Germany: who first preached, and wrote against the Indulgences of the Pope,
afterward against the Primacy of the Roman Church, then against constraned
single life, and other rites, and customs of the ancient Church. Caranca our
adversary, does herein witness, what was the cause that moved Luther to speak
against the Church of Rome. Who lists to know this, let him read Sleidons
History. Eckius took part with the Pope: What the cause was that moved Luther
to speak against the Church of Rome.
and Luther and Eckius in the pulpits, preached, the one against the other.
When Leo 10. heard of these rufflings, he condemned Luther for an heretic,
which condemnation understood by Luther, he apealed to the first General
Counsel: wherein he did imitate the university of Paris, which a few months
before had appealed from the same Leo, to the Counsel. In Rome Leo caused
Luthers books to be burned, Lnther burns the Cannon Law.
which when Luther understood, he burned in Wittenberg the Cannon Law, which is
the decretals, and Popish decrees, saying as they have done unto me: So have I
also done unto them. Who will not wonder, and be astonished at so great a
courage, and daring boldness, that a poor begging Augustine Friar should dare
to do such a disgrace, and to give such a blow? and to whom think thou? to
the Pope. Was not the Pope he, whom in times past the potentates, Princes,
kings and Emperors, fell prostrate unto, and worshipped? How comes it then
to pass, that a mean man of no esteem, gave him such a blow, that he left
him for dead? Not Luther, but God it was, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
that chooses the low things to confound the most high. The stink of the
villainies and abominations of the Popes, and Clergy, was gone up to heaven:
now were the iniquities of the Amorites come to their height. And God cast
down the pride of the Pope a second Lucyfer. God gave us the grace, that
acknowledging such a benifit, we may be thankful, and in holiness and
righteousness serve him, all the days of our life. By this means, has God
brought us out of darkness into light, and out of thralldome, into liberty.
And Luther, not content here with, came to Worms or Wormacia where Charles the
Emperor held his first Diet, and presenting himself before the Emperor and so
many* Papists as were with him, he disputed, and maintained his cause: Charles
the Emperor kept his word with Luther.
and in the end departed (the Emperor, better keeping promise with him, then
it had formerly been kept, with John Hus, and Ierom of Prage in the Council of
Constance. One thing here I cannot leave to speak of: that Luther going to
worms; his friend advised him in the way: before they came at worms, to
beware of going thither: because they would do to him, as they had done to his
books: which they had burned. The magnanimity of Luther
Whereunto Luther with great courage answered, that albeit he knew there were
so many devils against him in Worms, as there were tyles upon the houses: yet
for all that, would he not let to appear there, and give account of his faith,
in so solemn, an assembly. And so he dyed. In the 1522. Anno 1522.
year. Leo 10 hearing that the Frenchmen, by the Imperialls were vanquished,
slain, taken, and cast out of Italy, and that through his assistance, Leo dyed
for joy.
died by his excessive joy, and laughter, his soul departed from him, but of
poison that they gave him, Poison.
as Panuinus supposes. An Atheist he was, and thought there was after this
life, neither heaven nor hell. And so he died without receiving the sacraments.
He could not (says Sanazaro) received them; because he had sold them. And so
almost no chief bishop (as notes Panuinus upon the life of Pius 4) received
them. The Atheism of Leo.
His Atheism plainly appeared by an answer which he made to Cardinal
Bembus; who had alleged unto him a passage of the Gospel: Whereunto in these
words, he dissolutly a^swered: what profit this fable of Christ has brought
to us, and our company: All the world knows. Leo by this answer, well showed
himself to be Antichrist. Obey him then Spain, and hold him for Chists vicar.
Paulus Iouius wrote the life of Leo 10. where among other things. he says
these words: Leo had also an evil report, because it apeared that he affected
unhonestly some of his chamberlaines (which were of the greatest nobles of all
Italic) and heartily and freely played with them. It is not Luther his enemy,
that says this against him: but his friend, an Italian, and Bishop Paulus
Iouius. Albeit that such a one was Leo, as the historians of his time do paint
him: yet so great is the flattery of D. Illescas, that upon his life 12. these
words of him he says: After that he came to the Bishopdome his care was
always to eat little, and of meats but meanly* hot, because they should not
provoke him to dishonesty. Hither to Illescas. In the time of this Leo, Charles
the Emprour reigned in Spain.

Adrian 6. Adrian 6.
a Hollander, was tutor to Don Charles the Emperonr, and by his means, came to
be bishop of Tortosa, Cardinal, and (jointly with Don Francisco Zimenes
Archbishop of Toledo) governor of Spain: and being resident in Spain, after
the death of Pope Leo, was in his absence elected* when he was Pope, he
promised to the princes by his letter to cause the court of Rome, which had
given occasion of commiting great wickedness, to be first of all reformed and
amended: to the end, that that which had given cause of the malady, should give
also the beginning of the medicine, and health: but all was but words. For
Adrian following the steps of his predecessor* the* Antichrist of Rome, gave
himself to persecute Luther* Ecolampadius and other godly ministers of the
word of God. He changed not his name, nor yet in customs and life was so
wicked, as the other Popes: and for not being so wicked, Poison.
many say, he was dispatched with poison, Anno 1523.
and in the 1523. year dyed. In whose time Don Charles the Emperor reigned in
Spain.

Clement 7. Clement 7.
(or as after some others) 8. or 9. for the cause we have spoken of in the life
of the other Clement 7. Florentine was nephew, or as others say, the son of
Pope Leo 10. Panuinus says: he was the son of Iulianus de medices, and of
another not certainly, or manifestly his lawful wife. D. Illescas upon the life
of this Clement 5. says: It is a thing much to be noted, that Clement having
all his life time, been most liberal, and a spender, and here with all affable,
and well spoken, exceeding discreet, and a great Negociator, when he came to be
Pope, he was not known, for he wholly changed his conditions, and became most
sparing and remiss. So great is the change which dignities and honors do
often make, etc. In the time of this Clement, was great war between the
Spaniards and French, which this Clement did much kindle to his own shame and
Infamy. And this by his inconstancy: for now was he a Spaniard, now a
Frenchman: and contrariwise, now a Frenchman and now a Spaniard. Three great
things in his time happened in Spain. The king of France prisoAnno 1525.
1. The taking of Frauncis K. of France, and so his nobility in Pauy: who was
carried into Spain, and there was prisoner. 2. the sacking of Rome, Rome
Sacked Anno 1527.
as we will declare in the year 1527. in which year was borne Don Phillip the
prince son of the Emperor Don Charles 3. The Coronation of Don Charles Anno
1530.
The coronation of Don Charles the Emperor, king of Spain, by the hand of
this Pope Clement in Bologna, and in the 1530. year. In the same year, the
German princes presented to the Emperor in the Diet, held at Augusta their
confession of the faith, The confession of Augusta for which they are called
protestants
which they called the confession of Augusta: and for that they made public
protestation at the presenting thereof, therefore ever since are they called
Protestants. Such was the sacking of Rome by the Spaniardes, Italians, and.
Germans, that since Rome was Rome, there was not another like it, The Spanish
proverb is verefied: Lo mal ganado elloy su dueno (se pierde) evil gotten
euilly spent. Rome had robbed them, He that of a thief does steal 100 days
pardon does not says
and many other nations of all that treasure: God sent them such thieves,
robbers, and Ruffiians, which neither pardoned men, nor women, small, nor
great, Priest, nor Friar, ecclesiastical, nor secular person. These thieves,
(if that be true which the Spanish Proverb speaks) Quien hurta al ladron
cien dias gana de perdon gained a hundred days pardon. Clement himself, that
Sathanicall father was taken prisoner in his own castle S. Angelo, and the
Spaniards made him rhyme a new Paternoster: which they sang together at the
Popes window, to give him music.

Padre nuestro en quanto Papa,
Soys Clemeynte, sin que os quadre:
Mas reniego yo del padre,
Que al hijo quita la capa, etc.
O father our as being Pope,
Clement thou art, though not a right:
In him for father have I no hope,
That his sons cloak does take by might, etc.
This cloak was the state of Milan, which the Pope pretended to take from the
Emperor. Among others that wrote this History of the sacking of Rome, was a
Spaniard, which at that time lived: the book is entitled ^Dialogo; wherein
the things are particularly handled, that in the 1527. year happened in Rome.
In it will very well appear what a one was this Pope Clement, and how he, and
his Court of Rome, were justly handled of our Spaniardes. Paulus Iouius does
also recount it. John Tilius says: that Pope Clement was ransomed for 40000
florences. In the time of this Pope, and in a monastery of Auserra in France,
a notable history happened, of that which in the 1526. year was done with the
vomited Sacrament. The which when we shall treat of the mass, for that shall be
his proper place (if God please) we will declare. Most great vices had this
Clement, The virtues of the Pope.
a witch he was, a manslayar, a brotheller, a Simonist. a Sodomit, perjured, a
rauisher of young maids, a nigroma^cer, and a sacriliger. Adorned with these
precious stones, he exercised his papal office: which is never to preach the
Gospel, but to persecute them that do preach it, and cast them out of the
Church: The Pope is Diotrephes. 3. John 9.
Another Diotrephes (as were also the other Popes) was this Clement, of whom S.
John in his last Epistle says: that he loved to hold the chiefest rooms, etc.
And a little lower, speaking of the same Diotrephes he says: He not only not
received the brethren: but also forbad those that would receive them, and cast
them out of the Church. Note the place: and that the Pope at this day does
fully the same. Into France went this Clement, and lived in Marsille with
Frauncis K. of France, with who^ he made great friendship: for confirmation
whereof, he gave in marriage his niece, Catalina de medices, to Hennry 2. some
of Frauncis. This is she, whom they call Queen mother, so spoken of in
Histories, who died in the year 1588. Anno 1534.
After the pope returned from France, but a short time he lived, In September
and in the 1534. year he died of poison, which was put in the smoke of a
torch: wherewith he and son^e Cardinals his familars, Poison
were poisoned. Don Charles at this time reigned in Spain*

When Paul 3. Paul 3. accursed.
a Roman was Pope, he endeavored by all ways possible to advance his bastards,
of whom he had store: and to beat down and oppress Luther. For reformation of
the Church, (as he said) he first appointed Mantua, to celebrate there in a
general Council: but al was but words. He afterward appointed Vincencia, as
little was ought done. The 3. time, he appointed Trent, al was but wind. The 4.
time, he again nominated Trent, where it began the 13. day of Dceember, 1545.
and ended in the year 1563. in the time of Pius 4. So that it 18 year
continued; and for the hate as we have said, which the Popes bear to the
Council, nothing ever had been done; had it not been for the instant v^ging of
the Emperor, and his instigatio^ of Pope Paul thereunto. To recount his
enormious and horrible vices, his murders, robberies; witcheries, treasones,
tirannies, incests, and wicked whoredoms, we should never make an end. Some
notable things will I declare, notwithstanding that thou Spain may open
thine eyes, and hasten to know him, whom thou worshipest as God in the earth:
as the successor of S. Peter; as the vicar of Christ. Paul 3. was a great
Astrologer, southsayer, Inchanter, and nigromancer, and such as were of that
art, he loved and advanced. A great friend he was of Dionisus seruita, whom he
made Cardinal: of Gauricus Lusitanus of Cecius and Marcellus notable
nigromancers, of these he sought to know the fortune of his bastards: which by
their horoscopicall aspects, and houses of the stars, and planets, they gave
him to understand. To have the hat, as he had it, he gave his own sister*
Iulia Farnesia to the Spanish Pope Alexander 6. His own mother, and sister he
poisoned: Another sister he also poisoned, Poison.
with whom he had an evil report: the cause why he poisoned her, was for that
she loved not him, as she loved others, etc. Whiles he was Legate in Ancono
with promise of marriage, he deceived a young gentlewoman: and so the miad not
thinking, it was the Legate, but one of his gentlemen, was deceived. Of this
coniunctio^ sprang that good piece Pero Luis prince of Sodom, captain
General of the Roman Church, and Duke of Parma, and of Plazencia. The wicked
abomination he committed against Colmus Cherius Bishop of Fana all the world
knows. This Pero luys, his own gentlemen (unable longer to endure his
tyrannies, and wicked abominations) in the 1548. year murdered. He was the
eye of the Father, upon whom he looked, and looked again: And when the Pope
heard any of his abominations, ^e showed no great sorrow: but smiling as it
were said that his son had not learned those vices of him. This
notwithstanding, there are some Parasites of the Pope, that against their own
conscience, affirm Panl 3. to have been married. And so D. Illescas upon the
life of this Paul 3. 17 says: Paul 3. was married, and after he had put away
his wife, of whom he had Poro luys, he was made Priest and obtained the hat,
etc. 23. he says: the unthought of death of Pero luis, Poison
lawful son of this Pope etc. But Illescas tells not who was the mother of
Peroluys, nor how long time he was married; nor where he was married; nor yet
where he lived married. This Paul poisoned Fulgosius and Contarenus Cardinals,
and Johannes Baptista Vergerius Bishop of Pole, because they tasted how sweet
and good was Christ, and how bitter and evil was Antichrist. Paulus Vergerius
Bishop of Iustinopole, brother of the abouesaid John escaped, and fled into
Germany, and from thence with his writings made war against him. In his time,
with fire and blood, etc. Suffered the Church great persecution. In the 1546.
year Alexander Farnesius Cardinal: and Octauius his brother, Duke of Parma,
sons of the cursed Poro luys, and nephews of the Pope, going to make war in
Almaigne, bruted it a broad; they there purposed to shed so much blood of the
Lutherans, that the horses might swim therein. This Paul enjoyed the rent of
above 40000. 40000 Curtesanes in Rome
whores, or as they call the^, Curtesanes, which were in Rome. The rent (as
before we have said) is a Iulio, or Spanish royal every week. Multiply the
same, and thou shall see, if the Pope may make a mighty birthright of his
whorish rents. This Paul 3. did excommuncate and an anathemise Henry. Henry 8
made no reconing of the Pope
8. king of England, and gave his kingdom for a pray to them that could take
it. Al which this Magnanimious king naught esteemed, but so valliantly defended
his kingdom, that they, whom the Pope had incited against him, themselves
sought peace with him. In the biginning of his Popedom, and the 1534. year,
happened one notable villainy, done by the Franciscan Friars in Orleans. The tale
is this: that in that year, Anotable villainy, done by the Franciscan friars at
orleans
died the wife of the Corregidor, or mayor of Orlea^s who commanded that she
should simply, without any pomp at al be buried. With her father, and
grandfather did they bury her in S. Frauncis Church of Orleans. The Friars (the
person being qualified and rich) supposed they should have a rich reward; and
commanded many masses to be said etc. but they were deceived. For they had but
only six crowns, which the widdower Corregidor sent the^: whereat the Friars
were highly offended, and for revenge, with deui^lish minds, they suborned one
of their nouices, The Franciscans deceive the people with false apparitio^s.
whom they placed above in the feeling of the Temple, that he might make a
great noise from thence, at the time when they said their mattens: which the
Nouice persormed, and said he was a soul (as they call it) sinful and damned.
By some that knew the mystery of Iniquity, was this soul coniured, and being
demanded of the co^iurers who^ he was? he answered, that he was the soul of
the wife of the Crrregidor, which a little before was deceased, and that she
was for ever condemned; being demanded whereof? answered: for Lutheranisme.
When the Friars hard this, they made great exclamations; heald their Church for
excommunicate, drue thence the sacrament, and would not there say mass but went
within the monastary. The fame hereof ran throughout all the city. when the
Corregidon understood his villainy, he called the Friars before the Chauncellor
of Paris: where the cause being examined before the Chauncellor Antonias
praetentis the villainy was proved: and so Colimanus, and Stephen of Arras both
preachers, and chief authors of this tragedy, were by public sentence
condemned. But to what? To shame the villainies deserving a 1000. deaths, for
mocking at God and his religro^, and defaming of men. So gentle was the
punishment, because they seemed not to faourthe Lutherans. In the time of this
Paul 3. Jesuits.
arose up from the depth and botto^e of hell, the new sect, called of the
fellowship of Jesus, or Jesuits: Whom with greater reason may we call
Iebusites, or Iebuseans. Their first author, inuentor, and founder was Inigo
Layola: whom the more to authorize his name, they called: father Ignacius. This
Inigo was a Guipuscuan borne, who being a simple and ignorant man, applied
himself to the the wars, and so in the year, las Comunidades as they call
it in Spain (which was about eyeare 1520. or 1521.) he was a soldier in the
castle of Pamphona: which Castle was then beleagred by the king of Navarre, and
the Frenchmen. And upon a day as the enemies shot at the Castle, one of the
bullets stroke a stone of the Castle, and brake it, some of the pieces of the
stones, stroke into the feet of this soldier Inigo; so that unable to stand,
he fell to the earth Inigo finding himself unfit for the war, changed his
purpose, and so of a soldier, became a holy hypocrite (yet recovered he his
feet) and so gave himself to foolish devotion and superstition, which men of
themselves, without the word of God have invented: and so deceive all those,
whose names are not written in the book of life. Inigo then having been a
soldier, and anignorant man, gave himself to study; and when he understood
somewhat of the Grammar, to prosecute his study, he came to Alcala de Henares,
where, to gain the greater credit, and, reputation of a holy man, he went
barefooted: which manner ofliuing, when the students of Alcala, laughed and
Iested at Inigo, confounded and ashamed, that they naught esteemed his course
of life: leaving Alcala, he went to Salamanca: where the Students much more
mocked him then before: For which cause. Inigo leaving Salamanca, went to
Paris, where he was made master, and gained the opinion of an holy man: Anno
1537. began the Iebusites or Jesuits.
with whom in the 1537. year there joined ten companions, and so went they
into Italy. Whiles Panle 3. Poped, the Jesuits began to be known in Italy:
but not without great gainesaying and contradiction. They were permitted in the
end, to hear confessions: and by this means they obtained great reputation of
holy, chiefly among Ignorant people. These ten companions, in the 1538. year
were all together in Rome: whereof they obtained of Pope Paul 3. confirmation
of their sect, and were received under the protection of the Roman seat: but
this holy viua vocis oraculo, remitting them, in as much as touched the dispatch
of the perpetuity of their sect, to Cardinal Guidiccion Luques: And being
aided by him, they were approved and confirmed by Letters and Bulls of the
first of October, in the 1540. year, given at Tiuoli, under the name and title
of the fellowship of Jesus, with license and power to receive into their
company (which then was only ten) to the number of of sixttie persons. In the
1543. year of the said Paul 3. they obtained license, to receive into their
company so many as they would: which Paul in the 1545. year, did grant them
all the priuilledges, faculties, and graces, which at this present they enjoy.
Shortly after the master Petrus Fabrus, and Antonius de Araoz, and then others
also came to Castile. When Paul 3. was dead. Pope Julius 3. almost with the
confirmation of this sect, in the 1550. year began his Popedom. By the
conversation which Don Francisca de Boria Duke of Gandia, and Marquess of
Lombay had with the said Araoz, he bare great love and liking to this sect;
wherein he was much more confirmed by the persuasions of his wife Dona Leonora
de Castro a Portugale, much devoted to the Jesuits: And so went the Duke to
Rome, in the company of the said Araoz, who was the first provincial in
Castile. The Duke of Gandia a Jesuit.
When they both two returned into Spain; the Duke was made a Jesuit in the
College of Onate: where he took all the orders. In Rome built Inigo Layola,
the Almaigne College, to instruct the youth of that nation against the
Doctrine which they call Lutheran: and saw before he died 16 Prouincials of his
own Institution and more then 70. Colleges. he died in Rome in the 1556.
year, and in the 61 year of his age,

The Jesuits were commonly, and yet in Italy and Spain, are called Theatinos,
but so be they not. For the Theatinians had another beginning, and manner of
living, certain gentlemen, and other people they were, which moved with
devotion, were given to prayers, and singing other such exercises: and were
called at the beginning, the fellowship of Godly love. Of this company, was
made Iuan Pedro Carrasa a Neapolitan, Bishop of Chiety: who holden (a person
famous as he was) for the principal and head of these religious persons, they
began to be called Chietinos and after corrupting the word, for Chietinos were
they called Theatinos. This passed in the time of Clement 7. These Chietinians
or Theatinians by reason of the sacking of Rome, fled from Rome to Astia: where
they found certain venecian galleys, and in them passed to Venice. And this
was 11. years before Inigo layola and his 10 companions came to Venice, to go
to the holi-land. The Jesuits stopped in this voyage, by the wars between the
Turk and Venecias, went from Venice to Rome. The Romans supposed they were the
Chietinians or Thiatinia^s, which returned to Rome, and so through ignorance
they confounded these two sects, which are far diferent the principal of the
Thiatinians Iuan Pedro Carraf^ was afterward Pope and called Paul 4. Of the
Thiatinians, but few Colleges or monastaries are found (to wit) in Venice,
Rome, Naples; and Pauia. The Jesuits also, in Arogon of Inigo their founder
are called Iniguistes: and in Portugal, Apostles: but in all places else, they
are called Jesuits: and so in the bulls and process of the Pope are they
called. Greatly in short time have these Jesuits multiplied. For the locusts
be they, whereof speaks S. John in the 9. chap. of his Revelation, which
issued out of the bottomless pit, whose K. which is the Angel of the deep,
in Hebrewe is called Abaddon, and in Greek, Apolyon: both the one and the
other word, as much to say as destroyer. And who but the Pope can be this
Abaddon, which Popeth, and all destroys? And who be his locusts but the
Jesuits, which wheresoever they come do destroy and consume all things? They
Insinuate themselves into the houses, castles, and palaces of princes, kings,
and monarchs, and stay not till they know the very inward secret, and intents
of the heart: with fire and blod do they incite them to war upon those which
speak not, nor think as they do. And if force and violence suffice not, then
by crafty treasons and poysonings do they practice to kill them. And so no
Lord, prince, king, nor monarche, in his own house is secure, if he speak, and
think not as they do: Sufficient exampls hereof we have had within these 20 or
30 years let the Histories be read. Jesuits attempt to kill the Queen of
England.
Lady Elisabeth the most illustrious Queen of England (well knowing the^ for
such, as she, that of the Jesuits great treasons, has so great experience,
who^ so, and so often, they have practiced to murder; and* God the father of
mercies has as often again delivered her, for the comfort of his Church,
advanceme^t of the kingdom of his Christ, and the confusion and contempt of
Antichrist, that Abaddon: has banished them from her kingdom; commanding upon
pain of life, that they enter not into it. These Jesuits have also practiced
to murder Henry 4. Jesuits attempt to kill the French king.
king of France. And so one of this company called John Castle did wound him;
but by the providence of God, he missed his blow, and willing to strike him in
the throat, hit his upper lip, and brake one of his teeth. The murderer was
caught, and as a traitor adjudged to death, and so Justice was executed, on
Thursday the 29 of Dece^ber, in the 1594. year: The house where the said
Jesuit was borne, was pulled down, and in it place, a Piramides set; whereupon
the cause why the house was pulled down, and the pyramides erected, are written
in marble with letters of gold: which in latin say thus.

Audi viator, sieve sis extraneu^,
Sieve incola vrbis, cui Paris nomen dedit:
Hic alta quae sto Piramis, domus fui,
Castella, sed quam diruendam funditus:
Frequens senatus Crimen vltus Censuit.
Huc me redegit tandem herilis filius,
Malis magistris vsus, et schola impia,
Sotericum, eheu, nomen vsurpantibus.
Which in English is this: The cause why the Jesuits banished France.
Listen O thou traveler, whether thou be stranger, or inhabitant of the
City, which Paris named. In this place where I stand the high Piramides, was
the house of Castle: which the common consent of the senate, for punishment of
the fault, appointed to be plucked down. To this has the son of my master,
brought me, because he had ill masters, and was trained up in a wicked schole,
which (o grief) usurp the name of the Savior Jesus. There was also written.

D. O. M. which is: Deo Optimo Maximo. Pro salute Henrici* 4. clementissimi, ac
fortissime Regis, quem nefandus Parricida perniciosissimae factionis haeresi
pestiferra imbutus, quae nuper abhominandis sceleribus pietatis nomen obtendit,
vnctos Domini, viuasque maiestatis ipsius Imagines occidere populariter docuit,
dum confodere tentat, caelesti numine scelestammanum inhibente, cultro in
labrum superius delato, and dentiu^ occursu faeliciter retuso violare ausus
est. Which in English is thus. For the health of Henry 4. most merciful and
potent king, whom whiles the wicked homicide (infected with the pestiferous
heresy of the most pernicious sect, which with abominable wickedness here
lately, pretended the name of piety, taught the people to murder the
anointed of the Lord, and dared to violate the sacred Images of his majesty
attempted to stabbe. But the dyuine majesty letting the cursed hand, caused
the knife to wound the upper lip, and so by the teeth to be most happily
hindered. Also: Pulso praeterea tota Gallia hominum genere nouae ac maleficae
snperstitionis, qui rempublicam turbant, quorum instinctu piacularis adolescens
dirum facinus instituerat. As much to say as: Banished from all France that
kind of men, which with their new and pestilent supersticion disturb the weal
public: by whose instinct and persuasion that miserable young man committed
so great abomination. It was also by the same Parliament of Paris (which is
the Chau^cery royal of France) commanded; that the Priests and students of the
College of Claremont, and all the rest of the same fellowship, as corrupters
of youth, perturbers of the public quiet, enemies of the king, and
commonwealth, should within three days after the publication of the present
sentence, depart from Paris, and from the other Cities and people; where they
have their Colleges; and avoid the whole Realm, within 15 days after: upon
pain, wheresoever they were found (the said time expired) to be punished as
offenders, culpable of high treason: their goods as well moveable as immovable
to them any ways belonging, to be employed in Godly works: and the
distribution thereof, to be made according to the oder which the Parliament
shall prescribe. Moreover it was commanded to all the kings subjects, that
none of them send their students to any College of the said company, which
were out of the kingdom, to be in them instructed, upon the same pain Laesae
Maiestratis. All that which I have said be the self words of the Sentence.
Thus then were the Jesuits, for their treasons and villainies out of all France
banished. But they, as unquiet spirits, and friends to blodshed, have not
ceased to effect their business, And so have printed a book, wherein wickedly
they speak against the king, and the Parliament, that gave such Sentence. They
justify, sanctify, and Canonize the foresaid traitor John Castle, incite the
people, and every one of them, either by force or treason to kill their Princes
and Lords, if in and by all things they agree not with that which the Jesuits
teach. This their shameless boldness, caused the most prudent Parliament in
the 1598. year, eftsoons to confirm the Sentence which it had formerly given
against the said Jesuits. Don Sebastian king of Portugale, for listening to
these Jesuits, and being governed by them, destroyed himself and his
kingdom. They persuaded his going into Barbary, where he valiantly fighting,
with the whole Niobilitie of Portugale, was destroyed, These Jesuits are the
cause of the vprores in the kingdom of Swethland. They of the kingdom being
protestants, would not that the king (at his return from Polonia) should place
Jesuits about him. The king, who was governed by the Jesuits, would place
them. So that of necessity it came to blows. Then let other princes and
Lords beware of strange directions, and in no wise suffer the Jesuits in
their lands: because they naught serve for, but spies, and disturbers of the
peace public, setting Princes against Princes. And that which worse is, all
this which they do, they sanctify with the title, pretext and color of
religion. Much puffed up they are with the title which they have taken of the
fellowship of Jesus: as though the rest of the Priests and Friars, and all
other Christians were of the fellowship of the devil. Many of their own
Papists, do now begin to smell and understand. And so the Franciscans,
Dominicans, and others eat no good crommes (as they say) with them. I will here
conclude this matter of the Jesuits, with a terrible lie: which to advance
the kingdom of their king Abaddon (that is to say, destroyer) they have forged.

All the world knows, The City Geneua in the la^d of Sauoy.
that in the land of Sauoy, is a City called Geneua. This City in these last
times, has God perticularly blessed with the true knowledge of his holy word.
With these weapons has this City warred against the Ignorance, supersticion
and Idolatry of the Popedom. And that to the great aduaunceme^t of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, and confusion of Antichrist. The Antichristians for
this cause, and chiefly the Jesuits bear secret hatred toward the city, and
have practiced the total ruin and destruction thereof. And seeing they could
not by violence destroy it (because God did help and defend it) with notable
lies have they often practiced to defame it. And so invented they that, which
their father the devil (who is the father of lies) could not more invent. A
qualified lie of the Jesuits.
They wrote one to another with great reioycinges, that Geneua was reduced (as
they call it) to the lap of the Church. They said, that Theodor de Beza (the
chief minister of Geneua) who with his learned sermons, and writings in that
city, has advanced the kingdom of Christ for forty years space, and more,
being ready to die, had repented and turned to the Church Catholic: and
that being in this holy purpose, he sent to request the Lords of Geneua, and
the ministers to come visit him: which had some what to impart unto them: they
came (say they) and that Beza exhorted them to be come Catholics. And that
with such vehemency he spoke unto them, that he converted them: and that he
also reduced al* Geneua to the catholic Roman faith. They proceed with their
lie: The Lantgraue of Hessen (said they) hearing this news; sent some of his
Gentlemen to Geneua, to understand what had passed; who returning from Geneua,
said, that Geneua was reduced to the catholic Roman Religion. They said also;
that their Jesuits had gone to dispute with the ministers of the elector of
Brandenberg: and that they had shamed and confounded them. To these most
notable lies, answered the most learned Beza: the other ministers of Geneua did
briefly also answer, but very lively, in their proper coullours and shadows
depainted the Jesuits. To which answer I refer me. John 8. 44.
The devil, (as our redeemer painteth him out) has been a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth: for there is no truth in him. When the
devil speaks lies, he speaks of himself: For he is a liar, and the father
of lies. The sons of such a father, cannot be but murderers, and liars:
Perque de mal Cueruo (conform al Commum refran) mal hueuo. For of an evil
crow, (after our Spanish Proverb) an evil egg. Such (except by miracle)
cannot leave their nature. When the Blackmore shall change his skin and the
Leopard his spots, Ier. 13. 23.
then these sons of the devil, taught to work wickedness, to murder, and
lie, may do good, and speak the truth. The gain which these wretches have
gotten by their lie, is that very many which before well conceited them, seeing
their lies so palpable, and known, that God (to advance his holy catholic
faith has no need of lies, now naught account of them. Amongst wise people,
and such as fear God, by little and little, will they loose their credit; and
so return to the bottomless pit from whence they came. For God abhors all
those that work iniquity, Psalm 5. 6. 7.
and those that speak lies will he destroy. The bloody and deceitful man (as
are the Jesuits, murderers and liars) will the Lord abhor. Return we now to
Paul the third, who approved, sanctified, advanced, and extolled such monsters
in nature. Paul 3. having Poped 15 years in the 1549. Anno 1549.
year dyed. In whose time Don Charles the Emperor reigned in Spain.

Julius 3. Julius 3. a blasphemer.
an Aretinian, after great discord had among the Cardinals, was chosen; who
(for that by the ancient custom he might give his hat where his listed) gave
it to a youth called Innocent, whom he had favored being Legate in Bologna;
and so made him Cardinal, The Pope gives the bar to whom he list.
and received him to his ancient office, This pleased not the Cardinals. And
albeit one of them spoke freely unto the Pope, saying: what saw your holiness
in this young man, for which he ought to be placed in so great dignity? The
Pope answered: what saw ye in me, that ye elected me chief Bishop? So that
(seeing it is the play of fortune, which aduaunceth whom she pleases) as your
advanced me without desert of mine, The Pope says that fortune is it that
makes the Pope.
we advance this young man, and make him Cardinal: and so he was. This
Innocent the Romans called Ganimedes: and the Pope they called Jupiter: The
Fable of Jupiter and his Ganimedes is filthy: and therefore will I pass it
over. When the same Julius was merry, he said of his Innocent, that he was very
la^ciuious, etc. O what a vicar of Jesus Christ? o what a holy father? D.
Illescas (albeit the Popes parasite) utters these wodes, Julius 3. gave his
hat with the tittle of Cardinal de monte to a youngling of 15 or 16 years,
whom he held with, him and most^ strangely affected him. He shortly made him
rich: and Caesar help him with sufficient pensions, and all this to gain the
favor of the chief Bishop, that the Council should eftsoons return, and be
holden in Trent: hitherto Illescas upon the life of Julius 3. Julius was a
great blasphemer, very filthy in his words, and much more filthy in his
deeds: the same blasphemies he used, that the desperate soldiers and
horsekeepers, are accustomed to use: which, for that it is so much against the
majesty of that good God, that with so great patience suffers the blasphemy
of him who boasts to be his vicar, and calls himself most holy father, (A
sathanicall father I call him) I omit to write them. Swines flesh, and peacoks
he greatly loved (which flesh is evil for the gout) and therefore his
Physicians forbad them to be set on the table: Pope Julius 3. his blasphemy for
swines flesh
but notwithstanding, he would have them. And when upon a time they failed to
set them on the table, the Pope missing them, demanded where the porke was
become? And when the steward answered, that the Physicians had commanded not to
set it on the table: he cursed with his cursed mouth, dispiting God, with the
same words, which ruffians and villains in Italy blaspheme, saying, that they
should bring him the porke. Another time as he was eating, they brought unto
him a peacocke, which was untouched: and the Pope commanded they should reserve
it for supper. And when he saw not at supper that cold peacoke, albeit he had
hot peacokes, he was terribly enraged, and blasphemed, as he was wont. A
certain Cardinal which supped then with him, said: Let not your Holiness be
so angry for a thing of so small importance: whom Julius answered. If God would
be so angry for an apple, Terrible blasmy for a peacocke.
that he cast our first parents out of Paridice: why shall it not be lawful for
me, that am his vicar, to be angry for a peacocke, seeing a peacocke, is a
thing of greater importance then an apple? If this be not to profane the
scripture, what shall be? So wicked was John of the house of Florence Archbishop
of Beneuent, Deane of the Chamber Apostolic, and this Julius his Nuncio in
Venice, that he compiled a book in praise of the wicked sin: which book was
printed at Venice, in the house of Troyano Nauo. Behold, if the abominations
of the Ammorits be come to the height. Awake Lord, remember, and judge thine
own cause: behold for thy Churches sake, that swine do destroy her: Qual Abad
(Aizen) tal Monazillo such Abbot (say they) such nouice. An abominable
Sodomite was Pope Julius, an abominable Sodomite was his Nuncie; which sat to
Judge the cause of Christians. Open thine eyes, O Spain. Upon the money made
by Julius, he put this circumscription.

Gens quae non seruierit tibi, peribit.
The people that will not serve thee shall perish.
Wherein Julius 3. appears to be another Nabuchadnezzer K. of Babylon, Anno
1555.
of whom these words are spoken. Ier. 27. 8. In the 1555. year he died. In
whose time the Emperor Don Charles reigned in Spain.

Marcellus 2. a Tuscan changed not his name; who being meanly learned in
humanity, Marcellus 2.
was made master of Grammar and afterward Paul 3. made him tutor of Alexander
his grandchild, whom he had made Cardinal, being a youth of 12 years old. A
youth of 12 years old Cardinal.
What a pillar of the Church was this? Thus by little and little came Marcellus
to be Cardinal, and afterward to be Pope: He was one of the three Legates, The
Popp permits not any to speak his mind freely in the Council.
whom Paul 3. sent to the Counsel of Trent. This man (as he whom the Pope most
trusted) the Pope commanded, that nothing in the Council shoud be suffered to
be spoken, which might any way prejudice the Majesty of the seat Appostolique.
and that all those which any such thing attempted, should be expulsed the
Council: and when Iacobus Nachiantes Bishop of Clodia Fossa, said: that he
could not approve the decree which said: That traditions ought to be received
and kept with the same Godly affection and reverence as the Gospel which was
written. The blasphemy of the Trident Council.
This Marcellus was the cause, that the said Bishop was expulsed the Council:
and when Gulihelmus venetus a Dominican Friar, said in the Counsel; that the
Council of Constance was above the Pope. This Marcellus sent for him, and most
sharply reproved him, and when the Friar answered, that experience showed the
Council to have been above the Pope, since it desposed him: Marcellus answered,
it is not so. For that the Pope willingly deprived himself: and said moreover;
that this he could prove by a bull of lead: and so commanded him to depart the
Council. Petrus Paulus vergerius, Bishop of lustinople, was at this time come
to the Council some held this man suspected in doctrine. For that he had been
often the Popes Legate in Almaine. The other two Cardinals Legates of the Pope:
Poole, and monte, and the Cardinal of Trent himself, and Pachecus would have
permitted the fore named Vergerius, to have entered the counsel: and this lest
in should be said the Council was not free, if they chased away Vergerius, a
man well known in Germany. But Marcellus the Popes third Legate, never stayed
until he saw him forth of the Council. Many Bishopes hearing that the
purpose was to expulse Vergerius. The Council agreed, to write to the Pope
that in no wise he should suffer such a thing to be done: because many would
say the Council was not free, seeing that the Bishops were expulsed the same.
Ier^nimus Vida Bishop of Cremona, had in the name of the other Bishops, indicted
the letter to the Pope. Which known to Marcellus, with most vehement words he
warned Vida, in no wise to send the letter to the Pope. For that it should be a
thing evil in example, that the Bishops assembled in the Council should write
such letters to the high Bishop, as though they would seem to prescribe him a
law: which would be so great a mischief, that they should be holden for
suspected. Vida vanquished with this saying so tempered with the other Bishops,
that the letter was not sent. When Vergerius was to depart the Council he
went to speak with Marcellus, and among other things that he said unto him,
he demanded, for what cause he did cast him from the Council, and what
Articles he could object, why he would exclude him from the company of the
other Bishops? To this answered Marcellus, because I have heard, thou have said
the Legends of Saint George, and Saint Christopher, were not true. Vergerius
answered: so it is, I said so; and so I say still. For I rely upon the
authority of Pope Paul 3. The Legends of S. Christopher end Saint George false
after Paul 3.
who having commanded, that both the one, and the other Legends should be
spunged out of the Roman Breuiarie. In the preface of the said Breuiarie he had
commanded (says he) the Legends, which were not true to be taken away;
Marcellus thus caught, answered: that they ought not to be holden for good men,
that seem in the least thing, to consent with the Lutheranes, and so said he
unto him: depart then from our Council. This have I said, that it may appear,
what hope is to be had of the Councelles, where the Pope and his Legates
govern. If there be any that will speak with good zeal of Gods glory; his
mouth they will stop: and if he will not yet be silent, cast him out of the
Council. Behold how free is that Council, It is no Council except it (...)
free.
where each one is not suffered to speak that is meet? Such a one was
Marcellus, before he was Pope: and such, and worse being Pope would he have
been, had not God taken him from the world, when he had Poped but twenty three
days, and some say that he dyed of Poison.

Paul 4. Poison.
a Neapolitane, before called Johannes Petrus Carafa Cardinal Chietino or
Theatino in the 1555. Paul 4. an enym^e to the Spaards.
year with full consent of the Cardinals, who desired to please Henry the
French king, Anno 1555.
was chosen Pope. He being in Venice, before he was Pope, with his hypocrisy
and feigned holiness did Institute, or reform the new order of the fellowship
of divine love, which of him (that was Bishop of Chiety) was called Chietinos
or Theatinos, as we have said upon Paul 3. He forsook this order, by him
instituted or reformed: and being ready to depart Venice, his religious consort
demanded whither he went. Whether I go, answered he, can ye not come: giving
them to understand, that he went to Rome, to be Pope, if he might. He gave it
out before he was Pope, that he naught else desired, but reformation of the
Church: and so of this argument wrote a book, which he dedicated to Paul the
third. But when he was Pope, he for nothing less cared. Who lists to read
this book, The vices (...) the Roman Church.
shall see, that almost he confirms those Articles, whereof we accuse the
Papists. To wit, that so ruyned is the Church among them, that it is not now
the Chuch of Christ, but of the devils. The Popes (says he) having itching
ears, have heaped up Masters, which entertain them in their lusts and
concupiscence. That through the Cardinals, and Bishops, the name of Christ is
blasphemed among the Gentiles. That the power of the keys, serves only to
^ake together money. That wicked men are ordained. That nothing but Symony is
seen in the Church: That the Prelates be very ambitious, and covetous: That
in monasteries, are committed enormious offenses: That Rome is full of whores.
These things and other such, does this book conteyne: of wicked customs and
life, it only speaks: but not once entreats of the false doctrine,
Idolatry, and superstition, which is taught in Rome: nor yet of the tyranny of
fire and blood, wherewith such are handled, as indeauor to serve God in spirit
and truth does it speak. But when he was Pope, how did he amend it? As did
Benedict 13. Pius 2. Pius 4. his predecessors and others (who before they were
Popes, much spoke of the duty of the Pope; but being Popes, did the like, or
worse then the rest) even so did he. For the cause of Religion, certain
Augustine Friars, many Bishops, and a great number of the faithful, he
imprisoned, tormented, and did them in the end, what evil he could: Not for
that they were adulterers, nor Incestuous persons, Simonists, nor blasphemers:
was all this: but for the Christian religion, which they professed. Reformation
then cast aside: he was occupied in the wars, against Don Phillip our king,
and the Spanish blood. Deny him then (O Spain) for father, who from the son
takes the cloak. The which this Paul from the king Don Phillip, and Clement
7. from Don Charles the Emperor indeauoured to take; as in the life of Clement
7. we have before declared. This Paul being a Neapolytan, and so vassal to the
king, was to him a traitor, and teacher: taking part with Frauncis his kings
enemy. His great servant Panuinus says: that aided by the French and Swizzars,
he raised great wars against king Phillip: and renewed the old hatred. For
the Spanish name, had he long before detested, that (as says Panuinus) for
public and particular Injuries, and so the Neapolitanes he well hoped, would
have risen against their king. When he was Cardinal, he persuaded Paul 3. to
war against the Imperials in the kingdom of Naples: promising him his
service, and the aid of many Neapolitans: of whom he had many friends (said he)
within that kingdom: But Paul 3. was more wise, and refused his Council. Then
Duke Dalua understanding that this Pope Paul 4. conspired against the king to
take Naples: with a great camp, came upon Rome and sent a letter to the Pope,
wherein he showed all, that since he was Pope, he had practiced against the
king, etc. and vehemently exhorted him to peace, warning him, that if he said
not, and that quickly, what he would do touching war, or peace, that he
should be assured, the war was proclaimed: To the College of Cardinals, he
wrote also to the same purpose: and after fifteen days, when the Duke
perceived that the Pope prolonged the time, he entered upon the Church lands and
very many of them took, which he kept (said he) for the Church, and the
succeeding Pope. All this notwithstanding would not the Pope yield to peace;
until he heard news of the great victory, Anno 1557.
which the king in the year 1557. hadhad against the French at the taking of
Saint Quintanes: The taking of S. Quintanes.
wherein all the nobility almost of France, The death of Don Charles the
Emperor, and of Mary Queen of England.
and Saint Quintanes also were taken. In the 1558. year, and the month of
September, died in Spain Don Charles the Emperor. And the 17 of November the
same year, dyed Mary Queen of England and Cardinal Poole, and in her place
reigns Lady Elizabeth by whose means, the great persecutions of fire and
blood, prisonment and banishment, Anno 1558.
which the Church, in the time of Queen Mary had suffered in England,
Elizabeth Queen of England.
ceased. Forty whole years that this magnanimous and most prudent Queen has
reigned, has this kingdom by the mercy of God enjoyed this freedom. In
which time, this kingdom has been, and is, a refuge and sanctuary for many
strangers, who escaping the tallons of the hawks, England a refuge for
strangers.
and the teeth of the lions, and woulues, have thither retired. God for his
infinite mercy, enrich it, with his spiritual and temporal riches: since it
has entertained and helped poor strangers, in the time of so great
affliction and calamity. Persecution in Seuill.
In the time of this Pope Paul 4. began the great persecution in Spain, and
chiefly in the City of Seuill, and Valladolid. At the end almost of the 1557.
year, this pesecution began: as we will afterward declare. The City of
Seuil, is one of the most Civil, populous, rich, ancient, fruictfull, and of
most sumptuous buildings, that is this day in Spain. To be most rich it
plainly appears, seeing all the Treasure of the west Indies comes unto it,
and that the king has thence every year a million and a half of Ducats.
Which rent is so great, that few kings there be, that have so much of one
whole entire kingdom. Most ancient it is: For (if we credit Histories) Hispalo
Nouono king of Spain (of whom it is called Hispalis) built it, and Hercules
before the destruction of Troy did augment it. That it is fruitful, is proved
by that place Axarase where be such, and so many olive trees, from which is
drawn so great plenty and abundance of oil, that it storeth not only a
great part of Spain: but many other lands also far distant from Spain: It
is seen also by the fields, of Carmona, and Zeres, so abounding with wheat:
and by the pastures so full stored with vines, oreng trees, fig trees,
pomgranate, and other infinite fruits. And where nothing is sown, the earth
brings forth much spirage and palm trees, etc It has also much cattle: and
chiefly sheep, from whence much woole is sent into Italy, and flaunders. The
father of mercy has not only enriched this city, making it so civil,
populous, rich, ancient, fruitful, and of such sumptuous buildings: but has
also enriched and blessed it with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things
in Christ: Ephesians. 1. 3.
electing it before the foundation of the world (all this says Saint Paul of
the city of Ephesus) to be the first city of our Country of Spain; Seuill
the first City in Spain where the Gospel in our time was almost clearly
preached.
that in these times should know the abuses, supersticions, and Idolatries of
the Roman Church. Wherewith Spain has so long time been deceived; and knowing
them to cause it to amend, should publish (as it has published and dyuulged)
the same. And so Jesus Christ might reign in his Church, and Antichrist be
banished, destroyed, and slain. Rodrigo de Valor.
About the year 1540. one Rodrigo de Valor borne at Lebrixa, lived in Seuill,
where also was borne, the most learned Aentonius de Brixa, restorer of the
Latin tongue in our Country of Spain. This Valor passed his youth, not in
virtue, nor spiritual exercises, not in reading, nor meditation of holy
scripture, but in vain and worldly exercises as rich youth accustomably does.
He delighted to have good and well barded horses. To day was he suited in one
apparel, and to morrow in another: he gave himself to play, to hunt, and to
such other exercises, whereunto knights and Gentlemen apply themselves. In the
midst of which his vain exercises, he knew not how, nor by what means, God
touched, altered and changed him into a new man, far different from the
former. So that by how much the more he formerly loved and followed his vain
exercises: by so much the more did he afterward abhor, detest and forsake
them, heartily applying himself, and bending all the forces of his body and
mind, to the exercise of piety, reading, and meditation of holy scriptures.
Some small knowledge he had in the Latin tongue, did much herein avail him.
For now is the tyranny of Antichrist known, which suffers not in Spain, the
books of holy scripture in the vulgar tongue. Many that understood not the
mysteries, which God wrought in Valor, held for foolishness and want of
Judgment, such a sudden and great alteration. For this is the Judgment,
which flesh holds of spiritual and divine things: it holds them for
foolishness, 1. Cor. 1. 18.
and drunkenness, as says S. Paul 1. Cor. 1 18. The word of the cross is
truly foolishness to them that are lost, etc, And in the 12. verse. It pleased
God by the foolishnes of the Gospel to save those that believe. And in the 2.
chap. 14. The Carnal man understands not the things that parteine to the
spirit of God: for to him they be foolishnes, etc. And S. Luke Act. 2. 13.
reports that many, Acts 2. 13.
ignorant of the sudden alteration which the spirit of God wrought in the
Apostles, said, they were drunken; but those that have eyes, may see, that it
was not folly, nor drunkenness, but a change, wrought by the hand of the most
high: and that the spirit of God it was, that moved Valor. When Valor was thus
changed, he conceived great sorrow and repentance for his vain life passed,
and so employed himself wholly in the exercise of Godliness, always speaking
and entreating of the principal points of Christian Religion: reading and
meditating in the holy Scriptures, and gave himself so to read them, that he
knew much thereof by heart: which he very aptly applied to that which he
handled. In Seuill where he dwelled, had he daily disputations and contentions
against the Priests and Friars: And told them to their faces, that they were
the causes of so great corruption, as was, not in the ecclesiastical state
only, but also in every Christian commonwealth: which corruption (said he)
was so great, that there was none, or very little hope of amendme^t. For this
cause, he reproved the^ sharply, and that not in corners, but in the midst of
the markets, and streets, and upon the exchange in Seuill, a place where
Merchants twice a day meet about their business: he pardoned nor spared them
not. S. Paul (as says Saint Luke Acts 17. 16. and 17. seeing the city of
Athens so greatly given to Idolatry was much moved, and disputed with the
Jews in their Sinagogue, and in the open market or assembly of men, with those
that encountered him. Even so our Valor seeing so noble a city as Seuill is,
given to so great superstition and Idolatry, and so full of scribes and
Pharesies, of so many priests and Friars, he disputed with them in the markets
and streets, and reproved and convinced them by the spripture. The same God
which of old: made Saint Paul to speak: the same made Valor also to speak,
And as Paul was holden for a Preacher of Novelties, and foolish: for such
another was Valor held also. The new Pharesies seeing themselves thus handled,
demanded whence he had such wisdom, and knowledge of holy things? whence
(being a secular man, not having studied, nor giving himself to virtue: but so
evil spent his youth in vanities) proceeded his boldness so irreverently to
handle the ecclesiastical persons, which be pillars of the Church? By what
authority (demanded they) did he this? Who had sent him? What sign had he
of his callings? The self same demaundes, Matthew 21. 23.
made the old Pharesies to Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, when they could not
deny their villainies, nor well be silent, when he showed them their
wickedness. Behold how the old Pharesies, and the new be all one, and the
sons of the devil. To these demaundes, excellently and with great constancy
answered Valor. John 7. 38.
This knowledge of holy things, he had obtained (said he) not of his own
stinking pudles, but of the spirit of God, which makes flowing rivers of
wisdom run from the hearts of those which truly believe in Christ. He told
them, that God and the cause he had in hand, gave him courage and boldness:
that the spirit of God was not tied to any estate how ecclesiastical soever;
the ecclesiastical state especially of any other being the most corrupted and
nearest to destruction. That the spirit of God in old time made of secular,
unlearned, and fishermen, Apostles: that they might clearly show the
blindness, and ignorance of all the Synagogue, so well instructed in the law,
and call by their preaching, the That Christ had sent him: That in the name and
authority of Christ, he did that he did: But the adulterous generation (said
he) which has long time degenerate from the true race of the sons of God,
seeing that darkness to be much manifested by the light and reshining of the
sun, demands a sign. In conclusion, for so liberal and constantly
speaking, was he called before the Inquicisitors* valiantly did Valor dispute
of the true Church of Christ, her marks and signs, of the Justification of
man, The Principal pomtes of Christian religion.
and other like chief points of Christian religion: the knowledge whereof
Valor had obtained, without any ministry, or humane help, but by the pure,
and wonderful revelation of God. His foolishness (as the Inquisitors called
it) did then excuse him, and so first confiscating all that he had; they sent
him away. To take away his goods, pleasant means to reduce a mad man to his
sense. Valor notwithstanding this loss of goods; ceased not to prosecute what
he had begun. A few years after, for the self same cause they called him
again: and yet supposing, that he was a fool indeed, they burned him not,
but made him to recant or deny, not in open audience, but to himself alone, in
the great Church between the two quiers. For all his foolishness, they
condemned him to continual wearing of a great Saint Benito (or devils coat)
and to perpetual prison. About the year 1545.
From this perpetual prison, every Lords day, they carried him, with many
other penitents, to hear mass and sermons in the Church of Saint Savior;
where, set to hear the Sermon (albeit a prisoner) he often times rose up before
all the people, and when he preached false Doctrine, gain said the preacher.
But the Inquisitors, as then not so wicked, with conceit of his folly, excused
him. Much did it also avail Valor, to have been an old Christian, and not
descended of the Jewish or Morish race. The Inquisitors in the end, drew him
from this perpetual prison in Seuill, and sent him to a monastery in Saint
Lucas, called of our Lady of Barrameda; where being 50 years old and vpwardes,
he died. By the means of this Valor, many that heard and conferred with him,
had knowledge of the true religion: and chiefly that famous and good Doctor
Egidius, D. Edigius.
Cannon and preacher in the great Church of Seuill, that so much good did in
Seuill, both with his good good life and Doctrine. I have long dwelled upon
discourse of this History of Valor: but pardon me; for this Valor was the
first, that openly, and with great constance, discovered the darkness in our
time in Seuill. After this persecution of Rodrigo de Valor, many others were
persecuted, some of whom escaped: as Doctor John Perez, who came to Geneua:
where he imprinted the new Teament, and other books in the Spanish tongue,
others aboade there still, of whom many perseuered. And others of the
Inquicitions conceived such fear, that they denied the truth: and which is
worse, were persecutors thereof as was doctor Herman Rodriguez, and master
Garci Arias, whom commonly they called master White. But God showed mercy upon
White, and of a woulfe, made him a lamb, and so was he with great constancy
burned. This White, when God had made him truly White, said freely unto the
Inquisitors, when they examined him in the audience, that they were fitter to
follow a drove of asses, then to sit and Judge matters of faith, which they
nothing understood. Anno 1555.
In the 1555. year, seven persons, men and women went out of Seuill, and came
to Geneua, where they made their abode. Anno 1557.
In the 1557. year happened marvelous things in Seuill, and worthy of
perpetual memory: namely, that in a monastery called S. Isidor, the most
famous and rich in all Seuil, the business of true religion went so, and so
plainly forward: that unable with good conscience, there to stay longer, 12 of
the Friars in short time departed, some one way, and some another: al which
within a year came to Geneua; whither at their departure, they determined to
go. None of the^ there was that passed not great dangers and perils: but from
all these perils God did free them, and with a mighty hand brought them to
Geneua. Thees, that abode in the monastery (for it is to be noted, that almost
al those of the monastery, albeit they went in woulues habits, had knowledge
of Christian religion) suffered great persecution: taken they were, tormented,
disgraced, very hardly and cruelly entreated, and in the end many of them
burned: and in many years almost was there no act of Inquisition in Seuill, in
which there went not more or less, out of this monastery: Among those that
went out, and came to Geneua, was the Prior, vicar and procurator of S. Isidor,
and with the^ the Prior of the Vale of Ecija, of the same order. And God with
his mighty arm, did not only deliver these 12 from the cruel grype es the
Inquisitors before the great persecution began in Seuill: but afterward also
in the time of the great persecution, delivered other 6 or 7 from the same
monastery, making foolish; and of no worth nor effect, all the stratagems,
Councels, subtelties, crafts, and deceits of the Inquisitors, that sought, but
could not find them: for who shall destroy, whom God will preserve? In the same
year of the Lord: 1557. another memorable thing happened also in the same city
of Seuill. And this it was, that one called Julian Hernandez (whom the French,
by reason of his small stature, called Julian le petit) with the great desire,
and zeal that he had to do some service to God, and his country, drew out
of Geneua two great drifattes, full of Spanish books, of those which before we
have said Doctor John Peers to have printed in Geneua; Which books, and
moreover all those that taught true Doctrine and Godliness, had the
Inquisitors forbidden: because the ignorance, and darkness of Antichrist,
loves not the wisdom, and brightness of the Gospel of Christ: for fear
that their works should be convinced and reproved. Julian by Gods great
miracle, carried all these books, and put, Julian brought many books to
Seuill.
and dispersed them in Seuill. Yet so secretly could he not do it, but (by
means of a fearful man, an hypocrite, which sold himself for a brother,
and was in deed a Judas) it came in the end to the Inquisitors ears: and so
they took Julian, and many others more. So great was the taking, that they
filled the prisons, and some particular houses also. 800. prisoners for the
teligion in Seuill.
There was eight hundred then taken for the Religion in Seuill: a thing which
astonished the Inquisitors themselves. Among these prisoners, and them also,
which were afterward taken, were found many men, excellent in life and
doctrine. As were Doctor Constantine, master White, the licenciate John
Gon^ales, the licenciate Christopher de Losada Phisitio^, and minister of the
private Church in Seuil, Christopher de Arellano Friar of S. Isidor, a most
learned man, even by report of the Inquisitors themselves, and master Ieronimo
Caro, a Friar dominik, Olmedo, a man learned, and the beneficed cafra. There
were also people both men and women, rich and of quality; among whom, was that
truly illustrious, in piety and goodness, Don John Ponce de Lions, brother to
the County of Baylen, and eldest son of the Duke of Arcos: and Lady Jane,
wife of the Lord de la Higura; to whom (newly delivered of child) the
Inquisitors gave the torment called del Borro, in the Castle of Triana: and
such was the torment, that thereof she dyed. For the cords pierced the very
bones and marrow pipes of the arms, of the muscles, and of the legs. And so
tormented, they carried her to her prison as dead, casting out of her mouth
blood in great abundance; by reason that her intralles were broken in her
body. Eight days after this cruel torment, without company, or any assistance
(save only a young maid, which a few days before was likewise tormented) in
the end she died. Oh Inquisitors, more cruel then wild beasts, how long
shall the Lord suffer your tyrannies and cruelties. O ye Spaniardes, that so
much love your wives; and so zealously, keep them: how long will ye suffer
that these cursed Elders of Susanna, should see your wives and daughters in
their smocks, yea in a manner naked, taking pleasure to behold them, and after
giving them torments, having sometimes formerly made love unto them, o that all
that were known, which in the Inquisition passes. A certain Inquisitor there
was, which in merriment and jest, said of his companion; that he contented not
himself to beat a cutle, but also to eat it. This said he, because the
Inquisitor, had whipped a fair young maid, that was taken for a Jew, the^ lay
with her, and burned her afterward. By this subtillty may the rest be
understood, which the Lords Inquisitors use with the women, which they hold
prisoners. Of this great number of prisoners, where many burned by twe^ties, or
few less, it chanced that they burned them. The rest were unhappily handled.
The like was done of the house of Doctor Cacalla in Vallodalid.
The house of Isabella de Vaena, where the faithful assembled to hear Gods
word, was plucked down and sown with salt, that it should never be built
again: and fot a perpetual memory that the faithful Christians, whom they
called Lutheran heretics, there assembled. In the midst thereof they placed
a marble pillar. The Licenciat Losada, minister of Gods word, was burned: many
deceassed, were vntombed and burned: D. Vargas. D. Egidius.
namely Doctor Vargas, and Doctor years was this Egidius in the Inquisition
prisoner, part of them in the castle of Triana, and the rest in other places;
where they shut him up. D. Constantine.
D. Constantine (who by infirmity and ill entreaty was not long before dead
in the castle of Triana) and so knew by such as were present at his death, and
aided him in his sickness) was also vntombed: which notwithstanding, the sons
of falsehood bruted it abroad, that Constantine murdered himself. This so great
a lie, they invented, that the vulgar sort, which neither know nor believe, but
that only, which the Inquisitors command them to know and believe, should
abhor the religion, and the preachers thereof, since being desperate like
Judas they killed themselves. This D. Constantine, was one of the most learned,
and eloquent men, that of long time our country of Spain yielded: confessor,
and preacher he was, to Don Charles the Emperor and K. of Spain; and thereby
might (if he had would) have attained to great dignities: but as one that
naught esteemed the vain honors of this world, The persecution of Voll odalid
etc.
he despised them al and returned to Seuill: where, of the Inquisition, he was
taken; therein died, and by the same was afterward burned. About this same
time, D. Cacalla.
or a little after, began the great persecution in Vallodalid, where Doctor
Cacalla preacher to the Emperor, the most eloquent (as says D. Illescas) in
the pulpit, of any that preached in Spain, his mother, brethren and sisters,
Don Charles a knight qualified, and many others, were burned: The son of the
marquis of Poza, and others were disgraced, and the house where they assembled
was pulled down; and in like sort used as was that of Isabell de varna in
Seuill. The vulgar sort believed, that they met by night in these houses; and
that the sermon ended, they put out the candles, and abused themselves together
without respect of kindred or other, and of many other abominations were they
slaundred. These lies be not newly stamped: many years are since passed that
to defame the Gospel, and professors there of, Satan did innent them: as by
the apologies made by the fathers of the Church that then lived, to Justify
their cause does appear. Read Iustine Martyr lib 1. of his questions, and the
answers to the 126 question. Tertulian, in his Appologie. S. Ciprian against
Demetrianus. Origin against Celsus, Arnobius in seven books, and chiefly in
the first against the Gentiles Saint Ambrose and Prudencius, against Symachus,
and much to the purpose S. Augustine in the 5 first books de Ciuitate Dei: and
Orosius lib. 7. Of the self same things that were the Christians in old time
slaundered, of the very same things are we now falsely slaundered. About the
sixty five year Nero caused Rome to be fired: which burned nine days: and the
tyrant gave it out, that the Christians had done it. About the 170. year, the
Gentiles forced with torments the servants of the Christians, to say of their
masters, many abominations: and among others, that they eat their own
children. Celsus the Gentile Philosopher, accused the Christians for disloyal,
and traitors: and said: that their religion they had taken from the Barbarians
and Jews. Origin defended the Christians, with 8 books which he wrote against
this Celsus. In the time of S. Augustine, were great calamities and wars, the
which Symachus an orator, and many other imputed to the Christians, Cap. 7. ^8.
saying: that whiles the Roman Empire adored their Gods, Cap. 44. 17. etc.
it prospered. The like History recites Jeremy, that when they worshipped the
Queen of heaven: then all things prospered. Read the books entitled of the
city of God, where Saint Augustine wrote against this slander in defense of
the Christians. In the time of the glorious martyr Saint Ciprian, who many
years lived before S. Augustine, there was a Proconsull in Africa, called
Demetrianus a great enemy of the Christians: he, and others such like with him,
said: that all the wars, famine and pestilence, wherewith the world was then
afflicted ought to be imputed to the Christians; because they did not worship
the Gods. Against this Demetrianus, wrote S. Cipria^, saying, that not the
Christians, but the Gentiles were the cause of these calamities: because
unwilling to worship the true God, they adored false Gods, and afflicted the
Christians with so great, and so unjust persecutions: not that they should
confess God, but that they should deny him. The weakness of their Gods he
showed them, seeing they could not defend themselves, etc. All this in our time
fully passes: For the self same causes are we at this day slaundered, and
unjustly, to the most cruel and shamfull kind of death condemned: The same
state of the Church is now, as it was in the time of Saint Ciprian, and of the
other Saints by us named: And as they were defended against the Gentiles. So
we, against the Antichristians do now, make our defense. We tell them, that
God sends in our days, so many calamities of wars, famine, and pestilence,
because they have profaned the divine worship, The cause of the present
calamities.
and in the place of the creator, they honor the creatures: They worship not
God (as he has commanded) in spirit and truth, but after the doctrines and
commandments of men, and God alone do they not worship: but also the Saints,
their Images and pictures. They adore not, will they tell me, the Images, but
that which they represent albeit their second Nicen Council (not the first
which is holy and good) commands Images with the same adoration to be
worshipped, as that which they represent: as in the beginning of this Treatise
we have declared. Also our adversaries seeing themselves in some affliction,
invoke the saints of Paradise, without any commandment or example in all the
holy scripture so to do, where they ought to invoke none but God alone. Also
whereas there is but one only mediator, Intercessor and advocate, betwixt God and
man, which is Christ Jesus, as the Apostle calls him: they not contented with
the only Intercession of Christ (for were they contented Christ is sufficient
for the^) many mediators do they invent, and each one makes choice of one for
himself. Also they take away, and ad to the law of God (he which so does being
cursed of God) and so take they away the 2. commandment against Images: and to
fill up the number of ten. of the tenth, do they make two commandments. Also
we read in holy scripture, that the Lord in his catholic church did institute
but two sacraments, baptism and the holy supper: they have made 7. The Pope,
the Council and Inquisition can not err.
They also say that neither the Pope, nor Counsel nor the Inquisition can err:
hence comes it that they give so much credit to the decrees and constitutions
of the Popes, Councels, and Inquisitors, as if they were the word of God it
self: and yet would God they gave not more credit to them, then to the word of
God. Very common are ignorance, supersticion, and Idolatry in the Roman
Church: This is the height of al their wickedness, that with fire and blood
do they persecute the true and catholic Christians: because so instructed
and governed by the word of God, they worship one only God in spirit and truth;
and because they hold Jesus Christ for the only, and alone mediator and because
they ad not, nor ought diminish from the law of God, nor his word. When our
adversaries shall then say; that we trouble the world with our new doctrine, we
will make them the same answer that Elias (inspired with the divine spirit)
freely made unto K. Achab. 1 Kings 18. 17.
Art thou he (says Achab) which troublest Israel? Elias answered. Not I, but
it is thou and thy fathers house, that trouble Israel: because ye have
forsaken the commandments of the Lord and followed Baall. ye then (will we
say to our adversaries) are they, that have forsaken the commandments of
Christ, and have followed the traditions of Antichrist, your father the Pope;
ye are they, which worship not, nor honor God, but ye worship and honor
Images, against the express commandment of God Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. with many
other places. Let our adversaries (at last) understand, these and others such
like, to be the cause why God afflicts the world, with so great wars, famine,
pestilence, and diverse other calamities, within our days we have, and yet do
suffer. His majesty for his infinite mercy, and for his Christ's sake, open
their eyes: that they may consider the works of God, and so may soften, and not
harden their hearts, as did Pharo: who by the more God did afflict him for his
rebellion and contempt, by so much the more was he hardened against God, and
the people of God.

But leaving ancient histories, come we to that which in our days happened,
let us come to our country of Spain. God by his just judgment has many
times in the space of 40 years afflicted Spain, with wars, famine,
pestilence, and other calamaties, which began a little after that great
persecution, against the faithful and catholic Christians: This persecution
beginning in Seuill, has stretched almost throughout all Spain, against the
noble and learned people (as after we will declare) The priests of Baall in
their pulpits, co^fessio^s and discourses do affirm all this of right to be
imputed unto those whom they call Lutheran heretics: The common people which
neither know, nor other thing believe, but that which these Baalamites tell
them, and command the^ to believe, do believe it so to be. For confirmation of
my sayings, I will here recite that which D. Illescas cap. 31. upon the life of
Pius 4. says. His words be these. In the 1561. year, on Saint Mathewes day
the 21 of September being the Saboth, Fire in Valladolid.
two hours before day in the morning, aftre was kindled in the street called
Costanilla of Valladolid so terrible and fearful, that without hope of
remedy, in the 30. hours space, it ruined above 400. of the most principal and
rich houses of that famous city. So wonderful, and almost never seen was
this calamity, that it was taken for a thing myraculous: For the neighbor
houses, and near adjoining to those that burned, were not only burned: but
the fire in a moment did leap from one street to another far of distant,
and beginning at the top of the house, brought the whole presently with it, to
the earth. Many marchandizes, much wheat, wine, and other things, which by
reason of the great fury and fierceness of the fire could not be put in safe
keepeing were lost. The whole City was greatly troubled: because none could
know, how, or by whom the fire was kindled. And all feared, that it was some
coniuration of the Lutherans, And a little lower: There is made every year
upon Saint Mathewes day a most solemn procession, to entreat our Lord, to be
pleased by the means of his holy Apostle, to deliver the city from the like
plague and tribulation. Thus far D. Illescas. To the self same purpose will I
here also recount a very pleasant tale, which I read in a history, and I my
self also heard D. Bourne, who in Queen Mary's time was bishop of Bathe in
England tell the same. The history is this: A history of John Fox.
In the time of K. Henry 8. one Malary master of Art of the university of
Cambridge, was for profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, condemned to do
public penance in the Church of S. Mary, in the university of Oxford. The
penance was, that he should publicly recant, and bear upon his back a
faggot, for the terror of the students of that university. And for the more
solempnitie of this recantation D. Smith divinity reader preached. The
principal and only matter, which he handled in his sermon was, concerning the
Sacrament of the altar. The Doctor for more confirmation and credit of that he
had to say in his sermon, caused their holy and catholic peace of White
bread, which they call the Sacrament of the altar, to be hanged in the pulpit
before him: To this spectacle, ran very much people; as well students as
citizens: which heard the sermon with great attention: hardly had the doctor
half finished his sermon, when a voice of one that cried in the street Fire,
fire, was suddenly heard in the Church. The cause of the cry was, for that one
coming along the street, espied a chimnie on fire, and after the English use
in such cases, he cried through the street Fire fire. When they within the
Church, and nere to the door heard fire fire: they also began to say, fire,
fire. And so from mouth to mouth went fire fire. even to the doctors and the
preacher himself: who at the hearing of fire fire, remained astonished with
the great fear he conceived, and marueyling what it might be, began to lift up
his eyes, and behold on all sides the roof and walls of the Church. His
auditorie seeing him look up, began with a loud voice to cry, Fire, fire:
some demanded of other some, where see ye the fire? To this demand one
answered: In the Church^ Hardly had the other answered: In the Church:
Imaginary fire in the Church.
when all in a moment began to cry out, The Church burns, the heretics
have set the Church on fire. And albeit no man saw any fire, all
notwithstanding together cried Fire, fire, and each one supposed that was truth
which he heard. Then feared they indeed: such was the concourse and tumult in
the Church, that cannot with words be expressed: such as have found themselves
in the like cases, have experience thereof. This strong Imagination of fire
possessing their heads; all whatsoever they saw or heard, confirmed and
increased in them the imagination conceived. The principal cause that
augmented this suspicion, was to see him with his faggot, whom they held for an
heretic. This made them believe, that all the other heretics had jointly
conspired with him, to set fire on the Church. The great dust which with the
unquietness, concourse, and tumult of the people was raised in the Church, did
augment in the^ also this suspision. This dust then seemed to be smoke of the
fire which they had imagined. This concourse was also the cause that many came
to their deaths: for the small ribs and bones were broken, whereof many died.
The people flocked to the doors of the Church: but so great* was the throng
and press; that none could go out of the Church In the end seeing no remedy,
they began to cry out against the co^spiracie of the heretics, which had
kindled the fire, to burn the^ alive. It was a world to see those great
rabbines, those great doctors, with their long scarlet robes and doctorall
habits, run from one side to another, blowing, panting, and sweating, seeking
some corners where to hide themselves. In all this company was there none more
quiet, then the poor penitent heretic who, throwing from him the faggot, it
fell upon the head of a Friar that was next him, and so abode quiet, expecting
what God would do with him. Among the^ al was there none more fearful, nor
more cried out for fear; then Smith the preacher; who with the first began to
cry from the pulpit, saying. These be the webs and crafts of the heretics
against me: Lord have mercy upon me, Lord have mercy upon me: But his breadde^
God, which he called Lord, and was hanged as we have said near unto him, could
not quiet him. Naught in this garboile more caused the^ to fear, then when the
lead was to begin to melt (for ye must know, that many Churches in England are
covered with lead) and many of the^ began now to affirm, that the molten lead
fell upon the^. Then were they amassed, and many of them that had authority and
command, seeing that neither by force, regard of their learning, nor authority
they could ought prevail, they changed their purpose and began to use very
gentle words; promising to them they would pull them from that danger (albeit
by the ears) a good reward. There was a man that gave 20 pound (every pound is
forty Spanish ryals) an other promised his garment, and others, other like
things. They that might, placed themselves in the hollownes between pillar
and pillar, that the lead, which they said was molte^, should not fall upon
the^. A master of the College there was, which vnnailed a table, and covered
therewith his head and shoulders, that the lead should work him no anoyance.
There was a man, albeit very gross, who seeing there was no means to go out
of the Church, needs would be breaking of the glass, to go out by the pane of
a window, but half of his body being forth, he stuck fast in the grate; so that
he was not master of himself, nor could he go forward nor backward. The poor
paunched monk saw his danger doubled: for if the fire, or moulten lead should
fall without, that part then that was without the window, would be in danger,
and if it fell within the Church, the part then within was in the same danger.

To another monk, another chance happened. And this it was* A certain boy
(seeing that by reason of the great press and multitude of people, he could
not go forth clymed as he could, upon their shoulders and heads; and so came
and placed himself on the top of the Church door, where he aboade, not able to
pass further: Thus resting upon the height of the door, he espied by chance
(among those that came crawling upon the heads of others) a monk coming
toward him, who bare at his back, a great and large cowle: the boy seeing good
occasion offered, A boy put himself in the cowle of a Monk.
let it not slip: and so when the monk was near unto him, he let fall
himself from the height of the door, and very wittily put himself into the
monks cowle; supposing if the monk escaped, that he also with him (as it
happened) should go out of the Church. In conclusion the monk crawling upon the
heads of others, at last escaped, carrying the boy at his back that was
placed in the cowle, and for some time perceived not any weight or burden upon
him. In the end, within a while the monk came somewhat to himself; felt his
cowle more weighty, then wontedly it was, and hearing the voice of one that
spoke in his cowle, then began he afresh to fear, more the^ before, when he
was thronged among the people, supposing (and that verily) that the evil
spirit, which had fired the Church, was placed in his cowle: and then presently
began he to conjure the spirit, saying: In the name of God, and of all the
Saints I command thee, to tell me whom thou art, that hanges at my back? To
whom the boy answered: I am Beltrams boy (for so was his master called) But I
conjure thee (said the monk) in the name of the indivisible Trintie, that thou
wicked spirit tell me, who thou art; whence thou come, and that thou depart
hence. To whom the youth answered, I am Beltrams boy: I beseech you sir let let
me go: and so speaking, assayed to go out of the cowle, which, with the
weight, and the boys endeavor to go out, began to rend upon the shoulders of
the monk. When the monk well understood the matter, he drew the boy out of
the cowle. The boy seeing himself out of danger; took him to his heels, and
ran with what speed he could. In the mean time whiles this passed, they
that were with out the Church, beholding on all sides, and seeing there was no
cause of fear, marueyled to see them in such a straight, and made signs and
shows, to them in the Church, to be quiet, and told them abroad, there was no
cause of fear. But for as much as they that were in the Church, could not for
the great noise, and rushing within, hear that which was told them; the signs
which they made, they interpret to the worst sense, as though all without the
Church had with lively flames burned, and that for the distilling down of the
molten lead, and for that it fell in many places, they should abide within the
Church; and not adventure to go forth. So that signs, and voices much
increased the fear. For the space of some hours endured this confusion. The
day following, and that whole week also, were many billets fixed one the
Church door: one said. If any have found a payer of shoes, lately lost in the
Church of Saint Mary: another said, if any have found a garment: In another it
was prayed that a hat should be restored: In another, a girdle, with a purse,
and money which was lost: In another was demanded a little ring, and other such
like things: for there was no one person almost in the Church, which had not
lost or forgotten some thing. As touching the poor penitent, him they
commanded, that for as much as he had not by reason of this tumult, done his
penance as was meet, he should do it the day following, in the Church of
Saint Frideswid, and so he did it. These Histories of the fire of Rome, of the
fire of Vallodalid, and the imaginary fire of Oxford do very well confirm
that which we have said: that the poor Chistians* have at all times been
slaundered, and unjustly condemned. Therefore are they called sheep appointed
to the slaughter* God, who is Just, will not leave without punishment, such
monstrous lies, such false testimonies, and such fierce cruelties: his day
(albeit he slack) will come upon the Inquisitors. For the blood of the Just,
holy, faithful, and catholic Christians, by them shed, cries unto God,
Apoc. 6. 10.
as did the blood of Abell, saying. How long Lord holy and true, will thou
slack to Judge and revenge our blood on those that dwell upon the earth? To
whom it was answered: that they should rest yet a while, until their fellow
servants were fulfilled, and their brethren which were also to be slain with
them. This day let us then expecte with patience. God one day show mercy to
Seuil, that this monastery of Saint Isodor, be converted to an university,
where divinity may be chiefly professed. The rents of this monastery, which
be great, suffice, with over plus to maintain the said university: and the
ruyned house of Isabella de Vaena, may be converted to a public Church, where
the word of God may be preached, and the Sacraments without adding or
diminishing, according to the institution of Jesus Christ, administered. So
great and greater things then these, has the Lord in our time brought to
pass. It shall not be from our purpose to recite that which D. Illescas
reports to have happened in Spain in the time of this Paul 4. touching the
great number of Spaniards, of the religion (which he calls Lutheranes) that
was discovered. His words be these: In the former years were Lutheran
heretics accustomed to be taken and burned whatsoever, in Spain: but al
those that they punished, were strangers, as Dutchmen, Fleminges, or
Englishmen, etc. And of those which came from these kingdoms. And a little
lower: vile people and of most wicked race before times did wontedly go out to
the Scaffoldes, and to wear the Sarbenitos in the Churches: but in these
latter years, have we seen the prisons, scaffolds, and fires also furnished
with famous people. And (which is more to be moaned) of illustrious persons
also and of such, as to the eye of the world, in learning and life were far
before others, etc. And somewhat lower: The business came to terms, that they
practiced now among themselves, a most fearful conspiracy, such, as had it
not happened so soon to be discovered (as it was afterward understood) al
Spain had run in great hazard to be lost, etc. And a lttle lower: In
Valladolid D. Cacalla, his five brothers and mother, with most great secrecy,
and singular diligence, were taken. In Toro was taken Herrezuelus, and many
other in Cemora, and in Pedrosa, many men and women, Nuns, married women, and
damsels, famous and of great quality, etc. Among those that were burned, were
also certain Nuns, very young, and beautiful: who not contented to be
Lutherans, were teachers of that cursed doctrine, etc. And alittle after. All the
prisoners were of Valladolid, Seuill, and Toledo, persons sufficiently
qualified, etc. And so many and such they were, that it was thought if they had
two or three months more slacked to remedy this mischief: all Spain would
have burned, and we should have come to the most bitter mischaunce that ever
was seen therein. Hitherto D. Illescas. Whereof we will conclude, that God
has revealed the light of his Gospel in Spain to learned people, and people
of renown, famous and noble. He will show like mercy when he pleases, to the
vulgar and common sort. When they see in Spain a man well lettered and learned
then say they, Que es tan docto, que esta en peligro de ser Luthrano he is so
learned, that he is in danger to become a Lutheran: And there is not almost any
noble house in Spain, that has not had in it some one or more of the reformed
religion. His majesty for his Christ's sake our redeemer increase the number,
for his glory, and the confusion of Antichrist. But returning to Paul 4. In
August, and the 1559. year, after he had poped 4 years, and almost three
months, Anno 1559.
he died. The seat was void 4 months, and 7 days, Don Phillip 2. being king
of Spain.

Pius 4. Pius 4.
a Millanist was not much liked nor loved of his predecessor Paul 4. which Paul
in the consistory, did publish, and openly speak against him, saying: that by
evil means he had procured the Archbishopric of Milan. Then Pius knowing the
dislike of Paul 4. against him, departed from Rome: and thence was absent all
the time that Paul the fourth Poped. But when Paul was dead, and he chosen
after great discord, and four months and 7 days: that the sea was vacant, he
revenged himself of him. Pope against Pope.
For many things which Paul had commanded, did Pius countermaund: and so
pronouncing Don Charles the Emperor, and Don Phillip his son, kings of Spain
innocent and faultlesse, he absouled them of all whatsoever Paul 4. had
objected against them. He confirmed the resignement of the Empire, made by Don
Charles, to Ferdina^do his brother, which Paul whiles he lived, neither would
approve, nor confirm. To master Antonius Columna, he restored his patrimony,
whereof Paul had deprived him: So did Benedict. 3. Pius 2.
many otherlike things he did, in despite of his predecessor Paul 4. by
Panuinus upon his life recited. The same Panuinus, Martine 5. and Paul 4.
of Pius 4. says: that when he was Bishop, he became another man; entertaining
other customs, and manners (not better but worse) For he which till then was
holden courteous, pacient, a well doer, gentle, and not covetous, suddaynely
seemed to have changed his nature. Such is the seat papal, that he which once
sits therein; albeit before he were not evil, becomes evil. And if he
were evil, becomes worse, and in the end most evil: as to this Pius 4. it
happened. The same Panuinus says: that Pius had no gravity, either in
countenance gate, or gestures: that more scoffing he was, then beseemed the
majesty which he represented: of him (says he) that whiles he lived without
charge he was of good life and reputation, and whiles also he had charge, under
the high bishops his predecessors. When he was Pope, great shows he gave of a
good Bishop, insomuch that he held the Council of Trent (note the hypocrisy)
whiles the Council continewed, The hypocrisy of Pope Pius 4.
he feigned to be good, but the Council once ended, Pius using great liberty,
did many things that pleased not all men. And a little lower, Pius was a
glutton, and swillar: but chiefly in eating, for at supper he exceeded. Given
he was to delights and pleasure: he was openly collerique, envious he was, but
in secret: impatient to hear. In his answers sometime hard and bitter,
ambitious, to command, crafty, a fayner and distembler. When he sa^^e it
needful, fearful, but bold in dissembling his fear, and ill be loved.
Panuinus his friend, all this* and yet much more says of him: Albeit true it
is, that as a Parasite of the Popes, much good he says of him also. But what
virtues could possess a man subject to such manifest and enormious sins? He
had (says he) a singular memory, and so could aptly, and suddenly recite the
whole volume of the ancient lawyers, Poets, and Historians (but not of the
Bible, which I suppose he never read* for by his profession, he was not a
divine* but a lawyer) of him (says he also) that at the hands of Cardinal
Borromeo his nephewe and sisters son, with great devotion he received all the
Sacraments of the Church, the which (to my knowledge) we do not read (says
the same Panuinus) to have happened to any of the chief Bishops. Doctor
Ille^cas speaking of Pascall 2. says. That having first received the holy
sacraments, he died. Of the other Popes I do not remember that he says any
such thing. The reason is (as says Sanazaro speaking of Leo 10.) that the
Popes being great Simonists, have sold the Sacraments, and so not kept them
for themselves. Or to speak better, the cause is, that the Popes hold and say
in their hearts there is no God: and so in the time of sickness, and at point to
die, they make no esteem of the sacraments, The Popes esteem not the
Sacraments be case they be Antichrists.
or Christian religion, but die like swine. This Pope Pius 4. ordained a
confession of faith, which all they should make, that were to be Bishops: the
which in his life Panuinus places. This confession is a summary of all the
ignorances, supersticions, and Idolatries of the Antichristianisme or papisme.
This Popes whole study was, by right or wrong, to get money: and whereof he had
store: which upon his kindred, friends, and buyldings, Whereunto he was much
inclined he wasted. In the 1565. year, after he had Poped almost six years,
he dyed (as in Rome went the common voice and fame) in the arms of his minion
(which is not much out of square, since Panuinus his friend of him says, that
he was given to delights and pleasures) and (as says the same Panuinus) he
procured his own death. Morbo ex victus intemperancia hausto) to wit by
disorder in eating, and glutting, whose belly was his God: our king Don Phillip
2. then reigning in Spain. In the time of this Pius 4. Anno 1563.
and the 1563. year, a thing very strange happened in Seuill, Confession was
almost the cause of the ruin of the Popedom.
the which, had it proceeded further, and the Inquisitors been a little more
careless; so likely it had brought the whole papasie to the ground: else
should it at the least have received some notable damage. The matter is this.
In Seuill where some more curious, then was mete for the papasie: which of the
priests and Friars complained bitterly to the Inquisitors, because they abused
confession (as others also before time had abused it) in courting and making
love to honest matrons and damsels; Confession serves for a band
and for such end moreover, as such beginnings accustomably succeed. The holy
office thought meet, that such confessors should be punished: But for that the
matter was obscure, and none in particular but generally were accused; they
made an edict, and published it throughout all the Churches of the
Archbishopric of Seuil, commanding al and every person of what estate or
condition they were, which had known, heard or understood, if any Friar or
Priest whatsoever, that with their daughter or daughters at confession had to
this end abused the sacrament of confession; that such person upon most
grievous pain, shoud declare it to the holy office within 30 days. This
decree once published, so great was the multitude of women, which from Seuill
only went to accuse their filthy confessors to the Inquisition, that 20
notaries, and so many Inquisitors, sufficed not to take their depositions. The
Inquisitors finding themselves much wearied and unable in 30 days to dispatch
the business, gave them other 30, and yet these 30 not suffising, again and
again, they prolonged the time. Many honest matrons, and many Ladies of
quality, held great wars within themselves: The scruple of conscience, on
the one side, to incur the sentence of excommunication imposed by the
Inquisitors upon such as should conceal it, moved them to go. And on the
other side, they feared lest their husbands holding them for suspect, should
become jealous of them. And so, neither durst they, nor yet found opportunity,
to go and speak with the Inquisitors. But at last disguised and masked after
the manner of Andaluzia, as covert as they could, they went to the Inquisitors:
yet how disguised, and secret soever they were, many husbands left not to
follow them, and watch them early to know whither they went: which was the
cause of great jealousy. On the other side it was a sport to see the priests
and Friars fathers of confession, to go sad and sorrowful hanging down their
heads, by reason of their guilty conscience: every hour and mynute expecting,
when the Familiar of the Inquisition would lay hands upon them. Many of them
supposed, that a great persecution was to come upon them; yea and greater then
that which the Lutherans then suffered, yet was all their fear but wind, and
smoke which passes away: For the Inquisitors by experience foreseeing the
great damage that would redound to all the Roman Church, if their
ecclesiastical persons should be despised and pointed at: and the sacrament of
confession should not be so prised nor esteemed as before: would no further
proceed in the business; but interposing their authority, hushed all things,
as though nothing had ever happened. And so no co^fessor was chastised, no not
those, whose villainies were sufficiently proved: which thing freed the
ecclesiastical order from great anguish of mind, and all their sorrow was
turned into joy. But his day will come upon such, and the Inquisitors that
smothered so great villainies, and abominations: Who pardoning their friends,
and household fathers of confession: turned all their hate and fury against
their enemies the Lutherans: whom with fire and blood, they did not only
persecute in Seuill and Valladolid: but in many parts of Spain also. And thus
was Jesus Christ again in his members condemned, and Barrabas let loose. About
the 1550. year one Don Pedro de Cordoua priest made confession an Instrument
to abuse his devout penitents. About 1576 year for the like business, were
many Theatinians, or Jesuits (called Alumbrados) in Erena condemned: the
principal of whom was called Father Ternan daluares who dyed in the galleys.
Not many years since, in Sicilia another such like chance happened, not that
which to this purpose says Machauile, in the third book and first chapter of
his discourses. I allege not Machauile because I hold him for Godly, but for a
wicked politician do I hold him: the History that he recounteth, do I
allege.

Of all the Roman Bishops (as says Panuinus upon the life of this Pope) very
few there were, Pius 5.
that from such low beginnings, and in such short time had attained so great
dignities as did Pius 5. for being a friar Dominick, without any other office,
he came on foot to Rome: and within 15 years obtained all these offices:
Inquisitor he was, Bishop, Cardinal and Pope. His name at the font was
Anthony: because he was borne on S. Anthonies day: when he was fifteen years
old, he placed himself a Friar, in a monastery of the Dominicks, and called
he was Michaell: This name he held, until he was Pope: and would then neither
be called Anthony, which was his Christian name: nor Michael, which was the
name of his order, but called himself Pius 5. which name well agrees with the
figure called Antiphrasis, as when we call a Negro White John; So he being
Impious, called himself Pius. Concerning his election might well be said, that
which said John Bishop and Cardinal of Porta said (as Panuinus reports) of
Gregory 10.

Quem patrem patrum fecit discordia fratrum. The discord among the Cardinals,
made Pius the fifth; Pope. After he was made Pope, he gave out against the most
gracious Queen of England, defendresse of the true and Catholic faith, a most
pestilent bull; wherein he absolved all her subjects from of their oathe of
obedience which they had made: and exhorted the Christian Princes, to take
arms against her. This furious and brutish lightning effected no mischief, al
was turned to smoke nothing was heard but a certain thunderclap, and noise of
gunshot or childernes squibbes. And so his bull was foolishness, a little
bubble it was, which when is rayneth, is made upon the water, and presently
vadeth away. He that brought this bull to England, was caught; and as a traitor
sentenced to death: and quartered; the Pope his God on earth being unable to
help him, nor with all the Masses, they said for him, could draw him out of
hell. And the Queen in her kingdom lives and reigns; triumphing over her
enemies, maintaining and defending the holy catholic faith, and making her
kingdom a receptacle, refuge and sanctuary for poor strangers, which from so
many parts of Europe (flying the tyranny of the Roman Antichrist) have these
40. years space with drawn themselves to it. The powerful arm of the most
high God, all sufficient, whose name is Iehoua has done this: to him be the
glory for ever and ever amen. Psalm. 97. 7.
For besides him is there no God: confounded then be they that serve and
worship carved Images; those that worship Idols: since they neither can help
them, nor yet do goodness. Pius 5. took out of the books that which the
authors with great truth said against the Pope.
This Impius 5. spunged out of Petrarque and Bocace the famous Italian Poets,
all that, which with great liberty and truth they had said concerning the Pope,
the court of Rome, and ecclesiastcall persons. For ye must note, that before
God raised up Luther, and others more that succeeded; the Italians, and
chiefly, the subtle and free witted Florentines, were those, that with their
lively colors, and proper shadows painted out the Pope, his Roman Court and
clergy. Read Dant, Petrark and Bocace (but beware they be not those which the
Pope has gelded, and thou shall see if I speak truth. Great shame it is for
our Spaniards, who esteemed themselves of as free and good conceit as the
Italians, that they disable, and deiect themselves slaves to the Pope; not
daring to whisper against him, what villainies soever they see him commit.
Liberty of conscience: Liberty, away away with the Pope this proud
Antichrist. Some of these places which Pius 5. has gelded, among the sayings
of learned men, which have spoken against the Pope, will we afterward allege.
Anno 1572.
In the 1572 year, and first day of May died Pius 5. Don Philip being king of
Spain.

Gregory 13. Gregory 13
a Bolonnist, before called Hugo boncompagno the 15. day of may, and 1572.
year was set in the seat of Antichrist. 13 years little more, or less he
Poped, when he was Pope, he renewed the old hatred of his predecessor Pius 5.
against the Queen of England: and so practiced by all possible means, one
while by force (as appears by the great Armada sent into Ireland, and had a
miserable end) another while by craft and deceit, (as was seen in the great
traitor Parry, and others by him sent, who had also a miserable end, and were
quatered into 4 parts, as they had deserved) to do her all the mischief he
could. But God delivered the Queen from all those cursed inventions, and the
same God a just judge, in the end chastized this Gregory, by killing his body,
and sending his soul into hell. It was the common voice and fame in Rome, that
Gregory, before he was Pope, and also being Pope, like a father, but not most
holy: nor yet holy, but carnal, had his concubyne of whom he had also little
sons, which said unto him such graces, as made him to laugh. And being Pope,
such was the grace that his little son Philippicus said, that the Pope his
father gave him five thousand crowns of rent. Mark o ye Spaniards, how the
Patrimony which you call Saint Peter's, is employed. And he is not alone, he
which has it does so also employ it: as we have seen in the lives of the
Popes. The ceremony of the stool, needed not this Gregory: for very well was
he known to be a man, and not a woman. In the time of this Pope, was the most
fierce and bloody battle between the Portugales, and Moors in Africa:
wherein 3 kings died. Don Sebastian the king, being dead in this battle; the
Cardinal Don Henry, brother of king Don John the third grandfather of Don
Sebastian, was elected king, who like another Anius was king and Priest, of
whom Virgill says in the 3. of his Aeneads.

Rex Anius, rex idem hominum, Phaebique sacerdos. Of this Cardinal say the
Portugales, that in the Epistle of the moon he was borne, and in the Eclipse
of the moon he died. In the 1581 or 82 year, and in the time of Gregory 13.
his Popeing, a very strange chance happened in Valladolid. There dwelled in
Valladolid, The cruelty of a father.
a knight quallified, who in the Inquisition had 2 daughters, which constantly
perseuering in the good religion, they had learned of the good D. Ca^alla, and
other martyrs of Jesus Christ; were condemned to be burned. The father being a
most rank Papist: besought the Inquisitors to permit the^ for their better
instruction to be carried to his house: which thing, the Inquisitors, in regard
of the great credit they reposed in him: granted. And brought thus to his
house, the father endeauored to divert them from their constant resolution. And
seeing he could not convince them; he caused Priests and Friars to dispute with
them: but in vain were all their disputs. For the Lord (as in Luke 21. 15. he
had promised) gave them utterance and wisdom, which the new Pharesies,
Priests, and Friars were not able to resist, nor gainesay, The father then
seeing al his endeavor naught auailed, went himself to his grove, cut down
wood, and caused it to be drawn to Valladolid, he himself kindled the fire,
and so were they burned. And no marvel: Seeing the Lord in the same place of S.
Luke 21. 18.
Luke forwarned us, that it so should happen. Ye shall be (says he) delivered up,
even of your own fathers, brothers, kinsflolkes and friends, and they shall
kill you, and ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, thus far of the
afflictions and miseries of the poor faithful: yet that which the Lord then
adds, is for our comfort. But one hair, says he, shall not perish or fall
from your head: in patience possess ye your souls. So did these two blessed
of the Lord possess, and now enjoy that celestial glory, which the Lord, for
whom they died, had prepared for them before the foundation of the world. This
cruel father, in doing that he did against his daughters, undoubtedly
supposed, he did great service to God. Of this also has the Lord foretold us,
Ioh. 16. 2*
John 16. 2. The hour comes says he, that whosoever shall kill you, shall
think he does God service. And that we should not be dismayed, but coragious
in such afflictions, the Lord, in the end of this chapter says. These things
have I told you, that in me ye might have peace: in the world ye shall have
trouble, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. This Gregory
careless to correct himself, or Clergy either in life or doctrine, by
a^ticipating 10 days in the year, gave himself to correct the callender. And
to eternize his name, this callender he called Gregorilanum. At this time, were
reunited all the kingdoms of Spain, which from the entrance of the Moors
into Spain 880. and so many years since, have been divided, and so Don
Philip our king and Lord in all Spain reigns I beseech my God, from the
bottom of my heart, to give him understanding to know who the Pope is.

In the 1521. Sistus 5*
year and the year of famine, the 13 of December, and in a village of 25 or
30 houses, called Montalto near to the city of Firmo, which is in the marches
of Ancona, was borne Felix Pereto called Sistus 5. In this Sistus 5. the common
saying in Spain was fulfilled: Rex por natura y papa por Ventura. A king by
nature, a Pope by adventure: for so poor was his father, that he was a
swineheard. Felix in his childhood was very poorly brought up, but showing
some sufficiency of wit, a ge^tlewoman for Gods sake, clothed him with the
habit of Saint Frauncis, and entreated the warden to receive him into his
covent where he studied Gra^mer, logique, Philosophy, and school divinity:
and in those sciences much proffited. In the end, being now of age he was
made Inquisitor. In which office, such was his carriage, as few could abide his
cruelty: And so it happened, that he called before him, a magnifico of Venice,
who (being come) very discourteously, and inhumanly he entreated. This
gentleman unaccustomed to hear such injuries and disgraces, (as by that which
after he did for revenge to the Lord Inquisitor appears) did stomach the
matter. A few days after, this gentleman encountered the Inquisitor, and when
he saw him, he commanded his servant with a good cudgel, which he carried, to
abate the fearcenes of the unhappy Pereto. Inf^^lix being thus cudgelled,
returned to Rome, and recounted his mischaunce to Pope. Pius 4. very much
complaining upon the Magnifico. The Pope hereat disdayning: sent him back to
Venice, with much more authority and power then before. When Felix was
returned unto Venice, he presented his co^omission to the Segniory. The
Segniory being wise and prudent, and knowing the quarrilous humor of this man,
and well perceiving that he came with a desire to revenge, commanded a wax
candle to be kindled and Felix if he were wise, precisely to depart their
dominion and jurisdiction, before that candle were consumed. This Infoelix
unable to do otherwise, A notable act of the seigniory of Veni^.
returned eftsoons to Rome, and complained to the Pope. The Pope seeing this
man meet for his service. made him master of his Palace. After this when the
Spanish Inquisition (of all men how high soever feared, and liked of none (held
the Archbishop of Toledo for suspected of heresy; the Pope sent Felix into
Spain to hear this cause. The General of the Francisca^s, the chief dignity
among them, now happened to die. This dignity gave the Pope to Felix, whom a
few years after, the same Pope made Cardinal. In conclusion, when Gregory 13
was dead: Felix by means of his good friends in Spain, was made Pope, and
called himself Sistus 5. This name he took in memory of Sistus 4. who was,
as was he a Franciscan Friar. So abominable truly are the things read of this
Sistus 4. that their memory with him, deserves to be buried in hell, and
perpetual oblivion. Read his life, which we have culled out of diverse authors.
Notwithstanding, all this, would Felix be called Sistus 5. because he thought
to be another, and yet worse then Sistus 4. When he was Pope (as though in
himself, his Roman court, his Rome, his Babylon, which for her customs, is
the mother of all fornications, and more then beastly abominations, and for
Doctrine, the school of error, and Temple of heresy said her renowned
Petrarque) now 200 years past, nothing there were to be corrected or amended)
he gave himself I say (as though in his own house he had nothing to do) to
seek to correct and after his manner, to entermedle in the houses of others.
And so by all possible ways, deceites, crafts, treason and violence, he
practiced to disturb the quiet and happiness of the kingdom of England,
suborning, and animating most wicked men, and abominable traitors: promising
them that, which he neither had for himself, nor could give to others: at
least the kingdom of heaven; if they should murder the most illustrious Queen
of England, who for forty years space, with so great peace, and clemency,
most prudently has governed her kingdom. In which time with temporal riches
and abundance of bodily necessaries, and with spiritual riches, which is the
preaching of the Gospel, has God blessed this kingdom. From all these
treasons, God as a most merciful father, maugre Antichrist of Rome has
delivered the Queen. Let the Pope then burst for anger. So also has this Pope
opposed himself to the most illustrious king of Navarre, and his first brother
the prince of Conde, cursing and depriving them of all whatsoever they had, and
were to have, and chiefly of the undoubted right which for want of right heir
male, has the king of Navarre to the crown of France. God for his infinite
goodness, have mercy on his poor Church, which this Antichrist in these princes
does persecute. Arise Lord, put to flight thine enemies, break the horns of
this beast, that he do no more harm to thy poor children: hasten to destroy
Antichrist with the spirit of thy mouth, with the preaching of the Gospel. The
God of peace beat down Satan, and that speedely under our feet, Ephesians. 1 21.
and exalt his son Christ Jesus, subiecting al things under his feet, and
placeing him above all things, for head of his Church: which is his body, and
he the fulness thereof; which fills al things in all persons. This most
Christian prince of Conde, whom Sistus 5. ba^ned, in the 1588 year died of
poison. The French K. causes the Duke of Guise to be slain.
In the same year did Henry 3. K. of France cause the Duke of Guise to be
slain, and another day the Cardinal, brother to the Guise: the cause was, for
that the Duke had co^spired to kill the king, and usurp the kingdom. Shortly
after (but of her natural death) died also the mother of the king. The death of
the Duke of Guise, and of his brother, caused many, and the most principal
cities of of France, as Paris, Roan, Lions, Tholous, and others to rebel
against the king. The year following, which was the 1589 the king came upon
Paris, and besieged it straightly. The Parisians seeing themselves in that
estate, resolved of no other remedy for deliverance from their present misery,
but to kill the king: To him that would kill him, did they promise great
rewards: and so there wanted not some desperate persons, A Dominican Friar
kills the French K.
which offered to do it. Amongst al these, was a Dominican Friar called
Clement before the rest preferred, aman unlearned, and of little honesty: and
for such a one, had often been chastised, with the discipline of the covent. To
the kings camp came he, fayning business to deal with the king, of most great
importance: The king in affection much inclined to these Friars, comanded he
should come in. The Friar being entered, kneeled on his knees before the king*
the king, who was sitting the better to hear him, somewhat dubled his body:
The cursed Sinon then drawing a poisoned knife, which he had brought for that
purpose, thrust it into the bowels of the king. The king feeling himself
wounded, cried out: to the cry ran many, who stabbed and killed this
unmerciful Clement, albeit the king commanded they should not kill him. This
wound of the king, caused sadness and sorrow in the kings camp* contrariwise,
great mirth amongst the enemies: who instantly demanded aloud, if the Friars
knife were sharp enough. The king (after he had appointed the king of Navarre
his brother in law, called Henry 4. who was the nearest in blood, for his
successor) the night following died. When news of the kings death came to
Rome, Pope Sistus 5. made a solemn Oration in the concistorie of Cardinals,
the 11. of September 1589. where he not only compared the treason of this
cursed Dominick, with the act of Eleazar, Judith 13. 10.
and of Judith: but said also it surpasses them. (Of Eleazar is made mention
1. Macha 6.) who seeing an Elephant more mighty then the rest, armed with the
arms of the king supposing that king Antiochus was upon him, to deliver his
people, and purchase eternal glory, he adventured himself, and ran
courageously to the Eelepha^t, through the midst of the squadron, killing on
the right hand, and on the left, and all sides throwing down, until he came
under the Elephant, and placing himself under him, slew him: the Elephant fell
to the ground upon him, and there he dyed. Judith cut of the head of
Holophernes. The war that Antiochus and Holophernes made against the people
of God was unjust: but the war which Henry the third made against the league,
which had conspired against him, to kill him, and take from him his kingdom;
was most just: So that herein was he no tyrant. Besides this, both living and
dying, he was of the same religion of the league: as at his end appeared. For
in that small time that he lived, after he was wounded, he confessed,
communicated, and was anointed. But leaving these humane reasons, come we to
the holy scripture. It appears by the scripture, that Saul was a wicked
king, an hypocrite, a tyrant, forsaken of God: and so has God to Samuel. How
long do thou morn for Saul, seeing I have forsaken him, and that he shall
not reign over Israel? And commanded him to go, 1. Samuel ^6. 4
and anoint for king, one of the sons of Issai: which was David, and in the
same chap. verse 14. it is said. The spirit of the Lord, departed from Saul,
and the evil spirit of the Lord did torment him. Albeit such a one was Saul,
yet did not God command Samuel or any other to kill him. And so David
(although God had chosen him, and Samuel anointed him for king) when manifest
occasion and means were twice offered him, to kill Saul; yet killed he him
not. Also when David and his followers were hid in a cave for fear of Saul (as
1. Sam. 24.) appears Saul entered the same cave to do his needs: then did
David's men advise him not to let slip occasion, but to kill Saul. But David
instructed in a better school then were they, answered: The Lord keep me from
doing such a thing against my master, and the anointed of the Lord, that I
stretch not out my hand against him: for he is the Lords anointed: And not
only did not kill him, but grieved to have cut of the lap of his garment, as if
herein he had done some great disgrace. And in the 26. chap. of the same book,
it is reported; that David and Abisai came by night to the camp of Saul, and
found him sleeping, etc. Then Abisai said to David, God has closed thine enemy
into thine hands this day: now therefore I pray thee let me smite him once with
a spear unto the earth, and I will not smite him again. And David said to
Abisai: Destroy him not: for who can lay his hand on the Lords Anointed, 2.
Sam. 1
and be guiltless. Moreover, David said: As the Lord lives, either the Lord
shall simite him, or his day shall come to dye; or he shall descend into
battle, and perish. The Lord keep me from laying mine hands upon the Lords
anointed, etc. And when one brought news of the death of Saul, saying; that
he had slain him: what gave David unto him for his good tidings? He said unto
him, How wast thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the Anointed
of the Lord? Then David commanded one to kill him: who wounded him, and so he
died. And David said unto him. Thy blood be upon thine own head: for thine
own mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords
anointed. And David mourned for Saul, etc. Whereupon we will conclude, that
wickedly did this Friar, and those of his counsel, in murdering their king:
and that wickedly did the Pope, in praising and cannonising this fact. What
revelation had Sistus 5. that God had wholly cast off Henry the third, that he
should forbid any obsequies and honors, accustomed to be made for the dead,
should be made for him, and commanded also, that they should not pray for him?
Samuel and David had most sure revelation that Saul was forsaken of God, and
that (as such a one) was he fallen into a reprobate sense: yet notwithstanding
did they let him live, and co^spired not his death. If a Prince in our time, be
he heretic (as they call him) or Catholic, shall not fully obey whatsoever
the Pope commands him, albeit it be to the depriving him of his kingdom, and
giving it to another, then shall he be cursed and excommunicate both in body
and soul, and the most vile person (if we believe Sistus 5.) with good
conscience may kill him. And such a one that shall murder him, shall have done
an act very meritorious and holy, for the which he deserves to be cannonized.
What Christian religion is this, that one shall be cannonized for committing
that which by the word of God (as by examples we already have proved) is
expressly forbidden? Oh times! oh customs! But upon such will his day come:
these swine shall not escape (as they say) without their Saint Martin.

With Sistus 5. conclude we saying, that in the month of September, and 1590.
year he died, whom Urban 7. which poped 12 days succeeded. At the end of the
year 1590. Gregory 14. succeeded him, and died in September 1591. Innocent 9.
succeeded Gregory 14. who a small time poped. So that in the space of 14.
months, four Popes died: Sistus, Urban, Gregory, and Innocent: and it is to
be thought, the most, or all of them died of poison. For Brazuto is not dead
that gives the^ poison. This Brazuto killed 6 Popes with poison (as upon the
life of Damasus 2. we have declared.) In the 1592. year Innocent 9. being dead
Clement 8. A Capuchan friar practiced to kill the French king.
or 9. or 10. succeeded. This Clement poping, in the 1599. year, a Friar
Capuchan, incited by the Jesuits, attempted to kill the French king Henry 4.
but his treason was discovered, and so was he caught. In the time of this Pope,
and in September 1598. died the king Don Philip 2. aged 70 years: and Don
Philip 3. son of the forenamed Don Philip 2. and of the daughter of
Maximillian the Emperor, and of the Empress Dona Maria de Austria, sister of
the king Don Philip 2. succeeded him. God grant him grace, as the duty and
office of a king requires, night and day to meditate in the law of the Lord,
God commands the king to read the holy scripture.
and accomplish that which God (Deuteronomy. 17. 18.) commands a king should do: When
he shall sit (says God, speaking of the king) upon the throne of his kingdom,
he shall cause to be written the book of this law, etc. And it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life. Note ye Spaniards,
that God commands the king to read the holy Scriptures: and then (says he)
he is to read them, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, that he may
keep all the words of this Law, and these ordinances to do them: That he lift
not up his heart above his brethren, nor turn f^rm the commandment, to the
right hand nor to the left: that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he
and his sons, etc. And God not only comaundeth the king to read the holy
scripture, but his captains also, when they be in wars, to read the same.
So commanded he Joshua the General, and most warlike captain of the people of
God, saying unto him: The book of this law, shall never depart from thy
mouth: but day and night shall thou meditate therein: that thou may observe
and do according to all things, that are written therein. For then shall thou
make thy way prosperous. And then shall thou understand. God of his infinite
goodness, give to our king and Lord, his captains and governors, the grace, to
read the scripture (which god has commanded them, and the Pope has
forbidden) that ruled thereby, they may well govern his subjects.

Albeit, by that we have said it clearly appears the popes, I mean from
Boniface. 3. which was in the year. 605. unto Clement the 8. or 10. which now
tirannizeth) to be of evil life, and of worse doctrine, by reason whereof,
they neither are, nor in any wise can be successors of Peter, nor vicars of
Christ, but truly Antichrists: yet, for better confirmation, with reasons, and
notable sayings of the doctors of the Church; with Decrees of Ancient
Councels; and chiefly, with 3. passages of holy scripture admirable for this
purpose, we will confirm it not with standing. But before we do this, we will
set down, certain ancient Spanish proverbs, declaring what are the lives of
these ecclesiastical persons, and how we ought to fly them.

The Spanish tongue, is not only eloquent, and copious, but sententious also.
Many proverbs it has, by us called Refranes: which be certain breife sayings,
sentencious, and true; so by common consent, and that of long time allowed. To
such proverbs, in all tongues, as well learned as unlearned give great credit:
because they be some chief principles, which the latins call Perse nota.
Contrary whereunto; whosoever will speak, shall be holden for unlearned, and
ignorant. That the Spanish tongue is plenteous in proverbs and brief
sentences, the book called Celestina (the first part I say, for the rest is
falsified) a book doubtless, did it entreat of some other matter, worthy to
be read, does very evidently declare. The book of Proverbs, which Hernan Nunes,
the Come^dador, most excellent professor of Rhetho^icke and Greek in Salamanca
collected, does show also the same. Whose purpose was not only to collect so
infinite a number of Spanish proverbs, but also would (had not death prevented
him) have glosed and commented upon them, as did Erasmus upon the Latin
proverbs. Verily had the Comendador effected his purpose, our Spanish tongue
should have had a great treasure. But to what end, will thou say unto me,
entreating of the Pope and his Clergy, say thou this? To great purpose (I
answer) have I said this: Proverbs against the Ecclesiastical persons.
because here I will allege many Spanish proverbs, which very briefly, and
most truly do naturally, and with lively colors, paint out the life of the
priests, and Friars, and of all the other ecclesiastical persons* from the
little Nouice that helps to say Mass, even to the Pope himself. Of the
wicked life of the Clergy, their deceits, subtilties, and hypocrisies,
covetousness, robbery, whordoms, ambition and simonie, etc. speak these
undoubted true proverbs, and so command us to fly from the^. All these
proverbs following, are drawn out of the said book of the Comendador.

OF THE WICKED LIVES OF Ecclesiastical men.
Sin Clerigoy palomar teruas limpio tu lugar. Evil life.


Of priests and doves where is a want,
There Is cleanness rife, and foulness scant.
Siboo negocio trazedes frade, podeys falar de la call (Potuguez.)

Speak Friar, if good: it light does crave:
If bad, it darkness seeks to have.
Entrays Padre sin licencia,
o os sobra favor, o falta verguen^a.
Here freely father entrest thou,
Or under leave, or shameless now.
Cregos, frades, pegas, e choyas do a ordemo quatro joyas (Gallego) clerigos,
frayles, pica^as, y grajas do al diablo tales quatro alhajas (^ joyas.

Priests, Friars, Pyes, Dawes and such like chaffer,
All jewels four to the devil I offer.
Frail ni Iudio nunca buen amigo.

Nor Friar nor Jew,
ever friends true.
Hize ami hijo monazillo,
y tornoseme diablillo.
A nouice young my son do make,
For demi devil do him take.
Quien quisiere su hijo vellaco del todo,
meta lo missario, o mo^o de cor^
Of knavery who lists to have his son heir,
Make him a Mass priest or youth of a Quire.
Moco missero, y Abad ballastero y frail cortes reniego de todos tres.

A massing youth, a flattering Friar,
A hunting Priest, a hateful liar.
Monja para parlar,
y frail para negociar, jamas se vido talpar.
A Nun to prate, a Friar to proule,
Who ere two such has seen so foul.
Ni amistad con frail, ni con monja que te ladre.

With flattering friar, nor puling Nun,
No friendship, else thou art undone.
Ni fies en monje prieto,
ni en amor de nieto.
In coal black friar have thou no trust,
Nor rest on grandchilds love thou must.
Ni a frail descalco, ni a hombre callado, ni a muger baruuda no le des posada.

To barefoot Friar, nor silent man*
Nor bearded she, subject thee than.
Nunca vide de cosas menos,
que de Abrilee y Obisp^s buenos,
Things less I never understood,
Then Aprils fair, and Bishops good.
Bendita la casa que no tiene corona rasa (quiere dezir rapada.) Este Refran es
tomado de Italiano. Beata quella casa que non ha cheregarasa.

The dwelling house is surely blessed,
Wherein no shaueling has his nest:
This Proverb is taken from the Italian, Beata quella casa que nen ha cherega
rasa.

Ni fies muger de frail, Whoredom.
ni barajes con alcayde.

No woman trust a holy Freyr,
Nor yet scolde with a Judge for fear.
Ni mula mohina, ni moca Marina, ni poyo a la puerta, ni Abad por vezino.

No Mule of color sad,
Nor bench have at thy door:
Nor maid of Marians trade,
Nor priest for thy neighbor.
Ni frayl^ por amigo, ui Clerigo por vezino.

A Friar for friend see thou forsake,
And priest for neighbor do not make.
Ni buen frail por amigo,
ni malo por enemigo.
No good Friar for a friend do choose,
Nor bad for foe, else shall thou loose.
Por las haldas del vicario
sube la moca al campanario.
By Vicars skirts, the maid
Up to the Belfry goes,
Yet naught at all afraid,
What makes she there, who knows?
Muchas vezes de hombres casados
Clerigos y soldados no son amados
Holy Priests and Soldiers then,
Are often not loved of married men.
Obispo d^ Calahorra haze los asnos de Corona. Covetousness.


For bribes do bishops orders give
To Asses shorn, o that they live!
Ni de frale, ni de menja no esperar de recebir nada*

Of Friar nor Nun ought to receive
The hope that is will sure deceive.
Si con Monia quieres tratar,
cumplete de guardar.
If with a Nun thou list to deal,
Stand on thy guard for thine avail.
El frail que pide pan,
carne toma, si se la dan.
The holy Friar, that bread does crave,
Will take flesh, if he it may have.
De los biuos muchos diezmos, de los muertos mucha oblada (q. d. offrenda) en
buen ano renta, y en mal ano doblado.

Of the quick many tithes, of the dead many oblations (to wit, offerings) In a
good year a good rent, and in an evil year doubled.

Al cabo delano mas come elmuerto, que el sano. (Esto se entiende por las
offrendas q^ los Eclesiasticos tiene^ por las animas de purgatorio.)

At the end of the year, eat the dead more, then the whole. (This is meant by
the offerings which the Ecclesiastical persons have for the souls of
Purgatory.)

Andad diablos tras aquel finado, que no mando nada (q. d. a los clerigos que
lo entterrauan no dexo dinero para Missas, etc.)

The Devil foul that corpse do take,
Which gave us naught good cheer to make.
That is to say, which left nothing to the Priests for saying of Masses.

Hurtar elpuerco, Hypocrisy.
and dar los pies por amor de Dios.

To rob, to spoil, to steal a swine,
And give the feet for cause divine.
Vnas de gato,
y habitos de beato.
Fell Wolf in Lambe-skin queintly clad,
Like Cats nails Friar, though habit sad.
Cuentas de beato,
y unas de garauato.
A Friars beads, a graple hook,
A guilefull heart, though holy look.
La Cruz en los pechos,
y el diablo en los hechos
The holy cross upon the breast,
Yet there the devil has his neast.
Haz lo q^ dize el frail, y no lo q^ haze. (Son pues phariseos hypocritas)

What says the Friar that do: what does he, that do not. (They be then
hypocritical Pharisees.

Sease milagro,
y hagalo el Diablo.
A miracle is it,
and the devil does it.
La carcely la quaresma para los pobres es hecha.

The prison and lent
for the poor are meant.
Camino de Roma ni mula coxa, ^^monie.
ni bolsa floxa. (Q. D. que el que va a Roma por algun beneficio, o por meior
dezir maleficio, ha de tener buena cavalgadura para bolar, si pudiesse, de
medio quo otro no se adelante, y se lo coja. Y no basta ir presto, es menester
tambie^ llevar la bolsa fornida para comprar el beneficio: lo qual es Simonia.)

Neither a halting mule, nor empty purse is the way to Rome. To wit: he that
for any benefice, or, to speak better, malefice, goes to Rome, must have a
good horse to fly if he could, lest another come before him, and catch it up.
And to go speedily is not sufficient, a purse well stuffed must he carry also,
to buy the benefice, which is Simony.)

Roma, Roma, la que a los locos doma,
y a los cuerdos no perdona.
Rome, Rome which tameth fools,
And spares not the wise:
To pry, and proule for gain,
Has Linx his piercing eyes.
Quien tiene pie de altar, Idleness the mother of many vices.

come pausm amassar.
Idle Mass of the Altar,
Eat the fruit of others labor.
No ay casa harta,
sino donde ay Corona rapada.
No house there is that's fitly stored,
Which wants a crown not finely shared.
Quien es Conde, y dessea ser Duqut, metasc frail en Guadalupe.

Who so is an Earl, and would be a Duke,
Put he himself Friar in Guadelupe.
Que la fortuna, como ellos llaman, y no el espirtitu santo elija al papa.

That fickle fate, not Spirit divine,
Does choose the Pope (they say) in fine.
Rey por natura,
y Papa por ventura.
A king by nature,
and a Pope by adventure.
That we ought to fly these Ecclesiastical persons: by that which is said, and
this proverb appears.

A frail hueco soga verde y almendro seco.

A hollow hearted Friar,
A rope that is very green,
A withered Almond tree
Are never gainefull seen.
This the^ being so (as these most true proverbs affirm) blessed are they,
Ier. 51. 6.
that knowing them, depart from them, and do that which God by Jeremy
commands: Fly says he out of the midst of Babylon and deliver every one
his own soul, lest ye perish by reason of her wickedness, etc. And fear not
poverty: for God is the God of all the roundnesse of the earth: Psalm. 147. 9
he will provide for you For if (says David) it be God that gives food to the
beasts, and to the young ravens which call upon him, according to that which God
himself dema^deth of Job: Job. 39. 3.
Who pre pareth (says he) for the Raven his meat, when his birds cry unto
God, wandering for lack of meat. If God then take care for beasts, ravens, and
young ravens, and feeds them, how much more shall he feed man, made to his
own likeness, and bought with the blood of our Christ his son? chiefly, if
such a man, abhorring superstition and idolatry, desire in holiness and
righteousness, to serve his creator? Psalm. 37* 25.
I have been young (says David, well experienced in the power and mercies of
God) and now am old: yet never saw I the righteous for saken, nor their seed
begging their bread. The godly will he never fail, seeing he never fails the
beast, from whom by this or that means, their need is satisfied. For example,
1. King. 17. 6.
the Ravens that brought bread and flesh to Elias, Dan. 14. 32.
and the pottage brought by Habacuc to Daniel, in the den of the Lions.
Notwithstanding all that I have said touching the wicked life of the Cergie: I
confess (as the truth is) that there be some good, honest, and desirous to
serve God among them: which more offend of ignorance, then malice: who, when
the Lord shall show them mercy to know the vices, both in life and doctrine,
will reprove them: and if that suffice not, go out from among the^. Two Roman
Empire.
As the Lord in all times has ever prevented some, in our time chiefly, and
has made them notable preachers of the Gospel of his son Jesus Christ. His
Majesty show the same mercy to the rest, that the kingdom of Antichrist may
wholly fall to the earth, and that of his Christ be exalted. Let us now come to
the reasons.

Two Roman Empires have been (the first will we call the old, and the second
the new) Of very mean beginnings, began the one and the other, and by little
and little so greatly climbed, that they became the greatest and most mightiest
Empires that ever were, or shall be in the world.

The first took beginning in two shepherds, Romulus and Remus, his brother:
who made a receptacle of evil doers and offenders, and a gate (as it were)
whereby they retired and escaped: of that multitude was a city builded which
they called Rome. Romulus, not brooking a competitor in the Empire, slew Remus
his brother. From this city, did they great violence and outrage to their
neighbor nations; not only robbing them of their goods, but of their young
maidens also. This was the first occasion of the wars: This war ended,
others much more great, had they: wherein they so much increased and enriched
themselves, that not contented with Italy, they made wars also upon foreign
nations, and leaving their own limits, The beginning of the Popedom, which is
the new Empire.
they invaded Affrike and Asia. Thus were they daily increasing, until another
Prince and Lord arose up in Rome, thrusting himself into the same seat of the
Empire, and at the side (as it were) of the Roman Emperor. This new Prince at
the first made no show, that he purposed ought to diminish the authority of the
Emperor: but only took care of the affairs of the Church: wherein, whiles he
was so employed the strength of the Emperor, and Empire flourished. But
afterward, he began to think, how to benefit himself of that opinion of
religion, and holiness which he held: and to attain hereunto, he doubted not
to entreat the Emperor, that by his authority he might hold the souereignty
over all Churches. The cause that this new Prince alleged was, that Rome was
always the Lady of the whole world: and therefore was it meet that the Bishop
of that city should go before other Bishops in degree and dignity. To obtain
this was a thing most difficult: For albeit that the Emperor let it slip: yet
did the Bishops of other nations confidently gainesay him: alleging lawful
causes why they withstood him: unwilling to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome,
otherwise then for a brother, companion, and in power equal with them.
Notwithstanding all this he of Rome forslowed not, but continually urged to
attain to his purpose, until he obtained of Phocas the Emperor (who
murdered Mauricius his good Lord and Emperor) that which he would: Boniface 3.
and so called himself universal Bishop, and what besides he best pleased.
Here may ye see, that old Rome was founded upon one murder, The Popedom
founded upon murder.
and the new, which is the Popedom upon another. In this concerning the
primacie, was the Pope merely oposit to Christ, Mark 13. 41.
who sharply in his disciples reproved the like strife and ambition, Luke 22.
25.
But the Pope mounted to this height by the benefit of the Emperors, did now
further dare to promise to himself greater matters: yet long time proceeding
with great dissimulation. A hundred years almost after the death of
Constantine the great, was the Empire much weakened: it lost France, England,
and Almaine, The Hunnes held Italy, the Vandals, Afric. Such was the
dissipation, that the Emperors leaving Rome, which is in the West, went to
Constantinople, The Pope taking occasion of the question about Images denies
obedience to the Emperor.
where they made their abode. The Bishop of Rome, seeing the scattering of the
Empire, minded not to let slip occasion: but armed a question for his part
against the Emperor: The chief cause was; that the Emperor commanded all
statues and Images to be taken out of the Churches: So greatly did the Pope
withstand this command, that he dared to excommunicate the Emperor: so much
now was the horn increased. At this time in the East, arose up Mahomet, who
took many lands form the Empire. The Emperors notwithstanding, would have it
understood, that all the dignity, power and Majesty, which the Pope did hold,
depended upon them. The Pope then to be freed from this subjection, and the
wars which the king of Lumbardie made in italy, devised a notable policy;
and this it was. To advance of himself another, whom he liked, and to name
him Emperor of the Romans. Who accknowledging the benefit, Charles the great
made Emperor and why.
should deem himself happy, to please and serve him in all that he would:
And so Charles the great he elected, and declared Emperor, who had chased out
of Italy, the king of Lumbardy, and enemy to the Pope. This caused great
anger, and strife between the Eastern and Western Emperors: and not
between them only, but the Churches also of both the one and other party: of
all which, the covetousness, and ambition of the Pope of Rome were the cause.
Much contention was there afterward, among the Italians, French and Almaynes,
about the election of the Emperor. But in the end, when Otho the third Duke of
Saxoni^ was Emperor, and Gregory 5. an Almayne Pope, order was given, that
seven electors should choose the Emperor, (as in the life of this Gregory the
fifth we have declared) And this was done, to exclude strange nations, that
none but an Almayne should be Emperor. Great garboyles arose afterward
between the Pope and the Emperor, who could no longer endure, the
unmeasurable arrogancy and ambition of the Pope. Read the Histories of Henry
the third and fourth, and of Frederick the first and second, and to come nearer
our time, those of the Emperor Charles 5. whose host in the 1527. year,
sacked Rome* took Pope Clement 7. and held him prisoner. This Clement (as sang
the Spaniardes at the Popes window, whiles he was prisoner) would have taken
away the cloak from the Emperor, as upon the life of this Clement, we have
before declared. So also sought Paul the fourth to take away the cloak from
our king Don Philip the second. The kingdom of Naples would he have taken from
him: but the host of the king, whose captain was the Duke Dalua put the Pope
into such a straight, that he was contented to make peace, and chiefly hearing
of the taking of Saint Quintans, which was in the 1557. year (as upon the
life of this Paul the fourth, before we have said. So proud is the Pope become,
that he has made the form of an oath, the which he causes the Emperor to
swear (being in time past his master and Lord, and so Saint Gregory called
Lord, the good Emperor Mauricius) but now, The oath which the Emperor makes
to the Pope.
is he his servant and vassal. This form of oath, conteyneth; that the
Emperor, by all possible ways keep, increase and defend the goods of the
Roman Church, and chief Bishopes, their dignity, priueledges, and decrees.
And so no Emperor (but if he would be holden infamous and a faith breaker)
durst in any thing contradict him. The oath which the Emperor Charles 5. made
to Clement 7. or 8. in the 1530. The 1. oath of the Emperor.
year, at the time of his Coronation, will I here put down. Ego Carolus
Romanoru^ rex, etc. That is to say. I Charles king of the Romans, which by Gods
assistance, hold to be Emperor, promise, protest, affirm, and swear to God
and blessed S. Peter, that I will henceforth be protector and defendor of the
chief Bishop, and of the holy Church of Rome in all their necessities and
profits, keeping, and preserving their possessions, dignities, and rightes,
etc. When he had made this oath, was Don Charles made king of Lumbardy, and
after he was king of Lumbardy, another oath in this form he made: The 2. oath*
Ego Carolus, etc. I Charles king of the Romans and Lumbardes, promise and
swear, by the father, son, and holy Ghost, and by the word of the living
flesh, and by these holy relics, that if the Lord permit me to come to be
Emperor, I shall to my power, advance to holy Roman Church, the holiness
thereof* and her Rector, and that by my will, Council, consent, nor
exhortation, he shall loose neither life, member* nor honor which he holds.
And I shall not make in Rome any decree or ordynation of all that, to his
holiness, or to the Romans perteyneth, without your consent: And all that of
Saint Peter's lands, which shall be in our power, we shall then restore, and to
whom soever I shall deliver over the government of Itali^, I shall cause him
swear to be an ayder of his holiness, to defend to his power, the lands of
Saint Peter, as God me help, and by these holy Gospells of God, The Emperor
made a chanon and kinght of S. Peter.
etc. After this 2. oath Don Charles was made a Chanon of Saint Peter, and
after, a knight of Saint Peter. These two oaths shall ye find in the History
and 10. book of the marquess of Pescara. Here may ye see, how the world
goes contrary. The Pope of a subject to the Emperor, has made himself his
Lord. This which I have said, touching the original and growing up of the
Pope, in an information, presented to the princes, and states of the Empire in
the time of Don Charles the Emperor, our king and Lord, is handled more at
large. Hence will we conclude, that the authority, which the Pope boasts to
hold, is neither by divine nor humane right, but diabolical: with subtilty he
thrust himself into it, with strange force (as says Daniell) he does and
shall maineteine the same, until God destroy him with the force and power of
his word. By which saying it appears, that the Popedom built (as it is)
upon hypocrysie, craft, Matthew. 16. 16.
avarice, ambition and tyranny, is not builded upon the firm rock which is
Jesus Christ, whom Saint Peter confessed saying: Thou art the Christ, the son
of the living God. And if the Popedom be not founded upon Christ, much less
is the Pope the head, or universal Bishop of the Church of God, but of the
devil. And that he is not universal Bishop, I will confirm it proving with
short and apparent reasons, that Saint Peter whose successor they say the Pope
to be, The 1. Reason. Clemens ad Iacobum.
was not universal Bishop of the Church. The first reason Saint Clement,
Bishop of Rome, writing (as say our adversaries) to Saint James, called him the
brother of the Lord, Bishop of Bishops, Governor of the Church of Jerusalem,
and of all others through the whole world. If this be true, it follows, The
2. Reason. Acts 15.
that so was not Saint Clement, albeit he were Bishop of Rome. 2. Also in the
first Christian Council, whereof Saint Luke in his History makes mention,
not S. Peter as universal Bishop but S. James governed. Who heard each one,
and among them S. Peter: and when all had spoken, Saint James, as President,
concluded, in the 19. verse, saying: wherefore my sentence is etc. Read the
chapter, and you shall see that which I say to be truth. Notwithstanding all
this D. Illescas the Popes parasite, in his part 1. fol. 20. says: That Saint
Peter as chief Bishop was president in this Council. The 3. Reason.
3. Also the Apostles (as reports Saint Luke) hearing that Samaria had
received the doctrine of the Gospel; to teach and more fully instruct them;
sent Peter and John thither. But who shall now, send the Pope to preach?
Suerely the Counsel will not be so bold: and though the Counsel so should, yet
would not the Pope do it, saying: he is Immediate from God. The Apostles sent
Peter, and Peter, as a faithful member of the. Church, The 4. Reason. Gal. 2.
11.
obeyed, went and preached. 4. Saint Paul, reproved Saint Peter because (faith
Saint Paul) he so deserved, Saint Peter listened thereto and allowed the
reprehension. That he was imediate from God, that he was universal Bishop, and
therefore greater then he, answered he not neither did he answer, that none
ought, nor could reprove him, nor yet demand account of him, why he did so, or
so: as the Popes now, and many years also, to kings, Emperors, yea and
general Councels, have answered. So shameless are some of our adversaries,
that notwithstanding Saint Paul says, that being come to Antioche, I
withstood Peter to his face, etc. And verse 14. he says: whom when I saw that
they walked not rightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, I said to Peter
before all, etc. yet say they, that Saint Paul reproved not S. Peter, but
another, which was called Cephas* Read D. Illescas part 1. fol. 21. Whose words
be these. Before that S. Peter (say they) came to Rome, he held equality with
S. Paul in Antioch, etc. Illescas believes not that which S. Paul witnesses
of this equalltie: and therefore; as one doubting, says: They say, what credit
shall we give to such a one, that doubts of that which Saint Paul affirms?
The 5. Reason. 1. These. 2. 3.
That Antichrist, whosoever he shall be, which Saint Paul calls the son of
perdition, and man of sin, Apoc. 17. 9.
shall sit in the temple of God; and as adds S. John, in the city situate
upon 7* mountains. This city as S. Jerome and many others declare, is Rome:
Only the Pope sits in the Temple of* God, in the city of seven mountains,
which is Rome. The 6. Reason.
Therefore only the Pope is that Antichrist. 6. Also, in the first Council of
Nice assembled by Constantine, that good Emperor, to confound and destroy the
heresy of Arrius (who with this blaspheamous mouth took away the divinity of
Jesus Christ) the Legates of the Bishop of Rome, not in the 1. 2. nor 3. but in
the 4. place did sit: Ergo the Bishop of Rome, was not then head, nor
universal Bishop of the Church. In this Nicen Council, the Limits of the
Patriarchs were bounded, to whom the same authority, over their Churches, was
given, as held the Bishop of Rome over his neighbor Churches. The Papists (as
they know, which have read Histories) have endeavored, what they could, to
falsify this decree. Read for this purpose, the sixth Council of Carthage,
whereof we will afterward make mention. Cardinal Cusanus alleging the Nicen
Council, showed the rialtie of the truth, saying as follows. The Bishop of
Rome, of the ancients, Lib. 2 de concordia Cathol, cap. 12.
is often called Patriarch, or Archbishop: and like authority was given him in
the Council of Nice, as to the other Patriarchs. Here we see, what great
authority has the Pope newly in our times usurped, more then that which the
holy and ancient constitutions gave him, and all this by continuance, and
custom of slavish obedience. Neither Iu^us, who then was Bishop of Rome, nor
his Legates, which were in this Council, gain said this decree. And that
which more is, the same decree, was afterwareds, in the Council of Antioche,
and in the Council of Constantinople, confirmed. In the first Council of
Ephesus, Cyrillus, In the 2. Dioscorus, Patriaches of Alexandria did govern,
albeit the Legates of the the Bishop of Rome, were there present. In the 5.
Counsel of Constantinople, Menas, as patriarch of the city where the Council
was holden, governed. In the General Council holden in Aquilea, S. Ambrose
bishop of Milan was president, and not the bishop of Rome: albeit the Council
was holden in Italy. But what forces it to allege so many Councels: since in
one Council this question was heard and determined, and both parties heard
also? The bishop of Rome, with the title of Patriark, took upon him much
authority, over the Churches of Affrique. The Council of Mileuant against the
Primacie
So that the Sismatiques of Afric as to a refuge, retired unto him. For this
cause, the Council of Maleuant (wherein was Saint Augustine, and a great
number of fathers) pronounced al those excommunicate, which should appeal to
parts beyound the seas. The Bishop of Rome grudging here at, sent his Legates,
to the 6. Council of Carthage (wherein also was S. Augustine present) to
defend his right. This question, in this Council, was truly handled; Zozimus,
Boniface, and Celestine, successively being Bishops. Aurelius, Archbishop of
Carthage, where the Council was holden, and not the Legates of the Pope
(albeit they were three, and present: namely, Faustine Bishop, Philip and
Aselias presbiters) there governed. These had the Bishop of Rome sent to the
Council of Carthage, to defend the authority, which the Nicen Council (said
they) had given to the Bishop of Rome: to wit, that appeal might be made to
the Bishop o of Rome, from the sentence given by any metropolitaine whatsoever.
One Daniell a notarie red the whole 5. chap. of the Council of Sardice, which
the Bishop of Rome said (but very untruly) was of the Council of Niece. The
Pope like a good apothecarie, when it is for his profit, well knows to give
quid pro quo. All the Bishops and Archbishops much marueyled, and said, that
such a thing was never read in the Council of Nice: and so the same Council
of Nice, which they had then in writing, they commanded to be read: which
being read, and no word of such appellation found: yet did the Roman Legates
insist, that it was so. Needful it was then, to send certain men, to
Constantinople, Alexandria, and also to Rome it self, The deceit of the Pope
discovered.
that they might bring other copies of the Nicen Council. Within one year
were they brought, and the original it self chiefly, which was kept in
Constantinople: Read they were, and no mention, nor ought else that might give
suspicion of this privilege, which the Romans alleged, to have been granted
them in the Nicen Council: was at all found in any of these coppies. A letter
then was written by consent of the whole Council of Carthage, to the Bishop of
Rome, wherein no such thing (said they) but the contrary rather was found in
the Council of Nice: In those times every Bishop was called Pope.
that the Bishop of Rome, as did other Popes and metropolitanes, should meddle
within his own limits and bounds. And that therefore, if he were wise, he
should thenceforth be content with his own dioces, and bishorick; and not
intrude upon an others possession. This letter was subscribed by 230 fathers,
and among them, the Popes self same three Legates before named. If the Pope and
his Legates, when they used not such tyranny as now they use, did dare to
falsify a Council: in almost a thousand, two hundred, and so many years
passed, after this Council of Carthage, unto this year 1598. What shall they
not have done? Quien haze un cesto, hara ciento: He that makes one basket, will
make a hundred. And no wonder it is, that they have dared to falsify the
Councels, seeing they have shamelesly taken from the law of God the 2.
Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any image, etc. And seeing but 9
Commandments, of the tenth commandment, Thou shall not lust, etc. have they
made two commandments, as in the beginning of this Treatise we have noted. Our
Spanish Caran^a in his Summa Conciliorum, sets down no one of so many
Cannons in it) of this 6. Council of Carthage the cause is, least he should
therein have discovered the falsehood of the Bishop of Rome, in alleging of the
Nicen Council, that which the Council never, but the contrary rather
determined. A Summarie only he made, and very brief saying: that the
Council determined, what the Nicen Council demanded of the Eastern
Bishops: but says not unto what purpose. O great subtlety. This Council
of Carthage, albeit it was general, called he prouincial. So also calls it
Panuinus, notwithstanding they both confess that there were found there
present 217 Bishops, and three legates of the Pope: what lets it then to be
general? The Papists, what they may, will forget this sixth Council of
Carthage: albeit, says Panninus, it was confirmed in Trullo. Gracian also
interpreting the words of the Council, Cursed is the gloss that corrupts the
text.
uses the same malice: That none appeal (says he) to parts beyond the sea,
except it be to the Bishop of Rome. The cause why it was commanded in this 6.
Council of Carthage, that no appeal should be beyond the sea, was, for that
the sismatikes of Affrike, condemned by the good Bishops of Affrike, appealed
to Rome: Therefore commanded the council they should not appeal, but that the
business, without seeking further, should be concluded in Affricke. And so was
the conclusion of this Council: That the Bishop of Rome should not receive
those, that were excommunicate by the Bishops of Affricke, nor accept their
appellations, which had in Affrike been condemned: and those that appealed to
him, should be, for the same matter, excommunicate. The reasons whereupon this
Council was founded, sent by it to Celestine Bishop of Rome, be these: That in
no Counsel was any such thing determined: But that the Nicen Council
contrariwise gave the charge of the Bishops, and Ecclesiastical persons to the
Metropolitan. The grace of the holy Spirit (says it) will assist every
province to judge controversies: that each one which felt himself grieved,
might appeal to a provincial Council: For it is more to be believed, that
God will rather inspire many Priests in a Council assembled then one only
man, etc. By that which we have alleged of the sixth Council of Carthage, it
clearly appears: how false is that, which the Pope said, that in the Nicen
Council the primacie was given him: and yet want there not some in our times
also, which renew this falsehood. And so D. Illescas upon the life of Boniface
3 in the marginall note says these words: Phocas de clared by the Law, that
the Roman Church is head of the Church universal. Also he says: This
superiority of the Roman Church has ever since been, and by all faithful
and Catholic Christians is holden for a thing proved, and without dispute: as
the Council of Niece chap. 6. and Raimundus Rufus against the heretics of this
time, for lovers of novelties, etc. most plainly proves. In the seventh
Council of Carthage, Anno 600.
the matter of the primacie was also debated. The cause was this: That John,
Bishop of Constantinople, seeing himself favored of Maurice the Emperor,
called himself Bishop of Bishops, and universal bishop. And this because he
was Bishop of the city, where the Emperor was resident. Mauricius willing to
advance his city, and abase Rome, did support, and maintain him. A curse
then was pronounced in this Council, not against John of Constantinople, but
generally, against whomsoever should take upon him the title of universal
Bishop. The Doctors against the primacie.
The Doctors which at this time lived, and chiefly Saint Gregory, do witness
the same. Let them read his epistles of the first book the 76. Saint Gregory
against the primacie.
78. 80. 85. and of the second book, the 188. and 194. In none of these
epistles says S. Gregory, that the said John wronged S. Peter, nor withheld,
nor yet usurped the right and title of the Bishops of Rome: but protests,
that it is title profane, sacrilegious, and the forerunner of Antichrist. And
in the 4. book and 48. chap. of the Register, the same Saint Gregory doubts
not to pronounce him, that suffers himself to be called universal and chief
Bishop, to be the forerunner of Antichrist. Read for this purpose the same
Saint Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 76. 78. 30. lib. 7. and 69. epist. And in the 35.
epist. which he wrote to John Bishop of Constantinople, who usurped this title,
he says: All that was prophesied is fulfilled: the king of pride (namely
Antichrist) is near at hand: and that which is abomination to speak, an host
of Priests make preparation for him. And in an epistle, which he wrote to
Mauricius the Emperor, he says: And I say boldly, that whosoever is called
universal Priest, either in his pride desires so to be called, or is the
forerunner of Antichrist: for that in waxing proud he prefers himself to
the rest, and with incomparable pride, walks in the way of error. For, as
that perverse man will above al men be holden for God: A notable discourse made
by Edward bishop of Salisburg.
so neither more, nor less is he (be he what he will) that seeks to be
called Priest over the other priests, etc. About the 1240. year, Edward
Archibishop of Salisburg, speaking in the Council holden at Ratisbon to
repress the insolency and tyranny of the Popes, How the Popes employ
themselves;
said these words: we might have perceived, had we not been blind, under the
title of chief Bishop, a most cruel wolf in shepherds clothing. The Roman
bishops daring, deceiving and sowing the wars of wars, draw weapons
against all Christians. And becoming great, they kill the sheep, cast peace
and concord out of the world: draw from hell civil wars and domestical
seditions: more and more weaken the strengths of all men to triumph over all
men, to deliver up all men, and to put all men in bondage and captivity. It is
now (says he) 170 years, since Hildebrand (he was called Gregory 7.) under
color of religion, laid the foundations of the Empire of Antichrist: he was
the first that began this abominable wars: which his successors: until this
day have continued. And then, the chief Bishops of Babylon, desire to reign,
they ca^nnot endure an equal. Believe me, that have made experience: cease they
will not, until (having suppressed the Emperor, defaced the majesty of the
Roman Empire, All this is fully accomplished.
and oppressed the true Pastors) they destroy by the same way, all whatsoever
remains: they put al under their feet: they sit in the temple of God, and
lift up themselves above all that is worshipped. He which is servant of
servants desires (as if he were God) to be Lord of Lords. In his breast
tosseth, he new Councils to establish a proper empire: laws he cha^geth, and
establishes his own: This man of perdition, whom they wontedly call
Antichrist (in whose forehead is written the name of blasphemy, I am God: I
cannot err, polluteth, robs, spoyleth and kills. The title of the Pope.
He is set in the temple of God, making himself Lord of all. And that
moreover, which ye may read in the 7. book of the Annals of Auentino fol.
685. If such were the Popes 357. years since, when malice was not yet come to
the height, what manner of men shall the Popes of our times be? Surely, much
worse: for in nothing do evil men profit, but in doing more evil.

Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, Arnulphus.
openly in the Council at Remes, holden more then 560. years since, called
the Pope Antichrist. Bernard.
Saint Bernard, who lived in the 1150. year, in his second, third and fourth
books of Considerations, called the Pope Antichrist. Ioachin.
The Abbot Ioachin Calabres, who lived 350 years since, called the Pope
Antichrist. About the 1101. Fluencius.
year lived Bishop Fluencius, that called the Pope Antichrist. Nicholas Gallus.
About the 1245. year, lived Nicholas Gallus, who seeing the deformity of the
Church, wrote a book against the Popes entitled Ignea sagitta, Marsilius.
a fiery arrow. Marsilius, a learned man, Cesenas.
wrote more then 200. years since, against the Pope and his laws. At the same
time almost lived Michael Cesenas, General of the Minoritts, who openly called
the Pope Antichrist. Above. Wickliffe.
200. years past, John Wicliffe wrote and preached against the Pope; John Hus.
Ierom of Prage Petrarcus.
and reformed many popish abuses in England. The same did after wards John
Hus, and Jerome of Prage in Bohemia Francisco Petrarca, an Italyan borne in the
1304 year, and in the 1374. year dyed, very truly wrote, against the Pope, and
his court. Read this 20. Epistle, wherein he calls the court Papal, Babylon,
and Babilonish stru^per, which is set upon many waters. Mother of all
Idolatries, and whoredoms. Read his 92. which begins: Del' Empia Babilonia,
etc. which word for word thus sounds in English. From wicked Babylon, whence
all shame is fled, where no goodness remains: Harbor of sorrow, mother of
errors, to prolong life am I fled. Item the 106. Sonet, which begins Fiamma
d'oal ciel, etc. The flame of heaven upon thy hayres (or curled locks) O
caytife, which from the fountain and wallet (to wit from drinking of water,
and poorly feeding) by impouerishing others, art become rich and great: Since
so much thou reioycest in doing evil. Neast of treasons, wherein what
mischiefs are now spread through the world, be hatched. Servant of wine, bed,
and belly cheer, in whom whoredom has made her last proof: For thy
Chamberlaines young and old go playing the wantons, and Baelzabub in the
midst, with bellows, fire, and looking glasses. In the fether at the shadow
wast thou not brought, but naked to the wind, unshod among the bushes, etc.
Such now is thy life, that the stink is gone up unto God.

Also in the 107. Sonet, which begins, L'auara Babylonia, etc. Covetous
Babylon so full has heaped the sack of the wrath of God, and of wicked and
perverse vices, that it bursteht: and not Jupiter, nor Pallas, but Bacchus and
Venus has made her gods. Expecting reason does torment and consume me, etc.
And four verses further. Her Idolles shall be holden for earth, etc. Also the
108. Sonnet, which begins: Fontana di dolor, etc. Fountain of grief,
harbor of wrath, school of errors, and Temple of heresy: Rome in elder time,
now false and perverse Babylon, for whom I so much weep and sigh. O shop of
deceit, o prison of wrath, where goodness dies, and evil is maintained and
nourished: hell of the living: great wonder shall it be, if Christ in the end
be not wroth with thee, founded in chaste and humble poverty, liftest thou up
thy horns against thy founders? Shameless strumpet, where have thou put thy
trust? In thine adulteries, in so great abundance of evil gotten riches? etc.
If Petrarch 260 years and more since, with great reason and truth said this
against the Pope and his Court papal: what shall be said now, when the malice,
tyranny, ungodliness and idolatry of the Pope and his court are come to the
height? Dante.
Danter an Author more ancient then Petrarch, and Bocace, of the same time with
Petrarch, as little flattred the Pope: other things as much as Petrarch say
they. Dante in his 7. song of hell, accuses the Pope of covetousness. In the
11. song and 6. circle he accuses him of heresy. In the 15. song he accuses
him of sodomie. And in the 19. he accuses him of simonie. The Popes four
cardinal virtues: avarice heresy, sodomy and simonie. Bocace.
(These be the four cardinal virtues, which are found in the Popes,
Covetousness, heresy, sodomie, and simonie. Bocace in the second Novel of
the Iornada of his Decameron, in the name of a Jew called Abraham, says, that
generally all the Court of Rome, from the greatest to the least, dishonestly
sinned in the sin of whoredom: and not naturally only, but also
sodomitically, without any bridle, without any remorse of conscience, or shame,
etc. They have not (says he) either holiness, devotion, or good works, etc.
And in many other places does he the same. These three Dante, Petrarch and
Botace be ancient writers, Italians, and fathers of the Italian tongue,
Sanazaro.
and well experienced in the affairs of the Pope and his Court. Sanazaro the
most excellent Italian Poet of our times, speaking of the Pope, thus says in
his Epigrams.

In vaticano noster latet, hunc tamen alto,
Christ vides coelo, proh dolor, and pateris.
To wit, In the Vaticano (which is the palace of Saint Peter in Rome) our
(Barbarian) lies hid: but yet thou Christ from the high heaven beholdest him:
ah grief, and do thou suffer him? What more could Luther, or Calvin, or the
rest of the late writers, which have written against the Pope and his Romish
court say, then these his Italians have said. Petrarch calls it wicked
Babylon, mother of errors: he wishes fire to fall from heaven and consume it
(such abominations had seen therein) he calls it a neast of treasons, etc.
gluttonous and luxurious. God cannot (says he) longer be patient with her,
etc. Idols he says shall be thrown to the ground, The Church of Rome erreth
in faith.
etc. He calls her the fountain of grief, harbor of wrath, school of
errors, temple of heresies, etc. Behold if the Pope may err in faith: And it
is to be noted, that Pope Pius the fifth, (as in his life we have said) has
spunged all these places by us alleged, out of Petrarch and Bocace. The cause
is, least men should know their wickedness, abominations and impieties, but
may hold him for holy, and for God upon earth. Great shame was it for the Pope,
Thomas Rendonio.
that so famous Italian Authors, that Italian books, and printed in Italy,
should so roundly tell the wickedness of him and his. About the 1430. year
lived Thomas Rendon, a Carmelite, of whom in the life of Eugenius the fourth,
we have before made mention: He said in his sermons, which in Italy and France
he preached: Laurencius Valla.
that in Rome were committed great abominations, etc. For which cause Pope
Eugenius 4. did cause him to be burned in Rome. Above a hundred years is it,
since Laurencius Valla Patricius, a Roman opposed himself to the Pope, and
called Rome Babylon: for which cause he was banished: but the king of Naples,
Sauanarola.
received, and very honorably entertained him. Ieronymus Sauanarola a Dominican
Friar, preached in Italy, the Pope to be Antichrist, etc. For this that our
cursed Spanish beast Alexander 6. (as in the life of this Alexander 6. we have
said) did cause him in Florence most cruelly to be burned. Within these 80
years space, have been infinite numbers, that in Almaine, France, Italy,
England, yea, in Spain, and other nations also have written against the Pope
and his Popish doctrine: let their works be read, and their reasons agreeing
with the word of God considered, which is the true and only squire and rule,
whereby every life and doctrine ought to be ruled and confirmed. Return we
now to the Primacie, which the Pope as another Diotrephes (of whom speaks S.
John in his 3. catholic Epistle) loves to hold, 3. Io. 9.
and so does usurp it. A history wrote S. Augustine, very well declaring the
equality which has the Bishop of Rome with other Bishops. Donatus (says S.
Augustine) de casas negras, of whom the Donatists take their name, had
grievously accused Cecilianus Archbishop of Carthage. Epistle. 162
Constantine the Emperor (the cause being simply ecclesiastical) committed
the same to Miltiades Bishop of Rome, and other certain Bishops of Italy,
France, and Spain. Had there been ordinary jurisdiction no commission from
the Emperor, nor to appoint him associates had been needful. But listen a
little: Donatus was condemned by them above named, who seeing himself condemned,
appealed to the Emperor: the Emperor remitted the appeal to the Archbishop
of Areletum, either to allow or disallow of the sentence, which the Bishop of
Rome and his associates, had given. Where then was the Primacie of the Pope his
jurisdiction: his sentence without any appellation: his knowledge, and hearing
of all appeals, his fullness of power, whereof he so much glories? And the
Emperor, will they not say, was an infidel, or tyrant: for it was Constantine
the Great, who (by their own reckoning) spoiled himself of a good part of the
Empire, to give it unto them. That Constantine the Great appointed Miltiades
jointly with the rest, for Judge, to hear the cause of Cecilianus. Onuphrius
Panuinus in his note upon Platina, in the life of Miltiades does witness the
same: and confirms it with Optatus Mileuitanus in his first book, and with
that which says Eusebius in the tenth book and fifth chap. of his
ecclesiastical history. But Panuinus as a Flatterer of the pope makes no
mention of the appeal we have spoken of, because it impeached the authority,
The Emperors called the general Councels
which the Popes have usurped. As touching the calling of the Councels, the
Emperors called the General, the Patriarks and Metropolitans called the
National, or prouincial Councels: The Patriarchs and not the Bishop of Rome
did govern in the Councels, which they held in their Patriarkedomes: for all
being equal, and under one head Christ, the Bishop of Rome did not exceed
them either in dignity or power. Epistola ad Liberium Epise opum Romanu^.
So says Athanasius, writing to Liberius Bishop of Rome. All the Apostles
(says he) in honor and power be equal. Saint Cyprian likewise, more ancient
then Athanasius: There is not (says he) but one bishopric through the world,
whereof every bishop holds his part. De simplice Prelat.
Also that none in his time was called, In sen^entiis Episcoprum. libro 1.
epist. 1.
or made Bishop of Bishops, nor had by tyranny subjected his companions to obey
him. Also he complains that the profane Sismatikes withdrew themselves to
the Bishop of Rome. There was none (says he) that would do this, but certain
lost and desperate men, making men believe, that the Bishops of Affrike had
less authority the^ he of Rome. Hieronymus in Epist. ad Euagrium repetitur in
Decreto Graciani.
S. Jerome to this self same purpose says: Wheresoever a Bishop shall be, be
it in Rome, or in Egubium, be it in Constantinople, or in Regium, one self
same dignity he has, and one selfsame priesthood: Hieron. ad Nepotianum.
riches nor poverty either make him superior or inferior. And so the ancient
Doctors, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Hilarious, Cyprian, etc. when they wrote to
the Bishop of Rome, they gave him not the glorious titles, which the flatterers
of our times now give him: Most holy father, most blessed Pope, chief Bishop,
our Lord, and God upon earth: they called him brother, fellow Bishop, companion
in office: and other such like titles, which sauored of love and Christian
simplicity, and not of flattery and pride, wherewith the miserable Popes are
puffed up, and rest much contented. And if it seemed to those Fathers, that the
Bishop of Rome counterma^ded, or in any thing faulted (seeing he was a man)
either in life or doctrine, they advised him, and if need so required reproved
him. Thus not once by chance, but many times, and that very sharply did Cyprian
handle Stephen Bishop of Rome. Ireneus reproved Victor, for that through an
impudent ambition, he excommunicated the Churches of Asia, for the difference
in celebration of Easter. Who should now dare to do this, albeit the Pope were
another John 8. 12. 13. 14. 23. or 24. or were he another Boniface 8. another
Syluester 2. another Gregory 7. another Alexander 6, Paul 3. and 4. or Pius
the fifth. By divine law all Bishops are equal: and so as brothers, are to
advise and correct one another. If any difference there be of Maioritie, or
Minority, by positive law it comes, as the Cannonists themselves, when the
truth does enforce the^, confess, saying: Quod omnis maioritas and minoritas,
etiam Papatus, est de iure positiuo. That all maioritie and minority, yea the
very Popedom it self, is by the positive law: as much to say, that men have
made it. And yet go I further. The maiority, say I, which the Pope has usurped
over all the Churches, being against the Lamb of the Apocalypse, and against
his Saints, is not by divine, nor yet humane law, I say it is de iure
diabolico, of the devil: that it is, an infernal tyranny, against which, all
the world is to rise up, as against a fire and general burning, which touches
every particular person. Note here, that which in the life of John 24. we have
noted: where the Pope by a decree of the Council of Constance and Basile is
proved to be subject to the Council: and that more over which there we have
said. Not bluntly and foolishly (as they say) but with good reason me seems,
do I say this: as by the sayings of the Fathers, and decrees of ancient
Councels, we have sufficiently proved the same. And had there been none to have
said it, yet their proper life and doctrine, which we have in the beginning
mentioned, are most evident testimonies to confirm our sayings. By their lives
may each one see (if of wilful ignorance he become not blockish, Anno. 605.
foolish, and blind) the Popes, which have bin bishops of Rome, from Boniface
the third (who was a creature of Phocas the Emperor, an adulterer, murderer,
and tyrant) until Clement 8. or 10. which now tyrannizeth) to have almost been
al noted (read their histories) of terrible, enormious and wicked vices, and
sins. Witches they have been, murderers, ill beloved, tumultuous troublers
of common wealths and kingdoms, seditious, reuengefull brothellers, simonists,
sodomites, perjured, incestuous, Nigromancers, sacrilegious, wicked, without
God, without religion. They then being such, we conclude them not to be
successors of Peter, but of Judas: not to be vicars of Christ, but of the
Devil, and very Antichrist. But now for more confirmation of that which is
said, we will allege certain passages of holy Scripture, which the Papists
themselue understand and interpret of Antichrist: we will consider if that
which the Scripture says Antichrist shall do and say, the Pope does and says.
And seeing that the doctrine and life of the Pope is the very same, which the
scripture does say shall be that of Antichrist: by the Papists own confession,
will we conclude, the Pope to be Antichrist.

The first passage, Dan. 11. 36.
is taken out of Daniel the 11. chapter: which says: And the king shall do
what he list: By king, as well in this place, as chapter 8. 23. and 24. is meant
Antiochus, a great persecutor of the people of God; This Antiochus was a figure
of Antichrist, which is the Pope. Antiochus burned the Bible, advanced his God
Mauzim, forbad marriage, made Idols of gold and silver, adorned them with rich
ornaments, etc. and the same does the Pope. Daniell proceeds. He shall exalt,
and magnify himself against all that is God, and shall speak marvelous
things against the God of Gods: and shall prosper till the wrath be
accomplished: for the determination is made; Neither shall he regard the God of
his fathers, nor the desires of women, nor care for any God: for he shall
magnify himself against all, Three marks wherewith Antichrist shall be marked.
etc. Note here in Daniel. 3. notable marks which (says he) Antichrist shall
have: In whomsoever then we shall see them, hold we him for. Antichrist. The 1.
is that he shall not acknowledge the God of his fathers: 2. is that he shall
not regard the love of women, The Pope is an Apostata in religion.
3. nor care for any God. The cause of all this (says he) is the excessive
pride. The Pope being of the race of Christians, which have worshipped the true
God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has brought into the Church of God,
where he holds his seat, Idolatry and superstition, commanding men, in
affliction and calamity, to invoke another, and others then God: Exodus 20.
contrary to the express commandment of God. Thou shall have no other Gods
before me: and contrary to that which he commands by his Prophet: Psalm 50.
51.
Call upon me in the day of trouble. There is no commandment of God, either
in the old or new Testament, that commands us to invoke any other but God
alone. Neither is there any example of Patriarch, Prophet, Romans 10. 14.
or Apostle, which has called upon any, save God alone. For how shall they
call upon him, in whom they have not believed? as says Saint Paul. In one
only God we believe, upon him only let us call. This new Doctrine has the
Pope brought into the Church, to call upon others then God alone: Therefore is
he Antichrist. Who has forbidden Christians to read the law of the Lord, the
books of the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists? The Pope. Who burns these
holy books, and those that for instruction of their conscience read them? The
Pope. Who has taken upon him authority to pardon sins, and that for money,
it being God alone which does graciously pardon the^? The Pope. Who has caused
a little piece of white bread to be worshipped saying: it is the true God,
which created heaven and earth? The Pope. Therefore is he Antichrist, which
neither honoreth nor a doreth the God of his fathers, The Pope abhors
matrimony by God ordained.
who in the books, that the Pope burns, has manifested himself to his
faithful. The 2. mark is, that he shall not regard the love of women (to wit)
that under color of chastity, holiness, and meritorious works, he shall
abhor marriage. So greatly has the Pope abhorred marriage that a law he has
made, that no Pope, Cardinal, Patriarch, Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, Archeacon,
Priest, nor Friar, Deacon, nor subdeaco^, nor any Nun shall marry. And
wherefore? For pure hypocrisy; to be sold to the ignorant people, for holy;
for Angels, which are not fleshly, but wholly spiritual: And the miserable
people, dispising the means of marriage, which God has given them. Will
rather burn then marry. And so God delivers them up to shameful and vile
affections, and in their lusts do they burn (as says S. Paul) Fornicators
they are, Romans 1.
adulterers, Incestuous persons, and that moreover which the Apostle
me^tioneth. These be the fruits of his constrained chastity, of his angelical,
and not fleshly life, of his vow of chastity, vowed of so many, and kept of so
few. Of such like, the same S. Paul fore warns his disciple Timothy, 1.
Timothy 4. 2.
saying: that they shall speak lies through hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared; that they shall forbid marriage. What nation in the world,
has been so barbarous, so cruel, so tyrannous, and Godless that has
forbidden marriage to so many thousands of men and women as are at this day of
Priests, Friars, and Nuns? Only such law makes Antichrist: Only the Pope
makes it, therefore is the Pope Antichrist: which regards not his own
lawful wife, but his Ganimeds and strumpets. Much pain has the Pope of long
time taken, to cause this his tyrannical law to be observed: Many people and
nations, seeing it a law tyrannous, and prejudicial to the Commonwealth have
withstood him: because that priests and Friars, not having proper wives, and
being lusty men, which live in idleness, and abundance (a life inclyning men
to luxuritie) bestow themselves among the wives and daughters of their
neighbors and friends. The Council of (...). S. Gregory permit marriage.
In the Council of Nice, was this business proposed: but through the Council
of good Paphnucius not affected. S. Gregory forbad marriage: but (taught
afterward by experience of 6000. heads of young Infants, which they found in a
pond) adnulled and revoked his decree: as before in his life, we have declared.
Note that which we have said to this same purpose upon the life of Siricius who
so against the hair alleged the saying of S. Paul. Those which be in the
flesh cannot please God. And that which we noted upon Nicholas 1. and in the
life of Pius 2. and of Paul 2. experience at this day sufficiently shows, how
impious and tyrannous this law is. And suppose it were good yet is it not
observed. Much better should it be to leave to each one the liberty which God
has given them, and not to lay s^ares for the conscience. He that can pass
without marriage, shall do very well not to mar^y: and chiefly the minister in
time of persecution which i^ to be free to preach the word of God wheresoever
they shall call him. But the gift of chastity is not given to all: and if to
any, yet is it not perpetual. The surest way then not to offend God, nor
defile his own body, which is the tem^le of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor 7. 2.
and therefore to be kept clean is that every man (as Saint Paul does advise
us) have his own wife and every woman her own husband to the great grief of
the Pope, who is Antichrist, The Pope an Atheist.
and commands the contrary. The third mark is, that Antichrist shall not
care for any God: to wit, he shall be an Atheist; a Godless man, and without
religion. This in many Popes have we fully, and clearly seen which neither
liueing, nor dying, had any religion. He is not one alone, that entered into the
Popedom like a fox, Boniface 8.
lived in the Popedom like a Lion, and dyed like a dog: Let their lives be
read. the reason of all this gives Daniel, saying: for he shall magnify
himself above all Antichrist, which is the Pope, has made himself universal
Bishop, head of the Church absolute (or dissolute) Lord, as well in the
temporaltie, as the spi^itualty, ever all the Monarkes. kings and Princes, of
the world: that he may displace and place them, when he pleases, and no man
ought to demand why do thou so? And so causes Emperors, kings, and great
Lords to fall prostrate on the gorund, in token of vassallrie, slavery, and
subjection, kiss his feet, and worship him: The Pope truly is proud as the
devil, who said to Christ. All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. And so shall have the wages, that had the devil. Which thing
Daniell declares, in the 36. verse of the 11. chapter saying, that he shall
prosper, until the wrath be accomplished: for the determination is made: and
in the last words of this chapter he says. And his end shall come, and none
shall help him. This is the comfort of a Christian, that Antichrist, the Pope,
his enemy, and persecutor: shall so end, as he has deserved. And so shall the
Church be from hi^ tyranny. The 2. passage 2. These. 2. 3.
The 2. passage is, of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, where clearly and plainly
he calls Antichrist, man of sin, and son of perdition, which opposes,
and li^teth up himself against all which is God, Verse. 9.
or that is worshipped: So that, as God, he sits in the temple of Cod
showing himself that he is God. And a little lower: whose coming is by the
working of Satan, What thing is Antichrist.
with great power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiueablenesse
of unrighteousness (working) in them that perish, etc. The papists themselves
co^fefse, that Saint Paul here speaks of Antichrist. Now let us fee, if the
Pope do the same things: and if he do them, then is he Antichrist. By
Antichrist, must we not understand one man alone, which is to be and happen:
but an estate, a seat, a succession of men* and an Empire exalted against
Christ: yet with the name and title of pastor, and Bishop of the Church, and
with the title of the vicar of Christ Jesus himself. Through hypocrisy, and
feigned humility, he calls himself, the servant of Gods servants: but
through devilish pride, he makes himself Lord of all. In the time of S. Paul,
began this Empire of Antichrist, as he witnesses saying: For all ready the
mystery of Iniquity begins to work, Verse 7.
only he which now rules, shall let, until he be taken out of the way. This
shall be, when the Lord shall slay him, with the spirit of his mouth (as there
says the Apostle) Now have we proved that of the ruin of the Roman Empire,
the Pope, who is Antichrist, by little and little has erected his kingdom.
All this to one man cannot be applied: but to an estate, and condition of men.
Antichrist is a Greek word, as much to say, as contrary to Christ: See we
then some things, John 6. 15.
wherein the Pope does oppose himself to Christ. Contrarieties between christ
and the Pope.
The people sought to make Christ a king: but Christ would not: For his
kingdom, he says: is not of this world. The Pope without demanding, The
first Contrarietic.
or seeking it of the people, has made himself universal king over all the
kings of this world. and so at his fantasy, does place and displace them. The
second opposition. Phil. 2. 6.
Christ, being God, humbled himself, and to save us, The 2. Contraritie.
became man, reconcyling us with the father. The Pope being a man, makes
himself God, saying: that in hell he has authority and power casting into
it, whom soever he will, and also drawing out from thence (If he please) as did
Pope S. Gregory (say they) draw the soul of the Emperor Traian, To this
purpose read Damascen in the sermon of the dead.
who was an Infidel, and persecutor of the Church. Authority he has in
purgatory, drawing souls from thence (as say they) he does daily. He has
authority in earth binding and loosing whomsoever he will: He has authority
also in heaven, placing therein whom he will, commanding the Angels to carry
the Soul of whomsoever he shall please without passing the pains of
purgatory (as by the bull which Pope Clement the s^xt granted to such as
coming to Rome to obtain the Iubile, should die by the way) does appear. All
this says the Pope that he can do. And so also says his Parasites: Yet all
is but lies, to condemn, and carry us with him, The 3 Contrarictie.
to the house of his Father the devil. The third opposition. Christ does
command us to search the scripture: John 5. 39.
and gives a reason, for by them shall we know him. The Pope under most
greiuous pain, commands us not to read them, nor look upon them: least
that we knowing Christ by reading of the Scriptures, may also know him to be
Antichrist. And to busy us with some thing, he commaund^ us to read lying
Legends, he commands us to pray the Rosarie, which Alanus with so great
falsehood and impiety, as we have said in the life of Sistus 4. renewed. So
many Paternosters, and so many Aue Mary's, before a c^^^^fixe, before the Image
of the virgin Mary, or of this or that other he, or she Saints, he commands us
to pray. To a certain great Lady, called Isabell granted Pope Leo pardon of
all her sins, if kneeling in her own lodging, before the Image of any he or
she Saint, she should say five Paternosters, and five Aue Mary's. Behold what
agreement is there between the Aue Marta and the Crucifixe: or the
Paternoster, and the virgin Mary? The 4. Contrariety.
What manner of prayer is this, when he that prays, neither knows, nor
understands what he prays? Oh blindness! Oh ignorance. Matthew. 11. 28.
The fourth opposi^ion. Christ calls unto him all those that travel, and be
afflicted in conscience, that he may refresh them. The Pope commands us to go
to the virgin Marie, and to he and she Saints. What other thing is this,
Jeremy 2, 1^.
but to leave the fountain of living water (as says Ieremias) and to dig
pooles, that can hold no water? Between Christ, and the Pope are there many
other opposicions yet will we set down but the last of all: that Christ with
great triumph is ascended into heaven, The 5. Contrariette.
and there sits at the right hand of his father: And shamefully the Pope
descends into hell, and to the depth of hell falls in the company of Judas,
whose successor he is, and there by his own Father the devil shall be
everlastingly tormented. Ye see here, that the Pope is an adversary, and
opposes, and lifts up himself against all that is God, or that is
worshipped, and sits in the Temple of God, showing himself to be God. By
that which the Apostle says, that Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, he
gives to understand, that Antichrist shall neither be Turk, Moore, Jew, nor
Pagan, but a Christian, and that professes Christian religion. The Pope
sits in Rome, a City very ancient in Christian Religion, where were so many
good Bishops, for almost the space of 300 years: which sealed with their blood
the Doctrine, which preached, and now also in Rome, notwithstanding the
tyranny of Antichrist, has God his Church, as he had in Sodom, where was Lot
and his family. That which Saint Paul says, that the coming of Antichrist
shall be with great power, signs, and lying woonders: is to be noted: and all
this shall he do, by the working of Satan. Here also it appears, that the
devil works his miracles. The devil also works miracles.
Which confirms the Spanish proverb. Sease milagro, y hagalo eldiablo. Be it
a Miracle, and the devil does it: but all, to dec^iue. The mighty power of
the Pope who is ignorant of? Matthew. 28. 18.
That which Christ of himself says, dares the Pope to say of himself. Data
est mihi omnis potestas, all power is given unto me. O blasphemy intolerable!
As touching his signs, and lying wonders, the world is full: The very papists
themselves, that have any understanding, are ashamed of them. But the simple,
the Idiots, the vulgar sort believe, and hold them for true miracles, and for
them rather will die, then for the Doctrine of the Prophets, or Apostles, or
Christ Jesus himself, whereof they are wholly ignorant! Oh ignorant
blindness, Lying wonpers
and blind ignorance. How many Images have spoken? How many have sweat, and
that drops of blood? The ignorant people believes that the beard, hairs and
nails of the crucifixe of Burgos, do grow. How many miracles, say they, do
the Images of our Lady of Guadalupe, and that of Monsarrate? How many Capti^es
deliver they? How many dead do they raise again? How many blind give they
sight unto? etc. Either this which they say, is untruth, and not therefore to
be believed: or else verily do they these miracles (if they do them) by the
operation of Satan; that the unbelievers, which will not believe the truth may
believe lies: 2. These. 2. 11.
as in this self same chapter Saint Paul does advise us, not to believe such
miracles, as are ^or founded upon the word of God. In the Treatise of the Mass
more shall be said concerning miracles. Not to make an Image* nor any likeness,
etc. Not to worship or do them reverence does God command us. To make Images,
to worship and do reverence unto them does the Pope command us, Purgatory.
that purgatory should be better believed. O how many m^r^cles, how many
dreams, visions, and apparitions have there been? only one I will recite*
which is read in the Enchiridion of times, composed by Friar Alonso Venero.
Thus then says he fol. 118. In the year of our Lord 1164. a certain holy
Hermit before deceased, appeared in vision to the bishop of Ligoniu^, and said
unto him; there dyed in all parts with him 30000. Of 30000. men one only went
to heaven 3 to Purgatory, and all the rest to hell.
men, and only Saint Barnard without any pain, flew to heaven, 3. descended
into purgatory, and all the rest into hell, perpetually to be damned. Thus far
Venero. He that reports this, was no Idiot, but a preacher; and of the order
of preachers. Who will not believe an holy hermit, come from another world? a
Bishop, and a preacher also? O happy Bishop which knew what passed in Heaven,
Purgatory, and hell. Blessed be our God, which has opened our eyes, and made
us to understand, such apparitions, to be illusions of the devil. For
confirmation of this our Doctrine, Luke 16. 27.
Read the Parable, which our Savior propounds, of the rich worldling, who
prayed Abraham, to send Lazarus before deceased to the house of his father,
that he might declare to his five brethren, that which he passed. But Abraham
answered: they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: whom if they
will not hear; neither will they be persuaded though a man should rise from
the dead. Luke 16. So that every Christian, which reads, searches, and
meditateth the holy scripture, does know, that all this which they say
concerning Purgatory, is lies: albeit the Pope will have it an Article of
faith. Were it an article of faith, it should be founded upon the scripture: On
the scripture it is not founded: therefore it is no Article of faith. Also,
were it an Artticle of faith, it should be one of the twelve of the Apostles
creed: but it is not, therefore it is not an Article of faith. But it is (as
says Doctor Constantine) the head of the wolf. It serves to mainetayne idle
bellies. Conclude we this then of the false miracles of Antichrist, with that
which the Lord says. False Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise, Matthew.
24. 24.
and shall work signs great and wonderful, so that, if it were possible, the
very elect should be deceived. Well has our Redemer forewarned us, well has
his Apostle Saint Paul foretold us. See we now to our selves: for of ignorance
now shall we not sin, we are forewarned. And as Daniel for our consolation
foretold us of the miserable end of Antichrist: so also says Saint Paul, and
that more plainly then Daniel, that the Lord will destroy him with the spirit
of his mouth, and consume him with the brightness of his coming: which we see
daily more and more accomplished. How many kingdoms and provinces do now know
the Pope to be Antichrist? And how came they by this knowledge? not forced, but
by reading and hearing the word of God. Very subtle was the Pope in
forbidding the reading of the holy Scripture.
Very wise was the Pope in forbidding the Bible, in forbidding the reading of
the holy Scripture: well did he understand, that all his evil, his whole ruin
and destruction should there thence proceed. But I command it. The Lord
(says Saint Paul) will destroy him with the Spirit of his mouth, with his
word, with the holy Scripture, with the doctrine of the old and new Testament,
with the Bible, which he so much abhors. Many nations have forsaken him,
only Spain and Italy give him life. But albeit they so do, yet is his
sickness incurable, and doubtless shall he die thereof.

The third and last passage, wherewith we confirm the Pope to be Antichrist,
The 3. pas^age of the holy, Scripture.
is taken out of the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation of Saint John. Read
the whole chapter. Here will we note the principal points. Saint John says,
he saw a woman sit upon a beast: the woman and the beast with their
quallities and attire he depainteth. The woman (says he) was the great whore,
which sits upon many waters, with whom the kings of the earth have
committed fornication: He says, that she was set upon a beast: That this
woman was clothed with purple and Scarlet, and gilded with gold, and adorned
with precious stones, etc. Who had in her forehead a name wri^ten, A Mystery.
Great Babylon, mother of fornications, and abominations of the earth: that
this woman was drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus. And concluding the chapter, he says: that this woman is the
great city, which reigns over all the kings of the earth. Concerning the
beast (says he) which was of the color of Scarlet, full of the names of
blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns. Saint John says, that when
he saw this woman ride upon the beast, he greatly wondered. The Angel
declares unto him the secret of the woman and of the beast. The beast (says
the Angel) which thou have seen, was, and is not, etc. He says unto him that
the seven heads be seven mountains, whereupon the woman sits. He says:
that the ten horns be ten kings, The vi^tory of the Lamb.
subject to the beast: That these kings shall fight against the Lamb: but the
Lamb shall oue^come them. That the waters whereupon the Whore sits, The
waters be kindreds, etc.
be peoples, and kindreds, and nations, and tongues. He says, that the ten
horns of the beast shall hate the whore, The 10 kings having altered their
minds shall persecute the whore.
shall make her desolate, and destroy her. Who sees not Antichrist, the Pope
of Rome, here figured and lively painted out? to whom can all these things be
applied, but to him alone, The whore is the Pope: The whore is the Pope.
the beast is the Roman Empire, whereupon the Pope sits, and wherewith he
has lifted up himself. The Beast is the Roman Empire.
It is a common p^rase of speech in the Scr^pture, to call Idolatry and
superstition, fornication: and the Idolaters it calls strumpets and whoores.
Read the second chapter of Jeremy and 3. verse. Ezech. 16. chap. Of (...)
chap. 1. 2. and 3. The Pope then is called Whore and great whore, for his
idolatry and superstition which he commits, and teaches to so many people
and nations. Note that which we have said in the passage, cited out of the 11.
chapter of Daniel.

How much more yet, by the great providence of God, has this thing fully, and
plainly happened; seeing a Pope has bin, which was a woman and a great
whore. Read the life which we have recited of John 8. where he says: that
the woman was clothed with purple and scarlet, and gold etc. Even so, is the
Pope in his pontifical habit, and chiefly the day of his coronation fully
clothed. Platina, speaking of Pope Clement the fifth (as in his l^fe we have
decla^ed) says: that at his coronation, fell a wall, which killed many, and
that the Pope falling from his horse, lost a Carbuncle which fell from his
Miter, or as they call it Reyno, that was worth s^xe thousand Florences. D.
Illescas, chap. 24. speaking of the coroantion of Leo the tenth* says these
words: The day of this coronation in Rome was so solemn and joyful, that any
hardly remembered to have seen the like thing. For besides the other feasts
made, which should be tedious to recount, they affirm above an hundred
thousand ducats to have been cast among the people, etc. How could this Pope
say that which said Saint Peter, Silver and gold have I none? This woman he
calls Babylon, as much to say as confusion. He calls her the mother of
whoredoms and abominations. The same also is Rome fully and plainly. What
city is there now in the world, wherein are so great confusions of vices,
and so many thousands of common whoores, which they call Curtisans, of whom the
Pope has so great a rent, that he may make thereof a great inheritance? Yet
this is nothing, compared with other infinite abominations, which in Rome are
committed. What place in Christendom is the wicked sin more suffered without
punishment, then in Rome? This woman, says Saint John was druken with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. How many, and how many has the Pope caused to
be burned, and to die by the sword, for saying and believing Jesus Christ to be
our only and chief Bishop, Intercessor and Mediator, as the Apostle calls
him? For believing that the body which he once offered upon the tree of the
cross, is the only and alone sacrifice, wherewith the wrath of the Father is
appeased? For believing that by faith only, without any respect of our own
works, we are justified? In our times of these threescore or fourscore
years, how much innocent blood has this ravening wolf, for this cause shed
and spilled in Almaine, France, England, and in Italy also, and within forty
or fifty years, in our country of Spain? The fires and persecutions of
Seuill, Valladolid and other parts of Spain, do witness. What satisfaction
shall this so cruel beast make for one Doctor Constantine, the only pearl
of our country of Spain? For one Doctor Vargas? For Doctor Egidius? For Don
John Ponce of Lions, son to the County of Baylen, so near kinsman to the
Duke of Arcos? For one Christopher de Arellano, a man, by the confession of the
Inquisitors themselves, most learned? For one Ieronymo Caro? For one Licenciate
John Goncales? For the Licenciate Losada? All these were men of singular life,
which the Papists themselves that knew them, cannot deny: and godly they
were in doctrine. All these in Seuill, and many others, men and women, were
either condemned alive, or else vntombed being dead, by the fire consumed. At
one time, were all these, and so all at one time almost burned in Seuill. O
Seuill, Seuill, that killest and burnest the prophets which God sends unto
thee. Name me some eight of thy servants of the Pope, at this day living in
thee, which as well in life as doctrine, may compare with or paragon those eight
which I have named, as thou then burnedst. As the blood of Abell cried out to
God: Genesis 4. 10.
so now the blood of these Martyrs do likewise cry unto God. Under the ashes
of these blessed men has God hidden many small sparkles, which when he shall
please, he will blow away, and so kindle them, that a far greater fire shall
they make, then that which is passed: and so shall increase the number of the
faithful: Tertullian.
For the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Gospel. Saint John concludes
his chapter, The woman is he great city.
saying: That this woman is the great City, which reigns over all the kings
of the earth. Is not this a mainifest description of the Court of Rome? what
other city, but Rome, reigned over all the kings of the earth? From all parts
of the world they went to Rome: The riches of the world they carried to Rome:
the Pope only was king of kings, and Lord of Lords. And woe to him that
should displease him. Of the beast, says S. John, that he had 7 heads, and 10
horns: which S. John himself declares, saying: that the seven heads which the
beast has, are 7 mountains. The holy Spirit* which spoke this by the mouth of
Saint John, nothing wanted but the naming of Rome. The ancient Poets, as Virgil
and Horace, which lived in the time of Augustus Caesar the Emperor, 7.
Mountanes.
in whose time also S. John lived, called Rome Septicollis, of 7 hills or
mountains. The Grecians call it Eptalophos, which is the same with
Septicollis: ^o sever it from all the cities of the world, this Epitheton they
give it:

Calepin. Septicollis, vrbis Romae Epitheton, a septem collium numero
impositu^. Tertullian in the 35. chap. of his Apology, says: Ipsos Quirites,
ipsam vernacula^ septem collium plebem couenio, etc.

Horace in the end of his Epodon.
Dijs quibus septem placuere colles.
Dicere carmen. He speaks of Rome.
And Virgil Aeneid. 6. Septemque vna sibi muro circundedit arces, And
Propertius: Septem vrbis alta ingis, toto quae praesidet orbi. As much to say,
as the lofty city with seven hills, which is Lady of all the world.

The names of these seven mountains are: Capitolino, Palatino, Quirinal,
Auentino, Celio, Viminal, and Exquilino.

By these words of Saint John we clearly see, that Antichrist has his seat at
Rome: and no other there is that has his seat at Rome, Ten Horns.
but the Pope. Therefore the Pope is Antichrist. The ten horns, says Saint
John, be ten kings, subject to Antichrist, who stoutly fight in defense of
their Monarch Antichrist: and they shall fight, says he against the Lamb.
What more sorcelesse thing is there, Apoc. 13. 18.
without weapons and subtlety then a Lamb? Notwithstanding the weak, simple
and disarmed Lamb overcomes these ten kings, which with Lyonlike and
Wolfelike force, rush upon him, and not prevail. And when by force they
cannot, as old Foxes, by craft will, they seek to catch and kill him. But come
as they will, the Lamb ouercomes them all. Who is this Lamb? The same is he
of whom Saint John says that he is slain from the beginning of the world*
How? The slain Lamb, does he overcome? Yea verily. This is the power of God.
John 1. 29.
That Lamb he is, of whom witnesses the other Saint John, saying: Behold the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Jesus Christ is this
Lamb, who kills Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth: as in handling the
second passage which we alleged of the Epistle to the Thessalonians, 2. These.
2.
we have before declared. Saint John says further, That these ten horns are
ten kings (who perceiving the invincible power of the impotent Lamb) shall
forsake Antichrist, disgrace him, make war against him, and destroy him.
Before 80 years past, what king in Christendom durst whisper against the
Pope? All were his vassals, all were his soldiers, and all he commanded. But
seeing the mortal wounds which the Lamb with his only word* has given the
Pope. How many have forsaken him within these fourscore years? In Almaine,
England, Scotland, Denmark, and Swethland, we have manifest examples: France
also and Polonia are falling away from the Pope. Who so shall live shall one
day hear the same of Spain. God has begun his work; he will not leave it
imperfect, nor yet end in the midst. Behold, how Daniel, Paul, and John
concur and agree together. All they three with one Spirit which caused them
to speak declare that ^his so^e ^f perdition, and man of Sin, shall be very
abominable in his life, and much more abominable in his doctrine. Very rich,
very mighty, clothed with silk, and clothe of Gold and precious stones; a
great warrior, and persecutor of the Lamb, and his followers. Saint Paul
noting the place of his abode, says: that he shall sit in the temple of God.
Saint John goes further: he shall sit, says he, in the city that has. 7
mountains; which is Rome. Jerome in prcfat. lib. de spiritu sancto, and in
vita Marci.
And so under stood Saint Jerome, when he said: This Babylon, and this whore,
which in the Apoc: is painted out to us, no other thing then Rome can signify
unto us: In the life of Mar^k he repeateth the same: Very blind is he which
sees not through a boulter. That this can agree with none but only the Pope,
who sees not? Therefore is he Antichrist. Concerning his end, the holy
Spirit by Daniel, Paul, and John, before alleged, says: (as we have said)
that it shall be miserable; wherewith he helps* comfort, and animateth the
poor faithful which with his tyranny are afflicted and oppressed. Come Lord
Jesus. Blessed are those that read, and those that hea^e the words of the
prophesies of this book, and keep the things which are written in them,
Apoc. ^. 3.
as says the same Saint John in the beginning of his Re^elation.

By that which we have said touching the life and doctrine of the Popes, and by
that which the Doctors* and ancient Councels have said, and the holy Scripture
also it self: which we have before alleged: each faithful. true, and
Catholic Christian, which has any iu^gement or little spark of faith shall
clearly understand the Pope, not to be universal Bishop, not to be Peter's
successor, nor the vicar of Jesus Christ, but contrariwise, to be the
successor of Judas, to be the Vicar of Satan, to be the man of sin, and
son of perdition, which as God, sits in the Temple of God* to be the whore
of Babylon, which has her seat in the great City, that has 7 mountains,
which is Rome: to be the Antichrist, which in all and by all opposes himself
to Christ: and knowing him for such a one shall abhor and detest him. And
shall know also, how to answer the reasons, or to speak better, reasonlesse
reasons, which the Popes Parasites (for their own temporal commodities, to be
made Bishops, or enjoy other ecclesiastical dignities, etc. and oftentimes
against their own conscience, contrary to that which they think, to
entertain the Pope, and maintain his primacie) do allege* To answer to all
their objections, and passages, which this way and that way they allege,
should be never to make an end. Only will we answer to the principalles,
whereupon the rest are founded, which being cast down, all the building
thereupon builded, of necessity must needs fall to the ground. These in
number be two: Thou art Peter, Matthew. 16. and, Feed my sheep. Ioh. 21. and in
Pro^^mio Sexti in Gloss. it is said: that the Pope by these words obtained the
Primacie: In prooemio Sexti in Glo. Matthew. 16. 18.
Tu es Petrus, thou art Peter: or by these, Pasce oues meas: Feed my sheep.
Jesus Christ (say they) said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will
I build my Church, etc. To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven; whatsoever thou bindest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: John 10. 4.
and whatsouer thou loosest in earth shall be loosed in heaven: The sheep
(says Christ) know the voice of their shepherd. All this then which Jesus
Christ said unto S. Peter, we know to be very true, because it was pronounced
by our pastor, An answer to the 2 places wherewith the Pope confirms his
primacie.
master, and redeemer Christ Jesus, who is truth it self. But we say, that by
no way, neither in part, nor by art has it any agreement with the Pope:
neither in part nor art it can be applied to the Pope who is Antichrist, nor
yet pertaines it unto him: when the Pope shall have made the same confession
that did S. Peter, Thou art the Christ, etc. and shall so believe: when the Pope
shall live as S. Peter lived: when the Pope shall teach and preach the doctrine
which S. Peter taught and preached: then shall it agree with him. But the Pope
is an Atheist, he holds for a fable the history of the Gospel: abominably
lives, teaches doctrins of devils (as befoe we have proved) whereupon it
follows that this which Christ says to S. Peter, he said not to the Pope,
nor in any wise does it belong to him. But the better to understand it, examine
we this place. Christ demanded of his disciples, whom do men say that the son
of man is? They answered unto him: Some say, Thou art John Baptist, others,
Elias, etc. And again Christ asked them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter
answered: Thou art the Christ, etc. Then Christ approving the confession of
Peter, which proceeded of the Spirit, and not of the flesh, said unto him: Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock (to wit, upon this confession which thou have
made, saying that I am the son of God) will I build my Church. So that not so
much the person, as the confession of Peter is here to be considered. And so
says Christ these words, not to Peter only, but also to whomsoever shall make
the same confession, and with the same faith that Peter did. For the rock
which Peter confessed, which is the fundamental stone of the corner, whereupon
the Church is builded, that rock is Christ. Upon Peter is it not sounded: but
Peter (as says Saint Augustine) is founded upon the rock. For other
foundation (says Saint* 1. Cor. ^. 11.
Paul) then that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus, can no man lay. H^e
only and no other, is the foundation and head of his Church: the Virgin Mary,
Peter, John, and the other Apostles, and faithful Christians, be lively
stones, builded upon this foundation: thy are members of the Church, whose head
is Christ. The Pope ought to be contented to be a stone of this building: to be
a member of this body. But as he is no member, Ioh. 20. 21.
much less is he the head. To thee (says Christ) will I give the keys, etc.
All whatsoever thou bindest, etc. Not only to Peter, but also to all and each
one of the Apostles, to all and whomsoever of the Apostles successors* that
shall teach the word of God, did Christ make this promise. And that this is the
true meaning of this place, appears clearly, by that which the same Jesus
Christ, Matthew. 18. 18. says, Whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye loose i^ earth, shall be loosed in heaven. See thou
not, that the same which Christ before had said to Peter. the same, and by the
same words says he afterward to all the Apostles. The same says he by Saint
John, when he spoke to all his Apostles, and sent them to go and preach the
Gospel: As the Father (says Christ) sent me, so also send I you. And when he
had thus spoken, he breathed upon them, and said unto them, Receive ye the holy
Ghost those whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto them: and
whosesoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained. To all equally does Christ
show mercy, to all equally grants Christ the privilege, and gives
authority. To think that Christ reserved matters for the sea Apostolic of
Peter, which neither John nor James, nor Paul, nor any of the other Apostles
were able to dispatch, is mere mockery, and Impiety also. In authority and
dignity, were all the Apostles equal. And long continewed this order in the
Church among the ministers of the Gospel, until covetousness and ambition
crept in, and confounded this good order, making one greater, and another
less, because one was more rich then another, we (speaking of the Primacy)
confirm this, with the sayings of the ancient Doctors. If Christ by these
words, Thou art Peter, etc. had appointed Saint Peter universal Bishop, and
head of the whole Church (as they say) to what purpose did then the Apostles so
often reason among themselves upon this question of the Primacie, who should be
chief among them. Saint Matthew from the 1 verse to the 5. of the 18 chapter,
makes mention hereof: S. Mark cap* 9 from the 33. verse unto the 37. S. Luke,
from the 46. verse unto the 48. of the 9. chapter does mention it S. Matthew. 20.
20. says. That the mother of the sons of Zebedeus, and (as says Saint
Mark) the sons themselves. 10. 15. besought Christ that one might sit at his
right hand, and the other at his left, for which cause (as say both the
Evangelists) the ten Apostles disdained at the 2. brethren. Saint Luke cap
22. 24. tells: that there was a contention among the Apostles, which of them
should be greatest. What answers Christ Jesus to the demand which the
Apostles made Matthew. 18. 1. who shall be the greatest? etc. He set in the midst
of them a little child, and said unto them. Whosoever shall humble himself as
this little child, he shall be the greatest, etc. S. Mark 9 35. says, he that
willbe the first, he shall be the last, and servant of al. S. Luke 9. 48. he that
is least among you shall be great. Christ reproves the sons of Zebedeus, for
their ambitious demand: He said unto them, ye know what ye ask etc. the ten
were angry with them for this superiority which they pretended, Christ said
unto them, that in a Political kingdom there it superiority: and so kings
and princes hold authority over all: But that in his kingdom, which is
spiritual; wherein there neither is, nor ought to be superiority, it is not
so. But it shall not be so (says Christ) among you, etc.

Would our adversaries well examine this, they would be ashamed of their
primacy, and principality that they seek to g^ue to their Pope: which neither
Saint Peter, nor any other of the Apostles ever had. For had Christ given the
primacie to Saint Peter, when he heard them contend, which of them should be
the greatest, doubtless he would have said unto them: Wherefore strive you?
know ye not that I have given the Primacy to Peter? Do ye not know that I
have made Peter the chiefest of you all? Quiet then your selves, and for such a
one do ye hold him? The same also would Saint Peter have said, I am he,
whom Christ has appointed to be the head of the whole Church, etc. But
neither did Christ so say, but rather for their ambition, and affectation of
the primacie reproved them. Nor yet did Saint Peter allege, that Jesus Christ
had said unto him: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, etc.

The second place fundamental which our adversaries do allege, to mainetaine
the primacy of the Pope is, that Christ said to Peter, Feed my sheep.
Love thou me? etc. Peter answered, Yea, Lord, etc. Then said Christ unto
him. Feed my sheep. Here do they infer, John 21. 16.
that seeing that Christ said this to Saint Peter, and said it not to any other
of the Apostles, that by the same reason, he made him Prince of the Apostles.
The most high wisdom, and love of Christ, in Peter's confirmation and comfort,
they nothing consider. There times had Peter denied Christ. And Christ three
times demanded if he loved him? Twice answered Peter, Yea Lord: but the third
time he waxed sorrowful: and to comfort him, Christ said unto him, Feed my
sheep. As if he should have said: Thou have thrice denied me Peter: but have
repented, and with most bitter weeping craved pardon for the same: Thy sins I
pardon, and restore thee to the same state thou wast formerly in: Feed then my
sheep. And to cheer him the more, he said unto him; that he should be
constant, and should not deny him. And gave him to understand (as there says
the Evangelist) with what death he should glorify God. The same charge and
office of feeding, gave Jesus Christ to all the Apostles, Mark. chap. 16. verse.
15. when he commanded them to go through the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creatu^e: and when he said unto them* Receive ye the holy Ghost. Mark
16. 15.
Whosoeuers sins ye remit, etc. So that in this, carried not Saint Peter any
pre-eminence over the rest of the Apostles. In dignity and authority all are
equal, John 20. 22.
and principal members of the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church:
which body (seeing it is no monster) has but one only head, which is Christ.
And yet say I further: suppose that Saint Peter had been Prince of the
Apostles, and of much greater authority then they all: yet not withstanding,
the Pope not being Peter's successor, nor the Vicar of Christ (as already we
have proved (shall not be prince of Bishops, nor universal Bishop over all
Churches. He should content himself to be Bishop of Rome, nor is he yet so,
but Antichrist. These two be the principal and fundamental places wherewith
the Romists endeavor to maintain their primacy. And seeing they prove not these
things, much less will they prove the rest by them alleged: to which may be
answered, that which I have before said. One thing will I demand of them, and
this it is. If it be necessary for a man to believe the Pope to be the
successor of Saint Peter, Vicar of Christ, and universal head of all the
Church (as Boniface the eight ordained) what shall become of the Greek Church
which never so believed? what shall become of all those that lived in the time
of Pope Ione? what shall become of all them that lived in the time of
Anastasius 2. Liberius, and Felix 2. these three Popes were Arians, John the
24. an heretic. For the which and other great abominations proved against
him in the Council of Constance he was deposed? What shall become of them,
which lived in the time of this Pope, and other heretics, and of the Popes,
that by Arms, or bribes, or both arms and bribes jointly obtained the
Popedom? Such according to the decrees of the Popes themselves, be not Popes.
And yet notwithstanding is this almost always, and of long time before has
been the common way to obtain the Popedom. How often hereof, complained
Platina, and the other writers of the lives of the Popes? What shall be come of
them that lived in the time of Sisme? ^0. Sismes.
30. Sismes (as Onufrius Panuinus, a most papisticall author notes it) have
been in the Church? A Sisme has been which 50. years endured. For from
Clement 7. until our Spanish Clement 8. renounced having poped four years, In
Cronico pontifi^um.
after that Benedict 13. a Spaniard also, dyed in Spain, so many years
passed. What shall become of them, that lived in the time that four Popes,
Victor, Alexander 3. 4 popes at once
Calistus 3 and Pascall, in the time of the Emperor Frederi^ke Barbarossa were
jointly together? What shall become of those, that in the time of 3. Popes
Benedict 8. or 9. Si^^ester 3. and Gregory 6. lived. And all they three, at
one instant, 3 Popes ^t once in Rome.
held residence in Rome? Benedict had his seat in the Palace of Lateran,
Siluester, in S. Peter's, and Gregory; in Saint Mary's the great. But the
Emperor Henry 3. deposed them all three. Somewhat before the Council of
Constance was hol^e^, Gregory 12. Benedict 13. and Alexander 5. excommunicated
one another* In Rome was Gregory made Pope. Benedict in Auino^, and Alexander
in the Counsel of Pisa, which of these 3. will they hold for Pope? what shall
become of them, that in the time of the Pope Sergius 3. Sergius 2. and Benedict
9. were each of them thrice Pope.
and of Pope Benedict 9. or after other 8 lived? Each one of these 2 was 3
times Pope. Read their lives. These by force, devises and bribes were made
Popes; But came others more strong, more cunning in devises, and greater bribes
and cast the^ forth: but recovering strength, they eftsonnes returned and cast
out them, that had cast them our. This done, the other again re^u^ned, and
cast them out. These the 3. time (for the 3. ^ime was gotten the victory)
returned to be Pope.

What shameful heads of the Church of Jesus Christ be these? Great vacatio^s
What shall become of them that in the time of vacations which long continewed,
and wherein were many dissentions, and altera^ions lived? After the death of
Clement 4. was the sea void two years 9 months, and ^ days. After the death
of Nichol^s 4. was the sea void 2 years 3 months and 2 days. After the
death of Clement 5. was the sea void 2 years three months, and 17 days.
Marcelinus as says D. Illescas being dead, the seat of S. Peter was void 7
years and a half, and 25 days And Illescas adds that Damascus and many
other authors affirm the same. But Platina satih, it was void 25 days. In
such times as these, what was the Church? How miserable was the state of a
Christian, if he could not be saved, except he believed the Pope to be his
head? What should he do in the time of four Popes of 3. of 2. In the time of
heretic Popes, Simonists, and to pass over worse things, whoremongers: and of
so long vacatio^s? But most happy is the state of a good Catholic Christian;
Not upon men, but Christ his head, is his faith founded. He believes that he
cannot die, he believes that he once died to destroy the sin of al those that
believe in him: but that being now set at the right hand of his father making
intercession for us, he lives eternally. He himself is the chief Bishop, and
of such a one, and not of the Pope have we need. To Christ then be glory and
Empire, and to the Pope confusion and shame, and let al those which desire that
the kingdom of God may come, say jointly with me Amen, so be it.

Willing now to conclude this Treatise of the Pope, briefly will we here set
down by way of an appendix or addition, some of the blasphemies which the Pope
teaches, or commands to be taught (for seldo^e or never he either preaches
or reads) whereby may be understood, what is al his doctrine, which he
commands us to believe and adore; as if it were Gods word it self. And woe to
him that will not believe it, to the fire he co^de^nes him for a dog, an
heretic, a Luthera^. God have mercy upon the^ and open their eyes. This then
is his doctrine, that follows.

The Roman Bishop is God. Did. 96. cap. Satis and enidenter Baldo in L. vlti.
C. sentent. rescin. Decio in C. 1. de Constitut. Felino in C. Ego. N. de Iure
iurando.

The Pope is not man Lib. 1. sexti de eloctione tit. 6. cap. fundamentum in
Glossatore.

The Pope neither is God, nor man. In prologo Clementinarum in Glossatore.
(Wherein he appears to be very Antichrist, because Christ is God and man)

It is lawful for none to will, or, break the commandments of the Sea
Apostolic. did. 20* ca. Nulli. Item did. 12. and 22.

Whosoever obeieth not the statutes of the Pope, is an heretic Ibid. in Glos.

He commits Sacrilege which lies to the Pope: For he holds in earth, the
place of the living God. De panitent. did. 1. c^. Libenter ignosco.

The Pope is Bishop of all the world. lib 5. sextica. Foelicis in Gloss.

The Pope holds the principality of all the world lib. 3. sexti. tit. 16. cap.
Periculoso.

No man dare say to the Pope, Lord, why do thou so. In Extrauag. tom. 22.
tit. 5. cap. Ad Apostolatus in Gloss. 2. Decretal. tit. 7. cap. 5. Vide Glossam.

The Pope by these words thou art Peter, or Feed my sheep has obtained the
primacy. In Proaemio sexti in Gloss.

No man may judge the Pope. Cause. 9. quest. 2. ca. Nemo. Item, aliorum and
did. 40. ca. si Papa ca. 12 quest. 2. ca. Quisquis in Gloss. did. 50. ca. Non
nos in Glossatore.

To none it is permitted, to judge of the judgment given by the sea
Apostolic, nor revoke his sentence ca. 17. quest. 4. ca. Nemini

The Pope dispenses against the Apostle. Did* 34. ca. Lector in Gloss* did.
28 ca. Presbiter in Gloss. cause. 15. q. 6. ca. autoritatem in Glossatore.

The Pope has a heavenly judgment. li. 1. Decret. Grego. tit. 7. ca. Quinto,

The Pope can change the nature of things ibidem.

The Pope of nothing, can make some thing ibidem.

The Pope his will serves, for a reason in, that he will do ibidem

The Pope can dispense with the law of God. ibidem.

Of unrighteousness can the Pope make righteousness ibidem

The Pope holds the fullness of power ibidem.

How great a difference there is between the Sun and the Moon: so great is
it between the king, and the high Bishop. Lib. Decret. Gregor. tit. 33.
Solitae.

Those that are unjustly condemned, ought to have restitution by the Church of
Rome, Mat^h. 28. 18.
and the oppressed, succor. Cause. 2. Extrauag. de maiori and obedient ca 2 ^an.
2. 21. lib 7. Decretal. d^senten. and re indicata.
quest. 6. ca. Ideo.

And because Jesus Christ speaking of himself says, al power is given me of my
father as well in heaven as in earth. The Romists here upon conclude. ^rgo the
Pope absolutely commands in heaven and in earth. And for that God (says
Daniel) displaceth, and places kings, and transferreth kingdoms from one
nation to another. Ergo (say they) the Pope has autho^i^ie to dispose
kingdoms giving them to whom he will, and taking them from whom he lists.
Herehence came it that kings and Emperors began stri^ingly to kiss their
feet being present, or by their Embassadous being absent Hence it is, that
the Emperor himself ^erueth him for a horse boy* holding the stirrup to his
Sathanship, when he mounteth on horseback. And yet brawleth the Pope if he
hold not the stirrup featly. Extrauag (...) Cathol(...).
So shameless was Pope Boniface 8. that he made an Article of faith (without
which there could be no salvation. That the Pope as well in the temporalltie,
as spiritualltie, is absolute Lord: presenting himself in the Iubile; to the
view of all men, with a keye in the one hand, and a Sword in the other. His
successor Pope Clement the sixth, Clement in Clement pastoralie.
not contenting himself to command kings and Emperors, dared in a bull, to
command the Angels. In the Popes (Rota) which is his Chauncerie, was it
concluded and determined, that whatsoever the Pope does, God holds for good,
and approves it. Item in rescripto. This writing is kept in viena del
Dolfinado.
That the will of the Pope, is the rule of all law and Justice. That the Pope,
may do absolutely in this world all whatsoever God does. Seeing that he is
all, and above all things. And that if he change his opinion it ought to be
presumed that God also has changed. That ableit the Pope should send many
thousands of souls to hell, Et in Extrauag eadem.
none can reprove him, That the power extends to heaven, Decisiones Rote.
earth, and hell it self, That from him, may no man appeal to God. That he
may dispense, and command, Baldu, Franci^cus de Ripa.
against the Epistles of S. Paul, as he that is greater then Paul. The same
may he do against the old Testament: as he that is greater then the authors
of the old Testament. Phillippus Decius Hostien^is Carolus de Ruino.
And yet have they gone further: they have disputed, whether the Pope might
dispense against the Gospel? Whether the Pope has more power then Saint
Peter? Johannes de Anauias etc. Did. 40. cap. ^. Papa.
Whether the Pope, be simple man or as God? Briefly, the devil has so far
further proceeded, that a little before the coming of Luther, and afterward
also, it was disputed in the schools whether the Pope did participate (as did
Jesus Christ) of the ^. natures (to wit) divine and humane? Better should they
have demanded, if the Pope were an Hermophrodit, which well may be: because a
woman has been Pope. Read Erasmus Annot. 1. caput 1. Epistle ad Timotheu^.
They also disputed (to use their proper Latin) An mill Angels possint saltare
in summitate digiti. To wit, whether a thousand Angels might dance one the end
of a fingar? Item an Christus sub forma scarabei posset saluare genus humanum?
Ths Pope after the Romists is more mercrfull then Christ and why.
Whether Christ in form of a beetle, could save mankind? Item whether the Pope
were more merciful then Christ? O blasphemy: they conclude, yea. The reason
which they give is this: That it is not read in all the scripture, That Jesus
Christ drew any soul out of Purgatory: But the Pope of his great piety and
mercy, an infinite number of Souls does daily deliver. And yet go they
further, and in their disputations conclude, that the Pope has power to kindle
and quench the fire of Purgatory. Flattering the Pope, conclude they in all
these questions; lying against their own consciences; and making no reckoning
of the honor only due to God: nor of his only son Christ Jesus. And Ca.
Quoniam de imunit in 6. the Pope says: we not willing to contemn our Justice,
nor that of our spouse the Church. The Church is well known to have no other
spouse but only Christ. The Pope passes further. He says and commands:
that so it be said and preached, and that we also so believe, the virtue and
holiness of his seat to be such and so great, that what wicked man soever,
how impious, perjured, and abominable he be, which shall sit therein, even
then in a moment, for having sitten therein, is altered and changed to another
man, and is made holy. But hear we the self same words, which the beast
himself speaks, as in Ca. Non nos did. Ca. Non nos Did. 41.
41. they be written, and these they be. The blessed S. Peter transferreth to
his successors, together with the inheritance of innocence, an everlasting
dowery of merits. That which to him was granted by the light of his works,
pertains to those, that be lightened with like clerenesse of conversation:
For who may doubt him to be holy, which is lifted up to the height of dignity?
wherein, if he want goods gotten by his own merit, those that are given by the
predecessor of the place, suffice, etc. If this were truth, then no Pope should
be evil either in life or Doctrine, since that in being Pope, he is learned and
holy: and in a word to speak all, he is God upon earth, and so all whatsoever
he does, God approves it in heaven. But the lives of the Popes by us recited,
and the same lives also, which the Popes parasites have written, do show us
the contrary. This is that seat papal, this is the heritage which one Pope
inheriteth of another, that one sitting therein, were he not so evil before,
he is made evil. 2. These. 2. 4.
And if he were evil, he becomes most evil: and in the end, each one is
made the son of perdition, and man of sin, opposing, and lifting up
himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: So that as God
he sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

All these things, which here we have gathered together, concerning the
doctrine of the Pope, are blasphemies, such, as were the devil himself
clothed with humane flesh, he could not speak greater nor more horrible: yet
for all this, art thou blind o Spain, and see not, nor yet know thou
Antichrist, whom (supposing thou do service to God, and honor to Jesus
Christ his son) thou adorest and honor. God show thee his mercy, and
open the eyes of thine understanding, that thou may read, hear and
understand the will of God: which his Majesty has revealed in his holy
Scriprure: without the reading or meditation whereof, impossible it is for a
man to attain to the truth. John. 5. 39.
Search (says Jesus Christ) the Scripture: for they be those that testify of
me, and so by consequence of Antichrist also. When with the Spirit of humility
thou shall well have read, and meditated upon them: thou shall then understand
how great has been thy blindesse and ignorance. Then turning thy self heartily
to the true God, that created, redeemed and sanctified thee, thou shall abhor
the idols of silver, and the Idols of gold, which thy sinful hands (as says
Esaie) have made: Esaias. 31. 7.
And thou, blind and ignorant, (supposing thou did great service to God)
did honor and adore them. Then shall thou cast them from thee, stamp them
in pieces, and consume them; so great shall be thy hatred against Idolatry.
Then, then, by how much the more, thou of all other nations of the world, in
these last times, have abased and dejected thy self, to serve and adore this
monster, this man of sin, this son of perdition, this whore, clothed with
scarlet and purple, and adorned with so great store of gold and precious sto^s
this beast, this Antichrist, this thy Pope, this thy God upon earth: by so much
the more holding thy self ashamed and confounded, for that which thou have
done (because thou so much love, and more esteemest honor then other nations)
thou shall abandon, abhor him, and shall practice his utter ruin and
destruction. God give thee that grace, and that quickly, for the sacrifice sake
which Jesus Christ his son, our chief and only high Bishop, our redeemer and
Lord, unto him has offered Amen.

For the healpe of memory have we hear placed a table, wherein is plainly
declared the Pope to be Antichrist: which is the sum of of this first
Treatise.

An end of the first Treatise.
A brief table wherein most clearly and evidently is declared who Antichrist
is, and by what marks he may be known
The necessity of this Doctrine is first declared.
AS it behooves the Christian Church, and every faithful member thereof to
know Jesus Christ the Lord; and follow his Doctrine with all obedience: So is
it meet, that every faithful Christian should perceive and know, what the
holy scripture does teach concerning Antichrist: to the end that all the
faithful may truly know him, and knowing him fly from him, and beware his
deceites. And if the Apostles themselves in the Primitive Church, forewarned
the faithful of the danger: and coming of the great woolfe, as in the 2.
These. 2. 3. 4. etc. 1 Ioh. 2. 18. etc. appears. How much more now, in this
old age of the world, wherein all iniquity abounds, and the end of all
things approaches, ought we to esteem this Doctrine necessary.

2 Concerning the name of Antichrist, and how the holy scripture speaks
touching the same.
Antichrist is a Greek word, and as much to say as contrary to Christ. For as
Antipapa is he, who not being Pope, attributes to himself, the whole
authority and power of the Pope. So is he Antichrist that opposes himself to
Christ; attributing to himself, that which is proper to Christ. The holy
scripture of Antichrist, speaks two manner of ways: For as this word Christ
or anointed is sometimes generally taken, Psalm 105. verse 15. Touch not mine
Anointed, where, by anointed, all the faithful that hold Communion with
Christ are understood. And properly again, when Christ our Lord is mentioned.
So by this word Antichrist is some time generally understood, all such as in
Doctrine, oppose themselves to Christ. 1. John 2. 22. and cap. 4. 3. But then
properly it mentions Antichrist, when it notes an head of an abominable
kingdom: which head lifts up it self against Christ, as in 1. Ioh. 2. chap.
18. where the Apostle says, that Antichrist should come. It is to be noted,
that as many things in the scripture foretold of Christ, are applied to some
persons, which were types and figures of Christ: as David, Solomon, Zerubbabel,
etc. Which properly, and truly are meant of Christ, and in him accomplished: so
many things also foretold of Antichrist, Dan. 7. 8. 20. 21. 25. chap. 8. 23.
24. 25. chap. 11. 36. and 1. Timoth. 4. 1. 2. 3. are applied to certain
tyrants and heretics, as forerunners and types of Antichrist but properly to
Antichrist, and in him are fulfilled.

3 Whether Antichrist be come.
The Papists say that Antichrist is not yet come, but shall come (teach they) of
the race of the Jews, of the Tribe of Dan, be borne in Babylon, brought up in
Chorazain and Bethsaida, and shall reign in Jerusalem, etc. with sundry such
like inventions of man, not warranted by authority of holy Scriptures. But
we say that Antichrist is already come, and that will we prove by the
testimonies of the holy Scriptures. For the same thing now is befallen the
Papists, which in time past, when Christ Jesus our redeemer did manifest
himself in the world, happened to the Jews. For as the Jews (with the
Apostles) did believe and confess, the Prophets to have spoken many things
touching the Messiah: but not believed nor confessed that the promised Messiah
then was come, nor that Jesus borne of the Virgin Mary in Bethelem, was that
true Messiah. Even so do the Papists at this day, fully confess with us,
that many things in holy Scripture are foretold concerning Antichrist, yet
believe they not, nor confess that he is come, but say he shall come, as the
Jews did of the Messiah. We say then, that Antichrist is already come. Let us
see now who he is, and by what marks he may be known.

4 Who Antichrist is, and by what marks he may be known.
This question in former time was hard and obscure: but now Antichrist being
revealed is Very clear and easy. For as this is the true Messiah, in whom,
all things foretold by the holy Ghost, concerning the Messiah, are fulfilled:
So is, and ought this to be truly Antichrist, in whom, all things foretold of
Antichrist, by the Prophets and Apostles, do properly belong, and are
fulfilled. Let us then consider what the holy Ghost, in holy scripture has
spoken of Antichrist, which we will divide into three points.

1 Of the time of his revelation. 2 Of the place of his seat and being. 3 Of
his estate, life and Doctrine:
The time of Antichrists revelation is signified by Dan. cap. 7. 5. 8. when he
says: A little horn arose up among the other horns in the head of the
fourth Beast. The Prophet declares that the kingdom of Antichrist should rise
up in the Roman Empire, which was the fourth Monarchy; signified by the
fourth Beast. The Apostle Saint Paul well notes the time of the revelation
and coming of Antichrist; when he writes. 2. Thestal. 2. 3. Let no man
deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a
departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the son of
perdition. Clearly signifies the Apostle, that after an Apostasy, Antichrist
shall come. True it is, that from the Appostles time have been some forerunners
of Antichrist, of whom we read Io. 1. 18. 22 etc. And that then the Mystery of
iniquity did work 2. These. 2. 7. yet could not the kingdom of Antichrist
increase whiles the Roman Empire flourished: But when the Roman Empire should
be weakened, then should Antichrist be chief: as the same Apostle declares,
when he says 2. These. 2. 7. 8. Only he which now withholdeth shall let, till
he be taken out of the way: And then shall that wicked man be revealed.

The place where Antichrist shall hold his seat, is noted by Daniel ^1. 45.
when he says, And he shall place the Tabernacles of his Palace between the
seas. Saint John also in his Apoc. ca. 17. when he signified Antichrist by a
woman, arrayed with purple and scarlet, gilded with gold, and decked with
pearls and precious stones, etc. In the 9. verse. he plainly mentions 7
mountains, whereon the woman sits: adding afterward in the 18. verse: That
great city which reigns over all the kings of the earth. And Saint Paul 2.
These. 2. 4. says: that Antichrist shall sit in the temple of God.

Largely writes Daniel, chap. 7. 5. 8. concerning the estate life, and
doctrine of Antichrist: where Behold (says he) there came up another little
horn, and then adds, That in this horn were eyes, like the eyes of a man,
and a mouth speaking presumptuous things. And in the 20. and 21. verses. And he
appeared greater then any of his fellows. And I beheld, and the same horn
made war against the saints, and overcame them. And verse 25. And he spoke
words against the most high, and shall consume the Saints of the most high:
and think that he may change times and laws. And chap. 8. verse. 23. 24. 25.
There shall rise up a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark
sentences, and his power shall increase, but not in his own strength: and
shall destroy wonderfully, and prosper, and practice, and shall destroy the
mighty and holy people: and through his policy also he shall cause craft to
prosper in his hand, and he shall extol himself in his heart: and by peace
shall destroy many: He shall stand up against the Prince of Princes: but he
shall be broken down without hand. Also in the eleventh chap. verse. 36. And
the king shall do what he lifts: he shall exalt himself, and shall magnify
himself against all that is God: and shall speak marvelous things against
the God of Gods, and shall prosper, till the wrath be accomplished: for the
determination is made. verse. 37. Neither shall he regard the God of his
Fathers, nor the love of women: nor care for any God: for he shall magnify
himself above all. verse. 38. But in his place shall he honor his God Mauzim.
A God whom his fathers knew not, shall he honor, with gold and with silver,
and with precious stones, and things of great price. verse. 39. This shall he
do in the strong holds of Mauzim, with a strange God, whom he shall
acknowledge: he shall increase his glory, and shall cause them to rule over
many, and shall divide the land for gain. The Apostle Saint Paul, in the
second epistle to the Thessal. chap. 2. 4. says: that this man of sin, and
son of perdition shall exalt and lift up himself against all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: So that he does sit as God, in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. And in the ninth verse Who shall come by the
effectual working of Satan, with great power, signs, and lying wonders, and
in all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness. Also 1. Timoth. chap. 4. verse. 2.
3. Which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences seared
with an hoteyron: forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created. Also in the Apoc. 13. 11. And I beheld another
beast, coming up out of the earth, which had two horns like the Lamb, but
spoke like the Dragon. And cap. 17. 6. And I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.

These prophesies do teach us, that Antichrist must be a king, who from mean
estate, shall become exceeding great and mighty, and prosper. That he shall
be also a blasphemer, an Idolater, a sacrileger, exceeding proud, subtle, an
hypocrite, a contemner of marriage, covetous, a great Tyrant, a persecutor of
the Saints, a deceiuer, and full of impiety.

Examine we now these testimonies of holy scripture, which will appear to be
most properly belonging to the Pope of Rome: So as by these prophesies we are
warned (as it were) with the finger of God from heaven, that the Pope is
Antichrist. Therefore the time of his revelation considered, the Popes reign
began in the fourth monarchy, and want of the Roman Empire. For about the
year 606. Pope Boniface the 3. received of Phocas the Emperor (who was a
tyrant, and murdered Mauricius his Lord, with his wife and children) the title
of Universal Bishop, and Head of the Church: which once being granted, the
Popes whole endeavors were to lift up themseues with the Empire of Rome, and the
whole world besides.

For the seat of Antichrist, it is clear, and to all men known, that the Pope
sits at Rome, which is a city scyted between the two seas Thyrren and
Adriartike, has 7 mountains, and reigned over all the kings of the earth,
which cannot be said of any other city in the world. And seeing Rome is in
Europe, and neither in India, Asia, nor Africa: it plainly appears, that
Antichrist sits in the temple of God (to wit) in Christendom, as Saint
Paul 2. These. 2. 4. declares.

Mean at the beginning was the estate and condition of the Pope, but it
mightily, and with great success increased. So that he holds not authority
and one crown as a king only, but three crowns, declaring thereby, his power
to be greater then that of all kings and Emperors. As he attributes also to
himself: the two swords or powers, spiritual and temporal, figured by the
two horns. Apoc. 13. 11.

A Blasphemer is the Pope, in saying he is Christ's Vicar: head of the Church:
that he can pardon sins: may not be judged of any: cannot err: in
conclusion, that he is God in the earth: can change nature: holds an heavenly
power, and the fulness of power, and of unrighteousness can make
righteousness. See lib. 1. Decret, Gregor. tit. 7. Can. 5.

An Idolater he is, when he commands Image Worship, invocation of Saints,
makes of the Sacrament an Idol, of Mauzim a God, whom neither the Apostles nor
their fathers knew, because they worshipped and honored one only God in spirit
and truth, Ioh. 4. 23.

A Sacriledger he shows himself to be, when he robs the Church of the
second commandment of Gods law: the lay people of the cup in the Lords supper:
and forbids Christian people to read the holy scripture, contrary to the
doctrine and express commandment of Christ. Ioh. 5. 39.

Most proud he appears, when he is carried on men's shoulders, as they carried
in time past the Ark of the Lord, upon the shoulders of the Levites: when he
calls himself most holy Father, and Holiness it self: dares to break and
change the ordinances of God, and impose new laws upon men's consciences:
compares himself to the Sun, and the Emperor to the Moon. lib. 1. Gregor.
tit. 33. and both Emperors and kings do kiss his feet.

Subtle he is in all his kingdom: but then chiefly when by means of
auricular confession, he diueth into the hearts of all men, not of the common
sort only: but also of the great States of the world, understanding thereby
all secrets.

A manifest hypocrite he is, when under the title of Servant of servants, he
rules as king of kings: and under the name of Pastor, he shows himself a
ravening Wolf: and under pretense to be S. Peter's successor, he declares
himself the follower of Judas: For as Judas with a kiss and feigned friendship
betrayed his Lord, so with feigned holiness, and outward ceremonies does the
Pope draw the common people, into the chains and snares of ignorance and
superstitions. The said title therefore, which Christ gave unto Judas. Ioh. 17.
12. the Apostle gives to Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

A contemner of marriage, when he esteems it a carnal estate, and therefore
with such severity forbids it to his Clergy; that although fornicators, and
adulterers can easily purchase absolution of their sins; no pardon remains
for the Clergy that mary according to the ordinance of God: but the same is
reputed and punished by the Pope for an unpardonable sin. Albeit the holy
scripture teaches. 1. Cor. 7. 9. That it is better to marry then to burn. And
Hebr. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable among all men. Also 1. Timoth. 3. 2. Every
Bishop must be the husband of one wife.

Insatiable is the covetousness of the Pope, and extends into all parts. For
money, he pardons sins: sells ecclesiastical functions: makes
merchandise of his Bulls, indulgences, Iubilies, Relics Masses, prayers and
sacraments, and compels the miserable people to buy his merchandise, not on
such days only, as other merchants use to traffic: but also, and
principally on the feast days, the Lords days and Sabboths, when other men
rest. And raketh together every day in the year, and of all sorts of people,
even of the Jews, and Curtesans of Rome.

A tyrant he is, and persecutor of Saints, being the cause of the sheding of so
much Christian blood, inciting kings and princes to persecute such as
contradict him, and abandon his Idolatries and superstitions, to serve God
according to his will and word: whom the Pope condemns for heretics to be
burned: and least they should speak, puts a gagge in their mouths. And to
fill up the measure of his cruelty, he spares not Emperors, nor kings, being
the Lords Anointed, when they refuse to execute his tyrannies: as histories
plainly witness.

A deceauer he is sundry ways; because he deceaueth the common people with
false doctrine, and vain promises, with high titles, and feigned holiness,
with bulls, Pardons, false miracles, and illusions of the devil. etc.

He is full of impiety; because he pleases and delights himself: not only
in sin, but causes others also to sin; because he has depraved the
worship of God with idolatry, the authority of kings with tyrany. The common
faith with deceit: and the life of his Clergy with shame and filthiness,
occasioned by constrained single life.

To conclud, in the kingdom of the Pope is the fountain and spring af all
abominations and slander, according to the old proverb. The nearer to Rome,
the worse Christian: So the nearer to Antichrist the further from Christ.

By these demonstrations it appears plainly, that the Pope is Antichrist,
whom the Holy scripture has foretold, and by whom, the Church of Christ has
so much suffered.

The second Treatise of the Mass and the holiness thereof.
WE have passed by the Lords assistance, the Laborinthe, not of Creete, but of
Rome, of the Pope, and his Roman Court, another much worse, and for more
intricate and troubleso^e. The Pope have we proved to be a false Priest and
very Antichrist, to be the man of sin, and son of perdition, to be that
whereof whom speaks S. John in his Revelation. This have we proved by his
evil life and wicked Doctrine, by the sayings of Doctors and ancient Councels;
and by three notable passages of holy scripture, Now will we show the Mass, A
brief of the Co^tents of this 2. Treatise.
which is the second pillar that supporteth and vpholdeth the Roman Church, to
be a false sacrifice, an invention of the devil; and a profanation of the holy
supper, which Jesus Christ our redeemer instituted. And if such be the Mass
(as we will prove it to be) it follows, that we ought to fly and detest
it; and so do we fly and abhor it, as a thing condemned and abominable
before the face of God. This done, we will show by the Lords assistance
(without which we can do no thing that good is) Jesus Christ, to be the true
and only priest, and chief bishop, And his propper body and blood which he
offered upon the cross to his father, to be the true and only sacrifice, the
memory whereof we show forth, so often as we celebrate his holy supper. A table
will we place at the end of this Treatise, wherein we will show the conformity
union and likeness, which the holy supper instituted by Jesus Christ, holds
with the holy supper in the reformed Churches celebrated. And the^ also will we
show the difference disconformity and contrariety that the Mass which our
adversaries celebrate, holds with the holy supper of Christ, which is the
same we now celebrate.

As the name of Pope is not found in the holy scripture, as little also is
there found the name of Mass. Mass.
And doubtless, had it been so necessary for a Christian to believe the
authority of the Pope and holiness of the Mass, without which faith (say
they) it is impossible for a man to be saved: It is, I say, to be believed,
that Jesus Christ, or his Apostles would have made some mention thereof. There
is no thing necessary for our salvation which the scripture declares not.
For all whatsoever is necessary for our salvation does Christ and his Apostles
teach us. Saint Paul speaking to the Ephesians, says. Ye know, that I keep
back nothing that was profitable, but have showed you, and have taught you
openly, and throughout every house. Witnessing both to the Jews, and Grecians,
the repentance and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 20. 20.
But this holy Apostle, so diligent in teaching that which we ought to believe,
makes no mention of the Pope, nor of the Mass. Hereuppon it follows, that
to believe the authority of the Pope, or holiness of the Mass, is no Article
of faith. But true it is, will they say unto me, that this word Mass, is not
found in the scripture, but its equivalent is found, the supper of the Lord:
And if we ought to admit the Lords supper, the^ must we admit this name Missa.
Whereunto we answer: that most great Injury and wrong do they to the holy
supper which the Lord instituted, in saying it to be the same that is their
Mass, which they have imagined, and forged. For how great difference there is
between Truth, and Falsehood, Light, and darkness, God and Belial: So great
is the difference between the holy supper, and the profane Mass. Had the
question been concerning the name; whether the holy supper were to be called
Missa or no. It should not be of great importance. Agree we in the substance
of the things, and call it as ye list: Albeit, it be il done, when the holy
spirit calls a thing by such or such name, that man dare call it by another
name. The Apostle calls it the supper of the Lord, and not the Mass. Call we
it then, the supper of the Lord, It is not yet known where of the Mass is
derived.
and not the Mass. And chiefly, the difference between the supper and the
Mass being so great as we shall see.

Concerning the name of Mass, yet is it not concluded among the Romists
themselves, whence it is derived. Some say: that it is deryued of this hebrew
word Mas, which signifies trybute, or tax: others said, that it is Latin,
and that Missa is the same that Missio is, as Remissa (which word some of the
ancients, and chiefly Saint Ciprian used) is the same that Remission is: what
the Mass is.
and others said other things. The Mass as our adversaries define it, is a
sacrifice, whereby pardon is obtained for the sins of the quick, and dead.
The Romists do magnify their Mass, and that (as they say) for diverse
reasons. Eight of the chieffest whereof, I will here set down. 8 reasons
wherewith they confirm the Mass
The first for that it is a sacryfice expiatorie. The second in regard of him
who instituted the same, which (as they say) was Jesus Christ. The third in
regard of them that say it, which were (as they say) Saint Peter, Saint John
who was chaplain (say they) of the virgin Mary, Saint James and the other
Apostles. The fourth, for the antiquity of the Mass; seeing all the Church
from the death of Christ until now, has celebrated it with great reverence.
God would never permit (say they) that his Church should so long time be
deceived. The fifth with many miracles which the Mass and their consecrate host
have done, they confirm it: which show the holiness, and divinity that
remains in the Mass. The sixth they maintain it, saying: that in the Mass,
are many good things taken out of holy scripture: as the Epistle, the
Gospel, the Hoc est corpus meum, the Pater noster, etc. The seventh, that
this sacrifice of the Mass (say they) was figured in Melchisedech, Genesis 14. 18.
who being a priest of the most high God, offered bread and wine unto him.
Malachy 1. 11.
Malachie (they say) spoke of the Mass, when he said. For from the rising of
ths sun, unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place, Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering. 8. For the great profit which thereby we receive, do they esteem it.
Of all this, they conclude that the mass is holy, good, blessed, and divine;
And that we for so shamelesly speaking against a thing so excellent, which
Jesus Christ ordained, his Apostles celebrated, and all the Church Catholic
worshippeth and honoreth are heretics, dogs, etc. In conclusion, their
Mass is their Helen, for whom they trouble the whole world. These be the
principal reasons, wherewith our adversaries do maintain their Mass.
Whereunto (inuocating the name of the Lord, whose cause we deal in, and here
mainetaine) in like order as we have proposed them, will we answer. I beseech
thee Christian reader, for the zeal thou hold of the glory of God, and the
desire thou have of the salvation of thine own soul, attentively to read, and
with ripe Judgment to weigh the foresaid reasons, and the answers which we will
give, and that moreover which we shall say to this purpose: See which of these
two Doctrines do agree, and are more conformable with the squier and rule of
holy scripture, and that believe. Be not a beast, understanding and his law
has God given thee. Consider well if thou be an idolater or no, that naught
therein befall thee, but the salvation of thy soul.

Concerning the first, where the Mass, they say, is a sacrifice to obtain
remision of sins, Our adversaries first reason and our answer.
etc. I say, by their leave, that the Mass is no sacrifice. For were it a
sacrifice, it should not (speaking properly) be a sacrament. The Mass is no
sacrifice.
And they affirm the Mass to be both a sacrifice, and a Sacrament: which
cannot be: For so great is the difference between a sacrifice; and a
sacrament, as there is difference between giving and taking. The difference
between a sacrifice and a sacrament.
The sacrifice, is offered and presented unto God. The sacrament is taken and
received of the hand of the Lord, by the ministry of the minister of his word.

The holy supper (speaking properly) is no expiatorie sacrifice: for of this
do we now speak: but a sacrament of the precious body and blood of Jesus
Christ our redeemer. But improperly speaking, it may be called a sacrifice;
because, a memorial it is of that everlasting and only sacrifice, which Jesus
christ offered to his father upon the alter of the Cross: And so understand
it the fathers, when they call it a sacrifice. Not that the supper is a
sacrifice, but a memorial of the sacrifice, do they understand according to
that which Christ speaks of his supper saying: Do this in remembrance of me.
And Saint Paul to the same purpose says: Ye shall show the Lords death till
his coming again. And if the supper be no sacrifice, much less shall the
Mass be, which they celebrate in the place of the supper. Besides this, were
the Mass a sacrifice, It should be either propitiatory, which we also call
expiatory, or Eucharisticall, to wit either offered for remission of sins: or
in thanksgiving. They will say unto me, as in the definition thereof they said,
that it is a sacrifice expiatory. I say unto them, it cannot so be: for no
other expiatory sacrifice is there, but only the death and passion of Jesus
Christ. An expiatorie sacrifice is that; which is made to appease the wrath of
God, Christ alone the expiatory sacrifice.
and to satisfy his justice, and in so doing, does purge and cleanse sins,
that the sinner being cleansed from his filthiness and sins, and restored to
the purity of righteounesse, may be reduced into the favor of God. All this
wholly and perfectly did the Lord, by his death upon the Cross, and he only,
and no other did sacrifice such kind of sacrifice: For the virtue and efficacy
hereof, which Christ alone, one only time offered, is eternal. And so said he
in offering this sacrifice, all is finished all is fullfilled, as much to say.
That whatsoever was necessary to reconcile us with the father, to obtain
remission of sins, righteousness, and salvation, all this was ended and
fulfilled, with that only sacrifice, which Jesus Christ offered: And so
faulted he nothing: that no place might afterward remain for any other
sacrifice. Hereuppon will we then conclude: that it is an intolerable
disgrace, and monstrous blasphemy against Jesus Christ and against his
sacrifice, if any offer any other sacrifice, besides that already offered: or
shall reitterate that, which Christ before offered, supposing by such sacrifice
to obtain forgiveness of sins, reconciliation with God, and righteousness.
And what other thing is done in the Mass, but that we by the merit of a new
sacrifice, may be made partakers of the death and passion of Christ? Who so
will well understand this, which we say, concerning the only expiatory
sacrifice, one only time offered, and never more iterated. Let him read the
Epistle which the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews: and chiefly the seventh
chapter. Of this will we entreat somewhat more to the purpose hereafter.

The 2. The sacrifice Eucharisticall.
manner of sacrifice, which we call Eucharisticall, comprehends all the
exercises of charity: which done to our neighbors, in some sort are they done
unto God; who is thus honored in his members. Our prayers, praises,
thanksgiving, and all whatsoever we do for the service and honor of God, are
also comprehended in this kind of sacrifice, Al which sacrifices do depend
upon that great sacrifice, by which we are consecrated in body and soul, and
dedicated for holy Temples to God. This kind of sacrifice naught serves to
appease the wrath of God, to obtain forgiveness of sin, or to deserve, or
purchase righteousness: but is only to magnify and glorify God. This
Eucharisticall sacrifice, can no way please God; except it proceed from those
which (having by the other kind of sacrifice, which we call Expiatory obtained
forgiveness of sins, be already reconcyled with him, and justified. This
sacrifice Eucharisticall is very necessary in the Church: And woe to that day
which a Christian passes, without offering of this sacrifice to God. Mal. 1.
11.
This is the incense, and oblation, Romans 12. 1.
clean and pure which Malachie Prophesied, that the Church of God should
offer. Of this sacrifice speaks Saint Paul when he says: Hebr. 13. 6.
that we offer up our bodies, a living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God,
a reasonable service of God. For this cause the alms and other good works of
the faithful, are called sacrifices; wherewith God is well pleased. The
Prophet Hoseas exhorts the people to return unto the Lord, Hosea 14. 3
and say unto him: Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: So will
we render the Calves of our lips. What the Prophet understood by the calves
of lips, the Appostle declares, Hebr. 13. 15.
when he says: Let us therefore by him, offer the sacrifice of praise always
to God, that is the fruit of the lips; Phillip. 4. 18.
which confess (or praise) his name. Saint Paul calls the liberality
wherewith the Phillippians in his necessity, had relieved him, A sacrifice of
sweet savor: and all the good works which the faithful do, are called
spiritual sacrifices. His Majesty give us grace continually to offer such
sacrifices unto him, and that when we offer them, we may without all hypocrisy
confess that we are unprofitable servants, etc. For if he commanded his
Apostles so to say, Luke. 17. 10.
and think, yea when they had done what God had commanded them. Why, shall he
not command the same unto us, which be in life and doctrine so far inferior
to his Apostles, that we are unworthy to lose the latchets of their shoes?
God give us grace to be humble in heart. Of this kind of sacrifice will we
also say more hereafter.

By that which is said, is plainly seen, that the Mass is neither an
expiatorie, nor Eucharisticall sacrifice: and so by consequence, no sacrifice
at all. That it is not expiatorie, we already have proved: and that it is not
Eucharisticall: by that which our adversaries say, that the Mass is an
expiatorie sacrifice, is proved: If it be expiatorie, then is it not
Eucharisticall. The force of this Argument consists in a rule of Logic,
which says: The members dividing must not be confounded: As touching the
definition of the Mass, this is sufficient. We have taken from it the kind,
in proving it no sacrifice: we have taken from it the difference, in proving
that it is not expiatorie: both the kind and difference taken away, what shall
be the definite? Nothing. Or if the Mass be any thing, it is a privation of
the holy supper of our master and redeemer Jesus Christ: even as sin is the
privation of grace.

Let not our adversaries think that we yield the^ their Mass to be so
ancient, The second and third reasons of our adversaries, and our answer.
as they make it, saying: that the Lord 1565 years past did institute it: for
so long it is since he suffered. Neither do we grant them that S. Peter. nor S.
John, nor any of the Apostles ever said that which our adversaries say to be
the Mass. Christ did not institute the Mass, neither did the Apostles say it.
Those which they bring are false testimonies. If any man bear false witness
against his neighbor, how vile or abject soever he be, he breaks the 9.
commandment, he breaks the law of God, and for the same is worthy of
eternal death. How much more shall he break it, and be worthy of death, that
upon cold blood and deliberat purpose (of the learned I speak, and not of the
vulgar sort, which can neither read nor understand) brings false witness
against Christ, his king, prophet, and priest, saying that he did institute the
Mass, wherein are so many superstitions and idolatries: saying that the
Apostles, chosen vessels of God to denounce the Gospel, and to preach the holy
catholic faith, have said such a Mass? And so say they that S. Peter was the
first that sang Mass: The Romistes raise up false witnesses against Christ S.
Peter* and S. James, etc.
but by hearesay they speak, without alleging any Authors. How is it possible
that S. Luke, so diligent an Historiographer of the Acts of the Apostles, has
left in the incke-horne this Article which our adversaries hold so necessary
to salvation, as any other of the twelve Articles of the faith contained in the
Creed. And seeing that this false testimony which they raise up against Peter
avails little to the confirmation of their Mass. Another false testimony
raise they up also of S. James: that S. James (say they) was the first that
said the first Mass in Jerusalem. Yet are they more shameless, bring to light
the said Mass said of S. James, which 1500 years since at the least was
buried: and cry out, a miracle, a miracle. Now is there no further disputing to
be had: since it is an Apostle which has said Mass: now neither can or ought
they to move any more doubts touching the Mass: upon pain to be an heretic,
and blasphemer, whosoever shall move it. In the 1560. year was this Mass of S.
James (as they call it) printed in Paris. In this Mass there is a prayer,
wherein are said these words: We pray for the gifts offered, sanctified,
precious, supercelestiall, ineffable, immaculate, glorious, horrible, fearful
and divine. What manner of speech is this? when used the Apostles any such form
of speaking? Also that this falsehood may be clearly perceived, there is a
prayer in the Mass for the Monks and Nuns, which lived in the Monasteries.
They which say that this Mass is of S. James, should read this and be silent.
For in the time of the Apostles was there neither Monks nor Nuns, nor
Monasteries: many years after were these things invented. Moreover, if this be
a Mass of S. James let them augment the Cannon: Let them place them among the
Canonical books of the holy Scripture. Let them believe and do all that which
is said in the same. In this Mass which they call of S. James, all the people
did under two kinds communicate: all the office was said in the vulgar tongue,
the people sang and answered to the prayers: in it was neither the sacrament of
the bread nor wine adored. But in the Masses of our adversaries are all things
contrary: wherein the people do not but once in the year communicate, and
this once that they do communicate, they take from them half by the middle:
they take from them the sacrament of the blood of Christ which Christ commanded
that all should drink: their Masses they say in a strange tongue, which the
people understand not, and oftentimes he himself that says it, neither
knows nor understands that which he says: The people are sile^t, as though
they should hear an Interlude: The people adore the bread and wine as though it
were Christ, and not the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. That which
Jesus Christ instituted, was his holy supper, and he commanded his Apostles
(who represented the universal or catholic Church) that they should afterward
do the same which they had seen him do. Do this (says he) in remembrance of
me. And S. Paul (speaking to the Corinthians, among who^ Satan had already
bestirred himself, bringing some abuses into the Church, 1. Chr. 11. 23.
concerning the supper of the Lord) says: For I received of the Lord, that
which also I delivered unto you. That the Lord, the night, etc. And what
agreement has the mass with this which the Apostle says? Nothing at all. Let
our adversaries then cease to co^fou^d things together: Let them cease to
change their names: Let the^ not call the supper of the Lord, the Mass, nor
the Mass the supper of the Lord: Because it is not so. This supper of the Lord
a very small time continued in it being and perfection. For even the^ whiles the
Apostles yet lived, arose up dissentions, scismes and heresies about the same:
The which S. Paul willing to reform, reduced the supper to it first
institution, as the Lord had instituted and celebrated it, and commanded that
the faithful should celebrate the same. After these times came others and the
business went from il to worse: Men not contented with the simplicity, wherewith
the Lord had celebrated his supper, sought to be famous, showing themselves
more wise, more prudent and advised, the^ Christ himself. And so they began to
ad and diminish in the supper of the Lord. But notwithstanding all this for a
1000. years space the substance of the supper was not touched. Albeit as
touching outward show, they used many ceremonies, which Christ Jesus never used
and attired themselves with other, then common ornaments, the which Christ nor
his Apostles never did. The 1000. years passed, me^ dared to touch the to
quick, the substance of the holy supper. They began to say, that the bread was
not bread and that the wine was not wine: but that they were converted
tra^sformed, and transsubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ. And this
gainsaying the holy Scripture and the Fathers, as well of the Greek as Latin
Church: which we will afterward very sufficiently prove. The matter thus
going in the Council of Vercele, Goncilium Vercelense.
Leo the ninth being Pope, Transubstantiation was concluded. This Pope
condemned the doctrine of Berengarius: as speaking of the fourth damage, we
will afterward declare. Berengarius believed what the holy scripture had
taught him, and in the Fathers he had read: to wit, that the Sacrament of the
Lords supper in two things consisted: in matter (as they call it) and in form:
the matter is that, which is seen, touched, and tasted, which is the bread and
wine. The form is that which is not seen, but believed, the body and blood of
Christ. You see here the great herefie of Berengarius which the Pope and the
Council (governed by the Pope) condemned. Afterward speaking against
transubstantiation by manifest authorities of the Scripture, and by the sayings
of ancient Doctors will we prove true bread and true wine visible and tangible
to be in the Sacrament, and the true body and blood of Christ to be iuuisible
and believed by faith. And albeit the Pope commanded that Transubstantiation
should be believed, and the Council decreed it, yet were there in those times
many learned and godly men, who (giving credit to that which the holy
Scripture and ancient Doctors said) naught esteemed that which the Pope and his
Council commanded. And yet as constantly passed they further: they wrote
against such doctrine, as impugning the word of God, and the Fathers.
Afterward in the year of our Lord 1200. Pope Innocent 3. confirmed this
decree: and Urban 4. in honor of this sacrament, at the request of a recluse
(with whom in times past he had bin overmuch familiar) invented the solemn
feast which they call Corpus Christ's. Read the life which we have written of
this Urban 4. And the devil not contented to have so euilly entreated the most
holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, nor to have given it so mortal
a wound, passed yet further. He cut off the sacrament half in half: he took
away (say I) the sacramental wine, which represented, sealed, and jointly gave
(receiving it by faith) the blood of Christ: And so was it decreed in the
Council of Constance, where were three Popes deposed: that the Sacrament not
sub vtraque specie, in both kinds, but in one only should be given. True it is,
they yield their excuses, why they depart from the institution of Christ and
that which in the Church was used, but their excuses be very frivolous and to
be laughed at: As more hereafter we shall see, entreating of the sixth damage
which the mass causes. And a fair thing it is that they condemn those for
heretics, which in both kinds receive the Sacrament according to the
Institution of Christ himself. If they seek antiquity. This manner of
communicating sub vtraque specie, under both kinds continued in the Church for
the space almost 400. years: Their communion in one kind is new and has not
been but 180 years, for so long is it since was held the Council of
Constance. One thing had I forgotten that it is many years sithence they began
to say their Mass without communicating of the People, for the priest alone
eats and drincketh it up all without giving any part thereof to any. How can
this be said to be the supper of the Lord, a communion, a common banquet set
forth, Private Masses forbidden.
and prepared for all the faithful. These manner of Masses call they privy
Masses and with favor speaking) very privy. True it is that many Canons* and
decrees have been made against these privy Masses: but behold how they are
kept. The priuies have so evilly smelled that each one thought good to stop
their noses and pass by them. Private be these Masses called, not for that
they be privately or secretly said, which publicly are in the Churches and
hearing of all men that will: But so they are called: Because not the people,
but the Priest alone does communicate. And yet have they gone further: The Pope
gives license to say these privy Masses in the corners of houses: but then is
the charge of them double. For the Priest which says Mass must have money. And
the Pope for the license which he gives to have an altar portable, which is
also called the Bull. All this is contrary to the institution of the Lord. You
see here how the holy supper which Jesus Christ did institute, and his holy
Apostles did celebrate, has been by little and little disfigured, until from
the Supper of the Lord, it is converted into the Mass of the Pope. Behold the
institution of the holy supper, and behold that which is done and said in the
Mass: and it is to be seen if the Mass be the Supper, or the Supper the
Mass.

By an infallible argument and palpable demonstration do we now prove, A
reason proving that neither Christ nor his Apostles said Mass.
that neither Jesus Christ did institute the Mass, nor his Apostles said it:
and this it is: that which very many years after the death of Christ and his
Apostles, and not of one, but many, and in diverse times was invented: Christ
did not institute, nor yet his Apostles did it. The Mass which our Aduersaties
say, many years after the death of Christ and his Apostles, not of one, but of
many, and in diverse times was invented. It follows then, that such a Mass
was not instituted by Christ, neither did his Apostles say it. The first part
of this argument none, except he be senseless and foolish, will deny. But
the second part will our adversaries deny, which easily may be proved. For one
Pope made the Confiteor: another the Introit: another the Kyrie-elison: another
the Gloria in excelsis: another the Gradual: another the Offertory: another the
Cannon: another the Mementoes: another the Agnus Dei: the same say I of all the
rest that is done or said in the Mass. None of these things Christ, but the
Popes, and in sundry times, ordained. Our adversaries (of those I speak which
have but meanly read the histories) though they burst again, can by no means
deny, Confiteor.
that the Mass from end to end has been made by many Popes. They well know
that Damasus, which was Bishop of Rome in the 368. year ordained the Confiteor.

Gelasius Affricanus, about the 492. year, composed (as says Neuclerus) the
Hymns, Hymns, Collect. Respons. gradu. prefac. vere dignum.
Collectes, Responsories, Graduals, and Prefaces, and added the Vere dignum.
and iustum est.

Symmachus, about the five hundredth and twelfth year, ordained, that every
Lords day, and principal feast of the Martyrs should be sung Gloria in
excelsis Deo. Gloria in excelsis.


Pelagius, Commemoratio defunctoru^.
about the 556. year, added the commemoration of the dead.

Gregory the first about the six hundredth year made the Anthems and the
Introit. Antif. introit, Kerie-elison. Alleluia, etc.
He ordained also that the Kyrie-elison should nine times be sung, and the
Alleluia: Item* that the Pater noster should with a high voice be sung over the
consecrated Host: and addeh the Cannon, Diesque no^tros i^ tua pace disponas.

Sergius which in the seven hundred and first year died, ordained that the
Agnus Dei should three times be sung before the breaking of the bread. Agnus
Dei,


Gregory the third added to the secret of the Mass, Quorum Sole^^itas.
Quorum solennitas hodie in conspectu tuae Maiestatis celebratur, Domimine Deus
noster in toto orb terrarum.

Nicholas 1. Seque^ces.
added the Sequences.

As little can they deny that Sistus the first, Sanctus.
added to the Mass Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath.

Innocent, pax.
about the 405. year added the kissing of the Paxe.

Leo the first added Orate pro me fratres, Orate pro me. Deo gratias.
and the Deo gragratias. He added also the Cannon, Sanctum sacrificium
immamaculatam hostiam, Sanctum Sacrificium.
Item hanc igitur oblationem, etc.

Celestine ordained the Offertorie. Hanc igitur.


Alexander the first, Offertorie.
who died in the year 117. began to corrupt the order and manner which Jesus
Christ and his Apostles held in celebrating of the Supper: And so the said Pope
ordained that the bread should be thin without leaven, and not common,
Unleavened bread.
as before it was. As it appears by Did. 93. Cap. Siquis. Item, he ordained
that water should be put into the wine. Water put into wine.
De Consec. Did. 2. Cap. Sacramento. Item, he added, Qui pridie quam
pateretur, etc. This shows very clearly that Jesus Christ did not institute
the Mass: Qui pridie qua^ pateretur.
seeing so many persons sithence the death of Christ have been much busied in
making the same.

Besides this, the great Teigitur clementissime Pater, which is one of the
chiefest patches of the Mass: Teigitur.
wherein mention is made of the Pope, of the Bishop, and the king, does
manifestly show, that Jesus Christ made not the Mass, because in the time of
Christ was neither Pope nor bishop.

The communicants, Commn^ica^t^
wherein made mention of the holy Virgin, of the Apostles, and of many Saints,
which very long time after the Apostles lived in the world (as S. Cyprian,
Laurence, Grisogonus, Cosmus, Damianus, and others) very well shows that
Jesus Christ made not the Mass. Saint Peter they have not placed in this
Cannon: for should he so have been, it would have been said, that he sought
his own glory. A piece of the Mass is there also, and that of the chiefest,
which begins, Nobis quoque peccatoribus.
Nobis quoque peccatoribus, wherein mention is made of some of the Apostles, he
and she Saints mingled without order one with another, as Saint Barbara,
Perpetua, Agueda, Lucia, Iues, Cicelia, etc. which long after the death of
Christ lived in the world.

By this then may be seen, that Christ did not institute the Mass: that which
we pretended have we proved, that Jesus Christ did not institute the Mass,
and that his Apostles never said it: but that the Popes in diverse times did
make it, one adding one piece, and another, another; until it was brought into
the being and estate wherein it now is: which has no agreement with the Supper
of the Lord. Entering sometimes into consideration of these patches, rags,
shreds and pieces, whereof the Mass is made, a wonderful similitude or
comparison (me seems) came to mind, and the same I suppose will also appear
to such as well consider it. To the Mass neither less nor more has it
happened, The Mass patched like a beggars cloak.
then to a pilgrims scrippe, to an old cloak of a beggar that beggeth from
door to door: upon such a cloak the elder it is, the more patches do they
set upon it: so that in time, nothing therein is seen but here a little piece,
and there a small piece of the cloth whereof it was first made. And this cloth
is so used, so wasted, so discolloured, and so without being, that it no way
appears to be that which it was. In this cloak are not seen but patches of
cloth, corrupt, and rotten, and very ill placed, and worse sowed together: so
that it causes loathing to those which have been delicately brought up. Such
another cloak, and neither more nor less is the Popish Mass. The cloth
whereof it was made, was the Supper of the Lord: which men not celebrating
according to the institution of Christ, waxed old, and lost it color, it
being, and worth: Thus comes one and casts a piece unto it: afterward
comes another and casts unto it, etc. So that now it is not the Supper of
the Lord, but the Mass of the Pope: now it is not the robe of an honorable
man, but a cloak of a shameless beggar. By that which is said, have we
answered to the second and third reasons, wherewith our adversaries do
confirm their Mass.

The fourth reason with which our adversaries suppose to mainetaine their Mass
is: The 4. Reason of our adversaries and our answer.
That all the Church Catholic, from the death of Christ, until this day,
with most great reverence has celebrated the Mass. This their reason they
confirm. saying: that God who loves his Church, as his spouse, would never
suffer it so long time to be deceived, especially with so great superstition,
and idolatry, as the Mass (we say) is. This fourth reason of our
adversaries, in two things consists. In antiquity: And in that God who
loves his Church, as his spouse, would not suffer, etc. concercerning the
first, of the Antiquity of the Mass. In answering to the second and third
reasons of our adversaries we showed, that Jesus Christ never instituted the
mass: nor his Apostles ever said it: and that the Church Catholic for the
space of a thousand years never celebrated the Mass, which our adversaries
now celebrate. But the holy supper was celebrated with some human traditions,
and ceremonies invented by man: Notwithstanding all this, the holy supper, as
touching it substance was ever in it being conferued, by the space of a
thousand years. For five hundred years space hitherto, the supper has
ceased to be a supper, and has every day more and more been converted into
the Mass: such as now we see, and chiefly since transubstantiation and the
Communion in one kind were commanded to be believed, as an Article of faith:
Then fell wholly, the holy supper, not in name only, calling it the mass: but
also in substance as before we have said.

Concerning the second part which they bring for confirmation of the first
namely, That God, who loves his Church, would not permit that his Church so
long time should live deceived: To this I answer praying them to read the
Histories of the old and new Testament. Wherein they shall find (if they
well consider) that the Church faulted and maintained errors, and that no
mean ones. The people of Israel was the people of God, the Church of God and
the spouse of God, and dearly beloved; but for all this, the same people fell
into many errors superstitions, heresies and Idolatries and not once by
chance but oftentimes, and of deliberate purpose. Read that notable song,
which Moses the man of God made, Deuteronomy. 32.
written in Deuteronomy: There I say, shall ye find that that people, and that
Church of God, fell into idolatry verse ninth, He says: For the Lords
portion is his people: Iaakob is the line (or lot) of his Inheritance. And in
the tenth verse, he says that God kept this people as the apple of his eye.
And in the eleventh: God carried this people upon his back like the Eagle.
etc. But behold what he says in the same chapter and verse fifteen of this
people so dear and so beloved. Behold if they fell to idolatry: And he
forsook (says he) God that made him and regarded not the strong God of his
salvation. They provoked him with their strange Gods, and made him angry with
their abominations: They sacrified to devils, and not to God. But to Gods whom
they knew not: new Gods, newly come up whom their fathers feared not, etc.
And in the two and thirtith chapter of Exodus, it is said: that the people of
Israel pluct of their golden Earnings etc. Exodus 23. 3. and 4.
And that Aaron took them and made of them a moulten calfe: And when the calfe
was seen, Israel said: These be thy Gods which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt. And when Aron saw that. He built an altar before it, etc. As we have
said in the beginning of the first Treatise. Here may ye fee, How all the
people of Israel, and Aaron their chief Priest committed idolatry. Let us
proceed fur^her. When the people of Israel were entered into the land of
promise. How behaved they themselves? they also committed Idolatry. Read in
the book of Judges, and chiefly the second chapter. and the eleventh verse.
And the children of Israel (says he) did wickedly in the sight of the Lord,
and served Baal. And verse nineteenth. But when the Judge was dead, they turned
and corrupted themselves more then their fathers following other Gods, serving
them and bowing down before them.

They ceased not from their own inventions: Nor from their rebellious way. All
this book is full of examples hereof. The Judges ended, and this people of God
governed by kings. How was it then? As ill, or worse then before. Let them
read the Prophets (which they call) great and small. This people of God, their
Priests and Princes condemned the good Doctrine, and persecuted the holy
Prophets that preached the same. So obstinate was this people in turning away
from God, That God in indignation commanded Esaie to say these words unto the
people: Esaie 6. 9.
in hearing, hear and not understand. In seeing, see, and not perceive. The
heart of this people is waxed fat and their hearing dull, and their eyes are
blinded, least they should see with their eyes and hear with their ears, etc.
The prophet Jeremy protests to all the people of Judah, Jeremy 25.
and to all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: the diligent care which the Lord had
used to convert them from Idolatry to himself and the small profect they
received thereby. He had this (said he) preached unto them by the space of
twenty and three years, and they heard him not. Note what the Prophet says:
in the second verse that he spoke this to all the people of Judah, and to all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And note, that only this Hebrewe people, and no
other in all the world, was then the Church of God: And behold if the Church
erred, Who wounded and imprisoned Jeremy for his sermons? Pashur the chief
Priest of the people of God. What was the state of the people of Israel, when
Elias supposed that there was none but he that worshipped the true God of
Israel? 1. kings 19. 10.
S. Paul alleges this place, Romans 11. 13. Let this suffice concerning the
Church of the old Testament. Come we now to the new. When the divine word,
taking flesh came into the world, How found he his spouse the Church? All to be
smeared with dirt, and sootte. The Scribes and Pharisees, priests and high
priests with their traditions had wholely corrupted her. As now do the
Priests and Friars, Bishops and Popes. So great then was the corrupption in
Doctrine among the people of God, that there was their principal sects of the
Pharifies sadduces and Essees. The Pharisees great hypochrits, corrupted the
scripture with their traditions. The Sadduces shamelesly denied the
resurrection, and allowed neither Angel nor spirit. As by the disputation which
they held with Christ about the woman that had seven husbands, appears.
Matthew. 22. 22. and in the Acts 23. 8. The Essees apart had their opinions. It
was a people solitary like the Charterhouse Monks. They had no wives, drunk
no wine, nor did they eat any flesh, a people they were very austere, and every
day fasted. Whiles the Church was divided into these sects, when all was
confused, came the son of God into the world. With such he conuersed: And of
such, for preaching the truth unto the^ he was crucified. When the light of the
Gospel was come, which Christ and his Apostles preached: who allowed it not,
but rather killed and crucified those that preached the same? The same people
of God, the Church of God, and chiefly the Scribes and Pharisees, priests and
high priests. These came together, and held a Council wherein they concluded,
that Christ should die, and all those that should preach the same Doctrine:
They took him, and because they wanted authority to put any to death, with
false witness they accused him before Pilate, Deputy to the Emperor Tiberius,
and thisin the holy Jerusalem. And so was he condemned for an evil doer, and
for such a one was crucified. O what a Church? O what a Council, if the chief
Priest may err, and erred in deed. The Lord by divine power eftsoons raised
up, who suborned his keepers to say that his disciples had stolen him away?
Who assembled a Council to persecute the Apostles* The Church, Council, and
chief Bishop may* and have erred in the faith.
and commanded them that they should not preach? who caused S. James to be put
to death? Who made S. Peter to be taken, to cause him to die, had not the Angel
of the Lord delivered him? The visible Church of God, the scribes and Pharisees
and high Priests. Not without cause faid the Lord, speaking of Jerusalem:
Jerusalem Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37.
which killest the prophets and stonest those that be sent unto thee.
Afterward the very same has hitherto happened: and leaving former times spoke
we of these wherein we live. Who has for the space of 70, or 80. years
hitherto, shed so much blood of Martyrs? they that call themselves the Church
of Jesus Christ and chiefly the peevish Friars, Bishops and chief Bishops, and
the same shall they do, until the end of the word. And so Christ speaking of
his second coming, when he shall come to the universal Judgment, says: Luke
18. 8. The son of man when he comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? As
if he should say: no. And in the XXIIII. chapter of Saint Matthewe, he makes a
discourse hereof: verse 12. And because (says he) iniquity shall be increased,
the love of many shall be cold. And verse 24. For there shall arise false Christ's
and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very elect. And think we not, these false
Christ's, and false Prophets shall be Turks and Jews: Christians they shall be,
and for such shall they be holden: Bishops and chief Bishops shall be the
principally as at this day they be.

I have sufficiently proved (me thinks) by many examples and passages of the
old and new. Testament, that the Church of God may err, and has erred
indeed: which to our adversaries seems impossible. Now will we resolve a
doubt: and this it is: If the Church be such, and subject to fall into
Errors, superstitions, heresies, and idolatries (as before we have proved) How
shall that be understood which the scripture says: How the church being the
pi^lar of truth may err.
That the Church is the body of Jesus Christ; That the Church is the spouse of
Christ: That the Church is the pillar of truth founded upon the sure
foundation. That the Church is without spot or wrincle, and wholly fair: That
the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, and other like commendations
and praises thereof the word of God witnesses? To this may we answer that
both the one, and the other may very well stand. For God never suffered all his
Church to fall together into Error: But rather has always reserved some good
and some times also seven thousand. As said he speaking of Elias, 1. kings 19.
18.
albeit in corners which never bowed the knees to Baal. Such as these, the
common error, dispatched: wherewith all the Church was generally deceived,
Against this Error, such others of these spoke, preached and wrote: and most
times it cost them their lives: and had each one of them had a thousand lives:
a thousand lives would each one of them have lost for the same cause. That
Church wherein Catholiquely and universally reigned that Error, or heresy:
she and her Bishops, did persecute condemned and kill them. As by examples
we have confirmed the same. So that when the scripture says: All Israel, all
Judah, all the inhabitants of Jerusalem turned away from God, committed
Idolatry, etc. Of such a manner ingenerall must we understand, which has it
Exceptions: for in the midst of these Errors, and idolatries so Catholic,
fo universal had always God some particular men, whom he reserved clean and
pure from that common error. So reserved God Moses and Joshua, and some other
particular persons also which worshipped not the calfe, when all Israel
ingenerall, and Aaron the high Priest him self, worshipped it. The same will
we say of the time of the Judges, that God never forsook his Church. The same
we say also of the times of the kings of Israel, and of Judah. When all
committed Idolatry God raised up an Esaias, a Micheas, a Ieremias, an
Ezechiel, a Daniel, etc. Who reproved vices and false Doctrine, and declared
the truth. But which of these did not the Church, and her high priests
persecute and kill. So also reserved the Lord vnro himself at his first
coming into the world. A Simeon, an Anna widdowe, a Joseph, and his spouse,
the virgin Marie, mother of our savior. An holy Elizabeth, and her son
Saint John Baptist: which were Godly, very well thought of the true religion,
and agreed neither with the Pharisees nor Sadduces nor Essees. And so the Lord
in so unhappy times, preserved his Church. And so likewise until now has he
preserved the same. And now also, in these lest miserable times, wherein
neither faith Luke 18, 8. nor love is found Matthew. 24. 12. God reserueth some
which oppose themselves to the tyranny of the Antichrist of Rome, and to the
common error and Idolatry of all the Roman Church ingenerall. And so God
has not permitted that his Church has wholly been deceived: nor according to
his promise, I am with you unto the end of the world. Will he ever permit the
same. Ever the^, has God reserved foam that have not been deceived with the
common error: and many from time to time be enlightened: As by experience we
have seen it. God of his infinite mercy increase them, that the number of his
chosen may be fulfilled, and so sin may cease: and only Christ, without any
competency of Antichrist, may reign. So be it. Amen.

I have long dwelled upon this fourth answer: for the matter so required:
considering that many simple people, which not otherwise have heard, nor are
able to understand how God who loves his Church, would permit her so long time
to be deceived, at the least, with such a deceit of idolatry, are in this
deceived. And so they and the rest shall see that, not to be the truth, which
our adversaries hold for for an oracle, that the visible Church cannot err.
God open their eyes, that seeing, they may see, and hearing they may hear: and
so convert and be saved. Amen.

Only God is he which cannot err, Esaias. 53. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 22.
but does ever right. But only his son Christ Jesus is he which sinned not,
which erred not, Esa. 40. 8.
neither was there any guile found in his mouth. Only the word of God abides
for ever. And as often as the Church (be she never so populous and apparent)
shall depart from this word of God, and shall not hold it for her squire, rule,
and pattern, she shall err. And the more she turns away, the more shall she
err. But always, when she will be governed thereby, she shall be established,
and shall never err. For the word of God says David) is a lantern unto our
feet, Psalm. 119. 105.
and a light unto our paths. The 5. The 5. reason, and our answer.
reason wherewith they confirm their Mass is the great miracles which the
Mass and their consecrate hosts have done. Here will I reckon some (for to
seek to reckon all, should be never to end. Damascen, among other great and
strange matters, which he cites in the sermon of the dead (afterward will we
speak of these wonders) tells for a great miracle, a true fable and old
woman's tale. One Macarius (says he) desirous to know the state of the dead,
spoke with the dry scull of one that was dead, etc. And that the same scull
answered him: that the souls of the dead are not so greatly tormented whilst
the sacrifice of the Mass continues. Herehence our adversaries conclude, the
Mass to be holy and good. Sermon de lapsis;
S. Cyprian an Author more ancient and autentike, and a martyr of Jesus Christ,
reports a strange miracle, which in his presence happened: Thus then says
he: I my self being present: and an eye witness thereof. It cha^ced that the
parents of a young girl flying, and making through great fear no reckening of
their daughter, they left her with the Nurse that brought, her up. The Nurse
having the abandoned child, carried her to the Magistrate gave unto this young
girl (before the idol, whereunto the people flocked) a foppe wet in the wine,
that was left of the sacrifice of them which perished: This sop gave they unto
her, for that by reason of her tende^ age she could not yet eat flesh: the
mother after this, recovered her child: but so much could the infant tell or
declare the horrible fact it had committed, as it could not before either
understand, or avoid it. It happened that the mother brought her through
ignorance, when we were sacrificing (as much to say as celebrating the supper
of the Lord, which in memory of the sacrifice, by the Lord once offered, was
celebrated) but the infant mingled with the Saints, unable to abide our
supplication and prayer, now with shrikes tormented her self, now with
fervor of heart, like a wave of the ^ea, she cast her self to and fro as
though a hangman had tormented her. And with the tokens and shows, that the
ignorant soul of her age and simplicity might, she confessed the conscience
of the deed. But when (the solemnities ended) the Deacon began to present the
cup to them that were present (note the communion in both kinds) and the
others having taken it, The Communion in both kinds in the time of Saint
Cyprian.
the turn came to her (in the time of Saint Cyprian they also gave the cup to
young children) the girl by very instinct of the divine Majesty, turned away
her face, shut her mouth, and forcing together her lips, refused the cup.
But all this notwithstanding, albeit she refused the sacrament of the cup,
yet insisted the deacon, and cast it into her mouth. Then began she to sigh,
and vomit. The Eucharist could not stay in a body and mouth which were filthy.
The drink sanctified in the blood of the Lord (note that he calls the wine
in the supper drink sanctified in the blood of the Lord) with fury departed
from the polluted intralles: Drink sanctified in the blood of the Lord.
so great is the power of the Lord, so hreat is his majesty. etc. Hitherto
Saint Cyprian. Of this miracle Saint Augustine also in the 23. Epistle makes
mention, reciting it there so certain authors: and more, Saint Cyprian says,
that he was an eyewitness, I assuredly believe that so it happened. But the
same will I not say, of that recounted by Dam^scen: no^ of that which now I
will declare. Albeit reported by Pius the second. In the description of Europe,
cap. 21. Pius the second speaking of Estiria, a province of Almaine, says
these words: It is said, and is a thing common among the^ of Estiria, that
there was a certain Gentleman, who many times purposed to hang himself: which
much displeasing hm, he went to a certain learned person, to demand remedy
against this temptation. The counsel that he gave him was this, that he
should carry his own priest every day to say Mass in a solitary rock, where
he dwelled. The Gentleman obeyed, and so continued for a year, and never after
came into his memory this wicked thought. Afterward, the Priest craves of
him license to go, and aid another Priest his neighbor, which dwelled in
another mountaintaine near adjoining, to celebrate the feast of the dedicatio^
of the Church. The Gentleman was contented that the Priest should go, purposing
in himself to follow speedily, and hear Mass. The Caualle^o busied now with
one thing, then with another, stayed long after. In the end, almost at the
middle of the day, he departed, and in the way encountered a certain villain,
which said unto him: The Mass in the other mountain is already ended, and the
people departed: The Gentleman sorrowing at this news, and calling himself
unlucky, for not seeing that day the body of Christ: the villain began to
cheer him, and said unto him: that he would sell him the merit, which he had
gotten by hearing of Mass, if the other would buy it: and demanded for a
price of the Gentleman his coat (for know this, that among the Papists one
sells his merits to another: as if there were some that had done more thereof
then he ought, wherewith he might do what he pleased.) The sale made and
passed, the knight notwithstanding went up into the mountain, and made his
prayers in the Church. And as he returned, he found the villain hanged upon a
tree, and never afterward was troubled with wicked temptations. Hitherto Pope
Pius the second. If this were truth, who ought not to worship the Mass? But
either it was a lie: or if it so happened, it was one of Satan's miracles, the
more to blind the people with the idolatry of the Mass. Of such miracles the
Lord and his Apostles do advise us to beware that we be not deceived by them.
Two sorts of miracles.
Many other miracles they recount, but in answering to these aforesaid, we
shall have answered to all that they can reckon.

And the better to answer this fifth objection, know we that there are two
sorts of miracles, the one true, and the other false. Those that are true, are
done by the power of God, for confirmation of the truth, and the confusion of
falsehood. Such were the miracles which God wrought by the hand of Moses, and of
the other Prophets: Such be those which Christ and his Apostles did. Coming
then to our purpose: I say that the miracles which God has done in the most
holy sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to make us understand that he
instituted this sacrament, and that it was not humane invention, he did them:
And this did the Lord for one of these two ends: The first is to expel the
wicked, impious, and unworthy persons from this so high a Sacrament: for this
end served the miracle, which Saint Cyprian saw, and we have declared: and
others also which the same author reports. For what actual sin had a
sucking infant, witout any discretion committed, in eating a soppe moystened
in the wine sacrificed unto idols? But did the Lord, to make us understand how
much those men, which unworthily, and without any consideration, receive the
holy Supper, do displease him: and that to them is it all one, to sit at the
table of the Lord, and to receive the Sacrament of his body, and of his blood*
or to sit at the table of the Devil, and receive the Devil himself. If God
chastised by his just Judgment, a sucking Babe: as Saint Cyprian reports,
for having participated of the table of the Devil, and of that of the Lord:
how think we, will he punish those, that of ripe age and deliberate purpose
do participate of both tables? This young child could not drink the cup of
the Lord, having first drunk that of the Devils: it could not be partaker of
the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils. For the cup of the Lord
is the communion of the blood of Christ: and the bread which we break (in the
Supper) is the Communion of the body of Christ. And what agreement has Christ
with the Devil? This is not mine own invention, they are the words of Saint
Paul, speaking for this purpose to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. chap. 10. 15. So
that we confess, that God has miraculously many times chastened those, which
unworthily receive the most holy sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. And
the Apostle in the eleventh chapter does witness the same, when he says: For
which cause (as much to say, as for having unworthily eaten) many amongst you
are sick and weak, and many are asleep, that is to say, are dead. The second
end that God pretends in the miracles which he does in the Supper, is
touching good men. In the celebration of this sacrament has God willed
sometimes to do miracles, to illustrate the same, and to show forth the
excellency and dignity thereof: and the more therewith to confirm the faith
of the godly, that (the Lord having blown away their sins) do worthily
receive it. And not only for confirmation of the faithful has the Lord in
the Sacrament wrought miracles: but also has he done them in the celebration
of Baptism. And so S. John Baptist, Mat. 3. 16.
when Christ was baptized, saw the heavens open, and the holy Ghost visibly
descending in the shape of a Dove. And this was, that the Baptist, as an eye
witness, might testify of Christ, and say: Behold the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.
29.
which takes away the sins of the world. Such miracles then admit we, that
for confirmation of our faith are done hy the power of God.

The second sort of miracles* are done by the art of the Devil, False
miracles.
to deciue men, and to cause them not to believe the true, but the false
doctrine: such miracles call we false for one of these two causes.

The first is, in regard of the Author the Devil, who is a liar, and the
father of lies.

The second because such miracles deceive them that believe them. By the art
of the Devil did the Sorcerers of Pharaoh work wonders, as Moses did. Of such
miracles the Lord forewarneth us: There shall arise up (says he) false
Christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders: Mat.
24. 24.
so that the very elect, if it were possible, should be deceived. Behold,
says the Lord, I have told you before. And Saint Paul speaking of
Antichrist, says: That his coming shall be by the working of Satan, ^.
These. 2.
in all power, signs, and lying wonders, etc. Such may we think were the
miracles of the Sorcerers of Pharaoh. Such be the miracles which Damascen
reports of the dead man's scull, and of the soul of Traian, Sermon de
defunctis.
and of the soul of Falconilla, that being condemned, and in hell, were saved.
Of these miracles of Damascen we will speak afterward. Such may we think was
the miracle of the Mass by us recited of Pius the second. In conclusion all
miracles which be to confirm a thing that is contrary to the word of God, be
false, and done by the art of the devil. Against the word of God is it, that
the souls by the just judgment of God condemned and buried in hell, should go
out thence and be saved. Against the word of God is it, to believe there is any
other Purgatory then the blood of Christ. Ireneus, a most ancient Doctor,
tells that a certain man called Mark, a great deceiuer, and heretic, with
the Sacrament of the Eucharist did strangely deceive the simple. For he so
changed the color of the wine, that nothing but blood appeared: and by his
enchantments so greatly increased a little of the wine, that it filled the
cup, and also ran over. And another cup greater and more capable being
brought: the self same, without adding more liquor, did fill it up to the top.
Shall we believe his heresy, because he confirmed it with miracles? Surely no.
A commandment have we, that if an Angel from heaven shall teach us another
Gospel, another doctrine, another faith then that which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles have taught us, wbich they have left us, written in the old and new
testament; that although he confirm it with many miracles, as did this Mark,
and the sorcerers of Pharaoh, we should not believe him. Of this Mark makes
Saint Jerome mention, and cites Ireneus for his author. This Mark (says he)
went into France, and thence passed into Spain: and with his enchantments
deceived many, the Gentle women chiefly, whom he allured to carnal love. Read
the epistle to Theodora, the wife of Lucinus Beticus, or Audaluz. tom. 1.

If we read the histories of the Gentiles, we shall find that they show many
and very strange miracles: in them shall we find, that there ran rivers of
blood, that blood flowed from the thumb of Jupiter.

Titus Liuius reports, that it rained flesh in Rome. Quintus Curtius says,
that when Alexander besieged Tire, the bread commonly did sweat blood. And
other infinite miracles to confirm their idol worship, may the Gentiles allege:
notwithstanding these miracles, their idol worship is wicked and detestable.
And such be the miracles which our adversaries recount to confirm their Mass:
their transubstantiation, their idolatry, wrought by art of the devil to
confirm false doctrine, deceive the simple, and if it were possible, the very
elect.

The sixth reason wherewith they confirm their Mass, The sixth reason and the
answer
is: to say that in the Mass are many good things, taken out of the holy
scripture: as are the Epistle, the Gospel, the Hoc est corpus meum, etc. To
this objection we may answer: That suppose, that in the Mass there be some
good things taken out of the holy scripture: it follows not therefore that the
Mass is good: for so should sorceries, witchcrafts, and enchantments be very
good. For in them the name of God, the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost is very often named. And no sorcerie, witcherie, or enchantment
is there, wherein these names with many epithites and properties are not named.
And the witches (that these names may have the more efficacy) do name them in
tongues, which they themselves understand not: in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
All goes backward, wherein our adversaries do imitate the witches. For all the
Mass almost they say in Latin, mingling with it some Greek words, as
Kyrie-eleyson, Christe-eleyson: He brue do they also mingle with it, as
Sabbath, Hosanna, Alleluia. But Christ when he celebrated his supper, all
whatsoever he spoke, in the vulgar tongue did he speak it, that all the
Apostles, simple men, might understand, and speak the same. From hence we
conclude, that it suffices not that the Mass, because it has some good
things in it, should therefore be holy and good, how much more good then this
there is in the Mass* is so corrupted and endomaged with superstition and
idolatry, that it can do no good, but much evil. or as a little leven does
leven the wholle lump of dough, and as a little poison does corrupt the best
meat that is in the world and the most excellent wine if never so little they
cast into yt kills him that drinks it* as Examples we have in our Spanish
Alexander 6. who by the error of his seruitour drunk the poisoned wine, which
he had prepared to kill some Cardinals, that he had invited, and thereof dyed)
even so also, the same things, which of their own nature be good, placed in
the Mass are poison, All whatsoever is in the Mass is poisoned.
which destroy. This will we afterward examine, and chiefly that which our
adversaries themselves, affirm to be most holy; and of the Mass, the
holiness it self, which is, Hoc est corpus meum. For now (say I) they apply
it not to the purpose, that Christ said. So contrary, say they it, to the
institution of Christ, and in a strange tongue, which the people understand
not, that it infecteth him that hears it. And if you believe their Hoc est
corpus me^m, as they understand it, into a terrible heresy shall ye fall: As
a little beneath, when we shall speak of the fourth damage of the Mass we
will declare. That which our adversaries conclude, that the Mass is good,
because many good things be in it, evidently appears by that we have said, to
be false.

The seventh reason wherewith they maintain their mass is, The 7. reason and
the answer.
that the sacrifice of the Mass was figured in the sacrifice, which
Melchisedech made, who being Priest of the most high God, offered unto God
bread and wine. They say also that Malachy chap. 1. verse. 11. speaks thereof,
as we have before alleged. Concerning that which they say of Melchisedech, it
shall be needful that they read and consider the history, as Moses sets
it down. Whereof the Apostle makes mention, and applies it to Christ, whose
figure (says he) Melchisedech was. Genesis 14. 18.
Moses declares that Abraham returning from that notable victory, Heb. 7. 1.
etc.
which against four kings, God had given him. Melchisedech king of Salem,
brought forth bread and wine: he says that Melchisedech was Priest of the high
God. Our Adversaries hearing that Melchisedech was a priest, and that he
offered bread and wine: from hence they conclude, that this bread and wine he
offered in sacrifice unto God, and that this was a figure of the sacrifice of
the Mass. Whereunto we answer: that Melchisedech offered not bread nor wine
unto God: but brought it forth, or to speak better, caused it to be brought
forth: for this is the force of the word which Moses here uses: which very
well agrees with our Spanish manner of speaking: He brought forth, or caused
to be brought forth bread and wine. If you will ask me why made he bread and
wine to be brought forth? I will tell you, to refresh Abraham and his people,
that came wearied from the slaughter, and hungry in the way which he made. For
confirmation of that which I say, I will content my self to allege Saint
Ambrose and Saint Jerome. Thus then says Saint Ambrose upon the seventh
chapter to the Hebrews. No new thing should it be, if Melchisedech went out to
meet Abraham the Conqueror, and brought him bread and wine for the refreshing
as well of him, as his fellow soldiers. The same, word for word says Saint
Jerome. Epist. ad Euagrium tom. 3.
You see here, wherefore served the bread and wine: which Melchisedech caused
to be brought forth. What agreement then has the bread and wine of
Melchisedech, with the accidents I say, Because they deny any substance of the
bread and wine in the Mass. Heb. 7.
Melchisedech, says the Apostle, was the figure of Christ: and shows
wherein; but he makes at all no mention of the sacrifice of bread, nor of
wine: for in this Melchisedech was not the figure of Christ, Melchisedech in
three things was the figure of Christ.
since neither the one nor the other offered the ^acrifice of bread and wine. In
three things (if we note well, that which the Apostle says,) shall we find
that Melchisedech was the figure of Christ: the first, in that Melchisedech was
a king, Heb 7.
and not after a sort, but King of Righteoufnesse and Peace: in this was he the
figure of Christ, who only is the true King of righteousness and peace. The
second is, that Melchisedech was a Priest, not as the Leuiticall priests, which
being mortal, one died, and another succeeded him: but Melchisedech was
eternal: and therefore his sacrifice was eternal: as of him the Apostle thus
speaking, does say: Without father, without mother, without kindred, which
neither has beginning of days nor end of life: But is likened unto the Son
of God, and does continue a priest for ever. You see here, how David speaking
with his Lord the Messiah, which is Christ: says unto him, Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Psalm. 110. 4.
Psalm. 110. 4. As much to say, as in that Melchisedech was thy figure and
likeness. As Mechisedech (in that he was a figure of Christ) was an
everlasting Priest, so thou also the Messiah, art the same. That which the
Apostle says, that Melchisedech was without father, without mother, is to be
understood, insomuch as he was the figure of Christ: for otherwise had he
father and mother: and so think some that Melchisedech was Sem. The Priests
after the order of Aaron were mortal, and none of them continued for ever: but
he of the order of Melchisedech is immortal and everlasting. Of the order of
Aaron were there many: but of the order of Melchisedech was there but only
one, the same Messiah our redeemer and Lord: who in that he is the eternal son
of God, has no mother: and in that he is man, borne in this world, when the
fullness of time was come, has no father: and as he is eternal, so shall his
priesthood be eternal. Every day sing they in their euensongs, pssalm. 110. 4.
Iurauit Dominus, and non poenitebit eum. Tu et Sacerdos in aeternum secundum
ordinem Melchisedech. But I call their own consciences to witness that daily
sing it, if they understand that which every day they sing. Of this order of
Melchisedech expect no other priests then Christ. But Antichrist is he that
shall so term himself to be (as he says) the vicar of Christ. He, and all
his shavelings and fatlings will say themselves to be Priests after the order
of Melchisedech: and not after the order of Aaron. But so are they not after
the order of Melchisedech, since there is no more but one, which is Christ: as
little are they after the order of Aaron, seeing with the death of Christ
ceased the Leuiticall priesthood. What priests then be the Papists? After the
order of Baal: and so they be enemies of God, and of his Prophets, which preach
against idolatry.

The third thing that the Apostle notes, wherein Melchisedech was the figure
of Christ, is: that Melchisedech, by reason of his priesthood, was much more
excellent than Abraham: and so, as the greater, blessed Abraham. And Abraham
himself acknowledging this maioritie and superiority, gave unto him the tithes
of the spoils. Such a one truly is Christ, upon whom the redemption,
righteousness, and sanctification, not of Abraham only, but of all the
faithful also, do depend. Here see you the things, wherein (may we believe the
Apostle, a vessel of election) Melchizedeck was the figure of Christ, No
mention at all makes he, of the sacrifice of bread nor of wine; which we doubt
the Apostle would have done, had Melchizedeck in this been a figure of Christ.
The place which they cite of Malachy, says thus: For from the rising of the
sun, until the going down of the same, my name (is great among the Gentiles.
And in every place shall be offered to my name pure incense, and Myrrach (which
we translate, present or gift) The common edition, whereunto our adversaries
give more credit, then to the Ebrew text, translateth: Et in omni loco
sacrificatur and offertur nomini meo oblatio munda. To wit: And in every place
is sacrificed and offered to my name, a clean offering. Here hence they
conclude: that this clean offering which in every place, is sacrificed, and
offered is the sacrifice of the mass. But the Mass, being a profanatio^ of
the holy supper (as before we have proved) it cannot be a present, nor
offering, which is offered to God; nor acceptable to him: whereof it follows,
that this Incense, and present. Of which speaks Malachy is another thing
far different from the Mass: It is (say I) the sacrifice, not expiatory, but
Eucharistical, of praise and thanksgiving, which the faithful every day, and
moment, do offer to God As before we have said, in the one hundred forty one
Psalm. and 2. verse. The Prophet uses these two very names which we translate
Incence and offering. The which place, none understand of the Mass: because
the Prophet says. An evening sacrifice; But their Mass is said in the morning.

It is no new thing with God, when his people, his priests and princes,
provoked him with their superstitions; and Idolatries, to threaten them, that
he would forsake them: that he would naught esteem them: that he would take
unto himself another people, which should serve him much better. Of whom, he
would have great regard. Romans 10. 19.
S. Paul alleges to this purpose, a notable passages when he says: But I
say, has not Israel attained to knowledge? First Moses says, I will provoke
you to jealousy with a people which is not mine: De^^. 32. 21.
with a foolish people I will provoke you to wrath: also Esaias is bold to say:
I was found of those that sought me not, I was manifested to them, that
enquired not for me etc. Esaias 65.
The same does the Lord, in the place of Malachias: which we have in hand,
Malach. 1. 10.
forsaking the Jews, he says I take no pleasure in you (says the Lord of
hosts, neither do I regard the offerings of your hands. You see here, how he
forsakes the Jewish people: And then in the following verse, he admits the
Gentiles, saying: For from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the
same, my name is great among the Gentiles: And in every place shall be offered to
my name Incense, and a pure offering, Mar. 16. 15.
Then says God: That his Church should now no more be straightned in Judea:
But that it should extend throughout all the world. The calling of the Gentiles.
Which was fulfilled, when the Lord sent his Apostles throughout all the world,
to preach the Gospel to every creature: Then did Malachy prophecy the calling
and conversion of the Gentiles: which heartily converted; John 4. 24.
should offer Incense, and a pure offering unto God. That is to say: That they
shall serve him, with spiritual worship and service, and shall worship him
in spirit and truth: and not in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem (As said
Christ to the woman of Samaria) but throughout all the world The prophets when
they will speak of the calling of the Gentiles, are wont to signify the
spiritual worship, Whereunto they exhort them, by the ceremonies of the law:
And in stead of saying, that all the people should turn unto God, They say:
That they shall go up to Jerusalem. In stead of saying, that all the people of
the South and of the East, shall worship God: they say, that they shall offer
for a present the riches of their land. To show, the great and abundant
knowledge, which he was to give to his faithful, in the kingdom of Christ,
they say: That the Daughters shall prophecy, the young men shall see visions,
and old men shall dream dreams. So now Malachy willing to say, that the
Gentiles shall worship God in spirit, and in truth, says: that they shall
offer Incense and an offering, which be things which God in the law
commanded the Jews to offer unto him, and adds, pure: to denote, that this
Incense and offering is not to be carnal but spiritual. What agreement has
this with the Mass? Which is a devilish invention, and prophaneth the holy
supper? Other places of the scripture allege they for confirmation of their
Mass: But with as great faithfulness, and as much to the purpose, As these
two, of Mechilzedeck and Malachy, which by that is said may easily be answered.
The 8 reason wherewith our adversaries do magnify their mass, The 8 reason of
our adversaries and our answer.
is for the great good and profit that thereof they receive: And of al these
reasons, and others such like which they allege, they conclude: us to be
heretics and dogs worse the^ Jews and Turks: Because, we so shamelesly
speak against the Mass; which Jesus Christ instituted, his Apostles said, and
all the Church Catholic unto this day has celebrated etc. They say then, that
besides the oblatio^ and sacrifice which Jesus Christ has made upon the
Cross, of his body and of his blood for remission of our sins, to reconcile
us with God and to obtain for us life eternal: he has ordained the
Priests, which be successors of the Apostles: to consecrate in the Mass, the
bread and wine: to transubstantiate it in the body and blood of Christ: to
sacrifice and offer unto God the father, that body and that blood for the
remission of our sins and to obtain all that is necessary for us, both in
body and soul. And what greater good then this (say they) can be? This
sacrifice (say they also) does much profit the dead, to allay the pains, The
propfits of the Mass.
which they have to suffer, and do suffer in purgatory As we cited before of
the dead ma^s scul of Macharius reported by Damascen. Who so lusts to know
the profits of the Mass, Let him read the Spanish houers, and he shall find
very many. Amongst others there mentioned, be these which follow, as much worth
is the mass, as is the passion of Jesus Christ. Also that he which hears it
waxes not old, whilst he hears it. Also that he shall not loose that day,
the light of his eyes Also that he shall not die an evil death: also that he
which shall have seen the body of the Lord, if that day he shall die suddenly,
that it is taken for comunicating, and he may not fear to be condemned. And all this say they that S. John Chrisostom, S. Augustine S. Ierom say; for they knew
how to raise false testimonies. These Articles of faith, have the inquisitors
of our country of Spain many years ago yielded to go among the houers,
which commonly are prayed. And if now they have caused the^ to be taken away,
and not suffered them to be printed: in this yet do they show their ignorance
that for so many years, they have suffered and commanded, that with their
license they should print them. The cause that they now fall in account is:
that so gross, and abominable lies, more serve at this day to make wary the
people, then to deceive them; And therefore permit they such things more, to be
printed. We say then, that the Mass procures us no good at all, but great
mischief rather, As after we shall see.

Now that we have answered to the reasons wherewith our adversaries think to
mainetaine their Mass, for more confutation thereof, we will now likewise set
down some notable domages which it causes, and great adversaries, which
necessarily follow the popish Doctrine of the mass. And I will not be much
curious in seting down here all the domages and absurdities which follow of the
mass: for that should be never to end. Only will I set down such as most fitly
come to mind for the present.

I say then, that the Mass causes many domages. First it prophaneth the holy
supper of the Lord, 7. domages, the Mass causes.
suppressing and despising his death and passion. 2. In it, they invoke the
dead saints. 3. In it dead saints are placed for intercessors. 4. The priests
that says it, hold he intention to consecrate or not, and the people that
hear it commit idolatry. Fifthly, The Mass mainetaineth many other abuses,
besides the Idolatry of transubstantiation: As the worshipping of Images, and
the invention of Purgatory, which is a common cutpurse. Sixth. In the mass
defraud they the people of the half of the Sacrament, and this half do they
give seldom and wickedly. Seventhly. And put case the Mass were good; yet is
it said in a strange Language which the people understand not, and with such
gesture moving childish toys, and apish fopperies that rather provoke
laughter, then devotion. These seven domages we prove by the same order, as we
propounded them. And that the mass derogateth from the passion of Christ, The
1. damage.
is clearly seen. For the Mass which for this cause was ordained, that a
hundred thousand sacrifices should every one day be offered, what does it
pretend; but that the passion of Jesus Christ, wherein he offered himse^^e, and
this once by one only sacrifice remains buried and cast in a corner? Who will
think to be redeemed by the death of Christ, when he shall see a new
redemption in the Mass? Who will believe his sins to be pardoned by the death
and passion of Christ, when he shall see a new remission of sins in the Mass?
Invocation is a high worship and service, which is only due to God. The 2.
damage. Rom 10. 4.
For in him only we believe, how says S. Paul shall we call upon him in whom
we have not believed? So that invocation presupposes faith, and such a faith
as is founded upon the word of God, the Nicen creed, they sing in their Mass,
which begins Credo in vnum Deum. I believe in one only God. If in one only
God we ought to believe, one only God ought we to invoke: The which
invocation being done in faith, God promises that he will hear it. Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord (says Joel) shall escape etc, Joel 2. 23.
As S. Paul Romans 10. 13. and Saint Peter Acts 2. 21. do interpret it, shall be
saved. Also that only God ought to be inuocated, is by this reason proved.
Sacrifice is only due to the true God (this our adversaries will not deny)
invocation is a sacrifice. As says the Psalm, 50. 14. Sacrifice unto me praise:
or as says the common edition, The sacrifice of praise: The sacrifice of
praise commends the Apostle Hebr. 13. 15. and Hosea 14. 3, that we shall offer
to God. Therefore Invocation, since it is a sacrifice to God only, ought it to
be offered. But our adversaries forsaking the fountain of living waters, have
dug them broken cesternes which can hold no water. Jeremy 2. 13.
They leave to call upon God, and invoke the Saints. And Saints sometime
also, that it is not known who they be; and some of them, it may be, that
are burning in hell. An example have we hereof, in the prayer of S. Roccus,
which together with the Crown of our Lady in the 1581 year was printed in the
house of John Gutierres in Siuell. The prayer says thus God which to the
blessed Roccus did promise a table which an Angel carried that he which
shall pittiously invoke him, may not be offended with the affliction of the
pestilence, etc. This prayer of Roccus, I put for example, because it came
first to hand. Many other examples may be drawn from their Masses. For what
do they in all their prayers, which they make to the Saints: but call upon
them, requesting them to do this or that? There is no commandment either in
the old or new Testament, wherein God commands us to call upon any other
then himself. Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, and I will hear
thee, and thou shall honor me. He never says, Call upon such, or such an
Angel, upon this or that other Saint, upon Abraham, Samuel, David, Esaias, etc.
Jesus Christ, when his Apostles besought him to teach them to pray, did not
command them to call upon his mother, upon such or such a Saint: but he
commanded them to call upon God: and of him should they demand whatsoever
they had need of, as well for the body as the soul. All which is contained in
the prayer that he taught them, Our Father, etc. And as there is no
commandment to call upon any other, then upon God: So is there no example of
any the faithful, either in the old or new testament that has called upon
any other then God alone. Secure we are of the infinite goodness, love, and
power of God. Assured we are, that wheresoever we shall be, albeit in the
belly of the whale, or in the fiery furnace, and shall call upon him, he
hears us. But of the Saints will we not say so much, whose goodness,
charity and power is limited, and communicated of that infinite. Only God is
infinite, and so is in every place. The Saints be finite, and therefore cannot
be in every place, and so can neither hear nor see our miseries and
necessities. And seeing we entreat of invocation, reason would we should say
something of prayer, prayer.
because invocation is so commonly called Prayer is a certain familiar
conference and discourse, which the faithful soul has with her God: wherein
she shows all her necessities: that he is as a Lord, may not only bear the^,
but also as a father may provide for them, and believes that his Majesty will
so do, and so he does the same. Prayer is a lifting up of the soul unto God.
Prayer is a ladder, by the which, the soul mounteth from this vale of tears,
from this gulf of miseries, and pierces all the heavens, and stays not
until it present it self before God, and propose unto him all her
necessities, believing as a good father, that he will provide for them. This
Ladder of Prayer has four stages.

The Ladder of Prayer.
1 Necessity constrains us to pray. 2 The Commandment of God commands it.
3 The Promise makes us assured to be heard. 4 Faith obtains that which is
prayed for.
Man of his own nature and condition is so evil of himself, so haughty and
proud, that did not necessity constrain him, he would never subject himself
to God, nor yet call upon him. For this cause said David, Psalm. 119. verse 71.
It is good for me that thou have humbled (or cast me down) and a little before
he had said, Before I was humbled (or abased) I went astray. The good which
David drew of this de^ection, and every Christian ought to draw the same, is
that he humbled himsefe before God, and called upon him. The Saints seeing
themselves oppressed with afflictions and sorrows, do acknowledge their
offenses, and call upon God. So did David, when he said, psalm. 120.
When I was in trouble I called upon the Lord, and he heard me. But when the
wicked be afflicted, they blaspheme against God, and despair. This is a mark
by which the children of God do differ from those which be not his. The
second stage is, that God commands us to call upon him, Call upon me in the
time of tribul^tion, Pfal. 50. 15. The third stage is, That the Promise does
make us assured to be heard. And so when God commands David to call upon
him, he promises that he will deliver him: and adds, that when the
afflicted calls upon God, he does him great service, And thou shall honor
me says he. Also Psalm. 91. verse. 15. he says: He shall call upon me, and
then promises, and I will hear him: I will be with him in trouble, I will
deliver him, and glorify him. In diverse places does the holy Scripture
promise, Joel. 2. 23.
that he which shall call upon the name of the Lord, Act. 2. 21.
shall be saved: but in no place does it promise aid, Romans 10. 13.
succor or salvation to him that shall call upon any other (be he never so
holy) then God. The fourth stage is, Faith obtains that which is prayed for.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray (Christ says, Mark. 11. 24.) believe that
ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. This faith had David, Psalm.
4. 4. when he said, The Lord will hear me when I call upon him. The eleventh
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews confirms this with many examples. Read
this whole chapter, for therein is lively set forth the power and efficacy of
faith without the which (says he) it is impossible to please God. If the heart
be not sincere, simple, Heb. 12. 17.
and pure, albeit one cry unto God, he will not hear him: as he heard not
Esau, albeit he prayed with tears: neither heard he Saul, nor many others of a
double heart: and to make the heart perfect, only faith suffices: Faith then
is that which obtains that which we pray for. The commandment which
commands us to pray is of God, and not of the creatures. The promise which
makes us assured to be heard, God, and not the creatures, makes. The faith
that obtaines that which is prayed for, is faith in God, and not in the
creatures. Hereupon and with great reason, will we conclude, that this ladder
of prayer which has such stages, brings us not to the creatures, but to the
creator, to only God omnipotent. Him only let us worship, him only let us call
upon, to him only let us pray: for so doing, sure we are we shall not be
confounded. He grant us the grace that we may truly feel our necessity and
misery, and feeling it, may call upon him, being assured, that for his
goodness and promise sake, and for the sacrifice wherewith his only begotten
son reconciled us to him, he will hear us.

There is no Mass which is not full of intercessions of Saints, The third
Damage.
and the Priest also which says it, presumes to be a mediator and
intercessour with God, that he may pardon the sins of those, for whom he
says his Mass, be they quick or dead. And not for men only entreats he,
but also for Christ himself, praying the Father to receive and accept him, as
he accepted the scacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech. Whereof we will
entreat in the fourth damage which the Mass works. Yet is there no other
mediator but Jesus Christ alone. The reason is this: for he that is to be a
Mediator, must be in hand with both parties, between who^ he is made a
mediator, for if he be in hatred, or is not well-beloved with one of the parties,
he shall never prevail: for suspected shall he ever be holden. For this cause
was it mere that man having offended God, and being to be reconciled with God,
it was needful (I say) that the reconcilour, Intercessour, advocate and
mediator, should be very God and very man: for had he been only man, he
should have been a sinner; conceived and borne in sin, and so should hue
naught prevailed with God. And had he been God, and not man, he could not by
dying have satisfied the justice of God (as dyed our Mediator and Intercessour
Christ, and dying, satisfied and paid all whatsoever man ought to the justice
of God) Like as sin for being committed against the infinite God, was
infinite: so was it meet, that the wages of that sin, should be infinite:
and so the infinite God and man Christ, performed the same. No other
intercessour, nor mediator is there to obtain of the Father pardon of sins,
but Christ alone: for as there is but one God: so is there but one Mediator
between God and man, Tim. 2. 5.
the man Christ Jesus: as says Saint Paul. He only is the Mediator of the
new testament: as in many places of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 8. 6. and
9. 15 and 12. 24.
the Apostle does witness. The same which we said of invocation, say we also
now: that there is no commandment of God, which commands to put the dead
Saints for intercessours: neither is there any example in the old or new
Testament, that any of the faithful has put them for intercessors. To seek
bread beyond wheat may we not go: for better bread then that of wheat cannot
be. We may not leave a certainty for a thing uncertain. Assured we are by the
word of God, that Jesus Christ is our Intercessour: that the Saints are the
same we see not by holy Scripture: and it not appearing unto us, yet (doubting
without faith) will we put them for intercessours. And whatsoever proceeds
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.
as says S. Paul to the Romans. And writing to the Hebrews, Heb. 11. 6.
he says: Without faith it is impossible to please God. Whereupon we conclude
then: that Christ only we ought to put for our intercessour: and that the
Mass doteth in putting for intercessour another besides Christ, to obtain
remission of sins, and not Christ only in dying was our Mediator. But now
also is he the same: as Saint John in his catholic Epistle, says: Little
children, these things have I written, 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
that ye sin not: And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. Saint John says not, we have advocates but an
advocate.
Had there been more Advocates then one, Saint John would doubtless have said,
We have Advocates, and would have named them. But as he certainly knew, that
there was but only one Advocate, he said, We have an Advocate, and names him,
Jesus Christ, and adds, The righteous: By which title all other men he
excludes: all which (none excepted) of their own nature are the children of
wrath; conceived and hardened in sin, in the belly of their mothers: as, that
holy Prophet king David witnesses. psalm. 51.
This doctrine so wholesome and full of consolation, that Jesus Christ, now is,
and hereafter will be our mediator and Intercessor, has Satan obscured and for
many years buried it in the church. Who was he that seeing himself in
necessity and misery would remember Jesus Christ to put him for an intercessor
and advocate with his father? Some ran to one he or she Saint, others to other:
according to their zeal and according to their foolish devotion and sometimes
put they those for Intercessors, whose souls were burning in hell. With the
Popes is it no new thing to discannonize these whom other Popes have canonized
for Saints: For example. Pope Boniface 8. that discannonized Hermanus
Ferrariensis, comaunding him after he had 30 years been buried, to be
vntombed and burned; during all which time he had bin holden for a Saint and
was inuocated of al, contrariwise a Pope has bin which cannonized him for a
Saint, whom others condemned for an heretic. S. Jerome and Pope Damasus
condemned for an Arrian Pope Liberius, but Gregory 7. did cannonize him for a
Saint. Their Mule being sick, they call upon S. Polonia: when they have fore
eyes, S. Lucie: for the throat they invoke S. Blase: for the pestilence, S.
Roccus. They go yet further, and shamelessely for their filthy lusts, put they
Magdalen for intercessour: the barren put for intercessour, whom think you?
The legend of S. Christopher after the pope himself is fabulous.
the great giant Saint Christopher: whose legend for being so fabulous, Pope
Pius the third commanded, to be taken out of the Roman Breuiarie, which he
caused to be corrected: as in the life of Marcellus the second before we have
noted. How many kingdoms, how many provinces, how many people, how many
houses, how many persons there be, so many protecting Gods have they, whom
they put for their intercessours. God our maker, and Jesus Christ our redeemer
sleep. Hereof complain the Prophets, Ier. 2. 28. and. 11.
and chiefly Jeremy, when he says: For according to the number of thy cities
were thy Gods, o Judah. Blessed be the Lord, who by his great mercy has
pleased in these latter times, to show us so great mercy, as to renew and
raise up again this doctrine so admirable and full of consolation: the which
in the time of darkness, of ignorance and superstition was dead (as it were)
and buried: Here will I briefly recite a chance, that upon this matter
happened. It is now thirty six years past, that one conferring with a
graduate, with a master in Israel: among other things, said unto him: that
Jesus Christ was now also our Advocate. The master wondered at that which was
said, it seeming to him to be new doctrine, for that never such had he heard or
read. The other seeing him wonder, wondered at his wonder, and for confirmation
of that he had said, alleged unto him the place of S. John, We have an
advocate with the father Jesus Christ. etc. Saint Paul confirms this doctrine,
Romans 8. 34. speaking of Christ, he says: Who is at the right hand of God, and
makes request (or intercession) for us. And Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able
also everlastingly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Well believed this Master that the
Saints were Advocates: but that Jesus Christ was the same, he neither believed,
nor knew. If he being a Master in Israel, was ignorant of this what shall we
wonder if the ignorant people know it not? What shall we marvel if silly old
women do not know it? That which I say: that there is no other intercessour
but Christ, I mean it as touching the obtaining of remission of sins: for
otherwise one may and ought to pray to God for another. And so S. Paul
recommendeth himself to the prayers of those to whom he wrote, that they
should pray to God for him. And the same Apostle besought God for them. Should
the Priest say, that in saying his Mass, he so prayed to God, as the Apostle
prayed for them to whom he wrote: such a prayer (were it done in faith) should
be good. But to presume to be an intercessour, and to sell his sacrifice for as
much virtue and efficacy, as the death and passion of Christ it self. This is
intolerable and overmuch pride. Let them begin to humble themselves, and to
give glory to God, who only pardons sins, and this does he by the only
intercession of Christ, and by the virtue of that only sacrifice, which he
once, and no more offered to his father.

The fourth damage, which we say the Mass works, and this passes and ought
no way to be supportted. The priest which says the Mass, and the people which
hear it commit idolatry.
That is, the Priest which says it, and the People that hear it commit
Idolatry. How great a sin is Idolatry and how much more God abhors it then
any other, we have already declared in our first Treatise. The Priest ordained
for the Mass (say our Adversaries) has authority and power from Christ and
his vicar the Pope, The authority of the popish Priest.
that in saying the words of consecration (as they call them) Hoc est enim
corpus meum (so that he say them super debitam materiam, over a competent
matter, and with intention to consecrate) he changes, conuerteth, transformeth
and transubstantiateth (this last word is it that best pleases them) the bread
into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood. In such sort, that be the
Priest what ye will, live he a letcher in mortal sin (as the most part of
them do) be he the greatest and most infamous villain of the world, yet for all
this, say they, that this authority he has, to bring Christ from heaven, in
finishing the words, Hoc est corpus meum, and to put him into the place where
the bread and wine were: so that no more bread, nor no more wine remain (for
the substance of the bread and of the wine is vanished and gone to naught) but
the body and blood of Christ: the which is there truly, really, corporally,
and carnally (these be their proper terms) as big, and as great, as
corpulent, and as large, as he was upon the cross, when he dyed for us
sinners. This is their doctrine. And because we believe not these strange
things which be contrary to the word of God, and contrary to that which the
ancient Doctors have taught (as we will prove it) they condemn us for
heretics, they persecute us most cruelly with fire and blood, worse then were
we Jews or Turks. But another more strong then they, to their grief, has
defended, does defend, and will defend us from them. Who lists to know more
of the root of this doctrine, let him read their new Councels, wherein the
Popes by their Legates tyrannically have governed. Let him read their Decrees,
Decretals, Sextos, Clementines, and Extrauagants, there shall he find it at
fall. Let him not read the Scripture for in it shall he find nothing at all
to confirm such wonders. Scotus super 4. sent.
Scotus, one of the chief and principal pillars of their Church says; That
albeyt the priest were not attyred to celebrate: nor in the state of grace: nor
over any Altar: but should say the five words or the four, leaving out
(Enim) over all the bread that is in the market or in the Pantry: and over all
the wine that is in the Sellar; how much bread so ever should be in the pantrie
or in the market, so that he had intention to consecrate) should be in that
very moment converted and transubstantiated into the body of Jesus Christ: and
all the wine of the sellar by the virtue of the words spoken and pronounced by
the Priest, should be converted into the blood of Christ. Herehence it comes
that no bread, but the body of Christ remaining in the sacrament in their
Sagrarios or pixes do they keep it, that when any shall be sick, they may
with torchlight carry it in procession, that the diseased may adore and receive
it, for the salvation of his soul. Jesus Christ (say they) is in sort as we
have said, not only in one Mass, but in an hundred thousand more also, if so
many could be said in one moment. And whole Christ is not in all the Host
only: but also in every small parcel, how little soever it be: so that Christ
is in the host as the soul is in the body: all in all, and all in every part
thereof.

This their doctrine of Transubstantiation they confirm, Three reasons
wherewith they confirm Transubstantiation.
first with the omnipotency of God: that seeing God of nothing could create
something, the heaven and the earth, and whatsoever is therein contained, how
much more can he cause one thing to be converted and transubstantiated into
another. 2. They say: that seeing Jesus Christ is the infallible truth, it is
meet that that which he says must be in sort as he spoke it: and since he
says, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body: they now infer, that the bread
is no bread, but the body of Christ. 3. For confirmation of their opinion, they
also allege the sayings of Doctors. In answering to these three reasons
wherewith they confirm their Transubstantiation, me seems we shall have
answered to all, whatsoever in this matter they can object unto us. The answer
to the first reason wherewith they confirm transubstantiation.


That which they say of the omnipotency of God, God forbid that we should once
deny: we confess it: and it may be, and also (without may be) much better
then they. With all our heart we do also confess that which the Creed says, I
believe in God the Father almighty (all sufficient) that which we say, is,
that from the power to the deed, is no good manner of argument. God in that he
is omnipotent, may eftsoons drown the world, as he did drown it in the time
of Noah: and the malice of our times is no less, but much more then that of
that time. Notwithstanding his omnipotency, and notwithstanding our extreme
malice, we know that he will not drown it, because so promised he to Noah, when
he said, My covenant will I establish witb you, that from henceforth all flesh
shall not be rooted out by the waters of the flood, etc. And to seal and
confirm this promise, God gave him the Bow in the clouds, for a sign of this
covenant, etc. Read the history. To this same purpose is it said in the
Psalm. 140. 9. that God set a bound for the waters, over which they shall not
pass, nor turn again to cover the earth. And God speaking to Job concerning
the sea, chap. 38. 10. says, I established my commandment upon it, and set
bars and doors: and said: Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and
there shall it stay thy proud waves. Here you see, that albeit God of his
absolute power can drown the whole world again, yet will he not drown it.
So then say we now, that Christ could do that which they say, annihilate the
substance of the bread, and be transubstantiated into it. But we say, that he
will not do it: because he will remain sitting at the right hand of his father
in heaven, and according to his humanity, according to his flesh which he
took of the Virgin Mary, according to the flesh wherein he dyed, wiil he never
descend hither, until he come to judge the quick and the dead. And so to this
end said he to his disciples: The poor ye shall have always with you, but me
shall ye not have always. For forty days passed after his resurrection he
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father, etc. Very
well did his Apostle S. Peter understand this, when in a sermon which he
preached at Jerusalem, Act. 3. 21.
he said: Whom (meaning Christ) the heavens must contain until the time that
all things be restored. And this is an Article of our faith, which in the
Creed we confess. That Jesus Christ is ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of God the Father, from whence shall come to judge the quick
and the dead. The heresy of the Papists.
Then will he not come to transubstantiate the bread into his body. So our
adversaries be heretics, denying in deed this article of faith, which with
their mouth they confess in the Creed. Hereuppon let us now conclude, that
Christ can, but he will not, transubstantiate himself into the bread, but
will sit at the right hand of the Father, until he come to judge, etc. As the
holy Scripture does witness it, and in the Creed we confess it.

The second reason wherewith they confirm their Transubstantiation, The second
confirmation of transubstantiation.
is, That Jesus Christ is infallible truth, and therefore of necessity that
which he says must be as he says it: He says, This is my body: Then it
follows, that that is his body: and if it be the body of Christ, it is not
Bread. With Esayas, chap. 53. verse 9. and Saint Peter, chap. 2. verse. 22.
confess we, that Jesus Christ never sinned: we also confess, that untruth nor
deceit was ever found in his mouth: For he is that which of himself he says,
Ioh. chap. 14. verse 6. The way, the truth, and the life. We also confess,
that with his own mouth he has said: This is my body: and so believe we that
it is. For should we deny that which our King, Prophet, and Priest affirms,
we should not be Christians.

Thus far agree we with our adversaries. The difference that is between them
and us, is as touching the manner. How or in what manner, that which Jesus
Christ by the mean of his minister, in the holy Supper does give us, is truly
and really the body and blood of Jesus Christ. For the better understanding
hereof, it shall be needful to use the distinction which the Lord uses in
the sixth chapter of the Gospel of Saint John. That there be two manners of
eating the body of Christ, the one carnal, the other spiritual. Commonly
when the Scripture opposes the flesh to the Spirit, by the flesh it
understands the part of man that is not regenerate, Two manners of eating
Christ. The one carnal and the other spiritual.
nor subject to the law of God. So call we men without the knowledge of God,
carnal, natural, and sensual men: But it is not here so to be taken. By
the flesh is understood the same flesh of Christ it self, jointly with his
blood, bones and sinews, and which Jesus Christ took when he was borne, and
lived in this world, when he dyed, and rose again, etc. The second manner of
eating which is called spiritual, is: when the faithful Christian (his body
being here below) is lifted up so high in spirit, that with the wings of faith
it flies, and with one flight does pierce all the heavens, and stays not,
until it come before the throne of the majesty of God the father, at whose
right hand he finds sitting his redeemer and satisfier Christ. And finding
him, with great joy does feed upon him eats his glorious body, and drinks
his most precious blood. And if the faithful Christian does freely eat him:
much more freely does the Lord give himself to sustain the souls, which he
with the death of his body, and with the shedding of his blood redeemed. He
that with his body and blood did redeem them: with his body and with his blood
will he maintain them: yet not carnally, but spiritually by faith, as before we
have said. Our adversaries believe the body of Christ in the first manner to be
in their Mass. Read the reca^tation which Nich. 2. commanded Berengarius to
make, which we will place a little beneath, in answering to the Councels.
They believe that the mouth takes, the teeth chawe, the throat swalloweth,
and the stomach receives the same carnal body, which was borne, which dyed,
which rose again, etc. They will understand the words of Christ literally: be
it as it will be: but Christ himself, speaking of the necessity that we have
to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, says: The words which I speak unto
you are spirit and life: to wit, that which I have said unto you touching the
eating of my flesh, and drinking of my blood, understand you not after the
letters as they carnally sound: Ioh. 6. 63.
lift up the mind, and understand it spiritually. The Capernaits and many of
the disciples also (as says S. John) carnally understood the words of Christ.
Ioh. 6. 60.
And also they said, that it was a hard saying, and murmured at it. To whom
Christ, unfolding their error, told them, they should understand his words
spiritually. You see here that our adversaries are worse then the Capernaits:
for the Capernaits would not carnally eat the flesh of Christ, nor drink his
blood: but they make no bones at it: without any scruple, and without any
loathing will they eat the flesh of Christ carnally: but it will naught avail
them. For the Spirit it is that quickens, Ioh. 6. 63.
and the flesh (as Christ himself says, speaking to our purpose profitteth
nothing, etc.

That the Lord, in his supper gave carnally his body may we not understand.
For should we so understand it, A most great absurdity world follow: that
Jesus Christ, when he celebrated his supper, had two carnal bodies, One by
one; The Body that celebrated the supper, An obsnrditie of transubstantiation.
that brake the bread in his hands, blessed it, brake it and gave it to his
disciples, etc. was the true carnal body of Christ, which was borne, and dyed,
etc. If that which this carnal body took in his hands and gave to his
disciples was also the carnal body of Christ, it follows; that Jesus Christ,
when he had celebrated his supper, had two carnal bodies: one which sat and
remained in his place: and the other, which sitting body, gave to his
disciples. The which is a great absurdity. But did they understand this second
manner of body (which the Carnal body of Christ gave to his disciples, and
they took it, and did eat it) not to be his carnal body, nor carnally taken:
They should fall into such an absurdity. Also least we should fall into this
absurdity, and others which we will afterward set down, in his supper may
we not believe Jesus Christ to be in the first manner carnally: but in the
second, spiritually.

This second manner of eating, can no way be done without faith; Because (as
we have said) it is not carnal, but spiritual: And it is to be noted, that
this spiritual eating, is done in two manners. The first, by the preaching of
the Gospel: As Saint Paul says: Faithful (says he) is God, By whom ye
are called, to the Communion of his son Jesus Christ. By the preaching of the
Gospel, are we made flesh, of the fleshly of Christ, and bones of bones: By
the preaching of the Gospel, he is to us the bread of life, which came down
from heaven to feed our souls: By the preaching of the Gospel are we made
one thing with him. Even as he is one with the father. The spiritual eating in
two sorts.


The second manner of spiritual eating, is done by the sacraments; and in the
holy supper chiefly. 1. Cor. 1. 9.
These two kinds of spiritual eating the body of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30.
and of drinkeing his blood: John 6. 36.
by the preaching of the Gospel, and by the sacraments, do the ancient
Doctors confess. John 17. 21. Origin.
Origin. Hom. 16. upon Nombers says: we are said to drink the blood of
Christ, not with the rite of the sacraments only: but also when we receive
his words. The same upon Ecclesiastes chap 3. Jerome.
says Saint Jerome. The faithful in the holy supper, receiving with the mouth
of the outward body and carnally the bread and wine (which be the most holy
sacraments of the body and blood of Christ) receaueth with the mouth of the
soul (which is faith) inward and spiritually the true body and blood of
Christ, without that carnal body of Christ discendeth here below, or ceasseth
to sit at the right hand of his father: As we will afterward more largely
declare. So that we confess the faithful, truly and really to receive in the
holy supper, the body and blood of Christ: As Christ himself witnesses:
This is my body this is my blood, yet not carnally, but spiritually, do we
understand these words: as Christ himself does declare them. For he (as
before we have said) speaking of the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his
blood, which is done in the supper, says: that this ought to be spiritually
understood and not carnally (As did the Capernaits and some of the disciples
also understand it) My words (says he) are Spirit and Life. And therefore,
that which he says of the eating of the body, and drinkeing of the blood,
ought spiritually to be understood. For the Spirit it is that quickens, and
the flesh profitteth nothing. Understanding then (As we have said) Christ to
be thus present in the Sacrament, it shall not be needful to adnihilate the
substance of the bread, nor of the wine, nor to transubstantiate it, into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ. We confess then, that in this
most holy sacrament, besides the having of the true body and blood of Christ,
in sort as before we have said, and the Lord himself declares: We confess,
I say, there is also true bread and wine in their proper substance as being
the bread and wine (say I) have lost nothing as touching their substance: but
as touching their qualities, they have much gained: For by the virtues, and
efficacy of Christ's institution, and of his words, they cease to be common
bread and wine, and be dedicated to signify, figure, represent and give the
true body and blood of Christ: and do so signify, figure represent, seal and
give the same; that whosoever takes this bread, and eats it, takes this
wine and drinks it worthily, according to the institution of Christ, who
says: Take and eat: Take and drink ye all of this: takes and receaueth
truly and really, the body and blood of Christ. According to that which the
Lord there says: This is my body: This is my blood: Yet not carnally, but
spiritually by faith. And if the bread and wine should not abide in their
substance and being, this sacrament should not be a sacrament: for every
sacrament (As our adversaries themselves cannot deny in two things consists:
The sacrament Consists in 2. things the one earthly and the other heavenly.
In a visible and earthly thing, which they call Materia, and an invisible and
celestial thing which they call Forma. That the invisible and celestial, is
the body and blood of Christ, do we all agree. As touching the visible and
earthly, between them and us, is there very great difference. For we say:
That the substance of the bread and wine, together with their accidents
remains: They say, that of the bread and wine, no substance remains. But
only the accidents of the bread and of the wine, the whiteness, the
roundnesse, the smell, the savor, and the coullor. As though the accidents of
the bread do nourish: As though the accidents of the wine do make cherefull,
and comfort, They be not accidents of bread, that do nourish, but the
substance of the bread. They be not the accidents of the wine, which glad the
heart: but the substance of the wine: The bread and wine converting themselves
into the substance of man which eats and drinks the same. To receive
spiritually in the supper, the true body and blood of Christ, needful it is to
receive carnally and materially true bread, and true wine: For otherwise should
therbe no Analogy or agreement, between the figure, which is bread, and the
wine, and the thing figured, which is the body and blood of Christ.

This that we say, teach the ancient Doctors, that in two things consists
this sacrament: in earthly, and heavenly. So says Ireneus, speaking against
the Valentinians. Also Gelasius a Bishop of Rome, who disputed of the
conjunction of the bread, with the body of Christ, both natures of the bread
and of Christ remaining in their being: And by this communication he proves in
Christ, the union of the humane nature, and divine; both the one, and the other
remaining in their whole being and substance. Were there not in the sacrament
true bread, and true wine, the argument of Gelasius should be nothing worth:
But his argument is good, and proves that (which he pretends: Therefore is
there true bread and true wine, in the sacrament of the supper. As there is
also true water in the sacrament of baptism. This selfsame argument uses
Theodorit, As a little after we will declare. Origin snpper. Matthew. cap. 15.
Origin says these words. So that that which is material in the bread of the
Lord, goes into the belly and is cast out into the draught, But which that is
by prayer, and the word of the Lord, according to the proportion of faith,
profitteth the soul. They will not say unto me, that Origin had some errors
and that one of the^ is this: for had this bin an error the ancient Doctors. As
S. Ierom and Epiphanius which collected his errors, would have noted this for
an error, had they taken it, for an error. But none of them say, that Origin
thought amiss of the Eucharist. Therefore that which Origin says is no error,
neither among the ancient Doctors was it holden for an error. But leave we the
pudles, and let us drink of the clear water of the fountain. Leave we apart
the fathers, and let us see, what the holy scriptur says. Many times does S.
Paul call it bread; yea, after it be consecrated after it be dedicated, and
made the sacrament of the body of the Lord. 1
First, 1. Cor 10. 16. 23.
the bread (says he) which we break is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 2. For one bread (is that) we many are one body. 1. Cor. 10. 17.
3. For we be al partakers of one bread. 4
4. So that whosoever shall eat of this bread, etc. 5. Let every man therefore
prove himself and 50. 1. Cor 11. 27.
Let him eat of that bread, 5
etc. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
The Apostle in all these places calls the bread bread: Math. 26. 29.
Not because it was so: But because it is so concerning the wine the Lord
himself, Mar. 14. etc.
aftrr he had made the sacrament of his blood calls it. Luke 22. 18. 1. Cor.
10. 16. 1. Cor. 11. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
The fruit of the vine. And I say unto you (says he) That henceforth will I
not drink more of this fruit of the vine, etc. what thing is the fruit of the
vine or of the grape but wine? S. Paul says. The cupp of Blessing, which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? Also. Or shall drink
of this cupp of the Lord unworthily. Also: And drinks of that cup. In these
there places, S. Paul by the cup does understand, that which in the cup is
contained: which is that, which his master calls the fruit of the vine, or
wine. Here ye see that the Lord his Apostle, and the ancient Doctors, call
that bread, and wine which in the sacrament is visible and earthly and by the
same reason admit no transubstantiation: As there is none in deed. This simple
and sound Doctrine, takes away many absurdity, and inconveniences, which
follow transubstantiation: it takes away many scruples and afflictions of
conscience. It is no sacrament, but when it is taken and eaten.
And so if the sacrament (I speak as they speak, for it is not a sacrament, but
when it is taken, and eaten. Take says Christ, and eat, and afterward says
This is my body: Then in the sacrament is not Christ's body (except it be taken
and eaten) be moldy, corrupt, eaten with worms or mice when it falls on the
ground or powered out etc. For to all these things the bread and wine and not
the body of Christ are subject the bread (say we) is moldy is corrupt etc. The
wine is spilled. The which bread and wine, had not rat^, but men eaten and
dronken had bin the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ Would our
adversaries understand this they should not need the book, which they call De
coutelas de la Missa which entreats what ought in such former like cases to
be done. This, book is a continual affliction, torment, and slaughter house
of the consciences which have zeal: Romans 10. 2.
but as says S. Paul, not according to knowledge. The reason is, because this
conscience are not founded upon the firm foundation upon the word of God, but
upon the sand, the traditions of men.

Such as will not understand the words of the Lord, This is my body etc.
Spiritually but carnally: do fall into great heresy and horrible Idolatry.
The Christian religion (as witnesses Athasius in his Symbol) believes that in
Jesus Christ, Athanasius.
are 2 natures divine and humane. It believes, that these two natures are so
united and conjoined in Christ, that they are not confounded nor mingled one
with another. The divine has his properties, and the humane his. As the
reasonable soul and fleshly be one man, So the divinity and humanity be
one Christ. It is the property of the divinity only and of no other thing
besides, to be in every place: for it is unmeasurable and infinite and no other
thing there is that is unmeasurable and infinite: It is the property of the
humanity to be in some one place and not in every place. So witnesses the
Angel speaking of the humanity of Christ, Mark. 16. 6.
He is risen (says he) he is not here. Behold here the place where they put
him. And S. Peter, Whom (says he) the Heavens must contain until the time of
the restoration of all things: Act. 3. 21.
And so do we hold it for an article of faith: that he ascended into Heaven
and is set at the right hand of God the father, from thence shall he come to
judge the quick and the dead. Jesus Christ himself says: The poor shall you
have always with you: but me shall you not have always. All these places do
prove Jesus Christ according to his humanity and in as much as he is man not to
be here below, but in heaven. This Article of faith do our adversaries impugn
when they believe the body of Christ to be in every Mass. And so many as daily
through all the world are celebrated, The hetesie of the papists.
and in all their Sagrarios or pixes, where they keep it enclosed really,
corporally, carnally, so great and so big, as it was upon the cross. If this
be not heresy, what shall be heresy? Good Transubstantiators are our
adversaries, when they have transubsta^tiated the bread and the wine into the
body and blood of Christ: so that now is it no bread, now it is no wine: but
(as they say) the body and blood of Christ. So now they transubstatiate the
humanity of Christ, his flesh and his blood into the divinity: seeing they
attribute vbiquitie to the body and blood of Christ, the which is only proper
to the divinity. Jesus Christ is true God and true man. But his Godhead is not
his manhood: and his manhood is not his Godhead. The one is the Creator, whose
beginning is from everlasting: The hetesie of the papists.
the other is a creature, whose being had beginning. Notwithstanding all this
which our adversaries (of the learned I speak) may hear and read, they
continue obstinate and hardened, and God has left them to a reprobate mind,
that they may believe the bread to be no bread, but the body of Christ: the
wine to be no wine but the blood of Christ. And so they worship that which a
parish Clearke makes between two yrons, and the Priest gives it a form,
making it his God: In the pixe do they keep it: to the sick they carry it:
Upon some feasts of the year, and chiefly the day which they call Corpus
Christi, with great pomp, triumph, and majesty take they it forth to walk,
and woe to that person that will not kneel before it. I would ask them who
commanded them to do this? If they know that Jesus Christ has so done,
orcommaunded his Apostles so to do? Neither example nor commandment* will
they give. Christ neither did nor commanded any such thing, nor his Apostles,
nor the Catholic Church did so by the space of one thousand years after the
death of Christ. A new invention it is humane and devilish, founded upon the
wicked foundation of transubstatiation.

Some things there be in the Mass, which manifestly declare that there is no
transubstantiation: as when they say in the Cannon: Offerimus praeclarae
maiestati tuae de tuis donis ac datis, etc. that is to say, We offer to thy
excellent Majesty of thy gifts, and of that which thou have given, These
crosses with the papists have their mystery.
etc. a pure Host, an holy Host, an Host without spot, holybread of life
eternal, and a cup of everlasting salvation. One of the two, either by these
gifts which they offer to God do they understand the bread and the wine,
without any transubstantiation: or else so transubstantiated into the body and
blood of Christ that now there remaynneth neither bread nor wine. It apeareth
by the prayer that there which there they make, that by the gifts they ought to
understand the bread and wine without any transubstantiation: which gifts the
Priest prays God to accept, as he accepted the gifts which Abel, Abraham and
Melchisedech offered: and so say they: super quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris, etc. that is to say. Upon which (gifts) vouchsafe to behold
with thy merciful and bright countenance, and to accept (the^) as thou
pleasedst to accept the gifts of thy just servant Abel, and the sacrifice of
our Patriarch Abraham, and that holy sacrifice and spotless ^ost which that
thy high Priest Melchisedech offered to thee. Beseeching humbly, we pray thee
to command these (gifts) to be carried by the hands of thine holy Angel to the
high Alter, before the presence of thy divine Majesty, etc. And if by gifts the
bread and wine vntransubstatiated be understood, what necessity have we of
such a sacrifice to obtain pardon of our sins, holding that most perfect and
sufficient sacrifice, which one only time (and ought not to be reiterated) our
redeemer Christ Jesus offered upon the cross, wherewith he sanctifies us for
ever? But they will say unto me, that they understand by gifts, not the bread
and wine vntransubstantiated, but transubstantiated into the body and blood of
Christ. If so they understand it, worse is it then it was: for then the prayer
which the Priest makes is a most blasphemous blasphemy against Jesus Christ,
Blasphemi of the Priest.
the only begotten son of God, true God and man. What pride, what
haughtiness and presumption is it, that a miserable sinner, conceived and
borue in sin and corruption, and that does nothing in all his life time but
add sins unto sins, dare to present himself before the majesty of God the
Father, and pray him to receive and accept his Son Jesus Christ? And how
says he that he should accept him? Even as he accepted the gifts of Abel,
Abraham, and Melchisedech? Is Christ no other thing then Abel, Abraham, and
Melchisedech? Is the sacrifice of Christ, his precious body and blood which he
offered, no other thing then the sacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melcbisedech,
and then the sacrifice of all how many soever just persons that have been and
shall be? Let them then be ashamed so to speak of Jesus Christ, and of his
sacrifice. On the one side they confess Jesus Christ to be equal with the
Father (as he is) in essence and power: and on the other side, and stinking
Priest put they for intercessor and mediator, that the Father should accept and
receive him with a merciful and cheerful countenance. O miserable sinner,
pray thou unto God, that he pardon thy sins, thy superstitions and
idolatries: and pray not, nor entreat thou for Christ, who is the Lamb without
spot, which takes away the sins of the world: he is he that committed no
sin neither was any guile found in his mouth. He needs not thee that thou
should pray to the Father for him: but thou have need, that he pray for
thee. The father himself speaking of his son, faith: This is my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him. Ye see here a terrible blasphemy
vttred by the priest in saying of the Mass. Of that which is said do we
conclude: that all those which hear Mass, seeing they believe this
transubstantiation be Idolaters: and that the priest which faith it, (hold he
intention of consecration or not) is a double Idolater. For he not only
commits idolatry: but causes also all that hear his Mass to commit
Idolatry. Infinite thanks I give to my God, that although he permitted, that I
with the rest committed Idolatry for a time in hearing the Mass, yet he
never suffered me to commit idolatry by saying it to others.

The third reason wherewith they confirm their new article of
Transubstantiation, The third confirmation.
is the authority of Doctors which they allege, Ireneus.
and determinations of Councels. They cite Ireneus, who in his fifth book
says: When the cup mingled, and the bread broken, receive the word of God: the
Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ is made. Tertullian
Tertullian, lib. 4. faith: Christ made the bread, which he took, his body,
and distributo his disciples. Origin.
Origin upon Matthew. chap. 25. says: This bread which God the Word does
witness to be his body, etc. Saint Cyprian, Ciprian.
Sermon de coena Domini, says: This common bread changed into flesh and blood
procures life. Also in the same sermon he says: This bread which the Lord
gave to his disciples, not in form or appearance, Ambrose.
but changed in nature, is made flesh of the omnipotent Word. Saint Ambrose,
lib. 4. de Sacramentis, says: Before the words of the sacrament it is bread,
when consecration is applied to it, of bread it is made the flesh of Christ.
Chrystome.
Saint Chrysostom, hom. de Eucharistia, tom. 6. says: This Sacrament is like
wax applied to the fire, in which no substance remains, but becomes like
to the fire: So (says Chrysostom) the bread and wine is consumed of the
substance of the body of Christ. Also in the 61. Homily he says, That Christ
not only gave himself, that we should see him, but that we should also touch
and handle him: and in whose flesh also we should fasten our teeth. Also Hom.
38. upon Matthew, he says: Many say, that they will and desire to see the
form and figure of Christ, and also his raiment and shoes: but he gives
himself to thee, that thou may not only see him, Augustine.
but also touch him. Saint Augustine, Prolog. in Psalm. 23. says: Christ did
bear himself with his hands, when in the Supper he instituted the
Sacrament. And upon the 98. Psalm, declaring those words, Fall down before
his footestoole: he affirms that the flesh of Christ ought to be in the
Sacrament adored: which should not fitly be, if the bread remained. Hillarie in
his eight book of the Trinity says: Hillary.
Christ is in us by the truth of nature, and not by conformity of will only,
and says: that in the meat of the Lord we truly receive the word flesh. Leo.
Leo Bishop of Rome in the tenth epistle which he wrote to the Clergy and
people of Constanstinople, says: Walk we on, receiving the virtue of the
heauely meat in his flesh, which is made our flesh. Damascen whom they cite,
libr. 4. Damascen.
cap. 14. Orthodoxae fidei, is clearly for them. They allege Theophilact,
Theophilact.
who manifestly makes mention of Transubstantiation. Other new Authors,
Auselme.
as Anselme, Hugo, and Richardus de sancto Victore they allege, Hugo.
which undoubtedly affirm Transubstantiatiation. Councels also do they cite:
Ricardus de sancto Victore.
as that of Ephesus, which was holden against Nestorius, The Council of
Ephesus.
in which was president Cirillus, where these words are used: We being made
partakers of the holy body and of the precious blood of Christ, receive not
common flesh; and not as of a man sanctified, but truly sanctifying, and made
proper of the word it self. They cite the Council of Verceill, The Conncell
of Veceill.
in the time of Leo the ninth, in which Berengarius was condemned. The Couucell
of Lateran.
They cite the Council of Laterane, in the time of Nicholas the second, which
caused Berengarius to recant: of whose recantation mention is made in the
decrees de consecrat. Another council of Lateran.
did. 2. and in the fourth sentence. They allege also another Council of
Lateran in the time of Innocent 3. whereof mention is made in the Decretals de
summa Trinitate. cap. Firmiter: and de celebratione Missarum. cap. Cum Martha.
The Council of Constance.
They allege also the Council of Constance, wherein was John Wickliffe, that
denied Transubstantiation condemned, and John Hus and Jerome of Prage were
burned for the same. Trident Council.
They cite the last Trident Council. They allege the common consent (as they
say) of all the whole Catholic Church: Transubstantiation cannot be proved
either by Seripture or reason. Common consent of the
with which consent Scotus so greatly was moved in four that seeing he could
firmly show Transubstantiation neither by the holy Scriptures, nor by reason,
yet he approved it (he said) for not being contrary to the common consent of
the Church. Our adversaries then seeing (as they suppose) so many Fathers, so
many Councels on their side, they think all cock sure, and cry out,
Victory, Victory, against these heretics, dogs. Now is there no bread, now
is there no wine in the Sacrament. They be converted and transubstantiated into
the body and blood of Christ. And whosoever believes not this, they call him
an heretic, excommunicate, accursed and condemned. But turn they over the
leaf, and behold and well consider that which follows. Were our strife and
contention about Transubstantiation to be decided, Fathers against
Transubstantiation.
concluded and proved by men, we want not other, as many, or rather more
Fathers, as ancient, learned and godly as those, whom our adversaries (as they
think) have armed against us, to arm in our defense against them. And many of
those also will we allege, which they have alleged against us. This done, to
all that will we answer which they have alleged against us. The first Father
which they allege is Ireneus: The same also do we allege: and for his
antiquity and authority, in the vauntgard will we place him, Thus says
Ireneus, speaking against the Valentinian heretics: Ireneus.
The earthly bread, the calling of the word of God received, is now no more
common bread, but is made the Eucharist. The which consists in two things
(to wit) in earthly and heavenly. As touching the first, Ireneus denies not
the Eucharist to be bread, but that which he says, is, that it is now not
common bread: And then says he, This Eucharist consists in two things, the
one whereof is earthly, and is the bread; and the other heavenly, and is the
body of Christ. For how necessary it is that the body of Christ be truly in
the Sacrament, so necessary is it also, that the bread be truly in the
Sacrament: For otherwise the bread, which is the figure, should have no
annalogie nor likeness with the thing figured, which is the body of Christ.

Tertullian in his first book against Marcion, Tertullian.
says: God has not cast away the bread, his creature: since that with it he
has represented his body. Also in his fourth book against the same Marcion he
says, The bread which he had taken and distributed to his disciples, he made
it his body, saying: This is my body, that is to say, as himself declares,
the figure of my body.

Origin upon the 26. Origin.
chap. of Matthew says, This bread which God the Word does witness to be his
body, is the nourishing word of souls. Also Homil. 7. upon Leuiticus, He
says: For not only in the old Testament, but also in the Gospel, is the
letter which kills. For if thou follow the letter, that which is said, Except
ye eat the flesh, etc. Also hom. 9. upon the same Leuiticus, he says: Cleave
not to the blood of the flesh, but apprehend rather the blood of the Word: and
hear what he says unto thee: For this is my blood which is shed for you. Also
upon the fifteenth chapter of Matthew he says: The sanctified bread, as
touching the matter goes into the belly, and is cast out below. In the same
place also he says: Not the matter of the bread, but the word spoken over it,
is that which profits him which worthily eats it. In the eight book also
against Celsus, he says: After thanks given for the benefits which we have
received eat we of the consecrate bread. Ciprian.
Cyprian, lib. 1. Epist. 6. ad Magnum says: The Lord calls the bread made of
the gathering together of many grains, his body; and the wine pressed out of
many clusters and grains of grapes, calls he his blood. Also, interpreting
the Lords prayer, he calls the bread the body of the Lord. Also, in the
sermon of the Supper of the Lord, he says: we whet not the tooth to bite, but
with sincere and true faith only do we break the bread, and eat it. Also,
in the sermon de Chrismate, he openly says: The sacraments have their names
of those things which they signify. Saint Augustine uses these self same two
manner of speeches that Saint Cyprian uses. Whereby it appears, that he
took them from him. The second he uses in the Epistle to Boniface, and
first, when he says: Why preparest thou the tooth and the belly: Believe, and
thou have eaten, Tract. 25. upon Saint John. And turning to Saint Cyprian, in
his second book and third epistle ad Cecilium, he says: In the wine is showed
the blood of the Lord. Ciprian.
Also against the Aquarians, he says: That the blood of the Lord could not
appear to be in the cup, if the wine ceased to be therein. And after our
Transubstantiators, no wine is there in the cup, therefore it follows, there
is no blood. For this is the argument of S. Cyprian. In the sermon also of the
supper of the Lord, he says: The symbols o be changed into the body of
Christ, but so that they take a certiane likeness of Christ himself in whom
the humane nature was seen and the divine remained hidden by which likeness it
appears that he would say: that as in Christ remain two natures, divine and
humane: So in the same manner are the two natures preserved in the Sacrament.
That of the bread which is seen and that of the body of Christ, which is not
seen. In the second book and third epistle he also says: So that the body
of Christ cannot be flower only: Nor water only, But both do meet and couple
together, and with the meeting together and union of one bread, become firm,
with which and the same sacrament, our People is showed to be coupled.
Athanasius.
Athanasius expounding these words: If any man shall speak a word against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him, but he which speaks against the holy
spirit, etc. says: And how great is the body that all the world is to eat of?
And concludes, that this is spiritually to be understood; and hereby that in
this place the Lord speaks of his ascension against the Capernaits.

Basil in his Liturgy, Basil.
calls the bread of the sacrament Antitypon of the body of Christ (to wit) an
example or pattern of the like form. And after the consecration he calls it
so also. Dionysius,
Dionysius de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, cap. 3. says: The Bishop uncovers
the covered and undivided bread, and parting it in pieces etc. Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose upon the first epistle to the Corinthians, says: When it is
said, that this is done in memory of Christ, and of his death: we by eating
and drinking, do signify the flesh and blood of Christ, which have been
offered. In the same place also he says: We receive the mystical cup, in type
(or figure) of the blood of Christ. Also in the fourth book De Sacramentis,
and fourth chap. where he sets down the change of the symbols, he handles
also our change into Christ: but for all this, those that receive the Sacrament
are not transubstantiated into Christ. Also in the same chapter he says: So
that we affirm. How can that which is bread, be the body of Christ by
consecration? And then: If the word of the Lord have so much power, that the
things which were not, begin to be: how much more powerful shall it be, to
cause that these things remain which have their being, and be changed into
another thing? Jerome.
Saint Jerome upon Saint Matthew says clearly: that in the bread and the wine
is represented the body and blood of Christ. Chrysostom upon the second to
the Corinthians says: Crisostome.
Not only that which is set before us upon the table, but the poor also is
the body of Christ; to whom we are bound to do good: for he that said this is
my body, with his mouth said also, that he it was which received the benefit,
and that he in the poor, was in necessity. Also in the eleventh Homily upon
Matthew. In opere imperfecto he says: In the holy vessels is neither the body
of Christ, nor his blood, but the mystery of the body and blood of Christ.
Also upon the twelfth chapter of the second epistle to the Corinthians, Hom.
27. he saih: So that Christ in the bread and wine said, Do this in remembrance
of me. In declaring also these words upon the twenty third Psalm, Thou have
prepared a table before me, says; So that the bread and the wine in the
Sacrament is showed unto us in the similitude of the body and blood of Christ,
etc. Also, writing to Cesarius against Apollinarius, and others, which
confounded the divinity and humanity of Christ (this Epistle is found in the
Library of Florence) he says: For even so the bread before it be sanctified
we call bread: but the divine grace signifying this: the bread by means of
the Priest is freed from the name of bread, and is found worthy to be called
the body of the Lord, albeit the nature of bread remain still in it. In very
many places is Saint Augustine wholly for us, Augustine.
and roundly confirms our doctrine. Upon the fourscore and second Psalm
he says: Thou art not to eat that which thou see: nor art thou to drink
this blood, which they have to pour out. That which I say is a mystery, which
will quicken, being spiritually understood. Also in the Treatise De Fide, ad
Petrum, chap. 19. he calls it the Sacrament of bread and wine. Also, against
Faustus, the twentieth book and twenty first chapter he says: In the old
Testament, under the similitude of the sacrifices, (to wit, of the beasts
sacrificed) the flesh and blood of Christ was promised unto us: upon the cross
was it really given, but in the Sacrament for a memorial it is celebrated. Let
us well consider these three times noted by Saint Augustine and the great
difference there is. After one sort gave Christ himself in the old Testament:
after another upon the cross: and after another in the Sacrament of the
Supper. Also, De Ciuitate Dei, the 21. book, and the twenty fifth chapter, he
clearelie affirms that the wicked eat not the matter of the Sacrament, to
wit, the body of Christ. And so (says he) It is not to be thought, that he
which is not in the body of Christ, and in whom Christ is not, nor he in
Christ, eats the body of Christ. The wicked eat not the body of Christ.
Also in the twentieth Treatise upon Saint John he says the same. Against
Adimantus also a Manachie, chap. 12. he says: The Lord doubted not to say,
This is my body, when he gave notwithstanding the sign of his body. In this
shows Saint Augustine, the words of Christ, This is my body: ought not to be
fully understood according as they sound, but by trope or figure; and so says
he, that this manner of speech is like to that alleged out of the twelfth
chapter of Deuteronomie, verse 23. The blood is the life. Also, De doctrina
Christiana, lib. 3. cap. 16. He shows that which Christ in the sixth chapter
of John uses, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. to be a
figurative manner of speech: the reason which he gives is, because it seems
to command a great wickedness. For to eat the flesh of a man, is a greater
cruelty then to kill him; and to drink his blood then to shed it. And
therefore says Saint Augustine, that it is a figure which commands us,
sweetly and profitably to remember that the flesh of Christ was crucified and
wounded for us. Also in the Epistle to Boniface says: The Sacraments take
their names of those things whereof they are Sacraments. These words (as we
have noted) took Saint Augustine from Saint Cyprian: and excellently names
the Sacrament of the body of Christ, in a certain manner to be the body of
Christ: and then says: The Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of
Christ.

Upon the eight Psalm he also says: Christ received Judas unto his banquet,
when he commended the figure of his body. Let that which we have already
said of this glorious Doctor suffice. Leo. 1.
Leo the first in an Epistle to the Clergy and people of Constantinople,
affirms this distribution to be mystical, to be spiritual meat, and that
therein we receive a celestial power to pass (or be converted) into the
flesh of Christ: Ciril.
who for us took upon him our flesh. Ciril. lib. 4. cap. 14. upon Saint John,
says: So to the faithful disciples gave he pieces of bread, saying: Take,
etc. Also in an Epistle to Calosyrius, he says: It was meet, that by means
of his holy flesh and precious blood, he shoud in a certain manner unite or
couple himself with our bodies, which by the lively blessing in the bread and
wine, we receive. Hesychius, lib. 20. upon Leuit, cap. 8. Hesychius.
says: By this he commands to eat the flesh with the bread, that we might
understand, he called it a mystery, which is bread and flesh jointly
together. Gelasius.
Gelasius does witness against Eutiches, that in the Eucharist, the substance
and nature of the bread and wine in no wise cease to hold their being: And
that moreover which before we have said, Gregory the first in his Register
says: Gregory 1.
When we receive as well the bread without leaven, as the leauened, we are made
the body of the Lord our Savior. Bertram.
Bertram in the book which he made of the body and blood of the Lord,
speaking of the nature of the Symbols, says: that according to the substance
of creatures, the symbols (which be the bread and wine) be the same after
consecration, that before they were. But why allege I one place of Bertrams
book, since the whole book does purposely handle this argument, and concludes
the same that we now affirm, with the holy Scripture, and many sayings of the
Fathers, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, Fulgentius etc. confirms Bertram his
doctrine: and confirming his doctrine, which is the same with ours, it
weakeneth and overthrows that of our adversaries: which says the bread and
wine in the sacrament to be the very same body and blood of Christ, in flesh,
bones, and sinews, which was borne, dyed, and rose again, etc. But the body
of Christ (says Bertram) is in two manners: Two manners of the body of Christ.
one in flesh and in bones etc. which was borne, and dyed, etc. and the other
spiritual; which is that which is given in the sacrament: and also he says,
that the spiritual body of Christ, and his spiritual blood, under the
couerture of the corporal bread, and of the corporal wine remain. At the
request of Charles the Great wrote Bertram this book: as he himself in the end
of his book speaking of Charles the great, to whom he dedicated the same,
says: The occasion he had, so to didicate it, was, for that, As Bertram says
in the beginning of the book Charles the Great had demanded of him whether the
body and blood of Christ, which in the Church is received with the mouth of the
faithful, be in mystery or really in truth received. So that it is now above.
760. years past since this book was written. Johannes Trithemius gives
this Testimony of Bertram. Bertram was (says Trithemius, much conversant in
the holy scripture, and very learned in humane science; eloquent he was, and no
less excellent in life, Bernard.
then in Doctrine. S. Bernard is the sermon of the supper of the Lord, by the
similitude, which he puts of a ring, shows that he is wholly for us. Now to
close up this band of the fathers, which against transubstantiation, of diverse
times, and diverse regions, we have alleged: we will set down one most
learned and godly: Theodoret.
This is Theodoret bishop of Cyr, that wrote the ecclesiastical history. He
flourished about the year of our Lord 451. For he was present in that famous
Council of Chalecdon in the company of 630. bishops, which condemned
Di^scorus. These bishops with great courtesy and honorable titles, 363 Bishops
in the Council of Chalcedon.
did honor Theodoret, being present in the Council; calling him catholic, and
true pastor and Doctor of the Church. The same witnesses Leo 1. Bishop of
Rome, in an epistle which he wrote to the foresaid Theodoret. And it is to be
believed, that had not Theodoret rightly thought of so high a mystery, As is
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, that a Council and one of the
most famous that has bin, wherein were 630. bishops, would not have called
Theodoret catholic, and true pastor of the church etc. In the 2. Council of
Ephesus, was this Theodoret unjustly deprived from his bishopirck: because he
would not take part with the heretic Eutiches. But in the Council of
Chalcedon with great honor and praise was his bishopric restored. If that
which Theodoret then thought and taught touching the Doctrine of the sacrament
were catholic; the same also shall it now be: for the same which then was
truth, is now truth. Very truly spoke this Theodoret, against
transubstantiation in a book God would should be printed in Rome, for the
greater confusion of the Romists: which cannot deny, that Theodoret is wholly
for us. But they excuse him, with saying, that this question of
transubstantiation, the Church had not yet determined. Thus may the Pope (for
he is all in all) cause that the Doctrine, which in old time was catholic and
true, be now heretical, and wicked, and that which then was heretical and
wicked, be now catholic and good. But if an Angel from heaven (says S. Paul
shall preach another Gospel, other Doctrine, then that which he had taught,
such a one should be cursed. Theodoret in his Dialogues brings in 2 persons,
Dialogue.
which dispute of good things: of things touching Christian religion: The one
called Orthodoxo, and the other Eranistes. Then says Orthodoxo, do thou know
that God has called the bread his proper body? Eran. I know it. Ortho.
know thou also that in an other place, his flesh, he calls wheat Eran.
This do I also know, etc. And a little lower, Ortho. In the same distribution
of the mysteries, The bread he calls, body and the cup mingled blood:
Erannist. So does he suerly call them. Ortho. But also has power to be called
a body, according to it nature, his body surely, and his blood. Erannist. It
is clear. Ortho. But the same our savior changes the names, and gives unto
his body, the name of symboll and contrariwise, to the Simboll gives he the
name of body. After the same manner also, when he had said of himself that he
was a vine, the same blood called he a Symboll, Eranist. This have thou well
spoken, But I would learn also the cause why the names are changed. Ortho.
This is the mark whereat those aim which profess religion: For I would not
that they which be partakers of the divine mysteries, should settle their minds
upon the nature of those things which are seen: but that by the change of the
names, they may believe that transmutation which is wrought by grace. For he
which called his natureall body, wheat, and bread, and called also himself a
vine: John 15. 1.
he himself honoreth the visible signs with the name of his body and of his
blood. Not changing verily the same nature, but adding grace to the nature.
Eranist. Surely the mystical things are mystically spoken, and the things
not Notorious to all, are clearly manifest. Ortho. Seeing he says that the
robe and the vesture are called of the patriarch the body of the Lord; and
that we are entered into discourse of divine mysteries. Tell me truly whose
signs, and whose figure supposest thou: that most holy meat to be. Of the
diuininitie it self of the Lord Christ, or of his body and blood. Eran. Of
those things doubtless, whose names they have received. Ortho. Of the body
say thou, and of the blood. Eran. So I say. Ortho. Very well have thou
spoken: For the Lord having taken the sign, said not this is my divinity: but
this is my body. Also this is my blood, and in another place, The bread which
I will give for the life of the world. John 6. 51.
Eran. All this is most true: for they be the words of God, etc. And in the 2.
Dialogue, Ortho. Tell me then whose Symbols be these mystical symbols, which
be offered to God, of the ministers of holy things, Eran. Of the body and of
the blood of the Lord. Ortho. Of the true, or not the true body, Eran. Of the
true etc. Ortho. For those mystical symbols: no not after sanctification, leave
not their proper being and nature: For they remain in their former substance,
figure and form, and are seen, and handled. neither more nor less the^ before
But the things which are made are understood believed and adored as thiugs
being which are believed. Compare the^ the Image, with the Archtipe (to wit)
the thing, whose Image it is, and thou shall see the likeness. For the figure of
necessity must agree with the truth. For that same body holds no doubt his
first figure, form and circumscriptio^, and to speak simply the same
substance also of the body, etc. That which Theodoret chiefly pretends to
prove in these dialogues is that, as there be a things really in the sacrament,
the figure and the thing figured, bread and. The body of Christ, and these 2
things be not confused, but each one holds his proper being. So neither more
nor less, are there 2 natures really in Christ: divine and humane, not
confounded, nor the one converted into the other. Were there not 2 things
really in the sacrament. The argument of Theodoret, should not prove his
intent: but should be rather for the heretics, against whom he disputed: which
said that the body of Christ, ascending into the heavens, is wholly converted
into the divine nature; As now, say, our adversaries that the bread and wine
are converted into the body and blood of Christ: So that there remains no
more bread, nor no more wine. The self same argument of Theodoret: uses
Gelasius, bishop of Rome against Eutiche^ as before we have alleged. Here sest
thou the victory which our adversaries have gotten by aleaging the fathers, to
confirm their transubstantiation. If many they have alleged for their
transubstantiation, many more have we alleged against transubstantiation, as
ancient, as learned, and as godly, as those whom they have cited: and the self
same, also have we alleged oftentimes, that they have alleged. Our
adversaries with full mouth still cry out, saying: Fathers, fathers, as though
the fathers were for them, and not for us: But by this disputation, which we
have in hand shall be seen, whether the fathers be before us, whether they
approve and confirm our Doctrine, and condemn that of our adversaries or no.
But for as much (as say the Logitians) to give an instance is not to assoyle
the argument. It shall be good to answer that which our adversaries have
alleged against our Doctrine. This will we do, with all possible brevity:
because we purpose not here to make long discourse of this matter. To show then,
that, that of the fathers which they have alleged, makes nothing against us.
Needful shall it be to consider, that the holy Scripture it self does wontedly
give the names of Symbols, signs, or figures to the things which they
betoken, figure and represent: and contrariwise, the names of the things
signified and figured, they give to the signs and figures, as the fathers do
observe it. Thus is Christ the pascall lamb, and the pascal lamb is Christ,
Christ is bread, and the bread is Christ, etc. For this cause the fathers,
imitating the phrase of the scripture, speaking of the things signified, they
call them by the names of those things which they signify: and contrariwise,
speaking of the figures, they give unto them the names of the things which they
figure. Ciprian.
Which thing S. Ciprian, by us before alleged, and S. Augustine in an epistle
which he wrote to Boniface before by us also alleged, and Therdoret in the
Dialog a little be fore cited do witness. Moreover if we diligently consider,
that which a little before, or a little after in other places they have said we
shall see, that they have understood, and witnessed, this meat to be
spiritual, not carnal for the mouth, teeth, nor the belly. Wherefore (says
S. Augustine, as before of him we have said) preparest thou the tooth, and the
belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. In which manner of speaking, S. Augustine
does imitate S. Cyprian (As before we have said) It is also to be noted that
the fathers speak one way of the bread, and of the wine before consecration,
and after consecration otherwise. Before consecration say they, that the bread
and wine are common and vulgar, as the rest. But of consecration they deny it
to be common bread; they deny it to be common wine: there is a changing say
they in them which thing is most true. For the bread and wine, by consecration
cease to be common bread and wine, What Consecration is.
and be dedicated to a sacred use, and so the bread and the wine are made
holy, or sanctified, ceasing to be common and profane: Such a change as
this, understood the fathers to be made in the bread and wine: but not as
touching the substance and being. But as touching the qualities. The which
change we do willingly allow, By such a change we confess; that the bread
and wine are made Sacraments, which effectually by the virtue of the holy
spirit, do signify: present, seal and give unto us, as touching the soul,
by the mean of faith. The body and blood of the Lord. Who so will mark this,
shall understand that when the fathers say: there is now no more bread, nor
wine, in the Sacrament, this ought not to be simply understood: As touching
the substance: but in a certain manner, in respect of him which receaueth the
sacrament, who ought not to settle his eyes upon the bread, nor upon the
wine, which be visible, earthly, and corruptible things: but ought to lift up
his heart soul, and spirit, to receive that, which by the bread and the wine is
signified unto us, To wit, Jesus Christ set at the right hand of the father.

Three causes can we show: Three causes why the fathers have given the name of
things figured to the figures.
why the fathers so loftily and so hiperbolically have spoken of the signs,
The first is (which before we have touched) taking license of the scripture
which does also the same. The 2. the more to move the hearts of men, and to lift
them up to contemplate heavenly things and unspeakable mercies, which in this
most holy sacrament we receive: Seeing that our souls are spiritually fed and
nourished with the precious body and blood of Christ. The 3. to show this
representation, which we say to be made in the sacrament, not to be
theatricall, not belonging to commedians: but that the Lord gives really that,
which for his part, he promises, his body and his blood, for the spiritual
nourishment of our souls: And that we for our part, receive it by faith.
Christ being our food: were by good reason to be converted into us, as are
other meats converted into the substance of him that eats them: but in
Christ is it not so. For we eating him, do convert our selves into him, and
are by a secret and unspeakable union made one thing with him. Oh admirable
mystery! Oh high Sacrament! Oh sweet and divine banquet wherein; our body
receiving carnally with the teeth bread and wine! our soul receaueth
spiritually by faith, Jesus Christ with all his treasure and riches, which
dying and rising again he gained for us. For here is he wholly given unto us.
that which is said (me seems) sufficient to answer that which our
adversaries out of the fathers have alleged against us. But setting a part
this general answers. Ireneus.
Let us answer to each one in particular. As touching Ireneus which says
invocation received the earthly bread is now no more common bread, have we
already answered to be truth, when on our part we alleged him. As touching
Tertullian we say what he himself declares, saying: Tertullian.
The Lord not only made the bread which he took his body, saying: This is
my body, to wit the figure of my body. Concerning that which Origin says:
that the Lord affirmed the bread to be this body, we deny it not: but the
controversy is, how it so is, carnally or spiritually: and in the places,
which of him, for us we have alleged: is it declared, Origin. Cyprian.
how Origin himself understood it. As touching that which Saint Cyprian says,
the bread to be changed into flesh and blood: The same also say we. But we
mean not a natural change, that one substance is converted into another. The
change which we understand, and which understands Saint Cyprian is
sacramental and so he there says, we are united (or made one self same
thing) with Christ, not so much by a natural change, as by a spiritual. For
he has made himself both bread and flesh, and blood. He himself is meat
substance, and life for his Church, which giving her participation etc. he
calls his body. Of these words will we conclude, the sacramental bread and
wine to be the body and blood of Christ, neither more nor less then the Church
is the body of Christ, not corporally but spiritually That which he says, that
the bread is changed, not in form, but in nature, seems to make much against
us. But by that which Saint Cyprian himself wrote to Cecilius, that in the
wine is showed the blood of God, it appears to be otherwise. Also speaking
against the Aquarians, he says: If the wine leave his being in the cup, the
blood of the Lord cannot appear to be in the cup. Also all that moreover,
which of him we have on our part alleged. Besides this, Saint Cyprian being a
Latin Author, he took, it may be, the Latin word Natura, not in
signification of substance, but in signification of virtue, force, and
propriety, as the Latin Authors do many times take it: and in the same
signification in our Spanish tongue is it taken. And so say we the nature of
this herb, or stone, etc. is this, etc. The nature of the loade-stone is to
draw the iron: As much as to say, as the virtue or property etc. Taking it
then in this signification, it will very well agree with that which Saint
Cyprian says. That which says Saint Ambrose of bread is made the flesh of
Christ, Ambrose.
ought to be sacramentally understood, as before we have said. And that this
was his meaning, by that which he himself says, in the places of him, for us,
before alleged appears. What thought Chrysostom of the figure, Chrysostom.
and the thing figured in this Sacrament, in alleging him for us, we have
already declared. Now it rests to answer that, which he says of the wax,
which applied to the fire is consumed: and applying this similitude, he says:
So the bread and the wine are consumed, of the substance of Christ, To this
objection we answer, that the word (thought) used by Chrysostom, declares
unto us, that which he said, ought not to be understood, but in respect of our
faith and knowledge, wherewith communicating the bread and wine, we receive
them, not as bread, nor as wine, but lifting up the spirit on high, we receive
them as the body and blood of Christ, or whose efficacy they are a figure. To
the other two places of Chrysostom, that Christ gives himself to us that we
should see him touch him, and handle him, and in whose flesh also we might
fasten our teeth: What Chrysostom thought of the sacramental bread and wine,
whether it be true bread and wine or no, we have very clearly showed by the
same words of Chrysostom himself. And it is not to be believed that so grave
an Author would contradict himself. Let us, now answer how this ought to be
understood which our adversaries allege of him against us. I say then, that
simply and properly speaking: Neither the body nor the blood of Christ in the
sacrament are either seen, handled or touched: The bread and the wine are
seen, handled and touched. The same Chrysostom in the same homily says: He
makes us (to say the same also one Mass with him. And this not only by
faith, but he makes us really his body. The same says he in the 60. and 62.
homily to the people of Antioch saying: We I say are not only by faith and
love but also really indeed made and mingled with the body of Christ. And
notwithstanding this union, there is none will say that we are
transubstantiated into the body of Christ. So say we also that notwithstanding
this sacramental union which remains between the bread and wine and the
body and blood of Christ, the bread is not transubstantiated into the body of
Christ, nor the wine into his blood. The same Chrysostom says: Think not
that thou take the body of Christ of the hands of a man, but of a Seraphin,
etc. Should we simply ^nderstand this: the minister is not now a man but
transubstantiated into a Seraphin. Also he says: we must not think the hand
of the Priest to give us the Sacrament but we must understand the stretched out
hand of Christ to do this. By all this variety of speech what think we sought
Chrysostom to do, but to draw the minds of the Communicants from the
consideration of the outward signs and figures visible and subject to perish,
and to make them consider the heavenly and divine things, which by them be
figured? This glorious Father then would, that in communicating, we should so
celebrate the memory of the death and passion of Christ, as if then at the
same instant that we communicate, his body were crucified and his blood were
shed for us. Would God that all Christians, when they communicate would have
this consideration and meditation: other fruit should they then receive of the
communion. The faithful believing the Evangelical doctrine, and celebrating
the holy Supper, are present as it were at the condemnation and death of the
Lord: and this is the memory commanded them to do: and so says Saint Paul to
the Galathians, That before their eyes was Christ condemned, Augustine.
and among them crucified. As touching that of Saint Augustine which they object
unto us, that Christ bare himself in his hands: We deny it not: For what
inconvenience is it, that Jesus Christ with his hands has borne his own body,
if by the body we understand the Sacrament of his body. And that this was his
meaing, he himself a little lower declares, when he says: Quodam modo, in
a certain manner, not simply. To the other which they say of Saint Augustine:
that the flesh of Christ ought to be adored in the Sacrament. We deny not the
flesh of Christ in so much as it is conjoined with the Divinity, from the
which it never departs, ought to be worshipped. For whosoever otherwise shall
simply worship the flesh of Christ, not respecting the hypostaticall union
which is between the flesh and the Divinity in Christ, shall commit
idolatry: for only God, only his Divinity ought to be worshipped. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Deuteronomy. chap. 6. verse.
13. Who so lists to see how much Saint Augustine is for us, and how much
against the Transubstantiation of our adversaries: and this not in one place by
chance, but in many, Hillarie.
let him read that which we have already alleged. S. Hillarie in the place
cited against us, groundeth his argument upon the truth of the Sacraments, the
which do really and truly seal, give, and present that which they represent
unto us. We receive then in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, the
true body and blood of Christ, and make our selves one self same thing with
him: and this spiritually by faith, as so often we have said which union is not
only made in the Eucharist, but also in Baptism. And so the same Hillarie a
little before he had said those words of the Eucharist, had said the same of
Baptism, saying: that by it we are conjoined with Christ and amongst our
selves. And this not by union of consent and will only, but also of nature: let
them also put Transubstantiation in the water of Baptism, As touching that
which they say of Leo the first, we confess the same which he says: that
Christ is made our flesh, and that we do pass into his flesh. Damaseen and
how much his authority is to be esteemed.
As touching Damascen, there is no doubt but that he is wholly for them. As
appears in the place against us alleged. This Damascen by nation and
profession was a Jew until he came to Constantinople and was converted: and
being converted, became a Monk: He lived in the time of the Emperor Leo
Isauricus, About the 720. year; when the Moors a few years before having
passed the Straights of Gibraltar had by the chastisement of God subdued almost
all our country of Spain. Some things he wrote wherein are found many wonders
superstitions and erours: I will here set down some that the credit may be
seen that to such an author is due. A great defender he was of Images: They
are not only to be made (says he) but also to be honored and reverenced: The
which is contrary to the second commandment: Thou shall not make to they self
any graven Image, Thou shall not worship nor honor them. The relics of
Saints he much esteemed and doubted not to call them fountains of the gifts
of God. He dared to say: that we ought with faith to honor dead saints, the
which is blasphemy. For in one only God ought we to believe: As we confess in
the beginning of the Nicene Creed. Speaking of Purgatory, to confirm it he
reports great wonders: Sermon de de functis.
he tells how Traian the Emperor; who was a pagan, an Idolaten, and a great
persecuter of the Christians by the prayers of S. Gregory went out of the
pains of hell, etc. Also that the soul of a woman called Falconilla a Pagan
went out of hell, whither for her idolatry she was condemned: and this by the
prayers of one which he calls Primera, a martyr. Friar John de Pineda, libr.
18. cap. 24. ^ 1. tells another such like tale: and this it is. Zenoras (whom
he calls a noble Historian) says that the Empress besought the Patriarch,
bishops, and religious persons to pray for the soul of the Emperor Theophilus
her hushand: and that they obtained pardon for his offenses: but I (says
Pineda) hold it very doubtful, seeing that he dyed an obstinate heretic. And
then I will leave mine opinion founded upon the roots of faith. One of which
says: that where the tree falls, there shall it ever remain: and another:
that in hell there is no redemption: and another, that grace deuideth between
the sons of the kingdom. and of hell, etc. For the self same causes say we,
that which Damascen says of the souls of Traian and Falconilla to be lies.
Pero Mexia upon the life of Traian says: that that which is said of the soul
of Traian is a mere fable and jest. Doctor Illescas upon the life of Gregory
the first holds it for certain truth and condemns Pero Mexia.

Also says Damascen, that one Macarius consulting with a dry scull, knew many
things of the state of the dead (and what is to be a Nigromancer if this be
not?) This Macarius (says he) wontedly prayed for the dead: and desired to
know if such prayers did ought avail them, and if they received any comfort by
them. He says: that God a lover of souls, willing by many and firm
arguments to declare this to his servant, inspired into the dry skull the
word of truth. For these words the skull pronounced: purgatory confirmed with
wonders.
When thou prayest for the dead, some small consolation we feel, etc. Also
he reports: that one saw a a Disciple of his (which had lived a life
somewhat dissolute, burning in the fire, whose body was in the flame even to
the throat: Afterward by the prayers of the Master. The same Master
himself saw him in the fire up to the middle: and afterward praying
eftsoons for him, he saw him free and safe without hurt of the fire.

These four so strange wonders, besides others which we pass over, shall you
find in his sermon of the dead. You see here the Textes of holy Scripture
wherewith he confirms his Purgatory. Genesis 9. 4.
Also to prove the resurrection, he cites the place of Genesis, Lib. 4. cap 25.
the ninth chapter and the fourth verse, where God commanded Noah: The flesh
with the blood shall thou not eat. Orthod. fide^


Also, another strange thing in the chapter of Virginity he says: that had
not Adam sinned, men for generation should not carnally have coupled with their
wives. And because he saw the Text of Scripture to be against him. God might
(says he) by other means multiply men without the conjunction of man and
woman. Also seeing that Saint Basil calls the bread and the wine of the
Sacrament, examples of the body and blood of Christ (which was opposite to
him.) This saying of S. Basil (said he) ought to be understood of the bread
and of the wine before sanctification (which is not so) for the bread and wine
before consecration (as already we have proved by the Fathers) are common
bread and wine, as the rest: and be no symbols, nor figures of the body and
blood of Christ, until (and not before) these words: Take and eat, this is my
body, be said. Since such a one then is Damascen, leave we him, and let us
follow that which the hole Scripture does teach us, that which the Fathers
(whom against Transubstantiation we have alleged) do tell us, and that also,
which experience it self, of that which we see, touch, and taste in the
sacrament does show us. To Theophilact, Anselme, Hugo, Richardo, etc. (whom
they cite against us*) and lived in the time that the holy Supper of the Lord
was now falling: the Popes then tyrannizing the consciences of men: who never
stayed until (the holy supper destroyed) they had made of some relics,
patches and remnants of their Mass such as now it is, full of abuses,
superstitions and idolatries) do we answer the same: Leo. 1.
He of these late writers which least erred in this matter of
Transubstantiation is Scotus: Transubstantiation can neither be proved by
Scripture nor by reason.
who says (as before we have said) that neither by Scripture, nor reason it
can be proved but would yet be deceived, because the Church so commands. How
could his Church (which is the Pope and his Cardinals make new articles of
faith, besides those which Jesus Christ, our king, our Prophet, and priest
ordained and taught us: which be contained in the Creed of the Apostles? Let us
now answer to the Councels which our adversaries allege against us. The
Council of Ephesus.
As touching that which they object against us of the Council of Ephesus,
wherein Cirillus governed, and Theodoret (who is so appaparantly against
Transubstantiation) was present therein, they do us great wrong. For the same
do we confess that the Council confesses. We say, that receiving this
Sacrament, we receive not common flesh: but flesh sanctifying, which by an
inseparable union is conjoined with the divine word. But how do we receive it?
Spiritually by faith, not carnally as say our adversaries that they receive,
eat and digest it. For until it be digested, they affirm it to be the flesh of
Christ. They object the council of Vercell in the time of Leo the ninth where
Berengarius was condemned. The Council of Lat^ran.
They object the Council of Lateran in the time of Nicholas 2. The Council of
Lateran.
which caused Berengarius to recant. The Lateran Council also in the time of
Innocent 3. Also the Council of Constance Anno. The Council of Constance.
1516. The Trident also of our time: in the time whereof so many Popes, as
Paul 3. The Council of Trident.
Julius 3. Marcellus 2. Paulus 4. Pius 4. (and none of these for the causes,
that speaking of the Popes we have showed, were present in it) poped. But
examine we the recantation, which Pope Nicholas the second that poped about
the year 1060. commanded Berengarius to make in the Council of Lateran: as
it is written in the Decrees de consecrat. did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius. Great
wonde*
Wherein he was constrained to confess, that the body of Christ is handled
(or sensnally felt) with the hands of Priests, that it is broken, that it is
chewed with the teeth. I demand of them how can the body of Christ, which now
is glorified, and therefore impossible, and no way subject to these humane
miseries suffer these things. Which the Pope and his Council do say? The
Glosser of the Decrees himself, although not very wise, could not but see so
great an absurdity as this, and therefore said, that this very warily and
advisedly ought to be understood: for if thou do not so (says he) thou
shall fall into an error far greater then that of Berengrius. The Glossor
then understood it much better then Pope Nicholas, or his Council (whose holy
spirit the Pope was) that the body of Christ in the Sacrament could no ways
be touched with the hands, nor broken, nor chawed with the teeth. For this
cause the Master of Sentences in the fourth, willing to amend or conceal this
so notable a fault, says That this which was commanded Berengarius to say,
ought not to be understood of the body of Christ, but of the Symbols: which say
they, be the accidents. And so in that manner of speaking admits a trope or
figure: according whereunto is attributed to the thing that which is of the
symbols. But should we use this figure, they would eat out our eyes. In the end
of the Treatise shall ye see how the Council of Trent was celebrated.
Now shall thou understand the account which is to be made of such a Council,
and of the other Councels that followed this: in which the Pope or his Legates
have governed, and nothing aught worthy was in them determined (albeit the
Fathers had broken their heads about it) if the Pope approved it not. So that
the Pope only is he which makes and vnmaketh decrees and articles of faith:
and not the Council. The manner of celebrating the Popish Councels.
When a Council is celebrated the which from many to many years is done: as
though there were no evil life of the Prelates to be amended; nor abuses,
superstitions, heresies nor idolatries in the Church to be corrected) the
Legates of the Pope, which commonly are three (for such is his cause, that he
trusts not one with it) have great regard to write to the Pope this or that
is determined in the Council, how likes it your Holiness. Then does the Pope
either approve it, or blotting it out, disalow it. If he blot it out, there is
then no more treaty of that matter, how true soever it be, and how profitable
soever for the Church. That which he approves he writes to his Legates. This
letter which the Pope sends, is the holy spirit which now governs the
Councels. This holy Spirit descends not from heaven, but comes enclosed in
a budget or wallet. Thus is the Council not free, but a servant: and of whom?
of the Pope. Who (as before by many most sufficient reasons we have proved to
be Antichrist. So necessary an article to salvation is Transubstantiation
among our adversaries, that they hold him not a Christian, but an heretic
anathematized, accursed, and excommunicated that does not believe it. Wherein,
to the Council of Florence, held in the time of Eugenius the fourth in the
year of our Lord 1439. do they great injury. In this Council were present
the Emperor of Grecia, the Patriarch of Constantinople, and many Eastern
Bishops. The Greeks and Latins agreed in this Council, in the difference
which they held touching the holy Spirit: and in some other things they also
agreed: but as touching Transubstantiation, albeit the Pope did labor them to
allow of it: yet could they never effect it with them. And great heed took the
Greeks, that in the letter of unity no mention were made of
Transubstantiation: the which was done to the good liking of the Greeks, as in
the Bull of Eugenius, which begins Exultent coeli, and laetetur terra,
appears: wherein he gives for good to all Christendom, that the Greek and
Latin Church had once again accorded. And I surely know, had their
Transubstantiation been an article of faith, without which there is no
salvation, the Roman Church did wickedly to admit the Greeks for brothers,
seeing they openly denied Transubstantiation. There was never mutual consent of
the Church touching Transubstantiation.
That which our adversaries say of the mutual consent of the Church touching
the article of Transubsta^tiation, here appears to be false. For neither the
Greek nor Eastern church ever believed it, nor now at this day believes it:
nor yet did the Latin Church for a thousand years space believe it. Of all
this which we have spoken touching Transubstantiation we conclude that which we
say to be truth, that he which hears the Mass is a great Idolater, and he
which says it is a greater.

The fifth Damage which the Mass causes, The 5. damage of the Mass. purgatory.
is: that besides the said four domages, it maintains many abuses, as is
Purgatory. Concerning Purgatory say we: there is no other purgatory but the
blood of Christ, which purges our sins. By which purgation we are
reconciled with the everlasting Father. The other purgatory say we which our
adversaries have forged, without the word of God, is the head of a wolf, as
Doctor Constantine did call it, who for the cause of religion, of infirmity,
age, and hard imprisonment, among those cruel Canibals, and eaters of man's
flesh, the defilers of the faith, in the castle of Traiana died. Purgatory is
a common cutpurse, that without shame or correction steals, robs, and
catches all what it can, to fill the paunches of these idle bellies, priests
and friars, and all the ecclesiastical order. For whence have they so enriched
themselves? whence is it that they have builded so many sumptuous Monasteries,
which seem rather Castles and palaces of most rich kings and Princes, then
houses of begging Friars and poor Monks, who in times past gained their
living with the labor of their hands? Whence have they founded so many
Chapels, so many Trentals, so many Masses prayed and sung, which they called
de requiem, but of the foolish persuasion of Purgatory? As the Mass
entertayneth Purgatory, so also does Purgatory entertain the Mass. The
Mass and Purgatory are even as two Mules, the one rubbing the other.

The false prophets made an old and simple woman believe, that the soul of her
father, mother, husband, daughter or other person who^ she dearly loved was
suffering most grievous torments and pains in Purgatory: and demanded some
relief by the Mass or Masses which should be said for it. Then the poor old
woman, taking it from their mouth, joined piece to piece, 68 Blancas which is a
ryall, Masses sold for money, according to the proverb, No penny no Pater noster
went to a Priest, and giving him the tyall (for Masses are sold for money)
besought him to say a Mass with great devotion for the soul of her father, or
some other person whom she loved. And were the old woman so much more
superstitions; then went she to a monastery, holding it for certain, that the
Friars lived a more religious and holy life then the Priests, and being come
to the monastery, besought the Sextan or potter to cause a Mass with all
speed to be said. The Sextan or porter said, it should presently be done.
Then went out a Father to say the Mass, and took money of her: to whom better
had it been to have given, then taken it from her: for God knows the
poverty that remained in the house of this old woman, and the riches and
superfluity that was in the monastery. And a fair thing it was, that they
said it not for her: for oftentimes it happens, that more Masses are received
for in one day, then all the Priests of the monastery can say in a month. And
this is the cause why they cannot say all the Masses they receive for. But thou will say unto me: Why do these reverend men take of them more money for Masses
then they well can say? Me seems they rob in doing this which thou say.
Hereunto I answer, that they reckon not of this, nor make they any conscience
thus to rob and deceive. And that which is worse, this their theft and robbery
do they sanctify, saying: that is very well done, and that necessity so
requires, Thus doing, they do contrary to that which the Apostle says: Evil
is not to be done that good may come of it Romans 3. ^.
that the devotion of the people be not despised. Ad the Pope for the cause
aforesaid a proves and makes good this theft: and commands them to say two
Masses at every months end, one for the quick, another for the dead: which
two Masses (says he) are as auayleable as all those (how many soever) they
have omitted to say. Did the Magistrates their duty, they would seek, and in
the chests of their Monasteries should find such Bulls, such mockeries, and
such licenses to steal. Purgatory have they made a new article of faith: so
that he which believes it not, is therefore an heretic. If it be heresy not
to believe that, which neither in the doctrine of the old or new Testament is
confirmed: The. 3. Credes contain the some of that whicha Christa^ is to
believe The. 6. Damage.
Nor is in any of the three Creedes, of the Apostles, the Nicen nor of
Athanasius being a Summarie token out of the scripture, which a Christian ought
to believe, contained.

The 6. damage is: that suppose the sacrifice of the Mass, or sacrament of the
altar (As they call it) had been such, As they paint it out: Yet should it not
be well administered, since the Christian people are defrauded, and deprived of
the one half of the sacrament. because they give them not the sacramental
wine, which is the sacrament of the blood of Christ, shed for us upon the
Cross, and when the other half is received, they give it seldom once in the
year, and wickedly, with so many superstitions and Idolatries (As we have
already proved). In bread and wine did Jesus Christ institute this sacrament,
for the high signification and allusion which the bread and wine hold with his
body and with his blood: and commanded his Apostles, in the self same manner,
As they had seen him celebrate the supper, in memorial of his death to
celebrate it. When he gave the^ the bread, he said. Take eat, this is my
body. And when he gave the wine, he said. Drink ye all of this. This is my
blood. In giving the wine, he adds, and that not without great mystery, this
word all, for with this word All, does the Lord prevent, and arm us against
the heretics, which were afterward to arise, saying: Drink not all of the
wine. Our adversaries cannot deny the Lord to have said. Drink ye all of
this. They cannot deny, that all those which have received the bread, have not
drunk of the wine. Mar. 14. 23.
And so says S. Mark. And they all drank thereof. As little also can they
deny that they themselves command, contrary to the commandment of God, that
all do not drink thereof. What shall we hereupon conclude? That they be
heretics, Albeit, The heresy of the Papists.
they deny it because they falsify and clip the most holy sacrament which
Christ did institute. If the laws command, that he which falsifieth or
clippeth the coin, bearing the figure of the king, or the Lord of the land;
shall die: What punishment shall he deserve, that falsifieth and clippeth the
sacrament, which has not only the figure of Christ, but his proper body and
blood As in bread and wine, Jesus Christ did celebrate his supper: Even so did
his Apostles celebrate it afterward. Read the 11. chapter of the first Epistle
to the Corinthes, where S. Paul entreats of the celebration of the holy
supper; But the space of one thousand years was the self same order touching
the substance of the supper, observed in the Church: until false prophets arose
that brake this good order, which Christ did institute and his Apostles: and
the Church did long time after observe, These would show the^se lues to be more
wise the^ Christ, and so comanded they that no Christian, were he not a
priest, should receive, when they communicated the consecrated wine. And their
reasons they yield (but very frivolous and ridiculous) why they so command.

The first is, because there is no difference between the priest, and the
people. Great pride and arrogance is this, ever have they pretended to keep
Christian people in subjection: So are they called the Clergy, for being, as
they say. The Lot of the Lord. As though the people, for whom Christ died, were
the lot of the devil,

The second cause is, the danger of shedding the blood, by the beardes: if the
people should drink it, If this be the cause why give they it not to women,
seeing they have no beards? why give they it not to many, which either by
nature, or shauing, or cutting have no beards? Why command they not, that all
Christians should be beard shaven?. Why permit they the Pope and many Cardinals
and Bishops in Italy to nourish their beards? and so no danger should be.

The third say they: that receiving the form of the bread, they receive the
body of Christ, and by consequence (as they call it) receive they the blood.
And thus (say they) that under one form they receive both things: the body
and blood of Christ. Oh learned men! Oh great wits! The Lord commands that
all should drink. They counterma^d saying. That all shall not drink: that to
receive one kind is sufficient. And a fair thing is this, that they condemn
those for heretics which receive the supper in both kinds: As Christ did
celebrate, and as the Apostles, and all the Church, for more then a thousand,
and so many years celebrated the same. They see not that in condemning us,
they condemn Christ, his Apostles, and all the Church for so many years. Let
the^ show me one Church, that comunicated in one kind, for the space of 1000.
years after the death of Christ. Teh^s reasons and all whatsoever they can
imagine, and in their fantasy forge, will not suffice to diminish nor defeat
the order which Christ ordained in his Church. In bread and wine did Christ
institute this sacrament, and so distributed it, to his Apostles, and commanded
them so to do the same, S. Paul as a good disciple obedient to his master, 1
Cor. 10. 20.
did so celebrate the holy supper: distributing the bread, which is the
sacrament of the body and the wine which is the sacrament of the blood. Ye
(says he) cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils, etc. And a
little before, by the cup, he had made mention of the communion of the blood,
and of the participation of his body by the bread. Also as often as ye shall
eat this bread, and drink this cup, etc. So that, whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, etc. Let every one therefore
prove himself, and so eat of that bread and drink of that cup. Also, for he
that eats and drinks unworthily, etc. Of all those that did communicate
spoke, S. Paul, and not of the priests alone. This self same order of
communicating in both kinds, was for many years observed in the Church. As in
the ecclesiastical histories and writings of the fathers, some of whom I will
here allege, appears Our flesh says Tertullian is fed with the flesh and
blood of Jesus Christ: Tertullian lib. de resurrect.
that the soul may be nourished of God. Oftentimes does S. Cyprian make
mention of this communion in both kinds, Cyprian, Sermon De lapsis.
in bread and wine. Read his sermon entitled Delapsis. In which, not once, but
5 or 6 times, he makes mention thereof. Also he says: that those which did
communicate, received the sacrament with the hand: and gives a reason why we
ought to communicate in both kinds, the which is of other touch, then those
which our adversaries give, why we should not in both kinds communicate. How
shall we exhort (says S. Cyprian) the people, to shed their blood for the
confesion of Christ, if when they enter the combat, we deny them the blood of
Christ? Or how shall we make the^ capable to drink the cup of martyrdom. If we
admit the^ not first to drink, the cup of the Lord? Also that which we said of
the same S. Cyprian concerning the young Infant (when we spoke of the miracles)
that in both kinds received the sacrament, Chrysostom says. Chrisostom upon.
2. Cor. ^.
We are not, as in the old law: where the priest took his portion, and the
people had the rest, but one self same body is here given to all, and one
self same cup: and all whatsoever is in the Eucharist, is common both to
priest and people. Chrysostom in this sacrament, puts not the difference
that our adversaries do, between the priest and the people: That the priest
in both kinds communicate, and the people only in one. But we will show for
greater confusion, of our adversaries, all those four Doctors (As they call
them) of the Church to be for us. As great credit give they to the Doctrine
which these four Doctors with one common consent do teach: Ambrose.
As they give, to the Gospel it self. Saint Ambrose (As Theodoret lib. 5.
cap. 17. reports speaking with the Emperor Theodosius 1. a natural
Spaniarde of Italica, which we now call old Civil, one league distant from
Civil They said unto him. The sacrament taken with hands and in both kynds.
How dare thou, I pray thee stretch out thy hands, stained with unjust
slaughter and blood, to receive with the same, the holy body of the Lord? Or
thou, that moved with the fury of wrath, so much blood so wickedly have
spilled, how will thou apply to thy mouth his venerable blood? depart then,
etc. Sozomenus. lib. 7. cap. 24. makes also mention of this History. The same
S. Ambrose in the funeral oration, which he made at the death of Theodosius,
makes mention of Theodosius his repentance. Were there many Ambroses There
would be many Theodosies. The cause will I here briefly tell, why Saint
Ambrose deprived him of the holy supper. They of Thessalonica murdered a Tribune
in a popular tumult: the Emperor Theodosius, hearing it was so highly offended
that he caused seven thousand men to be slain. Pero Mexia, writing the life
of this Theodosius, applies this to his Mass, which is so much against it.
He says: that Theodosius, the day following would go to the Temple to pray,
and hear Mass, as he was (says he) accustomed, etc. And note the affected
malice of Pero Mexia: That he alleged not the author of this his saying. That
Theodosius went to hear Mass: which he would have done, had any said it,
Maliciously he concealeth the name of Theodoret, because it made against his
Mass, which he so much adored. Two things may we note in this saying of S.
Ambrose: First, that he which did communicate took the sacrament with his
hands, and not with his mouth, a child, when they give it pappe. This
sacrament is not for Infants, which cannot eat strong meats, but it is for
people, that have discretion, and can eat a piece of bread, and drink a boule
of wine, And so says Christ unto them, Take eat, Take drink. He says not:
Open thy mouth, receive therewith the bread. The second thing which we are to
note in this saying of Saint Ambrose is: that the sacrament to the faithful was
given in both kinds, in bread and wine. For to eat without drinking, what does
it profit the body? Both the one and the other, have we noted, in the place of
S. Cyprian before aleaged. Also lib. 4. De sacramentis, cap. 5 these words
says the same S. Ambrose In the distribution of the body and blood of Christ,
the priest said Take the body of the Lord: Ieorme.
Take the blood of Christ. Whereunto the commucant answered Amen. The second
Doctor is Saint Jerome: Where speaking upon the second chapter of Malachy
says: The priest which consecrateth the bread of the supper, and distributeth
the blood of the Lord to the people. Saint Augustine is full of notable
sayings, confirming our Doctrine of the communion in both kinds. Of which I
will allege one or two, Augustine.
to avoid tediousness. How (says Saint Augustine lib. 5. Hypognost. Tom. 7.)
do thou promise the life of the kingdom of heaven to Babes, not regenerate
of water and the holy Ghost, nor nourished with the flesh, nor watered with
the blood of Christ, etc. Also in the first Epistle, to Ianuarius. Some (says
he) do every day communicate the body and the blood of Christ: others, etc.
This is most certain, that in the time of S. Cyprian. and of S. Augustine. and
long time also after the Eucharist was given in both kinds, and that to
Infants As Erasmus notes it. The fourth Doctor which is S. Gregory. now
remains: whom we may justly entitle the last bishop of Rome: and his
successor Boniface 3. may we call the first Pope: because he would be wholly
Pope, calling himself by the aid of that murderer Phocas, Gregory.
universal Bishop. Saint Gregory then says: you have learned what the blood
of the Lamb is: and this not by hearing, but by drinking his blood (to wit, as
often we have said, the sacrament of his blood) is shed into the mouths of the
faithful. Here you see, all the four Doctors of the Church confirm our
Doctrine. Why then do our adversaries deny it, And what say I of four
doctors? read they all the ancient Doctors as well Greeks as Latins, all are
found to be for us. And many years also after Saint Gregory, when all things
as it were went to ruin this custom continued: and not as a custom, but as a
law inviolable was it holde^: for the reverence of the divine institution was
yet on foot and in it being: and to separate those things which God has joined
they doubted not to be sacrilege. So said Gelasius Bish of Rome as de
Consecratione: Gelasius.
did. 2. cap. Comperimus it is alleged) we have understood, says he, that
some having only taken the body of the Lord, do absent themselves from the
cup: who for as much as they sin of superstition, must be compelled to
receive entirely the whole Sacrament or to abstain from the whole. For the
division of this mystery cannot be without great sacrilege. Our adversaries
then in dividing this mystery, by the saying of Gelasius, be superstitious and
Church-robbers. The papists be Superstitious and Sacrilegious.
In the 3. Council of Toledo, 2. Cannon And in the conclusion of the said
Council, the symbol of our faith is commanded to be said before the communion
of the body and blood of Christ, according to the custom of the East: the
reason which the Council gives is, that the people should confess that which
they believe, and so having hearts, purified by faith, are said to receive the
body and blood of Christ. In this Council was present the Catholic king
Ricaredo: as by the prayers which he made in the Council appears.

The 7. The 7. Damage.
Damage that the Mass causes is, that suppose the Mass were good, and
celebrated as it ought to be celebrated, yet in a strange tongue is it said,
that the people understand it not, and sometimes also be himself that faith it
understands not that which he says: which is against the commandment of S.
Paul, who commands that all be done with comeliness and order. 1 Gor. 14. 40.
And what comelines or order is there, where the people hear a language which
they understand not, and so know not whether the Priest does bless or curse
them? The same Apostle says, that the use of tongues not understood (albeit to
the praise of God) is unprofitable in the Church. And therefore, without
interpretation of that which is said, ought not to be used. Read 1. 1 Cor. 14.
Cor. 14. 8. where he says If the trumpet shall give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle? So likewise you by the tongue, except ye
utter words that have signification, how shall it be under flood that which is
spoken? For ye shall speak in the air, etc. And therefore in the 19. verse he
says: I would rather speak fine words in the Church with understanding (that
is to say, that may be understood, thereby also to instruct others) then ten
thousand words in a tongue (to wit) that the people understand not. The same
Apostle in the 27. verse commands, that if any shall speak in a strange
tongue, there be also an Interpreter. And if there shall be no Interpreter, he
commands that he speak not in the Church. And that if he speak, he speak
to himself and to God, and not to the people: for the people receive no
edification by a tongue that is not understood. And therefore in the 26. verse
he commands that all be done to edification. For this cause, when God spoke
with the Patriarks, with the Prophets, and with his people of Israel, or they
with him, they speak unto him in their mother tongue that all did understand.
The same did Jesus Christ, speaking with the Scribes and Pharisees, he spoke
unto them in the vulgar tongue, the same that was then used in Judea. The
Apostles when the Lord sent them through the world to preach, had first
received the gifts of tongues to preach the Gospel, and celebrate the
sacraments to every nation in their proper language. Why then do not our
adversaries in this imitate the Apostles, they taught and celebrated their
Sacraments in the vulgar tongue, that al might understand: that the people
might be edified, and God might be glorified. The mysteries of Christian
religion, be not as the mysteries of the Gentiles (which were those that they
called Mysterios Eleusimos, and those of the good goddess) and woe unto him
that revealed the same. Herehence it comes that the Priest pronounces the
words of consecration, not only in a strange tongue, but also in a very low
voice that none can hear the^, and so (say they) Pope Vigilius commanded, as
reports D. Illescas upon the life of Vigilius. The Lord will that his
Christian people understand the mysteries, Leuit: 11. 3.
and understood, do meditate upon them as God in old time loved not the beast
that chewed not the cud, Deuteronomy. 14. 4.
and suffered not his people to eat thereof, so now loves he not that
christian that chaweth not the cud, and meditates on the saw of the Lord his
mysteries and his sacraments. Psalm. (...)
David speaking of the exercise of a godly man says: That he meditateth night
and day upon the law of the Lord.

The Lord speaking with Joshua who was no Priest but a most warlike Captain
that wan so many battles says these words unto him: Joshua. 18.
The book of this law shall never depart from thy mouth but day and night
shall thou meditate therein, that thou may keep and do, etc. To each
nation in their vulgar tongue, let them then say their Mass that they may
understand and know whether that which is therein said be good or evil: and
not say it to all nations in Latin: whereof the people receives no
edificacion but destruction: naught learning, but superstition and Idolatry; As
before we have proved. Some notable domages, which the Mass causes, have we
showed. Absurdities which the Mass causes.
Now will we show some absurdities and great inconveniences which thereof
follow: Against the word of God are some of them and against the doctrine of
the fathers and others be against experience it self: against natural reason,
and common sense. And but three or four will I set down to avoid
tediousness. We said (being so taught by the word of God) that in the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, The faithful only receive the body
and blood of Christ.
the faithful only receive spiritually and by faith, the true body and blood
of Christ. Our adversaries not herewith contented, say: that not only the good,
godly, and faithful, but also the evil, wicked and unfaithful, The first
absurdity.
the Turks, Jews, and Pagans do receive the true body and blood of Christ:
and yet pass they further: they say, that beasts, mice, and other vermin do
eat it, that the moisture does moisten it, and the mouldinesse does make it
moldy, etc. Their black Transubstantiation has made them fall into so great
an absurdity and strange wonder: Transubstantiation is the cause that the
papists believe the mouse, etc. to eat the body of Christ.
they believe that there is no bread nor wine, but the body and blood of Christ
it the Sacrament: They understand that not the faithful only, but also the
infidel, Turk, Pagan, and Jew, the Mouse, etc. eats that which was in the
Sacrament. Hereupon conclude they that they eat and drink the body and blood
of Christ. He that will deny them Transubstantiation, will also deny this their
conclusion to be good. But this set apart, the wicked, etc. will we show by the
month of Christ himself, not to eat nor drink the body and blood of Christ.
S. John shows that the Lord says: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. 10. 6. 53.
Hereupon is concluded, that except we eat his flesh, and drink his blood we
shall not be saved. We eat and drink his flesh and his blood when we not only
reciue this Sacrament, but also at all times, and as often as we believe in
him. Believe says S. Augustine, and thou have eaten. And therefore the same
Lord recounteth the fruits which this eating of his body and drinking of his
blood do necessarily bring forth. He that eats (says he) my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up, etc. Also, He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him. And,
he that eats me, shall live also by me. Presuppose this, as most true and
apparent it is, that wicked men, Jews, mice, etc. have not eternal life, nor
shall be raised up in the company of the faithful. It is seen they that
dwell not in Christ, nor Christ in them, it is also apparent that they shall not
live by Christ. Hereupon we conclude, that they eat not the flesh of Christ,
nor drink his blood. For had they eaten it, and had they drunk it, heaven and
earth should rather fail, then the word of Christ should fail, the wicked
Jews, Turks, mice, etc. should have life eternal, and should dwell in Christ,
and Christ in them, etc. and to say this is a most great absurdity. Therefore
it follows, that such eat not the flesh, nor drink his blood. Saint
Augustine considering this he said: The other Disciples did eat Panem Dominum,
the Lord which was bread, but Judas did eat Panem Domini, Tractat. 59. in
Iohannem.
the bread of the Lord: as if he had said: Judas wanting faith, and receiving
the Sacrament unworthily, did not eat the body, nor drink the blood of Christ,
which the other Apostles did, because they had faith, and did eat it worthily:
but Judas did only eat and drink the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ. Also in the 21. book de Cinitate Dei cap. 25. he says: It is not to
be thought that he eats the body of Christ, which is not in the body of
Christ, nor in whom Christ is not, nor he in Christ. Origin upon those
words, Origin super Math. 15. 11,
That which enters in at the mouth defiles not the man, etc. manifestly
says, that the wicked do not eat the body of Christ: and gives the reason:
because the body of Christ (says he) is quickening, and he which eats it,
dwells in Christ. Saint Jerome upon Esaias Chap. 66.
Saint Jerome upon the 66. chap. of Esayas says: Not being holy in body nor
spirit, they eat not the flesh of Jesus, nor drink they his blood. Many
other places be there in the Fathers, that prove our doctrine, the wicked,
etc. not to eat nor drink the body and blood of Christ. But those which we
have alleged, are now sufficient.

Another absurdity there is, The 2 absurdity
and this it is, that the banquet being to be common and general to all: by
which it is called Communion: one only at his pleasure eats it and
swalloweth all, without giving part to others. Who taught them thus to do? Not
Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the primitive Church. In old time, all those that
were present when the Supper of the Lord was celebrated did communicate, and
that in both kinds. And except they did communicate they deprived them of the
Supper, which our Adversaries cannot deny. So confesses George Cassander in
the Preface of the book entitled Ordo Romanus de officio Missae: for
confirmation hereof he alleges the tenth Cannon of the Apostles: where it
is commanded, that all the faithful which were found present at the holy
solemnities of the Church, and continued not till the Mass were ended, nor
received the holy Communion, should be cast from the Communion. He cites the
Council of Antioch, the second chapter, wherein it is ordained, that all they
which enter into the Church of God, and receive not the holy Communion, should
be cast out of the Church. He alleged also the Cannon of Calixtus (or as say
others) Anacletus, which commands: that the consecration ended, all should
communicate. He alleges also John Coclaeus, in the book which he entitled
De Sacrificio Missae, contra Musculum. In old time says Cochleus. As Well the
Priests, as the Laity, so many as were found present at the sacrifice of the
Mass, the offering being ended, did jointly with the Priest communicate, etc.
And the same Cannon which they say in their Mass, makes this to be clearly
understood: because it makes mention of the people, standing about, offering
and communicating. For which cause some expounders of the Cannons say: that the
Cannon ought not to be said in the Mass, but only when the people
communicate. Many more Councels and Fathers might be alleged to confirm that
which Cassander says: but the thing being so manifest, many witnesses shall be
needless. The Grecians until this day observe the ancient custom: there is
no private Mass among them. Upon the Lords days and festival days, The
papists which hear the Mass and Communicate not are ex communicate by their
own Cannons.
the Supper of the Lord is only celebrated, and the people in both kinds
communicate. Our adversaries may see what has been the cause of leaving this
ancient and laudable custom, and that as many also as hear the Mass, and
communicate not, incur thereby Excommunication. The Communion in our time, is
but once a year celebrated, and this with damage and great idolatry: and all
the days in the year, is no other thing done, but saying of Masses in every
corner of the Churches, and in those also of particular houses, without any
Communion: except it be that some for devotion will communicate: and oftentimes
it happens, that none is found present at these Masses, but the Nouice only
that answers, Et cum Spiritu tuo, and with thy spirit: The Nouices commonly
are little villains.
when the Priest has said unto him, Dominus vobiscum, The Lord be with you.
And note that the Nouice is wont to be commonly a little villain, according to
the proverb: Hize a mi hijo Monazillo, y torno seem diabillo, Make my son a
Nouice, and turn him a little devil. What agreement then has this their
private Mass with the holy Supper of the Lord which is a common banquet,
proposed to the whole Church. Read the tenth and eleventh chapters of the
first epistle to the Corinthians, which before we have alleged. What wickedness
do they then that convert the Mass into the supper of the Lord: which they
never celebrate, except the whole Church, or the greatest part of it do
communicate, acording to the institution of Christ, and according to that which
his Apostles did, and the Church many years after.

The 3. The 3. Absurdity.
absurdity is that which before we have said, that were there
Tra^substantiation, Christ should have 2 carnal bodies, one which sat, and the
other which this sitting body did eat, and give to his Disciples. The fourth
Absurdity is, that they put the body of Jesus Christ in diverse places at one
instant, The 4. Absurdity.
in all the Masses which are said through the world: Against the order of
nature do they in this, according whereunto, nothing created that is finite,
can be at one self same time in diverse places. The body of Jesus Christ
considered it self, is finite, and in time created: therefore can it not be
in diverse places at one instaut. In this do they also against the article of
our faith, which in the Creed we confess, that Jesus Christ sits at the
right hand of God the Father. From whence shall he come (says the article of
our faith) to judge the quick and the dead. Also they do against common
experience: for seeing bread and wine with the eyes, tasting them with the
mouth, and smelling them with the nose, yet for all this, say they, that no
bread nor wine remains. I demand now, when they burn this their Sacrament
for the causes that they themselves in the book de Cautelis do command it to
be burned: I demand of them, what is that which is burned and converted into
ashes? Not the body of Christ, which now being glorified, is impassible, nor
the accidents of the bread, nor of the wine: for the substance of the ashes,
engendered of that which was burned, could not be engendered but of another
substance: according to that which commonly is said: The generation of one
thing is the corruption of another: It follows then Albeit it grieve them and
that they deny it) that the bread is burned. I demand of them also when the
Priest deuideth the Host into three parts: what is that which he deuideth?
Some say they be accidents without subject. To others this answer not seeming
to be good, because not the accidents, but the substance, which has quantity
is parted: Therefore say they, that nothing is parted. This people think us to
be blocks and fools. They will make us (as they say) del cielo cebolla, to
believe things impossible. Free should they be from all these absurdities,
would they with Jesus Christ, with his Apostle Saint Paul, and with the
Catholic Church confess true bread and true wine to be in this sacrament: of
which bread and of which wine being corrupted, are engendered those things
before spoken. So that the worms and ashes are engendered and made, not of the
body of Christ, which is glorious, and set at the right hand of the Father: not
of the accidents, which have not other being: but do remain in some subject,
(and by a miracle say they, the accidents in the Sacrament, be without
subject) but are made of the bread and of the wine which is corrupted or
burned. Now for confirmation of that which we have said: we will set down an
Appendix or addition, The estimation wherein the pope holds his God the
Sacrament.
which with wonderful examples will lively declare the estimation wherein the
Popes and their people, which the call ecclesiastical, hold their Sacrament,
which they sell unto us for God. And we as senseless, and ouer-suerstitious,
for money do buy it. Open thine eyes o Spain, and be no more by the Pope
deceived. Pope Gregory the seventh, which before was called Hildebrand, was (as
in his life we have said) a terrible and mortal enemy of the good Emperor
Henry the fourth: and so desperately procured by all ways and means possible,
now by force, now by dececit, now by enchantments to pull him out of the world.
And for that purpose suborned with promise of reward, a certain man, etc. as
in the life of the said Gregory we have declared. Cardinal Benon goes
further, he says: that the Pope with high voice from the pulpit upon the feast
of the resurrection at Easter, had prophesied the death of the Emperor Henry,
saying: Hold me not for Pope, but cast me from the Altar, if that which I say
unto you be not fulfilled between this and Pentecost: and so to prove a true
prophet, in this which he had spoken, he suborned certain Traitors that
secretly should kill the Emperor: As in deed they had killed him had not God
preserved him. The said Cardinal says further: that this Hildebrand, or
Gregory 7. ever wontedly carried with him a book of Nigromancie, that was to
him very familiar. He cast (says he) the consecrated Host into the fire and
burned it. The pope cast the Host into the fire and the cause.
Because, demanding of it a revelation against the Emperor, it answered him
not: albeit the Cardinals which then were present therein gainsayd him. John
Bishop of Porta, Secertarie of the said Gregory the seventh, alleges
Cardinal Benon for confirmation of that which is said. A strange case it is,
to cast the Sacrament into the fire, for that coniuring it, it gave him not
answer against the Emperor. Our adversaries cannot deny this Pope to have
erred in the faith, The pope erreth in faith.
and also to have been an Athiest, without God or religion: seeing that he
burned his Creator. If he believed it to be his Creator why did he burn it?
And if he believed it not (as most of the Popes do not believe it why did he
with fire and blood, persecute those that did not believe it? Miserable is the
God which is subject to burning. The true God is immortal, he lives for ever.

Moreover, many Popes and ecclesiastical men do we read in histories, to
have poisoned those whom they would kill, giving them poison in the Sacrament
it self. Two or three examples will I here set down: who so list to know more,
let him read the lives of the Popes, Victor 3. poisoned in the Chalice.
and of the Emperors. Of poison died Victor the third in the 1088. year,
which his Subdeacon had cast into the chalice. Don Alonso de Cartagena Bishop
of Burges, in his history called Anacephaleosis makes mention hereof. William
(as reports Matthew Paris) was restored to his Archbishoppricke of York in
England, and in the same year died of poison, Thh Archbishop of York poisoned
in the Chalice.
which in saying of Mass, they cast into the chalice: as upon Anastasius the
fourth in the 1146. year we have said. In the 1314. year a Dominican Friar
gave poison in the sacrament to the Emperor Henry, 7. county of Lucemburg: as
we have declared upon Clement the 5. The history is worrthy to be read. It
notes the great impiety and treason of the Friar, and the great patience of
the Emperor, after he perceived himself to be poisoned: The Emperor poisoned
in the Sacrament.
praying the Friar to fly, least his Almaines should kill him, saying: Vade
Domine, depart Lord, etc. Pero Mexia makes mention of this in the life which
he wrote of Henry the seventh. But as a man over passionate for his
Antichrist, and for his breaden God, would not believe it: whose words are
these: Henry the seventh died the day of the Assumption of our Lady, having
that day received the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein were given him
(write some) certain herbs, by a Monk of Saint Dominickes order, (...) that
of them the same day he died. Which is a thing so wicked, that of no Christian
it ought to be believed: how much more of a religious man? Thus far Pero
Mexia. But the punishment executed upon the Dominicke Friars, and their
Monasteries in Tuscan and Lombardie, shows, that which is said, to be true.
Raphael Volateranus, lib. Geograph. 5. speaking of Sixtus the fourth, says
these words: The chief Bishop understanding it, and ayding the Conspirators,
they came to Florence, and all met together in the Church of S. Raparada, at
the time of the Mass and of the sacrifice. Saluiatus with his followers which
were secretly armed, in the mean time departed the Temple: and faining other
business, went to the palace to confer with Alferez, but with intent that
the slaughter begun in the Temple, he might there be ready jointly with the
Magistrate to assault the palace. So that having given a sign at the
elevation of the Host (note the reverence and respect that the Pope and his
have of their God) At the lifting up (says he) of the Host, Impiety.
Bandino passed from part to part, to Julian de Medices, brother of Lorenco.
Antonio, who required to be the first, rushed by treason upon Lorenco, and a
little below the throat did wound him. As he at the cry turned back his
face, he escaped the blow: the other willing to second his blow, he hastily
retired to the Clearke of the Church, which was near unto him. The legate by
the Popes commandment gave the elevation of the host for a sign of the murder.
Then the Legate of the Pope (who had given the sign of murder at the
elevation of the Host) was taken by the citizens, and carried from the Church:
and being put in prison, was handled as his dignity required: In the mean time
Saluiatus bishop of Pisa, who by his industry prolonged the conference with
Alferez to see the end of the business, was then taken, and at a window of
the palace the same day hanged. The Pope at this news excommunicateth Lorenco
de Medices (who, say we escaped by flight) for laying his hands upon the
Priests of God, and upon the Legate, and proclaims open war against the
Florentines. By this history and others such like, shall thou see, o Spain,
the account and estimation that the Pope, his Legate, and their priestly order
do make of their consecrated Host, which they sell unto thee for God, and thou
beleeuest it. See we also the account that the devil himself makes of it.
Speaking of Syluester 2. (who much profited in Nigromancy, whiles he lived with
the Moore at Seuill) we said, that he much desired to know how long he should
be Pope, which thing he demanded of the devil. The devil made him answer, A
mockery of of the Devil in the Mass:
that he should not die until he should say Mass in Jerusalem. But the devil
meant a Church which is in Rome, called the holy Cross in Jerusalem. And so
with the Mass of Jerusalem the devil mocked the Pope, as in his life we have
declared. About the year of the Lord 1540. Another mockery of the Devil with
the Sacrament.
not much more nor less, the inquisitors of Cordeua condemned (but not to be
burned) one Magdelena de la Cruz, Magdelen de la Cruz.
Abbess of the Monastery of the Franciscan Nuns, for enormious offenses,
dealings and covenants which she had made with the devil. As the Inquisitors
themselves in their sentence do say: She with the aid of the devil, to whom
she had given her self, making with him this pact and covenant when she was
nine years old, became so notable an hypocrite, that she was holden in most
great worship and admiration: and so by means of her Paramour the devil
wrought great miracles: but of those which we have said, the devil,
Antichrist, and false Prophets to do. Mat. 25. 24. 2. These. 2. 9. Here will I
recite some, for to reckon all, would require another as great a time, as had
the Inquisitors when they drew her into the Act, in the great Church of
Cordoua: which Act was in the spring time, and lasted from six of the clock
in the morning, till four in the evening. In all this time was no other thing
read but the abominations and false miracles of this cursed woman. The false
miracles of magdalen de la Cruz.
Of her it was said, that the mariners in a storm did pray unto her, and she
being inuocated, appeared unto them, and so the storm ceased. Of her also it
is said, that she burned in lively flames, like the Seraphin (this very well
agrees with her, she being of the order of Seraphicall Saint Francis) and so
inflamed, was lift on high in a trance, wrapped up in spirit, and heard wonders
which mortal man could not utter. In this last was she made another Saint
Paul: who was wrapped up into the third heaven, where he hard, etc. Of her also
is it said, that when she did communicate, she lifted up an elle to measure the
height of the ground, and so being lifted up into the air, she received the
Sacrament: which visibly went out of the hands of the Priest that said the
Mass, and visibly went through the air, and entered into the mouth of Magdalen
de la Cruz. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
And all this by the art of the devil. In the same manner did the Nun of
Lisbon, whom they called holy, receive the Sacrament: whose life we will
declare in the end of this Treatise. What shall we say of this Sacrament? If it
were God how was he carried through the air to confirm the hypocrisy of
Magdalen de la Cruz, and that of Maria de la Annutiada, and the opinion that
was holden of them, and this by the art of the devil? The priest which said
the Mass counted his fourmes, according to the number of the Nuns, that were
to communicate: being counted did consecrate them. And consecrated, found so
many others, as before he had counted: and none he wanted, but that only
which he saw go into the air, and entered into the mouth of Magdalene and of
Marie. Also it is said of Magdalen de la Cruz, that when she was in the garden,
and the sacrament by chance, passed by the street, the wall of the garden
opened, and that then, she did worship it. Of her it is also said: that she
feigned not to have eaten in so many days together, but that she was nourished
only with the sacrament which he received. So great was the opinion of her
holiness, that great Ladies of Spain seeing themselves at point of child
birth, sent to Magdalen de la Cruz, their mantle and swaddling clothes, wherein
the creature should be wrapped, that he should bless them: supposing the
creatures should thus be holy and blessed. The Empress her self ready to be
delivered from Valladolid (a very long way) sent mantles to Cordoua. By reason
of the holiness of Magdalen de la Cruz' many Ladies and Nobles of Cordoua, and
of the land about Cordoua, put themselves Nuns of the order of Saint
Frauncis. And many Gentlemen became Franciscan Friars. Of this abominable
woman it is said. That she gave to her beloved He and she friends, some
drops of her menstruous blood, making them believe it was the blood of
Christ. The Dominicks ever haters of the Franciscanes raised up in Toledo,
another she possessed, which said: that she had, the Innocence of Adam, etc.
But so shameless, and manifest were her whooredomes, that she was by and by
discovered. A few years since, arose there up in Lisbon another Franciscan
woman, which (say they) had the five wounds of Christ. As had S. Frauncis and
many things else, they say of her. But I testify, that in time she (as the
rest) shall bewray her hypocrisy. In the mean time, believe not every spirit.
But as Saint John does warn us, prove the spirits whether they be of God: ^.
John. (...).
for many false Prophets (As he himself does advise us) are gone out into the
world, etc. Saint Paul 1. Thessa. chap. 5. verse. 21. says: prove all things,
hold that which is good. As did the people of Berea. Concerning this holy
Nun, her hypocritical life, her false miracles and illusions of the devil,
wherewith she deceived very many, and how she was discovered and condemned:
Read the swarm of false miracles, etc. Which thou shall find at the end of
this Treatise. The which I have added in this second impression. Returning then
to Magdalen de la Cruze for such heinous offenses and false miracles' contempts
and slanders, of Christian Religion, was she condemned, yet not to be burned,
but certain penaunces, and close imprisonment. Should a faithful and
catholic Christian say, As says Saint Paul that a man is justified by
faith, Rom 3. 28.
and not by works, because the most just and perfect works which we do, are
(says Esaias as stained clothes) Should he say, Esaus. 64. 6.
that God and no other ought to be worshipped and served. Math. 4. 10.
As Christ answered the devil when he tempted him. Should he say that
Anitchrist is set in the Temple of God: Who causes himself to be worshipped
as God. 2. These. 2
As says Saint Paul, and that Antichrists residence is in the City which
has seven mountains, or heads (which is Rome (as Saint John says. Should
he say That there is but one only sacrifice to obtain remission of sins;
Apo (:17.
which is the death and passion of Jesus Christ, As faith the Epistle to the
Ebrewes chapter 7. Such a one would they burn. But Magdalen de la Cruz a
terrible Hypocrite which feigned that she did not eat, in so many days: and
being demanded how she was sustained, said: with the only sacrament which she
received: who wrought miracles by the art of the devil and caused her self
to be inuocated and adored: and that besides, which we have said: such a one
shall not die. 4 Friars hanged in Civil.
Arise Lord, Judge thine own cause. About the 1536. year, somewhat more or
less, were four Augustine Friars hanged in Civil. These men had secretly by
night murdered their provincial; and the day following to avoid all note of
suspicion, all four of them said Mass. But (as they themselves afterward
confessed) they had no intention to consecrate: and so did they not consecrate.
Yet in the rest, they used all the Ceremonies and acts accustomably done by
them, ^o: Riuins lib. 1. De Religione.
that say the Mass. For confirmation of that which I have said: that the
popish priests have often times no intention to consecrate, and that not having
intention to consecrate, they cause all those that hear their mass, to commit
idolatry: I will here rehearse one notable history, which a grave author
reports: and in our days happened. There was in this land (says this
author) a certain priest, etc. When this man for his filthy life and
incredible rudenes and ignorance of holy things was deposed and another more
sufficient which could well and profitably feed the sheep of the Lord put in
his place: He that was deposed about certain business which he had came to my
house. After some discourse, I demanded of him, that seeing he had been above
30 years a leacher, and that he had by his concubine some sons now of big
stature, I demanded of him I say, if purposely and truly, and withal his heart,
had at any time repented him of his whoredom. He answered me that he had
sometimes repented: As at the time when he celebrated the birth of our Lord,
and at the feast of the resurrection at Easter. At that time (said he) he
always separated his bed, and for some nights slept not with his concubine. I
commanded of him if finally at any time, he had truly repented him of this his
abominable life? I dema^d of him, if with prayers tears sighs and groans,
and that with delebrat purpose to live thence forth chastely, and to change his
life into a better, he had craved pardon at Gods hand for his offense? And if
having reputed, he put from him, his concubine, with intent never more to
receive her He never had (said he) any such purpose. I said unto him: How then
saydest thou every day Mass? How maidest thou no scruple to eat the bread of
the Lord, and to drink of his holy cup, thy conscience accusing thee, of so
enormious a sin? Did thou not fear that the earth would open, and
swallowe thee up quick? I still insisting and constrayning him; at last, he
confessed, that not pronouncing the sacramental words wherewith is
consecrated the sacrament, that he should not unworthily receive the body
and blood of the Lord he had not consecrated. What say thou? Said I I tell
you that which passed, (answered he) and the same is truth. Alas, Alas, said
I, dare thou commit so horrible, and never once heard of wickedness? Is it
possible that thou gave so great an occasion, of so horrible Idolatry? The
people at your elevation kneeled on their knees, cast themselves to the earth,
lifted up the hands, toward the altar, stroke their breasts, and worshipped
the vnconsecrate bread and cup. What thing is this? I tremble to speak it.
But God (said I) if thou repent not, will doubtless sometimes give thee, the
punishment, that for such abomination and boldness thou deseruest. But what
need many words? When I with words had earnestly reproved him, my gallant
(who not with words, but with prison and irons deserved to be punished) began
to excuse his fault, saying: that it was not so great, and that he was not
alone, but many more, did the same: which thought it not so abominable an
offense, as I made it, etc. This far the said author.

All they that heard the mass of those men, and adored the sacrament which
they lifted up: by their own Cannons and decrees, committed idolatry. For this
is their Maxim that he consecrateth not, which has no intention to consecrate
and as little does he consecrate that pronounces not the words of
consecration: He consecrateth not that has no intention to consecrate.
miserable is the religion of those that depend upon the intention of another.
And who knows the intent of man, but God alone, which searches the hearts? In
the mean time shall man doubt, whether that be God, which he worshippeth, or
no. Therefore a certain Inquisitor and most great enemy to the co^uerts,
fearing when he heard mass, whither the priest had inte^tion to consecrate or
no, An Inquisitor to avoid Idolatry said I adore the Lord if thou be there
said. O Lord if thou be there I adore thee. By this subteltie thought this
Inquisitor to escape committing of Idolatry. In the time of the Council of
Constance, there were 3 Popes, all three did the Council, for their wickedness,
and abominations depose: and elected Martin 5. These 3 Popes, not being true
Popes, could not ordain priests nor give them authority to consecrate. So that
after their own cannons All they that heard their Masses, committed Idolatry.
As little did all they, that were ordained in the time of Constantine 1. and of
Pope Ione, consecrate. For Constantine being a lay man, and without receiving
any orders was by force, which Desiderius his brother, king of Lombardie, used
to the Romans, made Pope: who not being a priest, could not ordain, nor give
authority to ordain priests, which not being priests, consecrated not.
Concerning Pope Ione, there is none doubted, but that neither she, nor they by
her ordained, nor they which by her authority were ordained did consecrate.
And so as many as in the time of this man Pope, and in the time of this woman
Pope adored the sacrament, by their own Cannons committed Idolatry. For
although they had intention to consecrate, yet had they not the Caracter, which
they call (Indelibele)

Of the priestly order, and he which is not ordained priest, does not
consecrate: Alame^^able History of burning the Sacrament.
and not consecrating, all that hear his Masses commit Idolatry. And to make
their sacrament the more to be loathed, I will recite here an history, which
in the 1526. year in a Monastery of Dominican Friars of the town of Auserra
in France and upon the solemn feast day of Corpus Christi happened. There
was a Friar in the said coue^t, who by reason of his age, and chiefly for being
eaten with the Bubos, had not said Mass now of many days before: This
increasing in him devotion, he took courage to say Mass, upon so solemn a
day. So that, he said Mass, and finished it. His Mass ended, and he going
through the cloister of the Monastery, his stomach turned, and being not able
to digest and retain God: which he had in body and blood received, did vomit
him up before the chapter gate, Which thing once known a great rumor was
presently raised througout all the Covent. Some said this thing, others that
thing should be done. But in fine having some time disputed upon this matter,
they concluded that the Tabernacle or tomb which they use to put on the
graves, when they celebrate the Office of the dead, should be placed over that
holy vomit. And so was it done, And this, that none should tread upon, nor any
dogs should eat that holy sacramental vomit. And the more to honor it,
four light tapers they placed upon the four quarters of the tomb. This done,
the Nouices were commanded to sing all that day, the verse of the hymns which
is sung upon that day of Corpus Christi: and begins: Tantum ergo
Sacramentum veneremur cerni, etc. That is to say worship we th^n with bowed
knees, this so great a sacrament. Better should they have said. This vomit of a
pocky father, They sang also, the Anthem, of the same day, O Sacrum conuiuium:
O holy banquet. But how holy soever they said it was, there was none (albeit
some thereto exhorted the rest) that would taste it, nor put it into his body.
For after the book of de cautelis, as they call them, the best remedy is this
that in such case can be taken, since among them all there was none of them,
that dared to eat it: needful it was, another shift should be used. And
thus it was: In the best wise they could gathered they up that holy vomit, and
very curiously daubed the ground where it had fallen. The Subprior then for
that he Prior was from home) arraied himself in holy ornaments and with light
tapers carried the vomit to the Church in procession. Some sang that which
before we have said: others (and these were the most holy frantiques and
greatest hypocrites) sighed and groned for the moestful spectacle that they
saw: which much marred the feast: the vomit thus carried to the Church a new
deliberation was needful what therewith should to be done: The opinion of the
most ancient and most learned was, that this vomit should be cast into the fire
and burned to ashes: The papists burn the Sacrament which they believed to be
God.
and such ashes should be kept in el Sagrario, the Sanctuary: all which was
done, as in their book de Cautelis, etc. in such case it is commanded. So that
the papists conclude themselves their God to be burned: their god I call it, for
this is their doctrine: that all the time that any form or show of bread or of
wine shall be seen, all the time that it shall not be digested (as was not that
when the Pocky father vomited it up with the rest,) the bread is not bread but
the body of Christ; and the wine is not wine, but the blood of Christ.

We have recited the sorrowful spectacle that happened to the Friars
Dominickes, A Chough burned and the cause.
with their Sacrament vomited and burned: Now will we declare another, which
one which was present and an eyewitness told me, that happened to the
Franciscan Friars, but not so loathsome as the other. In the Covent De Alta
vila, which was in the province of the principality of the kingdom of Naples,
was an ancient Friar, called Friar Antonio de Contron, who for his recreation
had nourished up a Chough, and had taught her to fly up upon his shoulders,
and to eat bread in his hand, and other such like things. When the Friar one
Sabbath of the Aduent in the thousand five hundred threescore seventeen year
was saying the high Mass in the said Covent, and lift up the Host, that they
(as they are wont) should worship the same: The Chough which then hopped to
and fro, saw the Host, and supposed that her master showed her something to
give her. The Friar in the mean time pulled down his Host: and the Chough
remained there, watching if her master should mock her with any thing
again. Whiles the Chough thus awayted: behold, when the Friar the second time
showed the Host over his shoulders, the Chough seeing it, immediately leaped
upon the shoulder of her master, and caught hold of the Sacrament, and by
flight pearched upon a beam in the roof of the Church. When the Friars, and
the rest that heard the Mass, saw this, they began to call unto her, but
she would neither answer, nor come down, for she was busied with her
breakefast which (as she thought her master had given her. When good words
naught auayled, they began to throw stones and cudgels at her, until they
brought her to the ground. And now had she eaten all the Host, a few crommes
excepted, which had fallen down from her (and note, that according to the
opinion of our adversaries, every small cromme is God,) they took the poor
Chough, and taken, did sentence her to be burned, till she were converted
into ashes: which was performed, and her ashes were kept in the Sanctuary, as
were the other of the vomit of the pockie Father.

Into so many strange things causes Transubstantiation our adversaries to
fall. They believe that the bread is no bread, but the body of Christ. Hence it
comes that they believe the mouse, the worm, the chicken, the Chough, etc.
to eat the body of Christ. But to manifest the deceit unto them (if they leave
to be deceived) let them well note, what here we will say: and this it is: Two
kinds of creatures may eat the Sacrament: The one, which have the use of
reason: and the other that have not: those which have it not are beasts: These
creatures without use of reason eat only bread and drink wine: the sacrament
of Christ's body eat they not: neither do they drink the sacrament of his
blood: Unreasonable creatures eat not Christ nor his Sacrament but only the
bread.
much less do they eat the body of Christ or drink his blood, and so to
eat the bread or not to eat, they neither rejoice nor be sad. Men which have
the use of reason; are two fold: Some do worthily receive the sacrament; and
others unworthily. They that unworthily receive the sacrament, are those, which
do not examine their consciences, Nor prove themselves, before they receive
the sacrament: and to them it is all one, to sit at the table of the Lord,
John. 14. 21.
and to sit at the table of the devil: to receive the most blessed sacrament
which Jesus Christ in his holy suppe^ presents unto them: The wicked receaiue
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ but not the body and blood of
Christ. Tract. 54 in Iohannem.
or to receive the Idol, which the Pope in his Mass puts in his mouth.
Such as these receive not only the bread and wine (if it be given them) But
receive also the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: And this for their
condemnation and not for their salvation. And so Satan enters in and
possesses them: As after the taking of the soppe he entered into and
possesses Judas. Such as these, do no way receive Christ, for the cause which
we have showed When we proved the wicked, not to receive Christ: not to
receive the Lords bread, but the bread of the Lord. As says Saint Augustine,
speaking of Judas. They that worthily receive the sacrament, be they which
examine their consciences, how they stand toward their God, and toward their
neighbor. The which S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. calls proving of himself. And
finding themselves faulty and imperfect do humble themselves before God,
repent, and withal their heart crave pardon and mercy. This done, not trusting
in their own worthiness but in the worthiness of Christ, they are bold to
receive the sacrament, not to their condemnation, but their salvation. For
Christ, does possess them and incorporateth them into himself, and he
incorporateth himself into them. These be they alone, which receive not only
the bread and wine: but also the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; by
the bread, and by the wine signified: and receiving the sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ they receive truly and really, the glorious body and blood
of christ yet not carnally, but spiritually by faith. As before we have said.
would our adversaries admit this so true and clear doctrine that brings with
it no absurdities, but rather takes away many, which the word of God does
teach us, and the ancient Doctors do witness, they would not believe that the
mouse, the chicken, the poor Chough, etc. do eat the body of Christ, but a
piece of bread, and that but of small substance, and so would they not burn,
nor being burned, preserve their ashes.

I cannot omit here to tell that which on the same day of Corpus Christi, did
an Inquisitor in Bercelona. The tale is this: It is 34. or 35. years, little
more or less since, that being to go in solemn procession, which with so
great pomp and triumph is upon this day of Corpus Christi accustomed to be
done through out all Spain: and the Priest having now sung the high Mass,
which wontedly is the last upon that day (for all the Priests will that day go
in procession) it then happened, that the consecrated Host, which was to be put
in the box, was so great that it could not be placed in the same. This seen,
the preparation stayed: and there was none in that famous company, that could
tell in such a case what ought to be done. But in the end, the wisest of the
company were of opinion, that another Mass should be said, and an Host
consecrated of the like bigness with the box: but grievous it was unto them to
wait so long: and it might be also, that no Priest was found, which had not
already said his Mass, and broken his fast, the better to be able to go in
procession: which as that day is very solemn, and is far in going and
coming. In this famous company was there an Inquisitor much spoken of, called
Molon. This man impatient to suffer so much delay, and wait so long a time,
They will not say that the Inquisitor clipped the body of Christ, seeing it is
now glorified: it follows the^ that he clipped the bread or wheaten substance.
presuming upon his Inquisitory authority, demanded a pair of sheeres,
wherewith he clipped the consecrate Host: so that he made it fit for the box,
and so the procession went forward. It is to be thought that some did abhor
the rashness of the Inquisitor, and sighed to see their God and Creator (as
they call the sacrament) so handled by the wicked hands of the Inquisitor.
Others would say otherwise. This is most certain, that had any other but the
Inquisitor committed such an offense, and chiefly had he been of any race of a
new Christian, he should not (I suppose) have escaped with life: one by one, all that he had he should have lost. The chastisement wherewith Signor Molon was
punished for so enormious a fault, was; that they deprived him of his
inquisitors Office in Barcelona but because so notable an Inquisitor should not
be idle, they provided for him the office of the inquisitor at Seuill: where
he better might use his hands in the time of the great persecution, which a
few years before was raised: as in the life of Pius the 4. and the 1557. year
we have declared: This was the great punishment which they gave to better him
withal.

We will then conclude this Treatise with a notable history reported by Don
Rodrigo Archbishop of Toledo, who ended his history (as himself at the end
thereof witnesses) in the year of the Lord 1243. and in the 26. year of king
Don Fernando, and in the time of the great vacation of Gregory 9. So that it
is now three hundred fifty five years since he wrote it. The said Archbishop,
in his sixth book and twenty five chapter, That the Office which they call
Toledano by Isidorus and Leander ordained, was throughout all Spain
celebrated, until king Don Alonso the sixth, which wanne Toledo, at the
instance of his wife Queen Constance, Frenchwoman, sent to Rome to Pope
Gregory 7. requesting him that the Toledan Office being taken away, the Roman
Office throughout all Spain might be used, etc. And in the 26. chap. he says,
that Pope Gregory 7. at the petition of king Don Alonso, sent one Ricardus,
Abbot of Saint Victor, to set in good order the Churches of Spain. This Legate
sent by the Pope (as the same Archbishop reports) did wickedly govern: so
that he was deprived from his office. Before he was deprived he much disturbed
the state Ecclesiastical and common wealth of Spain, For the Legate and the
King caused them to take the French Office, and to leave the Toledan, wherein
they and their Ancestors had been brought up by the space almost of five
hundred years: which was from Saint Gregory the first, in whose time lived
Saint Leander and his brother Saint Isidor, Archbishops of Seuil, until this
Gregory the seventh, in whose time reigned Don Alonso the sixth and so upon a
certain day for his pleasure, was this matter very truly debated in the
presence of the king, the Primate, the Legate, and the people. The
Ecclesiastical state, Nobility (which the Archbishop calls Militia) and
people did purposely much withstand it, endeavoring what they could, that their
service should not be changed. But the king persuaded by his wife, a
Frenchwoman insisted with threats unless it were changed.

The conclusion was thus: Two knights were named to fight, the one for the
king, which should defend the French Office: the other for the Nobility and
Communaltie of Spain, which should maintain the office of Toledo. He that
took part with the king was vanquished: and the people seeing the knight of
the Toledan Office was victor, rejoiced. But so greatly was the king pricked
forward by the Queen, that he would not change his purpose 'saying: That the
single fight or (combat of two) was not law. The knight which sought for the
Toledan Office, was of the lineage of the Matiencas, whose race as yet lives.
And when for this cause arose great tumult (for the Nobility and people did
greatly mutine) it was determined, that the book of the Toledan Office, and
the book of the French Office should be cast into a great fire: all being
first commanded to assemble and pray together. Then after they had devoutly
joined together and prayed, both the one book and the other were cast into the
fire. And the book of the Toledan Office arose up safe and sound without
damage above all the flames of the great fire. The Roman office was cast into
the fire, and burned but not the Goti^sh.
All which, saw those that were present, and gave thanks unto God. But the king
being of an high stomach, and bold executor of his will, neither feared by the
miracle, nor moved by request, perseuered rather in his purpose, threatening
the loss of goods and life to those that should resist him: and so commanded
that the French Office (which was now the same with the Roman) should be
celebrated through all his kingdom. And then all weeping and swearing, From
whence comes this saying. As the King will, so go the Laws.
the old Spanish Proverb began to be said: Alla van leyes, do quieren Reyes.
As the king will, so go the laws.
And from that time was the French Office kept in Spain, as well in the
Psalter, as in the rest, which never before that time had bin received nor used
in Spain: yet in some monasteries it was afterward used for a time: And the
translation of the Psalter in many Cathedral Churches and Monasteries at this
day is also used. Thus far the Archbishop. In this history reported by the
Archbishop, is there much to be noted. First, that now 500 years past (for so
long time is it since Gregory the seventh died, in whose time reigned Don
Alonso the sixth) the divine Office celebrated in all our country of Spain was
not the Roman, but the Gothish, which they called the Toledane office. This
office was changed through the desire of a French woman, who so greatly pricked
forward the king her husband, that he changed the ancient Office, maugre the
state Ecclesiastical, Nobility, and all the Communaltie of Spain. The Pope
also that commanded the Office should be changed, was one of the most
abominable that did eat bread in his time. Many wrote his life: A great
inchanter he was: by force of Arms without any election he made himself Pope:
A tyrant he was, an heretic: he burned the Sacrament of the Altar, his God.
And the moreover, which in his abominable life we have declared. For which
enormious sins, in his absence (for he would not appear) he was condemned
and deprived, in the Council of Brixa. And Clement the third was made Pope in
his place. The Legate of the Pope, which dealt in this business, of the
change of the Office, was aso another such like as his master that sent him,
and so abode in the same with his master and Lord. For his wickedness (as the
Archbishop reports) was he deprived. In these two, Pope and Legate, is the
old Spanish Proverb verified: Qual Abad, tal Monazillo: Such Abbot, such
Nouice.

Hereby shall our Spaniards perceive, that the divine Office and Translation of
the Psalter, which our forefathers used in Spain, until the year 1080, or
little less, was not the Roman office: much less was it the Mass, which now
in Spain is so greatly esteemed. For the Roman Office, which before five
hundred years was celebrated, was defiled with the superstition and idolatry,
which we now see in the Mass, as be Transubstantiation, the taking from the
faithful the one half of the Sacrament, Intercession and Invocation of Saints
Purgatory, etc. Long time after, about the 1215. year, Innocent 3. being Pope
was Transubstantiation admitted and made an article of the faith. Albeit true
it is, that this Gregory 7. was the first that drawing it out of hell began to
exalt it. And notwithstanding that the Roman Office then used was nothing so
evil nor ought agreed in Idolatry with that which is now yet is it to be
thought there was great difference between the Toledane and the Roman office,
seeing that all Spain so purposely and truly opposed it self to the king, the
Queen, the Pope, and his legate, and received not the Roman Office but with
great dislike and forced by threats of life and goods. That also is to be noted
which the Archbishop speaks concerning the combat of the 2 Knights and of the
friar, which (the Gothish Office remaining safe) then burned the Roman Office.
If they will have miracles, this of the fire is strange. D. Illescas lib. 5.
upon the life of King Don Alonso the 6. says almost the same that Don Rodrigo
the Archbishop does: for from him he took it, but that of affected malice he
changed some things: whose words I will here set down: When he that defended
the part of the Gothish Office (says he) was Victor: the king strove by all
means to take it away, and having cast into the fire two Mass books (the
Archbishop says, it was determined that the book of the Toledan Office, and
the book of the French Office should be cast into a great fire. He says not
Mass books) the Roman leaped out of the fire. and the Gothish was not burned
in it. The Archbishop says, the book of the French Office was consumed of the
fire, and the book of the Toledan Office arose up without receiving any
damage. Here see thou the manner of our adversaries dealings. To advance his
Catholic faith has God no need of such lies. And note that Doctor Illescas
alleges not the Archbishop, from whence he took this report, lest his
shameless falsifying should have been seen. The Author, and the place,
which is the sixth book, the 25. and 26. chapters have I alleged. I beseech
the Reader to read it, that it may be seen whether I, or Doctor Illescas
does ly. I speaking with the Guardian of S. Francis of Mexico, touching this
falsification of Doctor Illesca^. It was so (answered he me) as Doctor Illescas
said, and that our book were falsified. But I brought him an old book with
the arms royal, printed at Granada, and showed him the place, and the poor
Warden was ashamed.

And it is to be noted (as notes D, Illescas) that by the command of Don
Sancho 1. king of Arragon, the Gothish or Mosorabish Office was least to be
said in Arragon, and the Roman Office, which now is used brought in. In S. John
de Pena the 21. day of March, The first Latin Mass said in Spain.
in the 1071. year, was said the first Latin Mass after the manner of the
Romans: The same Doctor Illescas also says: The 25. day of may in the. 1083.
year King Don Alonso 6. wan Toledo, the great Church whereof called Mesquita
was consecrated the 25. of October in the 1086. year. Thus was the Gothish
office changed in Arragon fifteen years at least before it was in Castile.
Note ye Spaniards (which think and believe the Latin Mass, now said in
Spain, to be most ancient from the time of the Apostles) the first Latin
Mass, after the Roman manner was said in S. John de Pena in the time of king
Don Sancho 1. And in this year 1599. is no more but 528 years since. If ye
believe not me, believe D. Illescas and others, that say the same which I do. A
new thing is the Mass: which plucketh from the Church, the institution of
Jesus Christ, I mean his holy Supper: God give you grace to return and
restore it to it former place.

Of this change others also make mention. George Cassander in the preface of
his book entitled Ordo Romanus de officio Missae, says these words: But the
Spaniards (As they be most resolute in the institution which they have once
received) held constantly for many years the rites of their country. Their
rite was called the Rite of the Mosarabes: and so was it called, because the
Christians mingled with the Alarabes, which occupied the best part of Spain,
used the same, from the time of Saint Llefonso Archbishop of Toledo, and Saint
Isidor Archbishop of Seuill. In the end and time of Gregory the seventh
(forcibly constrained by Don Alonso the sixth which wan Toledo, With grief and
tears was the Roman Rite admitted in Sqnine.
at the instigation of Queen Constance, a French woman, after many great
contentions (and not without tears, leaving their country rite, they received
the French or Roman rite: Which rite notwithstanding could not so be rooted
out, but that it still remained, and yet does remain in some Churches and
Chapels of Toledo. Very largely is this discourse in the general history of
Spain, made in the name of Don Alonso the tenth. It is also found in the
history of Don Rodrigo, a most grave Historiographer of Toledo. Hitherto
Cassander.

Johannes Vasseus hereof makes mention, speaking in his Chronicle of the
destruction of Spain, which happened in the time of King Don Rodrigo. The
Christians (says this Author) which remained in Spain, had liberty of their
Christian religion, until the time of Don Alonso the seventh, in whose time
came out of Affrike the Almohades, which suffered no Christian to live in the
Christian religion. These Christians which lived among the Moors, were called
Mosarabes, to wit, mingled with the Alarabes, and their divine Office composed
by Saint Leander and Saint Isidor, was called the Mosarabish Office. He says
also: This Office at this day is called Mosarabe, and is used in six parishes
in Toledo, and in the Cathedral Church, in the Chapel of Cardinal Francisco
Ximenez. On certain days of the year in Salamanca is it also used in the
Chapel of Doctor Talauera. Others say they are called Mucarabes with c, not
with s, of Muca the Moorish Captain which wan Spain, and gave liberty to the
Christians to live in the Christian religion. After this describes Vasseus
what maaner of Office is this Mosorabe, and how it is celebrated: But I much
fear me, that the Office Mosorabe, now in the foresaid places celebrated,
either by adding or diminishing, is much different from that, which Saint
Leander and Saint Isidor made a thousand years past. Of this I fear me,
because the Popes have been very diligent in taking away that which has been
contrary to their doctrine, and in adding that which made for them. And so
suspect I many of the ceremonies and garments, that now (as says Vasseus) are
used in the Office Mosorabe. In this opinion do I strengthen my self, seeing
that among other names of Saints in the Office Mosorabe named, are named
Ambrose, Augustine, Fulgentius, Leander, Isidor. And it is not to be thought
that Saint Leander and Saint Isidore, which composed this Gothish Office, would
put their own names among the names of the Saints: and so think I, that they
have much added and taken away to and from the Office Mosorabe, to make it hold
affinity with the Mass which now they say: and so to declare it almost all to
be one. But be it as it will be, either that they have added unto it, or taken
from it or not, I hold for a more sure thing the simplicity and manner which
Jesus Christ, his Apostles and Martyrs used in celebration of the holy supper,
in the primitive Church. Embrace we then the first institution which the
Evangelists and Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. recite: and so shall we not err.

By that we have said in this Appe^dix, thou shall see most deerly beloved
Spain (God for his mercy open thineeies,) the account which the Pope and his
clergy make of the Sacrament, albeit, they affirm it to be God, and not bread
nor wine* It they use to revenge their wrongs, hatreds and malice: and so in
Florence was the elevation the sign to begin the murder. With it they poison,
as a little before we have said: They use it for an Harbenger sending it one or
modaies iornies before, atended with the basest sort of people: as in the
beginning of this book we have declared: For coniuration they use it: as did
Gregory the seventh, and because the sacrament did not answer him, he cast it
into the fire, and burned it. The Dominicans of Auserra did also burn it: and
the Franciscans de Alta villa burned the Chough, and in burning the Chough,
they burned the Sacrament which she had eaten, etc. And the book which they
call de Cautelis, commanded in such cases, that they should so do. And when the
Sacrament for want of renewing in time, is become moldy, it commands it to
be burned, and the ashes to be kept. Molon the Inquisitor clipped it also. The
book of the Roman Office also was burned, the Gothish remaining miraculously
safe and sound, as reports Don Rodrigo Archbishop of Toledo, before alleged.
Also seeing the devil uses it to deceive, as he deceived the Pope, when he
told him he should not die until he had said Mass in Jerusalem, before by us
mentioned upon the life of Syluester the second: and to cause idolatry, as we
have seen in Magdalen de la Cruz, and in the four Friars, which were hanged
in Civil: which had no intention to consecrate, and so did not consecrate; and
in the clearke which said not the words of consecration: and in them that
Constantine 2 and Pope Ione ordained: who had intention to consecrate but not
being priests, as before we have said, did not consecrate What shall we
hereupon conclude? Two things, the first, that the Popes and their
ecclesiastical rabble, which do such things be Atheistes, without any God; or
religion. The 2. That their Massall sacrament, albeit they say (though many of
themselves believe it not) the same to be Gods is no God, but an Idol set in
the place of God, and as God worshipped. And if this be so; why then do they
persecute them with fire and blood which (so taught by the holy scripture) do
well know the Mass, and it misfall sacrament, to be a profanation of the
holy supper of the Lord; to be a terrible abomination and Idolatry? The
Mass has no agreement with the holy supper which the Lord instituted, and
which his disciples did celebrate: Compare the one with the other (the which we
will do at the end of this Treatise) as well touching the substance of that which
is given; as also the ceremonies with which it is given. And it is evidently to
be seen, that there is no more agreement between the holy supper, and the
devilish Mass: then there is between light and darkness: between good and
evil, between truth and falsehood between Christ and Beliall.

I have passed by the Lords assistaunce (whom with my whole heart I beseech to
direct my steps) two terrible labyrinthes of filthiness, and Idolatry:
which are the Pope and his Mass. Of the true priesthood and Sacrifice.
Now by the same assistaunce we will enter into the most pleasant garden, into
the most sweet and most holy orchard and garden full of all consolation and
comfort. Which is the Treatise of the true priest, and of the true Sacrifice,
which this our high priest offered: with which, we being sinners, and sons
of wrath, he reconciled us to God. Oh good news! Hear them then, O Spain,
and believe them. In this Treatise I will be short, for many things which were
here to be said, have we formerly said in the confutation of the false
priests, which is the Pope: and of the false sacrifice which is the Mass. And
there have we said it, for confutation of falsehood: For how can falsehood be
confuted, but with the truth? walk we then hence forth, as Children of truth
and light.

He that lists to know, who is this high priest, and what is this his only
and eternal sacrifice: Let him read the Epistle which the Apostle wrote to the
Hebrews, and there clearly shall he find both the one and the other. And no
book there is in all the holy scripture, which more to the purpose, and more
axcellently handles this argument, then this Epistle. An Epistle truly,
worthy for each faithful Christian to read, and read again, and to retain
in memory: Seeing there in is handled a matter so necessary, without the
understanding and knowledge whereof, it is impossible for man to be saved. For
what thing is more necessary, the^ to know, who my redeemer is: and how he has
redeemed me; and so to believe in him, and believing in him, to be thankful
unto him, by living in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life? His
majesty pardon our imperfections, and supply that much which is wanting. But
before we enter into this matter. That which we believe touching the person and
office of Christ.
Let us declare that, which we believe of Christ: we confess that Jesus Christ
is truly God, and truly man, and that in as much as he is God, he is equal
with the father and with the holy Ghost, and in nothing inferior. We confess
that in as much as he is man, he is less then the father, and less then the
holy Ghost, and in nothing equal. We confess these two, so far different
natures divine, and human, not to have bin united nor conjoined for ever,
Gal. 4. 4.
but in time: as says S. Paul when (says he) the fulness of time was come,
God sent his son made of a woman, and made under the law, Io. 114.
etc. The same says S. John. And the word was made flesh, and dwelled among
us. So that from thenceforth is he called, and is true God and true man: and
so according to this conjunction, Christ is less then the father. For the
father has made him, and given him unto us. For our king, Prophets and priest.
The office of Christ is to be our King, prophet and pressed.
Which three offices, the name of Christ signifies, which is a Greek word,
and is the same that is Messiah in Hebrewe and Vngido in our Spanish tongue. So
also is it called, because these three kinds of men, 1. Sam. 10. 1.
were in old time anointed. And so do we read that Samuel anointed Saul
for king. 1. Sam. 16. 13.
David also he anointed. 2. Sam. 1. 34:
Sadoc anointed Solomon, etc. Concerning the Prophets we read that Elias
anointed Eliseus. 1. Kings. 14. 16.
Concerning the Priests annoynting, it is seen in Exodus.. 30. 50. These 3.
Offices does the holy scripture attribute to Christ. It calls him king Psalm.
2. 6. I have appointed to my self a king over Sion. Also Luke 1. 33. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and his kingdom shall have no
end. Also John 1. 49. 12. 15. Mat. 22. All the places also which say Christ to
be the head of the Church, confirm Christ to be king, a Prophet he is called
Esaie, 61. 1. Luke 4. 19. Also Deuteronomy. 18. 15. It is promised that God will raise
up a Prophet: Acts. 3. ^3.
which place S. Peter, in that excellent sermon which S. Luke mentions,
understands of Christ who is the Prophet of Prophets. In the same manner
understands it S. Stephen. A priest is he called Psalm. 110. 4. Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedech. Act: 7. 38.
Which place in the Epistle to the Hebrews, is oftentimes alleged: where it
calls him the only and everlasting priest. But the difference between the
kings Prophets and priests of the old Testament, and Christ, is this: they
were the figure of Christ, and anointed they were with material and visible
oil: But Christ is the thing figured, and is anointed not with visible oil,
but with the grace of the holy spirit. As he himself Luke 4. 18. does witness,
in declaring the prophecy of Esaie. The spirit of the Lord, etc Of this kind
of ointme^t, thus speaks the Psalm. 45. 7. Thou have loved righteousness, and
hated Iniquity. Wherefore God even thy God, Esaias. 61. 1.
has anointed thee with the oil of goodness, above thy fellows, which place
the Apostle understands of Christ. Hebr. 1. 9.
And Christ being anointed with the spiritual ointment, we understand his
kingdom not to be of this world, his doctrine to be heavenly and his
priesthood to be everlasting and divine.

Christ as king appointed of the father, The office of the king.
governs his Church and gives her laws: which no prince, nor the mightiest
monarch of the world, philip: 2. 9. 10.
may disdain or abolish. For it is noted that all (how mighty soever) do
acknowledge him for king of kings and Lord of Lords. For God (as says S Paul
(exalted Christ, and gave him a name above all names: that at the name of
Jesus, every knee do bow in heaven in earth, The office of the prophet.
and under the earth.

Christ as a prophet does teach us the will of his father does show us what we
ought to fly: and what we ouht to follow. Who^ the father gave unto us, for our
Doctor, maisterand teacher, when he said: This is my beloved son in whom I
take delight, hear him. He will we should hear another Doctrine, albeit an
Angel from heaven do preach it, Math: 17. 5.
If an Angel from heaven (says Saint Paul) shall preach unto you another gospel
the^ that which I have preached unto you (the which he had learned of the Lord
Jesus) Let him be accursed. Gal: 1. 8.


The office of the priest, The office of the priest,
is to appear before the divine Majesty: to appease his wrath, and to obtain
grace for us. The which he performs: Offering a sacrifice pleasing, and
acceptable unto him. This did Jesus Christ, offering up himself upon the
Cross. Which sacrifice one only time offered, and never more reiteratetd (For
reiteration should show imperfection to have been in it) was so sweet, and
so good a savor unto God, that he was pleased: and being pleased, was
reconciled with men. So that he pardoned all our sins and sanctified us for
ever. Of these three offices treats also the epistle to the Hebrews. In the
1 chapter, it shows the excellency and majesty of Christ above the Angels,
and consequently over all Creatures. In which it deuoteth his kingdom. In the
third chapter, the Apostle calls him the teacher of the will of God. Which
thing did the Prophets. chapter 13. 20. he calls him Great Pastor. By Pastor,
he understands a teacher. And so in the 7. verse he said. Remember your
Pastors which speak unto you the word of God, etc. That Christ is a priest,
and his sacrifice, his proper body, his flesh, and his blood which he himself
offered to the father for us, all this Epistle is full thereof. Of which I will
here make a short Summarie concerning that which touches his Priesthood and
sacrifice. This then is that, which we now promised to show. So necessary for
a Christian, is this Doctrine of the Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ. That
without it, Acts. 4. 12.
it is impossible to be saved. For (as says Saint Peter) there is no salvation
in any other: and no other name there is given to men under heaven: A Summary
of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
wherein we may be saved: Come we then to the Summary: in the first chapter of
the Epistle, the Apostle shows the excellency of Christ above the Angels The
which he confirms with passages of the scripture. In the 3. verse, He makes
mention of the sacrifice of Christ: having made (says he) the purgation of our
sins in himself chap. 2. The Apostle having proved in the first chapter, the
dignity of Christ, concludes in the beginning of the 2. chapter the obedience
due to his doctrine, and the great punishment: prepared for us, if we despise
the same: which menaces he afterward uses, and chiefly in the 6 and 10 chap
In the third chapter, he compares Christ with Moses: proves Christ to be his
superior: wherefore he exhorts the Hebrews to obey him; And that they should
not be obstinate against Christ: As their fathers in the time of Moses, were
obstinate against God. In the 1. verse. he says. Consider the Apostle and
Bishop of our profession Jesus Christ. In the 4. chap. He exhorts the^ to
continue in the received grace of the Gospel, and opens the gate to the
Treatise of the priesthood of Christ: and so says he verse 14. Therefore
having one (so) great a high priest, which pierced the heavens Jesus, etc. And
in the 15. verse, we have not an high priest, which ce^not have compassion of
our infirmities: In the 5. chap. The Apostle shows, what the office of the
high priest is: speaks of the dignity of Christ and of his offering, and of
the virtue and efficacy thereof. The dignity. The eternal son of God: The
offering his flesh and his blood himself. The efficacy of his sacrifice, Heb.
7. 2^.
to be heard of the father, and made the cause of everlasting salvation, to
those that obey him (as he says verse. 9.) In the 6. verse, says he Christ is
a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedech. Which manner of speaking,
the Apostle takes of David. Psalm. 110. 4. and often times uses it in this
Epistle chap. 5. verse. 6 and 10. chap. 6. 20. cap. 7. verse. 17. and 21. And in
the 15 verse he sath: that he is likened to Melchizedech. What the order of
Melchizedech is, we have before said speaking of Transubtantiation. In the 6.
chap. he calls Christ our forerunner and high priest, etc. In the 7 chap. the
Apostle taking occasion of the last words of the chapter going before: Thou art
a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedech, begins very fitly to
entreat, who Melchizedech was, and wherein he was like to Christ, without
father (says verse. 3.) without mother, etc. This done, the Apostle shows the
priesthood of Christ, which is after the order of Melchizedech, to be much more
excellent, then the leuitical priesthood. The causes which he shows, are that
the priesthood of Christ being come, it adnulled and abolished the leuiticall
priesthood: that also of Christ was instituted with another: The Lord swear
(says he) and will not repent, etc. Psalm. 110. But the Leuitical priesthood
was instituted without an oath, the priesthood also of Christ is eternal, and
ever holds his being and virtue: the Leuiticallnot. Also Christ, who
exercises this everlasting priesthood, is much more excellent the^ Aaron:
Christ is our continuell Intercessor.
which exercises the Leuitical priesthood: Of so great virtue is the sacrifice
of Christ. That having one only time offered, he left no place for any other
expiatory sacrifice. For he eternally saves those that come unto God by him:
ever living to make intercession for them. Heb 17. 25.
They need not then any other sacrifice, but the only death and passion of
Christ. And as little have they need of any other Intercessor, or mediator but
only Christ. Who so will not be contented with this only sacrifice, nor with
this only intercessor, Ier. 2. 13.
let him seek for others better. To such a one, it will happen, that leaving
the fou^tain of living water, he shall dig cesterns, which will hold no water.
Also, of so unmeasurable virtue is this sacrifice which Christ one only time
offered that it neither ought, nor can be reiterated. For reiteratio^ is a most
sure argument of imperfection: And this is the cause why the Leuitical
facrifices were so, and so often reiterated, because the blood of calves, and
of Goats, could not perfectly sanctify either those that offered them, or
those for whom they were offered. He that will attentively read, and meditate
upon this 7. chap. shall not desire any other sacrifice but that only which
Jesus Christ one only time offered. Which was himself: As verse 27 is
declared. The memory whereof the Lord commands us to renew so often as we
celebrate his holy supper.

And this word (once) which the Apostle. chap. 9. verse. 12. 25. This word
once is much to be noted.
26. 28. and chap. 10. 10. 12. 14. uses, is very much to be noted. For upon
the word (once) groundeth the Apostle his argument, to prove the priesthood of
Christ to be much more excellent; then the Leuitical priesthood. For the
Leuitical priests, reiterated their sacrifice which they offered: First for
their own sins, and then for the sins of the people: But Christ offered
not sacrifices but one only sacifice (to wit) himself: and not for himself
(for he had no sin: Esaias 53. 9. 1 peter. 2. 12*
neither was there any guile found in his mouth) but for others. And this
sacrifice did he not oftentimes offer, nor commanded it should be oftentimes
offered: one only time did he offer it. In the 8. chap. the Apostle repeates
that which he had said in the chap going before concerning the heavenly and
everlasting priesthood of Christ. In the 9. chap. he three or four times
repeateth the word once. In the 10. chap. verse. 10. he repeateth the word once.
In the 5. and 12. One sacrifice, and verse. 14. One only offering.

Hitherto treats the Apostle of the Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ: After
the order of Melchisedeck,
and as in the word, after the order of Melchisedech, there remains great
mystery: for by it the Apostle proves the Priesthood of Christ to be eternal,
repeating the same as (we have seen) for a word of so great importance. So
also in the word Once, which the Apostle so often repeateth is there great
mystery: for thereby two things are proved. The first is, that there is no
other sacrifice to obtain remission of sins, but only that which Jesus
Christ offered. The second is, that this sacrifice is, and ever shall be of so
great virtue and efficacy, Once.
as it was the day, hour and moment when Christ offered it: for which cause it
neither ought, nor may be reiterated, without doing most great injury to
Christ: as though his sacrifice which he once offered, were not fufficient to
obtain pardon for all sins: and that therefore another new sacrifice were
needful, or at the least to reiterat the old. All, as many as were, or shall be
saved, not only since the death of Christ, but before his death also, from the
first just Abel, unto the last, were, are, and shall be saved by the virtue of
this only sacrifice once offered. Otherwise must he often have suffered since
the foundation of the world. But now in the end of the world has he appeared
once to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: Hebr. 9. 26.
These be the words of the Apostle: against which nothing impugneth that which
S. John says in his Revelation: Apo^^ ^ 3.
That the Lamb (Christ) was slain from the beginning of the world: for Jesus
Christ but only once died: and this was, when Tiberius Caesar was Emperor:
which is now 1566. years since. How the^ says S. John, that he died from the
beginning of the world? To this say we, that S. John meant that the sacrifice
which Christ offered, did not only profit those that in the time of Christ, or
sithence lived: but all those also, which were long time before from the
beginning of the world. For all before the death of Christ, which believed that
the seed of the woman (which is Christ) should break the head of the serpent
(which is the devil) were neither more nor less saved, then these which
sithence the death of Christ, believe that he is come and that by dying he has
overcome the devil. All one faith have We and the faithful of the old
Testament.
In the same God whom we believe, believed they: the same faith which we hold
held they: and by the same sacrifice of Jesus Christ one only time and no more
offered they and we are saved: The same Sacraments as touching the substance
that we have, had they. So wittnesseth Saint Paul when he says: Moreover,
Brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant, That all our fathers were
under the cloud and all passed through the Sea: 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4.
and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat
the same spiritual meat and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for
they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them which Rock was Christ.
This is the difference between them and us, that they believed Christ the
Messiah, should come and we believe that he is already come, and has fulfilled
all whatsoever was written of him. We then here conclude; that with one only
sacrifice, which Jesus Christ offered, and this one only time, and no more he
sanctified for ever all those that from the beginning of the world have been,
are, and shall be sanctified. The Lord God, which when we were the children of
wrath and his enemies, has showed us such mercy, give us grace firmly and
constantly to persevere in this faith, and perseuering, may live in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life.

The holy Scripture (as we have seen) mentions two kinds of Priests which
offer sacrifice for sins: Two kinds of priests.
the one after the order of Aaron, the other after the order of Melchisedech.
Many there were after the order of Aaron, because being mortal, they died, and
being dead one succeeded another. After the order of Melchisedech no other
Priest there is but only Christ: who being an everlasting Priest, and his
sacrifice being of everlasting virtue, admits no companion: for he only is
sufficient. This priesthood shall shall endure for ever, and it is proper to
the new Testament, wherein there is not, nor can be more then one only Priest,
which neither has, nor can have companion nor successor in his office. For he
is an everlasting priest: and therefore his offering one only time offered, is
of everlasting virtue. Hereupon we then conclude, that if the Mass Priests
(which say they offer Christ in Sacrifice for the sins of men) be Priests
instituted by God, either they so be after the order of Aaron, or after the
order of Melchisedech (for of these two only orders the scripture makes
mention.) But Priests they be not after the order of Aaron, which already
ceased with the death of Christ. As little are they of the order of
Melchisedech: for after this order there is but one only Priest, The Mass
priests be not after the order of Aron, nor after the order of Melchisedec but
of Baal.
which is Christ. Hereuppon it follows, that if they be Priests, not by God,
but by the devil be they instituted: and so be they the Priests of Baal. May
it please our God and Lord to convert them: Or if they be vessels of wrath, to
break them with his rod of iron, that they do not more mischief to the
Catholic Church, the Spouse of Jesus Christ, and with his precious blood
redeemed. I trust in mine omnipotent God that one day he will have mercy upon
our country of Spain: and send the true Elias, which with the power of Gods
word shall kill these false prophets and filthy priests.

Besides the expiatory sacrifice, The Sacrifice Eucharisticall.
whereof we have spoken, anothere there is called Eucharisticall, of
thanksgiving: This sacrifice offers and ought to offer every faithful and
Catholic Christian: and for such a one, he that offers it not, neither is,
nor ought to be holden. What manner of sacrifice this is, in the beginning of
this Treatise of the Mass we have before declared. And if every Christian
offer unto God this kind of sacrifice; it follows hereupon that every
Christian, Exodus 19. 6.
seeing he offreth sacrifice, is a priest. And for this cause God commanded
Moses to say these words to all the people of Israel, peter. 2. 6.
Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests, and a holy nation. And S. Peter
speaking to all the faithful, says: Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation,, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the
virtues of him that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light,
etc. S. John in his Revelation, speaking of the Lamb, says: Thou have made us
unto our God kings and priests. Of this which we have said we conclude, Christ
only to be the Priest, who offering up himself and this only once, obtained
for us remission of sins: and that all faithful christians are priests and that
not once, but many times, every day, every hour, and every moment (so ought
it to be done) do offer sacrifices of praises unto God. And why ought we to
praise God, and to give him thanks? For all the benefits which we receive each
moment of him touching both body and soul. But for this benefit chiefly that
passes all others which is the inestimable benefit that we receive by the
death and passion of Christ. By the sin of the first Adam we were all made
sinners and servants of sin, sons of wrath, enemies of God and to two sorts
of death, temporal and eternal of body and soul condemned. Strangers we were
from the common wealth of Israel which is the house of God: And so all the
goodness which was in us, was either wholly lost and banished from us, or else
corrupted and endamaged through sin: So that we cannot think well, much less
can we do well. The cause of all this is sin: which (as says Saint Paul)
entered into the world by Adam, Romans 5. 12.
and by sin, death: And so death went over all men: for as much as all men have
sinned. But contrary wise, by the righteousness of the second Adam Christ, by
his obedience, by his death and passion (for of no less power to save was his
obedience, then the disobedience of the first Adam to condemn all) are we made
just, free from sin, sons and friends of God, heirs of life eternal,
citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, desirous to do well, and enemies unto evil:
and whatsouer wickedness is in us, it is converted into goodness: For by Christ
grace entered into the world, and by grace, life,: and so went grace unto all
men in him, in whom all men were saved. O my God, how unspeakable is thy
mercy and goodness, that thou so much louedst the sinful world, that thou
gave thine only begotten son, that every one that believes in him should not
perish, Ioh. 3. 16.
but have everlasting life, etc. And if God so loved the world, that he spared
not his only begotten son, but gave him up for us how the^ shall he not give us
al things with him? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? And
that moreover which S. Paul to this purpose says, Romans 8. 32. But God sets
out his love or charity toward us: seeing, that whiles we were yet sinners,
Romans 5. 8.
Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, shall we
be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his son: much more now being reconciled
unto God, shall we be saved by his life, etc. Who so lists to know and
meditate upon that which Christ did, and suffered to obtain for him remission
of sins, and reconcile him with God: let him read the history which the
Evangelists set down concerning the life and death of Christ: he shall find,
that from the hour wherein he was borne v^ntil he died, no other thing he was
but a very example of crosses afflictions, miseries and calamities. And what
greater misery then to be born in a manger amongst beasts? And that when he
was borne, it behooved him to fly to a strange land, for fear of Herod, who
sought to slay him? This misery can none understand but he that with
adversity, has been a stranger. And to what land did he fly? To a land of a
barbarous language, and strange religion. The union of Religon is greater then
that of the nation.
It is great comfort for a stranger to find people of his own nation: but much
more is it to find people of his own religion. Very long should I be, thus to
prosecute the life of Christ: to the Evangelists I refer me. And if miserable
was his life to the eyes of men: much more miserable and unhappy was his death.
Since as a transgression of the divine and humane law, he was publicly
sentenced to die upon the cross: which kind of death was not given but to
abominable persons, which had committed enormious offenses and sins. And so
pronounced the holy scripture such sentence, Deuteronomy: 21 23.
when it said, Cursed is he which hangs on the tree. Gal. 3. 13.
And so Saint Paul speaking of Christ's humiliation, Philip. 2. 8.
says: He became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. And
all this which he out wardly suffered, was nothing in comparison of that which
his most holy soul inwardly felt: this was, the insupportable burden of
sins, not his, but of all men, which God laid upon him: for which, he only
was to satisfy. This so great a weight felt Christ, when praying in the garden
he said, Father if thou will, let this cup pass from me, Luke. 22. 42.
yet not mine, but thy willbe done. And so great was his sorrow, that an Angel
from heaven appeared unto him, and comforted him: and notwithstanding being in
an agony, Math. 27. 46.
he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was (as witnesses the same
Evangelist) like drops of blood trickling down to the ground: Christ in
saying my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, felt truly the pain which
the damned suffer in hell.
and so as abhorred and forsaken of the Father, for the multitude of sins (not
his, but ours) which were poured upon him, a little before he gave up the
ghost, cried he out with a loud voice, saying: My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Christ, thou see here cast into the depth of hell, striving with
death, with sin, and with the devil, which fell to the earth with him: but their
rejoicing not long endured: for Christ aided by his divine power returned upon
his enemies: and did in such sort suppress them that he va^quisht the^ for
ever. This is that which S. Peter says: Act: 2. 24.
Whom God has raised up, an^ loosed the sorrows of death, because it was
impossible that he should be holden of it. And so Christ having vanquished his
enemies, Esaias. 53. 4.
satified the Father for our sins, and reconciled us with him, went out
victorious from this cruel and bloody battle. Read for this purpose Esai. 53.
wherein Esayas seems not to be a prophet which foretells that which should
happen to Christ, but an Evangelist, which recounteth that which already had
befallen him. In the 4. verse he says: Surely he has borne our infirmities
and carried our sorrows: yet we did judge him as plagued and smitten of God
and humbled. verse. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken
for our iniquities, the chastisment of our peace was laid upon him, and with
his stripes are we healed, verse. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray: we
have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all etc. And ver. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. An admirable
chapter is this against the obstinate Jews, which expect their Messiah to be
very mighty in this world, The 53. chapter of Esaias, painteth o^t Christ far
otherwise then the Jews do expect.
a great warrior, which shall kill and cleave asunder. But here the Prophet
depaintcth out a man, the most humbled of any that has been, whipped and
wounded of God and men, without any form or beauty: so had he been handled of
God and men. Admirable also is this chapter to prove the Divinity of the Son
of God, of the Messiah, of our Christ. For who can by faith in him (which the
prophet calls with his knowledge) justify men? Who can give righteousness,
and take away the sins of men but God alone? This does Christ: therefore is
he God. The same Christ, Matthew. 9. 6. says, that he has power to pardon
sins: and so said he to the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good comfort,
thy sins be forgiven thee. For which cause said the Scribes that he
blasphemed. And so said he to the sinful woman Luk, 7. 4. S. Thy sins are
forgiven thee. The Scripture in many other places makes mention of this
humiliation and deiection of Christ, and then of his glorious triumph against
his enemies. But this which we have said suffices.

This benefit of the death and passion of Christ proposed ingenerall to all
men, does Saint Paul by faith apply to him self, Gal. 2. 20.
saying: I am crucified with Christ: and live, not I now but Christ lives in
me: and in that I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me: For me Christ died.
Who so will enjoy this benefit proposed in general to all, let him learn of
Saint Paul to apply it by faith in particular to himself. For whosoever shall
not so do: Let him hold it for spoken, Romans 4. 25.
he shall not enjoy it. They only be safe which believe Christ to be given for
their proper sins and risen again for their justification. Rom: 8. 38.
He which of himself shall not particularly believe this, shall be condemned:
the death of Christ shall nothing avail him. But he which shall believe it,
shall be saved: and being saved, is assured that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor strength, nor height, nor depth nor any other creature shall be able to
separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. His
Majesty increase this faith, his gift it is. A Christian then armed with such
weapons of faith, shall patiently, and I say more joyfully suffer for Christ,
tribulation, sorrow, persecution, famine, nakedness, danger, sword, fire, and
dishonor: for to all these things the very day that we truly believe in
Christ, are we subject. For the disciple is not more to be exempted from them
then his master was. philip. 4. 13.
He increase faith in us, and make us constant in adversities: for without him
can we do nothing; and with him can we do all things. This very well perceived
Saint Paul, when he said, I am able to do all things, through the help of
Christ which strengthens me. 1. Cor. 9. 20 1 peter. 1. 18.
God then with his exceeding love so loving us, that he spared not his proper
and only begotten Son, but gave him up for us; and being bought, not with
gold nor silver, but with an inestimable treasure, with the most precious blood
of Christ, the Lamb without spot, let us not abase nor subject our selves to
sin and wickedness: but seeing we are the friends, sons and heirs of God,
and brothers and coheires with Jesus Christ: let us highly esteem our selves
and apply our selves to virtue: that God be not angry, but joyful to have
such sons; nor Christ ashamed but rather honored to call us brethren friends
and companions. In the sacred Scriptures are there very many places, wherein
the holy Spirit does exhort us to live godly and holily: but of all have I
chose^ one, which makes much to the purpose, because in it are mentioned, both
kinds of sacrifices (to wit) the propitiatory which only Christ one only time
offered: and the Eucharistcall which every moment we offer, or to (speak
better) ought to offer: the Spirit of God by the mouth of S. Paul, does thus
exhort us: Ephe. 5. 1.
Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love, even
as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, to be an offering and
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God: But fornication and all
uncleanness, let it not once be named among you, as it be comes Saints:
neither filthiness neither foolish talking, nor iestings, which are things not
comely: but rather giving of thanks, etc. For all the che chapter is an
exhortation to well living. Let not man think, for being called a Christian,
for being baptized, for saying that he believes in God, for being trained up
in the Church, where he frequenteth sermons, and celebrateth with the rest, the
holy supper: Let him not think for all this (say I) that he shall be saved:
if he keep not together with this the commandments of God. If thou will
(says Christ) enter into life, keep the commandments: thou shall not kill,
thou shall not commit adultery, etc. That hypocrites may do, and do the same:
but not this. For without a true and lively faith, which hypocrites and wicked
Christians, have not, this cannot be done. The outward show, the dead faith,
imaginary and idle, is not the faith which justifies: but the lively, true,
and diligent faith which brings forth in time fruits of charity. For as true
fire, cannot be without heat, and the greater that the fire is, the greater
heat it gives: So true faith cannot be without good works: and the more the
faith is, so much the more it works. And contrariwise: as the painted fire
warmeth not, as little also the dead faith works: for being dead, how shall
it work. Such a perfection does the holy Spirit require in us, that we do not
only good, and commit no evil, but wills also that we be not familiar nor
conversant with the wicked. Whereas such calling themselves brothers, be
hypocrites, unjust and impious. So commands the Apostle, 1. Cor. chap. 5. 1.
If any man (says he) calling himself a brother, shall be a fornicator, a
covetous person, an idolater, an evil speaker, a drunkard, a thief, with such
a one eat not. The cause why we ought not to be familiar with such, in the
second epistle to the Thessal. chap. 3. 14. he shows. And converse not with
him (says he) that he may be ashamed. And Romans 16. 17. he commands us to
depart from them which make dissentions. And 2. Ioh. verse. 10. it is commanded
we should not salute them. To receive then and enjoy the benefit of Christ's
sacrifice, such ought (as we have mentioned) to be the life of a Christian. He
that shall not be so perfect, (for who shall he be? seeing there is no man
but finneth, and since the just man falls seven times, I would say many times
a day: if he fall seven times a day, what will he do all his life long? fall
and rise again.) He that shall not then be so perfect, let him desire so to
be: let him sigh and bewail his imperfection before the Lord: let him beseech
him of grace to become perfect. Let him believe the Lord to be so good, that he
will accept this good desire, proceeding from so contrite and humble heart: and
so will he supply the faults of our imperfections, and not impute them unto us.
And thus shall we enjoy the benefit of the sacrifice which Christ our high and
only Priest once offered to his Father.

We have proved Christ only to be our Priest, and only his body and blood
which he once offered upon the cross to be the only and vnreiterable sacrifice
expiatorie, whereby our sins are pardoned, and we for ever sanctified. Let us
now (as we promised) treat of the institution of the holy supper, and so will we
conclude this Treatise.

The Lord knowing our carelessness, The institution of the Supper.
negligence and forgetfulness of the things which concern our salvation, that we
should not forget the benefit of his death and passion, did institute the most
holy sacrament of his precious body, which he gave upon the cross, and of his
precious blood, which he shed in his passion: which sacrament he would should be
unto us a memorial of all that which he suffered for us, and of the benefit we
receive by his death and passion, As often as ye shall do this (to wit, as ye
shall celebrate the holy Supper) ye shall do it (says Christ) in remembrance of
me.

One only time was Christ offered, and by this (only offering) he obtained for
us a general pardon of all our sins. But he would we should always
remember this benefit: And to help our memory did he institute this sacrament,
and wills we not once but many times in our life receive it. The institution
of this Sacrament, the Evangelists Matthew, Mark, and Luke do declare: but
most largely Saint Paul in 1. Cor. chap. 11. and in the tenth chap. he
begins also to entreat thereof. He are we then Saint Peul declare how
Christ celebrated his holy supper, wherein he instituted the Sacrament of his
body, and of his blood. 1. Cor 11. 23
I received of the Lord (says Saint Paul) that which I also delivered unto
you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus the same night that he was betrayed, took
bread: and when he had given thanks he brake it, and said: Take, eat: This is
my body which is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me. Likewise also
after supper, he took the cup, saying: This is the new testament in my blood:
Do this as often as you shall drink it in remembrance of me. For as often as
you shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show forth the
Lords death until his coming. Whosoever therefore shall eat this bread, and
drink of this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord. Let then a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. For who so eats and drinks the same unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, not considering the Lords body.

We have heard how the Lord did celebrate his holy supper and instituted
therein the most holy sacrament of his body and blood. The same order that
Jesus Christ used in celebrating of it, held his Apostles, as often as they
celebrated the same. This self same order (as we have before showed) was for a
thousand years space observed in the Church. Albeit true it is, that before
the thousand years were accomplished, Satan (envying the great benefit and
comfort which we receive with this sacrament) began to alter it, adding thereto
many things touching rites and ceremonies. But the thousand years passed, the
whole sacrament with fury he cast to the earth: and in place thereof
advanced an idol made of dough made between two irons, which they adore and
sacrifice unto, neither more nor less, then if it were God himself that
created heaven and earth. But in all this time of so great ignorance, and
Idolatry. The Lord (as we have said) did never utterly forsake his Church: For
ever he raised up some true prophet, some holy man, or men, that with zeal of
the Lords house, and nor accompting of the danger whereunto they thrust their
lives reproved the world. Because through the Church of God, was sold this so
horrible idolatry. But particularly in these our times has the Lord showed
mercy, raising up very many learned and godly men. Which being simple poor
men, have with great zeal, opposed them selves to the tyranny of Antichrist,
and to all the power of the world. which was enchanted and bewitched with the
false Doctrine of Antichrist. And so has God blessed the labor of these men
(As he blessed in times past, the labor of the Apostles, mean and simple
people) that they have cast to the earth the Missa, or Mass, the breaden God,
which our adversaries have raised up and have eftsoons restored the holy
supper which the Lord Jesus, the night before he should suffer, celebrated with
his disciples. They that have eyes to see, Let them see, and they that have
ears to hear, Let them hear. That seeing, and hearing, All the world may
judge, if that be true, which we say. I will here set down, the order holden
in our Churches, which God, by the means of these holy men, has in our time
reformed, when the holy supper is celebrated. Hearken then O Spain, what in
thine own Language I speak: that small and great, learned, and unlearned may
understand me.

The form which is holden in the reformed Churches, of celebration of the
holy supper of the Lord.
It is to be noted. That the Lords day before the supper is celebratae. The
minister does warn the people that each one dispose, and prepare himself to
receive it worthily and with such reverence as is meet, The second thing which
is done is, that youths, which have now attained to years of discretion, do
not present themselves to receive it before they he well instructed and taught
in the Christian Doctrine, and have made profession of their faith in the
Church. Thirdly if therebe any strangers, or new comers, which be as yet
rude and ignorant in religion, that they come and present themselves to be
taught particularly in that which is meet for them to know: and the day on
which they celebrate the same, the minister at the end of the sermon, touches
somewhat concerning the mysteries: Or if need require, his whole sermon
treats of the Doctrine of the supper: to declare to the people, what the
Lord, by this mystery, will say, and give to understand, And how we ought to
receive it. After that the minister has publicly prayed, he says, the
general confession, and after the confession of faith made, to witness in the
name of the people, that they all will live and die in the doctrine and Christian
religion. The table being prepared, and the bread and wine upon it, he thus
aloud speaks.

The institution of the holy supper of the Lord
Let us hear how Jesus Christ did institute unto us his holy supper, according
to that which S. Paul in the 11. chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians declares.

I received of the Lord, etc. As we have before recited.

The form of excomunication and excluding from the holy supper of the Lord
these which be not worthy to receive it.
We have heard (brethren) how the Lord celebrated the supper with his
disciples, and in that which he did, he shows unto us: that strangers, to
wit those which be not of the fellowship of his faithful, ought not to be
admitted unto it: Following therefore this rule: in the name, and by the
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, I excommunicate all Idolaters,
blasphemers, contempners of God, heretics, and all Schismatiques which make
sects a part, to break the unity of the Church, all perjured persons: all that
be disobedient to their fathers and mothers, and to their superious, all
seditious persons, factious traitors, contentious persons, adulterours,
fornicators, thieues, dauncers, manslayers, evil speakers, deceivers, covetous
persons, he and she witches, usurers, raysers of false witness, robbers,
drunkards, gluttons and all those that live scandalously: denouncing unto them,
that they abstain from this holy table: that they foul not, nor defile the
holy meat, which our Lord Jesus Christ gives to his household and faithful
only.

An exhortation, wherein is declared what is the use, and fruit of the supper.
Therefore, after S. Paul's admonition, let every man prove and examine his
conscience, to know if he have true repentance of his sins, and if he
abhor them, grieuing to have committed them, against the divine goodness and
desires thenceforth to live holily according to the will of God. And above all
if he have his trust in the divine mercy, and seek wholly his salvation in
Jesus Christ. And if all Enmity and rancour laid aside, he have a good
purpose to live with his neighbors in concord and brotherly love.

If we have this testimony in our heart before God, we nothing doubt, but that
he accepts and acknowledges us for his sons: And that the Lord Jesus
Christ directs his word to us, to admit us unto his Table, and communicate
this sacrament unto us, which he commnnicated to his disciples. And albeit we
feel in our selves great weakness and misery: As not yet to have perfection
of faith. But to be inclined to unbelief and distrust, and as not to be so
fully addicted to serve God, and with such a zeal, as we ought: But to fight
continually with the Iustes of the flesh. Notwithstanding this has the Lord
showed us this mercy, to have imprinted in our hearts his Gospel, to resist all
incredulity: and has given us a desire and affection to renounce our own
inclinations and corrupt desires, to follow his righteousness, and obey his
holy commandments: Sure we are, that the vices and imperfections remain in
us cannot let, but that he receive us and make us worthy to be partakers of his
good things in this spiritual banquet. For we come not to him, to protest,
that in our selves we are perfect or just: But contrariwise in seeking with
great desire our life in Christ: we confess, that we abide in death. This
sacrament understand we to be a medecin for those which are needy in spirtuall
infirmities, and that all the dignity, which Christ our redeemer requires at
our hands, is to know us to have sorrow and hearty grief for our offenses: and
to settle all our delight joy and contentment only in him.

First do we believe these promises which Jesus Christ (who is the infallible
and eternal truth) pronounced with his mouth. To wit: that he will truly make
us partakers of his body, and blood To the end, we may wholly possess him, that
he may live in us and we in him. And although we see not the thing given, but
only bread and wine: yet are we sure, he will spiritually fulfill in our hearts
all that which he out wardly shows by these visible signs. He is (I would
say) the heavenly bread to feed us, and nourish us unto life eternal. Let us
not then be ungrateful to the infinite goodness of Jesus Christ our savior, who
sets before us upon this holy table, all his riches to distribute the same
unto us. For in giving himself unto us, he does witness, that all his good
things, are wholly ours. Let us therefore receive this sacrament as a most
certain pledge: whereby the virtue of his death and passion is imputed unto us,
for righteousness: As if we our selves in our own persons had suffered. Let us
not be so perverse of understanding, and nature to refuse, to rejoice, and
enjoy this divine banquet, whereunto Jesus Christ, by his word, does so gently
inuit us. But with great esteem of the dignity of this most precious gift,
wherewith he graceth us to present we our selves unto him with a burning zeal
and faithful heart, that he make us capable to receive him.

For this end, lift we up our minds and hearts unto him: there where Jesus
Christ is, in the glory of his father: from whence we expect him for our
redemption. And let us not be occupied, nor dwell upon these earthly and
corruptible elements: which we see with the eyes, and touch with the hands, to
seek him in the^: as though he were enclosed in the bread and wine. For the^
shall our souls (being so lifted up above all earthly things) be disposed to
be fed and quickened with his substance, to come unto heaven, and enter into
the kingdom of God, where he remains. Content we then our selves to hold the
bread, and wine, for signs and testimonies, seking spiritually the truth,
where the word of God does promise.

This done, the ministers distribute unto the people the bread, and the cup
having first admonished all, that they come with all reverence and by order to
receive it. In the mean time, they sung some psalms in the congregation, or
read with a loud voice some thing of the holy scripture, agreiug to that which
by the sacrament is signified, and when all have communicated, they kneel on
their knees and give thanks.

A thanksgiving after the communion

We give thee everlasting thanks and praise, eternal and heavenly father; for
the clemency which thou have used toward us in communicating unto us, so
great a benefit: being as we are, miserable sinners, and in having made us
partakers of the communion of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Whom thou
deliueredst over to death for us, and now give him unto us, for food, and
nourishment of everlasting life: Have mercy also upon us, and never suffer us
to forget these things so worthy of thee: But having them imprinted in our
hearts, we may always grow and be strengthened in faith, effectual to all
good works. And that this doing, we may order, and proceed all our life time
holily, to the advancement of thy glory, and edification of our neighbors,
through Jesus Christ thy son, who in the unity of the holy spirit lives and
reigns with thee the true God everlasting.

This done, the minister with this blessing dispatcheth the people, wherewith
the Lord commands, that they should bless the people. Numb. 9: 24.
The Lord bless you, and save you, the Lord make his face shine upon you, and
be merciful unto you. The Lord turn his favorable c^u^tenance toward you and
give you his peace. Amen.

In the vulgar tongue is all this said that all small, and great, learned, and
unlearned may understand.
Whosoever without passion, and with a desire to be assured of the way of his
salvation, shall read this which we have said, he shall easily understand the
supper which now we celebrate in the reformed Churches, to be the same, which
Jesus Christ our king, prophet and priest instituted, and which his Apostles
and the catholic church, for many hundred years did celebrate: And contrary
wise, shall he understand the Mass (which our adversaries at this day
celebrete) to have no agreement with the holy supper of the Lord, but in all,
and by all, to be opposite unto it. And so contrary, that where the one is, the
other in no wise can be: where the mass is, there is not the snpper of the
Lord, and where the supper of the Lord is there is not the mass, For how can
light and darkness be joined, the table of the Lord, and the table of devils,
God and Belial? And that the Christian people of my nation (for whose cause,
desiring to do them service, I have taken this pain (if that may be called
pain, which the person with great content and desire to serve, and do some
good takes) may easily understand this. I will here in a table set down, the
agreement, conformity, and unity, which is between the holy supper by us in
our reformed Churches celebrated and the holy supper of the Lord: then will I
set down the difference, disagreement, and contrariety which is between the
holy supper, by our Christ instituted, and the profane mass, which Antichrist
has invented, and sold for money to miserable people, called Christians. He
whom God has given understanding to understand, Let him understand the will of
the Lord and do the same.

The holy supper of the Lord.
Jesus Christ alone ordained his holy supper, and commanded his Church to
celebrate the same, As he himself, had celebrated it.

The supper of the reformed Churches.
The supper is celebrated neither more nor less, then Jesus Christ, did
celebrate it, and after the same manner by him commanded to his Church: as the
Evangelists Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. and S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. 24,
do declare. Therefore is our supper the supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Mass has been made by many Popes: For one Pope made the confite or,
another the introit, another the Kyri-elecson: another the Gloria in excelsis:
another the Gradual, another the Offertorie: another the Cannon: another the
Memento another the Teigitur another the Co^munica^tes, another ordained, that
the bread in the Mass should be unleavened, another that water should be put
into wine. Another commanded, that the bread should be worshipped, saying: it
was not bread, but God, which made heaven and earth, etc. Another made the
Agnus Dei. The same may also be said, of whatsoever is done in the mass.
Christ made none of all these things, nor commanded his faithful to do them.
Diverse Popes, and at sundry times did invent them. Whereupon it follows,
that never Christ, no not at all did institute the Mass, nor his Apostles said
it. Therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy supper of the Lord.
Christ entending to celebrate his Supper, changed not his garments.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
So also the Ministers, when they celebrate the Supper, change not their
garments. Therefore is our Supper the supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest (going to say his Mass) does naught else but cloth and
unclothe: and every garment that he puts on, how little soever, carries
great mysteries: which they without the word of God, to keep the poor people
still bewitched, have forged. Moreover, the Priest saying Mass must have his
head and beard shaued, and upon his head a circle of hair, which they call a
crown: wherein they follow not Christ, nor his Apostles, who never did wear
head nor beard shaven: but they imitate the Priests of the Gentiles: whom
Baruch, chap. 6. and 30. reports to have had their heads and beardes shaven.
Therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ used common bread, served at the table, when he supped with his
Apostles.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
We also do use common bread, therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish priest must expressly use other manner of bread, baked between two
yrons, which properly is no bread, but wafers. Therefore the Mass is not the
Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ made his Supper upon a table.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
We do also celebrate the Supper upon a table, and not upon an altar. An altar
is for sacrifice, and sacrifices ceased with the death of Christ. Therefore
need we no altar. A table is to suppe on. Saint Paul calls it the Lords supper,
1. Cor. chap. 11. 20. whereupon it follows, that it being a Supper, upon a
table (and not an altar) it is to be celebrated: therefore is our supper, the
Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest must have an altar, which he calls consecrated. An altar
(I say) in a hole in the midst whereof (which they call the Sepulcher) is put
a piece of some relics: and if the altar be not consecrate, then must he have
a marble stone, which they call a consecrate altar in the border whereof are
little pieces of cloth, which they call Corporales. All which Durandus in his
book entitled Rationale diuinorum, has diligently traveled to declare:
therefore the Mass is not the Suppet of the Lord.

The holy supper of the Lord.
Christ, in celebrating his supper, preached and taught his Apostels.

The supper of the refoumed Church.
The supper is never celebrated, but the minister does preach and teach those
that communicate: therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish priest mumbleth between his teeth certain prayers: he turns to
and from the altar one while his back, another while his face to the people:
now goes he from one part of the altar unto another: now he sings with an
high voice, now with a low voice: now liftes he up his arms, now he casts
them down: he lifts up the train of his cope, holding a candle or wax
burning. Briefly, he seems to be nothing else but a man wholly mad, not
knowing what countenance to use. Let them show when Christ or his Apostles did
this, or commanded the Church to do the same. Therefore the Mass is not supper
of the Lord.

The holy Super of the Lord.
Christ in celebrating of his Supper, spoke in the vulgar tongue that all might
understand.

The Supper of the Reformed Churches.
All whatsoever is said when we celebrate the Supper, is spoken in the vulgar
tongue, that all may understand: therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
In the Mass a strange tongue is used, which most of the Massing priests
understand not: which is wholly contrary to S. Paul's doctrine, 1. Cor. 14.
where he shows, that no tongue in the Church is to be used, but that which
may be understood. Therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ in the Supper first brake the bread, and then gave it to his Apostles.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
In celebrating of the Supper, the Minister first breaks the bread, and then
gives it to the communicants, therefore is our supper, the supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest in his Mass, observes not this order: for he first
speaks certain words over the bread, and then at his pleasure breaks it
(or as they say) the accidents of bread (by they) is transubsta^tiated into the
body of Christ. But Jesus Christ first brake the bread, and then spoke the
words, therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ after he had broken the bread, said, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
body

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
The same says and does the Minister without ought adding or diminishing:
therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The Profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest speaks the words without breaking of the bread: and not
content with Christ's words, adds thereto this word enim, saying, Hoc est
enim corpus meum, therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ sitting at the Table with his Apostles, said: Take and eat.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
The same says the minister, and never celebrateth the Supper but the Church
does the like: and all jointly with him do communicate, and not one swallow up
all: therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest (all being on their knees) only shows them the bread and
wine to be worshipped, and gives naught to the people, but like a glutton,
keeps all for himself, and eats it alone: which is not only contrary to
Christ's institution, but the custom also of ancient Fathers: as by the
Cannons of Anacletus and Calixtus plainly appears. Where under the pain of
excommunication, it is ordained, that after the consecration, all should
communicate. The same is ordained in the Cannons said to be the Apostles. And
in the Council of Toulouse. Whereupon it plainly follows that the Mass
(as now it is said) was never by Jesus Christ instituted, nor by his holy
Apostles celebrated: which being so, all those that now hear it, all those (I
say) are by the same Cannons excommunicate. Seeing that hearing the Mass, they
communicate not: but the Priest only takes it for himself, and eats it
alone, contrary to rhat which Christ and the ancient Fathers ordained.
Therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ gave not the bread only, but also the wine, saying: Drink ye all of
this, Matthew. chap. 26. 27. And as says Saint Mark chap. 14. verse 23. And
they drank all thereof.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
The Minister gives not the bread only, but also the wine, saying: Drink ye
all of this. And all drink thereof, as Christ has commanded, therefore is
our supper the supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest only gives the consecrated bread, and not the wine to the
people: which is wholly contrary, Consecra. Did. 2. Cap. Comperimus
appears: where it is said, that such as receive not the sacrament in both
kinds, refuse the one part or the other be sacrilegious infidels: Therefore the
Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

The holy Supper of the Lord.
Christ gave the bread by it self, and the wine by it self.

The Supper of the reformed Church.
The Minister gives the bread by it self, and the wine by it self: believing
the bread to be the Sacrament of the body of Christ, and the wine to be the
sacrament of his blood: therefore is our Supper the Supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The Popish Priest does first consecrate, as he thinks, the bread and wine.
and then a good while after breaking it in 3 parts: one part whereof he lets
fall into the wine, and so mingleth the^ together: all which he himself
deuoureth. Saving that once a year, when the people communicate, then he
gives them the consecrate bread, but of the consecrate wine, he never gives
to the communicants. Who thinks this to agree with the Lords supper?
Therefore the Mass is not the supper of the Lord.

The hoy Supper of the Lord.
Christ ordained his holy supper in memorial of his death and passion, and
that he had once offered up his body and blood upon the cross for us.

The Supper of the reformed Churches.
The Supper which we celebrate is in memorial of the death and passion of
Christ: and that he has once offered his body and blood for us upon the
cross: therefore is our supper the supper of the Lord.

The profane Mass of the Pope.
The popish Priest says his Mass in memorial of the Saints, both he and she.
And those oftentimes do they hold for Saints, whose souls are burning in heil.
He says his Mass also to find things which be lost, and that for money. The
Priest uses the Mass for a plaster or drugge against all infirmities. And,
which is more: he sacrifices (says he) Jesus Christ in his Mass, and
presents him to God his father, for the sins of the quick and the dead.
Which Christ, did once upon the cross and none but he only, could ever do
the same. Because (as Says the Apostle Heb. 7. chap. verse. 26.) it behooved
that the Priest which purged sins, should be holy, innocent, pure, separate
from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, which needed not every day to
offer sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the
people. This Christ once performed, offering up himself for the sins of all
men. Examine the lives of the popish priests, and how far off they are from
that purity, which it behooves the Priest to have, that offered the expiatorie
sacrifice, will appear. Therefore the Mass is not the Supper of the Lord.

Many other things there be, wherein the holy Supper and the Mass do differ
and are contrary: as in so many mouings, iestures, childish fopperies, maskings
and apish toys done in the Mass, which Chhrist never did, nor once thought
of. The Lord in celebrating his supper never commanded men to make Saints their
intercessors, nor to call upon them, nor to kiss nor worship images, nor to
pray for the souls of the dead in purgatory; nor not taking nor eating the
sacrament, believing it to be God, to worship it, nor to keep it in the box,
nor carry it in procession, to walk in the streets covered with boughs, the
walls hanged with fine Tapisterie of silk, gold, and cloth of gold, with
castles and much iollitie, etc. Who commanded the^ to do these things? Not
Christ nor his Apostles, who in all simplicity did celebrate the holy supper.
The wisdom of the flesh being enemy to God, has brought them into the Church
to make us forget the memory of the benefit of Christ's death and passion.

Moreover, we will cite certain histories, by which the Christian Reader shall
clearly see what account the Pope and his Clergy make of their Sacrament of
the Altar, which they affirm to be God.

Gregory 7. for that he demanded a revelation of the Host against the Emperor,
and had no answer cast it into the fire, and burned it.

Victor 3. died of poison, which his subdeacon in saying of Mass, put into the
chalice.

A Dominicke Friar, gave poison in the Sacrament, to the Emperor Henry 7.

Sixtus 4. commanded that at the time of the elevation, the-murder should
begin: and so it was performed at Florence.

A certain Inquisitor at Barcelona, called Molon, clipped the Host with a
pair of sheers.

Four Augustine Friars which were hanged at Seuill, said Mass without any
intention of consecration. The same have many other Priests done also: and so
by their own Cannons have caused all that heard their Mass to commit
idolatry.

That being (as it is) true which we have said and proved of the Mass: with
very just title, and good and sound conscience do we detest it as a
prophanatio^ of the holy supper of the Lord: There is then no cause why any
should condemn us, for sedicious heretics or schismatikes, if abhorring the
Mass, and flying the same, we follow and embrace the holy supper which Jesus
Christ iustituted, his Apostles and our forefathers for the space of a thousand
years celebrated. Would God for that only sacrifice sake, which his son our
high and only Priest offered unto him) that all our Spaniards would know (as
other nations do already know) what the Pope is, what things are his Bulls,
which be naught else but mockeries, which he makes of us: what is his
authority which is naught else but vanity, wherewith he has many years
deceived us, that they would know that when the Pope curses us, then God does
bless us: would God they would know the holiness of the mass to be
diuelishnesse, seeing it is a profanation of the holy Supper of the Lord. Very
hard will it be for them (I know well) to do this, because they have been
borne, brought up, and grown old in the contrary. But if the holy spirit give
them grace to read, compare, confer, and co^front that which we have said in
these two Treatises, with the holy Scripture, which is the word of God, very
easy it shall be unto them: whereby every faithful and catholic Christian in
particular, and the whole Church in general ought to be ruled and governed.
Our Spaniards in this should imitate those of Berea: Chapt. 17. 11.
who (as says S. Luke in his history of the Acts of the Apostles) searched the
Scriptures to know if that which Paul preached were the word of God or no. If
that we have said be the word of God, no time, no custom, how ancient soever,
ought to prevail against it. And if for our sins, lies, falsehood and error
have for a little or long time oppressed and darkened the truth, the error
ought to give place, as maugre the same it shall give: and so truth, iure
Postliminij (as say the laws) shall reenter his possession. And albeit an old
custom is very hardly left, yet none ought to prefer such custom to reason
and truth, do ever exclude and expel custom. Therefore, when with reason and
truth, for reason and truth we constrain and convince our adversaries. In
vain do they oppose ancient custom unto us, saying: in this were our
forefathers brought up: in this did they die: In this were we borne and
brought up, and in this then will we die. As if custom were greater then the
truth. This is even like the saying of another: A Moore was my father, a Moore
also will I be, having no other reason to give but custom. Custom without
truth is an old error: and error the elder, the more dangerous it is.
Therefore leaving (as says Saint Cyprian in his epistle ad Pompeium, Custom
with out truth is as old error, and therefore more dangerous. 3. Esdt. 3. 38.
) error, let us follow the truth. knowing (as says Esdras) Truth overcomes:
as it is written: Truth does and shall ever prevail, and live and reign
eternally. And then says the same S. Cyprian: Blessed be the God of truth, The
which truth Christ showing in his Gospel unto us, says: I am the Truth:
wherefore, if we be in Christ, and have Christ in us, if we abide in the truth
and the truth abide in us. Let us hold that which is the truth. And a little
lower: If the truth in any thing shall stagger or seem doubtful, meet it is,
that we run back to the original, which the Lord ordained, and to the
Evangelical and Apostolical instruction: and thence arises the reason of
that which we do: from whence the order and original was raised. And as he
himself in another place says: What men have formerly done ought we not to
look: but to that which Christ, who is the first of all, has done. The holy
Scripture is the most certain and infallible rule and squire, whereby all our
actions ought to be ruled and squired: as witness these places which we will
allege, and many others, David Psalm. 119. verse. 105. says: Thy word is a
lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths: Esaias. chap. 8. and 20. we are
commanded to repair to the Law and to the testimonies: and says: that they
which do not so, it is because there is no light in them: It is because they be
in darkness: it is because they are blind, and as blind men, go groping.
Saint Peter speaking of the word or doctrine of the Prophets, says: Whereunto,
ye shall do well to give ear, as to a candle, burning in an obscure place.
etc.

The holy Scripitures do teach us, that Jesus Christ is our high and only
Priest. It teaches us that he once offered up himself, with which sacrifice,
being of infinite virtue, he sanctifies us for ever. And teaches us that
there is no other sacrifice, nor was, nor shall be, but this alone, by which
remission of sins is obtained, it teaches us, that whosoever shall offer
another sacrifice be sides this, or reiterate this, does most great injury to
Christ: As though his sacrifice (which was Christ himself) were insufficient.
It teaches us, that Jesus Christ ordained his holy supper, which he commands
us to celebrat, in remembrance of that sacrifice, which he one only time
offered to the father: all this in general, and every thing in particular by
the grace of God, (to him be the glory) have we sufficiently proved. This is
the truth: for it is the word of God. This then we believe, his Majesty
grant us grace, not only with the heart to believe this, which he in his holy
Gospel he has revealed unto us: but also strength and constancy with the
mouth to confess it: and to suffer also, for this faith and confession,
whenever he pleases with persecution to prove us. Concerning that which men
have of their own heads have invented (That the Pope is our chief Bishop)
the successor of Saint Peter, the vicar of Christ God upon earth, and that as
such a one he pardons sins, That which the papists believe of their pope
and their Mass.
draws out of hell and purgatory what souls he will and what souls he
will he places in heaven. And that the Mass such as now they say, is a
sacrifice, as satisfactorie, as was the death and passion of Christ. None of
these things does the holy scripture teach us: it is humane invention, and
devilish lies, wherewith Satan has long time deceived us. The Apostle Saint
Paul willing to correct the vices brought into the holy supper of the Lord in
the Church of Corinth found no better remedy but to reduce it, The best remedy
for reforming is to reduce things to Christ's first institution.
to the original and first institution. And so 1. Cor. 11 he says: I received
of the Lord that which I have given you, etc. so now do we also the same. We
restore the supper of the Lord, and celebrate it according to it first
institution: as the Evangelists and Saint Paul do declare unto us. And if so
we do, the^ have they no cause to hold us for heretics but for good faithful
and catholic Christians: and for such do we hold our selves, and such we are,
albeit is the many imperfections: the Lord pardon them unto us. We confess: we
hold and believe that God through the merit of Christ, is our father, and the
holy catholic or universal, Apostololike, and true Church when it is ruled by
the word of God, in the sacred scripture of the old and new Testament
revealed. For otherwise is she no mother (but a Stepmother) our mother. And woe
to that man, which shall not be son of this father, and this mother. We
confess hold and believe, all that which this our mother confesses, holds
and belieueth: All whatsouer we ought to believe and do. the holy scripture
teaches us
All which is contained in the books of the old and new Testament. For nothing
there is which we ought either to do or believe, which is not written in these
sacred books. Therefore will we conclude this Treatise, saying: That
whosoever,, albeit, an Angel from heaven, shall preach or beliue another
Gospel, Gal. 1. 8.
another Doctrine besides that, which Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught
us all which is written in the books which we call the holy scripture: Let
such a one be accursed, and execrable, Let him be (as says Saint Paul)
Anathema.

Thou have hard (Christian Reader) the Enormious charges, wherewith we charge
the Pope, as touching life and Doctrine: But chiefly, touching the superstition
and Idolatry of the Mass which the said Pope of himself without the word of
God, has invented and brought into the Church. Thou have also heard, the
Enormious charges where with the Pope charge us. He accuses us for proud,
contentious and arrogant, that we will know more then all the whole Church. He
accuses us for disobedient to Magistrates, disturbers of commonwealths,
provinces and kingdoms. he accuses us for schismatiques, and heretics. For
the which, as an accuser, witness and Judge he concludes, that we are not
worthy to live in the world. But it is not sufficient to accuse. Of necessity
must he prove that which he says: We demand a general Council, lawfully
called and free, which may hear both parts.
and so convince the accused. Come we then to the proof, let a general
Council be assembled, which may hear both parts: Let it grant to every part
freedom of speech: The Council having heard both sides, let it judge
according to the thing alleged and proved, without respect of any person,
poor or rich, wise or ignorant, ecclesiastical or secular. Let it only have
regard of justice, equity and truth: Let the part convinced by the Testimony of
holy scripture, and of the fathers also, and ancient Councels (As be the first
four general) be subject to the censure which the Council shall ordain. Let
the Pope and his defendors appear personally in the Council: not as judges
(because they accuse us, and we accuse them) but as accusers, and accused. Let
us also appear, seeing we accuse them, and they accuse us. Let this Council
be called. As were the four first general Nicen 1. the Constantinople, the
Ephesian, and the Chalcedonian.

This is the only remedy to take away the dissentions and differences which
are at this day in the Church, as touching life and Doctrine. This remedy in
times past, used the Church in like cases. In the mean time beseech we our God
to move the hearts of the Emperor, Christian kings and Princes that they may
take in hand such an Enterprise for the glory of God, and quietness of his
Church. By the means of which Enterprise vice and false Doctrine,
superstitition, here sie and Idolatry may be condemned. And virtue and
wholesome Doctrine contained in holy scripture, confirmed. But our adversaries
will say unto me, that all this, in the last Council of Trent was concluded,
and that therefore another Council is not needful: Whereunto I answer that,
which so often in this book, The counsel of Trent was not free.
I have said: And chiefly upon the life of Pope Marcellus the second, That
this Council was not free: Since to none (whereof was had the least suspicion
in the world, not to be in all, and by all, slave of the Pope, and sworn to
the Pope) was it permited to speak therein. The rest which have there said to
this purpose, The council of Trent was not general In the council of Trent
were found 4: Cardinlls. 4 Archbishoppes 33. Bishops 47. Deuines all which
almost wear Spaniards and Italions.
and that which is said in the four hundred fifty and eight, and four hundred
fifty and nine pages is to be noted, besides this (say we) that this Council
was not general. For how shall the Council of Trent be called an Ecumenicall
universal, or general Council: Since in it was not found the hundredth part of
Bishops of Christendom. And that this is truth it is evidently seen: For in
it were found, but five Cardinals. Three of which were legates of the Pope:
four Archbishops, two of which were Archbishops in title (or as we call them
in Spain, de anillo) of the ring, namely Olaus magnus entitled Archbishop,
not of Hispall, but of Vpsall, people of Gocia; that never acknowledged the
Pope, nor the Roman Church: The other named Robert Venant, called Archbishop of
Armagh in Ireland under the Crown of England. A land, that as little
acknowledges the Pope: These two poor Archbishops Paul the third maintained,
giving to Olaus 15 crowns a month, and another like thing gave he to Robert.
33 Bishops were found there* all of them Spaniards or Italians. except only 3.
Then were also found between priests and Friars, 47. divines Of whom all, al
most were Spaniards or Italians. Thou see here the great number of bishops
with which the Trident Counsel began: The Italians would not continue there
council in Trent and so they went to Bologua, hut the Spaniardes ^emanined
(...) Trent.
which by times contained 18 years. In which time were holden 25 Sessions. In
many of which nothing was done for want of appearence in the Council. And so in
the 8 Session was nothing done, but that the Italians transported the Council
to Bologna, aland of the popes in Italy. Where was held the ninth Session:
Where in as little then did they: For the Spaniards and the rest (except the
Italians) stayed at Trent, willing to end the Council, In many scessions of
the council of Trent was nothing done for want of apperance.
where it was begun. The 10. Session was held in Bologna, wherein was nothing
done. For those of Trent there abode, expecting them of Bologna: and those of
Bologna, expected them of Trent. And so in this 10 Session was there no other
thing done, but a prolongation to the 15. of September. Which day being come,
they did nothing also: and so the one and the other, for a long time brake up
the Council. In this time died Paul 3. and Julius 3. succeeded him: who (at
the importunity of the Emperor, being much displeased at the translation, and
discontinuance of the Council) commanded, that the Session following, should
the first day of May 1557. be holded at Trent, wherein nothing else was
concluded, but that the twelfth Session should be holden, the first day of
September which day being come. As little was ought done: For the prelates were
not yet come. In the thirteenth Session were found forty Bishops and forty
two divines. In the 15. Session was there nothing done. In the 16. Session no
other thing was concluded, but the suspension of the Council for two years.
And so Julius 3. Marcellus 2. and Paul 4. and Pius 4. was elected in whose
time, the rest of the Sessions were holden: The number of Bishops then
increased, the Council was ended and confirmed by the Pope. For know this,
that all is naught worth, whatsoever the Council decrees if it be not
confirmed by the Pope: Know also, that so subject was this Council to the
Pope: that it made a decree. Wherein it was ordained, that all whatsoever was
in the Council ordained was intended, (So that it nothing derogated from the
Authority and commodity of the Pope: and the Council was not only subject to
the Pope: but to whatsoever other Bishops also. And so in the 18 decree, it was
ordained, that the Bishops, and the rest, to whom it should appertain, might
dispense with whatsoever decree, or decrees of this Council, so that he knew
the cause and commodity so required. This decree was it which gave most
content to the Ecclesiastical persons. For by virtue of this decree, each
thing remains polluted as before, and so nothing reformed. So that the
ecclesiastical Lords take courage and rejoice, because if there be any thing
in this Council that seems over harsh, hard, or bitter, irksome, they
rejoice I say: For that by virtue of this decree, shall they easily for money
have dispensation of the Bishop, or of the Pope: Which dispensation will make
them, so tender and so as a piece of soft bread, and so sweet as the honey.
Moreover, this Council was not admitted of the kings of England, and Denmark,
nor of the Protestant princes: nor of the common wealths of Germany. All these
be one good part of Christendom, inhabiting in Europe. But they will say unto
me: Our adversaries will not abide this 'for they know the scripture, the
fathers and the Councels to be against them:
that these which I have named be heretics. Whereunto I answer: that if they
hold them for heretics, for the same cause, are they to be suffered to speak
freely, that which they think in the Council. Their sayings being heard, they
ought to dispute with them, and convince them by the books, of holy scripture.
And by that which the Doctors and ancient Councels governed by Gods word,
believed and maintained. And now that they say the foresaid protestants, to be
heretics: What will they tell me of kings of France (whom the Pope himself
calls most Christian, for the great service they have done to the seat
Apostolic (which took not this of Trent for a general Council, nor lawfully
called? And so Frauncis 1. sent not, of all his kingdom, one prelate or divine
to the Council No more did his son Henry that succeeded him in his kingdom,
he took it not, for a general Council. As by the protestation, which this
king in the 1551. year, by his Ambassadors made in the Council was proved:
The report is this: James de Annot Abbot de Bellosana, Ambassadors of the king
came suddenly unto Trent, and presented to the Council a letter from his
king. The superscription whereof said: To the assembly of Trent. As Much to say,
As to the meeting at Trent: This superscription being read, the Spanish Bishops
spoke, saying: that such a letter was in contempt of the Council, and that it
ought not to be read nor yet opened. But notwithstanding the rest of the
Council, after they had well debated the buisines concluded, that the letter
ought be opened and read, presupposing that most Christian king, had not used,
such a superscription, either for contempt of the Council, nor to derogate from
it authority: and so was it read. The some of this letter was: The French king
holds not for general nor lawful the Council of Trent.
that he protested, as before he had protested in Rome, that he could not send
to Trent by reason of the wars, the Bishops of his kingdom. He said also:
that he held not this Council for general, or lawful, but for a particular
meeting calnot for the public good of Christendom (the which ought led
together for the profit and commodity of some particular person, and to be the
principal cause of the calling together of a Council) That he thought neither
himself, nor his subjects bound to observe the decrees, that there in should
be made: But that concerning the same he will use (if need should be) the
remedies, which his progenitors had in the like cases used, etc. And the king
of France not contented to have made this protestation in Rome, and in the
Council, but passed yet further, and sent an Ambassador called Marlot, and of
his Council, to the assembly which the Cantons of the Swizers held at Bade, to
persuade them not to take this of Trent, for a Council, nor to make any
reckoning thereof: Whereunto he persuaded also the same Cantons, which were
papists. The Grisons also, which had sent Thomas Planta their Bishop to the
Council (nor approving the Council) caused him to return home. They will not
say Frauncis, and Henry his son, kings of France to be Lutherans but most
Christen (as our adversaries the papists themselves call them) which hold not
for a Council, the Council of Trent, but an assembly of particular persons,
for their particular profit. The same account then that so many Nations, kings
mighty princes, and great States of Europe, not of the protestants only: but
also of the papists (without passing to the Christians of Affrique and Asia,
none of whom do I know, or have read to be found in this Council) made of
this Council, make we also: and so demand we a Council general, lawful, and
free, where each one may freely speak his opinion. Let the Council, and not
the Bishops only (who only with a deliberate voice have tyrannically lift up
themselves) examine and judge what every one shall say, according to the word
of God. Were there such a Council, God we trust would give us speech and
wisdom to maintain and defend our cause, which is his: because it is the
undeceivable truth, which his majesty in his holy Scripture, has revealed.
Concerning the lies and false doctrine of the authority of the Pope, and the
holiness of the Mass, which our adversaries maintain persecuting with fire and
blood, all those that believe it not, nor worship it, and therefore trouble
they the world (as at this day, we see it troubled) We assuredly know, that it
shall perish. According to that, which the Lord says: Every plant which my
heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the root. And we have
the axe, which is the word of God, put to the root of the two trees, the Pope
and the mass to cut them down.

I beseech the Lord our God (Christian reader, which has given thee a desire
and will to be informed and to know the causes why we subject not our selves to
the Pope, nor will hear his Mass, but rather detest and abhor the one and the
other) that he would please to lighten thine understanding, that thou may
comprehend what in these two Treatises have bin said and confirmed, not with
the sayings of men, but of God himself, of his holy Scripture, and give thee
such a mind and strength, that thou may wholly depart out from this wicked
Babylon (which is Rome) and deliver thee from all the enormities, abominations,
horrible superstitions, and detestable idolatries which Rome has invented,
among which the principal is the Mass. These idolatries without doubt be the
chief cause original, and fountain of all miseries, calamities, and wars
where with they that are called Christians, be at this day afflicted. For if
God in the primitive Church plagued with infirmities and death the Corinthians
for the abuses which they had brought into the holy supper, the Apostle S. Paul
yet living, which he reports in his first epistle that he sent them: what
shall we say, this self same Lord will now do, when the malice impiety,
superstition, and idolatry have so greatly increased, that the holy supper of
the Lord (which he instituted, and commanded us in remembrance of him to
clebrate) have they wholly converted into the profane Mass of the Pope? God
chastened and yet does chasten many that unworthily receive the Sacrament,
with death and other punnishments.
Truly the abuses of the Corinthes as touching the Supper, had no agreement by
far with the erroneous and intolerable abuses, which those that are called
Christians commit at this day in their Mass. And notwithstanding all this,
Saint Paul speaking to the Corinthians says unto the^: For which cause many of
you are infirmed and weak, and many sleep (he would have said, are dead.) We
are not then to marvel if God strong and jealous of his honor, do chasten at
this day such an idolatry as is that which in the Mass is committed, 1. Cor.
11.
with such great wars, famine and pestilence: and which is worse and less
perceived, a reprobate sense. And no other mean there is (Christian reader) to
obtain pardon for these superstitions, and passed idolatries, and to get and
keep the grace of God, of whom thou ought not only to expect all prosperity
and goodness, but to endeavor by all possible means to serve him and honor
him: applying thy self with all thine heart to all that; which pleases him:
which is that which his Majesty has ordained and instituted in his holy word:
flying contrariwise all whatsoever may displease and offend him: and especially
all kinds of idolatry, which he more detesteth and abhors then all other
sins and abominations: and as such does punish it (as in the beginning of
the first Treatise we have declared. Such is the Mass: fly then from it, and
follow the holy institution which Jesus Christ our king, prophet, and only
high Priest ordained. This is the holy Supper, as the Evangelists and S. Paul
do show. Do this the^ which Jesus Christ ordained and commanded us to do in
remembrance of him (as by the mercy of God with all simplicity, and without all
superstition or idolatry, is celebrated in our reformed Church) and thou shall
walk aright. All they that do otherwise, err. God give thee grace to walk
aright, that thou be not with this world coondemned. And this do he for the
virtue and merit of the sacrifice, with our high and only Priest Christ, one
only time offered unto him. To whom who lives and reigns with the Father
and the holy Spirit be everlasting glory and perpetual power. Amen.

A SWARM OF FALSE MIRAcles and Illusions of the devil, wherewith Maria de la
visitacion, Prioresse de la Anuntiada of Lisbon, deceived very many: and how
she was discovered and condemned. Anno. 1588.
FOr confirmation of that, which in these two Treatises so often I have said
that the Papists confirm their religion with false miracles inverted by their
ecclesiastical persons, or wrought by the Art of the devil. I will here set
down a most true history delivered in two popish books, which by the
providence of God came to my hands. Out of which, with all faithfulness as he
that must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and give an account, not
only of that he has done, and said, but of that also which he has thought) I
have taken that, which I will deliver. He that will not believe me, let him
read the two books, from whence I have taken that which I say. I name the
Authors of these books, the Printers, the year, and place where they were
imprinted, as a little after you shall see. Our Adversaries I wot well would
have buried all these things: for they open a door to men to seek to
understand and the truth: And that they may understand it, I have put it in
writing. The Lord which knows my desire, bless my travail. Our Adversaries
having no sound proof to confirm their new articles of faith which they have
made (as in very truth there is none) have confirmed them with dreams, with
fained apparitions, and visions of Phantasmes of spirits and of souls come (as
they say) from another world. Now I having met with a new, great and thick
swarm of such things which I found in a Portugal hiue, me seemed I should do
well by a new, familiar and domestical example (which be they that most move,
and that none can deny, seeing it happened in our country of Spain, in the
year 1588) truly to manifest the same: that all the world, and chiefly my
countrymen the Spaniards, for whom I have taken this pain, may hasten to know
them, and knowing them may abhor them, and so may turn to the holy catholic
faith, and true religion of Jesus Christ, which is written in holy Scripture.
This hiue is Maria de la Visitacion, Prioresse of the Monastery de la Anunciada
in Lisbon, who was held so certainly for holy: whose hypocrisy and false
miracles were discovered, and publicly condemned: as we shall after see. I
hearing much talk of the great holiness, admirable life, and marvelous
miracles of this woman whom for excellency they called The holy Nun) advised
my countrymen the Spaniards in a book which I published in the beginning of
the year 1588. not lightly to believe that which was reported of this Nun.
My words are these: Page 419. Another Franciscan (I should have said Dominican)
a few years since rose up in Lisbon, who they said had the five wounds of
Christ as had S. Francis: and many other things they say of her. But I appeal
to him for witness: she shall discover her hypocrisy, as the rest have done. In
the mean time believe not lightly every spirit, but as S. John (1. Ioh. 4. 1.)
warns us, Try the spirits whether they be of God. For many false Prophets (as
himself advises us) are gone out into the world, etc. God will that I should
write this, and that it should be imprinted at the charge of two Christian
Flemmish merchants, who for the great zeal they have that the Spanish nation
should be partaker of the benefit of the reformed profession of the gospel,
whereby God has showed mercy to other nations, will spare neither cost nor
travail. The Lord enrich them with his spiritual gifts, and increase their
faith. For two causes then was this imprinted: the one, to admonish those which
were of God, that they should not suffer themselves to be deceived with false
miracles: the other, to make all those inexcusable, that notwithstanding the
light of the Gospel, which God of his great goodness has in these our last
times revealed) believe lies confirmed by dreams and false miracles, and not
the Gospel written in the holy scripture. He that is of God (faith the Lord,
Ioh. 8. 47.) hears Gods word. These of the second sort therefore which will
not hear them are not of God. His Majesty, if he have chosen the^ to life
eternal, if he have made them vessels of honor, upon whom he will show his
mercy, convert them. And if they be vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction,
confound them. Many have spoken and written of this holy Nun. But he which has
entreated of her most to the purpose. Of all those, which I have heard of, or
read, is one Stephen de Lusignan, a Dominican Friar, who collecting all he
could get, to extol her, compiled a book in French, and dedicated the same to
the Queen of France, imprinted at Paris by John Bessaut 1586. In the beginning
of the book she is pictured like a Dominican Nun, with a black mantle, and a
white coule, a coat, and white loose habit upon the mantle, on her head she
has a crown of thorns: the crucifixe on high set over her, and falling
toward her, with rays from the wounds which reach to the feet and hands of
the Nun: that out of the side comes to a heart which she holds between the
fingers of her right hand: a Dragon she has under her feet a Dominican friar
before her kneeling, and a secular man and woman, and at her left side a pair
of beads hanging. The Title of the book is this which follows.

The great miracles and the most holy wounds, which this present year 1586.
have happened to the right renerend mother, now Prioresse of the Monastery de
la Annuntiada in the city of Lisbon in the kingdom of Portugal, of the order of
preaching Friars, approved by the reverend father, Friar Jews de Granada, and
by other persons worthy of credit: as shall be seen at the end of the
Discourse. In Paris by John Bessaut. 1586.

The Epistle dedicatory says thus.

To the most Christian Queen Luisa de Lorena, Queen of France, mirror of all
virtue, godliness and sweetness: Health.

Madam, having seen your Majesty most devoted to the most holy sacrament of
the altar, and to the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas of Aquine, in whose Chapel
you have instituted every month a solemn procession, with carrying the most
holy sacrament, and a Mass sung by all the religious of our College and
having considered, that because of your great devotion, and of the greatness of
your rare virtues and perfections, every man of any worth borne, enforces
himself to offer you most pleasing things. I (albeit the least of the^) am
also willing to ra^ge my self into the number of these. Therefore having found
certain writings printed in diverse cities, I have collected and put them all
together. In which I have found the greatest miracles, and effects, that ever
Almighty God in our times wrought in the person of a most noble, most virtuous,
and most religious virgin, mother Mary de la Visitacion, Prioresse de la
Anunciada of Lisbon in the kingdom of Portugal, most devoted to the holy
Sacrament, and the said Saint Thomas of Aquine: by whose merits and
intercessions she has deserved to have visibly for her husband Jesus Christ
crucified, and his five most holy wounds: by means whereof, the divine Majesty
does continually diverse miracles: the which in this book I humbly offer to
your Majesty, to the end that you so much the more fervently may follow and
continue these your devotions, which you have begun, and that it would please
your majesty to accept of this most holy virgin, a special servant of our
Lord that by her merits and intercession your Majesty may obtain that you
desire, as well concerning this whole kingdom, as all Christendo^e besides. And
if I for my part, Madam, beseech God to grant that which your M. desires, with
a most happy and long life. From the covent of S. Dominick at Paris the 20. of
August 1586. Your most humble and obedient servant F. Stephen de Lusignan of
the order of S. Dom.

This Lusignan for confirmation of that which he says, sets down 3
letters: the 1. is from the Prouincial, F. Antonio de la Cerda, sent to F.
Ferdinando de Castro, Proctor in Rome for the said province of Portugal, that
he should show it unto the pope. The date is from Lisbon 14. of March 1584.
This letter translated into Italian, was with license of the holy inquisitio^
printed in Rome and Plazencia, and afterward translated into French. All this
says Lusignan. Come we now to the letter which was to be showed to the Pope.
Page 8. it says. Mother Mary de la Visitacion at 11, years of age entered into
the Monastery de la Anunciada, and at 16. years made profession. In which
time, our Lord Jesus Christ appeared to this Religious, to recompense her
merits, and took her to his wise, saying to her the words of the Prophet
Jeremy, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with mercy have I
drawn thee. And from that time forward he still appeared to her, granting her
very many particular graces, and favors speaking and conuersing familiarly
with her: as one friend does with another, in such sort as God talked and
discoursed with Moses: and oftentimes appeared he to her, accompanied with he
and she Saints, as with Mary Magdalen (for much devoted was this Religious to
Magdalen and wontedly called her her fair) and accompanied with our father S
Dominicke, and with S. Tho. of Aquin Saint Katherin of Seen and other times
appeared he alone and very familiar, helping her to say the Cannonicall hours:
and at the End of every Psalm would she say: Gloria Patriet tibi and Spiritui
Sancto; Or, as says friar Lewys de Granada, and Tibifilio (To wit) Glory be to
the Father, and to thee his Son, and to the holy ghost, etc.

In the 9. Page he says: To communicate and receive her Creator was her
ordinary custom: during which time the other Nuns saw her in a trance for a
long space rapt up in Spirit, until her Governor commanded her to go to the
Communion with the other Religious. And then returning to her self, she went
most obediently forthwith to accomplish this holy mystery, etc.

In the 10. page (speaking of her great charity) he recounteth a miracle, and
this it is. In the Monastery there was a Nun that was very weak, and withal
had this fancy, that she would in no wise eat any meat, supposing that all
sorts of meats were poisoned: and in this frantic humor she kept her teeth
shut, by reason whereof her lips and jaws were covered with filth and matter.
This religious Marie, having compassion of the poor frantic Nun, and moved
with a fervent charity to her, went to see her: and praying her to eat a piece
of bread, which she offered her, assured her it had no poison in it. The
diseased answered: If you will eat of the same bread, and bite in the side
that I with my teeth and jaws (which were cankered) will bite, then will I
believe that the bread has no poison, and that it is good bread* Marie full of
charity, enforced her self, and with a strong heart, least she should vomit,
promised to do so. Then took she the bread and bit thereof in the same place
that the frantike Nun had bitten. And this she did with incredible
cheerfulness: hardly had she thus done, when our Lord Jesus Christ (by reason
of his charity) appeared to the said Mary and said unto her: For this thy so
charitable an act, I will give health to this diseased. And so was the sick
healed of her infirmity.

The 11. page says: That (as often, as being in the Monastery, she heard the
little bell, which accompanied the most holy sacrament of our Lord, when they
carried it to the diseased through the city) she kneeled down on the ground
with tears, and was rapt up in a trance, as witness the religious of the said
Monastery* desirous is she of this most holy sacrament, etc. so hunger after
it that Jesus Christ appears very often visibly unto her, and he himself
gives himself to this religious. The wednesday in the holy week, she went
into the low quire, where the Nuns through a window do wontedly receive the
holy communion, at the hands of the priest, who is on the other side without:
where seeing that all the Nuns had communnicated, and that there was never a
consecrat host left for her: she betook her self to prayer, entreating with
tears the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that she might have means to
comunicate, etc. And a little after: Then the holy place (where so rich a
treasure as is the body of our Lord Jesus Christ was kept) opened of his own
accord, and one of the consecrate forms went forth without any visible help,
and offered it self to the mouth of this Religious woman which with most great
devotion and humility she received. Another time on Innocents day another like
miracle happened unto her, who ever increasing in perfecttion and virtue is now
come to so high an estate. That about four or five years since, Jesus Christ
crucified appeared unto her all shining, from whose right side issued a beam
of fire which stroke upon the left side of this Religious, who stood right
against the Crucifixe made and left in her flesh a red mark as big as the
stroke of Lance, and this wound on certain days, namely at every Friday
opens: from whence issue certain drops of blood: and she feels (she
says) great grief of the said wound. The di^ine Majesty has showed these
wonders since she was made Prioresse; which was in the year 1583. in the
beginning of Iulie, etc.

Page 12. When she is in her Cell at prayer the religious see her environed
with brightness, and lifted up into the air with a great light, which issues
from her breast and face, which signify the great and fervent charity and
love of God that is in her. Lastly upon the day of Saint Thomas of Aquine the
7. of March 1584. she (being before advised thereto by our Lord Jesus, and by
the said Saint Thomas) communicated this vision to her Provincial: And being
by him exhorted thereunto for nine days together every day first confessed her
self, she received the most holy communion. In these days God showed many
favors, with much brightness by night. As she was praying in the Quire on the
said feast of Saint Thomas, after Mattens, between the hours of four and
five in the morning, Jesus Christ crucified, gloriously shining, appeared unto
her, as before he had appeared, with his five most holy wounds. From his feet,
hands and side issued out beams of fire, which wounded the hands, feet and
side of this Religious. The wounds and marks of bloody color most fair
remain in her, as well within the palms of the hands and the feet, as without:
the one in a round figure like to a nail, answering the other: and the same
side was marked in the same place, wherein she had before been wounded: but
with a sign or mark far more apparent. She confesses that she feels extreme
grief of the said wounds, etc. At the end of the letter the Provincial has
these words: Some of my Religious bring I with me, to give good testimony of
that which I have said: and he names these: Friar Antonio de la Cerda,
Prouincial of Portugal (who wrote this letter) F. Gasper Leiton, Rege^t of the
College of Lisbon, and preacher to the king: Friar Lewys de Granada, Friar
Pedro de Somer, Co^fessor of the most illustrious D. Henry Cardinal, that
afterward was K. of Portugal

The second Letter is from Friar Lewys de Granada, sent to the Patriarch of
Valencia, The date is from Lisbon the 18. of March 1584. the principal points
are these. In the 16. page of the book it says: that S. Thomas appeared unto
her 10 days before his feast, and told her, she should prepare her self: for
upon his feast day the Lord would come to visit her, and show unto her grace
and particular favor, namely, that of the impression of the five wounds: as
was said in the first letter, etc. Also he says: five or six days the pain
endured: during which time, when she stepped to walk, the soales of her feet
(she thought trod upon nails etc. And page 18. it says: On Tenable
Wednesday, she was in the Quire with great desire to communicate in a window by
which the Religious did communicate, right against whereunto was an altar,
where the little casket of the most holy Sacrament stood: for the great altar
was occupied with the Sepulcher, or monument that was made upon it. In the
mean while he saw the little casket open and a consecrate host to issue
thereout, which most devoutly she received, etc. And Page 19. She told me that
for 7. years every Thursday at the Auc Marie hour she has felt in her head
all the pains of the crown of thorns: insomuch that the blood issues forth:
and she has in her head some small pricks and holes of the said thorns: and
the pains endure until Friday at the same hour. She had at a certain time a
great desire (as very often she has) to communicate: at which time she saw in
spirit S. John Evangelist celebrate. The Mass being ended, a consecrate host
came from the Altar. She then returning to her self (for she was rapt or
ravished in spirit) she found that she had the said host in her mouth, etc.
All this which I have written (says Friar Jews de Granada) she her self told
me: and I should write much more, if I would reckon all the marvelous things
which our Lord works in this blessed soul, etc.

The third Letter is from the same Provincial, Friar Antonio de la Cerda, sent
to Friar Ferdiando de Castro, Proctor in Rome, for the province of Portugal.
The date is at Lisbon, the 30. of March 1585. Thus it says: Since your
departure from this city, it has pleased our Lord from day to day more
manifestly to declare how highly he esteems la Anunciada. For infinite be the
miracles* as well corporal as spiritual, which by her means he has wrought
in these parts: which has been the cause that very many Gentlemen have been
moved to become Friars, to whom with my hands I have given the habit. The fame
of which miracles has so far streched, that it is come to the Mores dwelling
in Alualady, which is a castle three leagues from Lisbon: Three whereof, because
the hour for them to turn Christians it should seem drew near, maruellously
desired to see the Prioresse: for believe they could not so great miracles, as
were reported of her. And from thenceforth the holy Spirit inwardly moved and
provoked them, more and more kindling in their hearts the desire to see the
said servant of God. And so much daily increased this desire in the^, that one
day very early not acquainting one another with th their purposes, they
departed all 3 from Alualady for this city of Lisbon, and came to seek me in
this covent, saying, that they knew not what it was, which so inwardly had
moved and burned them with so fervent a desire to see the Prioresse. And whiles
one of the told me these things behold, there comes the other and afterward
the third. And when they met all three together, they understood that they all
demanded one self same thing: they seeing themselves inflamed with one self
same desire, were greatly astonished: and perceiving that this proceeded of one
self moving of the holy Spirit, and not of curiosity, as some would presume,
I carried them to the monastery de la Anunciada, and went into the parlor, and
thence sent word to the Prioresse, that I would speak with her, without
letting her understand why she was called. She presently came: and the 3
Moors were fast by me when we spoke together. She lift up her veil to talk
with me* and scarcely had the three Moors seen her when they fell groueling
to the earth. And in such manner, that needful it was, some which were present
should help them up. When they arose beholding her eftsoons, they kneeled on
their knees with out a word speaking. But that they lamented without ceassing
having their eyes for a long time fixed upon the Prioresse. And when I asked
them why they spoke not to the Prioresse? They answered, that they saw in her
so great and admirable things that they knew not what to speak. Having thus
said, they besought the Prioresse, that he which was by her might give them
baptism. She answered, if they would be baptized, that I was there present who
would cause them to be baptized. Adding moreover, that this to her Spouse
should be greatly pleasing. This done, I returned, leading with me the Moors
(albeit to their great sorrow for they would not have parted from the
Prioresse) home to my Covent. Of all this I advertised the Archbishop, who sent
forthwith for the Moors, and I (accompanied with some Fathers) brought them.
Brought (as they were) they confessed to the Archbishop in our presence, that
they had seen near unto the Prioresse, Jesus Christ in humane shape, put upon
the cross. Which miracle was so admirable, that the same thereof stretched
through all the kingdom: and great multitudes of people are come to this city
to see the^ baptized. The Archbishop sent for the Prioresse, to give them their
names. The which at my command she gave unto them. Manuel she called the
first, John the second and the third Thomas: who were in this house baptized
and with us continue.

The second miracle which the Provincial tells is this: A Lady of quality
there was which had a cancker in one of her Lips. This lady talking with Dona
Vincencia told her, that the day following they were to cut the canker: The
Lady Vincencia moved with compassion, gave unto her a small piece of fine
linen cloth: which the Prioresse was wont to draw over her side, saying: that
she should put it upon her canker: for she trusted in God that when they
should cut it, she should feel no grief at all, etc. The Lady so did. And
with great devotion promised, that if she found so much good hereby, that in
cutting of her canker, she should feel no pain, she would publish to her
power, that God, through the merits of the Prioresse his servant, had granted
her this so singular and admirable mercy. This simplicity displeased not God,
But he granted the rather what she had demanded: for rising up early the day
following, she found her self whole, and without any sign where the canker,
nor any evil had been, etc. And a little lower. Of all this were instruments
made by art of a notary public, at command of the Cardinals most illustrious
worship.

The 3. Miracle which the prouincall, tells is, Anna Rodrigues del Crucifixo,
of the third order of Frauncis, brought with her two small pieces of a wodden
Cross, which the prioresse had given her. And going to visit one that was
diseased demanded a little water to drink. Anna took a porcelan, and pist
water into it. And after in the presence of them all, took a piece of the
Cross, which the Prioresse had given her, and making a sign of the Cross,
cast it into the Porcelan. The piece went to the bottom. And eftsoons (like a
candle on a candlestick) arose up right on end. Of this water gave she the
pacie^t to drink: Who then began to find himself better, and demanded, what
was that, they had given him, which had done him much good. After they had cold
him, what had passed, he prayed them to give him more water then before, to
drink. Then cast they more water into the Porcelane, where in also was the
piece of the Cross. Anna Rodrigues, supposing that the diseased in drinking,
had swallowed the same piece, cast in the other, the which went also to the
bottom And commning to the other which stood in end in the porcelane, cleaued
unto, and was joined together with it. So that of those two, was made a far
little Cross which moved all that saw it, to very great devotion. Scarcely
the second time, had the sickman tasted of the water, but he became whole and
sound, and the third day also arose from his bed, and went to walk through the
city. Of this also was information made by the commandment of the most
illustrious Legate. I could (says the prouincial) recount also many other like
things. Friar Stephen de Lusignan sets this down for conclusion.

The ten particular and principal instructions which we draw from these
marvelous effects in these letters missiue declared.
1. The true he and she religious, are much pleasing to God 2. Holy obedience,
is meritorious and charity, humanity, and simplicity of life. 3. Virginity is a
very pleasing spouse of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. It is needful to reverence
and honor the holy Images. 5. The he and she Saints of Paradise, are
intercessors and advocates for us. 6. It is needful to acknowledge the truth
of the most holy sacrament of the Altar. 7. He pleases God which often times
receives so great^ sacrament. 8. The gifts and graces of Jesus Christ cannot
be obtained, without sorrow, prayers and devotions. 9. The passion and death of
Jesus Christ, by means of our own works, are profittable for us. 10. Miracles
have ever continued in the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish Church. At the
end of this book of the holy Nun, was this.
Our holy father Sistus 5. through the devotion and request, of the most
Catholic king of Spain, has ordained to be made, the process of the
miracles of Friar Jews de Beltrum, in Aragon, one of the order of the Friars
of S. Dominick to put him in the number, and Catalogue of the Saints: and
blessed (which shall be another such, as this, of this holy Nun) All that I
have said is drawn out of the french book, which Friar Stephen wrote, in
praise of this holy Nun. So famous was the same of this Nuns holiness:
That Cardinal Albertus of Austria sent information to Pope Sistus 5. To whom
the Pope wrote this letter following translated into Latin with great joy have
we read, that thou have procured to be written, the virtues of the Prioresse of
the monastery de la Anunciada, of the most holy virgin, And of the great
benefits, which God has showed her, we pray the divine goodness to make her
from day to day more worthy of his grace, and enrich her with his heavenly
gift, for the glory of his name and joy of his faithful. Given in S. Mary's at
Rome, with the little Ring of the fisher. The 10. of September 1584. and of our
Bishopdome, etc. Subscribed Antonio Prucha Badulini. Lib. 22. cap. 29. 3.
Friar John de Pineca, in his book entitled Monarchia ecclesiastica printed
at Salama^ca by John Ferna^dez making mention of the Saints, that had the
wounds of Christ: names this Mary. And so says he, dyed the glorious Saint
Katherine of Sena in the 1380. year, whose marvelous life wrote S. Antonius
and Raimond of Capua: And albeit they both say, that the wounds of our redeemer
were printed upon her, S. Antonius affirms that at the request of the
Saints, they were not showed on her body: yet suffered she incredible
pains. And John Brugmano writes: that the holy virgin Saint Lyduuina
received the wounds of the redeemer: But that the virgin besought God. That to
avoid the applause of the world they should be covered: And then the skin
grew and covered the wounds Lorenco Surio, says: that the holy virgin
Gerturd of Esten, upon good Friday in the 1340. year received the wounds,
and for many days ran blood from them seven times a day. At this time it is
publicly said, and there are pictures of her, that there is a religious in
Portugal of the order of Saint Dominick, Which has the wounds of our redeemer
Hitherto Friar John de Pineda. The same author part 3. lib. 22. cap. 23. 3.
affirms for an approved thing; that their Saint Frauncis had the wounds of
Jesus Christ: as a little lower ye shall perceive. Concerning those which had
the five wounds I will recount to this purpose, an admirable history whereof
make mention many of our adversaries who as well in Dutch as in Latin, both in
verse and prose have written that the Dominick Friars have always holden a
certain emulation, envy and hatred toward the Franciscans, for both being
beggars, they could not well agree together. It happened tin Berne one of the 3
Cantons of the Swizers in the a thousand 5 hundred and ninth year that the
Franciscans were much more esteemed and favored then the Dominicks which the
Dominicks: perceauing, much stomacked: and so they consulted to find remedy for
such a mischief. Four of the chief of their order, came to understand the
causes, why the Franciscans were before them preferred. These two, besides
others which I will declare, they found to be the principal causes: first,
that Saint Frauncis had the wounds of Christ. The other, the brawling Question
which was between them, and the Franciscans, whether the virgin Mary was
conceived in sin or no. The Domincans did affirm it: the Franciscans denied
it. For this cause, the common people moved with foolish devotion, and with a
zeal without knowledge, much loved the Franciscans, and made no reckoning of
the Dominicks. The Dominicks then understanding the cause of their so great
evil, the remedy which they put, was this. A simple Friar they took, which
they had in their covent, a young frantique, or holy hypocrite, and so deceived
him with many persuasions and gave him certain inchaunted drinks, that the
small understanding which he had, they took quite from him. They mark, as
they could, the five wounds upon him. They made him to believe (and he foolish
also believed it) that he had then truly as S. Frauncis had them. And here
stayed they not: They made him believe, that the most holy virgin Saint
Barbara, and Saint Catalina de Sena, appeared, and revealed great things unto
him, they made him believe, that S. Mary gave him the red consecrated host, and
that she presented him with the blood of Christ and that she commanded him to
go the Cabildo or Senate, and say, that which she had commanded, given him in.
And among other things, this was one: that the holy virgin was conceived in
sin, and that for this cause, they ought in no wise to permit the Franciscans,
to dwell in their City, for that (besides that they are certain lost persons,
and without reformation) they taught a gross error, which ought in no wise to
be suffered. That the holy virgin was conceived without sin. He told them also,
that they should highly houour an Image of the holy virgin (which their Friars
had made by a certain Art) that distilled tears by the eyes as though it had
wept. All this at first was believed, that red blood was adored. As the very
blood of Christ, and was sent to great Lords, as an incomparable Treasure.
Great concourse there was to the weeping Image. So well knew the Dominickes to
draw water to their mill, that they only were holden for holy, and so carried
they all the Alms and devotions of the people. And the poor Franciscans were
cast aside, and no man made reckoning of them. The Franciscans then seeing
themselves so despised, and perceiving (like people as well exercised in false
miracles) as were the Dominickes, and the rest of the popish Clergy) the craft
and deceit of the Dominickes: used great diligence to discover the villainy. So
much did they, that at last it was discovered. The four principal Authors of
this Tragedy in the one thousand five hundred and ninth year, were burned, and
the rest were pardoned. Those deceauers that so shamelesly, make a mockery of
religion (besides these aforesaid) confessed in their torments great
abominations. (As the papists themselves that wrote this History do witness
wherein the Pope sending His Legate for this purpose, put all, to scilence: For
he feared to loose his ecclesiastical persons, which so great service with
their false miracles have done and do unto him. For well understands the
Pope, their superstitions and Idolatries (whereof their religion is full) to
have been invented or at the least confirmed with like deceipts of feigned
apparitions, revelations and false miracles. Into this reprobate sense, God
leaves them to fall, for not reading of the holy Scripture: which is the
only rule of the well living and serving of God. As his majesty will be
served. But return we now to our holy Nun, who with full gale until now,
most happily sailed, and set (as say the Gentiles) on the top of Fortunes
wheel, so much as was possible of small and great. As Well in Portugal, as else
where, was esteemed and reverenced. O how often of her was it said. Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck. She nothing
wanted in this world to be wholly blessed, but that then she should die. O how
great a Saint shall hell possess. O how great a Saint has the Roman Church
lost. Now that we have hard the Pro, Let us hear the Contra. From this spouse
of Jesus Christ, so holy, so charitable, and so miraculous, would the true
Jesus Christ) not her husband which was the devil) that the Mask of
hypocrisy, wherewith she was covered, should be taken away, and her
abominations, wickedness, superstitions, and Idolatries discovered. And so at
the end of the admirable year 1588. was she condemned: as a certain book,
which at the beginning of the year following, being the 1589. was printed at
Seuil, does witness: from whence word for word have I drawn that I will say
against other. The title thereof is this.

A Relation of the holiness and wounds of Mother Mary de la Visitation, which
was Prioresse de la Annuntiada of Lisbon, and that which was declared, in the
Sentence which was given.

All the book will I not set down, but the principal points thereof will I
take for my purpose. Thus then it begins. Having committed the verification
of the wounds and holiness of Marie Prioresse de la Annunciada of the order
of Saint Dominick, to the most reverend and illustrious Archbishoppes of Lisbon
and Braga, the Bishop de la Guardia, the Prouincial of Saint Dominiks order,
the Inquisitors of this City of Lisbon and Doctor Paulo Alfonso of his
majesty's Council. The said Lords went to the Monastery, upon the said
verification and examination, by the testimony of many Nuns of the said
Monastery which consentingly, declared, that the holiness of the Prioresse was
feigned, and the wounds painted. The information ended, the said Prioresse was
brought before them whom they commanded to swear upon the Mass book and
Christ crucified, that she should say the truth, of that should be demanded
of her. And if she so said: that God should help her: And if not, that the
devil should carry her away. Frst how said she that she had often times seen
the mother of God? And how had she the wounds: By the oath she had made, she
answered: That at nine or ten years of age, she entered into the Monastery.
And after she had made profession, being seventeen years old, one day, as
she was praying, to her was it revealed, that God would cherish her: And that
anonother like day, when she was at prayer, came the Angels and put a Crown
of thorns upon her head: which wounded her. And many days after being in
prayer, Christ crucrufied apeared unto her and of the beams that issued from
his wounds, were those which she had, imprinted: And Christ (whom she called
husband) oftentimes appeared to her) and talked with her, and help her to say
over the prayers, and that she confessed to this confessor that she said:
Gloria Patri, and tibi and Spiritui sancto. The Confessor told her she should
no more say so: but Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui sancto: as says the
holy mother the Church. And in a conference which she had with her husband,
she told him that which her Confessor had said unto her. And the husband
answered: she should do what her Confessor had commanded her. The foresaid
Fathers seeing she sought each way to make her self holy, and yet all was
feigned, as the other Nuns declared unto them; they persuaded her to say the
truth of that which had passed, seeing all was fictions, and so to them it
appeared, by information which they had taken: and that she should crave
mercy: and so would they have compassion upon her. But (she persisting that no
other truth there was, but that which she had said, as her husband well knew)
they left her. Another day in the Visitation which they had with her, they
took hard soap and hot water, and well washed her hands and wounds. And when
they began to do it, she fained to have great pain. And after a while that
they had washed them, the said wounds were taken from her. And when she saw
they were taken away, she fell to the earth, and began to weep, sigh, and
crave mercy, and cast her self at the feet of the said Lords: who willing
her to confess the truth: she was wearied and dead (said she) and that they
should leave her till another day, and she would confess the truth: and so
they left her in guard of the Nuns, charging them on pain of
excommunication, they should for no cause leave her alone. Another day the
foresaid Lords returned to the Monastery, and caused the said Prioresse to be
brought before them. And demanding of her how that business passed: she said:
that the truth was, because men should esteem her holy, she had painted the
wounds on her hands, and that ordinarily she so did: And that, that of the
side she had only done thrice with a knife which she had in her comb box.
Once when she published, that the said wounds were made: Another time at a
visitation, made by the Provincial of their order the last, this which now is
done: being like unto the scratch of a pen. And that the Crown of thorns
upon her head she made, pricking herself with a knife, and making the blood
to issue forth: and that this she had done six or seven times, Being demanded
how she imprinted in the clothes, the five drops of blood which were (said
she) of the wound in the side: She answered, that she carefully took certain
holland clothes, and painted them with blood, and when they gave her some, to
touch the wound which she feigned in her side: she cut them before those
which gave them in such sort, that they were like unto those which she had,
and put them upon her breast, and draw fourth, and gave them those, which
she had painted. Being demanded, when the Moore captain, of them, resident
in this City of Lisbon, and had been viceroye of Biquinos came to see her how
printed she the wounds in the little cloth, which she gave him: She answered.
Because she saw that the Moore did mark her, she drew a little, the curtain
of the lettife window, faining, that for shame he should not see her putting
the cloth upon her breast, she took out of her comb box a knife, and so
pticked her finger that it bled, and painted therewith the same cloth, and
afterward put it upon the breast and began to strain the same before them
all: and drew it out imprinted with blood and all believed, it was the blood
of her side, being demanded how she had put those drops of blood upon the
rotchet of ^he Popes Collector: She answered: That the Collector persuading
her, to put some blood of her wounds upon the said rotchet at such time as
she chanced to have a blister on her hand she took it away in such sort,
that the blood issued and therewith rubbed she her hand in the rotchet, and it
remained died with blood. Being demanded how she lift up her self: And how
the Nuns saw her many times, to shine in her Cell: She answered: that she
kindled in a chasing dish a fire with small light, and put before it a lookeing
glass, and that the light stroke upon the glass, and the reflection of the
glass glimpsed in her face: And that she should seem to have been lifted
up, she put her feet upon Chapins or women's shoes: other times upon timber,
which she had purposely provided: whereupon she so sat, that she seemed to be
lifted up into the air: demanded, that being in mortal sin, how she dared
every day to communicate: She answered: She ever trusted that our Lord would
draw her in time to repentance: and hereof she craved mercy of the foresaid
Lords. This notwithstanding, they proceeded to take further information:
wherein the Nuns declared, that she being one day in the Chapter, was lifted
up, and a place made by her side, as though some man should sit there:
Demanding of her for what purpose she did that she said: See ye not that our
father Saint Dominicke came thither, and there sits: And many other things,
which to avoid tediousness, I omit.

The foresaid process seen by the foresaid Lords, and the offenses which
thereof redounded against the Prioresse: the sixth of the instant month of
December in the 1588 year, they pronounced sentence against her, in the
Monastery of the mother of God, of the order of Saint Francis, in this city:
from whence they commanded to carry her, and in her presence was published
and read the sentence which we will now declare. And afterward, the 8. of the
said month in the pulpit of the great Church of this city, at the time of the
great Mass with an high and audible voice was published. Whereby they declared
that through only zeal, that men should deem her holy, all that to be and
have been fained. And for that she had not dealt with, nor inuocated the
devil, they adjudged her to perpetual imprisonment. And that in five years
she might not be confessed, nor communicate, except in case of necessity: and
three feasts in the year, and in the Iubilee: and that she should neither
bear veil nor habit, nor have any active or passive voice in the Chapter, nor
be elected to any office: And that for five years she should eat upon the
ground, and that the fragments remaining might not to any (no not to the poor)
be given, but burned: and that when they were to go forth of the dyning place,
she should lie prostrate on the earth, that all the Nuns might pass over
her: and that on wednesdayes and frydayes they should give her discipline
whiles the psalm of Miserere mei last. And that she should be carried forth
of the city to a Monastery of the same order, 25, leagues upwards the river
Tei^, where she should be included in a cell, and not go out of the cell, but
at the Massetime and Cannonicall hours: and that she might talk with no Nun
(one excepted) which the Prioresse of that Monastery should appoint her; and
that she should be instructed in the faith. And that her picture upon the wall
of the Annunciada should be blotted out, that no after sign remain there ever
to have been: and that the small clothes with the five wounds, and other her
things should be carried to the Inquisitors, where they should be: and otherwise
to the Prouisor, or curate of the parish, who was to appoint what should be
done with them.

Now to advise all those that truly desire to serve Christ, of whose name they
are called Christians, and will live according to his holy Gospel and law, and
not according to that which men have invented to live in pleasure. Some notes
and considerations will I here make of that which has been said upon the life
and sentence of this holy Nun. First, as touching the ten instructions drawn
by Lusignan, out of the Letters missiue, It were good to show how false they be
all in general, and every one in particular. For not upon the word of God, but
upon dreams, false miracles, illusions of the devil, and imaginations of a
cursed hypocrite (which fained her self to be no less then Christ) have they
any foundation. But seeing our adversaries by public sentence have condemned
all that contained in the Letters, concerning the holiness and miracles of
this Nun, to be false, fained, and hypocritically done. I will not pain my
self to prove their falsehood. Only I will tell them: that when they will
prove their new articles of faith, they seek better proofs. For dreams and
false miracles are now nothing worth. The time through the mercy of God, is
not now as wontedly it was, when the Clergy easily deceived the people, and
made them to believe all whatsoever they listed. Blessed be the Lord for the
light which in our times he has given us. His Majesty give us grace to draw
near unto it: For the servant that knows his masters will, and does it not,
shall be more punished then he that knows it not. Besides this, there is
nothing in these his ten instructions, which has not already in the two
precedent Treatises, of the Pope, and of the Mass, been sufficiently confuted.
To them I refer my self. Our redeemer Jesus Christ, when he began to
preach his Gospel, confirmed the same with true miracles: and departing from
this world (as Saint Mark in the last chapter of his Gospel declares) for
the same effect to confirm the Evangelical doctrine, he left to his Church
the gift of working miracles. This gift in the Church (I would say in some of
the faithful, for all had it not, as witnesses Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12. where
reckoning up the gifts of the holy Spirit, and how he distrributeth them
amongst other, he says And to another are given the gifts of holiness by the
same Spirit. To another working of miracles, etc.) for some time continued,
until the doctrine was confirmed, and then afterward ceased. Albeit God,
using his omnipotency, leaves not sometimes to do miracles. But this is
extraordinary, and not common as then it was. The Antichristians willing to be
sold for Christians, pretend, and do confirm their new and false doctrine
with new and false miracles, of which their books be full. For this is the
chief proof wherewith they confirm their doctrine.

Concerning that of the five wounds, there is no word in all the new Testament,
nor in any of the ancient Doctors, which for the space of one thousand and two
hundred years lived in the Church of God, that any of the Apostles, no not
Saint John the dearly beloved Disciple, nor yet the holy mother of our
redeemer her self has had them; nor ever was it said, an^e he or she Saint
in all this time to have had them: for so much as I remember, to have read the
first, that they say, had them, was Saint Francis, and this a few years before
his death: who died in the 1226. year. The book of Conformities, fol ^.
demands. In which of the saints have the miraculous wounds of Christ been
imprinted? The same answers: In none, but in the blessed our Father Saint
Frauncis: As witnesses the Roman Church: and commands the faithful to
believe it. Afterward say same: that in the 1340. year Saint Gertrude had
them. And holy Ludiuina (say they but know not in what year) also had them.
Also they say, that S. Katherine of Sena, who died in the 1380. year. And in
our days, in the 1588. year, was a public voice and fame* that the holy
Nun of Lisbon had them, For so great a truth hold they that of Saint Francis:
that if any believe it not, or doubt it, for an heretic is he ^olden, and as
an heretic ought he to be punished. So that it is now one of their new
articles of faith. And so Pope Gregory did command it to be believed. The
same commanded Pope Alexander the fourth, and says, that with his own eyes he
saw the^, as in his Bull he does witness. Another such like Bull gave out Pope
Nicholas 3 and Pope Bendict 12. who granted (besides this) to the Franciscan
Friars, that they should celebrate the feast of the wounds of Saint Francis.
All this says the book entitled, Of the Conformities of Saint Francis, with
Jesus Christ, A book full of blasphemies seeing it makes him equal with
Jesus Christ, and proves S. Francis with many reasonles reasons, to have bin
much more excellent then S. John Baptist. Blasphemy, which says S. Francis to
be much more excellent then S. John Baptist.
Amongst which he sets these down, that he converted many more than John,
that he preached repentance 18 years, and instituted the order of Penance: and
S. John but 2 years, and some what more preached. John received of the Lord
the word of repenta^^e: Francis received it of the Lord and of the Pope. And
which is more (terrible blasphemy to add ought to the infinite power of the
Lord) S. John was a friend of the Bridegroom. The like to the Lord Jesus Christ
was the blessed S. Francis. In holiness to the world was John most singular.
In conformity of his wounds with Christ was Francis then all men more
excellent. S. John is advanced into the order of the Seraphins. In the same
Seraphical order and seat of Lucifer is placed the blessed S. Francis, etc. If
this be not to make a mockery of Christian Religion, of the majesty of the Son
of God, and of the holiness of Saint John Baptist, what shall be? Friar John
de Pineda, a Friar Franciscan. part. 3. lib. 22. cap. 23. 3. speaking of his
holy Saint Francis, says thus: A few years before his death, fasting and
praying upon the Eve of Saint Michael the Archangell, he received in his
virginal body the wounds of Jesus Christ, by the impression of the same Jesus
Christ. as say Vbertino and the Master Pisano, S* Francis himself to have
revealed the same, having suffered most terrible pains when they were
imprinted, etc. He confirms his saying, with the sayings of Vbertino and the
Master Pisano, who is the Author of that blasphemous book of Conformities.
They say the same. Of no great credit be these two Authors: as easily as they
speak it, with the same facility will we condemn it.

It is said of Saint Francis, that he covered the wounds of S. Katherine of
Seen, says Antonius, that she besought God they should not be showed upon her
body: Of S. Lyduuina says John Brugmano, that to avoid the applause of the
world, she besought the same at God his hands. Of S. Gertrude says Surius,
that for many days ran blood from them 7. times every day. But of our holy
Nun of Lisbon say the Provincial, and Friar Jews de Granada, and it was the
public voice and fame, that she had them and showed them, and that they
yielded always fresh blood, wherewith she painted the small clothes which
they gave her. The Provincial says, that the wound of the side on certain
days, namely the fridayes, opened; and that certain drops of blood issued
from the same. etc. Surely this was much more shameless than all the others.
Saint Francis and the rest said to have the wounds, lived in the times of great
ignorance, as well of good letters, as of true and pure Christian religion, when
the Roman Antichrist was absolute Lord of all, and swayed both swords,
spiritual and temporal. Then was there none that durst whisper against him,
nor that was so bold to say unto him, thou do wickedly: but it should cost
him his life, or little less. An easy thing was it then, with such like
fictions of wounds and other miracles to deceive the simple poor common
people. But now that the Lord has given so great light of his Gospel, a very
hard thing shall it be to be long time manitained with like opinion of
holiness: by and by flies away hypocrisy: by and by God raises up some to
speak and write against it. Unhappy therefore was this Nun, as touching the
word, that in our time and not in their days, she lived. Had those, said to
have the wounds, been well examined, and with hot water and hard soap washed,
their hypocrisy no no doubt had been discovered, as well as that of our Marie
de la Visitacion: Wherein as touching the soul, were they more unhappy then
she: seeing they died in their hypocrisy, wherewith they deceived many, and
until this day do deceive with it. But our Mary living of her hypocrisy
convinced, in time (it may be) will she employ her great wit to better purpose,
and crave mercy at the hands of God, whom so wickedly she has offended. And
so his Majesty give her grace truly to convert to the true Christian religion:
which not with dreams, nor false miracles, but with the word of God it self is
confirmed. His Majesty show her this grace and mercy. Had this miserable
creature (as did the others) died before her hypocrisy had bin discovered,
cannonized had she been, as they were, and for ^o holy had been holden, that
hardly in all heaven should her Dominickes have found place to have set her Had
she been a Franciscan, as she was a Dominicke, her Franciscans would have
placed her next to Saint Francis in the most highest place of the Quire of the
Seraphins, joining to the seat of Lucifer, where they themselves said, that
their Saint Frauncis is placed.

Much do I marvel at the Lords which examined the process of this devilish
creature, this truly possessed of the devil, another Magd^len de la Cruz.
Another such as she, whom they called in England, The holy Maid of Kent: who in
the time of Henry the eight, king of England did wonderful and most false
miracles. Against whom was made process, and all proved to be false and
fained, as was that of our Nun. For which she was sen^enced to death, and so
was executed. That which passes in the Pontifical kingdom, is a thing against
all justice, that one for speaking, as in his conscience he thinks, and
according to that, which the word of God in the holy scriptures has revealed:
that he knows no other Purgatory, but the only blood of Christ, that he
knows no other righteousness, but that which is received by faith: and that
none is to be called upon* but God alone, by the only mean of Jesus Christ,
etc. That he shall die without redemption: and with greatest disgrace before
the world: and that Magdalen and Marie, and other such like, being cursed
blasphemers, perjured in public audience, possessed of the devil, mockers of
Christian religion of God, and of Jesus Christ his son, shall live, True it
is, that they were condemned, yet not to be burned, but to certain F^ia^ like
pe^an^es and restraints. Arise Lord, judge thine own cause. Behold, those die,
that confess thee, and they that blaspheme thee do live. Very much I say do I
marvel a^ these Lords, which condemned this cursed M^rie, that they should use
these words in their sentence which they give against her: All that which this
Nun has done, is, and has been fained of (...) only that they should hold
her for holy, and that she had not dealt with, nor in^ocated the devil.
Surely they speak in this (let their Lordships pardon ^e) against their own
consciences, which told them her miracles to have been done by the a^^e of the
devil, with whom doubtless, was she very familiar, and he was her husband,
conductor, and guide. For how could she do the miracles she did without the
help of the devil, and her invocation upon him? That which she says, that
Jesus Christ appeared unto her, now accompanied with he and she saints, and
now alone: that very familiar he was with her: that he ho^p her to pray over
the hours, that he was her husband, and imprinted the wounds upon her. Let all
this be fained of her, as all is fained, that men should take her for holy: and
more foolish they that believed her, and did not remember Magdalen de la Cruz.
But what will they say unto me of the diseased and frantic Nun which was
healed, as the Provincial in his letter witnesses? That the Provincial lied
will they say, and that the Nun was not healed? I think not so. Healed she was
by the mean which the Provincial reports, by miracle wrought by the devil*
What will they say unto me of the Lady of quality that had the ^anker, and was
healed, as the same Provincial does witness: and says that all this was
taken by faith, and testimony before a Notarie public by commandment of the
Cardinal? What will they say unto me of the diseased person, who for^aken of
the Physicians, with drinking of the water wherein was the little (...) of the
wodden cross, which the Prioresse had given to Anna Rodriguez, was healed?
What will they say unto me of this little (...), which set it self upright,
and of the other also, that being cast into the water, claue unto, and was
joined with the first: so that of them twain one fair little cross was made,
which moved to great devotion all those that saw it? (and this was that, which
the devil with this false miracle of the cross pretended, to cause the^ to
commit Idolatry) of this also was information taken by commandment of the
Legate. Of many other such like things that the Provincial faith, he could
declare, what will they say unto me? How could these things and the rest be
done without the art of the devil, without his help, and invocation upon him?
I demand of the^, what was that, which the three Moors saw in the Prioresse,
which were things so great and marvelous, that the Moors were not able to
speak. To the Archbishop of Lisbon in the presence of the Provincial and many
others, they confessed, that they saw near to the Prioresse, Jesus Christ in
humane shape, put upon the cross: throughout all Portugal was this miracle
published. Will they say unto me that it was the true Jesus Christ, or that it
was the illusion of the devil: that it was Jesus Christ will they not say: For
in their Sentence they say: All whatsoever this Nun has done to have been
fained. It follows then, that it was the devil in humane shape, that
appeared unto her. Saint Paul does advise us, 2. Cor. chap. 14. that Satan is
wont (the better to deceive) to transform himself into an Angel of light.
But here in the business of these three Moors, much more bold was Satan,
transforming himself into Christ crucified, and taking his form upon him. O
the great patience of God. And the Provincial adds. So famous, and so
admirable was this miracle, that the fame thereof has stretched throughout all
the kingdom, etc. Then was it a true miracle. But of those, which Satan
works, to deceive men, and not a fiction of the Prioresse. Why make their
Lordships no mention in their sentence how the Prioresse had made Satan to
appear in the figure of Christ crucified? And how that little so devout a
cross was made? and how the sick persons were healed? The principal passed
they over, least they should (...) superstitions and Idolatries. That which
they demanded of her is. How said she, that she had oftentimes seen the mother
of God? whereof in the Letters were made little mention? O great subtlety:
herewith they have stopped the mouth of the people. All these things was the
just judgment and punishment of God, wherewith he punishes those, that beeleue
not the word of God, revealed in the holy Scripture: but believe lies confirmed
with false miracles and illusions of the devil. The principal rests for me
yet to demand. What was, I demand of them, that consecrate form, as says
the Provincial, or host consecrated? as says Friar Jews de Granada, which
the wednesday in the holy week issued out of the little casket, wherein the
most holy sacrament lay: which casket, of it self opened, and out of it issued
the said host without any visible ministry, and was presented to the mouth of
the Religious, and she received it with most great devotion etc. The
Provincial adds: that another time upon Innocents day another such like
miracle happened. Friar Jews de Granada says: That the Mass being ended,
which Saint John Evangelist did celebrate, a consecrated host came from the
Altar, and was put into the mouth of this most holy Nun. Of Mag^alen de la
Cruz was it said: that when she communicated, she lifted up a rod to measure
the hight of the ground, as in the Treatise of the Mass we have noted. The
host which Mag^alen the Franciscan hipocrite, and that which Mary the Dominican
hypocrite received (albeit the ordained Masse-Friars and with intention to
consecrate, did consecrate them, murmuring over them their words of
consecration Hoc est enim Corpus meum: were not the body of Jesus Christ, whose
glorious body sits at the right hand of the Father, and is not to descend
thence, until he come to judge the quick and the dead: As witnesses S.
Peter. Act. 3. 21. Whom (meaning Christ) the heavens must contain until the
day of restoration of all things: And so do we hold it for an article of
faith, and confess the same in the Creed: Were there no other proof to prove
their consecrated hosts, their sacrament of the altar, not to be the body of
Christ: this in good reason, should suffice, that the devil uses his
consecrated hosts: he carries them into the air and puts them into the
mouth of his he and she devoted, that men may hold them for holy. As these two
domestical examples of the Franciscan Magdalen de la Cruz, and of the Dominican
Mary de la visitation, do confirm the same. But for as much as many other
proofs they are taken out of the holy scripture and out of the ancient
doctors, which we have noted in the Treatise of the Mass, there may thou
read the same. This opening of the casket, this issuing out of the consecrated
host, and visible coming through the air, without any visible mystery, and
putting it in to the mouth of Magdalen, of Mary, and other such like was by the
art of the devil, he came between and was inuocated. Open then thy eyes, O
Spain, and understand: Suffer not thy self to be deceived in the first
article of christian religion. Remember it is the first commandment which our
great God (whose name is Iehona) co^ma^deth us to keep. Thou shall have no
other Gods before me. How can that be God, how can that be a creator, which the
devil uses to cause the people to commit idolatry, to entertain the fained
holiness and hypocrisy of Magdalen and Mary, and of other such both he and
she? Holy and blessed is our God: he abhors wickedness, hipocrisy,
superstition and idolatry, Therefore conclude, that he which entertaineth these
abominations is not the true, but a false God, made by the invention of men,
and Satan their father, which governs them. And this is the just judgment
and punishment of God, that they which neither read, nor hear, nor yet give
credit to the word of God, registered by the holy prophets and Apostles, without
which, there is no salvation, may believe lies: wherewith Antichrist, and his
father the diuil deceived them, to carry them with him into hell. These things
which we have spoken of, done by these Ladies, I confess, are miracles, and
they caused that which our adversaries hold for the sacrament, and for the body
of Christ, truly to come. But of these they are, which the false prophets,
Antichrist and their father the devil do, as our redeemer forewarneth us,
Math. 2^. 24. and his Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. wherewith they that are founded
upon the firm rock, which is Christ. they that be taught by the word of God,
shall not be deceived: But they that be founded upon the sand, they that
confirm their opinion with dreams, imaginations, and humane tradititions,
these shall believe them, and hold them for true miracles, which God has
wrought and so believing them, shall perish, except God having mercy upon
them, do before they depart this world convert them. With their Lordships
favor, conclude we the^, saying: that Mary de la visitation, did her miracles
by the help and inuo^ation of the devil, for otherwise could she not do them.
I vehemently suspect the cause of their so saying they fear to give occasion,
lest some begin to think that their Sacrament, which they sell for the body of
Christ, is not the body of Christ, nor his Sacrament, which in his holy Suppe^
he instituted, but their profanation thereof. This if our Spaniardes begin
once to understand the pontifical kingdom will wholly fall, the kitchen of the
Priests and Friars, which is the Mass and Purgatory, will be cold: and so
superstition, ignonorance, heresy and Idolatry, as a new thing, which has no
foundation in the word of God, but in dreams, with false miracles, and
illusions of the devil, shall likewise fall, and the ancient doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ crucified, written in the holy scripture, maugre Antichrist,
shall flourish through the world. Blessed and ever glorified be the holy name
of the Lord: who by his great mercy freed us from such ignorance, errors, and
superstitions, heresies and Idolatries, where we were nourished: who delivered
us, I say, from the power of darkness, and translated us into the true kingdom
of his beloved son, in whom we have redemption by his blood, and forgiveness
of sins. What shall we render (speaking as does the Prophet) unto the Lord,
for all his benefits bestowed upon us, we will take the cup of our
Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. No other wills God, for all
his benefits, but that we be thankful, and call upon his name. Thus shall the
number of those whom God has elected to life eternal, increase: and so the
kingdom of sin, death and the devil, which is the kingdom of lies, of
false and new doctrine, confirmed with dreams, false miracles, and illusions
of the devil, shall be destroyed: and that of grace, life and of Christ, which
is the kingdom of truth, and the true and old doctrine, confirmed with the word
of God, shall abide for ever. To whom, which is one God, Father, Son and holy
Spirit who lives and reigns be perpetual hon^^ and glory, Amen.

An Addition.
I In the month of April 1588. Philip the second of that name king of Spain,
pretending to send his invincible fleet for the Conquest of England made choice
by the advice of the Prioresse of the monastery of the Anunciada, whose name
was Mary of the Visitacion, as most worthy for her holiness to bless his
Standard royal, the which she did with using diverse other c^remonies, and in
the delivery thereof, to the Duke of Medina Sedonia, who was appointed chief
General, she did pronounce openly good success and victory to the Duke, in
saying he should return a victorious Prince. This standard was carried in
procession by Don Francisco de Cordoua, who was a Spaniard and the tallest
Gentl. that could be found, he being on horse back to the end it might be the
better seen: at the solemnzing whereof there was such a number of people
assembled, that diverse of them perished with the throng. There was present the
Archduke Albertus, which then was Cardinal and Governor of the kingdom of
Portugal, the Popes Nuncio the Archbishop, who was head inquisitor with diverse
other Nobles, Prelates and Gentlemen. This solemnization dured so long that
Albertus fainted with fasting, and this holy Nun to comfort him, caused a
mess of the broth, which was for her own diet to be brought, presenting it to
him, which he accepted most willingly, coming from the hands of so holy a
Nun, as then she was holden to be: but about the beginning of Dece^ber next
after, all her holiness, false miracles, and great dissimulations was then found
out, and she condemned and punished for the same, according as is r^bersed in
this book. About the end of this year 1588 that this holy Nun was discovered
in Lisbon, there was also discovered in Seuil one father ^yon, who was counted
to be a most devour and religious man, but by his own fellows of his
profession, he was discovered to be a great hypocrite, and a most vicious (...)
given to carnal lusts, and for this and diverse other causes he was committed
to the prison which is in the Cardinals house of (...).

A Table, wherein by certain Antitheses is declared the difference and
contrariety which is between the ancient doctrine of God, contained in the
holy scripture, and taught in the reformed Churches: and the new doctrine of
men, ^aught and maintained in the Roman or Popish Church.
Ierem. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways, and behold, and ask
for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls.
THe ancient doctrine of God does teach, that the holy Scripture being the word
of God divinely inspired, has most sufficient authority of it self, and
contains all necessary doctrine to piety, and our salvation: as S. Paul
clearly teaches. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17.

The new doctrine of me^ teaches, that the holy Scripture, although it Belar.
de verb. De^ no^ scrip. l. 4.

The ancient doctrine of God, does teach that ignorance of the holy scriptures,
is the cause and mother of errors, as Jesus Christ our Lord does witness, Mat
22. 19. saying to the Sadduces, Ye err, because ye know not the Scriptures,
nor the power of God* and therefore the duty of every faithful Christian is
to read, meditate, and search the holy scripture, as God commands his
people, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and chap. 12. 32. and chap. 17. 19. Joshua 18. Esa. 8.

The new doctrine of men does teach, that ignorance is the mother of devotion:
and that to keep religion safe, it is needful to forbid the lay or secular
men, the reading of the holy scriptures, seeing it is the cause of many
heresies. Bellarm. de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 15 and 16. cens. col. f. 19.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that many deceivers and false Prophets
are gone out into the world, and that the faithful therefore are to prove the
spirits, whether they be of God, 1. Io. 4. 1. And that the holy scripture is
the touch, whereby this proof and examination ought to be made, Ioh. 5. 39.
Act 17. 11. So that all doctrine contrary and repugnant to holy Scripture (be
it of Councels, Fathers, Doctors, old or new, and that as says the Apostle of
himself or of an Angel from heaven) ought not to be received

The new doctrine of men does teach, that whosoever co^tradict the Pope, and his
decrees, and human traditions, be false teachers, and that the Pope has
authority to judge of all controversies, and of the true sense of holy
Scriptures, and that from his judgment it is not lawful to appeal. Bellar. de
verbo D^^ interp. lib. 3. cap. 3. etc.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that we ought to serve God alone:
which is the Creator and governor of all the world: following the doctrine of
Christ which says, Matt. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

Bellarm. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1. cap 12. Cens. Col. fol. 230.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that the lawful worship of God is to
be founded upon the holy Scripture: and that God will be served according to
his will and word, in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. and not after the opinion,
nor by the traditions nor customs of men. as God by his prophet Eze. 20. 18.
does very expressly teach us, saying: Walk not in the ordinances of your
fathers, nor observe their laws, nor defile your selves with their idols: I am
the Lord your God. Walk in mine ordinances, and keep my statutes, and do
them. The same teaches Jesus Christ, Mat. 15. 9 saying: In

The new doctrine of men does teach, that in the worship of God, the
traditions, ceremonies, and constitutions of the Roman Church ought to be
observed: and that the Cannon law does equal the constitutions of the Popes in
value with the Gospel* and that it is necessary to keep them: for (as says
Pope Leo 4.) The Gospel cannot well be observed, if a man obey not jointly
therewith all the decrees and constitutions of the Fathers, Did. 15. cap.
Sicut. and Did 19. cap In canonicis and Did. 20. cap. De libellis.

The ancient doctrine of God teaches, that the worship of images is a thing
abominable, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Leuit. 26. 1. and expressly forbidden in the second
commandment of the law of God, Exodus 20. 4. and Deuteronomy. 5. 8. 9. also, that the
holy Spirit calls images, Teachers of lies and vanity, Ierem. 10. 8. Habac.
2. 18. And therefore in no wise to be allowed in the Temples of

The new doctrine of men teaches, that the worship of images is well pleasing
to God, and very necessary and profitable for the Church. And that images are
the Books of the Laytie. He therefore that teaches the contrary is cursed
and anathema. Council. Trid. Sess. 9.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that Christians ought to imitate the
faith, godliness, and good doctrine of the Saints, as they imitated Christ. 1.
Cor. 11. 1. Heb. 6. 12 cap. 13. 7. But that in no wise they ought to invoke
them, nor put their confidence in them:

1 Because invocation is an honor due to God alone, which he declares by his
Prophet Esaias, 48. 11. Mine honor will I not give to another. 2 Because the
Saints being in this world will not receive this honor, neither the Angels. As
Act. chapter 10. 26. chap 14. 14. Reu^^^s 19. 10. chap. 22 9. appears. 3 Because
they be ignorant, and do not know us: as Esaias. 63. 16. does very clearly
teach, saying: Abraham has forgotten us, and Israel does not know us Thou Lord
art our Father and Redeemer.
So that as the Israelites in the old Testament were id^laters, and
transgressors of the Law of God, when they sacrificed to another then God
alone.

The new doctrine of men teaches, that Christians ought to invoke the Saints
and to be aided by their intercession to God: because they be his familiars.
Also that it is a false and wicked opinion, to believe that the Saints pray not
for men, and that the invocation of Saints is idolatry, contrary to the word
of God: and that he which so teaches and believes, is accursed and anathema.
Council. Trid. Sess. 9.

The ancient doctrine of God teaches, that Jesus Christ our Lord being true
God, and true man, ^s the only and perfect savior of the world, who says by
his Prophet Esaias, chap. 63. 3. I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all
the people there was none with me. And of whom says the Angel, Matthew. 1. 21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their
sins. And the Apostle Saint John does witness, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. that the blood
of Jesus Christ the Son of God, does cleanse

The new doctrine of men teaches, that Jesus Christ is not a perfect Savior
for Christ (says it) died only for original sin. And that by his death he
satisfied for the fault: but that God being just, will, that man satisfy h^s
justice for the punishment. Also that the purgation of sins is made by good
works, satisfactions, Masses, indulgences and Purgatory. Lib. 4. Sent.
distinct. 17. and 18.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach that Jesus Christ is the only Mediator
between God and man, and our Advocate and Intercessor to the Father, and that
no other can be found, nor ought to be sought for. 1. Because there is no
salvation in any other, but in him alone, Act. 4. 12. 2. Because (...) other
but Christ only, can be sufficient for this office, which has all power in
heaven and in earth, and remains ever with his to the end of the world, Math.
28. 18. 20. ^. Because Christ has loved us, and more loves us then any
other, seeing he gave himself for us, and has made the purgation of our
sins with his blood in his own person. Heb. chap. 13. And so graciously
invited unto him all that travel and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11. and 28. So
that men have no cause to doubt of his

The new doctrine of men does teach, that Jesus Christ is not the only
Mediator, but also the Saints which reign with him in heaven: and that Saint
Mary also the mother of God, is the Mediatrix and Aduocatrix of mankind, lib.
4. S^nt. Distinct. 45. in M^ssale Paris. in pros^ M^ssae de Anuntiat.

The ancient doctrine of God, does teach, that our Redeemer Jesus Christ, by
the perfect sacrifice of himself once offered upon the cross, for the putting
away of sin, has reconciled all the faithful with God his

The new doctrine of men does teach, that the Mass is a sacrifice for the
remission of sins of the quick and the dead. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. ^.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that we are justified by faith in Jesus
Christ without the works of the law, Romans 3. 24. 28. Gal, ^. 16. as witnesses
the holy Ghost of Abraham, the Father of all believers. Abraham (says he)
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, Genesis

The new doctrine of men does teach, that not faith only but works also do
justify. Council. Trid. Ses. 6. can. 11.

The ancient doctrine of God, teaches that faith is not doubtful, but assured
of salvation, which it has by the blood of Christ: and that it is not barren,
but full of works of charity, which are the fruits of righteousness, and

The new doctrine of men teaches, that the particular justification of me^ and
much more the salvation is very uncertain: so that men must always doubt of
their salvation. And that not to doubt of the grace and favor of God is
presumption. Conc. Trid. Ses. 6. Can. 13. Cens. Colon. fol. 96.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that our good works, for tha^ they
are imperfect, can deserve nothing at Gods hand, as says the Prophet Esaias 64
6. All our righteousness is as a stained cloth. And Christ our Lord says, Luke
17. 10 When ye have done all that is commanded you, say ye are unprofitable
servants.

^ellar. de Purgatorio, lib. 1. ^. 8. censor. colif. 175.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach that Jesus Christ is the head and
Spouse of the Church, which he governs and teaches by his word and Spirit,
and that the duty of the Church is to hear and obey the voice of her Spouse
and faithful Pastor, according to the commandment of the heavenly Father,
Mat. 17. 5. Hear him and as Christ Jesus also teaches, Io. 10. 27. My sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

obeys not, but gainesaith his constitutions is an heretic. In extra^ag.
Tom. 22. Tit. 5. In Gloss. 2. lib. 1. Decret. Tit 7. C. 5.

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that the pastors and ministers of the
Church ought to feed the Christian people with the true spiritual food which is
the word of God, and wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel. As the ministers of
Christ, and faithful Stewards of the mysteries of God: according to the
commandment of Christ Matthew. 28. 20. John. 21. 16. 17. And following the
stteps of the Apostle which taught the Church, that which they had received of
the Lord 1. Cor. 11. 23. And that which was agreeable to

The new Doctrine of men teaches, that the ecclesia^tical persons ought to
sacrifice, or say Mass, and sing, and pray in the Latin tongue, and to keep
the ceremonies and tradition of the Roman Church; And to teach the people to
observe all that which the Popes and Councels determine and co^ma^d. Albeit it
agrees not with the holy scripture. Co^ci. Trid. Ses. vltma. etc

The ancient Doctrine of God, does teach that the use of strange tongues (albeit
to the praise of God, is vnprofittable in the Church to the ignorant auditory.
Therefore that they which teach, pray, or sing in the Church ought to use the
vulgar tongue, understood of the people for edification and exhortation and
consolation of all. 1. Cor. 14 3. 6. 7. 8. etc.

The new Doctrine of men teaches that the worship of God ought to be used in
the Latin tongue. And that it should not be only vnprofittable, but also to
the common people hurtful if the holy scripture in the Church should be read
or sung in the vulgar tongue. Bellar de verbo Dei lib. 2. cap. ^5.

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that the sacraments be instituted of
Christ to imprint and confirm in our hearts the truth of the promises of God
and that they may be healthful unto us, it is of necessity required, that we be
faithful in the use of them: for as the word of God not believed, does not only
not profit the hearers thereof, but leaves them condemned: So have the
sacraments the same effect, when by faith they are not received, Matthew 28. 19.
20. Romans 4. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 27. 29. Heb. 4. 2. and cap. 11. 6.

The new doctrine of men teaches that the sacraments of the new testament,
give grace, ex opere operato. That is to say By the virtue of the work
wrought, without any good motion of his part, that receives the^ l. 4. se:
did. 1

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that Jesus Christ in the institution
of the holy supper, brake the bread and gave it to his disciples: and
afterward the wine, saying: drink ye all of it, without making difference.
The same teaches the Apostle Saint Paul 1. Cor. 11. 23.

The new Doctrine of men teaches, that the sacrament of the altar ought to be
given and dispensed in bread and in wine to the priests only: But to the
^ayty, the bread alone ought to be admonished Council. Trid. Sess. ^.

The ancient Doctrine of God, does teach, that matrimony is honorable among all
men, Heb. 13. 4. And that it is better to marry, then to burn ^. Cor. 7. 9.
Also, that to forbid marriage is a doctrine of devils 1. Tim. 4. 3.

The new Doctrine of men does teach, that matrimony is a Carnal estate and
therefore with such severity to be forbidden to the Clergy, that more th
lawfully to marry, according to the law of God, for (as says Bellar.) it is a
greater wickedness for an ecclesiastical person to marry then to commit
fornication. And adding the cause, says: for that he which is so married, is
made unable to keep his vow^ the which he that commits fornication is not
Bellar. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 34.

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that that which enters into the mouth
defiles not a man Math. 15. 11. And that all meats be clean creatures, and
that the faithful may indifferently use them with pure conscience Tim. 4. 4.
Tit. 1. 15.

The new Doctrine of men teaches, that it is not lawful for a Christian under
pain of mortal sin, to eat of all sorts of meats on all days and times.
As in Lent: the four times, the frydayes, the satturdayes and the vigils of
some Saints Did. 4. cap. Statuimus

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that the duty of a godly man is, to
speak truth, and keep his faith and promise, and not to violate his oath,
although it were to his own hindrance. Psalm. 15. 2. 4. Zach. 1. 16. Ephesians. 4. 25.

The new Doctrine of men teaches, that faith ought not to be kept with John
Hus confirmed, contrary to the public faith, and false conduct.

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that every soul ought to be subject
to the higher powers, which are the magistrates To. 13 1. Pet. ^. ^3.

The new Doctrine of men teaches, that ecclesiastical persons are not lib.
Decret. Gregor. Tit. 33.

The ancient Doctrine of God does teach, that Antichrist, as God sits in the
Temple of God, attributing to himself, that which is proper to God. ^. Thessalonians
24. And that the place of his sitting is the great City which has 7
mountains, and reigned over the kings of the earth Apoc. 17. 9. 18.

Dan. And that the place of his kingdom or seat, shall be in Ierusalem^ Bellar*
de Roman Pontific. lib. 3. cap 12. and 13.

The ancient doctrine of God does teach, that for those that depart out of this
world, there remain but two ways, for the faithful, which pass from death
to life: heaven, John 5. 24. And hell for the wicked and (...). As Saint John
Baptist very expressly does teach us. John 3. 36. He that believes (says ^e,
in the Son, has eu^^lasting life. But he that believes not in the Son shall
not see life. But the wratth of God, abides upon him. And Lazarus, who was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: And in the ritchman, that was
tormented in ^ell. Luke 16^ 22, 23.

The new doctrine of men teaches, that there are many places for the souls
after death To wit heaven, hell, the Lymbe^ of the fathers and (...) infants
dying without Baptism, purgatory, and another place, more honorable, joining
to purgatory, Bellar, (...).

By these Antitheses, the Christian Reader shall easily understand and judge,
what doctrine he ought to believe and follow to be saved. To wit, the ancient
doctrine of God, which cannot err not lie which is the true mark of the
Christian Catholic and Apostolic Church: As contrariwise, the new doctrine
invented by men, is the true mark of the Antichristian and Apostaticall Church:
which the godly ought to fly, detest and abhor, as damnable and a deceiuer.
Albeit she glory and triumph with high titles and outward appearaunce. But the
almighty God beholds not the outward appearaunce: but his eyes behold the
truth in the inward part, which he loves Ier. 5. 3. Psalm. 51. 8. 1. Sam. 16.
7. Esaie 11. 3. Let princes and Magistrates be advised what doctrine by their
authorities they maintain. Least by inconsiderate zeal, they persecute Christ
in his members, As in time past, did Saul, which afterward was called Paul
Acts 9. Let doctors and teachers of the people also, beware, what doctrine
they publish in the world; that they be not of the number of deceivers and
evil laborers in the Lords vineyard: which vainly, boasting of antiquity,
holiness, Multitude, and power, accuse the ancient doctrine of God, of
nouelty, and shroude the new doctrine of men, with the title and cloak of
antiquity, showing themselves, not the followers of Christ, nor his Apostles
But of the priests, prelates and ancients of Jerusalem, which always gloried,
of the fathers of the law, the succession of Aaron, of the Temple, of it
ornaments and privileges. And notwithstanding did resist and persecute Christ
and his Apostles, accusing and condemning the doctrine of the Gospel, for new
and strange: As the Evangelists do very clearly and largly witness, And as
S. Paul in the first Epistle These chap. 2. verse 18. 16. also declares.

Woe unto them that speak evil of good, and good of evil: which put darkness
for light, and light for darkness. Esaie 5. 20.

Take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying: I
am Christ and shall deceive many. Mat. 24. 4. 5.

An end of the book:
to God be the glory.
THe good Bishops of Rome continued almost 300. years. The first of whom was
Linus, and the last Siluester. page 23.

The Archbishops of Rome continued. 200 years. To wit, from the 320 year,
unto the year. 520. page 26.

The Patriarchs of Rome continued, from the 520. year, unto the 605: year.
page. 26.

The Popes began in the 605. year, the first was Boniface 3. page 34. Whose
tyranny to this day continues: As is seen by all the progress of the former
Treatise.

The names of the Popes follow, after the order of their Alphabet. Of whom
mention is made in the former Treatise.

Adrian 1. page 40. Adrain 3. 50 Adrian 4. 73 Adrian 5. 90 Adrian 6. ^50 Agatho
37 Alexander 2. 64 Alexander 3. 75 Alexander 4. 87 Alexander 5. 112 Alexander
6. 113 Anastatius 2. 30 Anastatius 3. 52 Anastatiu, 4. 73
B
Benedict 2. 37 Benedict 3. 49 Benedict ^. (...) Benedict. 6. or 5. 55
Benedict. 7. or 8. 59 Benedict. 9. or 8. 60 Benedict. 10. or 9. 61 Benedict.
11. or 9. ^3 Benedict. 12. or 10. 102 Benedict. 13. or 11. 111 Boniface 1. 30
Boniface 2. 31 Boniface 3. 34 Boniface 4. 35 Boniface 5. 36 Boniface 6. 50
Boniface 7. 55 Boniface 8. 92 Boniface 9. 110 Calistus 2. 71 Calistus 3. 123
Celestine 3. 79 Celestine 4. 85 Celestine 5. 92 Clement 2. 61 Clement 3. 68
Clement 4. 89 Clement 5. 96 Clement 6. 102 Clement 7 107 Clement 8. 111 Clement
9. or ^. 150 Constantine 1. 37 Constantine ^. 39 Comelius 26 Cunon. 37 Damasus
1. 28 Damasus 2. 62 Deus dedit, or Theodatus. 35 Donus. 55 Eugenius 2. 42
Eugenius 4. 120 Felix 2. Felix ^. (...) For(...) 50 Gelasius 1. 30 Gelasius 2
70 Gregory 1. 32 Gregory 2. 37 Gregory 3. 37 Gregory 4. 42 Gregory 5. 56
Gregory 6. 60 Gregory 7. 65 Gregory 8. 71 Gregory 9. 83 Gregory 10. 89 Gregory
11. 105 Gregory 12. 112 Gregory 13. 196 Gregory 14. 200 Honorius 1. 64 Honorius
2. 71 Honorius 3. 82 Honorius 4. 92 Hormisda. 30 Innocent 1. 30 Innocent 2. 72
Innocent 3. 80 Innocent 4. 86 Innocent 5. 90 Innocent 6. 104 Innocent 7 111
Iooncent 8. 130 Innocent 9. 200 John 1. 30 John 3. 32 John 5. 37 John 8. 43
John 9. or 8 50 John 11. or 10. 52 John 12 or 11. 53 John 13. or 12. 53 John
14. or 13. 55 John 16. or 15. 55 John 17. or 16. 56 John 18. or 17. 56 John 19.
or 17. or 18. 58 John 20. or 18. or 19. 58 John 21. or 14. or 20. 60 John 22.
or 20. or 21. 90 John 23. or 21. or 22. 89 John 24. 22. or 23. 114 Julius 2.
143 Julius 3. 163 Lando 52 Leo 2. 37 Leo 3. 41 Leo 4. 42 Leo 5. 51 Leo 8. 54
Leo 9. 62 Leo 10. 147 Liberius 27 Linus. 23 Lucius 2. 72 Lucius 3. 79 Marcellus
26 Marcellus 2. 165 Martin 1. 36 Martin 2. 50 Martin 4. 91 Martin 5. 118
Miltiades 222 Nicholas 1 49 Nicholas 2. 64 Nicholas 3. 91 Nicholas 4. 92
Nicholas 5. 101 Pascall 1. 42 Pascall 2. 68 Paul 1. 38 Paul 2. 124 Paul 3. 15^
Paul 4. 16^ Saint Peter 20 Pelagius 1. 37 Pelagius 2. 32 Pius 2. 1^3 Pius 3.
143 Pius 4. 187 Pius 5. 19^ Sabinianus 33 Sergius 2. 4^ Sergius 3. 50 Sergius
4. 59 Siluerius 3^ Siuester 1. 25 Siluester 2. 57 Siluester 3. 61 Symachus 30
Siricius 29 Sistus 4. 126 Sistus 5. 195 Stephen 2. or 3. 21 Stephen 4. or 3. 39
Stephen 5. or 4. 4^ Stephen 6. or 5. 50 Stephen 7. or 6. 50 Stephen 9. or 10.
63 Urban 2. Urban 3. 7^ Urban 4. 88 Urban 5. 105 Urban 6. 106 Frban 6. 200
Victor 2. 63 Victor 3. 68 Victor 4. 75 Vigilius 31 Vitellanus 36 Zacharias 37
FINIS.

