A DIVINE DISCOVERY OF DEATH, Directing all people to a triumphant
resurrection, and everlasting salvation.

It is ordained that all men shall die.

HEB. 9.17. Vnum hoc gestit verit as ne ignorata damnetur.

LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM JONES, and RICHARD BOIL dwelling in the
Blackefriers. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD, HENRY THE EARL OF HVNTINGTON.
AS amongst all ordinary accidents incide^t to the prosperity and adversity of
mankind, there is nothing more momentarie then marriage: even so, right
honorable, there is nothing more answerable to the salvation and condemnation
of mankind then death. For as by the one all men come into the world, and by
the other all men go out of the world: even so by both, all men without the
merits of Jesus Christ, shall go into hell fire. Yet for all that, there is
nothing more out of the minds of men then death, nor any thing less feared
then Gods irefull judgments which follow after. As may appear in every
profession which is stained and polluted with heathenish impiety: the like was
not in the time of blindness and ignorance; whereby it may be truly said, that
the last of the three reuolutions signified by seals, Reu. 5.1. and 8.2. and.
17.1.
by trumpets, and by viols, related to be the dishonor of God, and the
disturbance of the Church militant, is now more fresh and more ragingly
revived, then in any of the two former reuolutions, consisting of 600. years.
Your Lordship perhaps will say, What is that to me? how can I redress it? I
know my Lord, I know, and in truth I must acknowledge, that you are an example
unto others, for the diligent hearing of Gods holy word preached, and for the
sincere receiving of the Sacrament: well may your Honor go on and be
strengthened with the zeal of Gods glory, and be recommended before the throne
of Gods grace, by the prayers of such as you did relieve when they were
oppressed. But the principal cause of this my clamor is, to put you in mind of
that you know, to wit, seeing sin is so general and the same so horribly
heinous, that there is nothing else to be looked for but death, and not that
death only which is the common visitation of all men; but also the second
death, which is the perpetual reward of the devil and the damned. And also,
my Lord, the special end of my writing unto your Honor, is, so much as in me
lies, and as duty binds me, to make you partaker of the fruit of my poor
labor, with other my honorable and worshipful friends. Nothing doubting but
under that truth and plainness wherein I have so faithfully endeavored, and
so heartily desired the good also of so many thousands as to whom it may come;
your Lordship shall savor so much of some thing, as that you will say
hereafter for your labor in reading of all, you are right glad, and have thereby
lost nothing. Thus briefly and most humbly I end, desiring the Majesty of our
eternal God, through the mediation of Jesus Christ, to beautify and to adorn
you and your honorable Lady with all spiritual graces, and that you both may
see, (like your selves) according to your hearts desire, your childrens
children unto the third and fourth generation.

From Stretton Lefield the 3. of July, 1612. Your Honors most humble in the
Lord, Edw. Vaughan.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LADY THE COUNTESS of Leicester, Douger.
RIght Honorable, I know none amongst all the women in the world, upon my forty
years reading, neither yet truly reported by any, to who^ this book does so
properly appertain to be carefully read, as to your self. In respect specially
of Gods mercy wherein he has made your honor admirably memorable for your
exceeding wisdom and abounding graces: which was plainly seen in your
patient abiding of one such double deadly days news, concerning your noble
son, and your worthy honorable husband, as made al England, France, and
Ireland, more astonished the^ that great invincible Armado of Spain,
valorously floting under sail upon our narrow seas. And there is also another
famous respect of Gods mercy, and the kings Majesty's favor upon you, for that
there is yet alive a noble Earl of Essex, even out of your own loins, who is
like to repair the ruins of his father, to raise his and your honorable
house far more renowned, and lineally to leave it so to be vpholden for ever.
Madame, when the foundation of the Temple at Jerusalem was newly laid, the
sound of the people for joy could not be discerned from the noise of the
Priests, Ezra 4.
Levites, and Ancients for weeping: even so right Honorable, your, and their
most loving friends in that doleful day, could not discern whether the joy
for the Queens majesty's safety, or the sorrow for their deceasse was the
greatest. Although indeed some of both sides, most vnconsiderately were
partial in their ioying, and other some exceeding in their sorrowing; yet the
majesty of God did most divinely and most duly traduce the one to temper the
other in you, who had the greatest cause of both. Labor you therefore good
honorable Lady so to abound in joy for them, whose souls are in heaven, and so
to abound in sorrow for your own sins, that whilst you are alive, it may
not be discerned in which of both you exceed. And labor to abate your sorrow
for the father which is dead, because his heroical honor, and Christian
magnanimity is yet alive in his son. As for the manner of their death, it
makes nothing at all to the matter of their salvation, nor for the time of
their dissolution, as you may read in this book, by many infallible sentences
and warrantable examples of Scripture particularly, after this manner: First,
that death has his prerogative and privilege in general. Secondly, that
death makes this world no world, and men to trade and travel, to buy and sell
upon all uncertainties. Thirdly, that the decree concerning the time of death,
is inviolable and vnrepealable. And fourthly, how variable, and how sundry
ways death seizes: upon some with the stroke of an Angel, upon some with the
stroke of justice, upon some with the stroke of a friend, and that unwittingly
and unwillingly; upon some with the stroke of an enemy, wittingly and
willingly. Some godly men do kill and destroy themselves, but unwittingly and
unwillingly: and some ungodly men do kill and destroy themselves wittingly and
willingly, even by their own act and deed. And now to conclude, you know that
honorable honor rests not in the dignity that men and women have, but in
the good works whereby they deserve: and you know as stigmaticall brands are
tokens of former felonies, even so procrastinatio^ breadeth dangers. Apply your
self therefore good honorable Lady unto the conueniency of the time, for you
know not when death will light on you by many years, nor the manner of it by
many hundred ways; that whenever and howsoever it falls, you may have
recourse to the death of Jesus Christ, to whose holy protection I leave you,
etc. Newly from the Printers Press, the 3. July, 1612.

Your Honors most humble in the Lord Edw. Vaughan.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR JOHN HARPER AND SIR PHILIP STANHOP in the county
of Darby Knights:
And to the worshipful Master Richard Hall of London, Master Humphrey Bonner
of Nottingham, and Master George Abney in the said county of Darby, Esquiers.
MY singular selected friends, having published many and sundry books of
divinity, and resolutely concluded with my self there to surceasse, knowing
this to be the envious and maligning age, in which few men shall be condignely
rewarded, neither yet from unjust imputations, and impious calumniations freed:
yet for all that I was occasioned, or rather (as I may say) violently
importuned for my own better instruction and satisfaction, being more
surprised with sorrow then with the loss of all the kingdoms of the world,
carefully to collect answers to diverse questions, and objections which did
assail my soul, for and as concerning the deceasse of some such as did most
nearely concern me, and exceeding dearly appertain unto me. And having
therewithal received through Gods mercy, that which of all other things I
most specially desired; I was drawn dutifully and respectively to consider
that my case was, or might be yours, and the common case of all men. Wherefore
I took in hand methodically to dispose of all those dispersed collections into
this book, as your Worships may see. Wherein I allege nothing but true
sentences, and examples of holy Scriptures, and that so warrantably, so
briefly, and so plainly, as that I might not seem tedious to the wise and
learned, nor yet obscure to the simple and sorrowful hearted. Humbly and
heartily desiring you in liew of my labor, and in recompense of my love, that
you will be pleased sometimes to sequester your selves from your public
affairs, yea and sometimes from your most private occasions, for the orderly
and through reading thereof. Assuring you upon my poor experience, and upon
the judgment of the best learned writers, that there is nothing so effectual
in Gods word, except the graces of his holy Spirit, to make a regenerate man to
mourn in mirth, to solace in sorrow, and to apprehend the right use of all the
means, which God has ordained for the preservation of life, until the time
of death does come; as the meditation of mortality, with Scripture answers
co^templatiuely to every such question and objection, as may be raised
concerning death: together with devout prayers going before, and thanksgiving
following after. Or otherwise a thousand to one, death brings with it fear,
fear brings an increase of natural torments, an increase of torments, brings
distraction of memory. Afterward follows all idle, dissolute and damnable
speech, and so from one defect unto another, an obliuio^ of Christ and his
kingdom, as the devil would have it. Thus I end, having timely enough I hope
forewarnd you, with my hearty desires unto his holy Majesty, to comfot you in
your affliction and tribulation, that you may be able and ready to comfort
others, to the glory of his holy name, and the everlasting comfort of your own
souls.

From Stretton Lefield in the county of Darbie, this 3. of July 1612. Yours in
the Lord Edw. Vaughan.

The contents.
In the displaying of this divine discovery of death, is necessarily to be
observed these four general heads of instruction, approved by many sentences
and holy examples of Scriptures. viz.

First, the Generality of death, to wit, how inuincibly death reigns over
all the generation of mankind, no place exempted, no time privileged, nor any
person upon any occasion favored.

Secondly, the sundry sorts, manners, and kinds of death, that is to say, how
diversely and how many ways death seizes upon all people, with the several
reasons thereof.

Thirdly, the timelinesse of death, relating by particulars, the day, the
hour, the moment and point of time, in which almighty God has decreed that
every the generation of mankind shall die, so that no man by the diligent use
of the means can lengthen his life, nor any man by the negligent use of the
means shall shorten his life.

Fourthly, the memorabilitie of death, that is to say the commemoration and
religious solemnization which the living ought to have for their dead, with
four principal and Christian respects.

THE GENERALITY OF DEATH.
DEath has dominion over all mankind, not all together as they are
innumerable, but one after another in their appointed time. To which purpose,
the just man Job by the holy influence of Gods divine Spirit, said, not only
of himself, but also of all others: Job. 30.23.24.
Surely I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for
all the living. Solomon the wisest man then in all the world, having duly
considered of man's abode in this life, said: Eccles. 6, 6.
Man shall be covered with darkness, if he live an hundred years twice told;
and shall not all go into one place? Saint Luke speaking by the same spirit,
sets down the divine speech of Saint Paul to the Athenians, among which he
does plainly relate the manner of man's creation in this wise: Act. 17.26.
God has made of one blood all mankind to dwell on the face of the earth. As
if he had said, by a vulgar phrase of speech, Where there is a contagion or an
infection, it goes through that family, because they are of one nature, and of
one blood: even so he meant that all the generation of mankind, being of one
blood and of one flesh, shall all taste of one death. Saint Paul in his
exhortation to the Corinthians for their enduring affliction, and to live well,
2. Cor. 5.10.
said, We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: as if he had
said, There is no help nor hope, we must all die. Joshua a man exceeding
victorious, and full of magnanimity and Christian courage, yet being prepared
to die, in his exhortation to his people, points unto himself, saying, Joshua.
23.14
Behold I enter into the way of all the world: as if he had said, Marvel not
my brethren at me, who must needs depart this life, the like must be your lots
and your posterity. The wise woman of Tekoha amongst many other emphatiticall
speeches which she used to David the king, in the behalf of Absolon his son;
said unto him, We must all die, 2. Sam. 14.14.
and we are as water spilt on the earth, which cannot be gathered: neither does
God spare any person. As David said, 2. Sam. 11.25.
The sword deuoures as well one as another: even so it may be said of all
people, that death seizes one manner or other upon every man without
exception. Furthermore, Genesis 5.28.
the ten holy Fathers who lived every man almost his thousand yet died. Deuteronomy.
2.3. Joshua. 8.9.10.11.12.
We may speak of diverse by examples, as of Moses and Joshua the most valiant
and most victorious warriors that ever were; Iud. 16.28.29.
of Sampson the strongest man in all the world, and yet they died. 1. King.
11.43. Dan. 4.
Of Salomo^ who was the wisest man in all the world, and yet he died.
Nabucadnezzar was the richest man in all the world, and yet he died. Peter and
Paul were as holy as ever any before or since, and yet Peter and Paul died.
Genesis 23.1.2. Hest. 9.
Sarah and Hester were two beautiful Ladies as ever were, and yet Sarah and
Hester died. To conclude, there was never any time, nor place, nor person that
could exempt any man from death. For Sem called Melchizedech was before the
flood: he out lived all that knew him; Genesis 14.14. Heb. 7.1. to 7.
and so long, that no man knew his kindred: even when Lot was taken prisoner,
and a great grandfather of eight degrees in Abraham's time: whence he was said
to be without father and without mother, and in part a figure of Christ, whose
Godhead had no mother, and whose manhood had no father: without beginning of
days, or end of life: in respect of whom also he was said to be king of
righteousness, king of peace, and a Priest for ever of the most high God; yet
for all this Melchizedech died. Job said, If God set his heart upon man, Job.
34.14.
and gather his spirit unto himself, then man shall return to dust. As though
he had said more plainly; No man in all the world that lives, but lives to
die when God will; because man's life consists of that which is Gods. Solomon
says, The desire of death cannot be satisfied, Eccles. 8.8.
he gathers unto himself all nations, and does heap unto himself all
people. Hab. 2.5.
Job speaking to this purpose concerning all mankind, and more particularly of
himself, said thus; Job. 6.11.
What power have I that I should endure? is my strength the strength of stones?
or is my flesh of brass? To wit, What did men think of me when I was at the
best? or what could I ever think of my self? was I a man like to live
always? And what man may be named that now is, that ever was, or ever shall be
so strong or so enduring, as that he shall be able to surcharge death? The
sundry examples, and the common experience even of our own time has told us
and does still forewarne us of death, which is so due to us, as to them who are
gone before. The most unlikeliest do longest live, and the most likeliest do
soonest die; which argues plainly, that there is no stability, no certainty
nor true token of continuance in any man whatsoever. Also S. Paul said to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.51.
we shall not all die. Indeed we shall all once die inrespect of our outward
estate, ourelementarie inclination, and natural affections: but in respect of
Gods divine majesty, innarrable power, and secret will, they which shall live
at the last day shall be changed, they shall not be the same which formerly
they were as men in the world.

I have advisedly considered of ten holy motives, or divine reasons of
Scripture, why all men must die.

The first reason why all men must die,
It is the decree of almighty God, which orders all inferior causes, and
binds the^ to the obedience of his will. No king can produce so ancient a right
to his crown, as every man has out of this most ancient decree to challenge
after death the crown of glory. Solomon said, Eccles. 3.14.
I know that whatsoever God has done, he has done it for ever: to it can no
man add, and from it can no man diminish. Esai the Prophet, as in the proper
person of God himself, says, The Lord has sworn saying, Esa. 14.24.
surely as I have purposed so shall it come to pass, and as I have consulted
so shall it stand. Again he says, Seek ye the book of the Lord, and read;
none of these things shall fail, none shall want, his mouth has commanded it.
Mal. 3.6.
Malachi said to that purpose, I am the Lord that changes not. The Author to
the Hebrews says, Heb. 6.17.18.
That God more abundantly to show the stablenesse of his counsel, bound
himself by an oath, wherein it is impossible that God should lie; that we might
have strong consolation. Dan. 6.8.
As the laws of the Medes and Persians were vnrepealable: so is the decree of
almighty God concerning death vnrepealable, and in regard of the euerlastingnes
of it, Jeremy said, Ier. 17.1.
It is written with an iron pen, and with the point of a diamond, and graven
upon the tables of the heart.

The second reason why all men must die,
Is drawn from the uprightness of Gods justice. Sin being so general in
all men, his Majesty has decreed to punish it by death in all men, yea in his
own dear children; who although the guilt of sin be removed and taken from
them, yet sin remaining in their mortal bodies is to be punished with death,
and perishing of that substance so subject to sin. Saint Paul said, Death
went over all men, Romans 5.12.
in as much as all men have sinned. As by the law every husband may put away
his wife for alienating her body to another man: even so sin by the law does
alienate and put away the soul from the body of eueric man. Job. 34.11.
Elihu spoke most divinely to this purpose, with his friends: God will render
unto man according to his work and cause every man to find according to his
way. And as sin increased from age to age, so did the anger of God, as
appeared by the shortning of their days. Though Christ has forgiven us, yet
sin is not out of us. There is still in man that will keep him from soaring:
and a Quis me in his mouth, extending lamentably with Saint Paul, from men to
Angels, with a violent interrogation enforcing an answer, who shall deliver me
from the body of death?

The third reason why all men must die.
All men must die in respect of Gods general purpose for the changing and
renewing of mankind from one substance into another, for the transubsta^tiating
of one body into another, and a transmitting of one life into another. This
purpose of the Father in Christ Jesus, made Job to say, Job. 14.14.
I will wait mine appointed time till my changing come. S. Paul relating the
very same amongst many other things of great weight unto the Corinthians,
said, We shall all be changed. And in another place, 1. Cor. 15.
at another time, Flesh and blood, says he, 35 ^4.
cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven: mortality must be swallowed up of
life. 2. Cor. 5.4.
And in his epistle to the Philippians he writes the same in effect, being
occasioned otherwise thereunto, and that in these words. God shall change our
vile bodies, Phil. 3.21.
that they may be like unto his glorious body.

The fourth reason why all men must die is,
That there may be a performance and a seizure upon Gods promises for the
perpetual good of his Saints after death, which in this life can not be
obtained, and also for the inevitable destruction of the wicked. With the
godly, Esai. 23.18.
says Esai, shall be joy and gladness, slaying of oxen, kiling of sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking wine, rejoicing and triumphing. By which words is
meant all spiritual and heavenly plenty of immortal melodies, and unspeakable
alacrities; the father ioying and rejoicing in the son, and the son in the
father, and both the father and the son in other the Saints, in the Angels,
and specially in the Lamb Christ Jesus. The same Prophet continues his
speech, as being half ravished with the meditation thereof, in the behalf of
his fellow brethren, who says, Awake thou that sleep in the dust; Esai 25.9.
in that day men shall say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, he
will save us, we will rejoice and be joyful in his salvation. Again the Lord
himself speaks by the same Prophet, Esa. 26.19.
The dead men shall live ever; with my body shall they arise: awake and sing ye
that dwell in the dust. Saint Paul said to that effect, 1. Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which he has done in his body. As it was with Christ the
head, so is it with his members: Except the wheat corn die, and fall into the
ground, it abides alone, but if it die, it brings much fruit.

Concerning the seizure of Gods judgments upon the wicked according to Gods
promises, these joys, these preparations, and these exultations, are turned
unto weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then says Esai, Esa. 23.9.
that the noise of them that rejoice, ends, intimating the wicked: then their
mirth ceasseth, they shall not eat and drink with mirth, 24.8.26.21.
and good things shall be bitter unto them, Lo, then the Lord comes out of
his place, to visit the inhabitants of the earth. The earth shall disclose her
blood, and shall no more hide her slain. Then the Lord has decreed to stain
the pride of ma^s glory, and to bring into contempt all them that be glorious
upon earth. Here the glory of the wicked ends, and even here the glory of
the godly begins: as by the example of Dives, and Lazarus. And as Abimelech
having fought against the city Sechem fiercely, and exceedingly wrathful, he
slew all the people that were therein, left none alive; and afterward in sign
that it should never be inhabited, he sowed salt in it: even so is the Lord in
his wrath against the wicked of the world at that day.

The fifth reason why all men must die.
It is drawn from the matter or substance whereof man was made, to wit, of
earth, and therefore subject to perishing: earth cannot continue long out of
its sphere whence it was exhausted. Earth how cunningly, and how curiously
soever it be built, (as earth upon earth,) it will descend and press downward
according to the nature thereof, unto the place whence it came, and by little
and little, in short time much will come to nothing. According to the which God
said unto Adam, Thou art dust, Genesis 3.19.
and into dust thou shall return. Man is built upon a bad foundation, Job.
4.19.
therefore Job said that the souls which came from heaven do dwell in houses of
clay, and their foundation is in the dust, which shall be destroyed before the
moath. Eccles. 3.20.
And Solomon said that the spirit shall return to God that gave it.

The sixth reason why all men must die.
It is drawn from the matter or substance whereof the woman was made, or for
her immediate conversion from one substance to another, to wit, from earth to
flesh; which being rightly considered in it self, is a matter or substance
less durable, and more momentanie then the former. For flesh how fine soever
it be in it self, and how curiously, or costly so ever it be preserved: yet if
it be not used, and taken in season, it will putrify and become exceeding
noisome of it self, specially the flesh of a woman: for by how much more
excellent, brave, and beautiful she is in the constitution of her body then
the man, by so much the more foul, filthy, and stinking, her body will become
shortly after she is dissolved; following therein, the nature of other pure and
purified creatures, which in their time, and right use are much to the praise
of God, and to the comfort of man, but being abused, or not used as they ought,
are the most vile, and the most venomous things of all others. The flesh of
beasts, are good for men, and the flesh of men, good for something, but the
flesh of women when they are dead is good for nothing. Job therefore being
borne of a woman, said of him self, and of all others of that kind, My flesh
is meat for worms, Job 7.5.
my flesh is clothed with worms and filthiness. Man both by father and
mother, is a stigmaticall note, a word of disdain, or an appellation of anger:
therefore David says, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? Ye are all
but men, the sons of men. S. Paul said, O wretched man, not, o wretched
Apostle, nor, o wretched Christian, but, o wretched man; the cause of his
wretchedness was in him self, a man miserable, because a man.

The seventh reason why all men must die.
It is drawn from the vigor and virility of man's nature, which being grown
unto the height, declineth, fades, and falls. It wears, and waneth like
the Moon, and like Nabucadnezzars image, Dan. 3.31.32.33.
which being raised from the earth to iron, from iron to brass, from brass to
silver, and from silver to gold, the head and highest perfection; then it
declined, it returned, and abated from gold to silver, from silver to brass,
from brass to iron, and from iron to earth, even to that indeed whence first
it came. When nature is quite decayed, the^ the body extinguisheth, as in the
example of that renowned man David, 1 King. 1.1.2.
King of gods peculiar people: he was so old that he died, when nature was
quite worn out of him. This is also variably to be proved, even by the nature
of natural things, which having their licour, moisture or juice dried and
worn away, do decay and perish presently. To which purpose God said by the
mouth of the Prophet Esai, in part touching the desolation of Israel: They
shall be as an oak, Esai. 7.30.
whose leaf falls, and as a garden without water. So likewise says Job
interrogatiuely, Can a rush grow without dirt, Job. 8.11.
or can grass grow without water? As if he had said, Take dirt and water away,
then neither the rush nor the grass but will presently wither, and come to
nothing. Saint Peter likens mankind to the flower of the field, 1 Pet. 1.24.
and to grass which being grown to the full height and maturitie, which the
licour and juice thereof could possibly extend, then presently it returns, and
in very little time is withered, and clean gone. Solomon likens man, for his
growing and decreasing, unto Lillies and roses. Cant. 2.1.
As an Alchymist, having violently exhausted the spirits, and by little and
little distilled the quintessences of minerals, and metals, they are
thenceforth good for little or nothing, but as salt having left the saltness;
eue^ so man having his natural vigor, by little, and little, taken or worn
away, is but a dead carcass, good for nothing but for to be hid in the earth.

The eight reason why all men must die,
It is drawn from the decree of almighty God for the dissolution of the
world, and a final end of all things, a throwing together, and as it were a
folding up of many things into one thing. Esai said concerning this
dissolution, thus, Esai 13.9.
The day of the Lord comes, cruel with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the
land waste, Mat. 24.29.
the stars shall fall from heaven, and the planets shall not give their
light, the Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not
give her light. Likewise Ezechiel says, O how fearful, and how terrible that
day shall be to them which pierced him through! yet then whosoever shall call
on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

The ninth reason why all men must die.
It is that there may be a general victory over death and hell. For so says
S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.26.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. God speaks to that effect by
the mouth of his Prophet, unto death in the behalf of the godly: O death,
Hose. 13.14.
I will be thy death. As though he had said triumphantly, thou that have been
the death of all mankind, o cruel enemy, o thou insatiable deuourer, now I
will be thy death, now shall thou be destroyed for ever; now thy sting, and thy
strength, shall utterly be taken away. 5.8.6.
Again the same Prophet says, he will destroy death for ever, and God will
wipe all tears and heaviness, from all faces; Luke 20.36
and S. Luke says, they can die no more.

The tenth reason why all men must die,
Has four special respects or divine attributes.

The first whereof is drawn from the celestial kingdom whence our souls
came, and the terrestrial tabernacles and houses of clay, wherein our souls
do a while live or dwell, as strangers and soiourners. Men are said to be
strangers either in respect of their travel from one place unto another, or in
respect of some kingdom where they dwell, being borne elsewhere, not yet free
denized nor naturalized. In both which respects David says, Psa. 39.12. 1
Chro. 19.15. 1 Cor. 5.1.2.
that as our fathers were in this world strangers, and soiourners, so Saint
Paul to the like purpose says, We know that we have a building given us of
God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in heaven: as if he
had said, our certain and most resting place is not here on earth, but is in
heaven. As he that is in a voyage or journey never co^tenteth himself until
he be at home, and therefore toiles and travels with great carnestnesse to end
his business, that he may return: even so are we in this tabernacle, 2 Cor.
5.2.
as Saint Paul said, sighing, and desiring to be clothed with our house, which
is from heaven. The faithful did manifestly confess, that they were strangers
and pilgrims on earth, Heb. 11.13.
and that they desired an heavenly country.

The second respect or attribute given to the children of God, is
Drawn from the mere merits of Christ, by whom also our bodies and souls
have interest and title to the kingdom of heaven, and that in a more
particular and proper manner then in this world, as thus appears. Christ is
called our bridegroom, and we his bride, Mat. 25.6. Cant. 4.12. Ephe. 1.22.
Coll. 1.18.
inferring by a necessary consequence, that where the husband is there must be
the wife. Again, where Christ is called the head of the Church, it is to be
inferred necessarily, that where the head is gone before, the members must and
shall follow after: much like to that which Christ said, Whersoeuer the body
is, Luke 17.37.
thither will the Eagles resort. As an honest wife has always an insatiable
desire and longing to be with her husband, no way contented with his abse^ce,
no not with love letters, nor with messe^gers, nor with tokens of great price,
but with his corporal presence: even so the true member of Christ, being
zelously affected and faithfully disposed toward her holy and heavenly husband
Christ Jesus, Cant. 1.1.
says, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. As if the Church or
bride of Christ had said unto God his and her heavenly father: O let me have
the fruition of his glorious presence, let me be always with him.

The third respect or attribute given unto the children of God, is
Drawn from the mortal hatred and malice which the devil has against us,
exceedingly envying our spiritual, and glorious arrival into heaven, and
therefore lays many snares and infinite allurements, to let and hinder us from
our passage; with whom therefore according to the will of God, we must
encounter, under the conduct of our Lord General Christ Jesus. In respect of
which striuings, Ephesians. 6.10. to 18. 2. Timo. 2.3. Phile. 1.2.
conflicts and battelles, we are called soldiers and warriors: inferring
thereby that when we have valiantly fought the Lords battles, and faithfully
triumphed over the devil, then it follows that we shall return to our own
home with rewards and crowns of everlasting glotie.

The fourth respect or attribute given unto the children of God, is
Drawn from the affairs wherein God our eternal king has employed us for the
performance of certain religious duties, whereof some are pertaining to God,
some to our brethren, and some to our selves: the which being done, and duly
accomplished, then must we be gone. In regard whereof, we are called Legates,
Ambassadors and such like, sometimes laborers, sometimes pilgrims. And in our
commission we have every man his set and limited time of dispatch, Job. 7.1. 1
Pet. 2.1.
which being ended, the ancient of days, the Angel of the covenant will send
his Angel Gabriel, or some other, Dan 9.20.21.22.
saying unto us for our return unto heaven, as unto the people of Israel in
Babylon, for their return unto Jerusalem

Now me thinks I hear two objections made against me by two sorts of people:
The one saying, This doctrine concerning the generality of death, needed not;
it might have been spared, and the speech spent upon matter that we know not.
For by the use of reason, by common experience, and by manifold examples, men
are induced to believe all this that you have said to be true, and long since
generally allowed. This is now a harsh kind of doctrine to wise men, and it is
very distasteful to all men; for it is a melancholy kind of teaching, and of no
such necessity. Ye might rather, in steed thereof stir up men to be merry,
and to endure their miseries patiently. Preachers do nothing more then fright
and astonish men: in the name of God let us be merry whiles we may, sorrow
comes fast enough.

The other sort reasoning, and expostulating with flesh and blood, cannot
determine upon the generality of death. They see not, they say, how it may be,
nor how it can stand to be true, because then it is questionable, say they, who
shall have the dominion over other creatures in the world, which are
innumerable, and most admirable. 2 Pet. 3.1. 1.3.4.
Saint Peter says, these believe not that the world shall be destroyed with
fire.

An answer to the first concerning the generality of death.
Interrogatiuely, do you know this to be true by any sentence or example of
holy Scripture? No, no, you do not. For if you did so know it, the hearing of
the same again and again, would rather have been comfortable the^ tedious
unto you. That knowledge which is not grounded upon the Scriptures of truth is
naught worth, and merely imperfect. True it is, that men may know and be
induced to believe, that they which are a dying, will die; and that they which
are in eminent dangers and perils present, shall die. But truly to believe, and
certainly to know that all men shall die, or who, or how many shall die, flesh
and blood cannot reveal unto men. For the sense of hearing and seeing, by the
which men are brought to know and to believe, reaches no further then unto
things present; because light, which is the object of seeing, and the air
which is the object of hearing, upon diverse occasions are sometimes given, and
sometimes taken away. Therefore to see and to know certainly, as an article of
belief, that all men shall die, which is my general doctrine, no man can
apprehend nor yet comprehend, but by the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and
by the holy influence of Gods divine spirit; because in very truth, the same
reaches unto the apprehension of things in time to come, and unto that which
is clean out of sight and out of hearing. Saint Paul speaks directly of two
sorts of seeing, 2. Cor. 4.18.
the one proper to the spiritual eyes, or eyes of the understanding, in these
words: We look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are
not seen. As if he had said, We who are the children of God, do not esteem of
that which we may apprehend with our natural eyes, in comparison: but we
esteem and allow, specially, of that which we may comprehend and apprehend by
faith. And in that very place he verifies the same, calling the one, in a
sort, an object temporal; the other an object eternal. The same Apostle says
to the like purpose: We walk not by sight, but by faith: 2. Cor. 5.7.
to wit, We judge not so highly, nor so truly of that which the light or the
air does manifest unto our senses, as of those things which the word of faith
does manifest unto our souls. The effects and fruits of the one and the other
shows the difference. As the virtue attractiue was not in Noah's Arc, Genesis
7.7.9.10.
that drew famous and most worthy creatures and of all sorts into it; nor the
virtue attractiue was not in Elias cloak that drew Elisha from his plowing, 1.
King. 19.19.
but both in the effectual use of Gods word. Even so the virtue of hearing,
seeing, and believing the general doctrine of death and life, proceeds not
from any matter in nature, nor from worldly reason, nor yet from the wisest
humane narration, but from the holy Spirit of the living God, who works in us
by faith, which is grounded upon the written word of God. As for example
briefly; 2. King 6.18.19.
Elisha his man, as he was a natural man, saw only an army of the Aramites
who were come to take his master: but when the eyes of his understanding were
opened upon the prayers of his master, he saw a far greater army of Angels
that were come to protect them. This made S. Paul to pray, Ephesians. 1.
That the eyes of the Ephesians understanding might be opened: which was in
effect, that God would be pleased to inflame and to kindle their hearts and
their affections with the splendour of his word and Spirit. As the same host of
the Aramites was led with blindness, 1. King. 6.18.19.
unto their mortal enemy the king of Israel, at Samaria, the eyes of their
understanding being shut up: and as the Sodomites did strike at Lots door with
blindness, Genesis 19.10.11.
when their natural eyes were open; or as Saul and his company, 1. Sam. 26.12.
being in the justice of God, stricken into a dead sleep: even so all such as
have not their sight, and their knowledge for spiritual things out of
Scripture, they wear out themselves with wearisomnesse, and in the end do
bring themselves, as through ignorance, into that inevitable gulf of
perdition. Labor you therefore, ye servants of the Lord, labor ye the
Scriptures, and know you for certain, that ye know nothing as ye ought to
know, unless ye know it by the Scriptures, and believe it by the same Spirit
that wrote the Scriptures. As the light of the body is the eye, Luke 11.34.
so the light of the inner man is the word of God; and consider I pray you,
consider in due time I advise you. If I be to be blamed for this long discourse
concerning the generality of death, why then did the holy Ghost so largely
discourse thereof? Why did his holy Majesty so often particulate one and the
same matter, so variably and in so many places of Scripture? How can this be
answered? If you say, fewer places would have suffised, the^ you do directly
blaspheme; which God forbid. Then you charge the holy Ghost with superfluities
and tediousness, where as through Gods mercies, with such, and so many
iterations he does importune you to remember your mortality and to make
provision for the same accordingly. If you say this doctrine was not so
needful, because you knew it long since; out of your own words you prove this
doctrine, of all others, to be most needful, and my self of you most
careful. And whereas you know alreadle, as you say, that you shall die:
nevertheless, it is questionable, whether you be ready prepared to die every
hour for the testimony of a good conscience, as his Majesty has commanded,
yea or no. And it is questionable, whether you be willing and desirous to die.
You will say peradventure, you are of that mind, and you trust ever to be so,
that there is nothing vainly spoken in Gods word: and you will count them vain
and frivolous that shall speak any thing out of this word, that does not in
some sort humor and applaud you. Here I end this matter, desiring God to
enlarge your affections more and more unto the obedience of his word.

An answer to the 2. objection concerning the generality of death.
Herein I will be brief, because indeed, this sort of people are less worthy
of further instruction, who hold that this so goodly a frame of the world,
should not, or cannot be destroyed. Of whom Saint Peter speaks thus: 1. Pet.
3.3.
There shall come in the last days mockers who will walk after their own
lusts, and shall say, Where is the promise of his coming for since the Fathers
died, all things continue alike unto this day. There needs no other answer
for them then that which S. Peter makes them in the verses following, let them
look to it upon their peril.

This doctrine concerning the generality of death, serves to reprove three
sorts of people.
The first are those who wholly, or for the most part, do set their love and
liking upon the things of this world, as if they were to tarry in it for ever:
or as if they were to choose, they would not change this world, no not for the
kingdom of heaven; ioying and rejoicing, as Amos the Prophet said, Amos. 6.13.
in a thing of naught: and like unto the tribes of Ruben and Gad, and half the
tribe of Manasses, Number. 32.1.2.
who chose the towns and lands on this side Jordan, because there were goodly
habitations, and fertile soil, rather then the towns and lands in Canaan,
which for the fertility thereof, was said to flow with milk and honey: and for
the innumerable pleasures thereof, like unto the kingdom of heaven. Saint Paul
blaming such, and seeking to draw them unto better choice, exhorts, saying:
Seek ye the things which are above, Col. 3.1.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and set your affections on
heavenly things and not on earthly.

The second sort who are to be reproved by the general doctrine of death,

Are they who murmr much, or rather do mourn too much for the deceasse of
their near friends, as though God had not done well to take one, and not
another, to take this and not that: or as if death had surprised them before
their time, and for ever; or else that death had casually lighted on the^ more
then others. Saint Paul comforting himself and others concerning this
complaint, 2. Cor. 5.1.
said: We have a building given of God, that is, an house whose builder and
maker is God. The children of God die but one: Luke 20.36.
they taste not of that second death in hell, as the reprobates do. This once
to die, is but a short interiection between two eternities, to wit, election
and glorification, with a kingly and a kindly passage as it were, by calling
and justification unto eternal salvation. Romans 6.9.
Christ died once, but in that he lives, he lives for ever. So ye likewise,
says the holy Apostle, are dead to sin, Romans 6.9.
but alive to God through Jesus Christ.

The third sort who are to be reproved by this general doctrine of death,

Are those, who not minding their mortality, nor accounts which they must
make, do treasure up sin upon sin, being driven, as it were, with the
swinge of their nature, and set on fire of hell, defile their bodies, and the
whole course of nature: resolved with themselves to undergo any sin, so as it
may bring them either pleasure or profit. Always saying in their hearts, and
many times with their tongues, If we must die for sin, as Preachers say, and
that as well for one sin as for a thousand; why then let us eat and drink,
and be merry while we may. Solomon out of his own experience, and specially
from the holy Spirit of inspiration, faith of such one a after this manner:
Eccles. 10.9.
Rejoice o thou young man in thy youth, let thine heart cheer thee, walk in
the ways of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But what
follows? God will bring thee to judgment. Although his Majesty be inclined
to mercy, yet when he is moved to justice, it is inevitable, it is innarrable,
and it is intolerable. To that effect said David, as if it were in the proper
person of almighty God, unto all such desperate and graceless wretches, that
do abuse his holy patience: Psalm. 50.17.
I will set thy sins in order: to wit, thy sins in the night, thy sins in
the day, thy sins in thy youth, and thy sins in thine age, thy sins against me,
and thy sins against thy brethren. I will so muster and so rank them
together, and so place them by rows, and in every rank and row, such, and so
many, as shall seem to be more odious, shameful, and detestable even unto
thine own self. And what shall follow? I will tear thee in pieces, that is,
thy torments shall be more terrible, and far more horrible to nature then as
if thou were racked and tormented peece-meale. These are they who although in
deed sin is too too general, yet they rifle, and run ragingly after it, in
a more particular manner, not minding their mortality, or at least, not
regarding the accounts that they must make; do malign, envy, utterly hate,
yea and seek the whole overthrow of us the Preachers of his holy word, and
others the dear children of God, who run not into the same excess of riot
and damnable behavior: but with zeal do frequent the ministry of his word,
with reverence do keep his Sabbaths, and with all care do keep themselves
vnsported of the world. Therefore they esteem them not worth their society,
nor worthy to live upon the earth. Ioh. 15.19.
We are not of the world, therefore the world hatethvs, says S. John. The
manifold plagues to the Egyptians, the fiery Serpe^ts to the Israelites, and
the Emerods to the Philistims, were not so troublesome and tedious, as these
heathenish Atheists, and profane Jews are to us. We live not as enemies in an
hostile manner among them, but modestly, and mildly, and benignly, as Christian
co^forters, bringing peace, and offering reconciliation. The words of our
commission are of 3. emphaticall and public narrations. The first is,
Benedicite, bless ye; the second is, Benefacite, do ye good; and the third is,
Orate, pray ye. Thus are we enjoined to behave our selves, amongst many other
religious duties, toward God and good me^, yea and toward our enemies. Where
in so ever we do fail through frailty, it is not indifferent, nor justice for
them, being our enemies to judge what we should do, but rather out of charity
to judge what we would do. Neither is it for them to revenge themselves upon
us, it is his holy Maicstie to whom we must answer upon our account. We are
(whatsoever they say) bringers of peace, and we are peaceable. 2. King. 10.17.
Come and see, said Iehu to Iehonadab: so it were to be wished, that these men
would zealously and religiously come and see before they would condemn us, and
hear quietly what we have to say, before they do with their tongues so
injuriously execute us. Ier. 18.8.
As the soul of Ionatha^ was knit to the soul of David, 1. Sam. 18.1
so our souls are knit as in one to them. We can truly say, our hearts are
upright toward them, as the heart of Iehu was toward Ichonadab. 2. King.
10.15.
And yet for all that me thinks I hear them say, as Iehu said to Iehoram, 2.
King. 9.19
what have thou to do with peace? turn thou behind us. And to be brief, we
shall not need to insinuate for fear, to have their favor: every one of us may
with Christian magnanimity say unto them, as Nehemiah said to his adversaries,
Neh. 6.11.
Shall such a man as I fly? who is he being as I am that will do it? For we
may say as Elisha said to his man, 2. Kin. 6.16.
There are more with us then be with the^. And with the Prophet David, If God
be with us, who can be against us? Although they have dealt with us shamefully
and despitefully, as the Ammonites dealt with the kind messengers of king
David, 1 Samuel 10.1. to 17.
shauing half their beards, and cutting off their skirts even to their
buttockes, yet we will neither do nor say, Judge. 9.
but as Iotham said to the Sichemites, If ye have dealt truly and purely with
us, then rejoice ye with us, and we will rejoice with you: but if not, we will
retort upon the^ their own terms, What have we to do with your peace? turn
you behind us. These are they, who long since, as they say, do know right well
that they shall die, and they doubt not but they shall die so faithfully and so
godly, as the purest and most perfect Christian of us all.

That this their error and gross persuasion may appear unto them, and unto
all others, I will yet for their sakes, and for the better patient abiding of
the godly, deliver in sorne particular manner, by the Scriptures of truth, who
they be indeed, out of this general number, that shall die well, and so live
everlastingly in the glorious kingdom of heaven.

The generality of death is not now in question. It is generally agreed upon,
and withal, we find it is of necessity: it is forcible and violent upon the
warra^table decree of the most Highest. But the question is, who frames
himself to die willingly, and with contentment. All shall die of force: but
none shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but such as in some measure do
die willingly and with contentment. Saint Paul says, Although I preach the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.16.17.
I have nothing to rejoice of, for necessity is laid upon me: if I do it
willingly I have a reward, but if I do it against my will, what is my reward? As
if he had said, what religious duty soever is performed in respect of
commandment and fear, is not to any man so much as thank worthy: but that
which is performed by man voluntarily and freely, as from a liberal heart,
without respect of law, or constraint, that man shall have his reward. Even so
is it with every man that is of force surprised by death, but almighty God
highly accepts of every man that disposes of himself, with a willing heart
to die. Therefore the Lord said unto the people of Israel: My heart is among
them that are willing. As if he had said, Judge. 5 9.
Though you fail to do such things as I command you, yet I will accept of your
will. This willingness is a kind of strong affection and a forcible faculty
of the soul: and yet for all that, it is led captive unto sin. Such is the
corruption of man's nature, being inuegled with the manifold forces and assaults
of Satan, that it preuails against the will of the inner man: as S. Paul
complains of himelse verse largely and particularly, and which makes him to say
plainly, To. 7.15. to the end.
I allow not of that which I do; for what I would that do I not, but what I
hate, that do I. As if he had said, Howsoever it be, that I offend God through
corruption and frailty, yet my heart, my mind and my will is with God. When I
do any thing contrary to the will of God, I must confess it is not I that do
it, but finne that dwells in me. Phil. 1.23.
Saint Paul did desire to die, and yet in a stronger appetite and affection he
would not. So was it with Christ Jesus. Luke 22.42.
So long as a man can find in himself a will to do well, although it be
properly the gift of God, it shall be accounted unto him a deed, as it was
unto Abraham, Genesis 22.12.
when as his will led him to sacrifice his son, and yet did it not from his
natural affection. He that will die willingly and well, must live willingly and
well accordingly. There must be a continual combat, betwixt the spirit of man,
and his fleshly members. Col. 3.5. Ephe. 4.21. to the end 5.8 to 22.6.10. to 19.
The earthly members must be mortified, and subdued by little and little, with
the will and desire of man; to wit, man must carry a loathing in his mind and
will of that which is evil, by a clean contrary affection, lifted up to
heaven. Our savior Christ referres us unto the serpent, for two special
instructions, concerning this business, in these words; Be wise as serpents.
Mat. 10.16.
The serpent being fiercely pursued, and in danger of her life, not able to
shift any longer, she with her teeth, wings and claws, will earnestly labor
in the ground, to hide her head, being then sure enough from the pursuers, as
not caring for her body, because her life lies in her head: even so they that
make a good preparation to die willingly and well, must not regard their goods,
Jonah 1.5.
when their bodies are in question, nor regard their bodies, when their souls
are in question; because indeed the life of their body and soul lies in their
head Christ Jesus, who has so enjoined them. The other quality of the serpent
is, to rouse and rub herself very vehemently when she is old, against the
ground, until she has gotten off all her old skin; and then having new
under it, she flies up on high with such agilitie and nimblenesse, as when she
was young: even so if we will die well and willingly, so as our souls may
mount up to heaven, we must in our youth, and in our age rub off, and shake
away the old man which is sin and wickedness, Romans 6.6.
and be renewed in the spirit of our minds.

Three divine causes moving willingness to die.
The 1. is drawn from the general decree of God, who in respect of death,
deals indifferently with all the generation of mankind: all men must die, the
noble and the ignoble, the King as the beggar; why then should any man mourn
or murmr at the death of his dearest friends? and why should he not be moved
to yield himself, with all willingness and contentment to die? Why should any
one man think himself worthy of that prerogative, and privilege, as not to
die, yea rather willingly, then of constraint? Joshua the Lord General of
Israel, at his death took this as a strong forcible argument, to persuade with
his people, to live well, and that they might die willingly; therefore
emphatically, he said, Joshua. 23.14.
This is the way of all the world: to wit, Although I be a man as ye know, in
an extraordinary acceptance with God, yet I must die; so must you, and so must
all mankind that live, and are yet to be borne, look not you to be exempted
from this sentence: but provide accordingly. A voice said unto Esai, Cry;
Esai. 40.6.
What, said he? That all flesh is grass, and the grace thereof as the flower
of the field. This holy Prophet being suggested and instigated by the Spirit of
God, to prepare the way of Christ in the hearts of the people, he receives as
from the Lord also, the manner how to move them effectually thereunto, even by
telling them that they were all subject to death, and that the most wise and
most excellent amongst them was subject to the same end.

The second cause moving willingness to die.
It is drawn from a threefold excha^ge that we make with the Almighty: the
first is the exchange that we make of our bodies; 1 Cor. 15.25.54. Phili. 3.21.
Esai. 49.10.25.8.
for this corruptible body, which is subject to manifold miseries, and to fall
from God, we shall have incorruptible and immortal bodies. For these our
bodies subject to hunger, to thirst, to cold, to heat, to manifold diseases,
to sundry passions, and other such like calamities, we shall have celestial
and glorified bodies, every way freed of all those perturbations. The Lamb
which is in the midst of the throne, Reave. 7.15.16.17.
shall govern his people, and shall lead them unto the lively fountains of
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. 21.3.4.
The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall
be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them. There shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither pain. Every Christian is
always longing, and desiring this exchange, yea senseless creatures, do always
strain with a fervent desire to be unburdened, and to be discharged of this
life; how much more every good man? As he that is in prison desires and longs
to go abroad, or as Hagar in her bondage, so miserable is man living in the
flesh, as a living soul in a body subject to death.

The second exchange that we make is of our goods, as when we change earthly
riches for heavenly, momentanie and transitory treasures for everlasting, and
that which never fades. To which purpose the holy Ghost says, Mat. 6.19.20.
Lay not up treasures where moath or canker corrupts, and where thieves
break through and steal: but lay up treasures for your selves in heaven. As
if it were to say, The best things of this life, are subject to corruption, and
to manifold casualties: but the treasures which are in heaven, are not subject
either to mutability, or yet to decay. And our savior Christ says by way of a
parable, Luke 12.15.10.22.
that the abundance of worldly wealth auailes nothing for the time prefent,
which is but momentanie, neither does it any way minister comfort unto the
distressed soul. Thus he says, take heed of covetousness; for though a man
have abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches. Saint Paul seeing and
perceiving the inordinate desire of riches, which was in his time, and knowing
that the like would be continued, he speaks by way of comparison, very
disdainefully and contemptuously of worldly riches, 1 Timo 6.17.18.19.
and charges men to provide for better things, and to build upon a better
foundation. In heaven is all kind of plenty, maturitie, and satietie. Judge.
18.9.10.
As the Spies said unto the children of Dan their brethren concerning Laish,
Arise and let us go up, we have seen the land, and surely it is very good, it
is a place lacking nothing that is in the world; be not slothful to possess
it, for God has given it into your hands: even so do innumerable sentences and
examples of holy Scripture say and assure us as touching the kingdom and
immortal joys of heaven.

The third exchange that we make by dying willingly and well, is of our
society, and of our company; as when we change the society, fellowship, and
company of men, for the company and society of Angels; Heb. 12.22.23.24.
Revel. 14.1. to 6.
the company of whoremongers, drunkards, liers, swearers, oppressors, and such
like, for the company of the Saints; the company of children on earth, for the
company of children in heaven; the company of husband or wife, for the company
of Jesus Christ himself. As a virgin that is affianced to a man thinks it
long before the solemnization thereof: so is every one that is affianced with
Christ evermore desiring his full fruition and holy fellowship.

The third cause moving willingness to die.
It is the mitigations, co^forts, and helps, that almighty God yields against
the torments of death, to such as do commemorate their mortality, with prayers
and intercessions unto almighty God, that they may be faithfully prepared. Of
which gracious qualifications of sicknesses, and diminishing of deaths
torments, the holy Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 41.3.
most plainly, The Lord will strengthen him upon his bed of sorrow; thou Lord,
says the Prophet, have turned all his bed in his sickness as if it were to
say, God will enable a merciful religious man, to endure all that he will lay
on him, or else will diminish the quality or quantity of the disease. To whom
also Christ Jesus says, I am the physician: as if it were in effect to say, I
am a present discharge for the soul that is surcharged with sin, and also a
present qualification of bodily griefs, and natural diseases, as was
manifoldly and plainly experimented by Christ, upon diverse poor people, who
were miserably and mortally distressed with both.

The second instruction.
Concerning the manner, sort, or kind of death, to wit, how diversely, and how
many ways, death seizes on all the generation of mankind: I will distinguish
into four sorts. The which for assignations sake, I must call by four names,
under the which the holy Ghost comprehends as in a close narration dispersed
over the Bible, all manners, sorts, and kinds of death whatsoever, howsoever,
and wheresoever: which are these.

1. the Penal death. 2. the Natural death. 3. the Unnatural death. 4. the
Political death.
These three are comprehended in that answer of David, the selected man of God,
to Abishai, concerning Saul the king, whom God delivered into their hands, to
do with him as they would: even as Pontius Pilate delivered Jesus into the
hands of the Pharisees, to do with him as they would. 2. Sam. 26.8.9.10.
Let me smite him but once, said Abishai to David, and I will smite him no
more: intending by those words, with one blow to kill Saul. Shall I lay mine
hands upon the Lords anointed, said David? No, I will not, God shall smite
him. There he plainly related the penal death. Or his day shall come to die.
There he plainly related the natural death. Or he shall descend into battle.
There he plainly related the unnatural death.

First, the Penal death is that which almighty God did usually inflict upon
those, with whom he was wrathfully displeased; as appeared by the
ineuitablenesse thereof. It was most commonly miraculous, and publicly
powerful, that it might be for an everlasting remembrance among all nations.
Such was the punishment of Adam for the transgression of Gods commandment,
Genesis 3.17.18.19.
as did appear by many particular denuntiations; and afterward concluded with
his death, and with the death of all his posterity irrecouerable in themselves
for ever. Job to this purpose said, Job. 34.14.15.
If God set his heart upon man, and gather unto himself his spirit and his
breath, all flesh shall perish together, and man shall return to dust. As if
he had said, If God be once wrathfully displeased with any man, how shall he
live? how can he or they endure the hand of him, who so penally and powerfully
punishes unpenitent sinners?

Druine motives or reasons, why God does so penally, so miraculously, and so
powerfully punish some, and not others: with a sixefold answer thereunto.

The first Motive why God punished penally.
First, God punished penally with water, when men were publicly and generally
grown to be tirannous, cruel, and sauagely disposed, one toward another, as
the people of the old world. The^ did the windows of heaven open, Genesis
6.11.12.13. Genesis 7.4.10 11 to the end.
and the foundations of the great deep break up, so that the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth, and covered all the hie mountains of the world.

Likewise the Egyptians, Exodus 1.11. to 16.5. to 14.7.8.9.10.11.14.
who dealt tirannously, and cruelly with Gods people this Majesty taking
special knowledge thereof, did penally and powerfully punish the^ with
manifold plagues in their own land, and afterward with the inundations of
waters, wherein their king, and many thousands more were miraculously drowned.

The second Motive why God punished penally.
Secondly, God punished penally with fire, Genesis 19.5.15.16. to 17
when he saw that men were grown so generally and so publicly carnal,
sensual, fleshly, and unnaturally defiling their own bodies, taking the
loving admonitions, and godly persuasions of his Saints, but as jests and
mockes: as he did the Sodomites.

The third Motive why God punished penally.
Thirdly, by changing the nature and quality of the earth: when as particular
persons being in place of pre-eminence, did offer indignity and disloyalty to
such as were in authority, as did Corah Dathan, Number. 16.29.36.
and Abiram with their companions; whom God did penally, powerfully, and
miraculously destroy, by opening the earth to swallow them up alive.

The fourth Motive why God punished penally.
Fourthly, with savage beasts, when as his holy and well-beloved people are
disdained, mocked, and scorned; 2. King. 2.23.24.
as two and forty that mocked Elisha the Prophet of the Lord, and were penally
destroyed with Bears.

The fifth Motive why God punished penally.
Fifthly, with Angels, when as men in authority do publicly and incorrigibly
offend his holy Majesty, as did David in numbering his men of war, 2. Sam.
24.1.15.
and trusting in them: whom God did penally and publicly punish with the death
of seventy thousand of his chosen men, by the stroke of an Angel. Act. 12.23.
Likewise Herod the king was stricken unto death publicly by an Angel, because
he took that glory to himself, which was due to God. 1. King. 13.1.2.3.2. King
23.17.
So was Iehoram most penally and miraculously destroyed for his idolatry,
according to the saying of the man of God.

The sixth Motive why God punished penally.
Sixthly, where it may be demanded why God does punish some so penally and so
miraculously, and not others, it is drawn from his established rule, and
general order of governing kingdoms and nations, holding it sufficient in his
godly wisdom, to punish publicly some, in stead of many, that one example so
public and so penally powerful, should serve for many hundred years in a
whole nation or kingdom. When the Church began to spread through Gods mercies,
there were many miracles, signs and wonders; as that in Egypt, as that in
their journey through the wilderness, and as that their conquering of Canaan,
and so until the temple of Jerusalem was built, and religion established. But
afterward as it drew nearer and nearer unto Christ, they grew to be fewer and
fewer.

The first use of this doctrine concerning the penal death,
Serves to forewarne Landlords and Patrons, who most tyrannously live upon the
spoil of the poor: the one fleecing the Church, the other fleecing the
commonweal, and both robbing God of his honor so much as they may, or as it
does bring them either pleasure or profit. As in the old world, wherein
cruelty did ouerrun the whole earth: so it is now in the glorious Sunshine of
the Gospel. If the examples of those whom God so powerfully and so penally
punished, will not serve, it may well fall out even in the justice of God, that
for the same cruelty, their oppression and grinding of the poor, and selling
them for old shoes, that they shall be made examples for such as do come after.

The second use of this doctrine concerning penal death.
It may well serve to forewarne dissolute and loose livers, yea all such as
live according to their own lust, giving themselves over, according to the
swing of their own nature; lest they also neglecting the use of Gods holy word,
and the use of these fearful examples, do, in a time when they think not,
fall into some inevitable and damnable judgments of God in a miraculous manner.

The third use of this doctrine concerning penal death.
Forewarneth all such as are subjects, to submit themselves unto such as are in
authority over them, as unto the divine ordinance of God.

The fourth use of this doctrine concerning penal death.
It may serve to admonish all sorts of people to demean themselves reverently,
and conscionably, toward all the zealous professors of the Gospel.

The fifth use of this doctrine concerning the penal death.
It admonishes all those that are in authority, to submit themselves
dutifully, and every way religiously toward God, as they would their subjects
should do unto them.

The second manner, sort and kind of death, to wit,
The natural death is more moderate, more mild, and more alluding to the
favor of God, then the penal death; because indeed it has reference to the
promises of God, in Christ Jesus: by whom the guilt of sin, and the
condemnation of the law together, with the sting of death, is qualified and in
a sort done away; leaving indeed no more to do, nor to say, against such as can
take hold of his promises, but only the perishing and destroying of that body,
so naturally subject to sin. According as Paul proclaimed, in a most
comfortable manner, in these words. Death went over all men: Romans 5.11.
in as much as all men have sinned, as if he had said, Such was the infinite
mercy of God, and yet mingled with his justice, that he would lay no more to
the charge of his chosen, then he must needs by the open rules of religion,
and revealed word. Moses in his defense to the people of Israel concerning that
open rebellion of Corah and his company, speaks most divinely, and most
plainly, of this kind of death in these words, Numb. 16.29. to 36.
If these men die the common death of all men, or if these be visited with the
general visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent me. As if he had
said, There is a sort or kind of death, which is natural, which is usual, and
which is rightly appertayning unto the nature of mankind; and that which most
commonly falls out upon good and reasonable deliberation, upon orderly
disposing of worldly affairs, and upon due bequeathing of the body to be
buried. This natural death which he calls the common death, and the general
visitation of all men, Job says it is as a ricke of corn, Job. 5.26.
which comes into the barn in due time. As if he had said, This is the death
indeed that is full of maturitie, and seasonablenesse; lo, thus we have
inquired of it, and so it is. Again he says to the same effect: Job. 34.14.15.
As a rush cannot grow without mire, and as grass without water can grow no
longer, but withers, though it be not cut: even so man by nature lives
until nature be quite worn, and wholly extinguished, and then dies though he
were not touched nor meddled withal in any sort; which death is nothing so, nor
so as the penal. The man of God intimating such a kind of death, said to
Hezckiah King of Judah, Esai. 38.1.
Thou shall not die with the sword, but thou shall die in peace. To wit, thou
shall not die the penal death, which is terrible and painful; nor an
unwonted death, but the common death, the general visitation of all men, to
wit the natural death.

This natural death which is also called the common death, and the general
visitation of all men, has by the revealed word of God four other inferior
sorts or kinds of death, whereof I must dispose for methods sake after this
manner.

1. Some do die In their old age. 2. Some do die In their nonage. 3. Some do
die Languishingly. 4. Some do die Suddenly.
The first reason why some live long.
Is drawn from the singular favor of almighty God, in granting unto some one
amongst many, that which in his heart he specially desires. For amongst all
things that man specially desires, there are principally these two, to wit,
health and wealth. For wealth a man will bestow all his wits, all his endeavor,
all his labor, all his friends, and whatsoever else he possibly can devise:
but for health, and that he may live long, he will bestow all his wealth that
was so industriously, and so laboriously gotten, and be contented to be counted
a fool, yea a forlorn wretch, and to be indeed a beggar at every man's
door, all the days of his life. To be brief, as chastity is a singular gift
of God, to one amongst ten thousand, so long life is a singular gift of God,
to one amongst ten thousand. Solomon therefore said, Pro. 16.31.
Old age is a crown of glory, wherein are two goodly and godly respects; one
is, that a man may the better and the more abundantly gather riches, by looking
more respectively into the works of God, and the end of his creation. For the
longer a man lines in a reasonable kind of husbandry, the more his gain and
getting must needs be. Although his revenues be but small, yet if he get and
spare, here a little and there a little, in continuance of time according to the
old proverb, Many a little makes a mickle: following the example of that
little poor pismire, who according to her small strength, and yet being
diligent, Pro. 6.6.
has against winter a great heap of provision; and being also prouidident,
she painefully nibleth the heads of every grain, lest they should grow, and so
her labor lost. The Majesty of God to set forth his renewed love toward
Judah, and Jerusalem, said thus: Zach. 8.4.
Their men shall live so long as that they shall go by a staff. As there is no
commandment that has any promise, but the honoring of parents: so there is
no such reward pleasing to any man as to live long: therefore God made promise
thereof to the^ that keep his commandment. What temporal blessing did the
Lord bestow on David, 1 King. 3.14.
for a reward, who was a man according to his own heart, but long life? as the
holy Ghost testifies, he lived so long that he could live no longer, 1 King.
1.1.
nature was quite extinguished in him. This was also a reward specially,
bestowed upon the ten holy Fathers, Genesis 5.1. to the end.
before the flood. Thus shall men be enabled with their hands, to perform the
desire of their hearts, in contributing unto the necessity of the Saints.
Abraham also had for his temporary blessing, Deuteronomy. 31.2.
an hundred and twenty years life, even in his old age he was careful to
fulfill the work of the Lord so long, as he said that he could go no more out,
and in. Length of life, Deuteronomy. 11.9.
says Moses, is a reward for keeping of Gods commandments: they then that
keep not Gods commandments, shall be guilty of Gods judgments for the same,
and also for the time, which they have misspent.

The other special and most principal respect of long life, is that such men
might also gather spiritual riches. For as by little and little, men come to
be stored with the things of this world, specially if it be long continued:
even so by the continual keeping of the Sabbath, by the often reading and
hearing of Gods word, by usual prayers, by often reiterating with thankefulnes
the mercies of God, and such like, men may grow and increase most richly and
abundantly, in the things that concerns a better life. If the increase be but
as Esai the Prophet says, here a line, and there a line, Esai. 28.10.
to wit, a little at one time, and a little at another, either gotten or saved.
To which purpose Job says, Job. 12.12.
In length of days there is wisdom, and amongst the ancient there is
understanding. Therefore the holy man David all his life long followed the
counsel and directions of the ancient, and thereby prospered. It is a matter
ordinarily expected from old men, that they having such an extraordinary favor
at Gods hand, should not only be able well and wisely to govern themselves,
but also well and wisely to govern others.

The second reason, why some do die in their minority and nonage.
The answer is fourefold.
The first is drawn from Gods exceeding great mercy in Christ toward some to
whom he imputes nor sin, for their good even in this world, that they should
not see, nor hear of those lamentable calamities, and woeful judgments that
should fall upon them, with who^ they sometimes lived. His Majesty duly
te^dering the good disposition, the mild affection, and tender inclination of
all such people, takes them therefore before hand into his glorious protection,
that they should not be grieved with the sight nor hearing of those matters.
Accordingly says Esai the Prophet, The righteous shall be taken away from the
evil to come: Esa. 57.1.
that is as much to say, Some of Gods dear children shall not live to see and
hear the miseries which shall come upon those whom they do so highly love.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, Psalm. 37.37.
the end of that man is peace. So it is said of Ieroboams son, 1. King.
14.13.17.
he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found
some goodness toward the Lord God of Israel. As if it had bin said, He only of
that house shall go to his grave in peace, because he shall not see the
desolation that shall come upon the land. So also was it said of Josias, as if
it were in the proper person of God, in these words; 2. King. 22.20.
I will gather thee to thy fathers house, thou shall be put in thy grave in
peace, and thine eyes shall not see the evil that I will bring upon this
place. Wisd. 1.13.14.
Though they were soon dead. yet fulfilled they much time: as if he had said,
They did much glory to God, and much comfort to his Saints in that little time
wherein they lived.

The second answer, why some do die in their nonage or minority.
It is drawn from the merciful goodness of God in Christ Jesus, in brining
them more speedily out of this world into their heavenly inheritance. For by
how much the sooner he takes them out of this world, by so much the sooner he
brings them into their wished possession, Heb. 11.14.
God providing better things for them. In the prayer which Christ our advocate
has framed for us, we are taught specially to desire the speedy entrance into
this our heavenly inheritance, in these words, Thy kingdom come. And with all
for the better enabling, propping, and comforting of his people with patience,
to abide the time, he says in a figurative speech, Behold, Cant. 2.8. to 14.
he comes leaping upon the mountains, and skipping upon the hills like a young
Roe, or as a young Heart. Job speaking of the best estate of man living in this
world, says thus; While his flesh is upon him, Job. 14.22.
he shall be sorrowful; and whiles his soul is in him, he shall mourn.

The third answer why some do die in their minority.
It is the sin of the parents, or best affected friend of him that dies,
whose death is to him a punishment. For as generally amongst parents, there is
nothing more grievous, nothing more irksome, then the death of their young
children; specially such as are tractable: so is there no punishment so
counteruailable as the death of such children. Naomi, when her husband and her
two sons were dead, said unto her daughter in law: Ruth. 1.13. to 21.
The hand of the Lord is gone out against me, the almighty has given me much
bitterness. The widow of Sarepta, when her young son was dead cried, and said to
Eliah; 1. King. 17.18.19 20.
Art thou come to call my sins to remembrance, and to slay my son? As if
she had said, I see the greatness of my sins against God, by the greatness of
my punishment, which, by taking away my son, his Majesty has inflicted upon
me. The same Prophet in his intercession farther said; O Lord God, have thou
punished this widow by killing her son? As if he had said, O Lord do not so:
the world was not worthy of them, Heb. 11.38.
the sins of worldly men descrue them not. Lord do not lay her sins so
heavily to her charge. Saint Paul said, that the recovery of Epaphroditus out
of his mortal sickness, Phil. 2.25.26.27.
imparted the mercy of God toward him, lest he should have had sorrow upon
sorrow.

The fourth reason why some do die in their minority.
It is the extreme wickedness and outrage that some would grow into against
God and his Saints, if they were suffered to live. To which purpose his holy
Majesty says, Psa. 101.8.
I will destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all the workers of
iniquity from the city of the Lord. As if he had said, I will prevent by
death the ungodly determination of graceless men, they shall not live so long
as to do villainy against my people.

The third question why some do die languishingly.
It is answered threefold.
First, to declare that the use of Physic, Chirurgerie and such like means
are naught worth, and to no purpose, when as God denies the virtue thereof. To
make men know that the best means, and the effects thereof, are two distinct
things, Almighty God in his irefull speech to the Egyptians, says thus, Take
balm, Ier. 46.11.
o virgin daughter of Egypt, and in vain shall thou use many medicines, for
thou shall have no health. He speaks again by the same Prophet after this
manner, Thy burstings are incurable, 30.12.13.
and thy wounds dolorous, there are no plasters, nor medicines, nor help for
thee.

The second answer why some do die languishingly,
Is drawn from the fatherly care of Almighty God, who knowing whereunto some
of his children are inclined, and naturally addicted, accordingly he keeps
them under, he still disables them from the performance of that they would, even
in matters hurtful to their own souls. As a natural father tenderly
affecting the good of his son, whom he sees to take head, and make way to
spend all, sometimes he threatens him sore, sometimes he beats him sharply, at
other times he feeds him with hard fare, now and then he clothes him with
ragged apparel, and always keeps him without money. Or as a mother intending
to weane her child from the breast, lets him cry much; if that will not do, she
annoints it with wormwood or such like, even so God deals with some such as
are stubborn or like to grow disobedient, he keeps them under with many
strange devices, and does disable them every where, and at al times from doing
that they would, to the hurt of themselves. The peregrination of the people of
Israel from Egypt to Canaan, was through the most vaste, deep, and dangerous
places of all the world; and sometimes through goodly valleys, by pleasant
rivers, and such like places of contentment: sometimes in great penury and
scarceness of all good things, and sometimes in great plenty of every thing;
and thus with uncertainties, mutabilities, liking and disliking 40. Number. 33.1
years together before they came into the promised land, not resting in any
one good place one whole year, intermingling one with another. Eue^ so is it
with gods people, specially such of the^ as his Majesty knows will not travel
rightly the right way. Moses said, God led them 40 years in the wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 8.2.3
to try the^, to humble them, to know what was in their hearts. God said by
the mouth of his Prophet thus, Ier. 30.11.
Although I have stricken thee with the wound of an enemy, and with a sharp
chastisement, because thy sins were increased, I will correct thee, but not
utterly cut thee off. So God said to David concerning Solomon his son, 2 Samuel
7.13.
If he sin I will chastise him with the rods of the children of men, but my
mercy will I not utterly take from him. Whom the Lord loves, Heb. 12.6.
says the holy Author to the Hebrews, he chastises, and he scourges every
son that he receives. We have a famous example in David, who^ if God had not
humbled with continual persecution, it is certain he would have driven Saul
violently out of his kingdom.

The third reason why some do die languishingly.
As the former proceeded from the mercy of God toward those whom he would
reform: so in this we shall find the inevitable justice of God upon the
wicked, every way disabling and putting them down from their intents and
enterprises, keeping them at a low rate, and as it were at a scantling. He
deals with them, as with the house of Ioab the murderer; 2 Samuel 3.23.
never without running issues, never without the leprosy, or one that leans
on a staff, or does fall on the sword, or lacks bread. So God said he would
deal with the people Israel, if they would not keep his commandments, in
these words: The Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and of long continuance,
Deuteronomy. 28.59.
sore diseases, and of long durance. Such a writing was brought to Iehoram King
of Judah, from the Lord, because of his Idolatry, containing this effect; Thou
shall be in great diseases, 2 Chro 21.12 to 16. 2 King. 15.5.
in thy boweles day by day. Ahaziah King of Judah was disabled with a leprosy
for ever.

The fourth reason why some do die suddenly or instantly, has these two
respects.
The first respect is the matter wherewith they die. Some die with old age as
did David; some with long endured sickness; some with the eminency of the
place which ministers present danger and death, as a ship against the rocks, a
wilderness of wild beasts, a storehouse of gunpouder. Sometimes in respect of
Gods sudden decree, because the Lords breath is in his nostrels.

Sometimes being occasioned from a natural cause, which learned Physitio^s
say, does arise ab apoplexia, a stoppage in the head, or a vomida pulmonu^, a
suffocation in the lungs, or else a sincope vel cardiaogmo, from the stomach
or heart. All which is common both to good and bad men, to the just and unjust:
and that which never gives warning, nor knowledge, any manner of way formerly
to be prevented by physic, and therefore rightly called Mors repentina, a
sudden and an unprovided death.

The second respect is the manner or difference betwixt both. The bad and
unjust man dies suddenly, how long soever he lives, and what warning soever
he has, Mat. 25.3.
because of his vnpreparednesse, like the foolish virgins: or like the unjust
and careless steward.

The good and upright man who fears the Lord, and rules himself according to
his laws, is always upon his guard, like the good householder, who knows on
a night suddenly his house shall be broken up: and like those wise virgins
always in a readiness, ever looking for death. This rese^blance of both was
in the old world; Noah was well prepared, the rest were nothing at all.

The eight uses that we are to make of this doctrine, concerning the natural
death, which is the common death, and the general visitation of all men.

The first use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove old men, who either idly or riotously spend their
patrimonies, and their parents portions. The holy Prophet Hosea says, Hose 7.9.
Gray hairs are here and there, upon him, and he knows it not: to wit, the
aged man considers not, the old man whose life is almost ended remembers not,
he thinks upon time enough to be getting and sparing, which is yet left
behind; he deuiseth upon many more years, and so goes on until his strength
fails him, and he purposes to bring many matters unto good effect, even by
his wits, when as indeed with his strength, his senses will fail him.
Therefore Jeremy the Prophet said, Lam. 3.27.
It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth. It is expedient that he
do take pains in his profession while he may, lest when he should give, he be
enforced to take. Solomon not only for matters of salvation, but also for
matters of this life, does exhort very earnestly, particularly and plainly,
Eccle. 12.1.2. to 8.
thus: Remember thy maker in thy youth, whiles the evil days come not, nor the
years approach wherein thou shall say. I have no pleasure in them. To conclude
with that patheticall saying of Saint Paul, 1 Timo. 5.8.
If there be any man that provides not for his own, namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel; the honorable
age is not that which is measured by time, neither that which is measured by
the number of years: but wisdom is the gray hair, Wisd 4.7.8.
and an undefiled life is the old age. As if he had said, It is not the age of
any man, how old soever, that deserves reverence and special account amongst
men: but it is the knowledge of God, and an unreprovable life.

The second use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove those who by their over much care, and excessive labors,
have gotten much wealth, always getting, ever sparing, never spending,
accounting from ten to the hundred, and from the hundred to the thousands, for
every of their children; yea and many times (having neither son nor daughter)
they know not for whom: and yet in all this time and amongst all this wealth,
having nothing at all for themselves against the day of the Lord, having
indeed neither oil nor lamps. Much like the glutto^ that fared deliciously
every day, Luke 16.19.
and gorgeously apparelled: but inwardly for his soul he was more miserable
then any, and as the poor beggar at his door outwardly. So commonly at
deaths door the wicked parts with all joys: and there the godly receives
it.

The third use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove all such parents, who having a son or a daughter taken
from them by death in his minority, they do not take to heart nor think the
extraordinary care, the greedy griping, the intolerable shifts, and the
manifold devices which they used to get worldly wealth and preferments for him.
So that they ever kept from their heart, or for the most part, all conscionable
care of trayning him up in the fear and nurtour of the Lord, so as he might be
a necessary member in Church or common wealth. They consider not, neither can
they be made to think, much less to believe, that God took him away for
their punishment. And for this cause also God takes away another, and so
another of their best and dearest children, leaving such parents, either none
at all, or else such as are graceless, and without hope to be any comfort unto
them. If parents out of their natural affection, or out of Gods word, would
but imagine what a doleful day, what a sorrowful sight, and a galling grief
it would be unto them, to see one child after another suffer the bitter pains
and pangs of death, and then being dead to be doubtful of their salvation:
such parents might the better and the sooner see, and take knowledge of their
sins toward their poor children, and so by true repentance be turned unto
the Lord.

The fourth use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove those who out of their over abounding natural affection
toward their children, are never prepared to part with their children, no not
though they be to change their company, for the company of God himself, and
the company of others their brothers and sisters, for the company of the holy
Saints and Angels in heaven. And their worldly riches, for the true treasures
purchased by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. And this because that either
they want knowledge, or faith.

The fifth use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove those who live so securely and so carelessly, as if they
had made a covenant with death, until an appointed day: or as if they could
keep death away so long as they would, or at least give themselves lawful
warning. Upon these comes the day of the Lord suddenly, not in respect of God,
but in respect of themselves, being unprovided. By how much they want of that
they should have against his coming, or by how little they fear death, by so
much the more terrible and fearful death is unto them.

The sixth use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove those who arrogate to much unto the worthiness of the
means, attributing that virtue unto them, which indeed is due unto God; as in
the time of sickness, to physic, surgery and such like. No marvel though
they languish in their diseases, and no man able to help the^. What was the
overthrow of so many thousands of the Israelits, and the taking away of the
Ark of God by the Philistines? 1. Sam. 4.5.
was it not because they relied to much upon the arc? as appeared by their
shooting and loud rejoicing, as though heaven and earth rang together. Jeremy
speaks of them at another time, how they vanted and boasted of their temple,
saying, Ier. 7.4.
The temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: therefore the Lord gave their
Temple to be ransacked and ruinated by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. Dan.
1.1.2.
Jeremy likewise speaking of the pride and presumptusnesse of the Egyptians,
who in their strength and multitude of their men, concluded most infallibly the
utter overthrow of the people of Israel: Ier. 46 7.
They come, says he like floods and rivers, with raging horses, swift
chariots, Blackemores and Libians to shoot and to bear shields, yet all in
vain.

The seventh use concerning the natural kind of death.
It serves to reprove those who do derogate from the worthiness of the
means, which God in his mercy has ordained in his Church and commonwealth,
to be in him, and for him, or as in his stead, helpers and comforters unto his
people: as in the time of sickness, not to seek to the Physitia^, they rather
scoff and scorn them, and they deride their profession. These indeed, as the
former, are accessarie to their own continual diseases, languishing maladies,
and in the end, to their own death: not because that they thereby do directly
shorten their lives, but because that they do frustrate, so much as in the^
lies, the holy ordinances of God, which are joined with his decree.

The eight use concerning the natural death.
It serves to reprove those who run into eminent dangers and places of
contagion; they avoid not when they may conuemently, outrageous elements, as
fire, water, and such like: or enterprise to perform actions, which stand not
either with their wits, or with their abilities.

The 3. general sort, manner, or kind of death, to wit, the unnatural death.
The vnnatur all death, is that which is more violent, more abhorring nature,
more cross and contrary to the laws and ordinances of God. A kind of death
which proceeds from man's self, or rather a death instigated by the devil:
merely derogatiue to the Majesty of Gods government, dishonorable to his
name, and by the revealed word, impeachfull to the salvation of the souls of
such. An untimely and an unseasonable death.

Under this kind of death there are 4. other inferior sorts.
First when a man kills himself unawares, or against his will, as Ahaziah
king of Israel did with a fall. 2. King. 1.6


Secondly, when a man kills himself wittingly and willingly, 1 Samuel 31.4 2.
Sam. 17.23. 1. King. 16.18.
as Saul did with his own sword; as Achitophel hanged himself; and as Zimry
did, that burnt himself.

Thirdly, when a man is killed by another unwittingly and unwillingly, not
having hated him before; Nu. 35.22. Ios. 20.1.2.3
for whose saftetie God appointed cities of refuge.

Fourthly, when a man is wittingly and willingly killed by another, 2. Sam.
3.27 2. Sam. 20.10.
as Abner was by Ioab, and as Amasa was.

The first question concerning the manner of the unnatural death.
Why it is, or how it comes to pass, that some unwittingly and unwillingly do
kill and destroy themselves, yea with their act and deed, some hang themselves,
some burn themselves, some drown themselves, and such like manner of
unnatural death?

This kind of unnatural executions happens many times on the just, as well
as on the unjust, upon the wise, as upon the foolish; upon the rich as upon the
poor.

The answer therefore is twofold, one concerning the ungodly, the other
concerning the godly.
That which concerns the ungodly, is, when any such man or woman unwittingly
puts or brings himself into perilous places, puts himself to death by his
own act and deed. It proceeds from the upright justice of God, ruling and
ouer-ruling man how puissant, and how outrageous soever he be, making him in
despite of his heart, and wholly against his will, to do that to himself which
shall be to his own destruction, and against nature. To which purpose God
speaks by his Prophet, unto the wicked, in these words; Ier. 20.21.
I will make thee to be a terror unto thy self, and to thy friends. And by a
phrase of speech, as from him who has suffered great indignity, saying to the
wrong doer, I will make thee undo that again which thou have don unto me,
although thou did it by another: I will make thee undo it thy self, and
with thine own hands. After this manner it is said, that God does surcharge
the wicked, who sometimes have ouerruled and surcharged his people. As for
example, Paul and Silas having been wrongfully imprisoned, and sorely whipped
by the governors of Philippi, a famous city in Macedonia, they sent their
Sergeants, Act. 16.35.36.
saying, Let these men go. Nay verily said they, we have been beaten openly
uncondemned, and now would they put us away privily? but let them come and
bring us out. So they came and brought them out, and prayed them and desired
them to depart. Likewise he says by his Prophet Jeremy to the people of
Israel, Ier. 5.9.
As ye have worshipped strange gods in your own land, so shall ye worship
strange gods in another land. As if he had said, Whereas in your own country
you would worship idols whether I would or not, now I will make you do the like
in another la^d whether you will or not; how hurtful and loathsome soever it be
unto you, yet I will enforce you. Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.9.10.
who was a public enemy to the crown of Judah and a deadly enemy to the
king his father, by his own act and deed unwillingly, and against his heart
and mind hung himself. King Pharaoh having drowned many of Go^s people in
Egypt, by the justice of God upon him, unwittingly and unwillingly drowned
himself and his host even by his own act and deed. Exo. 14.26.
The Moabites mistaking the element of water for blood, became secure and
careless, 2. King. 3.22.23.16.17.
and therefore unwittingly and unwillingly, and yet by their own act and deed,
they fell upon the sword of their enemies. Wherein God showed that eue^ by the
self same matter wherewith the Israelites were comforted and relieved, their
enemies were confounded and discomfited: where with a man sins, Wis. 11.13.
even by the same God usually punishes. And as Samuel said unto Agag the king
of Amalek, As thy sword has made many women childlesse, 1. Sam. 15.33.
even so shall thy mother be childlesse of thee amongst other women.

The second answer concerning the godly, who unwittingly and unwillingly do by
their own act and deed kill and destroy themselves, is threefold.
The first sort are those, who being surprised with sorrows and anguish of
heart: as Eli, who having having heard that both his sons were slain by the
Philistims, 2. Sam. 4.19.20.21.
and specially that the Arc was taken, he fell back out of his chair and
brake his neck. Likewise Phineas wife, when she heard such news of the Arc,
pained and died. So Nabal having heard by his wife what David had intended, 1.
Sam. 25.37.
with sorrow his heart died within him, and he was like a stone.

The second sort mistaking the use of the good creatures of God, and their own
strength, do unwittingly and unwillingly destroy themselves: 2. King.
4.18.39.40. 2 King. 3.
so did the Shunamits son with overmuch heat in his head. So did the
children of the Prophets, who in stead of pothearbs gathered wild gourds, and
therewith had poisoned themselves, had not the Prophet miraculously and
speedily helped them.

The third sort being overcome with drowsinesse and stupiditie of nature do
unwittingly and unwillingly, even by their own act and deed kill themselves:
so did Eutychus, Act. 20.9.
who sleeping at Saint Paul's sermon fell out of an high window, so that he was
dead.

The second question, Why some kill and destroy themselves, so diversely and so
many ways, and that wittingly and willingly, as by their own act and deed.

The answer is of four sorts.

The first sort who kill and destroy themselves wittingly and willingly,
Are those who, through the ignorance of God that is in them, do not know
whether there be an hell or a heaven. Of which ignorance, Saint Paul speaks
thus: 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things that be of God; they are
spiritual, but he is carnal. It may be said unto them, as Christ said unto
Peter, Mar. 8.33.
Thou sauorest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.

The second sort who killand destroy themselves wittingly and willingly,
Are those who in the justice of God for their vnpenitencie and reprobate
manner of behautour, having the eyes of their understanding shut up, their
senses taken away for the time, their wits not their own, their memory gone.
Of which kind of benumming Saint Paul speaks to the Romans; Romans 1.24. to the
end. Ephe. 1.18.
and prays for the restoring of the Ephesians, to wit: that the eyes of their
understanding might be opened. The Aramites being in this reprobate sense,
having their eyes of understanding shut up, 2 King. 6.18.19.
went into Samaria where was their mortal enemy the King of Israel; when as
they thought to have gone home unto their master and King. In like manner,
Nebucadnezer the King of Babylon, Dani. 4.30.31.
being also in this te^per by the upright justice of God, went out of his
palace from amongst his Nobility, upon his hands and feet, into the fields
amongst his beasts, where he continued as a beast 7. years. Saul, as he
thought, was safe, 1 Samuel 26.11.12. to 18.
having his spear at his head, with Abner the Lord General, and the people
guarding him round about; but God sent a dead sleep upon them, whereby David
went in, and brought forth the Kings spear, and might have slain him. No man
saw it nor marked it, neither did any awake, so bewitched they were of their
sense.

The third sort who kill and destroy themselves wittingly and willingly,
Are those who from an exceeding distrust of Gods mercies, having long lauished
in an abominable life, and neglected all the means of their faith, they
conclude desperately with themselves. Much like the four leprous men, 2. King.
7.3.4.5.
at the gates of Samaria, who said one to another, If we tarry here we shall
die; if we go into the city we shall die come, let us go into the the tents of
the Aramits; if they save our lives, we shall live; and if they kill us we are
but dead: and as the King of Israel shamefully said, This evil comes from the
Lord, 2 King. 6.33.
shall I attend upon the Lord any longer? To them and to all such it may be
said, as Elias said to Ahab King of Israel, Thou have sold thy self to work
wickedness. 1 King. 21.20.
Thus these men betraying all succors that reason offers, they set every member
or members against another, Judge. 7.22.
like the sword of the Midianits rushed into the bowels one of another: the
soul against the body, and the body against the sole, althings vpside down
like the chariots of Pharo, Exo. 14.25.26.
the wheels upward, and the bodies downward; greatly afraid where no fear
was, like a lion who mastering al other beasts in the forest, quakes and
trembles at the crowing of a cock. Or rather like the damned indede, Pro. 28.1.
flying when none pursues; they are stricken with faintnes of heart, Leui.
26.17.36. Deuteronomy. 28.28. 1. Sam. 13.6.
with the sound or shaking of a leaf, and with cowardlinesse to hide
themselves in caves, in pits, and in dens, from a sword. All these being
formerly known unto God, for the manner of their behavior, his Majesty
decreed upon the manner of their death, not as it was in him, but as it would
be in them. As the devil did put into the heart of Judas to betray Christ his
master, so the devil puteth into the hearts of those to betray themselves.

The fourth sort who kill and destroy themselves wittingly and willingly,
Are those who do not only neglect all good means, and opportunities
thereunto: but also voluntarily contemn it tread it under feet, and with
fierce affection following their own ways: of whom Jeremy speaks
reprehensiuely after this manner, as it were in the proper person of the
almighty God. Iere. 2.12.13.
My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the well of life,
and have diged up puddles of their own. As Pontius Pilate delivered Jesus unto
the common people, Luke. 21.24.
to do with him what they would: even so these in a sort do deliver up most
unnaturally their bodies and their souls unto the devil, to do with them what
he will. Luke 21.14.
They fall upon the edge of the sword, to wit, into eminent and inevitable
dangers. Judge. 9.54.
As Abimelech being brayned by a woman, called hastily unto his page, Draw thy
sword and slay me, that it be not said, that a woman slew me: even so do they
that in their distresses do not rely upon Gods directions. As the waters
prevailed and increased over all high mountains, so does the devil increase
and multiply sin upon sin in the unpenitent person, making him
unrecoverable to godward.

The third question concerning those that do wittingly and willingly kill and
destroy one another.
The Prophet Malachi wondering at such unnaturalness, questioneth after this
manner: Mal. 2.
Have we not all one father? has not one God made us? Why do we every one
transgress against his brother, and break the covenant of our fathers? The
answer to this question is drawn first from the killer, secondly from the
killed. The killer is drawn thereunto sometimes by an evil spirit, executing
therein upon the killed, the rustice of God, for some former murder, as upon
Abimelech, Judge. 9.23.55.56.57.
who killed his seventy brethren. To which effect the Prophet Jeremy says,
They that devour shall be devoured they that spoil thee o Israel, Iere 30.16.
shall be spoiled, and they that rob thee, I will give to be robbed. So he
says by his Prophet Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 35.6.
Except thou hate blood, blood shall pursue thee. Ioash the King of Judah
having caused the son of Iehoiada the priest to be slain innocently, 2 Chro.
24.25.
he desired God to remember it, and therefore God according to justice
remembering it indeed, his own servants murdered him as he lay in his bed. 1 Samuel 14.20.
So it is said that the Philistians slew one another; also when the evil
spirit was upon Saul, 1 Samuel 19.10.
he still sought to kill David.

The second motive in the killer.
The killer is drawn thereunto by malice and envy, Gene. 4.4.
as Caine slew his brother Abell. Which made David to say unto Saul, 2 Samuel
26.19.
If the Lord do thus stir thee up, let him receive a sacrifice at my hands:
but if it be the children of men that have done it, cursed be they before the
Lord. To which effect the Lord speaks by his Prophet Ezechiel unto the
Seirians concerning his people Israel, Ere. 35.5.
Thou have a perpetual hatred against my people, and have put them to flight
with the sword, when their iniquity had an end. As if he had said, O Seir,
thou most malicious and envious wretch, thou persecutest my people, not as an
instrument of Gods justice, but out of thy own extreme malice and envy, even
when I was at peace with them. Again, he says unto all such by the mouth of
his Prophet Zachary, I am wrath with these careless heathen, Zach. 1.15.
who when I was angry but a little with my people, they helped forward the
affliction. Wherein he shows that they were very malicious, and very
enuiously disposed. After that manner Caine slew his brother. Genesis 4.8.


The third motive in the killer.
One kills another out of his own malicious and devilish quarrels, with an
insatiable desire of revenging. As Ioab slew Abner for the blood of Hasael, 2
Sa. 3.27.
which he had shed. 2. Sa. 13.27.
So Absolon slew Ammon. The holy Ghost says of a graceless man, Wis. 10.13.
In his wrath he kills his brother, and in his fury he perishes. As if he
had thereby pointed out by two special notes, a reprobate and a most vile man,
shedding his brothers blood, to wit, by surie and by anger. As Sampson being
moved with an intolerable passion, Judge. 16.28
desired nothing of God but that he might have strength to be avenged for his
two eyes.

The fourth motive in the killers.
Some kill one another being drawn thereunto through covetousness, as Iesabel
slew Naboth. 1. King. 21.12.
This kind of impiety is in such, for lukers sake, as he of whom Nahum the
Prophet speaks, likening him to a Lion, in these words; He did tear in
pieces for his whelps, Nah. 2.12.
and woried for his Lioness, and filled the holes with prey, and his dens with
spoil. Even so these graceless grigs to have worldly wealth for their
children, will spare neither old nor young.

The fifth motive in the killer is,
When a man does kill another in the quarrel of God and his people, as did
Ehud, Judge. 3.21. Judge. 4.21.
who slew Eglon: and as Iael who slew Sisera.

The sixth motive in the killer
Is to kill and destroy, being drawn thereunto with a damnable rage, for the
offense of some other. As that most execrable example of Saul, who killed the
priests of Nob, 2. Sam. 22.18.19.22.
through the offense that was committed by David, as he himself confessed to
Abiathar: I am guilty, said he, of their blood, they were innocent. Murder
has been held among barbarian heathens an intolerable and a reuengefull
sin, as appeared by their words, when as the viper fell upon Paul's hand, Act.
28.1.2.3. etc.
Sure said they, this man is a murderer, who although he has escaped the
seas, yet vengeance has not suffered him to live. Genesis 4.10.11.
The blood of Abel cried for vengeance. And to conclude; Murder is so
detestable in Gods sight, and so abhorring nature, as for what cause soever one
man shall or does wittingly and willingly kill another, if it be secretly done,
Deuteronomy. 21.1. to 10.
as does appear by diligent inquisition made for the finding out of the
murderer, the heinousness of the sin also appears by the greeuousnesse of
the punishments, which are no less then death. Leui. 24.17.21. Deu. 21.8.9.
It endangereth the whole congregation with the plagues of God how guiltless
soever they be of that fact. Genesis 4.10. Re. 6.9.10.11.
It calls and cries out from earth to heaven for vengeance, and the souls
of the Saints in heaven do call and cry unto God for instice. The holy man
David, who by his regal authority, and also in his martial affairs, was to
shed the blood of many: yet he prayed that God would deliver him from
bloudguiltinesse.

Now concerning the killed, to wit, why God does suffer innocent blood to be
shed wilfully, or to be subject to the will of the wicked.
The answer is twofold.
The first answer concerning the killed, is to manifest Gods secret decree
concerning the time of man's departure; and as for the manner how, it is all one
with God, and so is it with a righteous man. The manner of death makes nothing
against the matter of salvation. Christ's Jesus speaks comfortably and very
directly to this purpose, unto his Apostles and disciples, and so unto all true
Christians: You shall be betrayed of your brethren, Luke 21.16.17.18.19.
and kinsmen, and friends: and some of you they shall put to death; ye shall be
hated of all men, yet there shall not one hair of your heads perish; possess
your souls in patience.

The second answer concerning the killed.
It makes the justice of God the more manifest upon the killer. As Solomon said
concerning Ioab who had murdered Abner and Amasa: 1. King. 2.32.33.
The Lord shall bring his blood upon his own pate, for he slew two men
causlesse, and more righteous then he: their blood shall return upon the head
of Ioab. The Prophet Habacuck questions to that purpose with God, concerning
the innocent that were slain so unjustly: O God, Hab. 1.13.14.15.16.17.
says he, thou art of pure eyes and can not see evil, wherefore do thou
look upon the transgressors and holdst thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth
the man that is more righteous the^ he? Shall they therefore spread forth their
net and not spare continually to slay the nations? This is answered by the same
Prophet in the same chapter, after this manner: Art not thou o Lord my God, 12.
my holy one? we shall not die. O Lord thou have ordained them for judgment,
and o God thou have established them for correction. As if he had said, Thou will not suffer these lewd and graceless ones any longer, then until thou
have accomplished thy will in mercy upon us, then thy heavy wrath shall
consume them. Saint Luke affirms interrogatiuely the same after this manner:
Shall not God avenge his elect which cry day and night unto him? Luke 18.7.8.
though he suffer long, I tell you he will avenge the^ quickly. As Christ said
concerning the man that was borne blind, Ioh. 9.1.2.
It was not his sin, nor his parents, but that the work of God might be
seen: even so these whom the monsters of the world do kill and destroy, is not
in respect of that which they pertinently or properly have deserved, but that
the justice and vengeance of God might be seen just upon such as kill them.
There are many ways and diverse manners by the which the dear children of God
do depart this life, but no way nor manner can prevent their preparation to die
well, how sudden and how unusual soever it seems to be unto others. And
seeing the case so stands, let all men beware of rash judgment, and
uncharitable censuring of such as are slain. Let the manner of death be rather
an occasion to forewarn others to be ready also, as not knowing the time, nor
the manner of death. It is commonly alike, both to the just and to the unjust
for the outward manner of death, but the inward is nothing so nor so. As we may
read of the two thieves, the one upon the right hand, Mat. 27.38
the other upon the left hand of Christ: the outward manner of their death was
alike, but the inward was not so; for the one died faithful, and therefore
Christ said, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: the other being
unpenitent inwardly went unto the damned. Again, the suffering or permission
of God is always the means of his secret decree: no man can kill another, no
not iniure his brother in the least measure, but by the will of God; because no
sin can be committed against his will: nor any otherwise will God permit and
suffer a sinner to outrage, then in that manner, and so far forth as may stand
well with his divine purpose: and yet for all that, such a will, purpose, and
permission of his, cannot be said to be the immediate cause of such an outrage
or injury done howsoever; but rather out of man's will, who for his own part
respects not the fulfilling of Gods will so much as his own, which proceeds
from his corrupt nature being inuegled by the devil. And when as almighty God
does withdraw his helps, his gifts and graces, (which he may, because properly
they are his own, Ezod 7.4.
) thence it is said, that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh; and that Sihon
king of Heshbon would not let Israel pass by, Deuteronomy. 2.30.
for the Lord had hardened his spirit and his heart. Further, it must be
granted, that almighty God might very well, and most fitly, if he would, have
restrained and withholden that murder and shedding of innocent blood, and so
the wrong and killing of other his Saints; but it was not his will, it pleased
him not so to do, he foresees it not to be for his honor, and a further good.
As may plainly be euidenced by a special difference between the purpose of
God, and Gods election: for it is certain that election was before the purpose
of God to salvation or damnation, because in election there is the holy will of
God, without regard either of good or evil to be found in man, or before he
had done either good or evil. The concurrence and the prosecution whereof
stands in these three most holy asseuerations of the Almighty, the first being
vocation, the second justification, and the third glorification. To which
effect and purpose the holy man David being prevented of his murdering mind,
said with all holy consideration and gladsomnesse: 1 Samuel 25.33.
Blessed art thou which have kept me this day from shedding innocent blond.

The fourth manner, sort or kind of death, to wit, political.
In the discourse whereof there will arise many doleful questions, with cross
and contrary objections, made by the^ which are perplexed, some for their
sons, some for their daughters, some for their dear and familiar friends,
some for their wives, and some for their husbands, who before their faces were
cruelly executed unto death; which parents and friends of theirs, do attribute
the same unto the rigor of law, or unto the unjust proceedings of law, or at
least unto the cruel executioners of law. For the removing of all which unjust
imputations, as also for the comforting of all such sorrowful souls, I will
deliver so particularly, so plainly, and so directly, my mind and my knowledge
therein, as I hope through Gods mercy shall stand them in good stead for
persuasion and satisfaction in this manner and method.

First, what the laws ought to be in general in a well governed kingdom.
Secondly, what the laws now are in general inthis our glorious and so
selected a kingdom. Thirdly, what the law politic in particular is in this
kingdom for the complainants instanced.
First concerning the laws in general how they ought to be.
The laws of all well governed kingdoms ought to be grounded upon divine
intentions, and peaceable ends, consisting of jurisdiction, regal without
partiality, and of a civil policy without corruption, for the nourishing and
upholding of spiritual jurisdiction, tending to the religious worship of God,
and the mutual society amongst brethren, which is indeed rightly reckoned to
be the sum of the moral law of Moses, and the chiefest respect of our common
laws. The principles of all which laws also are to have their fit, their
convenient and their warrantable application, and denommation, first to the
glory of the blessed Trinity, secondly to the honor of the immediate Majesty
of the King; thirdly to the reverent regard of his or their substitutes: and
fourthly to the good of the people in public, according as times, places and
persons shall urge their importunities; still inferring and extending rules of
justice and equity, thereby making an evident difference betwixt the
plaintiff and the defendant, and betwixt the just and unjust, because
co^trarieties being laid together, makes justice to appear the more just, and
the same law to be the more commendable, and vnrepealable.

Secondly, concerning the common laws as they are now in England.
This little Isle of England, and Northern side of the world, of which the
great Prophet Ezechiel speaks in some particular, Chap. 38.2.3.4.5.6.15.
has been more anciently endued with Gods particular favors, then any other
part else of the whole world, for matter of his Majesty's religious service,
and for matter of civil government, in this land now most graciously
established. All which law is full of profound maturitie, full of needful
justice, and full of druine well ordered policies. And whereas other nations
round about this realm through their own homebread mutinies, and foreign
deuastations, cannot prescribe by any record, custom, or memory of man, by
what law, justice or equity, other then by the law of nature, which is common
amongst heathens, that they do execute any malefactor, or inflict any
pecuniarie punishment, almighty God out of his infinite providence and mercy,
although that many times religion, through the corrupt judgment of Kings and
Queens of this land, and the manifold sins of the people therein, were
sometimes altered, and sometimes quite overthrown: yet our common laws were
still maintained, and extolled even unto this day. All which laws had they not
excelled the laws of other nations, they could never have continued without
extinguishment, without impeachment, or at least, without some anullity, and
public indignity by the Kings of the Brittans, or by the Kings of the Saxons,
or by the Kings of the Danes, or by the Kings of the Normans; every of which
men were very wise, very politic, very religious, and most admirably
valorous: which Kings immediately succeeded one another, ever since this Island
was first found habitable. In all whose times these our said laws slorished,
and by many necessary additions were publicly enlarged. Again, had not these
our common laws been every way besitting the maintenance of Gods sacred and
true religion, and for the preservation of peace; as also by all former ages,
since the confusion of tongues, left unto our days and times uncontrollable,
and vnrepealable; then without all question, some one or other of our godly
Kings or Queens would have established other laws, or else would have in some
sort reformed them. But by reason of the great multiplication of this nation,
and through some disorders likely to accrue amongst so many, who would in time
cross and contrary the true meaning of those laws, our renowned Princes have
only repealed some few statutes, and in stead thereof have enacted others, to
better purpose, as necessarily was required: always with this prudent prouiso,
that no law nor statute should be in sense and intendement but according to the
rules and former patterns, which they had received from former ages, tending to
the true worship of God, and the peace of the people. So did Alfred a famous
King of the Saxons, in the year of our Lord 880. add unto these laws, holy
precepts and statutes, namely against sacrilege, against the violating of the
Sabbath, against treason, and against the immodest and unchaste touching of
another man's wife or daughter: all which facts were even then held to be most
vile, most odious, and most detestable; and yet for all that even then were
they most likely to have bin committed by many irreligious persons. So in like
manner Caesar the Emperor before the incarnation of Christ, by an established
law brought that wife within the compass of petty treason, which was found
guilty for betraying the life of her husband, and to be burned for the same. So
likewise the son that did betray his father, and the servant that betrayed
his master, should be hanged for the same as petty traitors: all which well
contrived laws are in force unto this day, blessed be the Majesty of God for
it.

Thirdly concerning the political law, which is a chief part of the common
law: whence indeed arises the matter instanced.
The political law is that by virtue whereof malefactors are iudicially
executed unto death, upon public trials and arraignment, by witnesses
produced, and then by the verdict of 12. substantial honest sworn men. The
common law, whereof I have spoken, does consist of a law Regal, and a law
political, both which were in request many years before Christ was borne.
This law Regal is said to be grounded upon diverse ancient customs, rules and
orders, drawn out of the natural law, or as it may be said, out of the will
of the King, be it good or evil, which is effected by his authority upon the
subjects. The political law is indeed a branch principal, and a means
special of that by the which the spiritual policy of the Church is royally
maintained and supported, and which is in very deed the life of the regal law.
As the judicial law of Moses was the coniunct and the inseparable companion of
the moral law amongst the people of Israel: so in like manner the political
law may be said to be arteries and ligaments of the common laws amongst us
here in England. As if it were to say, Where there is no political law wisely
and mercifully contrived, there is no regal law that can be vpholden and
maintained; take away the one, take away the other. A king I grant may govern
regally, and according to his will may enforce his subjects unto obedience, or
patience: yet without Christian policy no kingdom can continue. For the order
and frame of civil government is broken, if men may not possess their own in
peace after a peculiar property: so is it if men may nor be in their own
houses safely: so is it if men me^ may not travel without danger of robbery:
so is it if men may not have the free use of the Sabboths by an ingresse and
egresse for the service of God, according to an uniform order throughout the
Realm. This I conclude: We being defended by the kings laws from all injuries,
private and public throughout his dominions, and also having under his
protection, the peaceble profession of Jesus Christ, in effect then, Let us
subject our selves unto him as unto the immediate Vicar or Deputy of the King
of heaven.

The political law has in it self these four sorts or kinds of executions.
1. Beheadding. 2. Hanging. 3. Burning. 4. Pressing.
First, the reason of this political law in general, or the cause why it has
ever been held requisite and necessary in every wel-gouerned kingdom; it is
occasioned or drawn from the foulness and most outragiousnesse of some men's
nature, breaking forth into an hateful kind of demeanor toward their equals,
and a treacherous manner of behavior against their superiors; evermore and in
all places, preferring contentions and wars, before quietness and peace,
liking and allowing in their corrupt judgment, deceit, and rapine, before truth
and plain-dealing: still pressing themselves unto the dishonor of God, and
unto treason against the king; if it may carry any hope of profit, or
likelihood of pleasure. And therefore have need of such law as may restrain
all such, or if they will not be so restrained, then without all partiality to
execute them. The moral law of God, and the common law of this land, do only
manifest and persuade with men what things ought to be done. But the political
law, as the law judicial, does enforce and violently press men to the
performance of that which ought to be done. Of which sort of people Saint Paul
speaks, as of the Romans, Romans 1.31.
Though they knew the law of God, that they which do such things are worthy of
death, yet not only do the same, but favor them that do it. This kind of law
may be truly said to be the law of nature, to wit, a law common to all people;
where yet the law of God is not in force, and duly executed, they are a law
unto themselves. To be brief, the political law is an executioner of the
common law, and therefore a cause principal and necessary to have it, and to
keep it in use.

Secondly, the reason of such sundry sorts and several manners of execution,
which are used by virtue of the political law.
The manner, sort, or kind of executing malefactors worthily deserving the
same, is not to be found in the grounds of the common law, nor in any branch
thereof; but always has bin held as a matter indifferent, and to be published
and maintained according to the pleasure of the Prince for the time being,
specially as the manners of their subjects did enduce him thereunto by the
consideration of the heinousness of the fact either more or less: as we find
by the order and manner of Moses in his government, which must needs be
understood to be figuratively related to all other kings and people, as well as
to the people of Israel; whence they should derive the substance of their
politic laws to be consisting of justice and equity: and always using the
manner, the sort, and kind thereof, as being a matter of circumstance, according
to their own wills, as time, place, and persons require. As for example
briefly, The judicial law for him that stole an ox was, Exo. 22.1.2
that he should recompense it to the owner with five oxen. Some kings punish
such an offense with stocking and whipping, some do punish it with banishment,
and our kings for many hundred years together have punished it with hanging.
As for murder, it was ever and in all places punished with death, and yet the
manner of the death still remained in the will of the king, according as the
manner of the murder was found to be either more or less heinous. The
Judicial laws of Israel were said to be appertaining unto them, and therefore
can they not be said to be broken by us when as indeed they were never given
unto us, neither yet made for us.

This doctrine serves to reprove four sorts of people. The
First are those, whose nature is so froward and so rebellious, that they are
no way to be governed and guided but by force and violence: yielding rather
their obedience and loyalty to man and that only for fear of punishment,
then unto almighty God for the love of his favor.

Secondly, those who do most unjustly and most maliciously malign the reverend
and commendable students of the law, and generally all the learned and grave
professors thereof; being drawn thereunto out of their extreme folly and
palpable ignorance: or else being convicted unjustly in the trial of some
case, through their own wrong information, or want of means iudicially to
follow it: or otherwise, having had the overthrow and conviction, as justly
they deserved, by reason of the unlawfulness and vniustnesse of their case,
being plaintiff or defendant.

Thirdly, those who do utterly scorn and altogether disdain the very law it
self. And no marvel, for commonly they are such as do mock and scorn the
majesty of Gods holy Scriptures, and all the sincere Preachers thereof; drawn
thereunto, as may be thought, by a turn sick spirit of giddiness, or rather
from the stirring of the devil, who can away with nothing which is better then
himself.

Fourthly, those who most uncharitably, and without all Christian reason or
good consideration, do make question and doubt of their salvation, who are
iudicially executed for their unlawful acts. As though the manner of death
did any thing at all derogate from the matter and substance of faith, which is
required of every one that dies howsoever. Or as though he that steals, or
he that murthereth, or he that is a traitor, were a greater sinner then Christ
would or could forgive; or else as though that they which die naturally in
their beds, or they themselves which live in the good appearance of the world,
were not as guilty of condemnation for every small sin which they commit,
without faith in Jesus Christ, as they who are hanged, burned, beheadded or
pressed, or as those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell.

Here I conclude, asking pardon of the learned, wherein soever I have erred, or
have wanted in the disconise of the common laws of this land. Knewing the
profunditie thereof to be passing the reach of all men: and withal,
acknowledging it to be a mere subject out of my element; and therefore as a
man having spoken nothing in effect of that which it deferueth, I am content to
be condemned without replication, upon a nihil dicit, if reason require it

The third instruction concerning the timelinesse of death.
Not withstanding there are such variable and sundry sorts or manners of death,
as has been formerly enlarged; and howsoever almighty God has been
occasioned in his justice to punish sin: yet none of the generation of
mankind departs this life before his appointed day, so that no man by
diligence can lengthen his life, nor any man by negligence shorten his life.
The holy Prophet David having Saul his enemy in his hand, would not be
persuaded to lay his hands on him, but said, His day shall come to die, 1 Samuel
26.8.9.
I will not smite him. As if he had spoken more plainly, It is not for me to
kill him, for God has appointed him his time, in which he shall die. To this
purpose said the just man Job by way of two interrogations, Job. 7.1.
Is there not an appointed time for man upon the earth? And are not his days
determined? Job. 14.5.
The number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed him his bounds
over which he shall not pass. As if it were to say, Certainly there is an
appointed time for man's departure out of this world, even by the divine
ordinance and sacred decree of the Almighty, which cannot be shortened nor
lengthned, no not so much time more as to go over a mere or baulke, nor so
much time less as to come unto it. Again he says very emphatically and
affirmatively, believing in the promise of God therein, after this manner, I
will wait my appointed time: as though he had said, Job. 14.14.
My God has determined and set down the day, and hour of my dissolution: it
is hid from me, I will therefore attend, I will be looking for it from day to
day. Solomon after his conversion, amongst many excellent and most divine
instructions, he particulateth this secret decree of God most plainly after
this manner: Eccl. 3.12.
To all things there is an appointed time. And from this general he descends
into a more particular, thus: There is a time to be borne, and a time to die;
to wit, as there is a most certain time enclosed in every woman's womb, in
which she shall bring forth into the world: even so there is a certain and an
appointed time, in which he that is borne of a woman shall go out of the world.
Saint Paul said to the Athenians, Act. 17.26.
God has assigned the times that were ordained before, and the bounds of their
habitation. By that saying the time of man's departure is decreed, and
vnreapeable: why? because there is no alteration nor change in Gods divine
Majesty; that which he is, he was, and the same he will be for ever. Iehoida
said, 2 King. 11.15.
He that comes within the ranges, let him die the death: even so it may be
said, Whosoever comes within the compass of the time which God has decreed,
let him die without delay; there is no hope nor help for him, there will be no
partiality or favorable respects. The lives of the 10. Genesis 5.3. to the end.
Fathers were twice exactly reckoned, and their death once, for diverse causes,
but specially that thereby every man thenceforth might be able to know the age
of the old world before the flood. The ages of these holy men being computated
and laid together, do amount justly to 1656. years. In which observance or
sure rule for numeration, and multiplication, the holy Ghost delivers
plainly, that God does strictly and severely reckon the lives of all men, yea
from their very beginning to the very day of their death. Saint John and
other the Eua^gelists affirm out of their own knowledge, that the Jews used
all cunning means, and practiced diverse ways to apprehend our Lord and
Savior; but all was in vain, something or other went between: and why? his
hour was not yet come, Ioh. 8.30.
the time which his holy Father had decreed was not when they would. To this
effect Moses by a large measure of inspiration spoke of an holy woman, the wife
of the Patriarch Abraham, who had a particular and gracious respect before God,
specially for the time of her life, and the time of her death. Genesis 23.1.2
When Sarah, says he, was 127. years old, so long lived she, then Sarah
died. That is as much to say, She lived just so long indeed and no whit
longer; when her appointed time was come, then she died, and not before.
Likewise Moses does computate the age of Abraham her husband and says, Genesis
25.7.
This is the age of Abraham's life which he lived, 175. years. Then Abraham
yielded the spirit, and died in a good age. As if he had said, This 175. years
was the full time in which God had appointed him to live. When as Moses
himself was to depart this life, almighty God called him saying, Thy days
are come, Deu. 31.14.
thou must die: to wit, my decree is certain toward thee my loving and my
faithful servant, as toward all the generation of mankind. As in an host of
men furiously in fight, so in the world some shall die now, because God has so
appointed; and some shall not die then, because God has not so appointed. To
which effect he spoke by the mouth of his Prophet, Eze. 9.4.5.6.
Set a mark upon the foreheads of the^ that mourn. And concerning others he
said unto him, Go and smite, destroy utterly the old and the young. Genesis 4.15.
(So likewise God was said to set a mark upon Caine) but touch no man, upon
whom the mark is set: showing therein that even amongst furious and outrageous
men, in martial affairs, and in the determinations of malicious men, life and
death, is even then particularly in Gods hands, and also the very time thereof.

Here arise two necessary questions. One, why has God so exactly determined
the time of death: the other, why God does conceal the time.

The first whereof is: Why has God so exactly determined the very time of
every man's departure out of this world, so that no man can go beyond it, nor
come short of it? Why did he not rather resolve upon this, Let every man shift
for himself, and live so long as he can?

The answer or reason is fourefold.
The first reason thereof is to declare, that he is the principal master of
times, and according to his divine prescie^ce he is an exact performer of
promises through all ages of the world. He observes the time when a man comes
into the world, and when he goes out of the world. The Majesty of this
eternal God considerately and renownedly begins samous actions, and ends
them memorably by periods and places full of weighty consideration, accounting
upon the years of holy men. Genesis 5. Genesis 1. to Genesis 7. Genesis 8 to Genesis 12. Genesis
12. to Exodus 19. Exo. 12. to Ios. 1. Ios. 1. to Judge. 1. Judge. 1. to 1 Samuel 1.
1 Samuel 1. to Nehe. 1. Nehe. Esra. Hester. Daniel.
As by the lives and deaths of the first ten holy Fathers, how many years
there was from the creation to the flood: viz. 1656 years. From the flood to
the promise made to Abraham, 427. years. From the promise to the giving of the
law, 430 years. From their going out of Egypt to their entrance into Canaan,
40. years. From their entrance into Canaan to their quiet possession, 7.
years. From thence to Saul the first King, 450. years. Thence to their
captivity in Babylon, 490 years. From their captivity to their restoring
again, to build the Temple at Jerusalem, 70. years. From thence to their
general liberty by Christ Jesus, 490 years. Almighty God is so severe and so
sovereign an obseruer of time for the beginning and ending of all famous
actions, and specially the coming of man into the world, and his going out,
that he stands upon the performance of his word and promise even to a day.
Moses speaking of the Egyptian captivity said, Exo. 12.41.
that when the 430. years were expired, even the selfsame day departed all
the host of the Lord out of Egypt. Yea and farther his Majesty observes the
very name of the day, in which he does perform his word and promise, as he
speaks plainly by his Prophet. Eze. 14.1.2.
Son of man, says he, write the name of the day, even of this same day, for
the King of Babell set himself against Jerusalem the selfsame day. So God
orders all things in measure, Wisd. 11.17.
in mumber, and weight.

The second ten holy Fathers in whom it pleased God to multiply a new Church
after the flood, Genesis 11.10. to the end.
are exactly accounted by every full year in which they lived, according to
the determinate will of God, and that for diverse causes, but specially to
declare that the life of man is not at random nor at rouers. And here also
observe, that at the flood the ages of men were halfed, as may appear by the
ages of those holy men, who lived not above half so long as they lived before
the flood. Again the fame age was halfed at the building of Babel; again it
was halfed upon the going of Israel out of Egypt. And at every of these ages
his holy Majesty had a special hand, that neither the one nor the other, good
nor bad, should have either more or less then was in his will. As of these
holy men before, and immediately after the flood, so withal God computates the
ages very directly of all and every of the twelve Patriarchs: Genesis 49.50.
also how long every Judge of Israel hued, and how long every oppressor was to
live. He also kept a register and did diumely chronolize the age of every
king, and how long he did reign in Israel and in Judah, as may be sound in
every of their stories. Dan. 1.2.3.4.5.
The seventy years captivity was ended exactly upon the particular death of
three kings, to wit, Nebucadnezzar who lived 45. years, Euilmerodech who lived
22. years, and Baltashar who lived three years, neither one day more, nor one
day less.

The second answer or reason concerning the timelinesse of death, to wit, why
God has so exactly determined it.
It is to set forth the incomprehensiblenesse of Gods wisdom and providence,
in that he does govern all the generation of mankind throughout the world, as
one common weal, or as one private family, or as if it were one particular
person, registring and chronolizing every man by his name, by the place of his
habitation, by the manner of his conversation, and by the time specially of his
departure out of this life, as a wise master of a family, taking in some, and
letting others forth. So did Ahashuerus the king of Persia put forth Vasthi,
Hest. 1.19.
and took in Hester: so does the Majesty of God in due time take in some into
the world, and lets others depart. 1. King. 10. 1. to 11.
The Queen of Sheba hearing of the marvelous wisdom of Solomon for the
ordering and governing of his house and kingdom, came from far to see and to
hear more thereof: after the which she said, Happy are these thy servants which
stand before thee to hear thy wisdom. Behold here, faith the holy Ghost, a
greater then Solomon, to wit, a God more admirable then Solomon for his
government in Church and common weal. The holy Prophet David entering into some
consideration of his marvelous Majesty, concludes most admirably of it,
saying; O Lord our governor, how wonderful art thou in all thy works! thy
knowledge is too wonderful for me, Psalm. 139.1.
I cannot attain unto it. Ezra said, that God numbered all the vessels that
were to be returned from Babylon to Jerusalem even unto the meanest sort. Ezra,
1.7.8.
And he does account the people even by their names, and by the names of their
fathers: intimating thereby, Ezech. 9.7.
that none went to Babylon, but such, and so many as had received his express
name; nor any that were to return, but such as he had reserved to build the
Temple, and to reedifie the walls of the city, and to plant the religion of
their fathers. Gods wisdom and providence is innarrable and infinite, even to
a sparrow. Luke 12.6.
Barnabas and Paul said, Act. 15.18.
From the beginning of the world God knew his works. Moses, to the end he
might fasten the sure knowledge, and the everlasting remembrance thereof in the
hearts of the people of Israel, said; Remember the days of old, Deu. 32.7.8
ask thy father, and he will show thee, thine elders, and they will tell thee.
When the most high God divided the nations their inheritance, when he separated
the sons of Adam, he appointed the borders of the people according to their
number.

The third answer or reason concerning the timelinesse of death, why God has
so exactly determined upon the same.
It is to manifest the prerogative, the privilege, and supremacy that his holy
Maresty has, and holds over all principahties and powers, captiuating and
subduing them, and all the generation of man, to the obedience of his will,
that neither the one nor the other can possibly lengthen or shorten his own
life, much less the life of another. As a king that is to govern a kingdom,
must be powerful and severe in the execution of instice against the mighty,
and ready to minister mercy to the needy and distressed: even so the
Majesty of this eternal King, having the whole world to guide and to govern,
must be powerful and severe. To which effect he faith by his Prophet Ier emie,
Fear ye not him, faith he, Ier. 5.22.
who has placed the sand for the bounds of the sea by a perpetual decree that
it cannot pass? Again he said, Cannot I do with you o Israel, as this Potter?
Ier. 18.6.
The holy Prophet Ezekiel speaking of his predomina^t power over the wicked
faith after this manner; Ezech. 6.7.
I will take the blood out of his mouth, and his abomination from amongst his
teeth. The same prerogative our Savior Christ manifests himself to have in
his speech to his Disciples: If any man, says he, Mar. 11.3.
do say unto you, Why loose ye the Colt? say ye unto them, The Lord has need,
and they will straight way let it go. As if he had said, Do but tell them of
me, use but my name, and they shall have no power to withstand you.

The second question, why God does conceal the time of man's departure out of
this life?
Why does he keep it secret to himself? This seems to be hard justice, that
a matter of so great importance should be hid: Eccl. 9.12.
No man knows his time, says Solomon, but is suddenly taken, as a fish or as
a bird. Dan. 12.4.
It is shut up and sealed unto theend of the time appointed, said Daniel. Genesis
27.2.
I know not the day of my death, said the holy Patriarch Isaac. And as Saint
Luke said to the disciples concerning the restoring of Christ's kingdom: It is
not for you to know the times and seasons which God has rescrued in his own
power: Act. 17.
even so is it not for any man to know the time and season of his departure out
of this life. I conclude this question with the forewarning of Saint Paul to
Timothy, in these words; Put away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing
that they engender strife.

There are three special and divine reasons why the time of death is concealed.
The first reason is,
That every man should stand upon his guard, lest the enemy come suddenly.
Watch and pray therefore, said our Savior Christ Jesus. Saint Luke knowing the
manner of death, exhorts to watchfulness in these words, Luke 12.35.36.37.38.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves
like unto men that wait for their masters. God told Moses where he should die:
but he told him not the time: and why? because he, as all other men, should
stand upon his watch or guard. Deu. 28.66
Thy life says the Lord shall hang before thee, and thou shall fear both day
and night, and shall have none assurance of thy life.

The second reason why the time of death is concealed.
It is for the continual good of all succeeding ages, that the one ought to
provide for the other. Therefore specially it is said by Solomon, Eccl. 1.4.
One generation passes, and another comes: as of heavenly, so in some
proportion of earthly, which made Christ to say, One sows, and another
reapeth. Ioh. 4.37.
Were it that some might know the time of their departure, they would not renew
any thing that might be for them that should come after, partly through malice
and envy, and partly through extreme idleness, or superfluous expenses.

The third reason why the time of death is concealed.
That all men should carefully and conveniently use the means for life which
God has appointed in his Church. Whereas if they knew the exact time of their
departure, they would hold it frivolous to use any of those good means which his
holy Majesty has inserted and annexed to the decree for the time of man's
departure. So should the ordinance of God concerning the use of his creatures
be made frustrate, and those his exceeding good creatures stand of none effect.

The fourth reason why the time of death is concealed.
If the time of death were known to some, they would live very desperately and
damnably for many years: and the more near to the time of their death, they
would grow the more sad, sorrowful, and heavy, and into such intolerable
passions, as would drive them into desperation, or at least into an unwilling
and a most graceless striving with death, and in a sort against God himself.
Therefore Moses said, Deu. 29.29
Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the thing revealed belong unto
us and to our children for ever.

Besides these two questions which formerly you have heard, there arise out of
this doctrine concerning the timelinesse of death, three objections.

First, if God have so resolutely decreed upon the very day and hour of every
man's departure: To what end shall a man use endeavor or any of the best means
for the preservation of life?

The first answer for the use of means to preserve life.
As almighty God has decreed the time of death: so withal he has annexed,
and commanded religious and pertinent means for the preservation of life,
until the time come. As for example, The people under Moses and Aaron might
have perished in a natural contagion of the leprosy; therefore God commanded
that the whole might be singled and severed from the sick and infected. Leuit.
13.1.2.3.4.
The same people might have been destroyed in the judgment which God had
prepared for others; therefore God commanded some, saying, Separate your selves
from the tents of Corah, Numb. 16.1.2. 2 King. 10.23.
Dathan and Abiram. Iehu the King said, Search and see whether there be any of
the Lords servants amongst the servants of Baall, lest they be also destroyed
with them. Good men may perish in the outrage of the wicked, Mat. 2.12.13.
therefore God forewarned the wise men to depart home another way. And Saul
said to the Kenites, 1 Samuel 15.6.
Depart from amongst the Amalekits, lest I destroy you with them.

That virtuous woman so highly in the favor of God, might have been famished in
that seven years of dearth, 2 Kings 10.23.
had not God forewarned her by his Prophet, that she should shift for her self
and her household in due time.

All men, by the justice of God for their sin, might lawfully be destroyed
together in this or that plague or vengeance: yet he has in his mercy
forewarned some, and so does, to save themselves with the use of means which
he has commended and commanded in his Church. And withal in the use of the
same means, or the like, to preserve very reprobates from the plagues which
fall upon their fellows, to the end they may live unto the time which he has
decreed for their death, in which their sins will be full ripe. As may
appear in the four recited examples.

The second answer for the use of means to preserve life,
Is the practice of holy men who were moved by the Spirit of inspiratio^, as of
David the King and Prophet, who although he had the word and promise of
Almighty God, for victory against the Philistines; yet he knowing the right
rule of Gods will in his word, and promise, determined with himself to use
warlike means, and therefore came upon them valiantly with an alarm from the
mulberrie trees. 2 Samuel 5.25.24.
So did Gedeon politickly and valiantly come upon the Midianites with his 300.
men only, Judge 7.16.17.18.
having in sted of swords and staves, pitchers and lamps. Ichoiada the priest
though he did know that his cause and his butines was the Lords, yet he gave
commandment unto the Captains to use spears and shields which he gave them.
2 King 11.10.11.
As the servants of Benadab the King said to their master, when they were
overcome by the King of Israel, We have heard that the Kings of Israel are
merciful, 1 King. 20.31.
we pray thee let us put on sackcloth about our loins, and ropes about our
necks, and let us go to the King of Israel, it may be he will save thy life: So
likewise, we must all conclude and agree for the use of all kind, sorts and
manners of good means; who can tell whether the Lord our King and our God will
save us in the use of means or not? As Daniel said to his keeper, Da. 1.12.
Prove us ten days, let us have pulse to eat, and water to drink: so in like
manner let us say to our selves, and to whom else soever, Prove the means, try
what God vouchsaseth to do thereby. Although Saint Paul knew that neither he
nor any one of his company should perish in that dangerous voyage, yet he said
unto the mariners, Except these tarry in the ship, Act. 27.23. to 52.
they cannot be saved; as if he had said, We and they have one means of life,
let us use it, and God will give good issue thereunto. Saint Paul also knew by
the Spirit of inspiration and by the reueiled word of God, that no man should
die before his day, yet he commanded Timotheus to use wine for his stomach
sake, and his often infirmities. 1 Timothy 5.23.
As the Gibeonites being leaft-handed used to sling stones, whereby they became
so skillful that they could sling at an hair and not fail: Iud. 20.16.
even so Gods people are to be so skillful in the use of means from the least
to the greatest, that they may preserve life.

The third answer for the use and means to preserve life,
Is proved by the practice also of holy women, as that virtuous woman of
Tekoha, 2 Samuel 14.14.
who importunately entreated King David for the life of Absalon his son. The
Shunamitish woman being of great estimation, and having her only son dead, 2
King. 18.19.20.
most labouriously used the help of Elisha the Prophet, if it were possible,
to have him restored to life. As the inhabitants of Gibea, though they were
leaft-handed, Judge. 20.16.
could sling a stone at an hairs breadth, and fail not: even so must Gods
children, labor to be skillful in the use of al good means for the
preservation of life.

The fourth answer for the use of means to preserve life,
Is the practice of almighty God himself, who usually does annexe the use of
means with his decree concerning the time, as well for the destroying of life,
as for the preserving of life: whereby the one be not shorter, nor the other
longer. Sometimes he uses weak or small means to bring mighty things to
pass, and that for the manifestation of his mercy, and readiness, for the
chearing up of such as were weak, and miserable: 2 Cro. 14.11.
as Asa the King of Judah said in his prayers unto God. being miserably
distressed, It is nothing with thee to help with many or with no power.
Likewise Gedeon with his 300 me^ presumed upon the promise of God, Judge.
7.16.12.18.
to give the onset to many royal armies at one time of the Midianites. Ifrael
had victory against the Philistims, 1 Samuel 13.19.
without spear or shield. Sometimes God uses base, or, as it may be said by a
phrase of speech, foolish means, that thereby he might confound the wisdom
of the wise. So did he command Joshua to compass the great and invincible city
Ierico seven times, Joshua. 16.11. to 8.
sounding out their rams horns, and with the same to throw down the walls, and
to open their gates of iron and brass. Sometimes he uses miraculous means. 1 Samuel 14.15.
There was fear in the host of the Philistims amongst all the peope, the
garrison also and they that went out to spoil were afraid themselves: the
earth trembled, for it was stinken with fear by God He uses miraculous means
for the manifestation of his inexpugnable power, as at the winning of that
royal city of Gibeon, Joshua 10.11.12.
whereat fine Kings and their armies were discomfited in one day. Joshua being
the Lord General of Israel; whereof some with the sword, some with stones from
heaven. Sometimes his Majesty uses physical means, as that plaster of figs
which Hezechiah, 2 King. 20.7.
was commanded to take for his plague sore. Sometimes he works the good of
his people, even by no means, as he himself said by the Prophet Hosea: I will
not save them by bow, Hos. 1.7.
not by sword, nor by battle, nor by horses, nor by horsemen; but I will save
them by the Lord their God. As if he had said, Natural and worldly men shall
not impute the deliverance of my people unto possible means on earth but it
shall be done beyond all expectation, clean contrary to the use of reason,
and besides the capacity of the most wise in the world.

The fifth answer for the use of means to preserve life.
There is in every man both good and bad by the instinct of nature, an
intolerable affected pronenesse to use all sorts and all kinds of means for
the preservation of life, drawn originally from a natural manner of fear,
such as was in Adam, who having in his own conscience deserved death, Genesis
3.8.9.10.
fled and hid himself. So Caine having murdered his brother, durst not for
fear of punishment acknowledge his offense, and when sentence was pronounced
against him, Genesis 4.13.14.
he feared death exceedingly which made him to expostulate with God in a most
desperate manner. Act. 27.1. to 21.
Saint Paul his company in that most dangerous voyage, were marvelous
fearful, which made them to labor, and to use all means possibles for their
lives. The heathen sailers with Jonas to Tarshis in that great outrageous
tempest, Ion. 1.1. to 8.
spared not their best commodities, but threw them into the sea to lighten the
ship, and labored innarrably, and all with the fear of death.

So in like manner, holy men, such as were indeed the true and sincere servants
of God, were touched with this natural fear, and therewith drawn to use all
means possible for help and safeguard of their lives. Jeremy the Prophet did
importune the king after this manner for his life, being drawn into an
extraordinary fear; Ier 37.20.
Now I pray thee o my Lord the king, let my prayer be accepted before thee,
that thou cause me not to return unto the prison, lest I die there. Likewise,
Jesus Christ himself, knowing that the hour of his death was at hand, did
exceedingly desire his Father, that if it were possible he might escape it.
Mat. 26.39


Secondly, we are to observe that there is in man's corrupt nature an insatiable
kind of devouring or eating and drinking, which made the Majesty of God to
restrain man and his generation by way of exceptions, Leuit. 11. to the end.
Genesis 3.3.4.
from diverse sorts of creatures whereof they should not cate. Adam was to eat
of every tree in the garden of God, which was a sufficient allowance, but out
of his insatiableness he took also of that which was excepted: of which
corrupted nature, it comes that men generally have a continual renewed desire
of eating and drinking. Which God in his mercy does tolerate, and allow their
provision so far, as they are not excepted nor forbidden.

Thirdly, from the nakedness of Adam, which was Gods particular justice for
his wilfulness, it comes to pass that his posterity do use all sorts of
clothing, some to avoid heat, some to avoid cold, the which also God does like
and allow so far still as is not excepted.

Nevertheless, he that is moved to use means for the preservation of his life
by the instinct of nature only, and not for imitation and example sake,
according to faith in the promises of God and obedience to his commandments,
he is still a most miserable natural man, and far from the way of his
salvation.

To conclude this doctrine for the use of means, as notwithstanding the
diligent use thereof, men must die when the time of Gods decree is come, in
things pertaining to God: even so notwithstanding the negligent use of the
means, men must live until their time does come, in things pertaining to men.
Both which are to be found in the consideration of the difference that is
between the preserving of life, and the lengthning of life. Men may by means
preserve life until the time of Gods decree come: but men by no means can
lengthen life, when the time of Gods decree for death is come. As for example,
two me^ are stricken with the plague both at one time, the one a beggar, the
other a king; both of equal years, both of one complexion, both of one
disposition, both of one climate, both of one house, both in one bed, both
under one Physician, and both applied with one self same salve or medicine;
yet the beggar lives, and the king dies. And why? the one was stricken (his
time being come) by an Angel, either good or bad, and that supernaturally, as
some in every house from Dan to Bersheba: 2. Sa. 24.15.
and therefore incurably: the other naturally, derived from some corrupt and
poysonfull matter in himself, and therefore curable. And because the Angels
stroke is not essentially to be known from that stroke which comes by
natural corruption, because elements resolve into putrefaction; it were over
desperate, and unchristian presumption, to neglect the use of medicine; and no
folly, but faithlike when God gives the matter faithed, Genesis 17.1.
to wait carefully upon that service, and to stand with Christian magnanimity
to perform holy religious duties one toward another in such a case, as in a
time of the greatest weight in all the world, and in the judgment of many, is
an holy kind of martyrdom. As it was said by the spies to Rahab Whosoever
shall go out of his door, Joshua. 2.19.
his blood shall be upon his own head, and we will be guiltless: but whosoever
shall be within the house, his blood shall be on our heads: even so, he that
neglects the means of life, shall be guilty of eternal death; but he that
uses the means shall be innocent.

The second objection.
If means are to be used, as formerly you seemed to prove, and that of
necessity: then it follows by a necessary consequent, that he who does
contemn them or neglect them, does shorten his life, and therein is gultie of
his own destruction.

The same is answered 6. manner of ways.
The first answer concerning him that does contemn or neglect the means, is
From the generality and timelinesse of death, where already it was proved,
that the time of every man's departure is according to Almighty Gods former
decree and unchangeable counsel; which makes also, that neither the diligent
use of the means can lengthen life, nor the neglect thereof can shorten the
time of life.

The 2. answer concerning him that does contemn or neglect the means.
Where you heard that it was formerly commanded that means should be used for
the preservation of life, neither those, nor other places do say, that the use
of the means does lengthe^ life, nor the neglect thereof shorten life; that
were to cross and contrary other holy Scripture. But those places do
absolutely command the use of all good means, as men will avoid Gods high
displeasure, and not be found guilty of their own everlasting death.

The third answer concerning him that does contemn or neglect the means.
There is no sentence nor example of Scripture that does conclude the neglect
of the means to be the shortning of life, nor the diligent use thereof the
lengthning of life.

The fourth answer concerning him that does contemn or neglect the means.
If the neglect or contempt of the means were the shortning of life, then that
were to prove injustice in God by punishing one man's sin for another. As if
the father neglect or contemn the means of helping the preservation of his
child, shall that be the child's death? No, God forbid. So likewise in Baptism;
if the parent do neglect and delay the baptising of his child, and the child in
the mean time dies, shall that neglect be to the condemnation of the child?
No no. Again, if the neglect of the means be a shortning of life, and the
diligent use thereof be a lengthning of life: then it must needs follow, and
necessarily be granted, that it is in man by his diligent or negligent use of
the means, to cross or to alter the decree of God, concerning the time of
man's deceasse; which by no way can be granted: and be it far from any man so to
think, much less to say, least of all so to teach.

The fifth answer concerning him that does contemn or neglect the means.
By an usual phrase of speech (it is said) that man shortneth his life, when he
refuses the means, or does run headlong into eminent dangers: yet by the
propriety of the Scripture, that phrase cannot be so generally maintained, no
more then it may be truly said, that a man performing the will of God in some
special matter, is a mean thereby to lengthen his life, but only by a phrase
of speech. So it was said to Ebedmelech the Blackmore, Thy life shall be a prey
unto thee, Iere. 39.16.17.
because of the favor thou did show to Jeremy.

The sixth answer concerning him that does neglect or contemn means.
If the diligent use of the means be a prolonging of life, and the neglect
thereof be a shortning of life; then of necessity it must be granted, that
there is an inseparable virtue, and an inherent quality of saving life in the
means: and that were no less sin then sacrilidg, arrogating to the creature
by derogating from the creator, or as absurdly to say, 2 King. 6.6. Genesis 7.7.
that Elisha his bough caused iton to swim: or that Noah's arc caused some of
all sorts of creatures to come into it. Thus did that proud and profane
Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.45.
presumptuously challenging all Israel, crusting in his greatness, in his
spear and in his shield; but David manfully met him with his sling and his
shepherds crook, trusting in the virtue and power of God whom he did serve.
The Lord speaks unto wicked me^ trusting to the means, by the mouth of his
Prophet David; I said, Psalm. 89.43.
I will turn back the edge of the sword: as if he had said, When the wicked
think with their instruments of death to destroy my people, I will take away
their force, they shall not cut nor hurt. Iere. 6.22.
So he says to the same purpose, I will turn back the weapons of war that
are in their hands. The Lord makes question by his Prophet Jeremy thus: Is
there no balm in Gilead? Iere. 9.
is there no physic there? why then is not the health of my people recovered?
As if he had said, That precious medicinable balm, and those people skillful
in Gilead, of all others in the world, shall do no good on them, to whom I deny
the virtue thereof; these licors, oyntme^ts and such like, and the most
exquisite physicians shall not prevail. Again he says by his Prophet
Ezechiel, Eze. 5.16.
I will break the staff of bread: to wit, I will take away the virtue and
efficacy, even of their daintiest food. To which purpose Hosea the Prophet
said, They shall eat and not have enough: to wit, Hose. 4.10.
those which do rely wholly upon the means, shall fail of their expectation.
Likewise said Micha the Prophet, All hands shall be weak, Mich. 6.14.
and all knees shall be weak as water: to wit, those valiant and mighty men
that do depend upon their strength, when they come to the push shall fail of
their purpose; for they shall not be able to stand of themselves upon their
feet, because the Lord has disabled them. Again the Lord says unto all such
by the mouth of his Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 7.17.39.3.
I will strike thy bow out of thy left hand, and thine arrows out of thy right
hand: as if he had said, How ready soever the wicked be prepared against the
faces of the godly, yet they shall not do the least harm. The same in effect
he says by the mouth of Haggai the Prophet: Hagg. 1.6.
Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye
drink, but ye are not filled; ye cloth you, but you be not warm, and he that
earneth wages puts it in a bottomless bag.

To conclude, as a man may use all lawful means for an honest and a virtuous
wife, and yet may have a graceles and an irreligious wretch: even so a man may
use all means and all endeavors for the preservation of life, and shall not be
able to prevent death. Because the virtue, the efficacy and power of the means
is in the hands of God, and the use only in the hands of men. As in Noah his
olive leaf which the dove brought into the arc, Genesis 8.12.
there were actions of two sundry natures, to wit, peace and plenty; and as in
the ministry of Gods word there is an action of life and an action of death:
even so in this matter or means concerning life and death, there are actions
of two sundry natures, one concerning God, the other concerning man. That which
pertaines to man, is the diligent use of the means, that which pertaines to
God, is to give virtue and efficacy unto the means. As for example, God said
unto the people of Israel, Iere. 38.2.
He that remains in the city shall die without the sword, by the famine, and
by the pestilence, but he that goes forth shall live, he shall have his life
for a prey. Here life and death was in present question, to fly out of the
city was the means of life, which was for the people to do, and to give
virtue unto their flight, was in God to do. On the contrary side the neglect of
that duty, made the^ guilty of their own death, and accessory by a phrase of
speech to their own destruction: and yet in that very rebellious actio^ of
theirs, was the decree of God fulfilled concerning the time of their death.
Mat. 2.
Likewise in that Herodian persecution the wise men took the forewarning of of
God for the means of their preservation, and his Majesty gave good success
and effect thereunto. I conclude again, that he which uses means (how
lawful soever) with an understanding, and with a believing, that the same of
it self is effectual for the lengthning of life, that man is an Infidel. But
to use means which are not inhibited for the preservation of health, wealth
and liberty, and such like, is very religious.

The third objection concerning addition, or conditional life
If the time of death be so exactly set down and so resolutely concluded in
the counsel of God,
Why then does his holy Majesty promise to lengthen the life of the godly? as
is in the first commandment of the second table, Exo. 20.12.
I will prolong thy days, if thou will walk in my ways. The performance of
his promise concerning long life, Genesis 5.5.8. to 32.
may be euidenced from the ten holy Fathers before the flood, who for keeping
of his commandments did live many hundred years more then any other lived
after them. And the same we have in a sort truly said of Ezechias, whose
sincerity was such as God vouchsafed to add fifteen years unto his life.
And again, 2 King. 20.5.6.


Why is it said by the Prophet, Psalm. 55.23.
The bloodthirsty man shall not live half his days? Or he shall live long
co^ditionally? as God said to Abimelech. Deliver Abraham his wife that thou
may live: Genesis 20.7.
but if not, be sure thou shall die the death, thou and all that thou have.

The answer to this objection is threefold.
First, as by a decree from the beginning is set down how long the godly and
the wicked shall live, so withal even in the same decree was set down before
the giving of the law, that long life should be a reward for him that kept the
law, and shortness of life for him that did break the law, when as yet he had
done neither good nor evil. Almighty God foretells the sins of Israel,
many hundred years before they were, and their judgments that should be
accordingly, in these words: Deuteronomy. 31.16.17.
This people will go a whoring after other gods, they will forsake me and my
covenant; wherefore my wrath will wax hot against them that day, and I will
forsake them: then shall they be confounded.

Almighty God to the like purpose by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias speaks thus
concerning the same people: Esa 48.8.
I knew that thou would transgress, therefore have I called thee a
transgressor from the womb.

Saint Peter speaking of Christ's death, and therein of the death of his Saints,
says thus to the Jews: Act. 2.23.
Him have ye taken by the hands of the wicked being delivered by the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God. As if he had said, This could
not have been, had it not been so decreed before hand: this is not happened by
chance nor by adventure, but as it was foreseen good of God.

The second answer concerning conditional lengthning, and threats of shortning
life.
The answer concerning the Prophets praying for, and in the behalf of Gods
people, for long life, and sometimes praying for the cutting off of the wicked.
They being so graciously and so ple^tifully inspired by the spirit of God,
could not err so grossly as to cross and contrary other holy men, who had
written by the same Spirit. They knew well that God had exactly concluded the
time of all men for their life, and time of death, and therefore they did but
pray as other religious me^ drawn thereunto upon the performance of other
religious duties, in that behalf toward their brethren. After this manner
Daniel does pray for the people of Israel being in Babylon; Dan. 9.2.3.
having found by books, when the number of years was ended whereof the Lord
had spoken by Jeremy, that he would accomplish 70 years in the desolation of
Jerusalem. Therefore although he knew that God would deliver his people out of
bondage, according as he had promised: yet out of his love to them, and from
his duty to God, he betook himself most importunately to pray for them, and
so continued until the Angel Gabriel brought him a direct and an immediate
answer from the throne of the Almighty. Genesis 18.23. to 33.
Abraham prayed for the Zodomites, and that very importunately, though he knew
very well that God had most justly determined their overthrow.

The third answer concerning conditional lengthning of life.
Thirdly, concerning that addition of fifteen years to Hezekiahs life, it is
not so to be understood, when he was so mortally sick, that his day was come to
die. But in such a case always, where such a Scripture seems literally to
disallow or cross another, as this does; men must look for another sense, yea
such a sense as may agree with the analogy of faith. It seemed indeed unto
Hezekiah as he was a mortal man, and as the case stood between him and God at
that time, that indeed fifteen years were added to his life. Job. 42.16.
The like place is in Iobe.

Having exactly by many sentences proved the timelinesse of death: and withal
having answered some objections that might be made in the discourse thereof:

Let us now observe six sorts of people who are to be reproved by this
objection of lengthning and shortning of life.
First it serves warrantably to reprove those that do put off the time of
their death, using the world as if they were to dwell therein for ever. Like
the people before the flood, Genesis 7.11.
of whom Saint Luke speaks, who notwithstanding 120. years repentance given
unto the^, in the which the arc was a preparing; yet nevertheless they were
careless and unconscionable. Luke 17.26.27.
They did eat and drink, married wives, and gave in marriage, even unto the day
that Noe entered into the arc, and the flood came. Likewise as it was in the
days of Lot, and when as they took his holy exhortation for mockage, they
eat, Gen 19.24. Luke 17.28.
they drank, planted vineyards, and builded; but in the day that Lot went out
of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone, and destroyed them all. So the people in
these days, notwithstanding the manifold and variable warnings of the
Amightie, sometimes out of the element, sometimes out of the earth, sometimes
out of the sea, and specially out of his holy Scripture: these I say, are not
yet moved in heart to provide for their departure, or at least they have no
willingness, or resolution thereunto. They stand, as it were, upon terms with
his Majesty, until they be overcome and surprised suddenly, as a bird in the
snare of the fowler. These are they whose affections being alienated, do judge
better of earthly things then of heavenly: of whom Saint John says, They love
darkness better then light. Io. 3.19.31
And he that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth. And
as God said unto the Israelites, Judge. 10.14 11.7. Deu. 32.29
Go and cry unto the gods which you have chosen, let them save you in the time
of your tribulation; so will the Lord say unto all such as defer the time of
their repentance and amendment: Seek you help elsewhere, and find it if you
can, for I will do nothing for you. Why come ye unto me now in the time of your
tribulation? did ye not thrust me out? O that men were wise, then would they
consider their latter end.

Secondly, it serves to reprove those who wilfully and riotously waste,
spoil, and spend that which should necessarily appertain to their posterity.
Even in nature and quality like the wild Boar, Psalm. 80.13.
of which the Prophet David speaks, who not only eats and deuoures all that
is above ground: but afterward roots up all that should serve another year.
And in the same place also likened unto wild savage beasts, who having eaten
their fill, do tread and trample all the rest under foot and into the dirt,
that no other beast may, or can eat thereof. If they sin that do neglect the
use of lawful means: how much more then they, that use lawful means
unlawfully, by surfeiting, by drunkenness, and such like? which God in his
mercy has ordained for the chearing and comforting of the godly. Pro. 31.7.8
Even as the people of Laish after the manner of the Sidonians, Judge. 18.7.
dwelt carelessly, and so were conquered.

Thirdly, it serves to reprove those who not knowing the Scriptures, and
therein not knowing specially the absolute decree of almighty God, concerning
the very certain day and hour of every man's departure; they fret, they
furne, they weep, they wail excessiuely for the deceasse of such as are
nearely appertaining unto them; as if the want of means, or the neglect of
some duty, had directly shortened his or their lives: all which is a plain
evidence of an unbelieving heart.

Fourthly, it serves to reprove those who to prevent death in the time of
danger, do arrogate unto the use of unlawful means, as forceries, witchcraft,
and such like, which God has directly and absolutely forbidden: or else, do
first use unlawful means, and afterward do apply themselves to the use of
lawful means, Da. 2.1.4.1.
as Nebucadnezzer did, who first sought to his astrologers, soothsayers, and
others of that kind: and afterward sought help of Daniel the servant of the
living God. For to attribute that unto the means which is due to God, is every
where inhibited; as it was forbidden the people of Israel to say; Deu. 8.17.18.
My power and the strength of my hands has prepared me this abundance: but
remember the Lord thy God, for it is he which gives thee power to get
substance.

Fifthly, it reproues those who spend the time of their renowm, the time of
their dwelling here, and the time wherein they possess their souls, so
vainly. Every point whereof is precious: although not riotously, nor wantonly,
nor couetously, yet carelessly, and unconscionably spent without desire of the
knowledge of God according to his word, without grows in zeal to his holy
ordinances, in the strength of faith, and in the power of his spirit, having
all means thereof brought even home unto them; but even as a people that does
neither good nor harm, lukewarm, or halting between two opinions. The time
of this ignorance, want of zeal, knowledge, and such like, God regards not
in us whiles we are without the means thereof, as in his mercy he declared
himself also toward the heathen. But now it is called to day. Christ said,
partly concerning himself, and partly concerning others, I must work while it
is called to day, Ioh. 9.4.
the night comes when a man cannot work. Let us also take it as spoken to us,
we are Gods children, and therefore may not be idle: let us be doing in time,
for time will away. A man not knowing by the word of God the timelinesse of
death, to wit, that death cannot take hold on him until Gods appointed time,
and that then he must needs depart, the same man dies willingly and
comfortably: whereas a man that is ignorant thereof, mournes, and murmurs,
imputing the cause of his sickness and death unto casual means.

Sixthly, it is sharply and warrantably to rebuke those most ignorant and most
profane caluminators, who do derogate from the worthiness of the means which
God has ordained in his Church, whose detracting tongs do manifest their
hearts in speaking so maliciously, so untruly, and every way so indignely, not
only of grave and learned Physicians, but also eue^ of that laudable and
honorable use of Physic it self, which was highly commended, and carefully
used amongst the holy Patriarchs, the Prophets and Apostles, and thence from
age to age successively, by all, and amongst all godly men ruling themselves by
the former examples and sufficient grounds of Scripture. Some of which
malicious, and profane persons will nevertheless in their depth of danger use
the aduico and help of Physicians, whom at other times, before and after, they
use in a parable of reproach and disdain, as they do the Ministers and Pastors
of their souls, without whose ministry they cannot possibly be saved: and as
indeed they do use the learned, the grave, and most honest professors of the
law, who in their places do stand for the defense of their goods, their good
names and their patrimonies. Every of which stately and most honorable
professions, is so needful and so necessarily required in Church and in
commonweal, as that neither the one nor the other can be, nor in any good
seasonable sort continue. And to be brief, the ignorant and dissolute man does
always bear armor defensive to defend his own euilles, and arms offensive to
assail the good manners of others; according to the old saying, and common
Proverb. Yet according to my humble duty, in Christ, and in Christ his steed,
even by the mercifulnes of God I do exhort all such, as in an acceptable time,
to make use of these honest and holy professors, as of the means of his mercy
toward them, and as of effectual instruments for their bodies, and for their
souls: and that according to the directions of the Scriptures of truth, and
examples of holy men in all ages. And as Abimelech said unto his folk, Judge
9.48.
What ye see me do, make have and do the like; look on me and do likewise,
even as I do so do ye: even so say I and more also unto you my good christian
brethren, let all things be spoken and done in the fear of God, according to
knowledge, and according to the good example of such as guide themselves by the
word and Spirit.

The fourth instruction concerning the memorability of death, having in it
these 4. principal respects or christian considerations; as the persons are in
place or in behavior, so is the co^memoration either more or less, after
their decease to be solemnized privately or publicly, with mourning, fasting
and praying.

First the person dead or dying. Secondly whether private or public. Thirdly
whether spiritual or temporal. Fourthly whether just or unjust.
First, whether the person dead or dying be private or public, we are
instigated unto this mournful memento, for the terrors and torments of death,
which he endured in our sight and in our hearing; as did appear by his woeful
complaints to such as were about him, who would and should, but by no means
could minister any help unto him; as also by the galling griefs and griping
groans he endured, who being yet alive was so surprised of al his vigor and
force of spirit, as made him blind, yea deaf and dumb. O how detestable is
sin, whence death and the intolerable pangs thereof are originally derived!
Sin being so odious, and so detestable with God, his Majesty devised an
odious and detestable punishment and plague for it, which is death. A plague of
all plagues, and the most vnwillingest plague of all other, for any man to
undergo. There was never any punishment that God did inflict upon man for the
breach of his holy laws, nor any torture which the Imps of the devil could
devise for the Saints of God, but every man was more willing to endure it then
death. Not only because it did deprive man of the world and worldly things,
but also, and more specially, because that man has even in nature a great
loathing, and an unspeakable fear of it: as may partly appear by the strange
means, by the notable devices, and by the desperate attempts which men have
used and endeavored, only to shun and to avoid the torments of death: and as
also may appear by the examples of many in the Scriptures, and of others who
are recorded in Ecclesiastical histories. The pains and pangs which the body
does endure before the soul be sundred, may be likened unto the pains and
pangs of a woman in her travel with child, of who^ the holy Prophet speaks:
Her hands, says he, on her loins, Iere. 30.6. Esai. 13.7.8,
her face turned to palenesse, her heart weakened and melting with fear and
anguish. Yea the pains and pangs of death do well resemble the pains and
torments of hell, and therefore the first and second death, is but one and
selfsame, with this difference only; the one is natural and temporary, the
other is supernatural and everlasting. The fear of this death made our
blessed Savior Jesus Christ as he was a man, to importune the Majesty of his
Father with tears that it might pass from him, Mat. 26.39.40.41.42.43.
and being brought unto it through the agony thereof he was enforced to call
and to cry unto God his Father, as if in part he had despaired: O my Father,
why have thou forsaken me? The like oblivion and desperate speeches are heard
and seen in the time of deaths torments, even from many of Gods dear children
and canonized Saints. Saint Paul says that death has a sting, thereby
inferring that death is venomous, as all creatures which have stings are
noisome and hurtful either more or less: but death is like unto the devil
himself, stinging and poysonful, and therefore called a serpent, the most
noisome, and the most pestiferous creature of all others. Again, Saint Paul
calls death an enemy, inferring thereby as out of the natural disposition
of a natural enemy, the greatest mischief that possibly he can devise to the
poor body of man, specially being godly. The torments of death must needs be
held innarrable, if we do but consider the combat and conflict that is
between the soul and the body, the one affecting clean contrary to the
other, and in nature quite opposite. Which opposition and conflict may well be
resembled unto that dangerous tempest on the sea of Tarshish, which was raised
purposely by God himself, for the arresting of Jonas, who was as he thought
secure. The winds were sent into the seas, which being an element light,
labored vehemently according to the nature thereof to ascend, and the seas
being an element heavy, labored mightily according to the quality thereof to
descend; so that the seas being violently kept up by the winds, and the winds
being violently kept down by the seas, made such a storm and such an
outrageous tempest, as if heaven and earth had ratled and rang together, or as
if the ship had been still a rushing and a riuing in pieces upon the rocks:
even so is the soul and body of him who is in the hands of death. The soul
according to the nature and quality thereof, being a spiritual, an heavenly
and holy creature of the Almighty, uses and enforces all means thither to
ascend: but the body being of a clean contrary disposition, massy, heavy and
earthy according to the quality thereof, in sort and kind labors thither to
descend. The one being of a clean contrary disposition to the other, they
become hindrances to the passage one of another, and means one against another
of greater enduring passions. And to conclude briefly, the torments of death
are as the hewing of Agag in pieces, 1 Samuel 15.33. Psalm. 50.22.
and as the irefull execution of God, whereof David speaks. Although this
torme^ting be the decree of the Almighty, for the subduing of man's body, and
for the deprivation of his life: yet it is evident, that the variety and
sundry manners, sorts and kinds of death, whereunto his Majesty has left
himself at large, is the cause that many wicked men so well as the godly do
depart this life with little pangs or pains. And at other times out of his
Majesty's royal and extraordinary favor through Jesus Christ, the pains and
pangs of death in many of the godly are mitigated and diminished, as may
appear out of manifold sentences and examples of Scripture. For it is all one
with him, in regard of his power and mercy to abate or to annihilate the
quality and the quantity of executing creatures: or things appointed for
torments, as it is for him to increase and to multiply the same. As the savage
and hungry lions were so assuaged, and in their natures so mitigated, Dani.
6.20.21.22.3.20.21.22.
that they became as playfellowes unto Daniel; the fiery furnace being seven
times hotter then ordinary, was unto him and his companions but as a place of
recreation: So no doubt were the fiery torments unto the Saints of God, who
were cruelly executed in Queen Mary's days. After another sort most
powerfully does his Majesty multiply or increase the quality of bread and
water, for the good of the poor who otherwise could not possibly live: and
abateth the extremity of their cold in the winter. Remember the augmentation
of the 7. Mar. 8.8. Dan. 1.15.
loves and few fishes, so that more was taken up then was laid down: and
remember Daniels pu^^^. And albeit I should absolutely grant that there is no
mitigation of pains in death for any, and that it must needs be concluded,
that the very Saints and servants of God shall suffer the most grievous
torments of natural death equally with the reprobates (which cannot be truly
agreeed unto, and which God forbid): yet considering that the guiltiness of
sin is clean taken away in Jesus Christ, and that these torments of death are
but as it were momentanie, or as the twinkling of an eye in comparison of the
everlasting torments of the reprobates: what man or woman having any hope
thereof, having any feeling of faith, or having any one motion of Gods spirit,
but would most willingly endure the torments of bodily death, were they yet
greater? yea before it come, to co^memorate, and withal to celebrate the
remembrance of death, by which there is an end of all sorrows, and the
possessing of all joys and immortal happiness.

If the person dead or dying be an husband,
Then the matrimonial association which by Gods ordinance was made, singularly
and plurally, two in one, and one in two, the better to be helpful one unto
another, is now by death dashed, as it were into powder, and violently parted a
sunder, and severed one from another for ever into two distinct places, which
division to the husband or wife is so naturally grievous, as it is for one
limb being cut off from another, as Ruth does impart out of her most singular
affection to Nahomie her mother in law in these words; Ruth. 1.17.
The Lord do so to me and more also, if ought but death part thee and me: even
so is the love of a wife, fearing God, toward her husband, that she concludes
in her heart, from the first hour unto the last, that nothing shall infringe
her faith toward him but death, which when it comes exceedingly moves her to
mourn. This also appears upon the woeful and lamentable experience of
Nahomie, who by death was violently rent from her husband, which made her as
out of a sorrowful heart to cry out saying, Ruth. 1.20.21
The Almighty has given me much bitterness, I went full, I return empty,
the Lord has humbled me, and brought me to adversity. By which words and by
many daily examples, it is plain, that the parting of an husband from a wife
ministers many occasions of weeping, mourning, and calling upon God. If she be
old, then is she void of hope, and the farther from help in her greatest
need; if she be young, then is she the more subject to utter undoing, by her
choice, which stands so in general amongst all men in the world. In the
mean time she is in danger by her singularity to the subtle temptations of
the devil, and so to the prouocations of devilish men, together with the
breaking up of her household, and the dispersing of her fatherless children.
All which doleful dangers should be sufficient matter to move her to
commemorate her husbands death, and by the divine ordering of her self in the
same to solemnize her own.

If the party dead be private, and a wife, the husband in like manner is
occasioned to commemorate her death, with much mourning. The more godly and
wise the husband is, the more is his grief with the consideration of that
danger which is to come, in the choice of another, and in step-daming, and
mother-lawing his little young children, and when as specially he shall
endanger religious exercises, in his house amongst his family, and in himself
the decay of Gods service, by means of a wife who perhaps will cross and
contrary all. The consideration of these, and such like disturbances no doubt
together with natural affection, being powerful in Abraham (although a man
highly in the favor of God) it wrought in him exceeding great passions, which
made him to mourn much and with hearty grife, Gen 23. verse. 3.
not able to abide the sight of his corpse.

Here a complaint may well be raised against husbands, who most carelessly, and
most unconscionably do pass over the deceasse of their wives, and in like
manner the wives passing over the deceasse of their husbands; saving only for
the present time, the matter seeming irksome, they burst out passionatly into
some few funeral tears, saying with admiration, what is he dead? or is she
dead? what dead? alack what dead? and who would have thought it! With clapping
of hands, and striking of thighs, as if death were vnwo^ted, they still for a
few days speak admirably, Such a man is dead, the only honest husband is
dead, or the only honest wife that ever man had is dead; well, this is the
world, there is no remedy, weeping will not serve, we shall all die; or else
dissemblingly they mourn on their backs, but joy in their hearts, making an
outward show of that which is not inward. Sam. 14.1. to 13.
Like the woman of Tekoha, who with her mourning apparel, with her heavy
countenance, and with her lamentable cries made David the King (though a great
wife man) to believe that her husband and her two sons were dead in deed as
she said, which was nothing so. Or else most unnatural of whom S. Paul
speaks, Romans 1.23.
who are nothing moved to mourn, being in sort a people forsaken of God, and
branded with the mark of unnatural affection. To yield no natural affection,
is so much abhorring nature, and so contrary to pity, and so void of piety,
as it is to deny the burial of the dead; so that before God it is all one
kind of profaneness, and so much as that husband or that wife can do, to
condemn them that are graciously dead in the Lord, to be in state of
damnation, and therefore not any way worthy of commemoration: whom the Prophet
Ezechiel reproves after this manner, Cruelty is risen up, Eze. 7.11.
and a rod of wickedness, none of them shall remain, nor of their riches, nor
any of theirs, neither shall there be lamentation for them. And Esaias says,
Esai. 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart, and merciful men
are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away from
the evil to come.

If the person dead or dying be private, and a son or daughter, the inherent
quality, and the unanswerable affections of parents toward their children
whiles they are alive, does sufficiently discover their continual mourning,
their grief and their hearty sorrows when the children are dead. And now I
call to mind out of my own tormented heart, and fatherly afflicted soul, my
sorrow for many sons, specially forone. Parents cannot be included within
this account of reproose, but rather truly be reckoned amongst those who mourn
too much and ouerlong, being drawn thereunto as out of their unanswerable
affections, derived no man knows whence, nor how, saving that which is in
respect of children begotten in marriage, to which the exceeding divine
affection of God the Father in Christ Jesus has relation and perfect reference.

If the person dead or dying be private, and a father or mother,

What exceeding great cause have the children continually to commemorate, and
religiously to celebrate, his or her death, with mourning, with fasting, and
with calling heartily upon God, for these two special causes? One is, for
their continual care of parents, tending only for their welfare in the world;
the other, their Christian conscience for the salvation of their souls in the
world to come: and where parents fail in the one, they exceed in the other,
according to the common proverb; Happy is the child whose father goes to the
devil. As if it were to say more particularly and more plainly, The father and
the mother are so insatiable in their coveting, so infidell-like pinching their
backs and their bellies, and so diuellishly oppressing the poor, yea many
times so atheistlike hazarding their own lives by unlawful getting, and so
directly opposing themselves against God, for to enrich their children, as that
indeed they make whole shipwreck of their souls. The truth whereof is so
clear, and the matter it self so probable, as if there were neither many
millions of godly witnesses, neither the wicked lives and wastfull behavior of
their children: yet their own conscience to their own condemnation would
manifestly declare it. And have not such children great cause to mourn, yea
always to bewail the deceasse of such parents, specially, because of the
hellish torments, and the inevitable pains which they do endure? Me thinks I
hear and see the same or greater torments, which God in his upright instice
does prepare for such children, not only because of their unnatural and
undutiful behauior toward their parents being dead, and whiles they were
alive; but also for that they do so joy, and so rejoice in their goods, being
so gathered, and so left unto them, which is indeed, no other then the price of
blood; and I may say more plainly, the price of their parents souls and
bodies. Genesis 4.10.
As the blood of Abel did call and cry from earth to heaven for vengeance
against his brother Caine, 2. Kin. 1.12.13. to 15.
and as Eliah called and cried that fire might come from heaven to the earth
upon all the captains of Ahaziah: even so is there an interchangeable
intercourse from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven, of Gods irefull
plagues to fall upon such children. The holy man David, although he unlawfully
longed to drink of the water at Bethlehem, yet upon better consideration he
would none of it when the three Worthies brought it unto him, but poured it for
an oblation to the Lord; and said, Let not my Lord God suffer me to do this. 2 Samuel 23.15.16.
Be it far from me that I do this, is not this the blood of these men which
went in ieopardie of their lives? 1. Chron. 11 17.18.19.
shall I drink the blood of these men's lives? So that by this it appears
were there no other proof, how dangerously ill gotten goods are kept, how more
dangerously they are to be spent, and how damnably such children do live in
this world, indeed as it were without God: yea the very damned in hell shall
rise in judgment against the^. Luke 16.27
For the glutto^ in torments was perplexed with grief for the state of his
brethren which lived in sin, and would not have them come to that place to
aggrauate his torments. Whereas these ungracious children have no remorse or
sorrow for their distressed parents, which died in sin, and live in death.
And what may not be said of another sort of graceless children, who after the
deceasse of their godly religious parents, are so far from mourning after them,
or for them, as that they indeed do joy and rejoice in their hearts at their
departure? If they sorrow any thing at all, it is for that they died not
sooner, according as many times they wished, for their lands and goods sake.
Shall they escape for their wickedness? No: the Majesty of our eternal Father
will shorten their days, diminish their store; and from their graceless
stock shall spring ungracious impes, to requite disobedience seven fold into
their bosoms. Mat. 7.
For the measure, says our Lord, which you mete to others shall be heaped upon
you again. When good king Josiah was dead, we read not that his son Iehohaz
mourned for him, or followed his good examples, either in the continuance of
religion, administration of justice, or godly conversation. Wherefore his days
were shortened, his life miserable, and his kingdom was left to the disposition
of his enemy. His posterity was yet more miserable; for his son being dead,
was not lamented, Ier. 22.18.19.
neither did any mourn for him, saying; Ah Lord, or, ah his glory: he shall be
buried as an ass, even drawn and cast forth without the gates of Jerusalem.

This serves necessarily to instigate and to call upon all suruiuors of their
parents and friends, carefully to commemorate the heavy hand of God upon
themselves, for that private deprivation of friends if they were godly; with
the acknowledgement of their own sins, chiefly in the omission of many
reverent duties toward them, and specially in thankfulness unto God for those
helps which they received from them. It serves for the accomplishment of other
holy duties toward the dead, in taking care, and in making conscience to do
good unto those, whom their friends being dead, entirely loved whiles they
lived. Whereof we have a famous example in David toward his faithful friend
Jonathan who was dead: Is there any man, 2. Sam. 9.1. to 8.
said he, of the house of Saul, that I may show mercy unto him for Ionathans
sake? to whom was brought Mephiboseth, Ionathans son: David said unto him;
Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness, for Jonathan thy fathers
sake, who is dead, and I will restore thee all the fields of Saul thy father,
and thou shall eat at my table continually. Again he said, 2. Sam. 10.1
I will show kindness unto Hanun as his father showed kindness vno me. There
was a solemn law in Israel, which was to be performed to the widow of him
which was dead, if she had no son to comfort her: which law and Christian
commemoration for the dead was memorably performed by Boaz toward Ruth. Ruth.
4.10.21.
If the person dead were wicked in his life, and at his death; then there is
more cause of mourning and lamentation, and calling earnestly unto God, by his
kindred, and by his allied friends for the avoiding of Gods judgments, which
they most justly have deserved, in that they did not more carefully and more
conscionably instruct such a man or such a woman unto a better life, whereby he
or she might have made a better death. According to which purpose Saint James
speaks after this manner: Iam. 5. v. 19.20.
If any of you have erred from the truth, and some man has converted him, let
him know that he which has converted the sinner from going astray out of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

If the party dead or dying be public, spiritual, or temporal, and just,

Then consider the present evil that has happened to particular persons, to
private families, to public congregations, and to whole kindomes, after the
deceasse of such a man, or such a woman. Which is drawn from that good which
almighty God vouchsafes for the time present wherein they lived, who being
dead, it incontinently ceasseth. As Solomon says, By the blessing of the
righteous, Pro. 11.11.
cities are exalted: to wit, the whole inhabitants of that town and country
where a righteous person lives, shall fare and prosper the better, and shall
have the judgments of God which they have deserved withholden from them. And
it is certain, Joshua. 7.1. to 6.
as for the sins of one, many have been in the anger of God destroid and
brought to nothing; so for the true godliness of one or more, 2. Sam. 24.15.
many hundreds and thousands have been most miraculously preserved. God
promised Abraham, that if in all Sodom and Gomorrah there were found but ten
righteous persons, Genesis 18.24. to 33.19.18. to 26
he would spare all the rest for their sakes. The same was experimented in Zoar
at Lots request, for all the people therein were miraculously preserved from
the fire which abundantly fell from heaven round about them. There was three
years dearth in all the land of Israel for Saul's sins only in slaying the
Gibeonits. 2. Sam. 21.1. to 11.
David the King did therefore importune the Gibeonits, for their favor unto God
in their behalf, which being obtained the plague ceased. On the contrary so
long as Joseph lived, King Pharao and all his subjects prospered: but when
Joseph died, Exo. 1.6.7.8. to the end. 9.1.33. Exo. 9.27.28. 2 King. 24.2. to
the end. Dan. 11.1.2.
then their plagues revived and fell thick in Egypt. When Moses was entreated
to pray for the^, those plagues also ceased. Moreover after the death of King
Josias the city of Jerusalem was won, and the people carried captive unto
Babylon: God spared them and did withhold his wrath from the^ in all his days
according to his promise. As the person is in his place of pre-eminence, in
Church or co^monweale, and in his pains performing the work of the Lord: so
is the loss of him to the people whensoever he departs. And as the greatness
of the loss is, so ought the greatness of the considerations to be had
amongst those where he is missed, continually mourning, weeping and calling
upon God for his mercy, and that he will be pleased to withhold those plagues
which he has so begun, having always before them the remembrance of their
sins, and the judgments of God for the same, which they have many ways and
at sundry times deserved, humbly prostrating themselves before the throne of
his mercies, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ. The children of Israel
wept much and mourned sore for Moses thirty days together. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
The Majesty of God taking particular knowledge of his death, said unto Joshua,
Moses my servant is dead. Joshua. 1.2.3.
As if he had said more plainly, I see his want already amongst the people, it
is so great and so dangerous that there must be a present supply.

If the person public being dead were ungodly, an oppressor, and such like ill
disposed, being in profession either spiritual, or temporal; who will not
think it an happy day, a blessed time in which it pleased God to cut him off?
for every man where such an one had to do, for his own particular and private
good, has cause to commemorate the mercies of God in that behalf. And by how
much the more it may be said that he was generally disposed to evil: by so
much the more ought all that people amongst whom he lived, be generally
disposed to commemorate the mercies of God with all alacrity and cheerfulness
for his deprivation: weeping and mourning for their former sins, which was the
cause why God did raise such a graceless man to have rule over them so long,
and continually praying to have a more virtuous and a more religious man in his
room.

This teaches all true professors of christianity as formerly was said,
religiously to commemorate the deceasse of public persons, who had their
places in Church and commonwealth; specially if they were profitable to the
people, and religious toward God. We have the example of David the King, and
all his honorable subjects; who mourned much after the deceasse of Abner, 2 Samuel 3.27. to 39.
because he was a necessary man in the common wealth. So likewise it is said,
Act. 8.2.
that there was great lamentation amongst all the people which feared God, for
Saint Steven, who was a necessary man in the Church. This religious duty is not
so much required, because of their deceasses directly, as for our selves who
were the cause thereof according to the foreknowledge of God, sometimes
arrogating too much worthiness unto them, and thereby derogating from God; or
sometimes derogating from them that worthiness and desert which was their due,
and thereby do become spiritual spoilers and unfaithful unto God that gave
them. And I may press farther and justify out of mine own lamentable
experience, that the commemoration of death past upon others our dear friends,
will work in us a hearty calling upon God for mercy, and a kind of
preparation in our selves to die well, besides the good example which we shall
give thereby unto our posterity to do the like for us.

FINIS.

