THE ROMAN CONCLAVE. Wherein, by way of HISTORY, exemplified upon the Lives of
the Roman Emperors, from CHARLES the Great, to RODVLPH now Reigning; The
forcible Entries, and Usurpations of the Iesuited Statists, successively
practiced against the sacred Majesty of the said EMPIRE: And so by
Application, against the Residue of the CHRISTIAN KINGS, and FREE-STATES are
lively Acted, and truly Reported. By IO. VRSINVS Ante-Iesuite.

Io. de Turre-cremat. de Illicitis dispensat. Ecclesia iuribus and legibus
regitur, sieve debet regi; Non talibus actibus, sieve exemplis. D. AND. Fol. 46.
Dum enim Henrici, Frederici, Lodouici pugnant: Sultani, Chami, Ottomani, misera
nostra magni sunt, ditiones suas perditione nostra dilatarunt. LONDON Printed
for John Iagger, and are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetestreete within Temple
Bar. 1609.

The Names of the Authors out of whose Records, these memorials are Collected.
Auentine. Bartolus. Barnus de vitis Pontif. Benno. Blondus. Catal. testium
verit. Collenutius. Cuspinian. The Decretals. Aeneas Siluius. Feronius.
Functius. Gunther. Guicciardine. Hub. Goltz. Helmoldius. Hutenus. Joan. de
Cremona. Iouius. Krantzius. Gerard Moringus. Munster. Mutius. Nauclerus. Otho
Frisingensis. Pandulfus. Paral. Vrsperg. Petrus de Vineis. Platina. Radauicus.
Sleydan. Ia. Spigelij Annot. Theodore de Nyem. Tritemnius. Ab. Vrspergensis.
Wimphelinagus Ger. Zeigl. de vir. illust. German.
To the unresolved Reader, Peace and Profit.
IN Disputations words multiply words: In tedious Discourses (for the most
part) grounded upon the sole Authority of running reason, small satisfaction is
afforded to weak consciences. In this Argument, I must confess, matters of
weighty consequence are debated; The Romish Prelates are accused of Intrusion
and Usurpation: And they again, as stiffely maintain fair and filial usage,
with successiue diuolution. To what purpose were it then, for any man how
learned, or zealous soever, to enforce his utmost endeavors, to put end to a
Controuersied question; If when all has been said, that Truth and Learning
can allege: Every passionate and discontented Humorist may take upon him with
colors and cunning distinctions, to oppose and contradict his opposites
Assertions. In this case, what conscience can but remain distracted in
vtramque partem? The Disputants on either side, are men of admirable reputation
for their learning. Both of them bring warrant (or at least) seem to bring
warrant to maintain their party. Yet oftentimes upon private passion, so
impertinently and maliciously, that either they seem not to have read the
Authors whom they quote; Or having read them, they do not understand them,
or understanding them, they do of purpose misconster them. Upon which conceit
it should seem, that this our Ante-Iesuite, in assured hope to work more by
Example, then Discourse, has purposely declined these ambiguous Disputations;
And in liew thereof has brought upon the stage of Judgment, Time and
Testimony, Veritatis parents, to plead nothing for themselves, but matter on
Record. A course that has seldom in so doubtful a Controversy been
presented to Audience. The Remembrancers were men without Exception, and some
of them by testimonies on either side, Genere, pietate, and eruditione
Nobilissimi, atque harum rerum Testes pene oculati: Their names and credits you
are acquainted with; your understandings will inform you of their Manners, and
the Times, wherein, and under whom they flourished. Nothing then remains,
but a rectified conscience, to make true use of the Application. Which to
effect, behold our Ante-jesuite, has not only run the truest and plainest
Pathway to confidence, but also in old and ancient fashion, has of purpose
thus attired his Actors, that the busiest-headed Jesuit that ever put pen to
Paper, may rather with impudency cavil at Antiquity, then with his fiery
wit, become a stumbling-blocke to the wavering, by Excepting to his Pen or
Person. You your selves sit Judges; and as vnpreiudicated Arbitrators examine
the Pleas: Both parties are at the Bar, and shall produce their best Titles,
even Titles of prescription. Whereunto, how-euer Paul plant, or Apollo water,
Let that great God who searches the reins, and loves nothing but Truth,
give a plentiful increase to the restoration of his reformed kingdom, Amen.

Thine in Assurance, C. H.

A TRVE RELATION BY WAY OF HISTORY, DISCOVRSING UPON THE TRECHERIES,
INSOLENCES, AND Tyrannies, which the Roman Popes from time to time have
practiced, upon, and against the sacred Majesty of the GERMAN Empire: And so
by insinuation, upon all Christian Kings, Princes, and free Commonweals.
AMongst the manifold and infinite choice of Precedents, arguing and proving,
God himself, to be both the Parent and Protector of Order: Herein especially
appears the most evident and remarkable Confirmation thereof; In that all
those godly and goodly Conformities (whereby from everlasting, Religion, and
the unfeigned zeal thereof, together with the mutual references of Humane
life, and Civil society, have been by due and orderly proceedings maintained
and perfected) have tended even from the prime-birth of Mankind, by admirable
providence, to advance the Priesthood to govern the Church, and the Temporal
Magistrate to take care of the Commonwealth; and Both distinguished by their
peculiar Orders and Dignities, without intermedling one in another Office.

For albeit the fathers of the Old Testament, Abel, Seth, Noah, Abraham, and
Jacob, who lived before the promulgation of the written Law, are registered to
be sole Governors as well of Religion as of Lay-matters: and that in succeeding
ages, both amongst the Egyptians, and many other Nations (the presidents no
doubt being taken from the examples of the foresaid Patriarchs) none by the
authority of Plato were chosen to be Kings, but such as formerly had been
interessed in the administration of their Religious ceremonies: yet by the
written Law of Moses, God manifested his determinate pleasure in
distinguishment of eithers Authority: The Priests to Teach, to Sacrifice, to
Pray: The Princes with the people, to sit in judgment, to observe Discipline,
to procure Peace, and that according to Order and Equity.

In the new Priesthood, in the New Testament (being the very institution of
Christ the Son of God, and the Savior of the world,) Himself, being
ordained by the will of his Father, a Prince, and a Priest for ever, utterly
refusing to intermeddle in Temporal government, took upon him the charge of
Spiritual matters only: For that, his Kingdom was from eternity and
celestial, not transitory and political. For he knew, That in his Kingdom,
worldly matters, temporary, vain, and passeable, were not to be managed; but
blessings heavenly and everlasting to be distributed. Whereupon he gave Pilate,
demanding him as concerning his Temporalitie, this sweet answer, That, His
kingdom was not of this world: John 18.
Neither that he came to be ministered unto, but to minister; Yea, Matthew. 20
to lay down his life for the salvation of many. And when the multitude would
have created him a King, he avoided it. The judgment, or portion of an
offered inheritance, he refused: And not only commanded to give unto Caesar,
that which was Caesar's; John 6.
but where the tribute money was demanded (lest he should give an evil
president to others) the Silver being taken out from the Fishes mouth, he
delivered it unto the Kings Officers. Luke 12. Mark 12. Matthew. 17.


Moreover, when he understood that his Disciples distracted through the
ambition of superiority, contended for Primacie, he told them; That not they,
but Temporal Princes were to affect Sovereignty; hereby putting them in mind
of their Calling, as dis-vnited from worldly Government, and humane Policies.

At last, after his glorious resurrection, he sent them to Preach the Gospel
over the whole world, but with no other Commission, then what he himself had
received from his Father. Intimating by this Mandat, that they were never
called, nor chosen for Lordship, but that through the Preaching of the Gospel,
and the glad tidings of salvation, they were bound to beget a Congregation to
the Father in eternity: That, Him they should love, fear and invoke with
all their power: And being astonished with no torments, calumnies nor threats,
they should not forbear to confess his holy Name before all men. That, in
Prayer, they should carry themselves zealously, faithfully, constantly,
modestly, soberly, and chastely: That, upon cause of offenses, they should
study mildness; compassion toward good men oppressed, and patience amidst
their miseries: That, by the bond of peace, they should retain unity of
spirit; And finally, that casting away the care of earthly easements, they
should meekly endure poverty, and worldly displeasures, that thus by their
doctrine, and example of life, Christ might be glorified, the Church increased,
and their Ministry admired.

And surely the Apostles, and their successors, in all their travails over the
face of the earth, thus undertaken by the commandment of their Master, so
behaved themselves in all occurrances, but especially in this obseruancie of
difference between political Government and Ecclesiastical orders, that by
this note only they were acknowledged to be the true Disciples and followers
of their glorified Master. For they not only Preached with purity the
everlasting will of God (without intermingling of humane fancies) but also, in
all places accustomed to teach; That upon earth Caesar's (Kings) were to be
acknowledged next unto God, and to be reverenced before all other mortal men;
They styled them their Lords, paid them tribute, made intercession unto God
for their welfare; And unto such as spoke evil of the Magistrate, they
threatened revenge from above. From all worldly affairs, especially from the
abuse of Arms, they abhorred; Knowing that the twofold sword of the Church was
entrusted to salvation and regeneration, and not for destruction. So far were
they even from imagination, to think it lawful to disenthronize any King or
Potentate, though a most wicked one; either to absolve his people from their
Oaths of Allegiance, or to prove masteries with him about Precedencies. But
rather they thought it a work worthy their calling, by the space of two
hundred and seventy years, to suffer most bitter and terrible persecutions,
and those too rather to be endured by steadfast faith in Christ Jesus, by
zealous calling upon his Name, and by glorious Martyrdom; then by rebellious
impatiencie, Sanguis martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
and violent Meditation of requital; And all this, not without admirable
increase, and good success to the Church of Christ.

For in what Age was the face of the Church more amiable, or liker the head
thereof, even Christ Jesus, then when after his ascension, his Disciples
(striving to fulfill his Testament; and their successors, treading in the very
same footesteps) Preached faithfully and purely the Gospel through Iudaea,
Samaria, and Palestine? After that, when so glorious and conspicuous, as when
with their fellow laborers, taking their Iournyes toward other Nations, but
especially toward Rome (at that time the chief Seat of the Empire) and the
bordering Regions, they employed their times in dressing, in Planting and in
watering the Lords vineyard, viz. From the time of Linus to Siluester, and
Caesar Constantine by the space of two hundred and fifty years, under most
insufferable Persecutions, even to the loss of their lives and dearest bloods?

But as soon as Constantine by the divine providence had given peace to the
afflicted Churches, and that the Bishops being delivered from their lurking
corners, from Vaults and from dens, wherein during the time of Persecution
they had safe conducted their bodies, then, I say, shamed they not to give
themselves over to the delights of the world, to unprofitable idleness: to
live a pleasurable life; to degenerate from the ways of their predecessors,
through neglect of Gods word, being wholly seduced with carnal affections.
Then began they to give coulorable clothing to the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, by Canons, Decretals, and Ceremonies: Then began they to devise new
appellations of Dignity: To prefer one Church before all other, and finally
blushed not to confound all orders both Civil and Ecclesiastical. Whereupon
presently followed so universal a confusion of Doctrine, Discipline and Order,
that they no longer seemed to represent the late Pastors of the Lords flock,
but ravening Wolves; not Priests but blasphemers; not Doctors but deiectors of
souls from the sweet aspect of the face of God.

For surely, they did not only obscure in a wondrous manner the sincerity of
the Christian doctrine by their humane traditions; gave it so great a scandal
by superstitious impiety, and heathenish invocation of Souls departed; and so
wickedly polluted it with blasphemous Idolatry; But all honesty and
discipline being trodden underfoot, in all seducement and oppression of
verity, they spent their whole days in Sodomiticall abuses, in Wantonness,
in Luxury, in Ribaldrie, in Whoring, in Sacrilege, in Contention, in
Necromancie, in Charms, in Homicide, and such like transgressions: And that
more is, being possessed with a diabolical affectation of Government and pride,
clean contrary to the Divine commandment, they began to busy themselves in
secular affairs; to withdraw their faiths from the subjection of Kings, to
usurp upon other men's patrimonies; to thrust in their crooked Syckles (and
that at adventure) into another man's Harvest; to arrogate both Presences; to
challenge the jurisdiction of both Swords; to tolerate no equal, much less
no Superior; to defraude one of his right, an other of his Honor; to give Law
to Kings, and prescribe them ordinances; basely to esteem of Emperors, as if
they reigned at will; to accurse them and murder them; To set Princes together
by the ears; to sow dissentions; to patronize factions; to absolve Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance; and finally by their novel and sly Policies,
to move them to unlawful Rebellions: So far forth, that after they had once
pleaded prescription in their incrochments, they more defaced the Majesty of
the Roman Empire, by their dissimulations, slaughters, war, and such
varieties of wickednesses, then any foreign or barbarous enemy could have done
by the Sword or violence.

For to let pass the Empire of the East, ruinated by the cunning and sly
carriage of the Roman Bishops, the Grecians being first expulsed Italy by the
Lombards, and presently (they again being oppressed by the French) called in
against Astulphus King of the Lombards, for calling upon Steven the second for
his Subsidy money: Every man that is any thing seen in History, knows (the
Roman Empire being by the prowes of Charles the Great, transferred from the
Grecians to the Germans) how the Emperors of Germany have been harried by
the incredible subtilties and combinations of the Roman Bishops; wearied with
most lamentable wars, and lastly the goodly and most flourishing forces of
the Empire by their ungodliness disunited, impouerished, and wasted.

Surely the remembrance of these times are so distasteful and lamentable, that
I had rather wash them out with tears, then aggrauate them by speech: But
fithence our Pen is fallen into repetition thereof, I persuade my self, that
it shall prove neither a digression from my project, neither impertinent from
the point of our Argument, to Paint out in most lively colors, what has been
the humility, obseruancie, loyalty and obedience of the Roman Bishops
manifested throughout all Ages, sithence the days of the aforesaid Charles
toward the most worthy Germane Emperors, their very good Lords and especial
benefactors.

Charles the Great.
TO begin therefore with the Frenchmen, who first transferred the Empire from
the Grecians to the Germans: who lives so ignorant, that knows not, with
what immunities and honorable indowments they adorned the Roman Clergy?
First, Charles surnamed the Great, to his eternal renown delivered that Sea,
being most grievously laid unto by Desiderius King of the Lombards, to the
utter confusion of his Army. Against Herisigus Duke of Benouent, he likewise
defended his frontiers: And presently after that, he restored Leo the third to
his Sea, at Baryona, being expulsed from Rome by the faction of his adversaries.

Jews surnamed Pius.
This man was Emperor in the year of Christ eight hundred and fourteen, at
what time Egbright governed the West Saxons, and first called our Country
Anglia.

JEWS succeeding his father Charles (as the Roman Chronicles record) with no
less liberality, granted unto the Roman Bishops and his successors, the
City of Rome together with his Dukedom: and defended the jurisdiction and
dignity thereof, even to the imputation of superstition.

Notwithstanding; neither the remembrance of the good services of the father,
nor the virtues of the son, could so far forth wey with Gregory the
third, as to suppress, much less to mitigate his devilish intendments once
conceived against this Jews. For the War being on foot between Jews and
his sons; He (as it behooved an Apostolical Bishop) sought not to quench the
fire of this unkindness between father and child, but being sent by Jews
into the Camp of his sons to capitulate the Peace, with condition to return
again unto the Emperor; reuolting from Jews, he remained with his sons,
and like a true Apostata, abetted and complotted this unnatural dissension; so
far forth, that the father was taken, and being committed to most severe
imprisonment, with his younger son was finally thrust into the Monastery of
Suessons. Behold here a most strange precedent of ingratitude in children
against their dearest Parents, and the detestable impiety of a Bishop against
a most innocent Emperor; both equally gilty of like perjury and disloyalty.

From that time, although the Royal Diadem continued for some certain Ages in
the posterity of Jews, nevertheless their hellish humors did no more spare
the issue, then in former time it compassionated the Parent. And no marvel,
for this was the only mark that they shot at, that having once shaken off
the right which the Emperor pretended in the confirmation of Bishops, they
might with more security ever after have means to ouertop them in greatness.
Which their most provident project was long a hatching, neither could it be
delivered to discovery, before the year eight hundred ninety five. At what
time Charles the Gross departing out of Italy to war upon the Normans, who
at that time miserably infested the Sea coasts of France; Hadrian the third
laid hold upon this opportunity, and in the very beginning of his Pontificie,
made his complaint unto the Senate and people of Rome; That in the Election of
Bishops, the Imperial authority was not to be stood upon, but that the
Suffrages of the Clergy and the people ought always to be free.

By this Decree he disseysed the Emperors of their whole right, which but
lately they possessed both upon the Bishops and the City; Thereby pointing out
to his successors a course how to attempt proiects of higher nature in future
ages.

And surely from those times, what upon the deficiencie of the issue of Charles
the Great, which had most fortunately Governed the Empire for the space of one
hundred and odd years: and what in regard of that most horrible Schism
proceeding from that Chair of pestilence, managed between the Bishops
themselves by mutual Murders, Poysenings, and all other kind of enormities,
their continued machinations against the Emperors some-deale ceased; until
they reassumed a new occasion of plotting and reiterating their former courses
against Otho the first, Emperor of Germany.

Otho the Great.
He was chosen Emperor in the year nine hundred thirty and six. In England
reigned Adelstan.

FOr at what time, in the Reign of Otho, John the thirteenth, Noble in truth
by Birth, but most base in conversation, Governed the Romish Sea, and polluted
Peter's Chair with riot, gaming, pandarisme and Women, etc. At that very same
instant likewise Berengarius Duke of Lombardie, amongst many other Cities,
forbore not to press hard upon the City of Rome also. The Cardinals grew
discontented, as well at the Popes Epicurisme, as at Berengarius his Tyranny.
Two of them more agrieued then the rest (whether upon scruple of conscience, or
in remembrance of the greatness of the Roman name, or in hatred of the Pope)
resolved to pray in aid of Otho, a Prince of that time much celebrated for his
virtues amongst the Loraners, the French, the Hungarish, the Danes, and all the
other barbarous people, under his obedience throughout that part of the world.

Whereupon, calling some others to Council, by letters and messages they
solicit Otho, that he would vouchsafe to assist the declining estate of the
Church and Commonwealth: That he would repress the Tyranny of Berengarius
cruelly raging upon the Christian people: And that he would not let, to deliver
the Church from so fell and impure a beast. The Bishop coming to the knowledge
of these passages, first cut off three of his fingers, that indicted the
Letters, and then slit his Chancellors nose, for giving approbation thereunto.
But Otho, who thought it not fit to leave the Church succourlesse in times of
danger, having amassed all necessaries for warfare, marches into Italy with
fifty thousand Soldiers. Expels both Berengarius and his son Adelbert:
then speedeth toward Rome. Where arrived, although the inhumane cruelties of
the Bishop were not unknown to his Majesty: Yet in reverence of the
Apostolic Sea, at first he decreed no hard or unbeseeming censure against
him, but causing all things that had been injuriously taken from him to be
restored, he presented him moreover with great masses of Gold, Silver and
Jewels. And appointing him a time of conference; secretly and friendly he
repeated what he knew of his fore passed offenses, wishing him thereafter to
abstain from so gross and foul enormities; To lead a thriftie life; to be
an ornament, and not a dishonor to the Church; That integrity of life was no
less commendable in a Churchman, then Arts and learning.

For the present, the Pope protests great hopes of amendment: The Emperor
rejoices thereat, and leaving Rome iournieth toward Papia, there minding to
Winter, but withal exacteth a solemn Oath from the Bishop taken upon the
body of Saint PETER; THAT IN HIS ABSENCE HE SHOULD NO WAY BE ASSISTING TO
BERENGARIVS, NOR HIS SON. The Emperor had scarce left the Gates of Rome, but
the Bishop returning to his wonted inclination, not only follows his
pleasures, his Whoredoms, his Ryottes, his poysenings, and all other
mischiefs, of like nature; but also having forgotten his plighted faith to the
Emperor, reuoketh Adelbert from Fraxineto, whether he had fled out of Italy
to the Saracens, and promises him his utmost assistance against the Emperor:
He dispatcheth also his Legates to make like complaint against him at
Constantinople.

The Emperor, unto whom such gross and wilful perjury seemed more then
wonderful, upon the first intelligence thereof, thought it not fit rashly to
listen thereunto, but dispatcheth certain of his Servant to Rome to learn
the certainty of the business.

Upon their return, and justification of these, and more vile indignities, the
Emperor (not unjustly moved to displeasure) suddenly hastes toward Rome:
where pitching his tents hard under the walls (John and Adelbert being fled
into Campania) he is most honorably received into the City by the Inhabitants.
Unto him they promise faith and loyalty, and swear thereafter never to elect a
Pope without the consent of the Emperor Otho, Caesar, Augustus, and his Son
Otho.

John being thus escaped; and for fear of Caesar lurking in Campania in woods
and corners; after three days, at the instance both of the Clergy and the
people (desiring a Commission to enquire upon the life and conversation of
John) the Emperor agrees, and proclaims a Council; whereunto he calls all
the Bishops and Abbots of Italy, such as he knew to be men of integrity,
honest, and zealous.

Who appearing upon the day prescribed, although his abominable life was such,
that even by the general opinion of the Council, it could not but be
deciphered by the remotest Nations, yet this most virtuous Emperor, took order
that they should not proceed to any rash Judgment, but to determine all
accusations with mildness of mind and deliberate advice.

Whereupon with the Archbishops of Liguria, Tuscanie, Saxony and France, he
dispatcheth his letters unto John, reciting therein the cause and manner of his
accusation: not forbearing to entreat him to make his personal appearance, to
say for himself against his accusers.

But he returning for answer; that it should easily appear, what slight
esteem he made of that Council; And that, he would suddenly proceed to
Excommunication, in case they presumed to elect Any other: the Emperor in a
most solemn Oration intimates to the Council, his periuries toward
himself, and his dishonest conversation toward the whole Christian world.

Upon hearing whereof, with one consent the Council declared this Apostata John
for his evil life to be worthily deprived: And Leo chief Secretary of the
Roman Church was chosen to succeed him.

In the interim whereof, the Emperor not to be burdensome unto the State of
Rome, had dismissed many of those companies of Soldiers which at first he had
brought with him into Italy. Which coming unto the understanding of this
reprobate Bishop, who full well was acquainted with the disloyal and mutable
humors of the Italian Nation, sends his espialls to Rome, with exhortations
to the people to attempt a surprise upon the Emperor and his weak companies;
for which their good service he promises to reward them with all the Treasures
of the Church and Saint Peter.

The Romans being hereunto encouraged, partly by the weakness of Caesar's army,
and partly with the conceit of these Golden mountains, arise, and at the sound
of a Trumpet charge upon the Emperor.

He makes a stand upon the Bridge of Tiber, and there with his fearelesse and
old Trained companies, valiantly receives the charge: The Romans receive the
just reward of their treachery: for being routed, and put to flight, neither
sanctuary, nor vnsanctuary could warrant any one man's life; the fury of the
Soldiers slew the periurd, as well at the Altar, as in the Shambles.

When this was done, Caesar stood in good hope, that after so great a
punishment, the Romans would prove afterward to be of more quiet and advised
dispositions, and in this conceit, he hastneth to Spoletum, the place of
Adelberts rendeuou.

Upon which absence John betaking him to his wits, through the mediation of
certain good-wenches, heretofore of his ancient acquaintance, so works with
many of the Roman gentry, that John is received into the City; and Leo with
much labor escaping their hands, flies unto the Emperor.

The deposement of Leo, and the cruelty of John, which he had already inflicted
upon some few, being known; Caesar repaireth his Army, with intention to be
revenged upon the Romans, as well for the injury offered to his own person, as
for the wrong in deposing a Bishop of his own institution.

In midst of which intendment, by the judgment of Almighty God, meaning to
make this John an exemplary president to the world of his most just
indignation, it came to pass, that he died a most strange kind of death.

For when upon a certain night without the walls of the City, he was sporting
himself with an other man's wife, the devil gave him such a knock on the
Temples, says Luitprandus of Ticine, that within eight days he died of the
wound.

Plati. in the life of John xiij.
Other write, that he was wounded by the woman's husband; and so gave up his
impure soul to the devil his master, whom he had long served.

But death gave no surcease to the seditions first occasioned by this monster.
For the Romans, in place of the deceased, set up Benedict the fifth, and
afterward required Confirmation from the Emperor, then residing at Spoletum.

The Emperor disallowing the Election, disdainfully dismissed the Romans,
little mistrusting any such welcome: and by fire and sword wasting all things
about the City, finally compelled them, that expulsing (or rather yielding up)
Benedict, they should accept of Leo: binding them by Oath, that they should not
presume to alter any thing, which he had set down for the Churches government.

Hereupon Leo being restored to his Sea at Barionea, Platina in the life of
Benedict the fif^.

See also Krantzius lib. 4. cap. 9.


and over wearied with the disloyal humors of the Roman people, retransferred
the whole Authority of chosing the Roman Bishops from the Clergy and people of
Rome, unto the Emperor; as it is set down. distinct. 6. c. in Synodo.

And Otho, having in this manner marshalled his affairs, returned into
Germany, taking Benedict with him; who not long after through grief of mind,
being committed to the safe custody of Adaldag, Othoes Chancellor, and
Archbishop of Hanburg, died at Hamburg, and there lies buried in the
Cathedral Church.

Otho the third.
He reigned in the year of Christ 984. about the days of Etheldred.

Naucler. general 34. Plat. in vita Gregorij V. Cuspinian and Theod. de Nyem in
the life of Otho the third.
SOme few years after, as Otho succeeded his Grandfather in the Empire: so did
he likewise in the contentions of the Bishops. For when as John the xvij.
being dead, by the right of Election, invested upon him by the donation of Leo
the viij, to his predecessor Otho the great, he had chosen Gregory the v. for
Pope; Crescentius and the people stomacking that a man of the German nation
should be advanced to be their Bishop, and him also chosen by the sole
authority of the Emperor, they resolved to depose him; and in his place they
substituted, John the xviij. of that name, first Bishop of Placentia, a man
well stored with coin, and a great Scholar.

Gregory makes his repair into Germany to the Emperor, and there unfolding
his hard usage, so provoked the Emperor, that he besieges the City, and
pressed it so closely, that the people almost hunger starued opened their
Gates, and received his Majesty.

Being now in possession, and understanding, that like power by warrant of Gods
word, was bequeathed him over a wicked Bishop, as over a common thief; at
first he gave commandment that the eyes of the captive Bishop should be put
out, the fingers of both his hands to be cut off, and then clothed in vile
attire, with his stumps and feet manacled, to be set upon an Ass, so to be
conveyed through the City, and finally to be thrown headlong from the rock
Tarpeia.

Crescentius the Consul he also caused to be mounted upon a base Beast, his
face toward his tail, his nose and ears to be cut off, so to be a common
spectacle to all beholders, and lastly to be hanged upon the common Gallows in
sight of the City walls.

Thus having wrecked his just indignation upon his adversaries, he not only
restored Gregory, the xj. month after his deposall to his pristinate dignity:
But also this good and most excellent Emperor, left an example to his
successors, that these proud Churchmen were not to be managed by lenity and
mildness, but to be curbed by roughness and severity. For it was the received
opinion of that age, that look which of the Caesar's showed himself to be of
more mild disposition, then some others; so much the more wantonlike would
they dally with his lenity, and more basely prosecute him with railings, and
foule-mouthed reproaches; As by that which follows, I will clearly make
manifest unto you.

Henricus Niger.
He ruled Anno Christi. 1039. In England Harold Harefoot.

THis severity of Otho, last before spoken off in punishing the treason of
John, Cardinal Benn^ of the l^fe and gests of Hildebrand.
for some certain time so terrified the Bishops, that until the smart was
forgotten, openly they attempted nothing against the Majesty of the sacred
Empire. But no sooner had Benedict the xj. by Satanicall and magical
Inchantmentes leaped into the place, but by how much his skill and confidence in
that profession was remarqueable, by so much the more insolent was his carriage
in the Popedom.

For no sooner was Conradus, (a most faithful steward of the Law and Religion,
Emperor of Romans, always Augustus) gathered to his fathers; but this
firebrand going to counsel with his minion Laurentius, and other his fauorits;
bends his studies, how he might dispossess Henry the son of Conrade from
his hereditary succession to the Crown of the Empire; and disturb the peace
of the Church with Schism and dissension.

To the effecting of which stratageme, he sends the Crown of the Roman
Empire unto Peter King of Hungary, with this Motto under written. Petra dedit
Romam Petro: tibi Papa Coronam. The Rock gave Peter Rome: to thee the Pope
this Crown. But the Emperor, under the leading of Godfrey Duke of Lorain, a
most excellent Soldier, and faithful seruitor, confronted Peter, took him
Prisoner; and further, meaning to repay Theophilact the ringleader unto so
dangerous a Schism, according to his deserts, set forward for Rome. Upon brute
whereof, Theophilact, (alias Benedict the ninth) stricken in remorse of
conscience, and amazed with terror, bartered the Papacy to one of his
Companions, the Archpriest of Saint John's de Porta latina, the Master of
Hildebrand, for the Sum of one thousand and five hundred pounds. Who
ascending the Seat by the stairs of such abominable iniquity, by changing
his Name, was thenceforth styled, Gregory the sixth.

Now is the Cup brimfull; Benno. Plati. in the life of Siluester the third and
Gregory the sixth.
and the Papacy so managed, that all good men being either rejected or
oppressed, every other party, as he was carried away by ambition, or enabled for
briberie, cast to lay hold-fast upon this so high a step of Dignity; more
entering like thieves and robbers by the window, then by the door. So that in
these days (besides the Archpriest John Gratian) ascended also into this Seat
of iniquities; John Bishop of Sauoy who (changing his Name) was otherwise
nominated Siluester the third. Thus was the Roman Church ren tinto diverse
factions: Three Popes appeared at one instant, viz. Benedict the ninth,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth, and every one claims lawful
succession in Peter's Chair, and pleads possession. Where is now the Church?
Who is this head? Who shall now stand up to arbitrate so difficult a
controversy? None is now to be seen but the Emperor; And him, without
question, surnamed Niger, God himself stirred up (having set Germany in good
order) with an Army to travail into Italy, where calling a Council, he
inforceth Theophilact to fly: He imprisoned Gregory, and afterward with
Hildebrand, exiled him into Germany. The Bishop of Sauoy he dispatched to his
charge; and in their places consecrated Syndoger Bishop of Bamberg, otherwise
called Clement the second. Of whom he received the inauguration of the
Imperial Crown, and then enforced the Romans to take an Oath: That thereafter
they should never presume to meddle with the Election of a Roman Bishop,
without express Commission first obtained from the Emperor.

For his most excellent Majesty did well foresee, that in those times the
world was given to so much licentious liberty, that every factious and Potent
companion, though most ignoble, would not stick to arrogate unto himself that
so eminent a dignity, by corruption and vnderhand-courses, which by the strict
commandment of God, was not to be bestowed upon any living creature, save him
who for learning and sanctity of life, ought worthily to be preferred
thereunto.

This usage now grew unto so inueterate a custom, that every sedicious and
wicked varlet presumed, that he might without scruple of conscience usurp
upon Saint Peter's Chair; As did Damasus the second, by birth a Bauarian. This
man having gotten poison for his purpose, slew Clement, and labored by
villainy to attain to that promotion, which whilom was accustomed to be
bestowed only upon virtue. But God, the most just revenger of such wickedness
prevented him, and the three and twenty day after his usurped installment,
sent him to accompany the dead in the place of darkness.

Henricus quartus.
He reigned in the year of Christ 1056. in Germany. In England Edward the
Confessor.

ALbeit, that even hitherto, from the days of Charlemaine, the Roman Bishops
being generally possessed with the spirit of Supremacy, by sleights and
devises, did continually oppose themselves against the Majesty of the Empire,
and left no practice unattempted, that might weaken or discountenance the
Emperors sovereignty; that so they might dispose of all things at their
pleasures without all fear of controlment: yet was it not the will of Almighty
God, to suffer them as yet totally to cast off the yoke of duty, by warrant of
Holy writ invested upon Princes and great personages placed in Authority. But
what can humane wisdom plead in search of Gods purposes? perdere quos vult
Jupiter, and hos dementat: For now the malice, impiety and treason of the Roman
Clergy, together with their diabolical ambition, especially under that
figurative Dragon ( Gregory the seventh) grew like a violent tempest so
outrageous and exorbitant, that those times may truly be recorded to be the
days, which utterly razed, blemished, and wounded the Majesty of this famous
empire with the fatal ruin of glory and Honor.

For this mischievous monster, not contented to have poisoned six Bishops, and
to have deposed his Master Alexander, for imploring assistance from the
Emperor; Neither mindful of the favors which Henry (surnamed Niger) had
afforded him, in courteously dismissing him from perpetual Imprisonment,
separated from the company and sight of all mortal creatures, whereinto (as we
told you before) he had been condemned with Gregory the sixth: At what time,
the Normans raged through Apulia, Calabria and Campania, Of this Matilda,
whence and what she was, see Krantzius lib. 5. Saxon.
partly relying upon the great wealth of Matilda, a most potent woman in those
days, and partly animated to see the Empire distracted with most dangerous
wars raised by the warlike Nation of the Saxons against the Emperor, scarce
three year seated in his government; together with the revolt of the Germane
Bishops whom the Impostor our perpetual adversary had seduced from the service
of their Master: Then I say, this man first of all other, against the custom of
his predecessors, absolutely usurped upon the Papacy, without all consent of
the Emperor, before that time always accustomed to be mediated in the Election
of these Bishops.

And in future; to prevent the residue of the Bishops and Abbots from seeking
their confirmations at the Emperors hands, Formula decreti extat. C. si quis
deinceps.
he set forth a decree under pain of Excommunication; That he had not only
power in heaven to bind and to loose, but also that he had plenitude of
jurisdiction in Earth, to take away, and to give Empires, Kingdoms and
Principalities. Then began he impudently to boast: to usurp upon the temporal
and Supreme jurisdiction, and that by a law of his own coining: to esteem of
Kings and Emperors as tenants at will: to imprison Caesar's Ambassadors opposing
against his insolences, and finally leading them through Rome in ignominious
manner, to expel them the city.

Henry, albeit he were infinitely perplexed with the war of Saxony, yet
knowing that this novel and vnvsual pertinacie of the Bishop, was not to be
forgotten, calls a Council at Worms; wherein, audience being given to the
Ambassadors, which came from Rome, and Hildebrands disloyal Letters being
read; besides the Saxons, all the German and French Bishops, made a Decree;
That sithence Pope Hildebrand a fugitive Monk first of all other incroched
upon the Papacy without the good liking or priuity of the Roman Emperor,
constituted of God to be his Sovereign Lord, and that, contrary to the
Custom of his Predecessors, contrary to law, and contrary to his oath of
instalment: And moreover had usurped upon both jurisdictions, the temporal and
Ecclesiastical, as the Decij and worshippers of false Gods were accustomed to
do: That ipso facto he was deposed from his Bishopric; for sheep were no
longer to be entrusted to the keeping of such a woluish Shepherd.

One Rowland a Clerk of Parma, was dispatched to Rome with letters containing
the sentence of the Council: In whose Name he was commanded to interdict
Gregory from all Ecclesiastical Function; and moreover to enioyn the
Cardinals, that making choice of another for Bishop, they should present him to
the Emperor.

In like manner, Caesar himself dateth his Letters unto Hildebrand, to the
Clergy, and the Roman people: commanding according to the Iniunction of the
Council; That himself should return to a private life; and That, they
forsaking Hildebrand, according to their accustomed Privileges should proceed
to the election of a New Pastor.

At the receipt of this news, Hildebrand became not so much lenified, as
furiously exasperated, and insolently imboldned. For, whereas before he had
Excommunicated but some certain of the Emperors familiars, whose advice he
presumed Caesar to have used in these his proceedings: now presumes he by
novel president to Excommunicate Caesar himself in a hellish conuenticle,
against the order of Christian piety, ratified by the sacred Canons of Holy
writ; Him, I say he prescribes, Vide formulam abrogationis apud Plat in. in
vita Gregorij. 7. Be^ no.
depriueth of all kingly Authority, dispoileth of his Kingdom, and absolueth
his Subjects from their oths of obedience.

Behold, he was no sooner risen from the Seat wherein he sat to Excommunicate
Caesar, but the Chair being lately made of strong and new timber, suddenly by
the providence of God in most terrible manner was rent into a thousand
shatters: manifestly foreshewing, That by that rash and unadvised
Excommunication, this cruel Scismaticke should prove the Author of a most
fearful division in the Church of God.

And surely these were neither blind nor idle predictions. For the Princes and
German Bishops, taking notice of the Curse, some upon a vain superstition,
some in hope of bettering their estates, and others in remembrance of their
ancient hatred against Henry, at the next assembly of the States, threatening a
Revolt, unless he would suppliantly desire forgiveness of the Pope (now
resolved to come into Germany) brought the controversy unto so narrow a
pinch, and his Majesty into such mistrusts of despair, with the dispoiling him
of his real possession, That he was fain to promise the Princes, that he
would go unto the Pope, and personally crave absolution at his foot.

Whereupon putting off his regal habiliments, with his wife and young son
barefooted, and clothed in canuasse, being made a spectacle for Angels and men
to admire at, in a most bitter winter, and a most dangerous kind of travel,
comes to Canusium where the Pope then resided: There before the gates of the
City fasting and sutor-like from morning till euentide, he danceth attendance:
Mean while Hildebrand within, Benno. Nauclerus generatione 36. Vrspergensis.
Platina in loco ante citato.
amongst whores and shauelings laugheth him to scorn. Three days he patiently
indureth this lamentable affliction, desiring admittance. He is denied. At
three days end instancing admittance with greater importunacie, It is
answered; That his Holiness is not yet at leisure to attend his suit. Henry
by patience making a virtue of necessity (In that he could not be admitted into
the City) contenteth himself to abide in the Suburbs, but not without many
incommodious greeuances. For the wether was sharp, and all places appeared
hoary with frost.

At last, after his incessant three-daies petitioning, and denial, at the
instance of Maud the Countess of Adelaus Earl of Sauoie, and the Abbot of
Clunois, he is admitted unto presence.

Upon the fourth day in sign of unfeigned penitency, he resigned his Crown and
imperial Ensigns, and makes a protestation that he were unworthy to enjoy
the Title of an Emperor, if he should again commit the like offenses against
the Roman Sea, as formerly he had done.

For all this, this inexorable Prelat would neither pardon nor absolve him,
unless he would put in good security, that according unto his Popish pleasure
he would expiate the offense in a Council, and be forth coming at every day
and place appointed, (there the Pope being Judge) to answer unto all
accusations without once plotting in his thoughts any scruple of revenge.

2. Yea after his purgation, and reconciliation, either to retain, or forsake
his kingdom, if the Pope thought it so fitting 3. Thirdly, that before the
Examination of his Cause, he should not presume to wear any Kingly habit,
neither have borne before him any Imperial ensigns, That he should not
meddle in state government, nor exact any oath of allegiance upon his vassalls.

Upon promise of performance, and future obedience, The Pope will deal surely.
the atonement is now at length confirmed as well by Oath as Indenture, and
Henry absolved.

Now observe I beseech you, the restless humors of attainted consciences. The
Court of shauelings, deep politicians, men of profound reaches; and admirable
well seen in the principles of Machiuell, and careful as well to prevent future
blows, as to oppose against present perils, either reuoluing in their far
reaching wits, or suspecting in their seared consciences, that Henry being
sure seated in a peaceable estate, could not possibly digest so vilanous an
indignity, nor the world allow of so base a tyranny; fall again to their old
plots, but a new-Counsell; viz. how they might utterly dispossess Henry of
his Empire. Rodulph Duke of Sweuia, Henry's brother in law, is presented with a
golden Crown, thus inscribed. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho: And
withal the Bishops of Magunce and Colen are commanded, that (rebelling against
Henry) they should set it upon Rodulphs head, and assist him therein to the
utmost of their forces. Was it for Love, or Honor may the world dispute, that
the Pope became thus bountiful of an other man's patrimony, to bestow it upon
Rodulph? Or does any History make mention that Rodulph was a more kind Son to
the Church, then Henry? Believe me, the Pope did neither upon any such
respects, it was far from his imagination. But this was the windlace of all: if
Henry must live in peace, Henry must seek revenge: but if the Duke of Sweuia
find him play on one side, Romandiola shall be secured on the other side. Let
Rodulph or Henry sink or swim, mean while res nostrae tutiores redduntur,
that is, the Court of Rome may securely swagger; If Henry have the better, yet
shall he be much the weaker: if Henry have the worse, then all the care is
taken, for Rodulph is infinitely beholding unto us. And be it as be may: nether
party (being potent Princes) shall have cause to laugh at their bargain; let
time try the sequel; and so it happened. O the blind folly of ambition.

For albeit that Rodulph was the Emperors sworn liege-man, his brother in law
by marriage, endowed with the Dukedom of Sweuia after his decease, and honored
with many other favors: notwithstanding being seduced by the fair and false
protestations of the Bishops, and borne out by his own greatness and the
succors of Saxony, he inuadeth the Empire, and rebelliously to his utmost
power moves war against his Sovereign master.

Caesar by the admonishment of the Bishop of Argentine, seeing the danger
arising from all parts, leuieth his people, affronteth Rodolph, and sets all
upon the hazard of a battle. The issue whereof was this, That the Pope upon
mistrust of the worst, commanded both parties to Peace, and that Henry should
expect his sentence at the Synod, which shortly he would proclaim to be held
in Germany. Which limitation, when Henry stomacked, upon protestation that
he would suffer no Assembly to be holden in Germany, unless Rodolph were
first removed: The Pope (rather then he would disharten Rodolph by final
Peace) renueth the Excommunication, and sends forth his Mandates full
stuffed with hellish fury. The form of the Curse is extant in Platina.
Henry is nothing abashed, but the third time gives the battle at Elistrum
of Misia, and there overthrows his enemy. This came to pass in the year
1080. the Ides of October.

Vrsperg. fol. 238 does witness this conference between the King and the
Bishops.
Rodolph being grievously wounded, and from the field conveyed to Merseburg,
entreats the Bishops and the Leaders of his people to compeere before him.
Where being assembled, Rodolph feeling death seazing upon him, stretched forth
his right hand and said: My Lords, this is the hand with which I plighted my
faith to my Lord Henry. At your entreaties, thus, and thus many times has it
unfortunately fought against him: Return ye, and make good your first Oaths
to the King: I am to depart to my fathers.

See the judgment of God.
Rodolph being vanquished, and Germany by his death resonably well quieted,
Henry neither forgetting Hildebrands injuries; neither having his spirits so
peaceably affected, but that he could call to remembrance, how the Pope had
twice Excommunicated him; how for three days space being a most suppliant
Petitioner in a very cold season, he could attain no reconciliation; As also,
that cunningly he had assisted his enemy, even the competitor of his
Kingdom, proclaims a Synod of the Bishops of Italy, Lombardy, and Germany,
to be celebrated at Brixia a City of Norica.

Where being assembled, and the Acts of Hildebrand examined, with one consent
they promulge this suffrage.

For that it is apparently known, that Hildebrand was not Elected of God,
Abbas Vrsperg.
but most impudently by fraud and briberie, made his own way to the Papal
dignity: And therein being seated, has subverted all the Orders of the
Church, disquieted the whole Christian world; intended the death both of body
and soul, to a most peaceable and Catholic King; defended a periurd Prince,
and amongst the peaceable, sowed seeds of discord, etc. We here Congregated
by the Grace of God, and assisted by the Legates and letters of nineteen
Bishops, assembled against the foresaid Hildebrand at Mognuce the eight day of
Pentecost, do canonically give judgment against the said Hildebrand, That he
is to be deposed and expelled, for unadvisedly Preaching of Sacriledges and
factions, defending Periuries and Scandals; Abclieuer of Dreams and
diuinations, a notorious Necromancer; a man possessed with an unclean spirit;
And therefore an Apostata from the true faith: And unless upon the receite of
this our judgment, he shall voluntarily resign the Seat, we do finally
Accurse him.

These businesses being thus dispatched, and Germany quieted, in the year
1081. the Emperor iournyeth to Rome, and pitching his Camp before the Castle
of Saint Peter, he charge the Romans with so many assaults, that they are
glad to pray for Peace, and to open their Gates. The Bishop with his followers
retireth into the Bastile of Adrian: wherein being besieged, he works the
Emperor more disquiet by craft and subtlety, then the Emperor could do him,
by Mine or Engine. For as Henry accustomed frequently to make his Orisons in
Saint Mary's in Mount Auentine, this Traitor suborned a certain villain,
secretly to convey upon the Rafters of the Church, great and massiue stones;
and so to dispose them, that as the Emperor should kneel at his Prayers, from
aloft they should fall upon his head, and dash out his brains.

As this villainous Regicide, the Minister of Popish iniquity, was hastening his
dissiegne, and laboring to fit this massy stone to the execution of his
Treason, the stone fell down and drew this villain down withal: So that
bruising the Table whereon it fell, supported with strong Tressels, it rested
on the Pauement, and there by the judgment of God, dashed in pieces the
carkise of this Traiterous workman. The Romans upon notice of the Treason,
fastening a cord to one of his legs, for three days space dragged him along
through the streets of the City.

This failing, had the Pope so shallow a pate, as to carry about him but one
string to his bow? Or was he so honest a man, that rather then he would spare
the blood of Christian people, he would give over his own life, nay his
Seat, for the saftie of many thousands? Observe what follows: To be sure,
that neither Germany should long breath in peace, now Rodolph was gone; nor
the Emperor be secured in Italy; Ab. Vrsperg. Helmoldus in his 30. cap. of
the hist. of S^lad Krantz. and innumerable others.
he turns to the Art of diuersion (a point of War well known amongst
Soldiers) and stirs up the Saxons in his absence to create Harman Prince of
Lucelburg in Lorain, Emperor at Isleb. by Hercinia: Who likewise by the
providence of GOD at the siege of a certain Castle, was miserably slain by
the fall of a stone cast from the battailement of the Wall by the hand of a
siely woman.

He being gone, (the Romish Religion will still be dealing, rather then loose
one jot of their reputes, if they cannot otherwise prevail) this inhumane
Tyrant thirdly stirred up Ecbert Marquis of Saxony: and him also God
predestined to suffer condign punishment for his Rebellion. For the fifth
year after, he was beset in a Mill near Brunswicke by the Emperors Guard,
and thete miserably slain.

Once again, Hildebrand flies to his wits, I hope the Romanists of this age
are not behind for shifts* etc.
and perceiving, that his stake in Germany was clean lost; Himself immured
in a Bastill, where he could not always continue, and that he had small reason
to fall into the sight of Caesar, he dissembleth a parley, and during the
conference Iudaslike forsaking his company, in disguised habit flies unto
Salerne amongst the Normans.

Caesar forthwith assembled a Senate of his Nobles and Bishops, according to
the custom of his predecessors, gives order for an Ecclesiastical Diet:
Where Hildebrand, as a thief and a robber; a perfidious fugitive, a forsaker
of the fold; a Traitor to the flock, a debalker of Christian charity, by the
universal consent of the Convocation, is denounced and condemned.

In his place is promoted Guibert Archbishop of Rauenna, a lover of Peace and
Concord; a man learned and religious: By the consent of the Clergy he is
Consecrated Bishop by the name of Clement the third, in the year of Christ
1084. This done, he Rein-stalleth Caesar and his spouse Bertha, and saluteth
them Augusti, with the universal applause of the people. As for Hildebrand,
either through grief, or guiltiness of conscience, he died in exile (as the
saying is) Ab aris and focis in the Town of Salerne.

But this firebrand of War and discord being extinguished, the fury of the
Prelates amongst themselves was never the near allayed; howbeit, thereby, the
world enjoyed peace; and Germany her pristinate Majesty.

For Urban (after Victor the second, a Bishop but of a few days standing)
intruded upon the Papacy at Gurstung by the faction of Hildebrand, but
especially by the money of Matilda, and the Arms of the Normans. Him the
Emperor with the greater part of his Nobility accused of Irreligion, and
denounced him in the number of the wicked. This fellow, notwithstanding that he
had long wandered sine lare, sine grege, yet he so artificially finished the
web begun by Hildebrand, Benno.
that instead of Vrbanus, the world styled him Turbanus, yea, he went far
beyond his Schoolmaster Hildebrand in wit and villainy.

A^. Vrsperg, Aue i^inus. Naucler.
For, being not able any way to wrong Henry by secret invasion (Papists will
do nothing openly, or at least without pretext) he commands the Canons of
that most pestilent knave Hildebrand, to be confirmed and holden in force
against him.

Then draws he into Parricide Cunrade the son of Henry, begotten on his
first wife, by his fathers appointment Viceroy of Italy. Upon him he bestowed
Matilda the wife of Roger the Norman, and by him expulseth Clement the third,
Installed by the good liking and consent of his father.

But Urban and Cunrade being both quickly dispatched, Paschal the second loath
to come behind his predecessors in Treachery, and taking it for good Policy,
to give Caesar no breathing time to provide against tempests, by the example of
Urban, in a Synod at Rome reuiueth and ratifieth the Curse of Gregory against
the Emperor. Bulls are but words, and words are no weapons for Popes. Whereupon
a quicker corasiue must be applied: The other Son of Henry (named also
Henry) the Princes of Aquisgrane must salute as Caesar, notwithstanding that
already he had given his father his Oath of Loyalty and true Leigeman.

O Lord! where shall not a man find a man for blood, if promotion, or money,
or Marriage be offered for recompense; but especially, if the man of blood may
resort unto a Churchman, and receive absolution for so cruel and unpardonable
mischiefs? Of such persons, and such stratagems, behold in those days the
Popes made their especial uses: they may be as bold in these times and in
these points to plead universality and antiquity as they did and do for
their Mass, and the residue of their trumperie. For young Henry is up in
parricidiall Rebellion: Papa impellit, says the History: and being borne out
by the Arms of the Saxons, so carried the War, that this most valorous
Emperor, and stout revenger of the impeached Majesty of the Empire, being
harried with continual conflicts, and weary of his life through the perpetual
burden of Popish vexations, as he travailed toward the Diet of Mogunce,
Krantzius li. 5. c. 22. Vrsperg. 362. Helmold. in the annals of Sclauony. li.
1. ca. 32.
by treason upon the high way, and that against a public oath of safe conduct,
was taken by his Son Henry: then being degraded most unwillingly of all
imperial ensigns, as also of his Crown by the Bishops of Mogunce, Colen and
Worms; he was committed to prison in the town of Leyge: where pining to
death through grief, he finished his troublesome days in this most lamentable
manner.

Notwithstanding such was the irreconcilable rancor of these charity-preaching
fathers, that they not contented with these their most cruel turmoiles
practiced against his life; Hyena-like, with as barbarous bestiality they also
preyed upon his liuelesse carcass. For the body being already buried in the
monastery of Leyge, See more hereof D. Barlo 240. at full.
they enforced the Bishop of the place to dig it up again, and without either
honor to so great a personage, or reverence to holy sepulture, they commanded
it to be cast amongst other carcases into a profane place. The reason was
grounded upon one of their own Canons: Quibus viris ecclesia non communicate,
illis etiam nec mortuis communicare possit. Repentance etiam in nouissima hora,
and the reward of him that came into the vineyard at the cloze of the day,
equalized to his, that began to work in the dawning, is of no force with them.
It is scripture; and scripture, you know, is not sufficient for salvation. I
quake in writing. Councels may control It; the Church, The Councels; and who
is the Church? the Pope; For otherwise it were folly to broche so many
positions, as it does, against law, conscience and sound divinity, if it lay
not in their fullness of power to do and undo, say and unsay.

To conclude, at last, See Krantz. lib. 5. Vrsperg. fo. 264 H. Mutius
seventeenth of his Cronicles.
the body is conveyed in a coffin of stone from Leyge to Spire, and there also
for five years space, it remained without the duties of Christian burial.

Henry the fifth.
NOw let us see, if Henry the fifth, seduced by the witchcraft of the false
Pope, to usurp upon the Empire of his father, experimented any other allowance
of love and fidelity from the Bishops, then did his ancestor.

Coming unto Rome to be crowned with the imperial Dyadem, he thought it much
to concern his honor, to demand restitution of his right in the confirmation
of Bishops, Abbots and Prelates. The Pope forgetful of all former favors,
does stoutly deny the motion. From request they fall to blows, insomuch that
the Pope with certain of his servants was taken prisoner, and conveyed to
Mount Soracte, now called Mount Siluester.

Paschal seeing no remedy, C. Adrian. c. in synodo 63. distinct. c inter vos.
sent unto the City for Notaries, and at length confirms and reuiueth to the
use of the Empire, the ancient prerogatives claymed by the EMPEROVRS in the
Creation and Inuestiture of Popes and Bishops: and in requital is honored
again by the Emperor, with many rich presents.

But such was the just judgment of God toward this Henry; that as he
observed not faith toward his father, no more did others keep toward him. For
even those men who for his sake had forsaken his father, rise now in rebellion
against the Son. For presently upon his return in the year 1116. into
Germany, the Pope congregateth a full Council of his own creatures, and
there bewailing his sin, A Pretext for Perjury.
which he had committed in surrendering his privileges; after long and solemn
debating of the case, undoes all he had done before; confirms the Decrees of
Gregory the seventh; and upon the custom lately taken up, Excommunicateth
Henry.

Hereupon many the Princes of Germany, and especially the Bishop of Mogunce
fall into rebellion. Caesar sends unto the Pope, to treat a peace, but by his
death that business was determined.

After his decease the Cardinals create Gelasius Pope, neither calling Caesar
to Council, nor once acquainting him with their determinations. Whereat Caesar
being agreeued, flies to Rome, and consecrateth Mauritius Archbishop of
Brachar for Pope.

Gelasius being deposed, and Maurice confirmed, they both conspire with joint
consent to curse the Emperor in his retrait from Rome, dispersing their
Ministers through Germany after the precedents of their predecessors to incite
the Subjects of the Emperor to rebellion. Henry fearing the sequel, hastneth
into Germany.

Gelasius being dead, Calixtus the second being his successor, warreth upon the
Antipope, whom as we told you the Emperor had consecrated. Henry perceiving
the Pope, vnderborne by the Arms of the Normans, to be too strong for him,
and that he began to meat the same measure toward him, as his predecessors
had toward his father: In the year 1122. by the special mediation of the
Apostolic Legate Lampert, afterward Pope, and called Honorius, he became so
deuote a Convert to Papacy, that he resigned his whole right of Inuestiture
concerning the Ring and the Staff; granted a free Election and Consecration to
be thenceforth used in all Churches; and couenanted to restore, or at least, to
cause to be restored all Regalities, formerly renounced, or at least as many as
remained in his dispose.

The Pope again couenanted, that the Election of Bishops and Abbots should be
done in the Emperors presence, without violence: so far forth that the Elect
should receive his Regalities, by the Scepter from the Emperor. This Concord
bore date at Worms, Nono Call. October. Anno Dom. M.C.XXII.

But, albeit this Henry utterly discouraged with the Thunderbolts of curses,
gave way to all Popish usurpations, and to the everlasting stain and
impouerishment of the Germane Empire, thrust his neck under the yoke of the
Romish tyranny, yet, in regard of new tumults and rebellions practiced in
Belgia and the higher Germany, he could not live out the remainder of his
days in affected peace. For appeazement whereof, as he traveled toward
Vtrick, he fell sick, and died without issue. This accident, and not iniustly,
men argued, to have proceeded from the judgment of God, for that contrary to
his commandment, he had behaved himself so ungraciously toward a father,
that had so well deserved of him his son.

Lotharius Saxo.
He reigned in the year 1125. about the five and twenty year of Henry the
first.

HENRY being gone, and Germany still reeking in blood and civil war: The
greatest care that the Bishops took, was to provide, that the people should
not reunite their forces, and take time to breath from these inhumane and
unnatural murders. Whereupon after the death of Henry, when as Cunrade Duke
of Sweuia, Henry the fifth sisters son, laid claim to the Empire; against
him by the cunning of Albert Archbishop of Mogunce, they set up Lotharius Duke
of Saxony, the man in truth whose infidelity they had used in the miscarriage
of Henry the fifth.

Cunrade is now in march, and having ouertopped mount Septim. is honorably
received of the Millanois and crowned by the Archbishop Anselme at Modoecia,
the chief Sea of the Kingdom of Italy. Honorius, in favor of Lotharius, and
in despite of the House of Henry (which he thirsted utterly to extinguish)
deposes Anselme, Otho frising. li. 7. ca. 17. Nauclerus genesis 38.
and by the terror of his Curses inforceth Cunrade to post out of Italy: Who
finally in despair of the Germane aid by reason of their factions and
dissensions, utterly gives over his further hopes of inioying the Empire, and
by the mediation of S. Bernard of Clareual, falls to make his peace with his
corriuall Lotharius.

Lotharius being now sole and absolute Lord of the Empire, according to his
Saxonish simplicity, honoring the Papal Sea with more then common
obseruancie, cease not to deserve well thereof by all the offices of love and
duty, which an obedient son to the Church could possibly imagine to perform.
Innocentius the second, the successor of Honorius, expulsed by Anacletus
Antipope and Roger Duke of Apulia, flying unto him for succor, to his infinite
charge he restored to his Sea at Barionea.

But believe me, neither these kind offices, Nauel. genesis praeallegata, says
that this was done at Leyden, before his iourny into Jtaly.
nor any worldly respects, were of ability either to frustrate or to mollify
the Popish avarice: for when the Pope had declared Lotharius Emperor, he made
show as if he would again seek restitution of the ancient rites, which the
Empire claimed in the election of Bishops and Abbots: But the ravenous Pope not
only refused to vnloosen his talents upon what he had already seized, Otho
Frising. and Naucler. in the fore alleged places.
but also re-attaching whatsoever Lotharius himself either by the persuasion of
Bernard, or in fear of further sedition, had voluntarily offered to the Romish
sea, he labored by all other means to add more to the former, through his
immesurable avarice.

For when Lotharius having expulsed Roger the Apulean; would have bestowed the
Duchy upon Earl Reignold the general of his army; the Bishop impleded him,
as concerning the right of donation, with so vehement a contention, that
neither being minded to yield to other, the controversy at last was feign to
be thus determined: viz. That both parties should lay their hands upon the
Staff of the Feodarie ensign, then to be delivered to the new Duke of Apulia:
Thereby signifying that both of them had equal interest in the transportation
of that Dukedom.

So that, the more humility accompanied with sweet behavior and moderation,
that this all-praise-worthy Emperor showed toward the Papacy: The more the
waywardness and malice of the Romanists began to show it self, and that
without fear or modesty. For whereas this Emperor in receiving the Diadem had
cast himself at the Popes feet, the Clergy, to use the precedent to the
debasement of succeeding Emperors; and to deliver it as a trophee to posterity,
as soon as his back was turned, set up in the Lateran palace his protraiture,
with this inscription. Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores:
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante Coronam.
The King attends before the gates: and swears the City-rites to keep:
From Romes great Pastor takes his Crown, and vows to hold in vassalage.
What was this, but a bewraying first of their frowardness, manifested in
despising the Majesty of so high a calling; and secondly of their pride, in
that forsooth, they would seem either to ouertop, or obscure, the victorious
gests of him, who to his immortal commendation had subjected under tribute,
the Duke of Polonia, Cusp. in the life of Lotharius of Saxony.
the Pomeranes and the Russies: who I say, to the no small honor of the Majesty
Imperial; had enforced the King of Denmark to bear the sword at his
Coronation; had subiugated the states of Cremona, and Papia, Naucl. Genesis 38.
and brought the vanquished Bononians and Piemontois into the form of a
province: and finally with the conquest of Apulia, had brought under obedience
many most noble Cities in that Duchy. Now is he vanquished, and acknowledged
the Popes bondslaue. For what other signification does the Popes (Creature)
import, but to be his vassal or servant? Hominem fieri.
Such are these admirable servants of servants, whom even Emperors themselves
are glad to acknowledge and respect as Lords and Masters.

Conradus tertius.
He reigned in the year of Christ 1138. about the third year of King Steven.

LOtharius, in his second retrait out of Italy, being departed this world not
far from Trent, Conrade the same Prince (whom as before we told you) the
malice of Honorius had frustrated of the Empire, and banished Italy, now
succeeds his dead predecessor. But, albeit (after the decease of Lotharius)
the Princes of the Empire, and that in the presence of Theodoret the Popes
legate, Cuspin. in the life of Conrade.
and with his very good liking, did elect him King of Romans, yet by no means
could the Popes assent be gotten to perfect the Election.

For whereas he had conferred to Roger Duke of Apulia, that Dukedom, with the
titulary dignity of a Kingdom, in liew of ransom for himself, and his
Cardinals taken in battle; and Conrade in prejudice of the Empire would
neither ratify, nor hearken unto so unreasonable a motion: Nocentius
complotting with Roger, Naucler out of Antoninus and Godfridus Genesis 38.
incited Guelfo Duke of Bauaria, to rebel against Conrade, for that he could
not obtain at his hands the grant of his brothers Duchy: Herewith, the
Emperor had so much to do to defend his own, that he quite forgot to think
upon the recovery of Sicil and Apulia. Behold here a president of Papal
fidelity, Nauc. genesis 38. and 32.
if his avarice be not supplied by loss to the State.

About this time these fatal factions of the Guelfes and Gibellines (whereof
others have discoursed) began in Germany.

Bartolus in a peculiar book of the Guelphs and Gihellines. Panorm. in c.
Lucanis and Pisanis de rest. spol.

Cuspin. in the life of Fred. the second.


For as Nauclerus reports out of Hermanus, whilst the battle was fighting
between Conrade and Guelfo, those of the Kings party took for their word or
Motto, Hie Wiebling, which is as much to say, The King: as being nobly
descended from a village of that appellation: Those which followed Guelfo,
reclaimed, Hie welf. Where after it came to pass, that those two denomidations
of Guelfes and Gibellines, became the original of all the factions in Italy.
Which falling out happily for Gregory the ninth to make use of, from
thenceforth, he gave them such large entertainment, that no City, town nor
people were clear from the infection of so spreading a contagion. For upon no
other ground, save the use of these names, even until our days with more then
admirable fury, City bandied against City, Province against Province, yea and
in a City one part of the people confronted another.

Not only the factious people continued this dissension amongst themselves: but
the Bishops also in this quarrel prosecuted one another to the utmost of their
fury.

Amongst others, that Boniface the eight, Plati. in the life of Bonef. the
eight. Naucle. genesis 44.
then whom the Roman Sea never endured a more fell monster, persecuted from
place to place all those whom he knew to be of the Gibelline faction,
ransacking and spoiling all places whereunto they made any repair of abiding.
Whereupon some finding no safety in Cities, settled their abodes in woods and
forests: many of the Gentry, like wild beasts inhabited the Sea coasts,
and at last left Italy to be companions with pirates. For they assured
themselves, that the Pirates could not have used them worse, then this
Malefacius Nero would have done, if he had once caught them in his clutches.

As for example: When he heard that certain of the contrary faction were
fled to GENOA, he posted after them, with full determination by destroying
them all, to have razed their very name from the memory of mankind through
the whole world. Here likewise it happened upon Ashwednesdaie, as he was
casting Ashes according to Custom amongst the people: the Archbishop of the
City kneeling upon his Maribones with his head uncovered to receive the Ashes;
the Pope by chance understanding that he was a Gibelline; where his Holiness
should have said, Remember Man that thou art but Ashes, and into Ashes thou
shall return again: Not so (quoth the Pope) Remember Man that thou art a
Gibelline, and with the Gibellines thou must be turned to dust: and
therewithal in a most furious manner, without once regarding the holiness of
the place, the presence of the people, or the regard of Religion, of set
purpose (missing his head) he cast great quantities thereof into his eyes:
Afterward he deprived him, and then again restored him.

At last by Gods judgment it came to pass, that those Gentlemen, who (as we
told you) left Italy with the Pirates, returned again, and gathering together
some companies of such as here and there lay lurking in fear of Maleface,
breaking open the gates of the place where he lay, mistrusting no such adverse
adventure, they took him, and brought him prisoner to Rome: where in the space
of five and thirty days, what for grief and greatness of stomach, he
breathed out his loathsome soul, ouer-laden with innumerable mischiefs.

Frederick Barbarossa.
He reigned Anno Christ. 1152. about the seventeenth year of King Steven.

FRederick, for his red Beard, commonly termed Barbarossa, the son of
Frederick Duke of Sweuia, the brother of Conrade, a Prince of excellent parts
both for body and mind, succeeded this Conrade, a Prince also no whit
inferior to his successor for his honorable carriage in peace and war.

To speak little of his Nobility, it is recorded, that the entire right of the
most noble Families of the German Commonwealth, viz. of the Henry's of
Gweiblingen and Gwelforum of Altorff, descended upon him.

Howsoever; by the consent of all writers, he was reputed to be of an
excellent capacity, provident in Council, of a good memory, eloquent,
constant and valiant, a good Soldier, and well practiced in Arms; To the
humble, courteous; To the peaceable, mild. Amongst honest men, virtuous;
Amongst proud persons, imcompatible. Very bountiful, and in science of many
humane ornaments, not immatcheable to any. In regard of which his manifold
virtues, by the suffrage of the whole Nobility, he is declared Emperor, not
without assured expectation, that through his worthiness, Peace should be
maintained through Germany, the disgraced forces of the Empire restored, and
Italy now grown insolent through continual rebellion, brought into order and
requisite acknowledgment.

The Romish contentions with the Germane Emperors, by vile and novel
prescription, seemed now so possessionated, that the Bishops, by whose suffrage
the Emperors were to be confirmed, began to make small or no account of the
Imperial Majesty, which the preposterous ambition, and immatcheable pride of
the Romanists, the Germane Princes (and who can blame them) taking to heart,
could hardly digest: but by how much this noble Heroes in the greatness of his
mind, meditated to abate the insufferable pride of this pernicious rabble: by so
much the more found he all things to oppose against him with more and more
disadvantage, to the impeachment of all his proiects.

Which his noble exploits albeit they are not unknown to all men; neither is
it any part of my mind, nor the project of this pamphlet to set them down
punctually (for so they would require an Ilias) yet by patience I will glance
briefly at some of them, which in my judgment shall sufficiently inform you,
what was the obseruancie, and what the fidelity of the Bishops of these times,
toward the sacred majesty of this most worthy Emperor.

Observe therefore, that the third year after his election, this Frederic
having set Germany in order, and especially through infinite pains taking
procured a firm peace between Henry the younger, and Henry, Nauel, vbisupra.
Raaouicus li. 3.
Dukes of Saxony and Austrich, with a populous army marches into Lombardy,
now by the long absence of the Emperors, grown confident in ability of
resistance, by proiecting many infallible signs of insolency and rebellion.
By the way, he destroys the camp of the Millanois, Rosatum, Gailarda, Treca
and Gaira, and sets the city of Ast on fire: Derthona most strongly
fortified by art and nature, he takes by force: and from thence removing his
troops through Romania and Tuscanie, he passes as far as Sutrium.

In these times the Roman sea stood encumbered with most dangerous contentions.
William King of Sicil, who succeeded Roger (the same that we spoke of in the
life of Conrade) had taken from Hadrian the fourth, by birth an English man,
the suburbs of Beneuent, Ceperanum and Bacum in Campania.

Moreover, the Romans by the instigation of Arnold of Brixia, redemanding
their lost liberties in choosing their senate for the government of their City,
maintained the contention so far forth against Hadrian, that as, after his
election, he made his progress toward the Lateran to be consecrated, the
people meeting the Cardinal of Saint Pudentiana in the via sancta taking his
way toward the Court, twice wounded him.

At this outrage Pope Hadrian grew out of all patience, accurseth the King,
releaseth his subjects of their oath of allegiance, and the easier to draw them
into rebellion, leaves them at liberty.

The Romans sped no better, until upon alteration of their humors, they
banished Arnold out of the City, and renouncing their Consular prerogatives,
diuested the absolute government of the place upon the discretion of his
Holiness.

Who now hearing that Frederic was upon his way toward Rome, the Pope with his
Cardinals, neither for love nor in honor, but to mediate revenge against the
Romans and Roger, go forth to salute him. Funcius li. 10. Chro. Barnus de
vitis Pontif.
Frederic rejoicing at the approach of his Holiness, receaueth him with
wonderful devotion and majesty; holds his left stirrope as he alighteth
from horseback, and so conducteth him to the Imperial pauilion. Could more
reverence be devised to be done by an Emperor to a Pope? when Christ came to
Jerusalem upon Palm Sunday, did Herod or Pilat so observe him? or did Nere so
salute Peter at his first coming to Rome?

Well, these so great personages being arrived at the imperial pauilion;
Helmold. in the Cro. of Sclauony ca. 81.
The Bishop of Bamberg in the name of the Emperor in the exordiu^ of his
oration, began to discourse, with what earnestnes of affection his Majesty had
desired this long expected conference with his Holiness. And God be blessed
(quoth he) that he now is become master of his desires. Humbly and submissiuely
he requesteth your Holiness, that according to the accustomed manner, by the
Inauguration of the Imperial diadem, you would declare him chief Prince and
defender of the Catholic Commonweal. And herewithall the Bishop concludes
honestly, and elegantly, with the reasons and causes, which could not but
enable him most worthy of so reasonable, so just, and so Christian-like a
confirmation.

The Bishop having ended his Oration, the Pope commends the speech; but
withal replieth; That the contents thereof, and the matter in hand were of
far different arguments. For albeit (quoth he) that the matter whereof I
mean to speak of, be triuial and passable; yet can it not be denied, but that
there is cause of fear, that he, who becomes negligent in small matters,
will prove more negligent in greater.

At this, the company rowsing their attentions, and wondering what offense his
Holiness should intimate; he goes on; saying, As I alighted from my horse, he
held the left stirrope of my Saddle: and whether he did it in mockage of us, or
upon some other like fantasy, we can not guess, for surely if he meant to
have honored us, he knew that the right stirrope, and that with the right
hand, ought to have been holden.

Caesar being nothing moved with this base prattle of the Bishop, smiled and
replied; That he had not been brought up to hold a stirrope: you (most Holy
father, quoth he) are the first unto whom we have vouchsafed this office: And
by and by after his orisons, forgetting his patience; I would know (says he)
whether this office be to be done of duty, or of good will. If of good will,
who would find fault at an escape or oversight? If of duty, then we think
amongst friends there is small difference, on which side the party that
means to honor his friend, approaches. Thus bandying a few bitter words,
they brake company, but not without stomaking.

But the Emperor being a most prudent Prince, dissembling what he had heard,
and seen to proceed from the hellish heart of this proud prelate, the next
day following re-inuiteth the Bishop to a second conference. The Bishop
approaches, the Emperor makes speed to meet him; and by his former oversight,
being now become a better Prentize in his occupation, lays hold on the right
stirrope, and so leads his Holiness into his pauilion.

Being set, thus Hadrian thundereth: Barnus in vita. Hadriani, ex Johan. de
Cremona.
Thine ancestors (says he) Princes of the ancient world, who made their holy
repair unto this sea to receive the crown at our hands, were accustomed to
manifest their loves toward us, by some notable emolument bestowed upon S.
Peter's chair; thinking it their duties to prevent us, that so they might call
the world to witness, that they obtained our benediction and their
inauguration with an eminent gratuitie. So Charles, after he had tamed the
Lombards: So Otho, after he had subdued the Beringary; And so Lotharius, after
he had repressed the Normanes, merited the Imperial diadem.

In like manner, Let your Serenity, restore unto us and the Church, Apulia an
appendancie of the Romish sea, now arrogated by the Normanes, and then shall
you, with our very good will, obtain as much as appertains unto our loves to
perform.

Upon the reading of this History, can any man call this Prelat servum
seruorum, who ashamed not to exact from so great an Emperor, his Lord and
Master, as from a base and mercinarie soldier, the laborious toiles, and the
extreme expense of warfare gratis? Are conquests of Kingdoms, surrendering of
Provinces, and such like passages (let any man tell me) those spiritualia,
whereof our modern Papists do hold the Pope capable?

When the Nobility saw no remedy, but Hadrians hand was as hard as Pharaos
heart, so that it were folly to expect a Coronation, until at their proper
costs and charges they had restored to the Apostaticall sea, Apulia (in truth
an appendancie of the Imperial right) from William King of Sicil; they thought
it fittest to content his holiness with this ouerture; That sithence their
present forces were wasted through continual labor and indefatigable
iourneyes, that Caesar having levied a new army in Germany, would return,
and accomplish his expectation. The Bishop flaming what with indignation
against William, and almost half dead to hear, that against his will he must
volens nolens give him time of breathing and re-inforcement, showing a
countenance as if he liked well of their excuses, allowed thereof, and so
dismissed them with promise that he would set the crown upon Fredericks head.

Frising. li. 2. cap. 21.
These businesses thus dispatched; the Emperor with the Bishop departs from
Sutrium, and iournieth toward Rome. Mid way certain Roman Orators, as full
swollen with pride, as their Master with disdain, accourt him with this rude
welcome: For their theme they begin to extol, even above the skies, the
antiquity of their Commonwealth: At conclusion they fall in glorious terms to
intimate, That of mere good will the Roman people had called Frederick out of
Germany over the Alps, first to create him a citizen, and afterward a Prince
of Rome: but with this per-closse; That the Romans stood ready to receive him;
upon condition; That he should confirm the fundamental laws of the City: If
the Pope can not have Apulia presently, he must have gold without excuse.
That he should bestow upon the Romans who were to bid God save him, in the
Capitol, five thousand pound of gold: That he should defend the commonwealth
from injuries, even to the hazard of his own life: And finally, that he should
confirm all these capitulations with an oath, and thereto set his hand.

Frederick being beyond mean enraged at these their mad and arrogant
motions, roundly takes them up for their follies in a most pithy oration: and
tells them, That the Empire descended upon him, not by any the least
well-wish of the Romans, but by the mere virtue of the Germans. And
perceiving their knavery, that under pretext of these demands, they meant to
gull him of money; he told them in plain terms: That he came not into Italy,
to bring it in, but to carry it out. With which answer when these impudent
shauelings were not satisfied, but still urged the Articles, his Majesty
disgracefully commanded them to depart.

And perceiving that their coming unto him was but to put some trick upon him,
he caused his men of war to fortify the Church of S. Peter and the bastile of
Leo. The day following he entered Rome, the people following him with great
applause and being honorably accompanied, was crowned and blessed. 4. Calend.
Iulij. in the fourth year of his reign.

The Emperor being about his Coronation in the Church of S. Peter, the Romans
stomacking the business, and betaking them to their arms, kept the gates of
the City shut, under color, that the Emperor should bring in no forces to the
prejudice of the City. And perceiving that Fredericks troops had pitched
their tents in the Neronean meadows, through the gate of Hadrian they break
out into the Vatican, to prevent Caesar's soldiers from entering thereinto.

Caesar's soldiers made strong resistance, and driving the enraged people from
the Vatican into the City, they slew about one thousand, and took sixty
prisoners: whom, the ceremonies being ended, at request of the Pope, the
Emperor dismissed in safety, and provided for his return into Germany.

But before his departure, it is reported, that such a like business happened
between him and the Pope, which I think not fit here to be pretermitted.

Innocent the second, he whom a little before Lotharius had restored unto the
Papacy, had caused to be painted in a Table, the Pope (as it were) sitting in
his chair, and the Emperor with his hands held up together, receiving the
Imperial Diadem: where under were written the foresaid two verses, Rex venit
ante fores etc. Cronicon Hersaugiense in vita Hartuigi abbatis. Radenious li 3.
number. 3. and 10.
When this picture with the inscription, was showed unto his Majesty, it did
greatly displease him, and casting forth some obiurgatorie word, he instanced
the Pope to take it away: which he promised to do, least so frivolous a
spectacle might give matter of discontent to many worthy personages then
residing in the City.

Frederick is departed: and Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople understanding
with what desire of revenge the Popes stomach burned against William King of
Apulia, by Palcologus his Orator and Ambassador, he offers unto the Pope his
voluntary service; and withal, to expulse William out of Italy; upon
condition, If the business took expected issue, that then, according to the
treaty; the Grecian should enjoy three maritime cities in Apulia. Doubt not, I
beseech you, but that he who had already deprived William of Apulia, for
contemning such religious wares, as are Popish Bulls and Curses, did not
strain much courtesy to accept of the Articles. Whereof William taking notice,
and withal somewhat fearful, by his Ambassadors moves his holiness to
hearken unto peace; promising not only to restore unto the Church, whatsoever
he had taken away, but also that he would add somewhat of his own thereto:
Moreover, that he would thencefoorth contain the Romans, rebels to the
Church, in their due obedience.

These were honorable conditions, but that the Pope should not accept thereof,
the Cardinals dissuaded him, like true men of arms, hoping to reap more
crowns by war, then by peace. Whereupon, war is proclaimed against William.
He leuieth an army throughout Sicily, landeth in Apulia, wastes the country
by sword and fire, and finally routeth Emanuel, who had pitched his Tents not
far from Brundusium unto Beneuent, where at that time the Pope with his
Cardinals resided, he gave such sharp assaults, that in despair of their
lives, he enforced them to sue for peace.

William accords, and is received into favor, and proclaimed king of both
kingdoms, on this side and beyond Pharum; but upon oath, that from thenceforth
he would never again infest the territories of the Church.

Thus, as you hear, matters being ignominiously compounded, the Pope riding in
visitation through the territories of the Cassinates, Marsi, Reatini,
Narnienses and Tudertini, at last ariueth at Ouieta; and there is given to
understand, that Rome is in combustion, the Consuls doing their utmost to
restore the City to it former liberty.

Hereupon groundeth He his deadly hatred against Frederick, most grievously
complaining, that being in distress between the swords of the Romans and
William, that contrary unto his superabundant promises, against all right, he
had forsaken him; yea, that he was now so incircled with perils, that he could
not live in security at Rome: As if the Emperor were a vessel especially
chosen rather to patronize the Popes wilful errors and ouersights, then to
defend the innocence of the Christian flock committed unto his tutelage.

But Frederick taking in evil part many the Popes actions, but especially the
alienation of Apulia, being an appendancy of the imperial dignity, without his
consent or knowledge: As also calling to remembrance, That the Pope had wrested
from the late Emperors the right of Inuestiture of Prelates: Nauel. Genesis 39.
That by his ministers he had impouerished the subjects of the Empire, and by
their subtle dispersions of treasonable practices, had done what in them lay,
to raise sedition throughout the Empire: Upon these grounds, I say, the
Emperors Majesty now thought it high time to put remedy unto these violent
intrusions upon the regalties of the Empire.

Hereupon he exacteth an oath of fidelity of all the Bishops of Germany; The
Popes Legates (such as were not called in by his good pleasure) he commands to
depart the Teutonick kingdom: prohihiteth his people either to appeal or
travail to the Romish Court and in his mandats causes his name to be inserted
before the Popes.

Upon the proclaiming of this Inhibition, it happened, that a certain Bishop
in his way from Rome, Radeuicus li. 3. ca. 9.10.
(whether as a contemner of the Emperors edict, or upon any other cause, I know
not) was taken prisoner, and committed to ward.

Now has the Pope found an occasion by the taking of this Bishop, to fulminate
his long-conceiued displeasure against the Emperor, and by a proud Embassy,
seems only to be agreeued, that the Bishop is not delivered from Captivity;
but withal interlaceth, both in his letters, as also in the speeches of his
legate, many blundering Items; which did abundantly insinuate in what manner he
deemed the Emperor to be obliged unto him.

For by his letters he wished him to re-consider, how from him he had received
the confirmation of the Imperial crown; and yet did his Holiness nothing
repent it, had the favors which he had bestowed upon him, been far more
beneficial.

Upon the reading of which letters, the nobility falling into discontent; one
of the Legates rose up, and resolutely took upon him to broach: That the Roman
Empire was transferred from the Grecians to the Almans, not to be called
Emperor, but King of the Teutonicks, until he were confirmed by the Apostolic
sea: Before consecration he was a King, after an Emperor: Whence then has he
his Empire, if not of the Pope? By the election of the nobility he has the
name of a king, by consecration of the Pope, the style of an Emperor, and
Caesar Augustus, Ergo per Papam imperat. Search Antiquity: Zachary inobled
Charles and gave him the surname of Great, that he might be Emperor: and
ordained that ever after the Teutonic King should be Emperor, and Champion of
the Apostolic Sea: That Apulia, by him should be pacified, and restored to
the Church, being in truth holden of S. Peter, and not of the Empire.

Rome is the seat of the Pope, Aquis in Arden is the Emperors: Whatsoever the
Emperor possesses, he holds it wholly of the Pope. As Zachary transferred
the Empire from the Greeks to the Teutonics: So may the Pope retransfer it from
the Almans to the Grecians. Behold, it is in his power to give it to whom he
pleases, being only constituted of God over Kingdoms and people; to
destroy, to pull down, to build and to plant. In conclusion, he terms the
Germans cowards, for that they could neither expulse Roger out of Italy,
Radeuicus vbi supra.
nor would at any time bring the Danes and Frislanders to subjection. Upon the
hearing of these scandalous exorbitations, both the Emperor conceived a just
displeasure, and the whole nobility so stormed thereat, that Otto of
Wittelspach drawing the sword, which he accustomed to bear before the Emperor,
had shethed it in the body of the Legate, had not the Emperor thrust between
them. Of these abuses the Emperor or ever after made use, pretending that the
cause of his so and so doing, took original from these saucy and malepert
speeches of the Popish ministers. And thereupon causing the Legates to be safe
conducted to their lodging, at break of day he commanded them to be packing;
with especial caution, that they should not rome hither and thither upon the
livings of the Bishops and Abbots: but that they should keep the high way
toward the City, without declining therefrom either to the right hand or the
left. The especial reason was, that according unto the accustomed dog-trick of
the Romanists, they should not disperse their conceived poison of discontent
over all the Churches and Parishes of the Kingdom; neither strip the Altars,
nor carry away the vtensils of Gods house, nor fliece the crosses.

And because that no man should imagine, that this intimation was inflicted
above desert, nor any commotion should thereupon arise, Caesar by the council
of the wise men of his Kingdom, sends his letters through the whole Empire,
showing the tenor of the cause. And thereunto adioyneth his most passionate
complaints upon the diminution of the honor of the Empire: with a declaration,
That by the election of the Princes, under God only, the Empire had deuolued
to him and his successors. Against which, if any man presumed to affirm that
the Emperor ought to hold of the Pope in fee, he was to suffer punishment, as
a person guilty of an untruth, and one that maintained an opinion contrary to
the divine institution, and the doctrine of Saint Peter.

The Legates ariue at Rome, where in most calumnious manner aggravating their
wrongs and injuries, in the presence of Hadrian, by adding flame to fire, they
so incense his holiness already transported with fury and revenge, but to
think that Frederick had done, what his ancestors durst not have dreamed of
(for of which of the Roman Emperors is it read of, that ever interdicted the
Romanists Germany.) That forthwith he addresseth his minitory letters unto
Caesar: wherein most bitterly and papally he expostulateth with his Majesty
of these and all fore-passed greeuances. The transcript whereof because they
are worth the reading and animaduersion, for the benefit of the Reader I will
here insert.

Adrian Bishop, servant unto the servants of God, sends greeting and
apostolical benediction unto Frederick Emperor of Romans. Nauel fo. 761.
Genesis 39.
As the Divine Law assures long life unto those, that render due obedience
unto their parents: So, unto him that disobeyeth his father or mother, it
inflicteth the sentence of death, and damnation. The voice of verity does
teach us, that every soul that exalts it self, shall be humbled. Whereupon
(beloved son in the Lord) according unto your wisdom, we are not a little
amazed, that you show not that measure of reverence toward Saint Peter, and
the Roman Church, as you are bound to do. In your letters dated to our
Holiness, you insert your style before Ours. Wherein, you incur the scandal
of presumption, I will not say, of Arrogancy. As concerning your fealty
auowed and sworn to Saint Peter and us, how is it kept, when you require
Homage, exact fealty, and hold the holy hands of those between yours, who are
duly dedicated to God, being his most glorious children, viz. the Bishops,
showing your self manifestly rebellious unto us, in denying our Cardinals
(directed unto you from our side) not only entrance into the Churches, but
also into the Cities of your Kingdom? Repent, repent therefore we advise you,
least that in seeking to deserve a Crown and coronation, at our hands, in
affecting things vngranted, you lose not what is already granted. We tender
your nobleness.

What inference of humility or apostolical lenity appears (I beseech you)
in these letters? nay, rather may not a good Christian without offense term
such a pride to be truly Luciferian, that takes so great a scorn to have the
papal style placed behind the Imperial, as if other Emperors in their
letters to His Holiness, had not before times done the like? See 97. did. c.
victor. and 63. distinct. c. tibi.

After the receite of these blunt and proud-papall mandats, the Emperor
according to his excellent sufficiency in Christian sapience, requiteth him;
and as the proverb is, driving out one nail with another, he pays his
holiness home in this manner.

Frederick by the grace of God Emperor of Romans always Augustus, Nau. fo.
792.
unto Adrian Bishop of the Catholic congregation. Whatsoever Jesus began to
do and to teach, in all things ought we that to follow. The Law of Justice
distributeth unto every man his own. We derogate not from our parents, as
long as in this Kingdom we vouchsafe them due Honor, from whom, viz. our
progenitors, we have received the dignity and Crown of the Kingdom. I pray
you in the time of Constantine was Siluester known to have any interest in the
Regalties? By his Piety, the Church obtained liberty and peace: and what ever
iura regalia your Papacy can claim, they accrewed unto you by the bounty of
Princes. Turn over the Cronicles, and if you please not to believe what I
write, there shall you find as much as we affirm. What should then let us,
that we should not exact homage and oaths of allegiance from them, which are
Gods by adoption, yet hold of us in regaltie: sithence that He, who was ours
and your Master (taking nothing from the King, but distributing all his goods
indifferently amongst all persons; paying tribute to Caesar for himself and
Peter, and leaving the example behind him for you to follow) has warranted
the president, by saying; Learn you of me, for I am meek and humble of heart.
Wherefore, let them either resign their regalties, viz. their temporalities;
or in the name of God, if they shall judge them profitable, let them give unto
God the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar, what belongs to Caesar. The
reason wherefore we interdicted your Cardinals, the Churches, and forbad them
our Cities, was because we find them not Preachers, but robbers: not
peacemakers but money masters: not conuerters of the people, but heapers of
insatiable treasure. Yet, when we shall find them, such as the Church
ordains them; messengers of peace, lights to their Country, and impartial
assistants to the cause of the Humble, then will we not defer to relieve them
with competent stipends, and necessary provisions: mean time you wrong
humility, the Princess of virtues, and mightily scandalize your
submissiuenesse, by terrifying the consciences of secular persons, with
positions wholly impertinent to religion. Let your fatherhood therefore take
heed, lest while you motion points of such nature (whereof we make light
account) that you offend not those, who would otherwise even in have open their
ears as willingly unto the words of your mouth, as unto a presage of a joyful
accident. These things we can not but answer, sithence so detestable a beast
of pride has crept into S. Peter's Chair. Fare you well always, and God at
all times make you careful for the peace of the Church.

What humane spirit can scandalize these the Emperors letters? What scruple of
equity, of piety, or uprightness can any man say is wanting in them? Who can
justify, that he wrote otherwise then became a true and a Christian Emperor?
He but retorted the Bishops pride; he maintained but the honor of the Empire;
he sought but reason, and that was, Christian humility and modesty in Christian
Churchmen; which in those times, as the world then complained, was not to be
found in that sort of people.

What followed? Peace I warrant you: nothing less. For the Pope not contented
that by letters he had bandied with the Emperor, but writing unto all the
Archbishops and Bishops of Germany, he punctually notes down the carriage of
the cause, The Epistle is to be seen in Radeuicus li. 3. c. 15.
and aggreuateth the indignity of the fact: Admonishing them, that sithence the
action concerned the whole body of the Church (for they will make us believe
that without their intrusions all Christendom must perish) that they should
corroborate themselves, as a wall of brass to sustain the declining estate of
the house of God. And that they should not only find means to reduce the
Emperor into the right way, but also take open and condign satisfaction upon
Rainold the Emperors Chancellor, and Otto Earl of Wittelspach, who forsooth had
belched out infinite blasphemies against the Apostolic Legates and the Church of
Rome: That as the inciuilitie of their speech had offended the ears of many,
Notable policy cunning and hypocrisy.
so their penances might be an example to restore as many again into the
right path of obedience.

But for that (as certain of the writers of that age do testify) the then
Bishops were not so eagerly addicted to maintain the Popes usurpations, Jacob.
Spigelius in annotat. ad Ligurinum Gunthori. li. 6. fol. 143.
as many of them are now, they conuocated a Council, and thus wrote back unto
his fatherhood: That they were not only wonderfully agreeued at these abuses;
Epist. extat li. 3. ca. 16. in Radeuicus. Auent. li. 6. Annal. Boior. so. 636.
but also Arnold of Mogunce and Euerard of Saltzburge by their private letters
admonished all Roman Priests, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops and Massemungers,
to give over their sauciness, their pride, their avarice, their perfidie, and
all other enormities, by which they robbed the poor, and disturbed the peace
of the Empire. Finally they humbly besought them, that they would put their
helping hands to work Adrian to observe peace: undertaking for the Emperor
that he should do nothing, but what stood with religion, reason and equity.

Sure these were bitter pills for Hadrians stomach: But what remedy? Popes, as
they are cursefull, so are they politic, and being well skild in
speculation, they know by the Planets, when it is high time to hold a candle
before the Devil. He that now reigns is not Henry the fourth, but Frederick
the first: who is now preparing for Italy; and having sent his honorable
Ambassadors, Rainold his Chauncellor and Otto of Wittelsbach, before to
assemble a convocation of the Princes and Bishops of Italy, prepares his way
in potent and Princelike manner, and means himself in short time to sit in
person in Council amongst them.

Now is it time to fly unto the fox his case; a necromantique spell has
informed us, that the Lions skin will nothing prevail us: Nau. Genesis 39.
Auenti. loco prae allegato. Rade. li. 3. cap. 17.
Humble letters are dispatched toward Augusta to lenifie the Emperors
displeasure; and Henry Duke of Saxony and Bauaria with Otho the Frison; made
intercessors to reconciliation.

No long time after, Hadrian betakes himself again to his perspectiue, where
observing that the Cities of Italy ( Crema being hardly besieged by Frederick)
had interprised a conspiracy to re-uindicate their liberty, the Pope having
utterly forgotten his yesterdaies reconciliation, traitorously adhereth to the
faction and animateth the conspiracy upon these conditions. First That neither
party should accept of peace without the good leave of the other. Secondly,
That if the Bishop chanced to die, that none but one of the same faction,
shoald be created in his stead.

And then to give the better countenance to the rebellion, Nau. Genesis 39. ex
Joh. Cremonensi.
for an infinite Mass of money he is corrupted to accurse his Majesty. So says
mine Author; but in these days, I am of opinion, that malice is as powerful
in a Papists breast as corruption in the Papal Court.

But our best and great God, who by the mouth of his servant David, seems
punctually to cry out against these hired Excommunications of Popes: They
curse, and thou blessest: Let those that rise against me be confounded, but thy
servant shall rejoice: This good God, I say, inuerted this execrable maledict
upon the Popes own head, and miraculously confounded the man, to the terror of
all posterity. For being at Anagnia, the place where he had excommunicated
Frederick, it chanced that as he walked abroad amongst his familiars to take
the air, as he was drinking at a certain fountain, a fly flying into his
throat, stuck so fast therein, that no physical experiment could give him
ease; and so he died miserably choked.

Would it not amase any humane flesh, to see so huge a giant in the midst of
his armed and rebellious battalions, but even now scorning the Emperor and all
his forces, presently to lie dead with the stroke of a fly? Or is there any
Priest amongst them so irreligious, that dare but imagine, that this stroke
proceeded from casualty, and not from the finger of God, considering that that
throat which had but now belched out so iniust an execration against a most
godly and innocent Emperor, was also appointed the instrument to confound his
spirits? Yea this vnshamed rabble, being nothing terrified with so miraculous a
president, could by no means be diuerted from their intended conspiracy. For
perceiving that they could not have their wills upon his Majesty by force,
being strong in soldiery, Lord of Italy, and in diverse ouerthrows putting the
Millanois to the worse; they made their recourse to villainy, and by treason
laid wait for his life.

To the execution whereof, by great rewards they cunningly corrupt a fellow of
a strong body under the habit of a fool or iester to go unto Landa, the place
where the Emperor then resided, and there upon opportunity to offer him violence.

The traitor wholly animated by their large promises, Radeuicus li. 4. ca. 40.
and 4. Guntherus in Ligucinoli 9. circa finem.
resolves upon the villainy, goes to Landa; enters the Camp, and by jests
and fooleries makes his access ever into the Emperors pauilion: His Tent at
that time was pitched upon the very bank of the river Abdua, so steep and
sliding, that if any thing fell thereinto, the swift course of the stream
would forth with carry it away with violence. Which the foole-villaine
observing to be a fit project for his intended treason, assaulteth the Emperor
(according to his custom going alone unto his prayers by day dawning) and by
struggling and tugging labors to carry him to the foresaid steep place. The
Emperor plaieth the man, so that both parties being entangled with the tackling
of the tents, fell to ground; by which time the Gentlemen of the chamber being
awaked, by the calling of the Emperor, run to succor, and taking the
villain, they threw him headlong into the same place of the river. This
stratagem being f^ustrated, they fall to a second, but will be seen in neither.

They suborne eight creatures of their own with plenty of crowns, to set
Landa on fire. One of them mistaking the night, and laying his trains, was
taken by the watch, with an other of his companions a counterfeit Monk, and
both hanged.

Being also deceived in the execution of this Gunpowder plot, they fall to a
third; and send forth a certain Mountebank, resolute to death, accompanied
with some such fellows as himself, to set to sale in the Emperors Camp
poisoned rings, bridels and spurs, so deadly inuenomed, that if the Emperor
had touched any of them, he had surely perished. But his Majesty being
forewarned, causes this Merchant to be watched and apprehended: Commands
him to be examined, but finding that he scorned both questions and torments,
without more a-doe he sends him to the gallows.

Hadrian (as we told you) being choakt with a Fly, Ab. vrsperg. Plat. in vita
Alex. Nauc. Genesis 39. Rad. li. 4. ca. 54.
the Cardinals begin to wrangle about the choice of a successor. For two and
twenty, being the Emperors adversaries, would have chosen Roland of Siena,
one of those Cardinals; whom a little before Hadrian had sent Legate unto
Frederick, and Frederick had banished Germany: But nine others adhearing to
the Emperor, by the suffrages of the Prefect of the City, and the people,
created Octauianus a Roman borne, Priest and Cardinal of Saint Clements, and
styled him Victor.

But these rash elections being likely to foster infinite dissensions, It was
agreed between the Electors of both parties; that neither of the Elected
should be confirmed, before it was agreed upon at all hands who should be the
Man, and the contention quite silenced.

But the Rolanders being the mayor party, falsifying their oaths, proclaimed
the election of Roland, and new christened him Alexander the third. From hence
arose a mighty Schism. Victor remains at Rome, Alexander flies unto William
King of Sicil, and there the twelfth day after his election, is confirmed Pope.
And to prevent, Behold the Imperial jurisdiction solicited. Radeu. li. 4. cap.
58.
that this dissension should not draw with it the final destruction of the
Church of Rome, by his legates, he entreats the Emperor Frederick, that by
interposition of his authority, he would vouchsafe to put end to the Schism.
The doubtful issue of a new Schism much troubled Frederick; wherefore,
finding that both the Elettos, being orderly consecrated, he could not lawfully
determine the strife, without the authority of a Council; after the examples
of Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian and other Emperors: (knowing that the
summoning thereof appertained unto him) he nominateth the day of the Assembly
to be held at Papia; and thither he warns both the Bishops to appear,
promising also to be there in person to take cognizance of eithers greeuances.

After proclamation whereof, Alexander goes to Anagnia, General councels
ominous to Popes.
whereat the Emperor being angry for his contempt, despatcheth his letters
unto him by Daniel and Herman, Bishops of Prage and Verdim, citing him by the
name of Bishop, and not of Pope, to appear at the Council.

Alexander rejects Caesar's Ambassadors most contumeliously, C. Patet. and
canemo 9. q. 3. Item 17. q. 4. ca. Si quis suadente in extremo. Item did. 40.
c. si papa. Naucl. genesis 39.
and in very arrogant terms tells them plainly, That the Roman Bishop was
to be judged by no mortal creature. They doing no good upon Alexander, retire
toward Octauianus, him they salute as Pope, and accompany to Papia. There the
Council being assembled, and the cause upon sufficient witness through all
circumstances iudicially examined, Victor is declared Pope, and so acknowledged
by all the German Bishops by the commandment of Caesar.

At which pretended injury Alexander being moved, he accurseth Frederick and
Victor: and forthwith dateth his letters of justification unto all Christians
Kings and Potentates; That what He did, was done with equity and good reason.
But at his return into the City, finding many new vpstart adversaries, openly
opposing against him, he went to Tarracine: And there going on shipbord,
purposely there laid for him by William of Sicil, he retired into France:
where by the good leave of Philip, assembling a Conuenticle in Claremount, in
all have he proclaims his curse against the Emperor and the Antipope.

His Majesty, albeit he foresaw the mischiefs likely to arise upon this
dissension; notwithstanding he continues his siege against Millan, until
enforced by famine and wants, the inhabitants voluntarily surrendered the City at
discretion, This dispatched, he sent his Ambassadors to the French King, to
desire that he would call a Council at Didion: Whether if he would bring his
Pope, then would his Majesty also promise to be there, and with him, to bring
his Pope also. What answer these Ambassadors received, Nauc. genesis 39.
it is not truly known: but so much is recorded to memory, that the Earl of
Blois gave the Emperor his faith, that the King his master would not fail to
be there. Whereupon, at the prefixed day the Emperor with Victor kept promise,
and pitched his tents near Didion: Thither came also Henry the second, and
William kings of England and Scotland.

But Alexander could not only not be persuaded to come; under pretense, that
the assembly was congregated by the Emperor, and not by him: but he also so
wrought with Philip, that he came unto the place indeed, but before the
Emperor; where washing his hands in the river hard by, forthwith by the voice
of an Herald he summoned his Majesty (as if herein he had satisfied his oath)
and so departed. Wherewith the Emperor, the Kings, and the other Princes being
much agreeued, wished Victor to return to his Popedom, and they retired every
man to his own home.

Naucl. vbi supra.
Victor arrived at Lucca in Hetruria, fell sick, and died: in whose place
succeeded Guido Bishop of Cremona, called Paschal the third. And unto him at
Goslaria the Emperor, and all the Princes and Bishops of Germany did their
reverence.

Alexander who was yet in France, to keep Rome in obedience, constituted John
the Cardinal his Vicar general, and regranted liberty to the Romans to choose
their own Consuls; provided that they were such as were favorites of his
faction. Then departs he from France into Sicil, forthwith returns to
Rome, and is willingly received of the Romans, and Guido rejected. Whereupon
the cities of Italy, encouraged by the coming of Alexander to hope after
liberty, contrary to their oaths sworn before unto the Emperor, they
reedified Millan, but lately razed and subverted by Caesar. Then at the
instigation of Alexander, they enter into actual rebellion; they invade the
Emperors ministers and fauorits, Nauc. genesis 40. Vrspergens.
some of whom they expel, and some they murder. Then using his further
council and assistance, they proceed to the building of a new City, called
Alexandria, in honor of Alexander and contempt of Frederick, culling out of
every City, fifteen thousand men for inhabitation; unto whom they divide the
territory, and assign portions whereupon to build their dwellings.

Upon intelligence of these rebellious combinations, Caesar leuieth an army,
and prepares for Italy: where enforcing certain of the rebels to
composition, he besieges Alexandria; but this siege proved nothing honorable:
for Alexandria being continually relieved from the interessed cities, defended
it self valiantly. And more then that, Henry Leo Duke of Bauaria and Saxony,
corrupted with money contrary to all imagination of the Emperor, neither
regarding the bond of kindred, nor the memory of fore-passed kindnesses, most
traitorously departed with his forces: so that Frederick finding himself too
weak to withstand the Italian rebels, dispersed his host, and with great
difficulty in the habit of an Hostler fled into Burgundy by the way of Mount
Jupiter. But Leo escaped not scot-free: for the Emperor having now recovered
Germany, and re-inforcing his army, limiteth the Duke a day; appeacheth him
of treason; and overthrowing his forces, depriueth him of his Lordships and
Dukedom.

Nau genesis 40. Abbas vrspergensis.
Some Princes favoring Henry, gave out, that the Emperor could not condemn
him, unless the sentence had been given within his own dominions. Which
Frederick, who before times had shown himself a severe censurer in inflicting
exemplary punishment against rebels and outlawes, little esteemed; but
bestowed the Duchy of Noricum upon Otto of Wittelspach, that of Saxony upon
Bernard Anhaldin, and the residue, upon other of his servants. Who being
re-enforced by the assistance of their friends within the space of one month,
expulsed Leo almost out of all his liuelyhoods; which of any subject of the
Empire, were the greatest and goodliest; insomuch that nothing was left him,
save only the Duchy of Brunswicke: An excellent president for gentlemen to
look unto, and to learn; that the authority of sovereignty lawfully warranted
by Gods own mouth, is not rashly to be vilified, but to be reverenced with
fidelity, obedience, and honor, and that for conscience sake.

And because I make no question, but that the review of this example, may be a
motive to bring many a rash spirit into the due consideration of authority, I
will be bold here to relate certain other exemplary punishments inflicted by
this Emperor upon others of his rebellious subjects.

Tritemius in Cronico Hiersaug. sub abbate volmaro. so. 175. Nau. ge. 39. fol.
765.
Herman Earl Palatin of the Rhene, and his accomplices, for that in his Italian
absence, he had violated the public peace, by raising arms against Arnold
Archbishop of Mogunce, he compelled publicly for satisfaction to lead a dog
upon the birth day of the Lord of Worms.

Gualfag Earl of Angleria, and Prince of Millan, for that after the
promulgation of the Curse by the Pope he sided with Alexander, and in his
quarrel committed many insolences in the City, to the derogation of the honor
of the Empire; having taken him, three days he tied him as a dog under his
table; whipped him with scurges, and at last in chains sent him into Germany.
These were the punishments of those days; the like whereof if transgressors in
like cases should undergo in these times, there were no doubt, but to find
greater tranquillity, and better obedience to the laws through out the Empire.
But to our pupose.

Frederick having thus abated the greatness of Henry, levied a new army in
Germany, Platin. in vitae Alex. Nau. genesis 41. Blondus and alij.
and again marches toward Italy.

Variable I know, is the opinion of writers about the gests done in Italy in
this journey.

Some report that he fought in such great danger against the Millanois, that
his horse being slain, himself had almost miscarried: and that upon the
compulsatory threats of the Bishops, he was fain to treat a peace with the
Church. Others write, Io. Cremonensis. Barnus Author vitae Frederici Germanice
scriptae.
that by the persuasion of the Bishop of Brixia, he went into the Holy Land,
and that there, after the atchiuement of many famous victories, he was
betrayed by Alexander to the Sultan, yet at length again restored to liberty by
the Popes liberality.

Albeit I know that these reports are heaued at by many: notwithstanding
sithence they are vouched with the authority of such authors, whose diligence
in reporting the life of so worthy an Emperor, may deservedly be tolerated:
I am only disposed to relate them as I find them, especially, being such as
in likelihood held correspondencie, with the papal disposition against
Emperors, not altogether impertinent to our Argument: for belief, I leave it
to every man's judgment. Then thus at large.

Frederick being arrived at Brixia, Hartmannus Bishop of the place, and the
Emperors Secretary, by the secret instructions of the Pope, deals with his
Majesty rather to turn these arms against Turks and Indels, Did not the
Bishops of England so by Henry the fifth.
then against the most Holy father and the Christian people. The Holy land
(quoth he) which your Grandfather Conrade to his infinite expense recovered
from the Turks, is now reconquered by the Egyptian Sultan. I beseech your
Majesty even in the name and behalf of the public welfare, that unto the
glorious recovery of these Kingdoms, you would divert your whole cogitations.
This if you please to entertain, you may assure your self, that the French
King will nobly assist you to expel this Sacracen. This honest-seeming
oration (says the History) the Emperor well liked, and transporteth into
Turkey this army, first levied against the Pope, and the Italian rebels.
Taking his journey by Hungary, he comes to Constantinople, transporteth his
army, and takes many cities from the Sultan. He inuadeth the lesser Armenia,
and coming to Jerusalem, he wins the City, and casts out the Pagans.
But whilst the world goes thus prosperously forward in the East, Pope
Alexander, that most wicked Traitor, imagining it would not be so with him and
his accomplices, if his Majesty should return so powrefull into Italy,
resolves to seek his destruction by villainy. He causes an excellent Painter
to draw the protraiture of Frederick, and sends it to the Sultan, with this
Item; That if he desired to live in peace, There was the Emperors counterfeit;
make means to destroy him. The Sultan having received the Breue, and the
Picture, meditateth how he might gratify the Bishop, pleasure himself, and be
revenged on his enemy. Opportunity in the Camp, or in conflict is seldom, or
never offered. But as Caesar led back his troops securely from the conquest of
Jerusalem, he deuideth them into Companies, for the better commodiousnesse in
their retreat to provide them of necessaries. In Armenia, what by the heat of
the sun, and the tediousnes of the journey (imagining that no danger could
proceed from those solitary woods) with a few horsemen, and his Chaplin he
departs from the Army. Being a little removed, and the horsemen commanded to
depart, he prepares to put off his garments, to wash himself in the river, to
assuage the heat of his body. There with his Chaplin he is taken, and through
the woods brought prisoner to the Sultan. The horsemen in vain expect the
return of their Master, yet diligently scourd up and down the country, both
that and next day to hear what news. The report goes that he is drowned.
Great is the grief of the Camp, and for a months space they drag for him in
the river. But not finding him, they chose new Captains and depart.

The Emperor being brought before the Sultan, faineth that he is his
Chamberlain. The Sultan by the protracture knows him to be the Emperor, and
commands the picture to be showed, and the Popes letters to be read. Whereat
his Majesty being astonished, and perceiving that there was no further time of
denial, confesses the truth, and asks honorable usage. The Sultan after many
discourses with his Majesty, incloseth him and his Chaplin in prison, and
according to his calling, entreats him accordingly. At three months end,
they inter-parly again: when the Sultan perceiving by conference, that
Frederick was an upright man, in whom no virtue requisite in so great a
personage was wanting; admiring his wisdom, his carriage his faith and
integrity; he fell into imagination with himself, that it would be much for
his honor and glory to set at liberty so great and so magnificent a Monarch.
Whereupon he sends for the Emperor, and proposes his conditional liberty,
viz. That he should give him hostages, and pay for his ransom three hundred
thousand sicles. The Emperor answers, that he is able to do neither; first,
that he had no man there to be his pledge, and secondly, that his treasure
being exhausted by this long war, he could not pay so excessive a mass of
money. The Sultan, well knowing that he spoke nothing but truth, delivered him
on condition; That he should ever during his life keep firm peace: pay one
hundredth thousand ducats, and leave his Chaplin behind him until the money
were paid. The covenants are drawn: the Emperor prepares for his journey:
wills his Chaplin to be of good courage: and promises him never to give
over, until the money were procured, and himself safe returned into Germany.
The Sultan bountifully honoreth the Emperor; provides for his journey, and
conducteth him to Brixia by the service of 34. horse, and certain companies of
foot.

The Princes understanding of the Emperors return, in frequent assemblies
congratulate his safety. Caesar requiteth his conuoy with an honorable larges,
and adioyeth some troops unto them to safe conduct them to the frontiers of
the Empire. Then proclaims he a Diet at Norimberg, and before all the Princes
of the Empire he unfolds the treason of Alexander; reads the letter; and
declares in what manner he was taken, and upon what conditions delivered. The
Nobility promise to assist him, so that he should keep his day of payment
with the Sultan; Haec subsequentia Naucl. genesis 40. narrat. vt et alij
pontisicij, praecedentibus tamen omissis.
and in anger advow, that they will never forsake him, until they see him
revenged on the Traitor Alexander. An Army is enrolled in Italy, no man
repining; and Rome approached. Thither he sends his Ambassadors, and
requires of the Romans (concealing yet a while his private wrongs) that upon
hearing of either Bishops cause, they would restore concord to the Church, by
determining the right of the Papacy to one of the Elected. If thus they would
do, he promised to give them peace, as also to restore, what in right they
could challenge.

The Pope perceauing, that by these good courses, the Emperor was become Lord
of his desires; by night he flies to Caietta, afterward to Beneuent, and
lastly, in the habit of his Cook to Venice. Where, after he had lien hid
certain months in a Monastery, he is at length made known, and in
Senatorial habit by the commandment of Duke Sebastian, honorably received,
and in his Pontificalibus accompanied to the temple of Saint Mark.

Frederick being given to understand of this reception, stormeth at the
Venetians for receiving their common adversary. He desires them to send unto
him, the destroyer of the Common wealth. The Venetians deny. Frederick sends
his Son with an Armada to demand the man; but with prohibition at any hand to
fight, before himself was come in person. Otho a Prince young, frolic and
aduenturous, desirous of honor and glory, copeth with his enemies, is taken
and made prisoner. Upon whose captivity, Alexander mounted upon the wings of
this prosperous success, utterly denies to treat with Caesar, unless he
would suppliantly come to Venice, and there accept the already written
conditions of peace. Wherewith Caesar being moved not upon any base conceit,
or despair of victory, but partly through his affectionate love toward his
child, but more for desire to settle a firm peace in Europe, assented, and
impawned his Honor to come upon the day prescribed.

Where according to promise, appearing, and proceeding to capittulation,
Alexander sent him word, That he would not absolve him from the censure of
Excommunication until he come into the Temple of S. Mark. Naucl. generat.
allegata.


Here is He now arrived, accoutred in humble and religious habiliment: The Pope,
before a multitude of people, most papally commands him to lie agroofe on his
belly, and suppliantly to ask forgiveness. The Emperor, German-like, simply
suspecting, that a Bishop, who ought to have been the mirour of modesty, would
have abused him with no gross or dishonorable behauior, obeieth the Pope
word, and so groueleth at his feet. At the sight whereof: He not only
insulteth, but that worse is; most tyrannically he treads upon his prostrated
neck, and then blasphemously yelleth forth this misapplied place of Scripture.
Thou shall tread upon the Aspe and the Bosiliskc, and thou shall bruise down
the Lion and the Dragon.

Did ever History record of so savage a demeanor? Surely some barbarous
soldiers, who in battle have taken Princes prisoners, have entreated them
more inhumanely, then stood with their estates: Sapores the Persian used to set
his foot upon the neck of Valerianus the captiuated Emperor, as he mounted his
Horse: The Tartarian Tamerlan (the correlatiue tyranny to this of the Popes)
enclosing Baiazeth Emperor of Turks in an iron Cage, carried him so
dishonored through all his iournies. But what is this to a Pope? By how much
the disproportion holds betwixt a soldier and a Churchman, between a
Christian and an Ethnique, by so much is the immatuity of the Pope the more
damnable. They being Barbarians, might plead some probability of excuse, in
that they misused but their enemies, and those by the law of Nations captiuated
for seruility: But the Pope is a Christian, seruus seruorum, a peacemaker, and
a Priest; whose office is only to pray and to preach: Wherefore I can not blame
Bellarmine, if he could make us believe; that this History may be doubted of,
when I shall relate unto you in the word of truth; That this mirror of
Christian Humility) Cyclopica immanitate, first, with a Gyantlike rudeness
says mine Author) most ignominiously with his bestiall feet presumed to touch
(nay to tread) upon the sacred neck of a mighty Emperor, then (as I said) in
peaceable manner lying agroofe, and humbly desiring absolution of an unjust
Excommunication.

But why do I against the Precepts of history, thus lash out, by aggreuating of
so barbarous a cruelty, to move the mind of my Reader to compassion, sithence
I can never do it, for that the president in it self goes far beyond any
delineation that humane wit can possibly polish it withal? Vox faucibus
haeret, etc.

Well, Caesar knowing himself, and recalling his generous spirits; to show
that he was not a little moved at the indignity, openly calls unto the Pope;
saying, Non tibi, sed Petro: meaning that he became so devout a suppliant, not
to this Tyrant, but his Apostolic Calling. But the tyrannical Pope, once
again bowing down his reverend neck with his beare-like paws; reclaimeth,
Et Mihi and Petro.

The good Emperor, that had never offended any man, no nor the Pope himself,
but his pride; albeit he could not but agrieue at this injurious and base
usage, yet in regard of the common quiet (much preferred before his own
dignity) held his peace: And after his absolution, thus renewed his grace with
the Bishop.

Henricus VI.
He reigned in the year 1191. about the second year of Richard the first.

Platina in the life of Celestin the third.
THe Romanists thinking it no safe policy, too much at one instant to irritate
the reuengefull spirits of secular Princes, smothered a while their domineering
humors, until the days of Celestine the third. Who although he had bestowed
upon Henry for wife, Constance the Nun, the daughter of Roger the fourth King
of Sicil, taken forth from the Monastery of Panormo, upon condition, that
Tancred the base Son of Roger now deposed, (whom Clement the third had before
to no purpose labored also to displant) should hold both kingdoms in fee of the
Church: Notwithstanding some there are, who write, Bergomensis in supplemento
and eum sequens Nau. genesis 40.
that because this Henry punished somewhat severely not only the Apulian and
Sicilian Laickes, for entering into actual rebellion against him, but also
proceeded with like rigor against the Clerks and Bishops, being guilty of the
same conspiracy; from some pulling their skins over their ears, from other
their eyes; impaling some upon stakes, and incircling some of their heads with
a flaming Garland; he escaped not Celestines curse, who by this time being
weary of peace, intended nothing else but the dispossession of Henry, from the
Crown of both Sicils.

Philip the Sweuian.
He reigned in the year of Christ 1199. about the last year of Richard the
first.

HOweuer the world fared in this age, certain it is, that presently after the
death of Henry, Nauel. genesis 40. Cuspinian in vita Henrici and Philippi.
the rage of the Bishop grew fiery hot against his successor. For Henry now
lying upon his death bed, had instituted Innocent the 3 (the successor of
Celestine) guardian to his young infant, four years of age, yet chosen to the
succession of the Empire by the Suffrage of the Princes; To him he also
recommended his wife Constance and ordained his own brother Philip Duke of
Hetruria and Sweuia (during the minority of the child) to be his Lieutenant,
through the whole Empire and the Kingdom of Sicil. But the Bishop falsifying
his faith of Guardianship, turns traitor, and by setting al Germany in
combustion, sideth with the House of Sweuia.

For as Philip posting toward his sick brother, by the way about Mount Flasco,
not far from Viterbium, understood that his brother was departed, tranported
with a desire of Sovereignty, he hastneth as fast to Haganoa, the place of the
Assembly of the Princes, and there works as many as he can, to favor his
proceedings.

Nocentius, who in show deadly hated the Sweuians as persecutors of the Church,
but in truth sorely thirsting after the real possession of Sicil, at first (to
give Philip to understand, that without his Holiness acted a part in all
Princely policies, it were folly to undertake great matters) he excepteth
against him by an Excommunication, which stood on Record filed against him, in
the days of Celestine. Secondly to show himself a displeased Father, he
sends the Bishop of Sutrium unto him, to demand at his hand certain
Hostages, whose eyes not long ago his brother Henry had caused to be put out.
Thirdly, failing, against imagination of his will; for that Philip by
confessing and repenting of his fault, had procured absolution from the Legate,
and remitted the Hostages: In odium Philippi he shows the blind pledges to
the people, and depriving the Bishop of Sutrium, for that without commission
he had absolved Philip, he confineth him into one of the Islands: And finally,
now to perfect his proiects, he recommendeth unto the favors of the Electors
Berthold Duke of Zazingia, a Prince strong and valiant, and whom he knew full
well to be a deadly enemy to the Sweuians, because he had before times been
molested by the wars of Conrade, the brother of Philip. The letters of his
election written at large, are yet to be seen. C. venerabilem. de Electi
potestate.

But Berthold, being a wise and an Honorable Prince, knowing himself far
inferior to Philip, and that he had been already nominated for Emperor by the
general good-liking of the Sweuians, Saxons, the Bauarians, the Bohemians and
the Princes of the Rhene, so affected the favor of his lawful king, that in
assurance of obedience, he gave him for pledges his own Nephews Crinen and
Berthold Earls of Vrach, together with his personal oath of Allegiance.
Whereat Innocent took so great an indignation, that he could not refrain, but
belched out: That either the Bishop should dispossess Philip of his Crown, or
Philip dispossess the Bishop of his Miter. And forthwith he calls from
England Otho the son of Henry Leo, a proud and harebraind Prince, and by
sending him the Imperial Diadem, he sets him up against Philip; And to
withdraw his subjects, he interdicteth him of all honor and authority.

Hereby arose a most pestiferous disunion in the state of Germany, but a mass
of advantages to the Pope and his Clergy. For as long as Philip and Otho by
their intestine wars distracted the Empire, there scant fell void any
Ecclesiastical dignity, yea almost scant no poor vicarage, but being made
litigious by the cunning of Rome, the dicesion of the incumbency was removed
into the Popes Court, and there peradventure compounded; but not without the
fleecing of both parties purses. This the Abbat of Vrsperg in the end of one of
his Orations does set down, for one of the tricks, whereby the Popedom is
accustomed to trouble Christendom, meane-while enriching their private
coffers. These be his words.

Rejoice (says he) our mother Rome: for cataracts of treasure are opened upon
earth, that rivers and masses of money in great abundance may flow into thy
bosom. Rejoice for the iniquity of the sons of men, for that rewards are
accumulated upon thee to reconcile mischiefs. Rejoice for thy Adiutresse,
Discord; for she is let loose from the bottomless pit, even to break thy
back with bags of silver. Now thou enioyest that, which thou have long
thirsted for: Sing a merry Song, for by the reciprocal malice of men, and not
by thy religous works, thou have got victory over the world. All men flock
unto thee, not for devotions sake, or in purity of conscience, but by rewards
to compound their contentions, and to redeem their trespasses.

And albeit that Odoacer King of Bohemia, Herman Lantgraue of Thuringe, the
Bishop of Argentine, and Adulph Archprelate of Colein, being terrified by the
papal curse, had sided with Otho, assisted with the forces of his Uncle
Richard, Naucl. genesis 41. Vrsperg. fo. 323.
King of England; yet being strong with his Hetrurians leauied in Italy, and
his Sweuians raised in Germany, he begins with Alsatia, next neighbor to
Sweuia, and wastes it: then falling upon the Thuringer, confederated with the
Bohemian, he inforceth him to submission, and routeth the Bohemian. This done,
through the reconciliation of the Colennois, at Confluence he treats a
league with the Dukes of Brabant and Lotharinge: with whom and his associates
descending to Aquisgran, with great solemnity he is there crowned by the
foresaid Colennois. Finally, meeting with Otho not far from Colen, he put
him to flight, and without his companions enforces him to fly again into
England.

When the Princes perceived these prosperous successes to attend Philip, being
now thoroughly wearied with these civil combustions; by a general consent,
they conclude to send an honorable Embassy to his Holiness; who upon
restitution of Philip into favor, should entreat his fatherhood to confirm
him in the Rights of the Empire.

He gives audience, and returns for answer; that unless Philip will give
unto Richard his brothers son (newly created Earl of Thuscanie) Spolet, and
Marchia Anconitana, with the daughter of Philip, he will never harken unto the
Emperors Ambassie. Behold here another trick of Popish discontent: By this
match, he only meant and hoped to inuest his Nephew in the perpetual
inheritance of these goodly Lordships.

Thus have these Holy fathers long since accustomed, under the habit of Saint
Peter, See Guicciardine.
to fish rather to enrich their Nephews, their kindred, and their Gossips,
then to be careful over the Church and the commonweal; yea, in these
respects they have often moved wars; so that the means, by which God has
ordained to reconcile families, and to corroborat peace; they have inuerted to
maintain factions, and to serve their own purposes.

After the Ambassadors had heard the proposed condition, altogether impertinent
to the business, whereabout they had taken so much pains; they took it as a
strange motion; That the daughter of a King, should be affianced to the base
Nephew of a Pope: Howbeit, not to offend his Holiness, they answered, that
they had no commission to treat of any such ouerture: but desire, that by some
people of his own, he would acquaint their Lord and Master with his Holiness
request.

Whereupon, with more heat, then good discretion, he adioyneth unto the
Ambassadors of Philip (now upon their return) Hugoline and Leo Cardinals of
Hostia, and Saint Crosses in Jerusalem. Who arriving at Augusta, were
honorably received, and highly feasted, but upon notice of the proud and
preposterous message of their Master (nothing ashamed to violate the
Constitutions of his Lord Peramount) the King and his Counsel secretly
laughing at the Legates discoursing upon matters, nothing tending to Peace and
Absolution; from Augusta the Court removed to Spiers and so to Northius. And
there after long debatement, the peace was ratified, and the Bishops Nephew
rejected; upon condition, that the daughter of Philip (whom the foole-Bishop
eagerly instanced) should be affianced to Otho; And that he living in private,
during the life of Philip, after his death, should succeed in the Empire.

Not long after this treaty Philip died: for leaving Saxony, and for
recreation sake retiring unto Babenberg in Sweuia, he was traitorously slain
in his Chamber, there solely remaining, after the opening of a vain, by Otho of
Wittelsback, Nephew unto him upon whom Frederick (as we told you before) had
bestowed Bauaria. The cause of his discontent arose, for that being a suter to
his daughter, in regard of some imputation of disloyalty, he had been
repulsed, and the Lady, by the Emperor, her fathers good liking, affianced to
Otho.

After this lamentable regicide, Otho by the general consent of the Nobility,
assembled at Francofurt, is saluted Emperor.

Otho the fourth.
OTho, Naucl. genesis 41. Vrsperg. in the life of Otho the 4.
by consent of the Princes being thus installed in the Imperial throne, sets
all things through Germany in good order; and then with a warlike Army
marching by the valley of Trent, he passes by Lombardie, and so comes to
Rome, to receive the Imperial diadem: where, by the Pope, the Clergy, and
the people he is heartely welcomed, and honorably received: And so much the
rather, the Pope studied to honor and gratify his Majesty, for that he had
heretofore always assisted his party, against Philip his predecessor.

But this extraordinary kindness was of no long continuance between these
new friends; but being soon ripe, soon vanished, and turned into hatred. For
upon the very day of the Coronation, an affray began between the Dutch and the
Romans, about the donatiues which the Emperors accustomed to bestow at this
time amongst the soldiers; so that (as report went) about one thousand and one
hundred men were slain, and as many wounded. Whereupon Otho being moved at so
great an indignity; complained unto the Romans for reparation of amends; which
they promised, but performed so slowly, that the Emperor began to enter into
suspicion, that the Pope himself became a fautor of the tumult; whereupon he
departed, toward Millan, and there laying aside his Imperial ensigns, he
infested Tuscanie, Mark Ancona, and Romandiola, vulgo, S. Peter's patrimony.
Moreover in warlike manner he invaded Apulia, subdued the Duchy of Capua, and
took from Frederick the second many other Cities pertaining to the kingdom of
Sicil, at that time mistrusting no such outrage.

Upon intelligence hereof Innocent admonishes Otho to restore the feodary
possessions of the Church, and to abstain from further violence. But Caesar
not only rejects his admonitions, but infesteth those possessions, with more
and more souldier-like depredations. Innocent flies to Excommunication,
depriueth him of his Imperial titles, and absolueth the Princes of their oath
of allegiance toward Otho. And that more is, prohibiteth under pain of
damnation, that no man serve, account, or call Otho Lord or Emperor. It is
reported, that he caused the Princes anew to swear unto Frederick King of
Sicil, being as yet an Infant; and him he made choice of to succeed in his
place.

Naucl. genesis
Whereupon Otho returned into Germany; where, albeit in the Assembly of
Noremberg, upon complaint of the Popish tyranny, and the cowardice of the
Princes, he had entered a strict bond of alliance with many; and had moreover
taken sharp revenge upon Herman Lantgraue of Thuringe by wasting his
territories, for that at the Popes commandment he had violated his faith: yet
at last being forsaken of his people, he was glad to retire into Saxony,
where the fourth day after his royal marriage at Northuis with the daughter of
Philip, he fell sick, and died.

Frederick the second.
He reigned 1212. About the thirteenth year of King JOHN.

FRederick the second, by the universal consent of all Writers, a Prince
worthy all attributes of honor, as well for his government in peace, as his
carriage in war; upon the deiection of Otho, at the commandment of Innocent
the third, took upon him the Imperial Crown at Aquisgran. And in the year
next following ( Otho departing at Perusium) he was crowned at Rome, and
honored with the name of Augustus, Cuspinian in vita Frederici. Pandulphus
Collomitius.
by Honorius the third. With him he brought many rich gifts into Italy, and
amongst the rest, the County of Funda; which with many notable donatiues he
bestowed upon the Church; And then setting Germany in order, he prepared
himself for the journey of Jerusalem, according to the custom of his
Ancestors: Who being deceived by their false pretexts of Religion, imagined
that they were not worthy to merit the Imperial Diademes, but by vows and
donatiues; First, forgetting that no Pope, but the Princes, and the people,
were interessed in the election of the Emperors: And secondly, not fore
seeing, that the Priests, who had too sharply felt the arms of the Princes to
their extreme loss, were not so careful to recover Jerusalem for the
Christian good, as they were provident to direct, or distract the forces of
stirring Potentates; That mean while they might live at pleasure, and provide
for their bellies. For the Princes being sequestered into the farthest parts of
the world (this pretext I confess, carried a great show of zeal and honesty)
who was left to hinder them, from making free use of their wits at home, and
that without restraint or contradiction.

Howeuer Frederick in the beginning carried himself bountiful and obedient
toward Honorius; notwithstanding, his virtues could neither safe conduct his
life against their subtilties, impieties and clandestine councels; neither his
bounty extenuate or lenifie their conceived malices against his person. For,
three most wicked Bishops successively succeeding one another, for almost
thirty years space, so hardly kept him to it, that his most barbarous
enemies, the Turks and Saracens, may be reported to have made fair and gentle
wars against this most warlike Emperor, in regard of those tricks and
tragedies, which the Romanists played him.

Pandulfus in vita Frederici. Vrsperg. and Alij.
First, Honorius immediately after the receipt of his Donatiues, without any
pretense of received displeasure, seditiously maintained and acquitted from
their oaths of allegiance the two Earls of Tuscanie, Richard and Thomas,
condemned of treason, and the Emperors public and dangerous enemies.
Secondly, that with more facility they might make use of his favor to purpose,
and usurp upon the Kingdoms of Sicil and Apulia, he branded the Emperor with
the censure of excommunication, and (as far as lay in his power) deprived him
of all Imperial sovereignty. After this, he provoked the Lombards to rebellion;
so that they repelled the Princes of Germany, approaching to a diet to be held
at Cremona by the Emperors direction: and had done more, had not God taken him
out of this world, to accompany his predecessors in the vale of death.

Gregory the ninth succeeds: He to seem nothing inferior to his
predecessor, even in the first step to his Papacy, raged worse then Honorius.
He accuses him, that according to his vow, undertaken in the time of Honorius,
to pass unto Jerusalem, he had not accomplished it within the prefixed time:
and therefore renewing the excommunication, he condemns him without
allowance of defense, vnsommoned and unheard; yea, he utterly denies either to
hear, or to admit unto the presence of his council, the honorable
Ambassadors of his Majesty, bringing honest and lawful reasons in excuse of
their Master; yea, petitioning to be admitted unto satisfaction, in case their
Lord had in any thing offended: But the Pope notwithstanding all offer of
submission, daily intimates his fulminations; confirms in their rebellions,
John King of Jerusalem, the Earls of Tuscany, the Emperors rebels, and the
Nobles of Lombardy; And forbids the Emperors servants to appear at the day
of the Assembly, proclaimed by the Emperor, to be held at Rauenna; And spoileth
the crossed soldiers, bound for the journey of Jerusalem, of all their
necessaries. The Emperor observing this passage, to lenifie his papal anger,
passes the sea, lays siege to Acon, and finisheth many glorious attempts to
the honor of Christendom and the Christian religion. Mean time, the Pope (O
the deep abyss of Popish impiety) takes his advantage upon the Emperors
absence, subdueth Apulia, prohibiteth the crossed companies to pass the seas,
and commits infinite such like masteries, not only unbeseeming a Christian
Bishop, but much more Christ his Vicar. For first, he slaieth those
Ambassadors, whom the Emperor had sent unto him to congratulate his good
success against the Sultan, and then to terrify those cities of Apulia, which
refused his yoke of subjection, he gives out public rumors, that the Emperor
was departed this world. He also makes means unto the Sultan (mean time to
work his will in Apulia) that he should not capitulate to surrender the Holy
la^d unto Caesar. Here behold the piety of this Holy father: Here behold his
study, and conversion of leuies of provisions taken up through christendom to
be employed against Gods enemies. This is his persecution of Infidels, this his
Croisado against Turks and Pagans, viz. To inuert christian arms against
christians, to forsake a christian Emperor warring in a foreign land against
the enemies of the Christian faith; and especially (I dare auow) for the safety
of Italy, as experience has since made manifest. For mine own part in the
behalf of the whole christian common weal, I can but condole for the general
captivity of Israel, but as for the Popes I say to them, as sometime mutata
regione Tasso prophetically said of the Greeks upon the very same Argument:
Tatine their guide, and except Tatine, none
Of all the Greeks went with the Christian Host:
O sin! O shame! O Greece acurst alone!
Did not this fatal war affront thy coast? O Rome.

Yet satest thou an idle looker on,
And glad attendedst which side won or lost;
Now if thou be a bondslaue vile become,
No wrong is that, but Gods most righteous doom.
But, as in another place the same Poet spoke of the Grecian Emperor, so the
German Monarch might at this time say of the Romish Prelate: And for I doubt
the Romish prelate sly,
Will use against me some of his wonted craft
To stay their passage, or divert awry
Elsewhere his promised forces, etc.
Necessity will enforce me to return; And so he did, Cuspinian in the life of
Frederick.
toward Italy. Where, albeit by the way he had intercepted the Popes letters
directed to the Sultan, containing the aforesaid instructions; yet having
recovered the losses suffered in his absence; most heroically for the love of
Christ he bears and dissembleth all forepassed greuances: And in pure
devotion to peace, of his own accord he beseeches his holiness to receive him
into favor, and in requital thereof, he protests to become his future true
liegeman for the kingdom of Sicil. What say you unto this, you hypocrites?
Here you see a king, humble, contrit, and studious of peace; through this
whole discourse have I yet read of no such Pope. What are the^ the signs of
christianity, and true religion? war or peace? Humility or pride? If you say
peace and humility, where then must we seek them? In the breasts commonly of
christian Princes. And no marvel, for both the written word of God, and
conscience, have warranted their authorities: yours not so, at leastwise, in
such worldly manner, as you use it. For being novel, and conversant in pompeous
habiliments, in Lordly appellations, in rich patrimonies, in commerce, in
treaties, inuestiture of Princes, in maintaining of garrisons, in rigging of
galleys, in entertaining of noble men and captains for service, how can it
choose but by plots and devises, to maintain these worldly charges, and
titulary honors, clean contrary to the example of Christ, the doctrine of the
Apostles, and the modesty of the Primitive Church) you shall be constrained to
mingle the leven of the Lord, with the abomination of Baal; and in stead of
preaching and prayer (your sole function) to spend your times in perfecting and
preventing your own imaginations, and your enemies designements. For I know the
kingdom of heaven is not of this world, neither will flesh and blood respect
you as they ought, if as you say, you should carry lowly shows, and truly
practice Christian humility: but you know, where your reward is laid up;
Imitate this good Emperor, and think with your selves, that in this he
followed your sayings, and not your doings. Imitate you your sayings, but say,
and do, and then will the world turn their bitter reprehensions, to sweetest
Sonnets in praise and admiration of your lives and Embassies. And here I crave
pardon for digression.

Cuspinian. Platina in the life of Gregory. Naucl. genesis 41. Platina citans.
Again to the History: Albeit, most of the Princes of Germany, Ecclesiastical
and secular, namely, Eberhard of Salisburg, Seyfrid of Ratisbone, Sibot of
Augusta, Bishops: Leopold of Austria, Otho of Merouia, and Barnard of
Carinthia, Dukes with many other Nobles, did to their utmost, labor with the
Pope to reconcile his displeasure against Caesar then residing at Capua: yet
could not his Majesty obtain promise of pardon, until he had given assurance
to pay into the Churches exchequer by the hands of the Master of the Teutonick
order, the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand ounces of gold. Is this to
forgive thy brother seauenty times seven? Or can sin and trespasses be washed
away by Masses of money? O impudent merchant, Antichristian impostor! The price
being made, pardon follows, and the Emperor invited to a riotous feast, where
amongst many dishes, simulata Amicitia, I assure you, is carried up for a
service. For the Emperor was scarce upon his way toward Germany, to repress
the son of Henry, who with the Lombards and Thuscians had rebelled against
him, but he is openly given to understand by the Princes, that by messengers in
the name of the Bishop, they have strict commandment, not to acknowledge any
man of the Emperors family for King: and moreover, that he had conspired with
the states of Italy to disgrade him of all imperial jurisdiction.

Whereat Caesar, being full of discontent, having tamed his rebels, he
plagueth the mutinous Cities of Hetruria and Lombardie. The Pope is now become
more then mad, and to disgorge melancholy (for otherwise it will stifle him)
again the third time he curses the Emperor with book, bell and candle. And to
be sure at this blow to tumble him quite down from the height of all Imperial
dignity; first he treats a league with the Venetians: Then by the counsel of
the Kings of France and England, he summoneth a council to be celebrated at
Rome in the Lateran: wherein is a great dispute about the utter abolishment of
the regal authority of Frederick. Before the first sitting the heads of the
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, with due solemnity are carried round about the
City. And lastly, Collomitius, quem prae caeteris, vide. Platina in vita
Gregorij noni.
in the Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, he makes a sermon full of
Commiseration; proclaims the Croisado, and promises life everlasting to as
many, as shall take up arms against his Majesty.

Frederick being given to understand, that the Croisado was now proclaimed
against him, which was never from the days of Adam heard of, to be divulged
against any, but Turks and Infidels, waxes exceeding angry, and directs his
forces to the walls of Rome; combatteth with the Romans, rowteth them with a
miserable slaughter, and spares not a man, marked with the Cross. To some
crosse-wayes he commanded four words to be given. Others had their heads
cloven a cross, and the Clergymen he willed to be shaven to the quick, and
the sign of the cross to be imprinted upon their bald pates; that so they,
who were but said to be signed with the Cross, might be so signed indeed.

Afterward, by a long and tedious siege, having forced Furentia, and hearing
that the Pope had sent forth his Legates, to summon the English and French
Prelates to the Council; he shuts up by sea and by land all passages: and by
the service of the Pisans takes some Cardinals, and many Prelates passing by
sea, and commits them to prison. Two Cardinals he drowneth, and assigns
to the gallows some Abbots and Bishops, but especially the Popes brother, for
their unpardonable treasons.

Whereupon, this good holy father, sorrowing to see so many of the Lords
anointed, for treason to be so sharply used by Frederick, became so moved and
distempered at the indignity, that falling into sickness, through grief of
mind, he departed the same way, which his beloved Sons, had but lately
foregone.

Celestine the fourth succeeds, and intends to proceed in the steps of his
predecessor against Frederick, had not death summoned him to attend another
business in a fitter place. For he sat Bishop but eighteen days, and then
was poisoned in drinking.

Innocentius the third succeeded; Petrus de vineis li. 1. ep. 33.
whilom the Emperors deuotest friend, but now his most bitter enemy;
persecuting his Majesty with more fury, then any of his deceased predecessors.
And thus it fell out.

Baldwin the Grecian Emperor, Collenutius and Cuspinian in vita Frederici.
Hieron. Martius.
hoping to play the part of a good Christian, in supplying the office of him,
who was utterly degenerated from all remembrance of his own function and
calling, labored what he could to set unity between these two mighty
monarchs: (for so is all Popery in truth, though not in show.) But the Bishop,
having no mind to hearken to so Christian-like a motion, deals with the
Geneois (having a Navy at that time riding at anchor in the Port of
Centumcellae) to transport him unto Lions in France, and there illuding both
Princes for their kindness and paines-taking, proclaims a concionable;
causes Frederick to be cited, yea himself in the end of his Homely, cites
him: and for default of appearance (although his sufficient substitute, Thadeus
Suessanus, a most famous Lawyer, humbly desired his Furiousness but to allow
him a sufficient return, whereby he might have conuenable time for his
repair to Lions) he denies him respit; accurseth him; depriueth him of al
Imperial honors; absolueth his subjects, and abetteth them in despite of
Frederick, to make choice of some other. Most impudently alleging (so did
ever the Pharisees by Christ, because otherwise they could not effect their
wills) very vile, false and forged suggestions against him, as blasphemies,
periuries, sacrilege, and such like stuff: which see in C. Apostol. de sent.
and re iudicata, lib. 6.

The Emperor hearing hereof, sets Italy in order, and with a complete army
marches toward Lions, there face to face to bandy with this insolent Prelate.
But think you a Pope to be so silly an Ass, as to deal with his forewarned
enemy? no believe it. His conscience can not assure his heart to look him in
the face: He must deal altogether upon advantage, civil dissentions,
alienations of obedience, trecheries, periuries, discontents of
neighbour-Princes and subjects. At which weapons he now deals with the
Emperor; and having his scouts, his espialls and Intelligencers in every
corner through the world, by their services, he works the banished gentlemen
of Parma, to return to their country, and there to plot out myriads of
rebellions against those Cities, which as yet in Italy stood well affected to
the Emperors service. Whereupon before his Majesty could come to Taurinum,
Cusp. in vita Frederici. Nauc. genesis 42. Epi. extat in epistolis Petri de
Vineis. epist. 32.
in fear that the residue of the Italian people would one follow another
example, he quitteth his Lyons-iourny; and by letters, directed both unto the
King of France, as also to the prelates there assembled, in most honest terms
he refuteth his enemies objections, discourses at large upon the insufficiency
and nullity of a Popish curse, and withal strongly prepares by sea to reduce
Parma to its former obedience.

But good Emperor, the greater thy learning, the more their grief: the
greater thy courage, the more vigilant is thy diuill-like enemy for thy ruin.
Thou staiest at Grossetum, about the sea coast of Sienna, there to refresh thy
wearied and ouerwrought spirits, with some disports of hauking; Thou will not
get thee into Germany, nor repasse the mountains: De hac coniuratione vide
ep. 10. and 52. li. 2. Rursus epi. 19. and 62. li. 3.
Then will thy ghostly father meditate night and day to undo thee; then will
he traitorously inueigle thy principal servants, some by wrested sentences of
Scripture, and some by corruption of money, to work thy downfall. Thus imitate
they Christ in blessing their enemies; Thus honor they Kings according to Saint
Peter; But (thank thy God) the conspiracy was detected, and the traitors
worthily punished.

Nocentius being fallen into a desperate fury, for that he had failed in these
his most nefarious proiects, in seeing the Emperor for this time fully cleared
from his devilish intendments, grew yet resolute, not to give over, until he
had really dispossessed him of his crown and life. Which to effect, by threats,
exhortations, and promises he aweth the Princes of Germany to depose
Frederick, and in his place to set up Henry Lantgraue of Thuringe. But this
gentleman following the service of his master at the siege of Vlmes, was deadly
wounded the same year wherein he was nominated King. So also his successor
William, being employed in other wars, performed nothing in favor of his
Furiousness. See D. B. 290.
Whereupon the Pope observing his Anathems to be vilified, his rebellious
hirelings in Italy to be thoroughly persecuted, and his adversary to be resolute
and undaunted, after long and manifold trecheries plotted, and frustrated, at
last, he procures him to be poisoned in the two and thirtith year of his
reign, and the fifty seventh of his age, on the very same day whereon he was
declared Emperor, Caesar, Augustus.

Thus, this most worthy Heroes, this Frederick the second, Emperor of Germany,
king of both Sicils and Jerusalem, Lord of Sardinia and Italy, and Duke of
Sweuia, an excellent Prince, adorned with all good gifts dained by God unto
man, as well for the furniture of mind, as body; valiant, honorable, liberal; a
great linguist, and excellent well learned, finished his mortal race: who, had
he not been diuerted, from turning his Christian Arms against the Pagans, by
the rebellions of Italy, and the Papal abetments thereto, verily he had
merited more praise of the Christian world, then Alexander in due could have
exacted of his Macedonian subjects.

Verily, If this our Age (miserably shaken with this inueterate Papal tyranny)
by this president would learn, what emolument, peace and plenty would accrue
both to the Church and commonweal, by due ballancing the temporal and
Ecclesiastical Authorities; then would I not doubt, but to behold the German
Empire most great, most glorious, and the Papal usurpation once again reduced
to its pure and primitive integrity. More in commendation of this good Emperor
I can not say, but only wish that the Motto, which was once underwritten
Brutus his statue, and now due to him ( vtinam viueres) might at this day be
revived in the hearts of all Christian Potentates to reuindicate their
pristinate prerogatives.

But who shall recomfort the Laments of Sion? Albeit that this most worthy
General was gathered in peace to the bed of his fathers, yet Death had no
privilege to give period either to the extinguishment or satiation of these
Popes never dying malice. For, against all humane belief, and the divine
precepts it raged with so inhumane a feruencie against this Emperors posterity,
that it never gave over, So did it in the powder treason.
until it had deprived his issue both of life and Empire.

For forthwith from the decease of Frederick, these (three Popish Sultans)
Innocent the third, Alexander and Urban the fourth, following the continual
stream of their proud fortunes, employed the utmost of their means to
re-inuest the Kingdom of Naples in the Church, and to strip thereof the House
of Sweuia; but in vain; for Manfred maintained and retained it valiantly as
yet against all their violences; until Clement the fifth following the claim
of his Predecessor Vrbans Intrusion, Platina in vita Clementis quarti.
called Charles Earl of Province and Aniow out of France, to take possession
thereof: upon condition, that Manfred being expulsed, He should yearly pay
unto the Church of Rome in the Name of a Tenure thirty thousand Ducats; And
for farther encouragement; Not to accept the inuestiture thereof, Nauel. genesis
43.
though freely offered, from the Roman Emperor, he caused him to be styled,
King of both Sicils. Which done, in the Lateran Church, he is inaugurated with
the Crown of Sicil and Jerusalem. And after many and various conflicts, he
not only overthrows, and slays Manfred at Beneuent, betrayed by his
people: but also, extinguisheth the sole heir of the noble house of Sweuia,
the stem of many worthy Emperors, Conrade the son of Conrade, who^ he got unto
his power by treason near Naples; and there by the wicked dispensatorie counsel
of the Pope, with more then Phalarian cruelty struck off his head, for going
about to recover his own, So always Pap. cavil.
but indeed, upon suggestion that he persecuted the Church.

For Clement, after he had heard the opinion of many wise men, persuading him
that Conrade, as being the only branch of the most noble house of Sweuia, was
to be preferred, and obliged to the Roman sea by favors and affinity, turned
himself to Charles, and would needs know of him, what he also deemed: To whom
the Traitor made this butcherly Reply. Vita Conradini, mors Caroli: Mors
Conradini, vita Coroli. i. The life of Conrade will be death to Charles; The
death of Conrade, life to Charles. By which his brutish opinion, he thus
whetted on a mind already prepared for murder; by manifest presumptions
fore-shewing, that he was already acquainted with some plot of treason against
Conrade. For after he understood, that Conrade with a puissant army of
Germans, was passed Viterbium, where then his Holiness resided, he was heard
to prophecy, That he was led as a Lamb to the slaughter.

Thus, the posterity of Frederick being for many ages turmoiled by this
succession of Bishops, after infinite practices at last was utterly ruinated by
these bloody monsters: yea, the Princes of Germany were so involued in these
fatal oppositio^s, that none of the^ either daring or willing to wear a Crown
at so dear a reckoning, Alphons of Spain, and Richard of England, by money and
the Popes favor (as the world says) began to aspire unto that Dignity, which
for so many ages past, the Germans alone had enjoyed, and honorably
maintained.

But neither of them, Herein let all Christians note the beginning, progress
and sequel of all Popish practices.
either in jealousy one of another, or in fear of their predecessors harms,
ever came to the real possession thereof, so that for the space almost of 22.
years, the Empire became an Anarchy, and so continued, until by the general
suffrage of all the Princes, Rodulph of Hauespurg was chosen Emperor.

Rodulphus Habspurgicus.
He reigned Anno 1273. About the second year of Edward the first.

AFter these lamentable Tragedies acted upon the person of Frederick and his
issue, is Rodulph of Hauespurg, elected King of Romans. Who, albeit he had
pleighted his faith to Gregory the tenth, that he would come to Rome, and
there be crowned; as also, had studied to deserve the friendship of him, and
other his successors, with extraordinary endeavors; For that, time had taught
him, that even against all humane reason, this viperous generation had clearly
extinguished the two most worthy and glorious families, of France and Sveuia;
As also, for that, they had transferred the Kingdom of Naples from the race of
Frederick, to the house of Aniow; and therefore thought with himself, that such
Potentates, as they, were not rashly to be provoked, especially being now
shielded with the favors of the French, and the peevishness of the Germane
Bishops; As also, that it was work enough, beseeming the Majesty of a good
and gracious Emperor, to tender the welfare of his native Country, now almost
ruinated and rent by civil dissentions: Notwithstanding his godliness, his
clemency, his devotion, his humanity, his modesty, and his obseruancie, yet
could he deserve no other retribution from these ungrateful Politicians, but
intrusions upon his Crown, and taunts against his person.

Mutius. li. 21. Naucl. genesis 44.
For Honorius the fourth, being Bishop at that season, arrogating unto himself
all Regal authority, directly against the good will of Rodulph, constituted
Priziualna Earl of Ianua, vicar General of the Empire throughout Italy. And
after his Majesty for money had quite claimed unto many Cities their liberties,
this Honorius most wickedly sealed this scandalous transaction.

Naucl. vbi supra.
After the decease of Honorius, Nicholas the fourth had utterly dispossessed this
Emperor of Romandiola and Rauenna, under the false pretext of an expedition
against the Turk, had not Death taken truce with his traitorous intents. By a
new creation of two Kings in Italy, the one to govern Lumbardy, the other
Tuscanie, he had plotted, that by the commodiousnesse of their scituations all
along the Teutonick Alps, from hence by arms he might always have means to
curb the French, who now hold Sicil, and the goodly Kingdom of Naples in full
possession.

Paralip. Vrsp.
Whereof Rodulph taking notice, resolving with himself never to be made a stale
to an other man's despite, which by affectation of a titularie Crown in
Italy, publicly at all times gives forth, that at some time or other, he
would find sufficient occasions of diuersion and redress; but in plain terms
he intimates to his friends, that he was wholly deterd from iournying into
Italy, for that he had formerly observed, That the entrance of the Caesar's
thereinto was applauded, honored, and full of hopes: but their returns
awkward, heavy, mournful and miserable. Not impertinently alluding unto Esops
fable of the Wolf; who told the Lion lying sick in his den, That in truth he
had no reason to enter, considering that he could well observe the footing of
every beast in entrance, going forward, but not of one, returning backward.

Albertus Primus.
He reigned 1298. About the six and twentieth year of Edward the first.

ALbeit Albert succeeding his father Rodulph, Cuspi. in vitae. Alberti.
in the Empire, continued the same obseruancy toward the Roman Monarchy,
Paralip. V^sperg.
as his father formerly had done: yet could he by no means escape the bitter
quips and taunts of these cloistered asses. For, at what time by his
Ambassadors according to custom he prayed of Boneface the eight, the
Confirmation of his Election, Boneface having a sword by his side, and the
Imperial Crown upon his head, shows himself in public to the assembly,
and with a high voice exclaymeth: Ego sum Caesar and Pontifex: Behold, here is
Caesar and the Pope: And in fury (whereas it might have been done without his
priuity or authority) he rejects the Election as frivolous and of no force;
denies confirmation, and with a full-foule mouth, calls him Homicide.

Afterward, upon a bitter quarrel arising between this Maleface and Philip
King of France, for that his Majesty would not acknowledge him for his supreme
Lord, he changed his first opinion; aprooued Albert Emperor; by his Breues
invested him with the Kingdom of France, and in a full Consistory
Excommunicated Philip. Yet again when Albert re-answered, that he would not
stir one foot against the King of France, unless his Holiness would confirm
him and his heirs in the Kingdom and Empire: The Pope, not able to conceal
his imprisoned displeasure, most arrogantly replied: Naucl. genesis 44.
Non futurum id Iezabele viuente; That, that should never come to pass, so
long as Iezabel lived By which abusiue name, he pointed at that most noble Dame
Elizabeth, the wife of Albert, the daughter of Menihard, Earl of Tirol, and
sister by the mothers side to Conrade late Duke of Sweuia. In show cauelling at
this noble Lady, as an implacable persecutrix of Clergy men against Gods
commandments, but in truth, most barbarously envying her in memory of her
brother and her deceased Ancestors, for their claming and retaining of their
hereditary royalties against the usurpations of the former Bishops. Let the
world be Judge, if they continue not the like, yea the very same stratagems,
against all Princes at this day, if they but cross their ambitions. The man
that fears God would think, that a good and a virtuous life, especially in a
Prince, should warrant his days from vexation, and his grave from infamy. But
here you see the contrary: Albert follows the steps of his father; he is
humble, in offensive, glad to please, yet not well requited: His Lady neither
medleth nor makes with these contentious persons, and yet in regard that her
Auncesters displeased the Roman prelacie, she sauoreth; and must be disgraced
in most opprobrious manner: Doct. B. fo. 68. S. E. H. fo. 48.
yea the depth of the grave can not secure her honorable friends from railing,
so furious is the fire of a Popish conscience.

No marvel: for this is that Boniface the eight, who (like the Devil in the
Gospel) censured all principalities and powers to be in his donation; who
usurped upon both swords, and would needs have enforced the whole world, to
have acknowledged him their Lord Peramount: glorying that to him were committed
the keys of Heaven gate: That he ought to be judged of no man, no though he
carried a million of souls with him to hell for company.

Henricus Septimus.
He reigned Anno 1308. About the second year of Edward the second.

AFter the decease of Albert, Henry of that name the seventh, Mutius lib. 23.
of the House of Lucelburge, by the lawful suffrage of the Electors, is
nominated Emperor. Clement the fifth (then High Priest) living at Auignion,
(well fare the jar between him and Philip the French King) in odium
Philippi, gave so courteous and facil a way unto this election, that sending
his Legates through all the quarters of Germany and Italy, he gave strict
commandment, that Henry should be acknowledged Emperor, and really confirmed
in the election; provided that, within the space of two years, he should come
to Rome to be crowned, and personally visit Italy, which now by reason of sixty
years absence of the Germane Emperors, was miserably afflicted with intestine
dissensions.

But the Pope could not long be Master of his own breast, he must needs
follow the accustomed knauerie of his vafrous predecessors. For when Henry,
in satisfaction of his promises, had made his perambulation throughout every
Province of Italy; had twice rowted Rupert King of Apulia with the Vrsins;
approached Rome, and expected his Coronation in the Cathedral Church of Saint
Peter: The Pope, repenting him of his forwardness, by calling to mind of
Henry's powerfulness, and Ruperts friendship, at first commands the
Cardinals not to proceed to Henry's inauguration; and then again upon the
Emperors serious expostulation, changing his interdiction; he assenteth,
conditionally, that he take an oath of fidelity to the sea of Saint Peter.

Which when his Majesty refused, alleging the president to be new, and but
lately usurped in the days of some few of his Predecessors, That the
chiefest Prince of Christendom should be obliged by an oath of fealty to the
servant of servants at last with much a-doe, but utterly against the Popes
mind, Cuspinian.
by the loyal service of Steven of Colonna, he was crowned by the Cardinals.
For, Clement himself in deadly hatred against Him, revolted to Rupert King of
Apulia, by a lawful trial condemned of high treason; and reuersed his
sentence of condemnation, Vide C. pastoralis, desententia and re iudicat. in
Clement.
not so much for any defect in Law, but in extreme malice against his Majesty.

Thus was the quarrel picked against Henry; observe the cause thereof, I
beseech you, and tell me if the president hold not with their practices at this
day. But by the sudden and immature departure of this religious Emperor,
nothing was effected.

For, Henry now being resolved to take upon him the Crown of Sicilie, Rhithmi
de morte Henrici impressi hunc proditorem veneficum Paulinum vocant.
being thereunto nominated by the Sicilians, upon the vigil of the Assumption
of our Lady was come as far as Bonconuent: Where, by Bernard the false
dominican Monk, who before times had given many hypocritical testimonies of
service toward his Majesty, by a new and never heard of example, at Mass
mingled poison, and the powder of Adamant (which as men say brings speediest
death) into the communion cup, and so slew his Lord and sovereign.

All the wakes, Annals, records, songs, rithmes, verses and Epigrams written in
those days, do make ample relation of this tragedy. But the whole Rabble (and
blame them not) of the Dominicans do utterly deny it; giving out, that in
grief of mind, for that he could not be fully revenged upon his enemies, he
gave up tho ghost, after he had received letters from his Holiness in
testimonial of this aforesaid villains innocence. But howeuer; These fair
glosses could not so exempt their Order from the suspicion of this murder, but
that many of their Covent, together with their houses were burnt and destroyed
by sword and fire in many places throughout Tuscanie and Lombardy.

Lodouicus Bauarus.
He reigned Anno 1314. About the seventh year of Edward the second.

HEnry (last spoken of) being thus dispatched, the tempest which in his life
time lay smothered in embers, in hideous manner now breaks out upon the head
of his successors. For Frederick of Austria, and Jews of Bauaria being both by
the discordant suffrages of the Electors, named for Caesar's, John the 22.
finds an occasion to disquiet them both; and first in very ignominious
fashion he quarelleth with Frederick. And thus it fared: Conrade the Bishop of
Gurcia was sent to Rome by the Austrians, to desire his Holiness in favor of
Frederick, to give assent to the election, and to repress Jews; where, in
making his Oration, he chanced to discourse, upon the praises of Frederick his
grandfathers and great-grandfathers, concluding, that the Christian world was
likely to reap nothing contrary to expectation, considering, That it was
always seen, that from good and valiant Parents, descended good and valiant
children; yet by your favor, most arrogantly and impertinently replied his
Holiness; Of all men living without question Solomon was the wisest, and yet
he begot a son most foolish. Not obscurely intimating thereby, that Frederick
was degenerated from the virtues of his ancestors, and therefore unworthy of
the Imperial diadem.

Was this displeasure, deem ye, of continuance? no surely; for then had it
not been papal. But at that time John had no need of Frederick: Jews
Iudas-like was saluted King, and the beloved son: But now Mapheus with his
sons the Visconti, are up in Italy, and assaulting Genoa. And thereupon must
a league of reconciliation be privily contracted with Frederick to the
expulsion of Jews, and the re-ordering of Mapheus.

Eight years after his election, Frederick was foiled in field, and taken
prisoner: Howbeit, Cuspin. in vita Ludouici Pulchri. Naucl. genesis 46.
the Pope prosecuteth Jews with continual malice; denounces him an Enemy to
the Church, a Schismatike, and an Heretic; First, for that immediately upon his
Election, without his Holiness permission, he had styled himself Emperor;
secondly, for that he presumed to relieve certain of his younger brethren
being condemned of heresy, and outlawed after excommunication; and thirdly,
for his rash assistance sent to Galeas Visconti of Millan against his holy
forces.

Whereupon Jews, Naucl. genesis 45.
understanding by the best Divines and Lawyers of that age, that the acts and
sayings of John were repugnant to Christ his Doctrine: That the Pope in truth
ought to be subject to the Emperor, and not the Emperor to him in temporal
causes: took thereat such encouragement, that, he appealed from the Pope male
informato (as the Lawyers speak) to the Pope melius informando, at the next
general Council to be held, when he sat at Rome in Peter's chair. Mean time,
valiantly and vigilantly he preuenteth all injuries, and diuulgeth the Tenor
of the Appeal throughout all the Provinces of Germany.

During these verbal and scribeling contentions, it came to pass, that the
Romans being thoroughly tormented with their civil dissentions, sent their
submissiue Orators to John, with humble supplications to entreat his Holiness;
that leaving Auignion, he would re-uisite Rome, and confer the Imperial
Inuestiture upon the King of Romans: this if he refused, they certified him in
plain terms, that they would renew the ancient Laws and government of the
Roman people. John not only denies their requests, but with threats and
minaces, in most ignominious manner dismisseth the Orators: At which his pride
the Romans being not a little offended, by letters and Ambassies call Jews to
Rome as their lawful Emperor.

Jews grants the motion, and with his army takes his way toward Italy; and
at Millan according to the accustomed manner is crowned by the Archbishop.
After this, making choice rather by humility, then arms, to assuage the
Bishops wrath, he sends messengers unto him, humbly to desire his fatherhood
to confer the usual and Imperial honors upon his Majesty. Which when the
Bishop not only gainsayd, but despighteously dismissing his Ambassadors,
peremptorily cited his Majesty to Auignion; As report goes: Caesar as having
full experience of the Papal tyranny, yet willing to preserve the Imperial
dignity (collated from above) holy and inviolable, utterly refuses slaue-like
to prostrate himself before the Pope, or to appear at Auignion. But to avoid
the effusion of blood, he is content in peaceable manner by proxy to become a
suitor for his collation. But herein finding the Pope as stiff as himself, and
his friends the Visconti to his disgrace already accursed, he makes no more
ado; but setting Millane in order, he iournyeth to Rome, where with great
applause by the commandment of the people and the Clergy, together with his
wife he is Crowned by Cardinal Steven Colonna, the whole Nobility assisting,
and crying, GOD save Lodowicke Augustus Emperor of Romans. And forthwith by
all their good liking, he creates Peter of Corbar, a Minorit, a man learned
and in-ured to Government, High Priest: He causes the counterfeit of John to
be made in wood, and in the presence of Caesar most ignominiously consumes it
to ashes; pronouncing him an Heretic, a destroier of the Church, and a
public enemy to the peace of Christendom.

John again, thundreth out cruel process against Jews, depriueth him of all
imperial pre-eminence, and excommunicateth him as a Rebel and Arch-heritique
against the Roman Church. Whereupon the Emperor, to whom Italy became
displeasa^t, partly for that he had already determined to make no long abode
therein, and partly in fear of poison, wherewith he knew the Romanists were
better acquainted, then with arms, made his retrait into Germany. Whether (no
sooner arrived) but news was spread abroad of John's departure, to the universal
joy of all wel-minded Christians, in hope that by the election of a new Bishop,
all old quarrels should lie buried with their framer. But not so: For Benedict
the twelfth succeeding in the Popedom, Plati. in vita Benedict. 12. Cusp. in
vita Ludouici.
succeeded also in all Popish qualities against this Emperor; confirming all
the censures, and deprivations which his predecessor John had sued out against
him.

Apud. Na Decretum hoc extat genesis 45.
Whereupon, Caesar perceiving that these fiery spirits would never be at peace,
until by the utter overthrow and disgrace of all temporal Authority, they had
fully and forceably strengthened their own greatness, at Franckford he
assembleth the Princes, with the wisemen of his Kingdom; persons of
immatcheable dexterity in divine and humane sciences, and there, by the advice
of the most zealous and best learned, he publishes a Decree under his seal
against the injurious process of the dead Bishop: therein rendering a most
Christianlike account of his faith, plainly and ingenuously confessing, that as
it became a true Catholic he believed all the Articles of the Christian
verity.

To these by solemn proclamation he annexeth many notable edicts, to the
ancient Constitutions he adds some new, and corroborateth the old, viz. That
the Electors of the Empire, and no man besides, should intermeddle in the
election of the King of Romans: Whereunto the Princes and nobility gave their
full consent: Ordaining moreover, that who ever was nominated King or Emperor,
should be acknowledged for the true, supreme, and indubitate Soueraign of the
Empire, being indeed though different in name, yet the same in effect. That
without any confirmation or approbation from the Apostolic sea, he might
absolutely govern and administer justice throughout the Empire. And that after
publication from the Princes, in case of lawful proceeding in the election,
the Pope is bound to anoint him: And in defalt of refusal or denial, that any
other catholic Bishop is as capable as the Pope, to proclaim him Emperor,
Caesar, Augustus; Considering that these formal and solemn ceremonies, are but
things indifferent devised by the Popes, conferring only titles and names, but
no matter of substance. For what Roman Bishop consecrated the
Constantinopolitan Emperors? what Pope before Charles his time, the ancient
Augusti? or who before Constantine the Ethnike Caesar's? And then, the Emperor
acknowledged no oath of fidelity, but of obseruancy and of defending the faith.

From this point, he proceeds to prove, that in case of vacancy, the
Imperial election diuolueth not to the Papacy: and that, the prescription is
derogatory to the liberty, dignity, the rites and majesty of the sacred Empire,
but in truth by long and aprooued custom from Antiquity, and stl in use, that
all Judicature, fealties and privileges of conferring and disposing of all
rights, interests, and demands, belonged and do belong to the House of the
Count Palatine of the Rhene, during the vacancy, notwithstanding the
constitutions of the Clementines.

What pen can be so partial, as not to give due commendation to the prudency
of this good Emperor, being seasoned with so plentiful a measure of
discretion? who so modestly carried himself between the Princes and the Pope,
that the former admired his wisdom, and the later celebrated his goodness?
Naucl. genesis 45.
For in Benedicts prime-entrance into the pontificacy, upon occasion of
discontents between his holiness and the French king his Majesty
understanding thereof, by means made for reconciliation and absolution, unto
which the Bishop, after he had entered into a large field of discourse in
praise of Germany and this Emperor, condiscended; promising to be mindful of
the motion; concluding, That that Noble branch of the Church (meaning Jews)
which now began to be separated, should again be re-ingrafted into the body of
the tree.

Upon another occasion, when the Ambassadors of the kings of France and Apulia,
had scandalized his Majesty for plotting of diverse indignities against the
Court of Rome: his Holiness excused him with great earnestnes, openly anouching,
that the Clergy had wronged him, and not he the Clergy.

Naucl. vbi supra.
But howeuer, at this time he acknowledged the innocence of Jews, yet
afterward, when the king of France in despite of the Emperor and the Pope,
had slily prevented the return of certain Cardinals into his kingdom; and
that John king of Bohemia, and Henry Duke of Bauaria, had traitorously
co^spired to elect a new Emperor, he suffered himself with small entreaty to
be dissuaded from his former resolution of Absolution: yea, after the king of
France and his Majesty had capitulated a peace, full sore against his mind;
upon request to have it ratified by his Holiness, he flatly denied it;
cauelling, that Jews being now declared an heretic, ought not again to be
accounted a Christian at the kings pleasure.

Thus may you see how the Popes were accustomed to play fast and loose with the
German Emperors.

Cuspin. Marius.
Well, the Absolution by this nicity being adiourned, and the Emperor well
observing whereunto these pontifical policies tended, summoneth the Princes and
Electors to a Diet at Rensium. There with ease, by his affability, liberality
and clemency, he so deuoteth their loyalties to his service, that by solemn
oath they not only auow to maintain and defend the honor of the Empire: but
they also decreed, the Processes of John late Pope of Rome, returned against
his Majesty, to be void and of no validity: yea, that a Bishop ought not to
entertain any such practices against an Emperor, for that their jurisdictions
were merely of distinct natures.

Benedict dies, and Clement the 6. succeeds: Cuspin. and Paralip. Vrsperg.
an effeminat Prelat, extraordinarily ambitious of honor and potencie. Who had
no sooner seated his foot in the chair of Lucifer, but his furious Genius took
such hold of his heart, that in Latin and Dutch libels affixed upon church
doors, he summoneth his Majesty under the censure of extreme penance, within
three days space to make satisfaction, to God and the church (meaning himself)
as also to desist from further meddling in the affairs of the Empire; which
limitation being expired, and no appearance recorded, he proceeds to sentence
of co^tumacie. Afterward, when his Proctors craved forgiveness, with an offer
to perform all injunctions to utmost: he was not ashamed to motion so foul an
atonement, as never Pagan demanded of his Captive slave: viz. That he should
confess and acknowledge all his errors and heresies. That he should resign
the Empire: and simply commit his children, and all his moueables into his
tuition.

Where is now become, O Lucifer, thy pastoral humility? where thy fatherly
aspect? where thy representative Holiness?

Notwithstanding, albeit the poorest refuse of the world would not have
accepted of these basest conditions, yet this good Emperor, foreseeing, that
if he should not bend; war, slaughter and spoils would ensue, he received
the pontifical libell; signed it with his seal, and swore to observe it; so
far forth humiliating his deiection, that upon relation thereof, the whole
College of the scarlet-roabed-fathers could not choose but receive it with
unaccustomed admiration.

But the Emperor upon sounder advice, considering with himself, that without
the consent of the Electors, and of the Princes and the estates of the Empire,
it was against the fundamental Law to accept of any such Capitulation, in the
next assembly at Frankford, he causes the tenor of the reconciliation to be
read before the whole Assembly. They give sentence, that it tends in most
points to the prejudice and destruction of the state, and therefore reject it:
They promise to stand fast unto his Majesty; in case, as before, he would
reassume his courage, and resolutely defend the honor of the Empire. And to
conclude, they dispatch an Embassy to the Pope, with intimation, that from
thence-forth he should cease from such frivolous conuentions, being purposely
devised to dishonor the Majesty of the German Empire.

They arrive before his Holiness; they expostulate the rigor of the Articles
to the prejudice of the Empire: nothing else they enforce, nothing else they
demand: But his Holiness enraged like an illuded Tigresse; lays all the
blame upon Jews, and with deeper hart-burning then before, falls into
treaty with John and Charles Kings of Bohemia, heretofore overthrown by
Jews, and with their uncle Baldwin, Archbishop of Treuers, to destoy Jews and
his whole posterity.

The bargain agreed upon by these Pseudo Christians, in the year of our
Savior 1346. upon Maundy-Thursday, he is most irreligiously accursed by
Benedict; and by the renouation of the Process (sent out by his predecessor
John) declared an Heretic and scismatique.

To aggrauate the despite, and by effects to show the solidity of his
religion, he commands the Electors within a proportioned time, to make
choice of another. Lo, the Emperor rather then he will be an instrument of
slaughter and faction, disgraceth his high calling by acceptance of basest
articles; but the Pope rather then he will want of his will, vnico statu (as
the proverb is) will depose, set up, commend, dispraise, bless and curse; and
without all respects, either of conscience or humanity, set all Christendom on
outrage, to be revenged on one creature. Were this the practice but of One, the
imputation were excusable, as a defect in manners, but through the whole Legend
of every Emperors life, you shall observe the one abstinent, yea timorous, for
conscience sake to defile even his imaginations with humane blood: the other
rigorous, wrathful, impatient, and quarrelsome: sometime upon donatiues,
sometime upon iura imperij, and sometimes upon non augmenting of Saint Peter's
patrimony. Which irreligious and Antichristian outrages, albeit they know them
in their consciences to be absolutely diabolical, repugnant to Christian
Doctrine, and pernicious to all civil society, yet rather then any Pope or
Popeling will let fall any one particle of unlawful usurpation, gained by any
the wickedest of his predecessors, words and works shall fly at randon upon
every occasion, so that it would amaze a very Turk to hear with what shifts,
with what euasions, and distinctions of spiritualia, they will stuff whole
volumes in justifying of their falsifications, in wresting and curtailing of
Authors, in denying manifest Records, in railing on their opposites, and
pressing men's consciences with miracles, policies, and impostures. Insomuch,
that if words will not work, impostures shall seduce; if impostures prove
fruitless, swords shall walk, if swords be prevented, then poisons and
treasonable practices shall put end to the controversy. Blood must satiate, or
the Church cannot be satisfied.

But to our History: The Electors have a peremptory day given them, against
which if they produce not their Anti-emperor, the Pope protests by no
irreligious relics, that rather then the Church shall want a Lieuetenant, an
Advocate (Himself must be Captain and chief Justice) he will set up One of
his sole Election. Well, oaths must be kept inviolable, especially with
traitors, and so does his Holiness. And thus he begins his web. Henry of
Wittenberg Archbishop of Mogunce, and one of the electors, for his loiall
adherency unto his Lord and master, to curry favor with the Bohemians, he
depriueth of all his ecclesiastical and temporal capacities, and into his
place he intrudeth Gerlace his Chaplein, the Nephew of Adolph of Nassaw, once
King of Romans. This new Papal Bishop in satisfaction of his Lord and masters
expectation, and in requital of like office toward the Bohemians for their
choice and election, upon the assembly of the Princes at Rensium, for the
nomination of a new Emperor, works with Baldwin of Treuers, Walram of Colein,
Rodulph Duke of Saxony, and John the father a Bohemian, to nominate and elect
Charles King of Bohemia for supreme Lord of the Empire.

But for all this; Paralip. V^sp.
albeit Charles in the life time of Jews was crowned at Bonna, yet such was
his reputation, and such the affection of all the good towns through the
Empire toward his service, that upon a convocation of a Diet, and that after
the coronation of Charles; No one of the Princes was found, either to second
the election, or to regard the Popes Breues, or to swerve from their promised
fidelity.

Had he been a Popelike Prince; that is, If to work his will, he would have
hazarded his Title upon war and bloodshed, what could he not have performed.
But being of a quite contrary disposition, and guided by the best spirits of
impartial Prechers, he never began a war against any man, though provoked,
but only for the quiet and honor of his country; And in detestation of
slaughter, resolved with himself never to determine a quarrel by war, if any
secondarie means might finish it by peace; and therefore betaking himself to
his quietest dispositions, by the treachery of Clement (as some Authors report)
he was poisoned at a meriment, and after as he rode on hunting, as soon as by
labor and the motion of his beast his blood heated, he fell headlong from
horseback. Thus, most unworthily was this Emperor to the grief of all good
Christians made away, in the second year after the election of Charles, the
fifth of the Ides of October, in the year of Grace 1347. after he had so
honorably governed the Empire for the space of thirty and three years, that
those good spirits who all his life time had administered unto him true and
loyal service against al Papisticall malediction, now after his death with
like constancy and honesty defended his never dying memory, against all Shemeis
posterity; as at this day it is apparently seen, not only by record of history,
but also by the particular letters of the Consul of Basil.

Parap. vrsp. Naucl. genesis 45.
And thus it is: the Bishop of Bamberg (by virtue of a commission directed unto
him from Auignion by the Popes authority, to absolve as many as adhered unto
Jews) the year following the death of Jews, iournied with Charles toward
Basil: At his ariuall he made a very perswasiue speech to induce the
Inhabitants, sithence they stood excommunicated in the behalf of Jews for
assisting his party, with all humility to demand absolution: unto whom
Conradus of Bernsfield, the Mayor of the City, in the presence of Charles, and
the rest of the nobility, as well secular as ecclesiastical, made this
resolute reply: Lord of Bamberg, know, that we will neither confess nor
believe, that our Sovereign Lord Jews, Emperor of Romans, was ever an
Heretic: But howeuer; whomsoever the Electors shall impose upon us for our
Master, him only we acknowledge, without asking leave of the Pope.

Surely as this Heroique speech of the Consul, showed the Christianlike courage
of the man, in attributing due obedience to his lawful Sovereign, and may to
future ages be a testimony of innocence protested, and in mere love and
admiration of virtue: so without question this noble and worthy Emperor
deserved no less, if the whole impartial world were to return a Jury upon
the passage of his entire life: being doubtless an honest man, unspotted,
studious of his countries freedom, and only a severe opugner of the Romish
tyranny: so far forth, that without exception, he is to be remembered with all
those styles of Honor, which are accustomed to be instiled upon those, who for
the love of their countries, have refused to undergo no difficult perils.

Charles the fourth.
He reigned in the year 1346. About the twentieth year of Edward the third.

JEWS being dead, Charles after he had by diverse means appeased the
competitors opposed against him by the electors of Mogunce, the Palatine, the
Saxon, and the Brandeburgean, is at last upon promise that he should procure
absolution for the free Cities (yet standing excommunicated for their adherence
unto Jews) crowned Emperor, and on his iourny toward Italy; but there
entertained with more disgrace, then any of his predecessors. For as on foot he
entered the City, Behold (quoth a certain Senator) in his Oration before the
people in the Capitol) thy King comes toward thee in great humility; very
bitterly taunting him with scoffs and reuilements. Insomuch that the Cardinal
of Hostia, sent from Auignion by Innocent the sixth, would not condescend to
Crown him, before he had given security to remain in Rome nor in Italy, no
longer then the business imported.

How base and ignominious this limitation was to the Honor of the Empire, is
apparently to be discerned by the Epistles of Francis Petrarch, (that most
learned and eloquent Poet) written unto Charles himself in these words. I
know not what this promise made and sworn to the Roman Bishop means, as if
your Majesty's entrance into the City, had been gaine-said by some
inexpugnable trench, or impassable mountain: what manner of pride is this,
that the Roman Prince, the life and fountain of liberty, should himself be
deprived of liberty; so far forth, that he who ought to be Lord of all, can
not be said to be Lord of himself?

And in another place, Nerio of Friuli, in his writings, does not much dissent.
All superiority is impacient of corriualty: whereof, if antiquity can not give
us presidents, I fear that late examples will make the case frequent. For now
(as fame goes) the Pope of Rome has forbidden the Roman Prince, Rome: whom
he not only suffers, but also commands, to be contented with the diadem,
and sole title of the Roman Empire. Him, whom he suffers to be Emperor, at
no hand will he suffer to enjoy Emperie.

As the cowardice of Charles, in dissembling his greeuances against this
propagating pride of the prelacie, is with just cause to be complained of. No
less are the Popes worthy of eternal reprehension, who for their proper
respects in deposing of good and godly Emperors, substituted in their places
such Ministers whose minds they knew were always prepared to satisfy their
behests by war and bloodshed, most wickedly and feloniously imposing upon
the Empire those losses and disgraces, wherewith at this day we see it weakened
and generally taxed.

For surely this Charles, to enable his proiects to appease his Competitors; to
dispose of the revenues of the Crown at his pleasure; and freely to bestow
them where he thought good, gave unto Gunther Earl of Swatzburg, a valiant and
warlike Leader, Cuspin. in vitae Guntheri.
and by the Electors saluted for Emperor 22. thousand marks of silver, with
two Imperial Cities in Thuringe for the term of his life.

Unto Frederick Marquis of Misnia, Idem in vitae Caroli.
elected in stead of Schwatzburge deceased, he gave ten thousand marks, to
resign his nomination; and then prepared for his journey toward Rome.

From whence escaping, Auont. li. 7.
by an excuse of going on hunting, in as dishonorable a manner, as never any of
his predecessors before, he returned to Millan, and there created the Visconti
(a Potent family in that City) in receipt of a wonderful mass of money,
perpetual Vicars of the Empire throughout Lombardy, to the everlasting
dishonor and prejudice of Germany.

For a sumptuous banquet in Ville-noue near Auignion, he re-deliuered to the
King of France, the Kingdom of Arles, acquired to the Empire by Otho the first.

From Gerlace, Archbishop of Mogunce, Theodor. de Nyem.
though by his partiality he gained his election, he wrested the privilege
of inaugurating the King of Bohemia, in right belonging to the Church of
Mogunce, and by confirmation of Clement the sixth, invested it in the Archbishop
of Prage.

Zeigl. de viris illustribus Germaniae. ca. 91.
He ordained by law, that none but Bohemians should be admitted into the
College of the Canons regular of Inglehame, Krant. li. 1. c. 3. Tritemius in
Cron. Hirsang.
being of the Dioces of Mogunce. And presently after to make quick and
profitable returns of the profits of the Empire, he retailed unto the
adjoining Princes sixteen free Cities of Sweuia, all held of the Crown. To
Cunon Archbishop of Treuers, he pawned Bopardia and Wesel (Imperial Cities) by
statute.

Lusatia, which time out of mind, had been held in fee of the Imperial
diadem by the Archbishops of Magdeburg, Aeneas Siluius ca. 3. hist. Bohemic.
by the corruption of the then Incumbent, he perpetuated unto the kingdom of
Bohemia.

Against the fundamental Laws of the Country, and the custom of Antiquity,
De his and alijs quam plurimis prolixe vide Theod. de Nyem in nemore suo iam
edito. c. 71.
by novel and subordinate practice, he offered every Elector (a part) one
hundred thousand Ducats to nominate for his successor, his son Winceslaus, a
man given over to idleness, cowardice, luxury, all wantonness and
belly-cheere. For which, when this Phocas had not wherewith to keep his days
of payment, he morgaged for one hundred thousand ducats, to some their
Imposts, and to the Palatine (as memory records) Caesarea Luthrea, Oppenham,
Odenham, and Ingelham. Whereupon I may be bold to say, that by these
diminutions, alienations, and mortgages, the Honorable entrados of the Crown
were so immeasurably wasted, that from that day to this, it has not been of
power to recover or restore this terrible downfall. Zeigl. de viris
illustribus Ger. ca. 83.
For by the sale of these Imposts (the true and essential Patrimony of the
Crown) the glorious Eagle has been so deplumed, that ever since she has
been but a scorn and contemptible to every other living creatures. Which
being true (as true it is) what Patriot can but accurse the Roman Bishops, as
the sole and prime-authors of all these mischiefs, the children of desolation,
and the perpetual disturbers of all Christian welfare?

Wenceslaus the Coward.
He reigned Anno Christ. 1379. about the second year of Richard the second.

AFter the demise of Charles, Wenceslaus his son, during the schism betwixt
Urban the sixth, and Clement the seventh (then the which a more fatal, bestial,
durable dissension never befell the Church) governed the Empire, and took part
with Urban. Naucl. genesis 47.
To Clement upon occasion he sends his Ambassadors; and amongst them, are
remembered certain honest and indifferent Prelates to have passed, whom by
exquisite tortures he slew most barbarously. And as for Urban, for that the
covetous King had deceived the more covetous Romans, gaping after the treasure
raised upon ecclesiastical benefices, in not keeping promise with his
personal presence, after he had granted his commission for leuying the said
ecclesiastical tribute through the whole Empire, toward the defrayment of his
charges for his Romane-iourney, he became utterly alienated from his ancient
friendship. But what Death prevented by the death of Urban his successor,
Boneface the ninth being sure to have had it, if God had given life, made good
in highest measure. For he approouing the censure of deiection against
Wenceslaus, not so much for his evil and degenerate life, as for that he had
beguiled the Romans of their pence, ratified and advanced the Election of
Rupert Earl Palatine, preferred unto the Empire by the Bishops of Mogunce,
Theod. de Nyem. li. 2. ca. 14.
Golen, and Treuers.

Rupertus Caesar.
He reigned. 1400.

AS Boneface the ninth, in despite of Wenceslaus, with great facility and
readiness approved his deposition: Theod. de Nyem. li. 3. ca. 53.
so Rupert but now aloft in highest favor of the Pope, at this present is so
counterchecked by this wether-cocke, Alexander the fifth, the third from
Boneface (a most malicious Cretusian) that he is very likely to feel the smart
of as violent a division in the state, as does the Church in a present and
terrible schism.

For upon his very installment at Pisa in the Fishers chair without any regard
either of Ruperts right, or his present possession upon a just title, he
nominateth by his missiues for King of Romans, Wenceslaus, the man, whom in a
frequent assembly, with one consent the Electors had heretofore removed from
imperial government.

Which Indignity Rupert not being able to digest, he made his grievous
complaints thereof unto the Lords of the state; and exceedingly interrupted the
obedience of the Church throughout the Empire. And without doubt, he had
attempted far greater reformations, had not the sparkles of these smoking
substances together with the Prelate, to the general good of Christendom been
at one extincted by the Physic of Marsilius a physician of Parma.

And Rupert applying his labors to redress what had been amiss by the
avarice of Charles, and the cowardice of Winceslaus, in the tenth year of his
reign departed this world. In whose place succeeded Sigismund, a Prince for
his wisdom, learning and integrity, most renowned.

Sigismund.
He reigned 1411. About the twelfth year of Henry the fourth.

SIGISMVND at his entrance upon the Imperial Diadem, finding the Roman Sea
miserably distracted by the wicked schism of three Antipopes ( John the four
and twentieth at Bononia, Gregory the twelfth at Ariminum, and Benedict the 12.
in Spain) took such infinite pains to restore it unto its pristinate beauty,
Naucl. genesis 48. Parap. vrsp. Cuspinian.
as few or none of the ancient kings or Emperors ever undertook the like, for
the welfare of the Church. For albeit of his own authority diuested upon
himself, and diuolued from his Ancestors, he might, and ought to have cast out
these boute-feaus of division; yet made he choice in modesty and trueness of
Christian piety, rather to redress these evils by a General Council, then by
the violent means of war and bloodshed. Which to effect, to his extreme
travail, danger and expenses, he visited almost all the realms of
Christendom, France, Spain, and England, and there by his godliness and good
counsel so wrought with the Princes of those kingdoms, that they commended
his zeal, allowed his course, and promised their best assistance.

Platinan vita Martini quinti, praeter alios.
This done, he took his iourny toward Italy, and dealt with John at Mantua, to
come unto the Council at Constance. The Assembly being set, such were his
feeling perswasiues, such his important motives, as the three Antipopes being
condemned to deposition, he caused Otho of Colonna, a Roman patrician, by the
name of Martin the fifth, to be preferred to the place by the general suffrage
of all the nations there assembled. Yea, and to remove all impediments from
retardation of the peace, he suffered John Husse and Jerome of Prage, men of
exquisit learning and singular piety, to be condemned and burned, against an
oath of safe-conducte publicly allowed them.

But now, let us go by examination to learn what thanks this godly, zealous,
honorable and Christian Emperor received at the hands of this Holy-seeming
Sea, for these their so infinite benefits. Upon which I will not stand to
exemplify, for that every weak brain can conceive, what are the blessings of
peace, what the fruits of a quieted conscience, what the rewards of unity in
religion. But surely their retributions were such, as would absolutely
dishearten any wise man, to enable such ungrateful Canonists by benefits. Yet
will we take so much pain, as to decipher them to our Reader.

No long time after ( Eugenius the fourth, Plat. in vita Eugenij. 4.
then Poping it in Venice) the Emperor took occasion to go into Italy to
receive his Inauguration: where by the way it happened that he countenanced
somewhat above ordinary, Philip Duke of Millan, at that instant warring against
the Venetians and Florentines. They partly fearing, and partly imagining, that
their wills were half obtained, if they might work the Pope to their fashion,
adventured, and without opposall gained his Fatherhoods good will, to deny the
Emperor his lawful request; and more, adjoined his forces, to make good the
passage of Aruo about Syenna against his Majesty's people. This, you must at
any hand remember, was the Popes requital, this their usual remunerations,
not unfitly beseeming their double dealing consciences.

Yet departed his Majesty not uncrowned, but observe I beseech you, by what
practices, by what cunning sleights they proceeded in their state-House.
Extraordinary Intercession must be made; Six months he must stay at Siena, to
his infinite expense; who gained by that? And at last, must he leave Rome, doubt
you not, but to Eugenius his high content.

And again, this Neronian bloud-thirsting Bishop, some short time after being
deposed, for going about to frustrate the decree of the Council of Constance
(whereby it was inacted that every seventh year the Bishops should celebrate a
General Council) and to ratify That of Basil, which Martin had summoned, and
himself authorized; in the days of Frederick the third, he set all Austria,
Vuimphelinagus in Epit. rerum Germani carum.
on a miserable, woeful and lamentable co^bustion, by provoking Jews the son
of Charles king of France, then called the Daulphin, to infest Germany with
war, fire, and famine. For this Prince, at the pleasure of Eugenius,
endeavoring to make void the Council of Basil, with his Armeniachs and
soldiers, by cunning, treason, and protestations, possessed himself of all
the plain Country, yea, and of some Cities of Alsatia, miserably wasting that
goodly Province, the most fertile mother of grain and wine. That done, he fell
to burning the villages, Naucl. genesis 49.
the Manors and Mansions of citizens, of orphans and widows, and therein
spared neither Gods Churches nor Monasteries. Having put period to wast, but
not to cruelty, he returned to Basil with 30. thousand Cumbatants, where by the
valiancy of three thousand Heluetians, charging for their Country, he was
finally slain, the third part of his lame and maimed Army, scant returning
with life into France. Such be the success of all papal entertainment.

Frederick the third.
He reigned Anno 1440. about the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth.

ALbert succeeded Sigismund; but he departing this world within two years
after his election, the Imperial diaceme diuolued upon Frederick of Austria;
who being by nature a Prince of a clement, mild and peaceable disposition, set
diligent watch and ward over his thoughts, his words, and his actions, not at
all to offend these hereditarie disturbers of peace, and perpetual manaclers
of Princes. Yet could he not fully avoid their crossings, abate their pride,
nor escape their plots.

For as in a public Parliament held at Mogunce, he did what he could to
corroborat the council of Basil, held in the year of our Lord 1441. which the
Pope labored tooth and nail to disanul; as also, to diminish the exactions
which by Popish injunctions were levied upon the German Churches; which to
effect, by his letters, he desired the king of France either to assist in
person, or by some eminent persons of his Kingdom: Epist. extat. infine
clemangis in fasciculo rerum repetundarum ante aliquot annos Coloniae impressa.
So the Pope, to countermine against this lawful battery of public trial
(for these can no more abide it, then Owls can light) tampereth with the
French, neither to go himself, nor to suffer any other (without his priuity)
to appear as his Deputy. Here behold one Popish trick more for the present
to frustrate the intended reformation of a noble and virtuous Emperor. And
hereupon followed that woeful Alsatian de-population, whereof we told you
but now; Work laid out on another frontier by the Court of Rome, when
reformation is spoken of.
There is an other trick complotted, to busy his head with-all, viz.
Diuersion. His own house is on fire, how can he then attend the quenching of
his neighbors?

And albeit, that he outliued three successiue Bishops, and during their
lives, carried himself so modestly and benignly toward them, that nothing was
attempted by them against his Dignity; and yet hoped for greater contentments
by the rising of Pius the second to the Papacy, his ancient servant and
Minister: Notwithstanding, this his trusty friend being once seated, without
acquainting the Emperor, made no scruple to accurse his kinsman, Sigismund
Archduke of Austria, and to entangle Germany with intestine divisions. As thus.

Sigismund, after long controuersying, and nothing prevailing, being unwilling
that the people under his tuition, should still stand exposed to the
depraedations of the Romanists, in a bickering of Horsemen, chanced to take
prisoner, and imprisoned, Nicholas Cusanus, by the Pope sent into Tirol, to
ransack the Bishopric of Brixia: The Bishop censuring him at no less a crime
then high treason, committed against one of his creatures, enioyneth him
grievous punishments, from which his trustiness could not be wooed to absolve
him, no not at the intercession of Caesar, until Pluto himself came a
messenger to release him from his papal obstinacy.

His own Creatures report, that neither the threats, nor the entreaties of
Princes or communalties could any whit terrify him, but in extreme and
insatiable prowling for money, he was ready to accurse and prosecute with war,
as many as any way offered to gainsay his intendments.

Vide Paralip. Vrsp. Munster. in Cosmog. Naucl. in vlt. genesis
Theodorick Erbach, Archbishop of Mogunce being dead, Diether Erusburg was
preferred to his place. This man, for that Annats and first fruits had been
abolished and condemned in the Council of Basil, refused to pay to Saint Peter
for bestowing the Pall upon him, those twenty thousand, six hundred and fifty
ducats of the Rhene, which his Holiness by prescription adjudged to be due
unto him. Pius was not a little moved at the refusal; denies him
confirmation, and bestowed the Incumbencie upon Adolph of Nassau (not for love
toward the one believe it, nor for especial desert in the other) but for that
he was honorably allied, Note.
and able by friends to become master of the possession.

Diether valiantly resists his Deiection, and amongst many others, by large
and bountiful entertainment draws Henry the Palatine, and Frederick of
Bamberg, to take part in his quarrel: All Germany is up in faction, and the
principal personages therein engaged, to their notable loss and consumption.
For, Charles Marquis of Baden, George Bishop of Meten, and Vlrich Earl of
Wittemberg, of the faction of Adolph, in a notable encounter near Sechenham,
are rowted, slain, captiuated, and imprisoned in the Castle of Heydelberge.
From whence they could not be delivered, before that Baden had paid one
hundred thousand Florins; Meten forty five thousand, and Wittemberg as many, as
the Marquis. And for further gratuity, they were feign either to add, or to
release to the Palatine, other royalties of equal value unto their ransomes.

At this misfortune of his friends, who makes any doubt, but that Pius was
exceedingly agreeued? whereupon, as the bruised viper, he addresseth his
querimonious letters unto Philip Duke of Burgundy, concerning the miserable
estate of his partakers; a Prince as truly wise, as valiant in arms. Note
again.
Him he nominateth Captain of the War, and entreats his assistance
against the Palatine, Diether, the Earl of Catzenelboge, and their adherents.
But Philip in his high wisdom, either misliking the burden of this war, or by
the temporizing awkwardnes of the Pope too-long deferring his resolve; mean
while, by the treason of two Citizens, Mogunce was surprised by Scaludo in the
night and by Lodowic Niger Palatin, the Earl of Vold, and other of their
accomplices in the behalf of Adolph. Who put it to sack, and fire; slew five
hundred of the Citizens, and reduced it into perpetual servitude. So that this
noble Diocese, what by the sales, the alienations, and the mortgages, of the
dorps, villages and buroughs, even to this very day feels, and smarteth for
the outrages of this papal war.

This was one of Pius his good deeds; Rather then his auaricious Cofers would
forbear to in-exhaust Germany of her treasure, he cared not into what
distresses he cast the Princes, the people, and the Cities of the kingdom.

But as this second Impius dealt with the Princes; So did his successor, a
Venetian, Paulus the second (and worse) with his Majesty. For after the taking
of Constantinople, Frederick made his second iourny to Rome, on purpose to
deliberate with Paul about an expedition against the Turks, To the accelerating
whereof, for that the Princes through their mutual discontents were much
dejected in courage, he prayed his Holiness in person to bear him company
into Germany. But the Bishop putting off the motion with Courtship and kind
protestations, Hubertus Golt. and Hutenus.
notwithstanding laid wait for his life. Which he by his providence declining,
and in future resolving, to take precise notice of Popish trecheries, first
courageously opposed in the Parliament at Noremberg against the Legates of
Innocent, deputed through Germany to collect his Holinesses dismes, but
dispatched them away again to Rome as penilesse, as from thence they departed.

What man lives so void of proficiency, that reading these Legends, will
hereafter believe this traitorous society; sithence such worthy Emperors, such
wise Princes, and such great Potentates, could neither by their own
prouidences, nor the prudencie of their counsels, prescribe themselves an
assured means, to be fully acquitted from their ouer-reaching inventions?

Maximilian the first.
He reigned 1494. About the ninth year of Henry the seventh.

AFter the decease of Frederick, Maximilian being by the general suffrage of
the Electors in the life time of his Father chosen for his Consort in the
Empire, was now acknowledged for Emperor. Who although with ease he might have
purchased the accustomed solemnities of Caesar, yet being a Prince most
deeply in-seene into worldly practices; without question, upon recordation of
such inconveniences, which he observed formerlie to have fallen upon the
preceding Emperors, (allured unto Rome, by the glittering reflex of a golden
Crown) he set himself down, and quoted it in his Tables; That the presence
of the Popes were ever to be avoided, an infallible presage of ensuing
adversity to the Roman Emperors. Notwithstanding his wariest sincerity could
not at all times avoid their wickedest cousenages. Naucl. genesis 49. Mutius li.
29. Cuspinian in vita Maximil. and Zelemi Othomanni.


For in the very infancy of his installement, that most luxurious and covetous
Tyrant Alexander the sixth, for money, to the eternal reproach of the Christian
name, sold Zezimus heir of Turkey, expulsed by his brother Bajazet, alive and
dead within the space of one day. In like thirst of treasure, received from the
French, he ratified the Rape of Anne of Britain, before espoused by Proxy
unto Maximilian. The solemnized and consummated marriage of the daughter of the
said Emperor with Charles of France, he dissolved against the will, entreaty,
and real commandment of Caesar her father.

By Cardinal Raymond he pillaged the chiefest Provinces of Germany with novel
and unheard off devises of exaction.

Mut. li. 3.
By that irregular and incomprehensible power of the keys, for many years to
come he gave pardons to all rich-soules departed.

After him, as second in name, so second in Papacy, Iulio circumuented this
Emperor with as fine fetches, as did any of his predecessors the former Caesar's.

For after he had engaged his majesty in the war of Venice, Hubertus Goltz.
Paral. Vrsp.
a war of all other the most dangerous and troublesome, and that he had forced
the best of their Cities to the pinch of necessity: Julius against his faith,
most religiously sworn before the states of the Empire at Augusta; and against
common honesty, not only received the Venetians, upon request of peace, into
favor, but entering with them into League, this most wicked Senacherib turned
his arms against his Majesty. Yelling out a speech rather showing evident
testimony of an Out-lawes humor, then of Peter's successor.

For by records of memory it is certainly reported, that as he passed from the
City by the bridge of Tiber, he threw the keys into the River, exclaiming in
fury: Sithence Peter's keys will no longer stead us, welcome Paul's sword.
Whereby, if a man would fall to jest, he might well argue, that by this mad
trick he deprived himself and his successors of this Clauian Tyranny, claimed
from S. Peter, and now transferred to Saint Tiber.

Upon which translation of Julius his keys, one has played no less truly,
then wittely in these verses.

He that for many Ages long has sat
In Peter's chair, new doctrine does invent,
For sinful Souls he prays not: but at that,
Which peaceful Peter him to follow meant,
He jests: Loves arms and bloody streams of war,
Paul is his Saint, Peter inferior far.
Paul has a sword, but smites not: He not so,
For many souls have died with his blow.
A cruel Outlaw sprung from poyso'nd woomb,
And neither follows Christ, nor Peter's doom.
But our great and eternal God, Hubert. Goltz. Mutius lib. 3. Paralip. Vrsp.
the just revenger of iniquity, suffered not this his neuer-before-heard-of
perjury to die unrevenged.

For at what time Jews king of France, according to the Conuentions of the
League with Caesar, persecuted his Holiness, so far ouergone in pride through
the assistance of the Venetians, as he doubted not to scorn all conditions of
peace; yet after the battle of Rauenna, such was the disastrous fortune of him
and his, that the peace, which but even now, he scorned, now he humbly
seeks, to his cost experimenting that for all his jesting, Peter's keys at a
pinch did him more service, then many thousands of Paul's swords.

After this overthrow, and some other crosses, he died, and left Leo the
tenth, his successor, as well in seat as in treacherous disposition. For in the
beginning of his pontificie, estranging himself from the French King, he
adhered to Caesar and Sforza the Millanois, against the French, then in March
upon an invasion against Millan.

Upon the slaughter of the Heluetians at Marignan, Frederick and Sforza being
reduced into order, he violated his league with Maximilian, and returned again
to the friendship of Francis. Arnoldus Feronius in vita Francisci Valesij.
Unto whom, after he had obtained a Grant, that the pragmaticall Sanction
should be abolished in France, and a new inserted, he conserred the titles of
the Constantinopolitan Empire.

In this donation, whether should a Christian more admire his preposterous
liberality, in giving away an other man's right, or abhor his treachery in
doing his utmost, to cross Maximilian, so well-deseruing an Emperor?

Catal. testium veritatis.
But Caesar finding himself deceived (whether in this confrontment, or in some
other, I am not able to say) is reported to have said in Dutch: That he could
well auow, that none of the Popes had kept faith with him: And that Leo should
be the last of that rank, unto whom he would give credit. And that he said
so, and did so, the sequel proved. For within a few years after falling into a
laske, he yielded up his ghost, in the year of Salvation 1519. By whom, by the
pleasure of almighty God, it might have come to pass, that he, who had been
so often illuded by Popish practices, might have taken some course in so great
an alteration and blessed reformation of religion, to have begun primitive
restoration to their final destruction. But being prevented by immature
death, what was in his mind, he bequeathed to be executed, by the potencie of
his living successor Charles, his brothers son.

Charles the fifth.
He reigned Anno 1519. about the eleventh year of Henry the eighth.

But what Pen, as it ought, in suting ornament, is able to delineat to life,
the treacheries which from time to time these Patrons of confusion bounded out
against this Charles, this potent and thrice honorable Emperor? In so
wonderful an alteration of religion, such as since the corruption of the
Primitive, never befell the Christian world, who can but wonder at the daring
presumption of the Popes, in provoking so happy and so worthy a Potentate? who,
taking into notice his singular affection in defending and upholding the
Papacy, can choose but accurse the ingratitude of such desperate persons?

Jouius li. 4. de vita Leonis decimi. The Pope is now French.
For upon the decease of Maximilian, the Electors being assembled at Frankfort,
Charles and Francis king of France, became competitors for the diadem. Leo the
tenth, being in bonds of strict friendship with Francis, and according to the
innated humors of the Church, having received his fee, favored and pleaded
his best plea in bar of Charles, to the preferment of his bountiful client
Francis.

His cautions consisted of three principles; the first imported a consideratiue
fear of his Greatness, being by inheritance a Prince endowed with many spacious
and wealthy Kingdoms. The second, was taken from his peculiar and
figure-casting imagination; In that, forsooth, this Charles by no obscure and
lineamentall predictions of face and disposition, should resemble the man,
foretold in certain verses of an ancient Prophet; A truer Prophecy, then
the Pope was aware of.
Who arising in the North, should be the motive of grievous alterations to fall
upon all Italy, but especially upon the Romish sea: The third from pretense of
equity, by letters signified unto the Lords of the Election; That it stood not
with Law for Charles to aspire unto the Empire; for that the Kings of Naples
were the Churches Liege-men, and time out of mind by oath had capitulated with
the Bishops, never to affect the Roman Empire, but to rest contented with
their inheritances.

Appendix ad Plati. Sleid. vbi supra.
But by the integrity of Frederick Duke of Saxony, in manifestation of his
loyalty toward Maximilian his deceased Master, unto whom all his life time he
stood most devoted; Charles prevailed. Leo now turning Vulpes, Now Imperial.
follows the stream; for the present, cleanly falls off from the French:
And finding Grace to attend Charles; there courts he; and thither he
dispatcheth his Commendatorie miseries.

Charles requires his Amen to the Election; as also his dispensation, to
retain with the Empire the Kingdom of Naples, the Law of Inuestiture in no
point gaine-saying it. But give a Pope leave, I pray you, to fly to his wits,
he must, and does plot out new devises, to impeach the Greatness of Charles. He
sends his Breues and messengers throughout Germany, Resp. Caesaris ad breue
Apostolicum.
to forbid the Diet at Worms: of purpose to put off his Coronation at
Aquisgran. But when his pontifical improbity perceived his positive diuersions
to be illuded; and the resolution of the Electors to be such, as could not be
daunted in their proceedings by force, fear, flattery, nor threats, he then
fell again, to the renewing of his league, with the late-forsaken French:
Amongst other Articles inserting this for one; That, Again French.
both the Sicils should be taken from Charles; That the government of Italy
should be altered, and the protection of the Cities shared, between the French
and his Holiness.

Now the question is, for how long time this Combination stood immutable: so
long doubt you not, as it stood with the welfare of Leo, and the advantage of
his sea. And this is an especial note, to be always observed through the whole
discourse of these lives.

For, as soon as the French King, upon confidence of this Popish League, had
broken with Caesar, and sent Robert de la March, Charles his rebel, to infest
Netherland; yea, and his men of war into Italy, to assay the surprise of
Rhegium, a town late belonging to the Church; Leo fearing the potencie of the
French, and calling their fidelities into suspect: to make sure work for the
maintenance of his own stake, and to reduce a restitution to the Church of
those towns which the French had usurped; Now again the third time he
follows the Fortunes of Caesar: And lastly Imperial.
Desiring of his Majesty (after his most courteous reception) that Parma and
Placentia might be restored to the Church; Francis Sforza to the Duchy of
Millan; the French expulsed Italy, and the Papacy being settled in a peaceable
estate, might thenceforth be secured from all fear of the French.

But Paul dying; By the succession of Adrian the sixth, a Germane borne, the
Papal Anger for a while lay silenced. Gerardus Moringus in vita Hadriani vi.
Iouius in vita eiusdem.
For during the short time of his Papacy, As a good schoolmaster, he
persisted constant in good will toward Caesar; And against the French, he
assisted him with treasure, and conjoined him in league with the Florentines,
the Siennois, the Luquois, the Roytelets of Italy, the Apostolic sea, with
Henry of England, and Jews of Hungary.

But Adrian in the second year of his Papacy being departed, not without
suspicion of poison, the fatal practices of the Bishops by so much the more
eagerness outflamed, by how much they had gathered materials to work upon,
during the time of the former respiration.

Feronius in vita regis Francisci.
For Julius of Medices, otherwise Clement the seventh, after much wrangling
being elected Pope, before his installation was, no man more, esteemed of
Caesar. From the Church of Toledo, by his bounty he received an annuity of ten
thousand ducats. Resp. Caesaris ad breue Apostolicum.
He reconciled him so thoroughly into the favor of Adrian, from whence he was
fallen, that in all affairs of importance, Adrian made him only of his
counsel. But no sooner Pope, no sooner traitor. Against his Lord he
complotteth league upon league, discharging his bills of account with
acquittances of this nature.

For Francis the French king being in Italy, Feronius.
and after the taking of Millan dispersing his forces throughout Lombardy,
Clement works the disunion of the Hadrian confederacy, and forbids the
Florentins, the Syennois and the Luccois to pay the money, which by the
conuention they ought to have sent unto Caesar.

By Albert Pius Prince of Carpi, As Leo: So Julius.

As Leo and Julius, so the residue: viz. wethercocks, for advantage. Sleyd. li.
4.


he concluded a Clandestine league with king Francis, mean time cunningly
treating with the Imperialists by way of sequestration and Indifferency to
impledge the territory of Millan into his discretion.

But the devise being utterly disliked, and fortune against all imagination so
crossing his designements, that in a memorable defeature, Francis was taken
prisoner at Paruie, and carried captive into Spain; Feronius in vita
Francisci. Iouius li. 7. in vita F. Daui.
then to his perpetual reproach of leuity and inconstancy (to flater with
Caesar) he parted with an infinite mass of money for his soldiers arrerages:
yet during these passages in iealouzy, that Charles would turn his thoughts to
the conquest of Millan, which of all his Italian pretenda^cies was only left
unconquered, he goes to counsel with Loyesse the Queen mother, Henry king of
England, the Venetians and some other Potentates, how to expulse the
Imperialists out of Italy, and redeem Francis. To set forward the execution
whereof, he deals with Ferdinand Dauila, a man of eminent place and soldiery
in Caesar's Camp: assaieth to draw him to the party, and for a bait offers
him the title of the kingdom of Naples. Dauila being of a subtle and close
disposition, accepts, learneth the secrets of the enemies proiects, and
acquainteth his master therewith. Caesar laugheth at the man's perjury; who
being the principal architect of all injurious and prejudicial proceedings
against him, had notwithstanding himself made his enemy privy to counsels,
given him very serious cautions in future, how to proceed in his affairs, and
how to provide for his own security, with an intimation to become careful to
bind the loyalties of his men of war with greater devotion to his service.

Whereby finding himself ouer-reacht by Dauila, he gives not over, but tries
another way to the wood: And thus it was: Francis being set at liberty by
Caesar, and unwilling to make good these conuentions, whereunto by the treaty of
Madril he stood obliged; he takes hold of the occasion, absolueth him of his
oath; confederateth anew with the French and some others, and proclaims the
confederacy by the name of the Most holy League. Inserting amongst the
Articles, that Caesar also might be comprehended therein, So that, he would
first re-deliuer upon a competent ransom the children of France, as yet in
hostage for their father: restore Millan to Sforza, and enter Italy for his
Coronation with no greater troops, then should seem requisite to the
discretions of the Pope and the Venetians.

What indifferent Reader, weighing the original of this league, the time
wherein it was concluded: and the occasions whereupon it was broched, can make
any other construction to his vprightest censure, but that his Holiness had
small intention by these injurious breaches of concluded articles, to further
the public peace, but rather to administer matter of implacable
heart-burnings and assured wars between the Princes. For by one Apostaticall
Breue, first, the conditions of the peace are prescribed to so high and mighty
an Emperor, by his subject and Vassal Sforza of Milan: secondly, the oath of
the French King duly and solemnly taken, is pardoned and frustrated: thirdly
Caesar is commanded to re-deliuer the children of France, as if it were not
enough by the releasement of the fathers oath, to be once deluded. Fourthly, He
is commanded, not to wink at, but to perpetuate the tyranny of the Italian
Kinglings. Fifthly, he is commanded to forbear to come unto Italy, unless he
proportioned his troops to the shape of the Papal and Venetian limitations.
Sixthly, He is commanded to give pardon to Traitors: and for conclusion, in case
of not-performance, war is denounced by sea and by land.

Amidst which dishonorable limitations, what could Caesar do, but in true
acknowledgement of the vprightnes of his cause, reject these base conditions
with as great courage on the one side, as they were insolently propounded by
the other, reposing more hope in his innocence, then in the multitude of Horse
or shipping?

And surely, God almighty, the impartial Judge of humane actions, so moderated
the execution of his divine justice, that whatsoever complots this architect of
evil counsel, meant to have thrown down upon the head of Caesar, the very
same befell his own person, even when he thought himself to stand upon so sure
a ground, as to be an only Spectator of the ensuing troubles.

For Caesar being awakened at the Report of so famous a Confederacy, Sleyd.
li. 6. Feronius vbi supra.
dispatched into Italy the Duke of Burbon and Fronsperg, Captains of admirable
reputation for their carriage in the last wars; with warrant to defend Naples,
now by the tenor of the league given in prey to war and disunion.

These Leaders pretending, as if they meant to pass by Florence, now grown
proud by the continuance of peace, their mighty Citizen the Pope, and the late
league; at last bending their course by the mountains and rocks, upon the sixth
day of May, they solemnly entered Rome: drove Clement into the Bastil of Adrian;
and upon want of all necessaries (his Bulls, his Breues and execrations, thick
and threefold breathed out against the Germans and Spaniards, standing him in
no stead) compelled him to yield; but with so servile and base conditions, as
upon the like, never did Soldier to this day, give up his fort.

The insolency of the Spaniard, and the inhumanity of the Germane, I am not
able in apt words to display. See Guicoiardine, and the Histories of those
times.

For besides their horrible pillagings, their spoils, their rauishments, and
their wastes, no kind of scorn was left unpracticed against the Pope and his
Cardinals: All without difference were alike made captives, all alike tortured:
He that was ra^somed to day by the Spanish, to morrow was again in durance to
the Germans.

Caesar writes his letters to the Pope and the King of England, that all this
happened besides his priuity or command; yea, that he would not acknowledge
such transgressors for his soldiers, Like for like, by Caesar to the Pope.
who durst attempt so wicked a service. Yet sticks he not to attribute the
mishap to the secret judgments of God, who would not suffer so gross an
indignity concluded against the Majesty of the sacred Empire, to escape without
punishment. Bona verba.

The Pope being restored to liberty, makes show of great friendship, but in
secret works him all possible vexation.

For either upon hope to possess the Kingdom of Naples (a precise condition
in the articles) or else in desire of revenge; he so wrought with the French
king to renew the war, that at his direction Lautrick was sent into Italy,
for the conquest thereof. But such was the event, that Lautrick died; the
pestilence raged through the Camp; and nothing was effected. Whereupon, the
French king for the love of his children (as yet captives in Spain) was glad
to accept of the proffered conditions. The Bishop, always accustomed to go
with the stream, upon the peace perfected at Cambray, between the Emperor,
the French, and the other Princes, enstalleth Charles at Bononia, with the
Imperial diadem, and aydeth him in the siege and conquest of Florence; the
people whereof he saw punished most severely. But his Holiness had not
forgotten to requite Charles with many like courtesies, if God had bestowed
longer life upon him.

For within three years after, he had complotted a league with Francis the
French King at Marsellis, to take Millan from Caesar, and to invade Sauoy;
bestowing his niece Katherin upon his son Henry, if, to the good of the
Christian commonwealth, he had not been by death prevented, and that, not
without the suspicion of poison, as some suppose.

Could a more treacherous man be found living then this Clement, If such the
men continually, the^ what their Religion?
who continually being taken into favor and alliance with Caesar, continually
betrayed his faith, and of a dissembling friend, evermore proved a professed
enemy.

After the decease of Clement, succeeded Alexander Farnesius, otherwise Paul
the third, a man almost spent with age, yet of a far more subtle disposition.

Haec omnia exposita exstant apud Sleyd. li. 17. vsque ad lib. 23.
For upon observation, that the controversies in religion did daily more and
more augment, and propagate, with singular affection he studied Caesar's favor;
but to no other purpose, then in thirst of the German blood, to combine his
Majesty and the other Princes, in stricter bonds of perseverance, to take
arms against the Lutherans; hypocritically giving out to all persons, and in
all places, and that upon his faith, that he would speedily assemble the
General counsel, so often petitioned, and promised to the Germane Nation. And
surely so he did, To win time.
first proclaiming it to be held at Mantua, then at Verona, and lastly after
the expiration of many years at Trent: but not with any intention to salve the
greeuances of the Christian Commonweal, or the distemperature of the Church:
but that by holding the Germans in suspense upon the final determinations of
the Council; mean time he might win time to effectuate his secret resolutions;
viz. the suppression of the truth, and the restitution of Germany, now through
the light of the Gospel beginning to shake off Babilonian tyranny, to it
pristinat captivity. So in the year of our Lord 1546. he celebrateth the
Council at Trent, and makes all possible fair weather with the Germans. But
with what intent? surely to combine the nobility, and to instigate his Majesty
to begin the war against the Protestant Princes, and the Evangelical Cities.
In the beginning whereof, good fortune prognosticated a prosperous progress
unto Caesar (by the taking of John Frederick Elector of Saxony; the Lantgraue
of Hessen; the confiscating of all Wittembergs estates, and the finacing of
many confederat Cities) yet, in being too officious to give his Holiness
content, in keeping his prisoners more strictly then Honor could warrant, and
in coining new articles of religion to the Popes best liking; such an
alteration followed, upon the rising of Maurice Prince Elector, and Albert of
Brandenburg, and other new confederates, that (dismissing the captiuated
Princes, and granting liberty of Conscience through Germany) so
disaduantageous were his proofs of papal countenance, that he often wished,
that he had preferred the loves of the Princes, before the Popes surest
alliance.

For although (to confess truth) the proceedings of Paul against his Majesty,
were slower and better carried, then those of his predecessors; in regard that
he was his Champion, to manage bloody and difficult stratagems against the
servants of God: yet upon the death of Peter Aloysius duke of Parma and
Placentia (murdered by treason for his tyranny) when Ferdinand Gonzaga,
Caesar's General, and Governor of Millan, Mamb. Roseus li. 4. appendicis ad
Historiam Neapolita. Pa^dulphi Collenutij haec late explicat.
was invested in his stead: the Pope presently mistrusteth Caesar for an author
of the murder; and in vain requesting the Restitution of Placentia, he strait
starteth from Caesar, and bethinketh himself how to join with the French: And
had joined in deed, if he had longer lived; the time offering so fit an
opportunity.

For now Henry upon the defeature of the Princes, and the seizing on Placentia
(above expectation) growing into jealousy of the powerfulness of Caesar,
renueth his league with the Switzers, and strengthens his party with friends
on all hands.

But in midst of these reuengefull devises, this miser dyed, distracted more
through grief and anguish, then any infirmity of Age: the tenth day of
November. 1549.

Sleid. li. 21. l. 26.
After long wrangling in the Conclaue, 1550. Julius the third is saluted Pope:
being before his installment, of the French faction, and after, so given over
to belly-cheere and venery, that he died of a Lethargy, and wanted rather
leisure then will to attempt against Caesar.

But Paul the fourth a most devilish Hypocrite, and next succeeding Marcellus
the second, (a Pope also of a few days standing) by the packing of the
Cardinals wholly devoted to the French service, was consecrated High Priest:
This man during his Cardinalship, was Caesar's most malicious enemy: Insomuch
that by his provocation, Paul the third was persuaded to invade Naples, M.
Roseus li. 4. append. ad Hist. Neopolit. Hiero. Rosellus de bello Romano.
as an apourtena^t of the Church. But now enjoying fuller means to work
fuller despights, he makes open profession of his late concealed malice, and
prosecuteth his followers with indignities of deepest fury. For no sooner was
he seated in the Chair of the scarlet Beast, but he casts into durance
Alexander Farnesius Cardinal of Sanflorian, Camillus Collonna, and Iulianus
Caesar with his brother the Archbishop, upon suspicion of a conspiracy
complotted against him in favor of the Imperialists. As many the Servants and
ministers of Caesar, here and there negotiating his affairs through Italy, as
he could lay hands on, he seazeth; and amongst these, Tascis master of the
forests to his majesty, and don Garzia Lassus a Duke of no obscure reputation
amongst the Spanish.

Mark Anthony Colonna being absent, he cites to appear before him within
three days space; and in default of appearaunce, he makes prize of his goods.

To John Count of Montorian, he gives the goods of Ascanius Colonna, together
with the titular Earldom of Pallianum.

In despite of Caesar he recalleth the Outlawed gentlemen of Naples, and
endoweth them with offices, and public preheminences.

At the instance of Peter Stroza, he fortifieth Pallianum, and prepares it for
the receipt of the French to the infesting of Naples.

Finally, by sending his kinsman Cardinal Caraffa into France, most impiously
he disturbeth the peace concluded in Belgia, between his most excellent
Majesty and the French Monarch.

And to be especially careful, that no one shot of Popish malice should miss
his Majesty, he absolutely denies his son Philip (unto whom the father had
resigned the administration of all his kingdoms) the inuestiture of the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicil, being held of the Church. Whereupon followed such
furious and lamentable wars, managed between these mighty potentates of
Christendom, that Italy and France being chiefly engaged therein, reeked
again in the bloody tragedies of their dearest Citizens. Guil. Zenocarus de
vita caroli. 5.


For not Rome only was almost brought unto those extremities by the presence of
the Duke of Alua, which once it suffered in the days of Clement, and for the
present avoided by accepting of these conditions, which the
now-somwhat-lenified Lord General propounded: but the French also in favor of
the Papacy, being sent into Italy under the conduct of the Guise, to infest the
peaceful estate of the Latian provinces, At Saint Quintins.
underwent the miserable destiny of unfortunate warfare, in their endeavors to
thrust in new forces into the chief City of Vermandois, against the squadrons
of King Philip, marching out of Belgia to the relief of the said place. In
which conflict their whole army was routed by the Germane Horse, the Constable,
the Rhene-graue, and many noble men taken prisoners, and the City forced.

And not long after being masters of Calaies, they suffered a no less
disasterous defeature in their return by Graueling at Count Egmonds hands:
Terms and Villebon their two most famous leaders being taken prisoners, their
army routed, and their people slain.

Now, what upright conscience can savor a Religion so insatiate of blood? or
what Christian can think that Man, who to perfect his own respects, cares
not what mischief he works, to be the Vicar of Christ?

Surely, Let them impudently affirm what they list, their works so
perspicuously laid open to meanest capacities, may with sufficiency assure
us, that through the whole course of their successions, they have ever rather
merited the Sir-names of Saul, then the least title of Paul. And so to the
worlds end will they do, rather then by the redeeming of one Christian soul
from spoil and blood shed, they will suffer one Acre of Saint Peter's imaginary
patrimony, to be wrested from them, if possibility or treacherous policy can
any way withstand it.

Ferdinand Caesar.
He reigned 1558. About the fifth year of Queen Mary.

AS soon as Charles had betaken himself to a solitary life in Saint Iustus
in Spain, his brother Ferdinand long before elected King of the Romans, now
by the general suffrage of the Electors assembled at Frankford, is preferred
unto the Empire. After the ceremonies whereof accomplished, to make manifest
his obseruancie toward the Romish Sea, he dispatcheth to his Holiness Guzman,
his chief chamberlain; to signify, that his Majesty's pleasure was, upon
opportunity of first-offered-occasion, to request and receive the imperial
Diadem at his Holiness Hands. But such was his father-hoods arrogant and
froward answer: that it may well argue the Relator, not only not to be the
successor of Peter, who with the residue of the Apostles, reverenced the
authority of the higher powers, as the ordinance of God, with due honor and
obedience: no, nor a man willing to do one good turn for another, according
to the mutual laws of courtesy and humanity: but in truth, that very
Antichrist, whom the warrant of Holy writ does point out, to be the person, who
should arrogate to himself, to prescribe above, and against any thing, that
God himself has commanded to be holy and inviolable.

For this irregular Beast, would upon no reason acknowledge Ferdinand for
Emperor; cauilling that his predecessor Charles, had no ability or capacity
to surrender the Empire to no living creature, but to the Romish Sea; Neither
that it was lawful for Ferdinand, to take upon him the administration of the
State, without the approbation thereof.

His Majesty's Ambassador he would at no hand suffer to approach his
presence; but having learnt out the tenor of his Embassy, he propounded unto
the Cardinals and Lawyers certain questions, neither arising from the
rudiments of Gods word, nor enforced from the grounds of National Laws; but
harried from the deepest Abyss, and there discussed by Lucifer the Prince of
malice, pride and falsities. Which, as afterward they were libelled out, and
dispersed by the Romanists themselves, you shall here receive.

1 If Guzman, who auerreth that He is sent from his Lord Ferdinand, unto the
most Holy Lord the Pope, ought by Law to speak what Charles the fifth has
done, about the resignation of the Empire to his brother Ferdinand.

2 Which being sufficiently understood; whether they, wholly, or in part have
done rightfully and lawfully, sithence the Approbation of the most Holy Lord
the Pope, and the Apostolic sea, was not interposed therein.

3 Whether, these difficulties being cleared; nothing for the present may be
objected against the person of the most excellent Lord Ferdinand. Whereby, he
may be adjudged incapable of the Imperial dignity: As the evil education of
his son the king of Bohem, inclinable to manifest heresy. It being
promised, that within the Kingdoms subject to his authority, heresies are
tolerated without punishment; Catholics are oppressed, Monasteries
dissolved, Churches avoided, and the Professors of the Augustane reformation,
suffered to converse and inhabit promiscuouslie with Romish Catholics.

As also, that Ferdinand himself did grant a conference at Worms, as
touching controversies in Religion, without the consent and good leave of the
Holy Apostolic Sea. That, He bound himself by oath in the Diet of
Frankford, to observe all the Articles confirmed in the fore passed Sessions;
wherein many damnable and Heretical opinions were maintained and allowed.
That, He usurped the Name of Emperor by his own Authority. That he suspended
the Decree, published against Communicants under both kinds; especially at
such a time, wherein seuerest execution was most requisite: That he had
falsified his oath, taken upon his first election of King of Romans (wherein
he had bound himself, to be a defender of the Church, and the Catholic
faith) schisms, heresies, and the Protestant Religion. That he had faulted in
many more points of like kind, against his oath, and the Holy Canons.

4 What in like manner were to be determined concerning the persons of many the
Princes Electors, who being notoriously known to have forsaken the Romish
religion, have agreed to this Resignation: And how all these mischiefs may be
prevented and remedied with the least disturbance and breach of Tranquillity to
the Christian Commonwealth. No true Popish motion: but in these days the Turk
is grown too near a neighbor.
These were the points to be questioned by the Cardinals.

Now albeit the Method of the Narration do bind me, to acquaint you with the
Resolutions of these Creatures the Cardinals (for surely I know it is a part of
my task to diue into the cunning intendments of these proposed questions:)
Notwithstanding, the incompatible pride of the Romanists; their tyrannizing
over all Laws, and the indignity of such base, wicked, and malicious
propositions, do wholly divert me from my intended Method, forcibly compelling
me against the Rules of History, to walk a long digression from my intended
Narration. For which, I beseech thee (Reader) pardon and patience.

For who upon mature deliberation of such scruples, knowing the Author by whom
they were propounded, can refrain from accursing this so fanatical an ambition
of Sovereignty in a Bishop, accompanied with such horrible impiety and
contempt of his everliving Masters commandment? What conscience can but blush
at his impudency, who having by Gods permission for our manifold sins
tyranized over the Church of Christ for so many years, would yet at this day,
in despite of light and truth, reduce Kings and Princes into the ancient
estate of their Babilonical servitude? Not once looking back upon such like
narrations as these, (taken out from their own Records) to consider, how their
predecessors to work their wills upon mighty Potentates (for hic Aquila non
captat muscas, and quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui.) have made no
more conscience by secret and cunning practices, to imbrue the whole Christian
world in blood and desolation; Mustipha ac Famagusta.
then a Turkish General by falsifying his faith, has done against conquered
Christians. Yea, I dare auow, (for experientia optima magistra) that by hook
or crook, at this day they would as eagerly follow their Canonical presidents,
to restore their Entrados (hinc illae Lachrimae) as ever did any of their
Luciferian predecessors. Were it not, but that they apprehend, how the Turkish
forces, Tunc tua res agitur, etc.
first by land affront the Empire from the Carpathie Mountains to the
Ardiatique: Secondly by sea, how at diverse times, but especially in the year
of our Lord 1534. Barbarussa so scoured along the coast of Italy, that if he
had descended a little lower to Ostia, actum esset de Roma. His Holiness must
have resorted to ancient devises, viz. peradventure have sought a new Auignion
in Thule or China, whether his Jesuits are already employed to prepare his
way. But this is not all the fear, wherewith these merciless fellows have
terrified his holy wisdom.

For the world does know, that for a whole Winter they have set footing in
Italy, and wasted Friuli. Which to prevent, Read the Turkish History for the
bottom of their enforced lenities.
by the best means, wherewith God has truly enabled him, and the residue of
the Christian Princes, if they be not provident, I can but pray, that his
divine Majesty would be pleased, to resume the welfare of his people into his
own protection. And so to the Response of the Cardinals.

Who confessing the weightinesse of the questions to be such, as partly in
regard of the nouelty, partly in regard of the quality of the persons, and
lastly in regard of the trouble of the times, and the power of the infidel
enemy, they ought to be examined in a full counsel of the choicest and
discreetest wisdoms; yet either in wayward affectation to preserve the Papal
Authority, or in fear of his bestiall furiousness, maliciously powered out on
all sorts without difference; they returned an answer rather testifying some
such imagination, then any way sauouring of truth or integrity.

And thus it was. That, it ought to be proved by public Evidence, whether
it appeared, that the Empire became void by Charles his Resignation, or by
some other means. That, it ought to be sifted how Ferdinand could pretend to
succeed: mean time that his Ambassador sent to Proxy his obedience, or to
negotiate any other public Act, ought not to be admitted. That all things
treated of and ratified at Frankford concerning Ferdinands election, were
void, frustrate and of no effect, for that the Scepter of the Apostolic Sea
(unto whom at first the keys of all heavenly and earthly power were given)
was not first mediated. That those worthy personages who were assisting and
tainted of heretical impiety, had forfeited all the rites and prerogatives, of
old granted them, concerning the election of Emperors. As touching the points
objected against his Majesty in the third article: That it was of greatest
consequence; and had need of penance: which being performed, his Holiness was
to proceed according to fatherly clemency. Whereupon a Procurator was to be
sent from his Popishnesse, to renounce all the sanctions and decrees ratified
at Frankford. After publication whereof, and the Empire now void, a new mandat
might be made to petition Confirmation, for that it is apparent, that by
virtue of the Election, adjoined to Clement his Confirmation, Ferdinand ought
to succeed in the Empire.

As concerning the impediment procured by his own default, and somewhat
hindering him; It ought to be put to Examination: That after absolution
obtained, obedience performed, and the ancient oath of fidelity administered,
he may fully enjoy the confirmation of the Apostolic Court. Whose only and
peculiar property it is, to wide open its Arms, lovingly and half way (as it
were) to embrace every living soul coming to be received upon repentance,
and flying thereunto with a lively faith.

O you Romanists! here let me ask you, which of you dare presume to say, that
he is more holy, or more religious, then Ferdinand? What is his sin so
greatly to be repented of? What manner of repentance is that, which you so
much desire? or how. shall he hope to speed, if he stand to your wavering and
dispensatorie discretions? Here is no fault committed against God: his word
does warrant his proceedings. The fundamental laws of the Empire do avouch
that an Emperor being chosen by all the Electors, or the more part of them, Vide
de hoc constit. Lodouici 4. apud Alberic. de Rosate L. Been a Zenone C. de
quadrien. praescript.
upon the very election, without approbation of Pope, or any other foreign
Potentate, is to be received for true and indubitate Emperor. Cardinal Cusanus
says: Electores, qui communi consensu omnium Almanorum and aliorum qui imperio
subiecti erant, Lib. de concord. Cathol. cap. 4.
tempore secundi Henrici constituti sunt, radicalem vim habent ab ipso communi
omnium consensu, qui sibi naturali iure Imperatorem constituere poterant: non
ab ipso Romano Pontifice, in cuius potestate non est, dare cuicunque prouinciae
per mundum Regem vel Imperatorem; ipsa non consentiente.

The Electors who were instituted by the common assent of all the Almanes, and
others the subjects of the Empire, in the time of Henry the second: by the
said general consent have a successiue power, by their municipiall laws to
choose unto themselves an Emperor. Without depending upon the Pope, in whose
power it is not, to limit unto any province under the cope of heaven, a King or
governor, without its own agreement.



But admit there were no such law, is not the inauguration of all Princes
merely temporal? are not the setting on of a Crown, the girding of a sword,
and the delivery of a Scepter, orders merely ceremonial? where are then your
interessed claims? I will leave you to your wits, and proceed to your
starting-holes of spiritualia; Which I am sure consist in suffering the people
to receive the blessed Communion under both kinds. Here is a sin
unpardonable. Stay, I beseech you. Did not Paul the third, and he a Pope, send
out his Bulls, whereby he gave all the Bishops throughout Germany full
authority to communicate unto the people under both kinds? How say ye? Strange
conclusions in Popery.
shall his Majesty be exempted, and they privileged? will you tolerate an
order of your own inacting in every parish, and not suffer the magistrate to
see the same by peace and quietness preserved and executed through a whole
kingdom? you know upon what points of necessity, that Bull was granted, and now
rather then you will fail to make odious his sacred Majesty to the fautours of
your passions, you will quarrel him about an act of your own allowance. Woe
unto you, you Hypocrites, who in words seem Saints, but in your hearts retain
not a grain of piety. Woe unto you, who offer your open breasts to
penitentiaries, but having them in your clutches, you tear them in their
consciences with more then heathenish foppery. You inioine penance to others,
and perform no such matter your selves. Amongst your selves, ye reveal all
secrets, and are Iouiall thereat; but treasons and massacres you conceal, and
then your impudent wits must bear you out, (for your faces will not) that it
was told under the veil of confession. Thus by impostures you live, you
reign, and deceive the world, neither caring to enter heavens gates themselves
nor suffering others to enter that would.

Well, during the Interim of these ponderous machinations against his Majesty
by the college of Cardinals, Guzman coming to the understanding thereof, day
by day hastneth his Audience before his Holiness. At last after three months
attendance, and earnest begging (but not before he had received a more strict
commandment from his Master) either upon audience to execute his commission,
or without delay to return from Rome, he is admitted to speak in the
presence of seven Cardinals, from whom he rereceiueth this answer. Forasmuch
as his demand required the most mature deliberation of the Cardinals, and such
like persons learned in the Laws, that, according to his Masters command he
might depart at pleasure: mean time his Holiness would recall the whole
matter unto full examination.

Note the Evasion.
Good GOD, what other deliberation could be meant hereby, more then a mere
cunning, and dilatorie illusion? For the matter had been again and again
disputed on, and the confirmation so long delayed, in expectation of some
disaster, which Time might produce against Caesar, that before any thing was
determined, this politic Impostor was taken out of this world. After whom
departed unto the place of eternal bliss this worthy Emperor; but so, that
the confirmation which Clement made litigious, Pius the fourth offered
willingly, and Ferdinand rejected as constantly, after the examples of Radulph
of Habsburge his progenitor, and Maximilian his Grandfather, contenting
himself with the orderly election of the German Princes.

I have heard report of as weighty a toleration as this, even in matters of
religion, if as virtuous a Princess, as any of these aforementioned, would have
condiscended to have accepted the approbation at his Holinesses hand. And as
the world now stands, who doubts but the Pope would do much to be
reconciled to some Christian Constantines.

And therefore to conclude, I hold it not fit to conceal these worthy
remembrances of his godliness and sincerity; That in his reign, in the year
1552. the second day of August, an Edict was obtained, whereby peace was
granted to the professors of the Augustan confession.

That, in the year 1555. that noble Decree followed, wherein it was ordained,
that no force, nor offense, directly or indirectly, in case of Religion should
be thence-forth used against Prince, Earl, or any imperial City.

In the year 1559. at Augusta, in a full assembly of the States, the said
Decree was revived and confirmed.

After which Constitutions confirmed by the transaction of Passauia, and
confirmed by the Estates (as I said at Ausburg) this good Emperor persuading
himself, that men's minds were wrought to Religion, more by preaching and
teaching, then by force and bloodshed; was willing, even within his own
hereditarie possessions, That no subject of his should be troubled for his
conscience. Wishing, that some abuses (used by the Romanists) might by lawful
and moderate proceedings be reformed, and yet the Hierarchy and order of the
Ecclesiastical policy, be decently maintained.

Whereupon, when the Austrians desired the public use of the Lords supper in
both kinds; as also other articles of religion, to be freely permitted them,
which they had drawn forth in the confession of Ausburg; Ferdinand, not only
took the articles, and the reasons of the abuses (deserving reformation) into
his own consideration: but also, when he heard the testimony of the Greek
Church, concurring with the petition, he sent Urban Bishop of Gurcia for this
cause principally to Venice, that there he should procure instructions, how the
Greeks accustomed to do in distribution of this part of the Lords supper: as
also what was their Opinion concerning this maine point of doctrine. And in the
Synod of Trent by his Orators, he did most instantly insist and urge; That by
leave of the Pope, the people of Austria might use both the parts of the
Sacrament.

Somewhat before his death, he received the Breue, authorizing the Communion to
be administered unto the Laity under both kinds, which Pius the fourth sent
unto the Archbishop of Salisburge; but interlaced with diverse limitation of
conditions. Inseruiendum est tempori.
Whereat this good Emperor did exceedingly rejoice, and gave thanks that it
pleased God, that he had obtained that, which his subjects of Austria, had so
often, and so earnestly desired of his Majesty.

For his carriage toward the Counsel of Trent, which he referred wholly to his
Holiness, I hold it not fit to speak. For he adjudged, that he had received
an infinite pleasure from the Pope, in that he had granted him that, (though
by much entreaty and many restrictions) which Christ commanded unto all
Christians, plainly and effectually.

Maximilian the second.
He began his reign in the sixth year of Queen Elizabeth.

BEtter fortunes, then his father and uncle Charles, had not Maximilian the
second, from whom concerning the ample promises of Clement the seventh, we
have heard this saying to proceed: It is surely Jacobs voice; but his hands
denote him to be Esau: vehemently complaining, That evermore these people have
violated their faith, and broken their leagues: That against all right and
equity, their words are of no validity, nor their oaths of force. And
therefore hereafter never to be captiuated with security.

He was created Emperor in the year of our Lord 1564. A Prince of a sincere
disposition, especially in matters of religion: which when he perceived to be
sorely shaken and rent, with diversity of opinions; he grieved in mind, but
showed himself indifferent to the professors thereof, never hindering the
course with any severe edict.

Which his godly moderation, caused the Romanists to offer him some hard
measure surely not to be said, to have utterly washed away the contagion of
their ancient treachery and malice, in esse diuolued upon them from the
successiue descent of so many their predecessors. But this worthy Prince was
nothing moved thereat, neither started one jot from his accustomed lenity.
Crato Craftheim his Councellor and Physician, a man beyond all exception, shall
witness it in his funeral Oration. The Emperor Maximilian never entered into
judgment of another man's Conscience, but always in controversy of Religion
forbore by force to settle men's minds. For he confessed in the hearing of many
men ten years ago, unto William Prelate of Olomuch: That no sin was more
grievous, then the forcing of Consciences, Many are also alive who remember
what he said to a Prince flying his kingdom, and in his flight resorting unto
him for succor: Surely those that arrogate power over men's consciences, invade
the bulwarks of Heaven, and oftentimes loose that Authority, which God here
has given them upon earth.

Such care and study as Father Ferdinand used in observing the Pacification of
Passania, the same the son Maximilian emulated and defended, permitting unto
the Austrian Nobility the doctrine of the confession of Ausburg by edict, dated
the 18. August 1568.

For when as many noble men of Austria under the government of Ferdinand, had
presented unto Charles the fifth, certain Evangelical ministers professing the
Confession of Ausburg: and amongst these, many turbulent spirits dismissed
upon many occasions from many parts of Germany, had resorted unto his
government as to a place of security; And under blind pretenses of
Evangelical liberty had inconsiderately innouated and tumultuously preached
many things concerning Church-gouernement: This Maximilian after the example of
his father, thought it not meet to prohibit his subjects the confession of
Ausburg; and yet forbore not to restrain that anarchiall temerity of such hot
spirits, throughout every several village of the Province, almost teaching and
instituting a peculiar form of Doctrine and Ceremonies.

At last at the earnest entreaty and humble petitions of the Austrian Nobility,
he permitted them the free exercise of the Augustan confession, both in
Churches and families, so that they would assure him to observe that certain
order of doctrine and celebration of the Lords supper, throughout all their
Churches, which as then was already used and embraced by the residue of the
Protestant Churches, according to the prescript of order of the said
confession. For reformation whereof he employed Ioachim Camerarius and David
Chytreus: and the promise once granted, being afterward Emperor he observed
most religiously. Of whose faith and integrity, although to his never dying
honor much may be spoken, yet here will we cease, and fall to discourse upon
the succession of his Son Rodolph. What further matter the good and well
minded Reader may expect, I will leave to his own discretion to be exemplified,
by the application of these old verses: Tempora mutantur, Papa and mutatur in
illis:
Felix quem faciunt Romana pericula cautum.


Rodolph the second.
RODOLPH now only remains. Here, whether I should admire at the busy, but
now out-worne fury, tyranny and ambition of these selfe-wild Bishops: or
rejoice at the restored magnanimity, fortitude, and constancy of our Emperor
Rodolph, I confess my self grauelled. But to affirm nothing of mine own
brain, here behold a witness acting his own part; A man above exception,
auouching --

He is the same, who was Author of the Commentary upon the Coloin Business.
These are his words; What (says he) should I speak of the invincible
Emperor Rodolph, who now reigns. I have seen his Ambassadors at Rome, the
most noble and valiant Lord Flacchus, Prior of the Order of Saint John of
Jerusalem in Germany, and Jerome Turner of his Majesty's Council: A man of
exquisit learning, of high wisdom, faithful and honest. I soiourned with them
in the same house; For they lodged with Cardinal Mandrutius (whom for honors
sake I name) my very honorable good Master, and a man of excellent virtues. He
for acquaintance sake entertained them kindly, and used them royally: they
stayed with us almost one whole summer: of which delay this was the cause.

The Pope, Gregory the thirteenth was wonderful desirous to have the Emperor
perform his obedience to his Popeship. For, that it ought so to be, he pleaded
prescription. The Ambassadors, to do more then their Commission warranted,
resolutely refused. And their Commission stretched no further, then to promise
Obsequium, his humble service to the Pope, but obedience unto the Church.

Letters hereof were sent unto his Majesty, and mean while Turner was eagerly
assaulted by the Cardinals to change opinion; but he was constant. At last,
until the Emperors Majesty could be wrought, to relinquish that form of
words, which the worthy and laudable Caesar's, Ferdinand his grandfather and
Maximilian his father had used, the Ambassador was accepted to do what he was
commanded. And so in a full assembly of the Cardinals, the Pope being mounted
upon an high Seig, He promised his Holiness his service, and the Church, his
obedience. In action whereof he gave good proofs of his learning, wisdom,
and admirable boldness.

To many in the City, this seemed a ridiculous contention, sithence the words
obsequium and obedientia do so little differ in substance: but let them laugh;
The Popes rites well understand the meaning thereof, otherwise, let them be
assured, that his wisdom would not so stiffly have insisted upon the bare
word of obedience.

As for the Emperor, the world knows, that here he made it manifest, that
he was not bound to give obedience unto a Bishop, his subject, from whom he
expected subjection and fealty: At leastwise he laid an excellent foundation,
toward the restitution of the decayed Honor of the Empire, by others to be
perfected as God and time shall offer occasion. For what a greater blessing can
a Christian man wish, then to see a Bishop praying and preaching, and abhorring
to prescribe laws unto a temporal Emperor? What other thing more necessary
for peace and humane society can the Council of State devise, then to bridle
seditious minds, from taking advantage to disquiet the State, upon every
sinister seducement of an unconscionable Jesuit? Which if they once effect,
then shall the Emperors give them their due favors, that is, acknowledge the
Lateran Bishops to be venerable fathers. If these passages, I say, were reduced
to their pristinate form and integrity, then no longer should we behold the
Christian people turmoyled in discords, no Princes murdered, no oaths of
allegiance impugned, no equivocation justified, nor Turkish invasions so
powerfully maintained.

But of these abuses, and many more mentioned by mine Author, and still
maintained, but not with ancient obstinacy, for want of this implored
reformation, let him that has a stomach to be informed, read the Apology,
brought out of Spain, and printed at Antwarp in the year 1527. There in order
shall he find as much as follows, the sum whereof drawn into heads,
shall suffice for this present.

1 The Breues of Clement the seventh, wherein he loadeth Caesar with as many
calumniations, as his wit could devise, and those most false and forged.

2 The answer of the Emperor Charles the fifth unto these forgeries.

3 The second Breues of the Pope, wherein upon repentance that he had falsely
accused Caesar, he sends unto his Nuncio, to forbid him the delivery of the
former Breues.

4 The answer of Caesar to these second Breues.

5 An Epistle of Charles Caesar unto the College of Cardinals, desiring them,
that in case his Holiness did continue either to deny, or differ, a general
Council, that they themselves would proclaim it.

Now that we have fully informed you how this halfe-deplumed Estritch has
notwithstanding opposed against the two last Emperors, Ferdinand and
Maximilian, and not at this day fears not to be troublesome unto their
successor Rodolph: As also, how his patience has been nettled by the
transaction of Passauia, and the Edicts of peace devised, ratified and
proclaimed by these three late worthy Emperors: It shall not for a perclous
unto your wearied minds, I hope, prove a loathing service, if I shall in order
recite unto you, at what ward his Holiness at this day lies, considering
that he is not able any longer, to set father against son, and son against
father in open action; Prince against Prince, and people against Prince, and
Prince against people.

These practices are revealed and absolute, now must they erect (and but once
erect) an order to purpose; An order that must commit all villainies, and his
Popeship not seen therein: an order that must study Matchiauell, entertain
intelligence, and able in it self to negotiat in Princes affairs, without
posting and reposting, to the view of the world, for their dispatches to Rome:
an order of all orders that ever were devised, the most cruel and truly
bestial; the bane of mankind, and the firebrarnds of Christendom. Of whom, if
any worthy pen would take the pains, to indict a Legend; the world should
soon perceive, that they to the underpropping of this declining sea, within
these few years, have committed as many forgeries, villainies, Witness
France, Belgia, and Hungary.
and seducements to war and murder, as their Masters before them have done in
many Ages. So furious are their humors, so irregular their consciences to
work, pleasing services to their politic Monarch! Bound they are to auert,
whatsoever they shall think or know prejudicial to the Romish sea. Bound they
are (as much as in them lies) to hinder the propagation of the Gospel. Then,
their calling being such, their service such, and such their vows, let us
learn amongst many of their actions, by some few, what peace in religion is to
be expected, from such persons, that hereafter we may be able to discern the
man by his speech, as the Lion by his claws.

Notes of private passion.
HE that plays the Prologue, is Conradus Brunus, attired in his third book.
cap. 1. page 305. oppugning, Only because it reformed Popery.
railing and annihilating the Transaction of Passauia, and the peace granted
thereupon; a peace so religiously ratified by such and so many hand-writings,
and so solemnly sworn unto by such just, honorable and worthy personages. At
his first entrance you shall know him by his brazen face, and now you shall
hear him speak. The Edict (says he) is frivolous, void, and at no hand to
be observed: His reason, because a Catholic ought not live peaceably with
such Heretics, for so should they never be offended nor abolished. Yea, so
much the rather were the association so ordered to be abhorred and abominable,
for that a Catholic meeting one of them, should be adjudged to have assented
to the peace: But to offend them (with whom there is no communion) can be no
breach of peace; as whom the Laws of the Empire do subject under a curse, and
expose to offense, without punishment: Finally, whom all divine and humane
constitutions, would have to be utterly extirpated.

The next that presents himself is Paul Windich, in his book de Haereticis
extirpandis page 324. And he terms this religious peace to be nothing but a
breathing, a delay, or a toleration. page 327. He says, that, in his mind, he
can but wonder at the madness of the Sectaries. For foolishly auouching, and
so often babbling out the Decrees of the Diets, for the free exercise of their
religion. If I should stand to present you with Melchion, Hosius and
Posserinus, who wrote whole discourses unto Henry and Stephan Kings of Polonia,
to take into their serious cogitations, the extirpation of the Evangelical
professors, I should but weary you with words. Two lines shall suffice. With
the Protestant (Polonians) the assurance given upon Faith, is at no hand to be
observed: for that an oath ought not to be the bond of iniquity.

James Menochius the Lawyer, Consil. 100. Number. 225. excuses the Roman Emperor
Sigismund, in that he violated his safe conduct. As concerning the which
oversight, the impudent assertions of the Jesuits of Treuers are worthy the
relation, published in a certain book entitled, The Concertation of the
Catholic Church, Printed 1583. page 4. Husse did require safe conduct of
Sigismund: Sigismund signed it: but the Christian world, viz. the fathers of
the Council of Constance, being Sigismunds superiors, did disalow it.

Simanch a Bishop of Pacia, that lying spirit, blushed not to affirm, in his
Catholic Institution Cap. 46. Number. 52. That at no hand, faith was to be kept
toward Heretics, no not upon oath. And therefore it was justly decreed; That
against the tenor of the oath, Husse and Jerome of Prage were burned, and a
Canon provided; That an oath made toward an Heretic, was not to be regarded.
And at last concludes, That as warning thereof, ought often to be given, so
is it very necessary, that it be often re-iterated, and at no time to be
silenced, as often as any mention of this peace is objected.

O! Why should I offend the chaste cares of any good Christian with such
infernal stuff? Smally has he profited in the school of Gods word, that in
his own conscience is not able to decide controversies, of much more cunning
carriage, then any of these. In regard whereof, I will here cease, and affirm,
That in knowing of one, you know all: such is their malice in service of the
Romish sea, toward Emperor, Kings, Princes, and free States. Let him that has
a mind to be further and fully satisfied, peruse the most excellent treatises
printed this present year 1609.

For Conclusion unto these plain and pregnant presidents of Popish tyranny by
time and usurpation practiced upon the sacred Majesty's of mighty Princes,
mine Author, truly to aggrauate their immoderate pride, and further to
encourage the aggreeued parties to hasten their Reformation, for warrantize out
of diverse Authors, he has culled out many irresistible testimonies to
prove, That Rome is Babylon, and the Bishop thereof Antichrist. Which for that
(in mine opinion) in few words they have been more liuelier represented unto
your consideratiue consciences, in his Majesty's most excellent Premonition,
then which nothing can be spoken more fully, truly, and indifferently,
without spleen, or ambiguitie.

I will here crave pardon to ouerpasse them, and in lieu thereof content you,
with some few both theorique and practique notes, hatched upon the same
grounds, but practiced upon other states, of later days in diverse parts of
Christendom.

And first of their Jesuitical Theoriques, thus collected into order, and
eight times printed: as mine Author affirms.

Regulae Iuris Romani.
1. The Bishop of Rome has in himself all manner of power, both spiritual and
temporal: Authority to command, to forbid, to curse, and to exco^municat: al
power of punishing, right of Election and conferring the lieutenancy of the
Empire. Power, to create and depose magistrates, even Emperors, Kings and
Princes: so of al other Potentates, and their subjects. These aphorisms are to
be received as an article of faith: He that allows not, or believes not so
much, is to be reputed a most detestable Heretic. 2. On the contrary, all
Ecclesiastical persons, Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Monks, Nuns, and all their
temporal goods, their privileges and estates, are utterly exempted and freed
from all obedience of temporal Lords, from their commands, contributions, and
superiorities; and that as well in personal and real impleadings, as in civil
and criminal actions. Neither are they bound to obey Emperor, King, or any Lay
Magistrate. Yea Caesar, Kings and Princes, ought to instruct his fortresses
rather to ecclesiastical persons, then to Lay Captains. 3. Albeit the Pope be
a Man, yet for that he is Gods vicar on earth (a reason wherefore divine honor
is due to him) he can not err in points concerning Christian doctrine; no
although all other ecclesiastical fathers, yea and the Councels themselves
should fall into error. An argument, That from Councels we must appeal to the
Pope; but not e contra, From the Pope, to the Council. 4. The Validity,
interpretations, and power of innouating the sacred Scriptures, rests in the
bosom of the Pope: but his Holiness decrees, as simply necessary to faith and
salvation, are immutable, forcible, and obligatory. 5. The constitutions,
Statutes, ordinances, parliaments, edicts, Confederacies, and al letters
patents, of Emperors Kings, Princes, and other estates, which favor any other
religion, then the modern Roman ought to be reputed void and of no force, no,
although an oath be interposed. 6. The Edict of religion concluded by the
general consent of the German Nation, is not obligatory; for that it was
procured by force. That, it was granted, but to serve the time, as a Delay, or
Toleration: viz. until the publication of the Council of Trent, which
followed in the year 1564. 7. That now the Romanists are to employ their
utmost endeavors by fire, sword, poison, powder, war, or any other engine, to
suppress all heretics, but especially the Lutherans and Caluinists, with
their fautors and the politic catholics, who had rather maintain peace,
then adioyne their forces to the Catholic side in extirpation of heresies. 8.
But this rule is not without exception: If they have cause to fear that the
project be not likely to second imagination, or that danger or detriment be
likely to arise thereof to the Catholic cause: In this case, some regard is
to be had to the time, and a better season to be expected. Yet some are again
of opinion: That time is not to be respected. For what requital shall a Jesuit
return to so benign a parent as the Pope, if he stand tampering upon the
safety of his conscience, or the security of his life? And therefore without
any longer temporizing, it were better that in all places these Lutherans and
Caluinists were speedily banished, suppressed, or utterly rooted out; so that
hereafter not so much as one seed may be left, to restore so much as the
remembrance of their Religion. 9. As soon as the Roman-Catholique subjects in
their Conciliables have decreed, That the Emperor, King or Prince under whom
they serve, is to be accounted a Tyrant: then is it lawful for them to
renounce him, and to hold themselves free from their oath of allegiance. But if
they be deemed to hold their assemblies; Then is it granted unto every private
subject, yea praise-worthie and meritorious, to murder such a King or Prince:
but with prouiso, that he proceed not before he have used the counsel of
some Jesuit, or such like Theologian. Wherein, the Munke James Clement, who
slew Henry the third with an inuenomed knife, made true use of this Rule. And
in those days, he was adjudged to have acted as meritorious an action, that
should have played the like part by his successor Henry the fourth. 10 If
subjects have a Lutheran or Caluinist to their King, or Prince, who indeuoreth
to bring them into Heresies, (you must always understand what Heresies they
mean) they are those subjects quitted of homage and fealty toward their
sovereign Masters. To whom it is lawful and granted to renounce, murder or
imprison such an anointed and high Magistrate. 11 That, Emperors, Kings and
Princes may be poisoned by their vassals and servants; in case the Theologians,
or Jesuits, being learned and grave men, do account them for tyrants:
provided, that the concluded party to die, do not amend, nor procure his own
voluntary destruction. 12 The Pope has the free gift of all the kingdoms,
principalities, and territories of all heretical and infidel Princes: and such
donations shall be firm and auailable to all constructions and purposes. 13 It
is lawful and granted to Jesuits, and all other Catholic Priests, in case
they happen to be examined before heretic Magistrates, to use equivocation,
mental reservation, false names, and counterfeit apparel: the better to
insinuate, and dispatch their treacheries. 14 That it is lawful for Jesuits
and such like Romanists to equivocate to the demands of Magistrates: And that
as well by oath, as without. But this is to be understood, when the Respondent
does not account the Demaundant for a competent Judge or Magistrate: Or when,
the Respondent does imagine, that the Judge (though competent) has no lawful
pretense of examination: Or when he supposes his Adversary, has no just
cause of questioning him. 15 That such Catholics are not bound to answer
private Catholics from the heart, and with conscience, but to equivocate, and
answer them with double meanings. 16 That this equivocation is a profitable
Art, and good policy. Wherewith Martin Azpileneta, unto whose doctrine Gregory
the thirteenth gave the attestation of unanswerable and Holy: And of whom the
Jesuit Horat. Tursellimus in the life of Lauerius affirms, That he was a man
excellent for his honesty and learning, congratulateth himself, and boasts,
that he commanded unto a certain great Prince the Apothegme; Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit viuere; Whereof the said Prince made afterward great use
and profit.
These were the passions that troubled our foreign Nouellists; In lieu of
many, to avoid prolixity, now let us proceed to examine at what mark, the
Romanists on this side the sea do also level. And Saunders, for that he will
satisfy us by Scripture; is traced by Bellarmine, and magnified by our
adversaries to be a man of most eminent learning, shall be speaker for the
whole factorie. But by the way you must note, that these had their private
respects in their hearts, while they held their pens in their hands: So this
our Countryman was not destitute of his private passion also, which was either
an ouer-hard conceit against his dearest Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, out of
whose Kingdom he was banished; or an ouer-weeing respect, devoted unto the
service and gracious aspect of Pope Pius the fifth, unto whom he stood many
ways beholden. Otherwise your consciences would assure you, that he would
never have broached so manifest a lie. The work whereat he aimed, and the
greeuances which disquieted his pen, your discretions may judge of, by
reuoking to mind, the days wherein he lived, and the personage that then
reigned. Mutato nomine, the positions (you know) as yet are as peremptorily
maintained, and therefore above the rest fittest to be spoken unto.

With a lively suke to corroborat a bad matter, he groundeth his first
authority (his reasons and arguments as flowing from the bitterness of his
private brain I will ouer-passe) upon the second book of Cronicles the 26.
Chapter, where we read; For the more credit, you shall have his own words.
Oziam regem, cum sacerdotum officium vsurpauit, a Pontifice fuisse de templo
eiectum. Et cum propter idem peccatu^, lepra a Deo percussus fuisset, coactum
etiam fuisse ex vrbe discedere, and regnum filio renunciare.

Quod non sponte sua, sed ex sententia sacerdotis, vrbe, and regni
administratione priuatus fuerit, patet. Na^ legimus Leuit. 13. Quicunque,
inquit Lex, maculatus fuerit lepra, and seperatus est ad arbitrium sacerdotis,
solus habitabit extra castra.

Cum ergo, haec fuerit Lex in Israel, and simul legimus 2. Paralip. 26. Regem
habitasse extra vrbem in domo solitaria; and filium eius in vrbe iudicasse
populum terrae, cogimur dicere, fuisse cu^ ad arbitrium sacerdotis separatum,
and consequenter regnandi authoritate priuatum.

Si ergo propter lepram corporalem poterat sacerdos olim regem iudicare, and
regno priuare: quare id non potest modo propter lepram spiritualem, id est,
propter haeresim, quae per lepram figurabatur; vt August. decet in questionibus
Euangelicis lib. 2. quaest. 40. praesertim cum 1. Cor. 10. Paulus dicat:
Contigisse Iudeis omnia in figuris. Haec ille.

That Ozias the King, when he usurped upon the office of the Priesthood, was
by the Priest cast out of the temple. And when, for the same sin he was
stricken by God with leaprosie, he was constrained to depart out of the City,
and to resign the kingdom to his son.

That not of his own accord, but by the sentence of the high Priest, he was
banished the City, and deprived of the government of the kingdom. It
appears, Leuit. 13. whosoever (says the Law) shall be touched with the
leaprosie, and is separated by the judgment of the Priest, he shall dwell by
himself without the tents.

Sithence then, this was the Law in Israel: as also that we read 2. Paralip.
26. That the King dwelled without the City in a solitary Mansion; and that his
son judged the people of the land within the City: we must of necessity
confess, that he was sequestered by the judgment of the Priest, and
consequently deprived of all authority of government.

If then, in respect of corporal leprosy, the Priest of old might dispose of
the King and dispossess him of his kingdom.



Wherefore now may not the Pope do the like, in case of spiritual leprosy,
viz. for heresy, figured by Leprosy, as says S. Augustine, in his
Evangelical questions lib. 2. quaest. 40. Especially when in the first to the
Cor. ca. 10. Paul says: That all things were manifested unto the Jews in
figures. Hitherto Saunders.

Take him at his word, and here were learning enough to deceive millions of
souls: but examine him by his own authority, and you shall find him in a
miserable taking, unless God be merciful.

Lib. 5. cap. 11.
For to prove it most false, That Ozias was deprived of his regal Authority by
the sole judgment of the high Priest: Nothing through the whole History of the
Kings is more lively expressed, then that Ozias from the sixteenth year of his
age, when he began to reign, to the 60. year, See the text.
wherein he died, was perpetual King. Neither was he at any time during his
natural life deprived of his kingdom.

Without question he dwelled in an House apart: And in that respect, for the
nature of his Disease, he could not dispatch the office of a King, which is of
fact. But that bereaved him not of the right of his kingdom, neither of his
Kingly capacity; for so we should deny, that Children being crowned (as in
times past Ioas and Josias were) and men of full age (if they had fallen into
irrecouerable sicknesses, As Jews the eleventh in France.
either of mind, or body) to be Kings; sithence the one by nonage, the other by
sickness are necessarily sequestered from managing the State, which consists
in action.

2. But Ozias continued king as long as he lived. 2. King. 15. 2. Paral. 26.
For the scripture says: In the seven and twentieth year of Jeroboam king of
Israel, reigned Azarias ( called also Ozias, and Zacharias) the son of
Amazias king of Judah. Sixteen year old was he, when he began to reign, and he
reigned fifty two years in Jerusalem.

Behold our Romanist here plainly detected of an untruth (as I promised gone
before) and that by the truest testimony, that humane satisfaction can under
the concaue of the heavens demand.

But to bewray the true genius of impudency, I will yet go farther, to his and
his partakers final confusion. Witness the 2. of Kings. v. 27.

In the two and fiftieth year of Azarias King of Judah, Pekan the son of
Romeliah reigned over Israel in Samaria. Here is plain dealing, and matter
upon record. How shall we here believe this Romanist, when the spirit of truth
and Antiquity gives us assurance, that he continued King thirty six years
after his Coronation.

To the further verifying whereof (if it were possible) Josephus records in
his 9. book of Antiquities, cap. 11. That Azarias (or Ozias) dyed in the sixty
eight year of his age, and in the two and fiftith year of his reign: which
being most true, that he began his reign at sixteen years, and dyed at sixty
eight; what testimony is objected in the course of his life, whereby we may
gather that he was either deposed or deprived from his legal inheritance? That
during the time of his visitation, his son was but his deputy, we will prove
anon directly, as it is accustomed to be done unto them, who in like cases are
not able to attend their affairs themselves. For no less does the same Text
auerre: Ioatham the Kings Son was Ouer-seer of the Kings Palace, and
governed the Kings House, and judged the people of the Land.

Here observe, that Ioatham is styled but the Kings son in the life time, and
sickness of his father; Governor of the Court, and as I may properly speak,
Lord steward of his Fathers house. And why did he sit in judgment amongst the
people? because their complaints could not with conueniency be brought unto the
kings judicature, by reason of his infirmity, and his separation thereupon by
the prescript commandment of Gods Law. Leuit. 13.

3. For confirmation of which last point, hear what the Text says: And Ozias
slept with his Fathers, and they buried him in the field of the Regal
Sepulchers, because he was a leaper. And Ioatham his son reigned in his stead.

Here again observe, how plainly the scripture leads us in the way of truth:
Even now, It terms Ioatham the Kings son, the kings steward, or servant: But
now, after the decease of his father (and not before) It says: Regnare caepit:
He began to reign.

Yet Ozias was separated by the command of the high Priest? True: but that was
also commanded by the lively voice of the Divine Law* But that he was deposed
or deprived from his legal inheritance, his kingly authority, or enforced to
resign his estate to his son before his death: No man will avouch it,
unless a bloody and passionate Romanist. The simple know, that Soueraignety
and Government are of no less difference then proprietas and possession, or
as I may speak, an estate determinable, and an estate in Fee. Soueraignety is
always incorporated unto the person of the King, is as it were the soul of a
kingdom, and inseparable from the right thereto: But Government, Lieutenancy,
or procuration may be diuested upon deputies. As in the nonage of kings; or
in times of dangerous sicknesses, those who are assigned to take care of the
weighty affairs of the kingdom, are styled Deputies, Protectors, Tutors,
Lieutenants, Viceroyes, or Governors, neither propounding, dispatching, nor
negotiating any public business in their own names, but under the style and
seal of the young, or diseased Sovereign.

His second authority is taken from the second of Chronicles the 23. Chapter,
which because in truth it is but impertinent, though most maliciously framed* I
will recite in our vulgar tongue only.

At what time Athalia governed the kingdom by tyranny, and maintained the
worship of Baal, Saunders.
Ioada the High Priest called unto him the Centurions and soldiers, and
commanded them to slay Athalia, And in her stead they crowned Ioas king.

That the Priest persuaded not, but commanded, it is apparent by those words in
the fourth of Kings, and eleventh Chapter. And the men of war did according
unto all that Ioada the High priest commanded them. Again by those in the
second of Chronicles the three and twentieth Chapter. But Ioada the high Priest
going out unto the Centurions and leaders of the Army, said unto them; Bring
her forth (Athalia the Queen) from the precinct of the Temple, and let her be
slain without by the sword.

That the cause of the deposition and killing of Athalia, was not only her
tyranny, but also her maintenance of the worship of Baal; It is proved by the
words immediately placed after her slaughter. Whereupon, says the Scripture,
All the people entered into the house of Baal, and destroyed it, and broke down
the Altars and the images thereof. They also slew Mathan the Priest of Baal
before the Altar.

That this example of Ioada and Athalia, do nothing concern the mark, whereat
they so preposterously and maliciously leuel: or the modern controversy of
Papal intrusion over Kings and Princes, we will resolve you forthwith.

For the Example of Athalia, is of a party, who usurped upon a Kingdom without
any lawful pretension, save mere and barbarous tyranny; by force, by
wickedness, and the cruel murder of the royal Progeny. In which case, the
President was so abominable, that even without the commandment of Ioada, it
might have been lawful for every private Magistrate to have justified her
death: but for that such a designment seemed dangerous and difficult to be
executed upon her, who was mother to the deceased King Ahaziah; therefore was
it needful to have used the counsel and assistance of Ioada the high Priest.
Or at least, of some such eminent person, who for the Honor of his place, or
the reputation of uprightness, was of power to assemble and stir up the
soldiers and people to so justifiable an action.

But that the Act was executed as well by persuasion as command; It appears
by that which was spoken: Ioada the high Priest sent, 2. Kings 4.
and took the Centurions and men of war unto him, and caused them to come
into the Temple; Pepigitque cum eis faedus: And he couenanted with them. Now I
hope that so absolute a Commander, as our Romanists will make this high Priest
to be, would have scorned to have capitulated, if he could have commanded.
Besides, the words, we will, or command, are accustomably used by those, who in
faction, or in any other public business obtain the prime-place of
employment.

What then may be found in this example to enforce Ioadas, or the Popes
omnipotency, for innovation of States or Kingdoms? What is brought to prove so
dangerous an assertion. This is a true president to be enforced against a
Tirannesse or an usurper. But there is a great dissimilitude between legal
Lords, or true proprietaries, and thieves; or the inuaders of another man's
possession.

If there were any cause besides tyranny, material to depose, or sley
Athalia, what is that to us. Let it be enforced against people guilty of like
offenses, viz. those that worship, and defend the worship of Baal, and the
host of Heaven. It is sufficient, that she was a Tyranness, and an injurious
Usurper upon an other man's Kingdom; without that, that upon her part there
remained any obstacle, or impediment of Law, but that she might be deposed
from her throane, and slain. The like whereof, I hope, no good Christian will
affirm concerning any lawful King; whose sacred person (although blemished by
many humane infirmities) the Right of Inheritance, the Majesty of his Place,
and the capacity of his calling, ought always, and that for conscience sake,
to protect and defend from injury, infamy, and humane controlement. To which,
let all true Christians say, Amen.

Now to their practique.
NOw that I have epitomized unto your considerations the theorems, rules, and
policies of this enforced usurpation: I will also make manifest unto you by
true book cases, how they have practiced upon these Theorems, throughout all
the kingdoms of Christendom.

Spain. 1568. Chro. Belg.
In Spain, upon suspicion of heresy, they so ouerawed the conscience of Philip
the second, that they caused the vncompassionate father, in a bath to open the
veins of Charles his eldest son, a Prince of admirable expectation; there to
bleed out his dearest life. Now to explane unto you, what heresy this noble
young Prince had committed, let me report unto you (if fame say truth) that it
arose forsooth upon his hard usage toward the Clergy; In dismounting them
riding upon their pleasures, from their excellent Ienets and stately Mules; and
sending them home to their studies; bestowing these beasts upon some of his
more worthy followers. Or peradventure upon jealousy, that manifesting too
much of the Grandfathers spirit, in future times, He might call them to
account, as did Charles the fifth. Herman once Archbishop of Colein, to say for
himself what he could, against the accusations libelled against Him, by his
Clergy, and the University. I assure you, far less sins, then these, are
able to cast the best man living into the bottomless pit of their fiery
Inquisition, Vnde nulla redemptio.

Who were of Council unto Sebastian, the last of house of Portugal, to
undertake that woeful, Portugal. 1578. Chro. Bell.
but as they termed it, that most meritorious journey into Africa? To
understand the true motives whereof, I will say no more, but refer you over
to the Jesuits Cata. fo. 709.

Who but the same brood of Jesuits made away John of Albret, Queen Dowager of
Navarre, France. 1572. Hist. Gal.
the very eye of the French Protestants, by impoisoned Pills; which an Italian,
the Kings Apothecary at Paris, prepared for her?

Who but the brochets of such impieties, Anno. 1572. Hist. G^^
were the instruments of that most infernal resolution; under the color of so
solemn and Prince-like a marriage, to contriue the death of the Nauarrois, and
the massacre of so many brave Princes and Gentlemen, of the Religion through
the whole territories of France; And that without any regard or touch of
conscience, in abusing and violating the oath of safe conduct, religiously
swore unto, by the King himself.

By what sort of men, I pray you, was Peter Bar. suborned, and obliged by
Sacrament, Anno. 1589. Chro. Bell.
traitorously to have murdered Henry the fourth? And by whom, let me ask you,
is the Auditory at this day admonished, but to make use of some small patience,
For within few days, God himself is to make his personal appearance amongst
us, to work I know not what, miracles, to the confusion of Heretics.

Anno. 1594. Cat. Ies. 482. Chro. Belg.
Was not John Chastelius, a young man of nineteen years of age, and a nouice in
Claremount College, fully satisfied, think you, by the resolutions and
encouragements of these persons, and upon the foresaid positions; before he
would hazard his portion in heaven, to undertake the slaughter of the said king
of France and Nauar? But as God would, he missed his throat, and by the
wavering of his hand, struck out but one of his teeth: affirming that he was
but as another Ehud, appointed to murder Eglon the wicked king of the Moabites.

Eug. 1588.1594.1597. Cat Ies. 436. and 448.
By whom were so many and so often treacheries plotted not only to have been
executed by strangers against Queen Elizabeth, but also by her own servants,
namely Parry, Squier, Lopez, York, Williams, and Patrike Cullen: By whom was
her sacred Majesty excommunicated, her peace disturbed, her subjects assailed,
her Realm betrayed, and her life set at sale to be taken away by any means;
by poison, by massiue rewards, or any other kind of violence what ever? I will
not stand to dilate hereupon. The world I hope is again and again satisfied
with the proof hereof. It yet freshly remembers, what ouertures were made,
even but yesterday, and by whom, unto the Spanish king for a second Invasion.
And as yet, Caelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.

Anno. 1607.
For, it is as clear as day, that none but men molded and sold over to the
worst of wickedness, would ever have imagined or consented to have blown up a
State-house; And that upon the first day, and first sitting, when in certainty
they knew, that of necessity the King and Prince would be present, the assembly
fullest, and the massacre bloodiest.

Who were the instruments, Sweueland. 1593.
that Sigismund K. of Polonia and Sweland after the death of his father
returned into Sweland, there against the tenor of his oath, Or Pol. b. 4.
Praef. cat. Ies.
to root out the Lutheran Religion as they term it? who were the authors of
the unseasonable commotions in Liuonia? who accouncelled him by surprise to
invade the kingdom, and almost to have lost his life, as he has now at last
the kingdom? Polon.
And by whose seducements has he attempted so many innouations in Polonia?

To what shall we attribute, Moscouia.
but to their dangerous instigations, that Demetrius being returned out of
Poland into Moscouie, in attempting to alter the received Religion of the
Moscouits, was himself in one day deprived of life and Empire, with an infinite
number of his nobles and followers?

Whom should we accuse, but these furies, for the murder of the worthy Prince
of Orange, Netherland.
shot to death by Balthazar Gonhard, before prepared for blood by the assurance
of these cunning Garnets?

What should I dull your ears with these unpleasant discourses? If you list,
your selves may read at leisure the examinations of Peter de Pens, Michael
Renicher, and Peter de Four, against the life of Grave Maurice, the aforesaid
Prince his Son, for maintaining the cause of Religion?

I could also, bring you presidents from Transiluania 1607. from Bohemia, 1608.
from Austria 1609. Bauaria, 1592. Argentina School. Aquisgran, 1607 Donauerd and
Venice 1606. but that I am very unwilling to tire your patience with the
desperate resolutions of these irregular and faithless men. Faithless to God:
for they vow religion and humility, but work treachery and affect superiority.
And irregular amongst men, for they preach faith, and administer oaths; and
yet if any thing displease them, they send souls to desperation, and make
port-sale of perjury. And therefore to conclude, I will for your perpetual
remembrance, in the person of one, describe the very genius of the whole
fraternity in these short remembrances following.

Seductor Sweco: Gallo Sicarius: Anglo
Proditor: Imperio Explorator: Dauus Ibero:
Italo Adulator: Dixi teres ore suitam.
He that has often the Sweth-land-Pole seduced:
Murdered the French: And Englands-King abused:
A spy for Austria: A cunning knave for Spain,
And sooths the Italian States to Popish gain;
Is All one Man, and Jesuit is his name.
And what ye read of Henry, Frederick,
Of Otho Great: and their Succession.
Against By Boniface the eight.
Philip Fair, and the By Julius the second.
twelfe Lodowic,
French Kings: Against By Clement the seventh and Paul the third.
Henry the eight of Albion,
And his diuinest child By Pius the fist.
Eliza Queen:
With many more of Nations far and wide,
Be bold to say: Like measure to have been
In high proportion meated from That side.
The Tables to this Book:
The first declaring how many Emperors have been either Excommunicated, or
constrained to kiss his Holiness Feet.
Emperrours Excommunicated by Otho the fourth. Innocent the third. Henry the
fourth. Gregory the 7. Henry the fifth. Paschal the second. Frederick the first
Adrian the fifth. Philip the son of Frederick. Alexander the 3. Frederick the
second. Innocent the third thrice by Gre. the 9. Conradus the fourth Innocent
the fourth Lodowick the Bauarian. John the 22. Benedict the 12. and Clement the
VI. Emperors Constrained to kiss the feet of Charles the great. Iustian
Emperor of Constantinople. Luit Prandus king of Lomb. Crescentius Consul. etc.
Otho the first. Frederick the first. Henry the fifth. Sigismund. Charles the
fifth.
Adrian the Pope. Stephen the second. John the xvij. John the xvij. Alexander
the third agroofe, etc. Paschal the second. Of Martin the fifth, and Eugenius
the fourth. Of Clement the seventh.


The second, divided into Sections; severally epitomizing the lives of the
Popes, with the vices whereunto every one has in particular been addicted,
viz. who have been, 1 Atheists. 2 Arrians. 3 Magitians or Coniurers. 4
Blasphemers. 5 Forswearers and equiuocators. 6 Turkish Pentioners. 7 Madmen
and tyrants. 8 Warriors and bloud-succours. 9 Traitors and mouers of
seditions. 10 Parricids and impoysoners. 11 Whoremasters. 12 Adulterers. 13
Incestuous persons. 14 Sodomites. 15 Pandars. 16 Bawdes. 17 Bastards. 18
Drunkards. 19 Covetous persons. 20 Church-robbers. 21 Simonianists. 22
Ambitious persons. 23 Monsters. 24 Unlearned persons.


Lives of the Popes.
1. Atheists.
LEo the tenth: who hearing Cardinal Bembo speaking to a point concerning, The
joyful message of our Lord, answered most dissolutely; It is well known to
the world through all ages, in how great stead that fable of Christ has
profited us and our associates. This man neither believed heaven, nor hell,
after our departure out of this life.

And such were Alexander the tenth, Siluester the second, Paul the third,
Benedict the nineteenth, John the thirteenth, Clement the seventh, and Gregory
the seventh.

2. Arrians.
Anastasius, the eleventh: Liberius and Felix.

3. Magitians and Coniurers.
ALexander the sixth: this man made a league with the devil, upon promise to
procure him the Papacy.

Paul the 3. obtained the garland in Astrology, and in that kind of
speculatio^, which is assisted by the ministry of devils. He altogether kept
familiar acquaintance with Negromancers, and such like notable impostures, and
starre-gazers, to learn the faults of himself and his children.

Siluester the second, as well seen in these diabolical Arts, as his
Predecessors, gave himself wholly to the devil, upon condition to advance him
to the Papacy.

Benedict the ninth, obtained the same sea by charms, spells and enchantments.
Before his instalment, in company of his associates, in woods and remote places
he was accustomed to inuoke evil spirits, and by Negromantike toys to work
women to his filthy lust.

John the thirteenth, at dice would call upon the devil, and in merriment
carouse a cup of wine to his diuelship.

Of Clement the seventh, we read that he was a Geomantique and Simonianist.

Gregory the seventh, labored the Papacy by the same Arts. He was the first
that ever presumed to excommunicate an Emperor. And that was Henry the fourth,
unto the end of whose legend, if you please, you may with pleasure and to good
purpose add these true and uncontrollable records.

With the form of his Outlary upon earth, we will not trouble you; but with
his impudent presumption in banishing his soul from heaven (a place wherein I
fear) such persons have smallest interest, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, I will
not fail to inform you. Then thus.

Agite igitur Apostolorum sanctissimi Principes, and quod dixi vestra
authoritate interposita, confirmate, vt omnes nunc demu^ intelliga^t, si
potestis in caelo ligare and soluere, in terra quoque imperia regna,
principatus, and quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre and dare vos posse.
Ediscant nunc Reges huius exemplo, and omnes seculi principes, quid in coelo
possitis, quantique apud Deum sitis, ac deinceps timeant sanctae Ecclesiae
mandata contemnere. Hoc autem iudicium cito in Henricum exercete, vt
intelligant omnes, iniquitatis silium non fortuito, sed vestra opera e regno
cadere. Hoc tamen a vobis optauerim, vt paenitentia ductus, in die iudicij
vestro rogatu, gratiam a Domino consequatur. Actum Romae Nonis Martij;
indictione tertia.

Courage then ye most chosen Princes of the Apostles: And what I have thundered
by the deputation of your authorities, ratify I beseech you; that now at last
all people may understand, that as ye are of power in heaven to bind and to
loose: so likewise that you are of no less potencie on earth, to give and to
take Empires, Kingdoms and Honors, with whatsoever the inhabitants of this
world may peculiarly challenge. By the example of this man let Kings and
Princes of the earth now learn, what are your prerogatives in heaven, and what
your credits with God, that henceforth they may fear to contempe the awards of
Holy Church. Execute I beseech you, this sentence with speed upon Henry, that
all the world may perceive, that this son of iniquity was disinthronized by
your operation, and not by destiny. Yet thus much I request of your
clemencies, that after repentance, in the day of judgment, he may obtain
pardon of our Lord at your intercession. Given at Rome the Nones of March the
third indiction.

to the rareness and nouelty of which president, (to avoid exception) and to
confound such quarrelsome spirits, let them hear, what the wisdom of that
upright Bishop Frisingensis, a man for descent, zeal and learning most
eminent, reports: and the rather for that he was almost an eie-witnesse unto
those times.

Lego and relego (says he) Romanorum regum and Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam
inuenio quemquam eorum ante hunc a Romano Pontifice Excommunicatum vel regno
priuatum.

I read and read again the Chronicles of the Roman kings and Emperors, and in
no age can find that ever a Roman Bishop excommunicated or deprived any one of
them from his kingdom before this man: meaning Hildebrand.

And again in his first book of the gests of Frederick: Gregorius septimus
(says he) qui tunc vrbis Romae Pontificatum tenebat, eundem Imperatorem
tanquam a suis destitutum, anathematis gladio feriendum decernit. Cuius rei
nouitate eo vehementius indignatione motum suscepit Imperium, quo nunquam ante
haec tempora huiusmodi sententiam in Principem Romanorum promulgatam cognouerat.

Gregory the seventh says he, at that time Pope of Rome resolved to smite
with the sword of Excommunication the foresaid Emperor as forsaken of his
people. At the nouelty whereof the Empire was so much the rather moved with
indignation, for that before those times, it never had known such a sentence to
have been pronounced against the Prince of the Romans.



Now with what sequel this Hildebrand striued masteries to arrogate this
temporal authority from Henry the fourth. Otto Frisingensis also (whom
Bellarmine, not undeservedly, for his parentage, his learning and integrity of
life, terms Most noble) does relate unto you.

But what mischiefs, what wars, what hazarding of battles followed
hereupon? How often was miserable Rome besieged, taken, and sacked? It greeueth
me to record how a Pope was set up against a Pope, a King against a King.
Finally the turmoyle of this tempestuous season produced so many miseries, so
many schisms, so many shipwracks of souls and bodies, that those times only,
what by the massacres of persecution, and what by the perpetuity of mischiefs,
gave sufficient arguments to approve the infelicity of humane misery. So that,
those days were compared by a certain ecclesiastical writer to the palpable
and dark mists of Egypt. For the foresaid Bishop Gregory was enforced from
the Regal City, and Gibert of Rauenna was thrust into his place.

Hereunto, says one of the tender hearted Romanists, that it might be that
Gregory did this upon a good intension of the heart, let God judge; but it can
not be defended, that he did it justly, discreetly, or by warrant of his
calling; but that he erred foully following the humors and counsels of men, in
arrogating that unto himself which was none of his due. Where by the way our
adversaries may learn in avoiding of shedding of Christian blood, that
notwithstanding all the Pope could do by his excommunications, and curses, for
five and twenty years space, a great faction of the Clergy and Laytie sided
with the Emperor, so that Gregory's oversight could be no small fault, in that
he called not into his consideration; That it was the office of so eminent a
pastor to have studied all the points of christianity, peace and humility, by
suffering the faults of one man rather to escape unpunished, then to have
engaged the innocent and harmless people through his private desire of
revenge, in an Ocean of misfortunes.

For it is manifest that all which we go about in the fervor of zeal, and to
good intents, is not always done to good purpose. Moses in zeal to his
countryman slew the Egyptian, yet he sinned. Oza in zeal to uphold the Ark of God touched it, and dyed. Peter in zeal to our Lord and his master stroke off
Malchas his ear, and yet he was blamed. An inconsiderate zeal does oftentimes
produce mischief and inconvenience.

In regard whereof, he ought not to have excommunicated the Emperor, Lib. 3.
cap. 2. cont. ep. parmeniani.
in participation of whose offense such multitudes of Christian souls were
interessed, that without apparent schism, and disunion of unity in the Church
and common weal, it could not be remedied. This is but the same Council which
for many Ages past, that great light of the Church S. Augustine did religiously
and advisedly admonish us of, and proved the warrant thereof out of the
writings of S. Paul. Whose opinion the Church from thencefoorth held so
forceable, Can. Non potest. 23. q. 4.
reasonable, and acceptable, that it vouchsafed to avouch it in warrant of
their Canons.

For confirmation whereof let us take notice how Hildebrand behaved himself
after the feeling-smart of these monstrous miseries, by his troubled
conscience, and the testimony of antiquity, with reiection of bare assertions,
and cauills of dubiae fidei.

Pope Hildebrand (says our Author) alias Gregory the seventh, In Cronograph.
Anno. 1085.
died in banishment at Salerne. Of this man I find it thus recorded. Volumus
vos scire, etc. We will that you who are to be careful over the
Ecclesiastical flock, take notice, that our Apostolical Lord Hildebrand (
called also Gregory) now upon the point of death, called unto him one of the
twelve Cardinals, whom he best loved. And he confessed to God, to Saint
Peter, and before the whole Church, that he had grievously sinned in his
pastoral Office, committed unto his charge to govern; and that by the
persuasion of the devil he had raised great wrath and hatred amongst the
sons of Men. Then at last he sent his foresaid Confessor unto the Emperor
and the universal Church, that they would deigne to invoke his pardon, for
that he perceived that his end drew nigh. And presently he put on the
Angelical vestment, and released and reuersed unto the Emperor, and all
Christian people alive and dead, Clerks and Lay, the Censures of all his
Curses. And commanded all his followers to depart from the house of Deodoricus,
and the Emperors friends to aproach.

Such were John the nineteenth twentieth, Sig. In Cronograph. Anno. 1085.
and one and twentieth. Sergius the fourth. Benedict the eight. Siluester the
third. Gregory the sixth. Clement the second. Damasus the second. Leo the ninth.
Victor the second. Stephanus the ninth. Benedict the tenth. Nicholas the
second. Alexander the second. For from Siluester the second to the time of that
most infamous impostor Gregory the seventh. All the Roman Bishops applied
those studies, and therein far excelled the Aegiptian sorcerers.

4. Blasphemers.
LEO the tenth of whom before.

Julius the third. This man made it his common exercise to reason in contempt
of the Deity. Was especially delighted in the flesh of Pork and Peacocks: But
when the Physician admonished him to refrain from Hogges-flesh, for that it
was an enemy to the gowty disease, wherewith his Holiness was at that time
afflicted, and nevertheless would not abstain. His Physician, I say, forbad
his Steward to serve up any more Porke. Which when his Holiness observed, he
demanded for his dish. His Steward made answer, that his Physician had forbad
it. The Bishop replied, Al dispetto didio, bring me my Pork.

Again, when at dinner time, he had espied a Peacock, which was not touched.
Keep me (quoth he) this service cold for my supper, and let it be ready by an
hour; for I mean to inuit certain guests. But at supper perceiving many
hot smoking Peacocks, but missing his cold one; all pale with anger he
belched out most horrible blasphemy against the divine Majesty. Which when one
of the guest-Cardinals observed; Let not your Holiness (quoth he) be so angry
for so small a trifle. Where to Julius replied: If God were so far forth
angry about an Apple, that therefore he spared not to cast our first Parents
out of Paradise, shall it not be lawful for me (his Vicar) to be offended for
being cousoned of my Peacock, sithence a Peacock is of more worth then many
Apples.

5. For swearers and equiuocators.
THe Papal Canons do teach, that the Roman Bishop, may absolve from oaths,
dispense with vows, and release a perjured person. Whereupon, it is not to be
wondered at, to find so many perjured and faithless Papists, swarming in every
corner of the world.

The Council of Constance ouer-awed the Emperor Sigismond (to the violation of
his oath) to deal with John Hus, according to the foresaid Canon, and by that
law to burn him: vt supra.

Gregory the thirteenth, by the Breue wrote unto the Papists of England, that
Rebus sic stantibus, they might yield their obedience to the Queen. Which
intimates nothing else; but that for the present they may swear, and upon
occasion dally with their oaths as them best seems.

Julius the second, according to the testimony of Guicciardine in his eight
book, maintained, That the Romish Bishop might violate his pleighted faith. And
this Maxim he taught as well by example, as manner of life. For he not only
by falsifying his faith, cousoned the Cardinals of a huge mass of treasure,
but also by the treachery and equivocation, engaged the French and Venetians in
manifold encumbrances.

Siluerius, against his oath of allegiance sworn unto the Emperor, did his
best to betray the City to the Goths.

Gregory the second, having forgotten his oath given unto the Emperor, caused
Italy to revolt, and confederated with his enemies.

Gregory the seventh, in a moment forgot what he had religiously promised and
sworn to effect.

Pascal the second, after a peace sworn with the Emperor in special and precise
terms, as soon as his Popeship had levied his forces, he charged his Majesty.

Formosus, by breaking his oath, caused most cruel tragedies.

Alexander the sixth, for his false faith (more infamous then Punique) was most
renowned.

Leo the the tenth, against his sworn promise, banished the house of Ruver out
of the Duchy of Urban.

Clement the seventh, had small regard of his faith.

Paul the fourth, and Pius the fifth, excommunicated the English, for not
reuolting from their oaths of alegeance.

Gregory the fourteenth, threatens that he would do the like against the
subjects of France.

Remember the battle of Varna.

6. Turkish Pensioners.
CLement the sixth, was evermore very careful, to keep the Christian Princes
at iarres, so that they could never intend to prepare their minds to think
upon the Turk.

Alexander the sixth, being willing to make good his supremacy, called in the
Turk to assist him against the King of Erance.

Alexander the third, betrayed Frederick to the Sultan.

Gregory the ninth, by his letters requested the Sultan, not to make
restitution of the Holy land, but rather to slay the Emperor, then warring in
the Eastern parts.

7. Madmen and Tyrants.
John the thirteenth, put out the eyes of some of his Cardinals; some he
deprived of their tongues; some of their fingers, hands, noses and priuities.

Boniface the seventh, by an ambush took John the fifteenth prisoner; put out
his eyes; committed him to prison, starued him, and so became Master of the
Popedom.

Paschal the second, excommunicated Henry the fourth, being a most religious
Prince: provoked the Son to rise in arms against the Father. And to put no
period to his hellish Nature, so infinite was his rage toward the dead
carcass, that he commanded it to be dug up, to be cast out of the Church,
and to want Christian burial by the term of five years.

Histories record, that Nicholas the third was privy, nay, author of that
Sicilian massacre, from whence sprung the proverb: vesperae siculae.

John the fourteenth: This man delivered unto the Hangman, one Peter the
Prefect of Rome: Who stripping him to the skin, and shauing his beard, by
his fatherhoods commandment, tied him unto a Gallows for a whole days space
by the hair of the head. Then setting him on an Ass, with his face reuersed,
and his hands fastened unto the beasts tail, he commanded him so to be showed
in spectacle round about the City; To be scourged, and afterward banished
into Germany.

Gregory the ninth, his fury against the Emperor was unappeasable, and would
as far as in him lay, have utterly confounded him.

Urban the sixth, upon a creation of nine new Cardinals, cast seven of the old
into prison; sewed five in sacks, and cast them into the sea.

Boniface the eighth: such (in partiality of his own faction) was the
unquenchable flame of his rancour toward the Gibellins, that upon report, how
some of the side had seated themselves at Genoa; himself made have to the
place, finally to have destroyed them, and rooted out their race from the
memory of Man. Upon Ashwednesday being according unto custom to minister Ashes
unto the people, the Bishop of the place (whom he knew to be a Gibelline)
approached him, and upon his knees desired his Benediction. Unto whom his
Holiness (notwithstanding the reverence of the place, the frequency of the
people, and his religious calling) where he should have sprinkled the Ashes
upon his bald pate, he cast them wholly into his eyes: Saying: Remember man
that thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibellines thou shall be turned into
Ashes.

Innocent the 7. This man took such delight in governing his affairs with
tumult and disorder, that when the Roman Citizens desired him to restore unto
them their ancient privileges; to surrender the Capitol; to put an end to the
Schism; to finish the wars, and to bury all memory of seditions. He in show
of friendship requested the petitioners to attend his Resolve at his Nephew
Lodowicks house (as good had they been to have gone to the hang man) then
dwelling in the Hospital of S. Eskerit. For forthwith he murdered eleven of
them, and cast their dead bodies out at the windows, saying: That by any other
counsel it was not possible to finish the war and the Schism.

Innocent the fourth. As full of fanaticall frenzy, accursed Frederick;
deprived him of all Imperial dignity; absolved his people from their oaths of
obedience; insinuated with them to choose another: and to further his vile
purposes, devised infinite scandals to work the Commons.

Clement the sixth that unmannerly presbyter, rather then he would give over his
furious and selfe-wild intendments against the sacred majesty of an anointed
Emperor, fastened his libells upon every Church door. Protesting that unless
his majesty would within three days take order to satisfy his pleasure, he
would impose upon him his most grievous censures. Against what poor groom
could he proceed more basely?

Stephanus the sixth. Such was his malice against the name of Formosus, that
presently he abrogated his decrees; frustrated his acts, and continuated his
rage so far forth against the dead Bishop; that calling a Synod he caused the
body to be dug up, to be disrobed of all Episcopal habit, and clothed in
secular raiment, to be delivered to lay burial: From his right hand he cut off
two of his fingers, and cast them into Tiber.

Sergius the third. This man after eight years rest, caused the body of the
said Formosus again to be dug up: to be placed upon a papal seig, and to be
araigned and condemned to capital punishment, as if he had been living. From
the foresaid hand he caused the other three fingers to be chopped off, and
together with the remainder of his body to be thrown into the River, as
unworthy of common burial. He condemned all his actions, so that they who by
him had bin admitted unto his holy orders, were again fain to be readmitted by
his present Popeship.

8. Warriors and Bloodsuckers.
INnocent the second after his installment, accounted it his holiest project to
season his New and high calling with the destruction of Roger Duke of Sicil.
Whereupon he flies to Arms, marshalleth his forces, and speedily vanquisheth.
But by the unexpected coming in of Roger his son, his Popeship is taken, and
his Cardinals made prisoners.

Julius the second, in seven years space was the cause of the slaughter of
two hundred thousand Christian souls. He limited a reward to any man that
could kill a Frenchman. Marching out of the City accoutred with Paul's sword,
and other such holy Furniture, to fight against the French and the confederate
Princes: He unsheathed the blade, and cast the Keys into Tiber saying:
Sithence Peter's keys can no longer stead us, welcome the sword of good S. Paul.

Gregory the ninth, receiving news of the recovery of Jerusalem, caused the
Emperors Ambassadors to be murdered.

Clement the sixth to effectuate his proper deseignes, from time to time sowed
occasions of war and discord amongst the Christian Princes: and rather then
to fail of his purposes, he would not spare to set them on working by massiue
promises, by entertainment, by trecheries and many cunning devises.

Clement the fourth without either formal proceeding or objection of reason,
consented that the Noble Emperor Conradus, the last of the house of Sweuia,
should be publicly beheaded.

Sixtus the fourth managed many wars, and was the author of the Pactian league,
wherein Julian de Medices and many other gentlemen miserably miscarried.

Innocent the third persecuted Caesar Philip. And is reported to have boasted:
That either the Pope should take the Diadem from Philip, or Philip the
Apostolic Miter from Innocent.

Paul the third was prepared for great Innouations to be practiced against the
saints of God. For he raised the German war. Like unto him was Alexander the
sixth, whom the Papists affirm to be most cruel. Of whom they vulgarly
repeated these verses. If after death Borgia did spue up blood,
Wonder it is none: For his cold stomach could
Not well digest so great an ingorg'd flood.
Onuphrius writes, that even a light word was with him a sufficient color to
put any man to death.

Upon what terms the tumults of France were first raised, the league
instituted, the massacre contrived, and the wars continued, the closets of
Pius the fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth, can best testify.

9. Traitors and mouers of Seditions.
ALexander the third, manifestly engaged himself in a plot of treason against
Frederick. For proof whereof, Frederick summoned a Diet at Norimberge,
assembled the Princes of the Empire, and before them caused the Popes
traitorous letter, directed to the Sultan, to be opened, with the means of his
delivery.

Gregory the second procured all Spain, AEmylia, Liguria, Italy and other
provinces to revolt from the Empire: Antichristian-like forbidding the people
to pay those tributs, which Christ himself had formerly commanded.

Sixtus the fourth by entertainment of murdring rascals having slain Julius
of Medices, was the occasion of great tumults in Florence.

Gregory the seventh by plotting of infinite practices, studied to take away the
life of Henry the fourth, so far forth that he would have murdered him in S.
Mary's Church, being at his prayers. He soundly buffeted Alexander the second
Emperor of the East, and barbarously slew Cincius. Against him (says Bembo)
cries the Blood of the Church, poured out by his miserable trecheries.

Paschal the eleuent, spent the whole course of his life in war and
commotions.

Gregory the ninth, by his Legates publicly commanded the Princes of Germany
to depose Frederick. Guilty of the same treason were Julius the second.
Hadrian the fourth, and Gregory the third.

Gregory the thirteenth, the successor of Pius Quintus in impiety and tyranny
was the Author, approuer and commender of the Parisien massacre: then the which
the sun never beheld a more Satanical stratagem, whence rose the proverb;
Nuptiae Gallicae.

By the conniuance of Sixtus the fifth, Henry the third, was stabbed to death
by a traiterous Monk, and by him the said Murder was exceeding well allowed.

10. Parricids and impoysoners.
PAul the 3. impoysoned his mother and Niece, that the whole inheritance of the
Farnesian family, might accrue unto himself. His other sister also, who^ he
carnally knew, upon fancying of others, he slew by poison.

Alexander the sixth, by poison made away Gemen the brother and competitor of
Bajazet, for the hire of 200. thousand crowns. And by the like medicine he
purged away the life of many Senators and Cardinals. But preparing the like
sauce at a supper for some other, by mistaking of the Bottle, himself drunk
off the prepared cup, and died.

Innocent the fourth, being corrupted by rewards, offered a bole of the like
liquor to the Emperor Conrade. This the said Emperor verified by his public
letters.

Gregory the seventh, by the ministry of his companion Brazatus, slew
Nicholas the eleventh with poison. And again, some Authors affirm, that by
the service of this wicked villain, he impoisoned six or eight Cardinals,
obstacles in his preferment to the Papacy.

Paul the third, did his best, not only to raise the Christian Princes,
against Henry the eight king of England, but also plotted against him some
practices of conspiracy.

Gregory the thirteenth, loaded with his Indulgences, Parry, and others, to
have laid violent hands upon Queen Elizabeth.

11. Whoremongers.
John the eleventh. This man, Theodora (with the more state and pomp to enjoy
her fractique pleasure) made first Bishop of Bononia, secondly, Archbishop of
Rauenna, and thirdly, Pope of Rome.

Christopher the first, who upon the deposition of Leo, had by the assistance
of his female acquaintance, invaded the Papacy, was again himself, by one
Sergius the Amorite of a gallant whore, named Marozia, deposed and shamefully
disgraced.

John the thirteenth, who lived player-like, not Pope-like, was addicted to all
kind of voluptuous pleasure.

Gregory the seventh, had secret commerce with the Countess Matilda.

Clement the fifth, was a public fornicator, and kept for his Leman the
Countess of Perigord, a most beautiful Lady, and the daughter of the Earl of
Foix.

12. Adulterers.
SErgius the third begat John the twelfth, upon that most impudent whore
Marozia: and in his Papacy committed infinite abominations amongst light
women, as writes Luitprandus Ticinensis in his third book and 12. chapter de
Imperatorum gestis.

Lando the first: This man in fashion of an anointed Bachelor, according to
the custom of those days, consumed the greatest part of his life amongst
women; and was himself at last consumed, when he had reigned seven months.

John the eleventh. Theodora, a famous whore and Lady of Rome, was so
vehemently in love with this John (the bastard of Lando, at his coming to
Rome) that she not only desired, but enforced him to keep her company. And
the freer to enjoy his company, she caused him to translate the Bishops sea
from Rome to Rauenna, as writes Ticinensis in his second book. Cap. 13.

John the twelfth, the bastard of that famous whore Marozia, spent the time of
his whole Papacy, in most bestial sensuality, of him thus writes Theodorick
Niemensis. Being mounted into the Papacy, he was sometime present at the
huntings of wild beasts: the rest of his time he spent wantonly and
pleasantly, and kept company with suspicious women.

John the thirteenth. None would serve his turn but virgins, and votaresses.
The Lateran Palace he made his stews. He defiled Stephana his fathers
concubine, the widow Rayner; another widow Hanna; and his own Niece.

Alexander the sixth, was a most luxurious tyrant: No pen is able to register
the rare, beastly and obscene qualities of this most impious Knave. And such
were John the 14.15.21.24. Benedist the sixth and ninth. Stephan the eighth.

13. Incestuous persons.
PAul the third: He, to be made Cardinal and Bishop of Ostia, gave unto
Alexander the sixth, his sister Iulia Farnese, to be deflowred. Another of his
sisters, whom he kept for his own store, for playing false with others, he
poisoned. Nicholas Quercaeus taking him and his wife Laura Farnese (though his
Niece) together in company, gave him such a stab with his dagger, that the scar
remained with him to his dying day. Another of his Nieces (a delicat wench, no
less admired for her mayden-like modesty, then her choice beauty) this
Goat-like old Knave solicited to incest and unnatural whoredom. And to enjoy
his own daughter Constantia, with more liberty, whom he had often heretofore
known, he impoysoned her husband Bosius Sfortia.

Alexander the sixth, was more familiar with his impudent daughter Lucretia,
then stood with his honesty.

John the thirteenth, often times defiled Stephana his fathers concubine. Such
an other was Benedict the 3.

14. Sodomits.
JULIUS the second. This man, as we read in a certain Commentary of the
Masters of Paris, abused himself with two young gentlemen (besides others)
whom Anne Queen of France had sent unto Robert Cardinal of Nantes, to be
brought up and instructed.

Julius the third. Being Legate of Bononia, he used one Innocent, his ancient
Minion over familiarly. Being Bishop, against the mind of the College, he
admits him his household servant, and creates him one of the Cardinals. The
report went at Rome, and dispersed by libells, that Jove kept Ganimed, but an
ill favored one. At what time his Holiness presented this his darling to the
College, and every man denied his consent: for that his presented had neither
virtue nor good manners to advance him: It is reported that he should say: What
more saw you in me, I beseech you, when you preferred me to this Papacy?
Wherefore sithence we are all but fortunes tennis-balls, and by her good favor
you have assisted me: so in like manner be you favor able to this my boy, and I
will create him a Cardinal. But after that some writers had brandished this
Catife for his blasphemies and villainies, he procured a fellow as wicked as
himself, viz. Jerome Mutius, to defend his actions, and thereto he put his
approbation. Virgerius writes, that he abstained not from the Cardinals
themselves. In the time of this incarnate diuill lived, and issued from his
private closet, that Apostaticall Legate Johannes a Casa, Archbishop of
Beneuent, who in Italian rithmes writ a Poem in commendation of the sin of
Sodomy; and Entitled it, Opus diuinum: affirming that he took great delight
therein, and never knew any other venery.

Leo the tenth made always very much of his carcass, and gave his mind to all
variety of pleasure, but especially to the love of boys.

Sixtus the fourth built a famous brothell house at Rome, and dedicated it to
both Sexes. Wessell of groaning reports in his treatise of Popish Indulgences,
that at the requests of Peter Ruerius (his Fatherhoods Catanut) as also at the
instance of S. Sixtus Cardinal and Patriarch of Constantinople, and Jerome his
brother; his Holiness granted his faculty to all the household servants of the
Cardinal of S, Luce, chief hunts-man unto Paul the eleventh (a fearful
thing to be spoken) in the hot months of June, Iulie, and August, to use the
masculine sin; signing the Bull with this clause: Fiat quod petitur.

Petrus Mendoza called Cardinal Valentinian, not contented with a troop of
evil women, nor satisfied with the Queen her self; desired and often obtained
of Alexander the sixth to use in holy single-life, as his best beloved spouse,
his bastard Son the Marquess of Zaneth.

John the four and twentieth was accused in the Counsel of Constance, to have
been a Sodomit, an adulterer, and a whoremonger.

Clement the seventh. Of him it is recorded in a certain Commentary upon the
Articles of the Masters of Paris, that he was, a bastard, a poysoner, a
Manslayer, a Pandar, a Symonianist, a Sodomit, a Periurer, a deflowrer, a
Rauisher, a Geomancer, a Church-robber, and a plotter of all villainies. Such
like were Benedict the third, John the thirteenth, fourteenth and Paul the
third.

Hence complains Luit prandus, that the Lateran palace became by time and
sufferance to be a receptacle of unclean persons.

15. The Favorites of Whores.
VICTOR the third obtained the Papacy, neither by the choice of the Cardinals,
nor by the suffrages of the people, but was thereunto hoysted by his Mistrisse
Matilda with the assistance of the Normans.

Urban the second, and Victor, by the same party and like means, obtained the
like preferment.

John the eleventh, by the wealth of Theodora an impudent gamester, ran the
same fortune.

Paul the third had a roll of forty five thousand whores, of whom he exacted a
monthly tribut. And no wonder, for if fame deceive not, I have heard it
reported by men of good experience, that Rome is a City consisting of about
five thousand souls, whereof a third part were accounted to be light weomen
and Churchmen.

Sextus the fourth was very bountiful toward their maintenance, and had to
spare for his friends and servants. It should seem he augmented their
numbers; for their hyer proved very aduantagious to his Exchequer, every whore
being rated to pay weekly to his Holiness behoof, a piece of their Coin,
termed a Julius. The yearly Entrado whereof many times amounts to the yearly
value of four hundred thousand dukats. And the Officers of the Church do as
duly make their accounts for this Entrado, as for any other of the Churches
revenues.

Lucius the third ratified the sacring of whooremongers.

John the thirteenth being deposed for his enormious villainies, the weomen of
his old acquaintance by promising the Roman nobility their rewards out of the
Churches treasure, invited them to Arms, and wrought his restitution.

John the eight. She was at first called Gilberta; but counterfaiting the
virill Sex, and the habit of a young man, went first to Athens with a Monk her
sweet heart. Where after her great proficiency in the Arts, and the death of
her friend, She returned alone to Rome, but always in her late disguise.
Where in all disputations, behauing her self for eloquence and readiness of
acute answers with admiration, she so gained the good esteems of all her
Auditorie, that Leo being dead, she was chosen Pope, and sat in Peter's
Chair two years and six months.

During her Popedom she was gotten with child by a familiar friend, her
Chapleine, and in a solemn Procession, between the Colosse and Saint Clements
Church she fell in travail, and in the midst of the City, in the streets,
and before all the people, she brought forth a Son, and through pain died
in the place. Certainly it can not be doubted, but that God suffered this
whore to be Pope, to represent in plain terms that Babylonian creature,
spoken of in the 17. of the Apocalips, to the end that of her self, and her
enchantments, the Elect might beware.

16. Bawdes.
PAul the third, surrendered his sister Iulia Fernese unto Alexander the sixth,
to be defloured.

Sixtus the fourth, by the testimony of Agrippa, amongst the modern Pandors,
was the most eminent; As the man who excelled all other builders in the
edifying of that most stately brothel-house, which he dedicated to both sexes.

17. Bastards.
MArtin the eleventh, by a common woman, was the son of a Negromantique
Priest.

So was John the eleventh, begotten by Pope Lando.

Item, John the twelfth, begotten by Sergius the third upon Marozia.

Item, John the fourteenth, then son of John the twelfth.

Item, John the sixteenth, the son of Leo a Priest.

Item, Benedict the eighth, the son of Bishop Gregory.

Item, John the seventeenth, another son of the same Gregory.

Item, Siluester the third, the son of the Archpriest Lawrance.

Item, Adrian the fourth, the son of Monk Robert.

Item, Eugenius the fourth, the son of Gregory the twelfth, Pope.

Item, Clement the seventh, the son of Leo the tenth.

Item, Gregory the ninth, the son of Innocent the third.

Item, Adrian the fifth, the son of Innocent the fourth.

Item, Gregory the eleventh, the son of Clement the sixth.

18. Drunkards.
LEo the tenth, and Nicholas the fifth were famous for the love of their liquor.

19. Covetous persons.
THeodore of Niem, did long ago delineat the Avarice of the Roman Bishops.
For he compared the Popes Exchequer to the Ocean, whereunto all Rivers paid
tribute, and yet was it never satisfied.

Histories do affirm, that at one gleaning the Popes had out of France ninety
hundred thousand crowns. Whereupon Jews the ninth complained, that his
Kingdom was miserably exhausted by these Harpies.

The wealthy Kingdom of England to be miserably impouerished, partly by
tithes, partly by procurations of the Apostolic Legates, partly by donatiues,
and partly by the sale of Benefices, Matthew Paris in his time did much
complain. In those days, says he, Pope Gregory either so permitting or
procuring; the insatiable avarice of the Roman Clergy, grew to be so fervent,
that without any spark of modesty (confounding all law and equity, as a common
and brasen-faced-Harlot) set all to sale to all sorts of persons, and reputed
Usury as a trifle, and Simony as a matter of no inconvenience.

Germany was pillaged after the same fashion.

By war and cunning, the Pope wrested from the Emperor his lawful
Patrimonies, some after some, throughout Italy.

By harlots they make also rich purchases; they put out their money to Interest,
and account no gain, base or unlawful

20. Church-robbers.
BOniface the seventh, when he saw that it was no longer safe for him to reside
at Rome, privily and feloniously he purloyned certain rich tresurers out of
the Church of Saint Peter, and fled to Constantinople.

Clement the seventh, was accused for perjury, sacrilege, and impoysoning,
etc.

21. Simonianists.
FRom Gregory the ninth, Caesar obtained his absolution for the price of one
hundred thousand ounces of gold.

Benedict the ninth, being stricken with fear; for one thousand and five
hundred pounds, sold the Papacy to his Chapman John Gratian, afterward called
Gregory the sixth. Hereupon John the Monk complained, that Rome was founded by
thieves, and so continued until this day, to live by spoils. And Alan
Chartierius, says, you have made the divine sanctuary a bank of Exchange.

Alike in conscience were Leo the tenth. Innocent the eighth, Siluester the
third, Gregory the sixth, Gregory the twelfth, John the eighteenth, etc. So
that Bernhard also complained, That the Holy offices of the Church were become
merely questuarie.

22. Ambitious persons.
John the four and twentieth, by ambition only affected the Papacy. For by
the testimony of Stella, when he lived at Bononia, he carried himself more
like a Lord then a Legate; He was governor of a great Army, and unto him the
fathers were glad to resort to elect a new Pope; he gave out many under
hand-threats, that unless they would present one to the Papacy, who^ without
exception, himself should very well like of, he should not prevail.
Whereupon, many were nominated, of whom he meant never to approve one.
Whereupon, the Fathers beseeched him to name the man whom he best fancied. Then
give me Peter's cloak (quoth he) and I will bestow it on him that shall be
Pope. Which being done, he cast the cloak upon his own shoulders, saying,
Behold your Pope. Which stratagem, though it displeased the Fathers, yet they
thought it fitter to be silent, then to aggrauate displeasure.

John the three and twentieth, was a man most ambitious, writing unto the
Greeks, That he only was head of the Church, and Christ his Vicar. Unto whom
the Grecians re-answered in as many words. We constantly acknowledge thy high
authority over thy subjects: thy high pride we can not endure; thy avarice we
are not able to satisfy. The devil be with thee; the Lord is with us.

So John the two and twenteth, after a long vacation, being made Cardinal by
the Council of Naples; being entrusted with the election, elected himself:
which by the Canons he could not do.

So Boniface the third that ambitious beast, in the midst of a tumultuous
number, (yet many gainesaying it) was heaued into the Papacy; confirmed,
worshipped, and saluted Lord and Prince of all Bishops by that adulterous
Emperor, parricide and tyrant, Phocas.

Afterward by ardent importunity, or rather by his immoderate bribery, he
obtained, that Rome should be called the Head of all the christian Churches,
upon these idle reasons forsooth: That the Empire first took his origin from
Rome, and so Peter gave unto his successors of Rome the Keys, etc. Read the
history of Phocas and this Boniface, One of the Popes best benefactors.
to be further satisfied of their mutual knaueries.

Let Paschal the eleventh rank with these fellows. For when William
procurator and Clarke to king Henry, speaking in his masters right, amongst
other reasons constantly affirmed: That the King had rather loose his kingdom,
then the Inuestiture of Prelates: the Pope made this proud reply. If as thou
say, thy master will not suffer the Ecclesiastical presentations to be
alienated from him, for the loss of his kingdom; then take thou notice
precisely, I speak it before God, that neither I without the price of his head
will suffer him to enjoy them quietly.

A good Pope, that would not in those days touch an Emperor before he had
become a private person. A Popish miracle.
Clement the sixth answered the Ambassadors of Jews the Emperor as arrogantly:
That he would never pardon his Majesty, before he had resigned his Imperial
right, sequestered himself, his children, and all his goods into his custody,
and promised never to retake them but by the Bishops grace and good liking.

So great was the spirit of Boniface the eight, that almost he disdained all
men. For such was his ambition, that he suborned certain companions in lieu of
Angels with a soft voice by night, to sound in the chamber of Pope Celestine,
that he should voluntarily resign the Popedom, if he meant to save his life.
Which the simple man performed accordingly. But Boniface contrary to Law and
equity, stepping into the Popedom, laid violent hands upon Celestine
traveling out of Rome, to lead his life in some solitary mansion, and cast him
into perpetual prison.

The same Boniface instituted the Iubile, and celebrated it, in the year of
our Lord 1300. promising to all people that would visit the City, full
remission of their sins. He rejected an Embassy sent from the Emperor
Albert. Upon the first day of the solemnity, he appeared in his Pontificalibus,
and bestowed his benedictions upon the people. The next day he came forth
accoutred like an Emperor, and commanded a naked sword to be borne before him,
with this acclamation: Behold here two swords. This is the right I have to
kingdoms and Empire; they are all in my disposition. The kings of the earth,
unless they will receive their kingdom from this holy Sea, are to be accursed
and deposed* Finally he gloried in his pride, that he was the porter of
Heaven, and ought to be adjudged by no man.

Adrian the fourth did grievously chide Frederick the Emperor for holding his
left stirrope, as he came from horse. vt supra. fo.

Alexander the third in more base manner used an other Emperor as before. fo.

Stephen the second deposed Childerick, and preferred Pipin to his place. He
shaued Childericks crown, and thrust him into a monastery. Pipin lay agroofe
upon the earth, kissed the Popes toe, held his horse by the bridle, Note what
persons the Pope binds to his service.
performed the office of a footman, and gave him his oath of perpetual
fidelity.

Damasus the second. This man was Chancellor to his predecessor; but his
ambition not able to stay the death of his master, it is reported, that he gave
him a dram to dispatch him.

Note.
Constantine the first. This man was the first that put his foot to be kissed
by an Emperor.

Benedict the third followed the president, and suffered himself to be
worshipped as a most holy Father, or rather like a terrene Idol.

John the seven and twentieth did the like to Crescentius the Roman Consul.

Martin the fifth to Sigismund Caesar.

Leo the fourth gave his foot to all comers, and against the Canons of the
Aquisgran Council, first advanced a Papal cross, and adorned it with precious
stones, commanding it to be carried before him. Of the like stamp were Boniface
the first, Symmachus, Boniface the second, Siluerius, Martin the second,
Formosus the first, Theodorus the second, Benedict the fourth, Sergius the
third, John the tenth, Gregory the sixth, etc.

23. Monsters.
BEnedict the ninth. Historiographers do write that this Benedict was seen
near a certain Mill by an Hermit in a most horrible shape. His body was like
a Bear, adjoined thereto the head and tail of an Ass. And being asked by
him, how he came to be thus metamorphosed: It is reported, that he answered: In
this shape do I wander, for that in my Popedom I lived without reason,
without God, and without limitation.

Nicholas the third begat a son on his Concubin, who had hair and claws
like unto a Bear. Vide Iohannem Nouiomagum.

24. Illiterate persons.
BEnedict the eleventh was a mere Laique. And so were Benedict the ninth,
Sergius the third, Eugenius the fourth, John the ninth, John the one and
twentieth, etc.

OF THE FALL AND DEATH OF certain Roman Bishops.
ADrian the third flying from Rome, came unto Venice in the Habit of his Cook:
where he lurked in a certain monastery, and was made the Gardener of the
garden thereof.

John the five and twentieth traveling toward Constance fell headlong from his
litter: a presage of his future deposition. For many faults being objected
against him in the Council, he began to fly: but being taken and prevented;
he was cast into prison, and there remained for three years.

Siluerius Campanus was banished into Pontus by Theodora the wife of the
Emperor Justinian. The same Theodora her self impleaded Vigilius for not
perfourming his word: arrested him to Constantinople; there contumeliously
disgraced him, whipped him, cast an halter about his neck; caused him to be
haled through all the streets of the City, and finally banished him.

Constantinus the second, was eiected by a Council: and being deprived as well
of his eyes as of his Popedom, he was cast into a monastery, and after into a
perpetual prison.

Benedict the fifth was deprived of his papal dignity, and sent into banishment.

Stephen the eight was so sorely wounded in a popular tumult, that for the
deformity of his wound, he was never after willing to show himself in
public.

Innocent the fourth died miserably. Robert of Lincoln reproved his vile
behavior, his avarice, his pride, and his tyranny, and that as well by word of
mouth, as by writing. For which the Pope cites him to Rome, and injuriously
condemns him. From him Robert appealeth unto Christ as his Judge. Upon the
death of Lincoln (as writes Cestriensis lib. 7.) a voice is heard in the
Court of Rome, crying; Miserable man, make ready to come to the tribunal of
God. Upon the day following the Pope is found dead in his bed, and upon his
body appeared a bluish blow, as if he had been stricken with a cudgel.

Siluester the second being at Mass was attached with a sudden fever; and by
the noise of spirits (witness Peter Praemonstratensis) he perceived that his
end drew nigh, to pay the devil his due upon composition. He confessed his
errors, and (as says Benno) prevented a miserable and fearful destruction.
If it were a true confession, no doubt.
Yet in the anguish of death, he desired that his hands, his tongue, and his
priuities, wherewith even in his single life, he had blasphemed God, by
sacrificing to devils, might be cut off.

Nicholas the third in midst of his greatest imaginations, was taken with an
apoplexy, and without one word speaking breathed his last.

Paul the second having merrily supped, was also taken with the apoplexy, and
departed, without sight of any man.

Paschal the second was taken by the Emperor, and thrust into prison.

Gelasius the eleventh. One Cinthius a powerful patrician of the City made an
assault upon him, took him by the throat, cast him to the earth, spurnd him
with his feet, and cast him into prison.

Boniface the eight, Grown desperate with the ouerwaight of fury, gave up his
unhappy ghost laden with an infinite heap of mischievous actions. This is that
Pope, of whom it is recorded, That he entered as a wolf, lived as a Lion, and
dyed as a Dog.

Gregory the sixth was taken prisoner, and sent into banishment.

Gregory the seventh for his innumerable wickednesses was deposed by the
Emperor Henry, and in banishment ended his days.

Eugenius the fourth privily flying in a monastical cool, together with his
friend Arsenius, entered a fisher-boat. Upon report whereof, his enemies
followed to seek him with stones and shot.

Clement the seventh, for his conspiring with the French King against the
Emperor, was made prisoner by Charles his Captains, and wonderfully derided
by the Germane soldiers.

John the eleventh, was taken by the soldiers of Guido, committed to prison,
and stifled with a sirplice thrust into his mouth.

Boniface the eleventh died suddenly.

John the eighth, not that teeming woman, but a man, died together with his
Crescentius, having his eyes first put out, and his whole body mangled.

Benedict the eleventh, was poisoned at an Abbesses banquet with a dish of
figs.

Benedict the sixth, no doubt for such like malapert practices, as in these
days Popes play with mighty Princes, was taken by one Cinthius, a powerful
Roman Citizen, thrust into the Mole of Hadrian, now Saint Angelo, the prison of
the basest offenders, and there miserably strangled.

Hadrian the fourth: Into his mouth slew a fly, which could not be taken out,
nor thrust down, by any Art of the Physician: so that it stopped his breath,
and choked him.

Lucius the second, with an armed band, assaulted the Citizens in the Capitol,
of purpose utterly to destroy the whole Senate. The news runs through the
City: the people fly to Arms: and a strong fight is managed. Lucius engaging
himself in the hottest of his armed troops, is so mauled with stones and
shot, that a little while after he surrendered his life.

John the two and twentieth. At the instant wherein he promised unto himself a
long continuance of his life, was suddenly taken away, and was alone found
buried amongst timber and rubbish, by the fall of a chamber.

Clement the sixth was suddenly taken with an Apostume, and died.

Leo the tenth suddenly died with an astonishing disease.

Leo the third was so odious unto the people, that in a certain Procession
being cast from his horse; they dispoyled him of his pontifical ornaments;
buffeted him well fauouredly, and committed him to prison. And as some report,
they deprived him both of his eyes and his tongue.

Christopher the first being deposed from the Papacy, was constrained to lead a
monastical life. Not long after he was taken from the said monastery by
Sergius his successor, and committed to a most severe prison, and there ended
his days in great misery.

These under written were poisoned.
JOHN the sixteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth. Clement the second. Damasus the
second. Leo the ninth. Victorinus the second. Nicholas the second. Alexander
the second. Victorinus the third. Gregory the eight. Celestine the fourth.
Urban the sixth. Alexander the fifth. Clement the seventh.

Thus much for their manners: and now to stop the mouths of those who cry out;
what is this to Religion? Behold here for a conclusion, not the fruits, but the
very points, some few for a taste of these their irreligious documents.

BLASPHEMIES OF THE CANONISTES.
THE Bishop of Rome is God. Did. 96. ca. Satis euidenter.

2. The Pope is not man. Lib. 1. Sexti de electione. tit. 6. ca. Fundamenta in
Glossatore.

3. The Pope is neither God, nor man. In prologo clementinarum in glossatore.

4. It is lawful for no man to imagine or practice to transgress the precepts
of the Apostolical Sea. Did. 20. ca. Nulli. Item did. 12. and 22.

5. An Heretic is he who is not obedient to the Popes decrees. ibid. in
gloss.

6. He is guilty of Sacrilege, that belieth the Pope: For he supplieth the
place of the living God on earth. De paenit. did. 1. ca. libenter ignosco.

7. The Pope is the universal Bishop through al parts of the earth. Lib. 5.
Sexti. ca. faelicis. in gloss.

8. The Pope is Lord of all principalities upon earth. Li. 3. Sexti. tit. 16.
cap. Periculoso.

9. Let no man dare to say unto the Pope, Lord why do thou do thus, or thus?
In extrau. tom. 22. tit. 5. ca. ad Apostolatus in gloss. 2. li. 1. Decretal.
tit. 7. ca. 5. vide gloss.

10. The Pope by virtue of these words, Thou art Peter: or, feed my sheep,
obtains primacy. In praemio Sexti in gloss.

11. No mortal man may sit in judgment upon the Pope. Cause. 9. quaest. 3. c.
nemo. Item aliorum. and did. 40. ca. st Papa. Cause. 12. quaest. 2. ca.
quisquis. in gl. did. 40. ca. non nos. in gloss.

12. It is lawful for no creature to call into question the judgment of the
Apostolic Sea, or to delay the sentence thereof. Cause. 17. quaest. 4. c.
nemini.

13. The Pope may dispense against the Apostles. did. 34. collector in gloss.
did. 82. ca. presbiter. in gloss. cause. 15. quaest. 6. ca. Authoritatem. in
gloss.

14. The Pope has celestial arbitrament. Li. 1. decr. Greg. tit. 1. ca. 5.

15. The Pope may change the Nature of things. ibid.

16. The Pope of nothing can make something ibid.

17. The Popes will is a Law. ibid.

18. The Pope may dispense above the law. ibid.

19. The Pope may cause an unjust decree to be received for just. ibid.

20. The Pope has fullness of power. ibid.

21. As is the difference between the Sun and the Moon. such is the
difference between the Pope and a King. Li. 1. decre. Greg. tit. 33. solitae.

22. Persons unjustly condemned and oppressed ought to seek redress and
amends from the Church of Rome. Cause. 2. quaest. 6. c. ideo.

Last of all,

By these Men's Lives, Manners, and Doctrine new,
Penned by the travail of my Pen; O you,
Who read the leazings of this false-mouth'd crew,
Learn these their Lives, Words, Manners to eschew.
CONTRADICTIONS MORE REAsonable, then Canonisticall.
B. De potest. pa pae. so. 6.
A Learned and noble preacher (if any such be amongst the Jesuits) being
demanded his judgment concerning the opinion of Bozius (a more peremptory
Champian for the Canonists then any of his fellows) Eum vocabat Papalem
parasitum, viz. termed him a Papal parasite.

Li. 10. Hist. Fr. in vita Caroli vij.
Gaguin a learned and religious historiographer, in his time, thus taxes this
their irregular usurpation: Such is (says he) at this day their haughtiness
and Lordship, that having small respect unto Princes, they boast that all
things are lawful unto themselves soly. Neither in my Age did any of them
ascend the Papacy, but forthwith he enriched his nephews with infinite wealth,
and honors.

Lib. 3. de Consid. ad Eug. In vita Bonisacij.
S. Bernard long before Gaguin: Does not now ambition more then devotion,
possess the Apostolical succession?

Hereupon said Platina: In this manner dyed that Boniface, who studied more to
terrify, then to teach Kings, Princes, and nations. Who for his pleasure made
it a matter of pastime, to give and retake kingdoms, to interdict Nations, and
absolve them afterward. Gaguin again; Such was the end of Boniface, the
scorner of all men: Li. 7. hist. in vita Philippi Pulchri.
who having no remembrance of his Master Christ, did his utmost, according to
his private fancy, to take and to give kingdoms. When mean time, he was not
ignorant, that he was his vicegerent upon earth, whose kingdom was not of this
world, nether compounded of earthly, but of heavenly perquisits, etc.

Pius the fifth said unto Martin Aspibeneta; Nauar. in Com. Can. Non liceat
Papae. 12. q. 2.
That the Lawyers (meaning the Canonists) accustomed to attribute plus satis
potestatis, more then reasonable supereminency to the Papacy.

No wonder then, if I. Gers. termed them pusillos, that is, weak and simple
Christians, who being deceived (his own words) by unlearned Glossors, do
esteem the Pope only to be God, having all power in heaven and in earth.
Certainly, tales adulatores, such Parasites have corrupted the judgment and
dispositions of many Popes. As concerning whom, In Cano. Coniunctio. 35. q. 2.
Johan. de turre-cremata thus censureth. It is a wonder (says he) that the
Popes do treat so modestly of their Patent of Power, and yet certain
Doctorculi, vpstart Doctors without any true ground will, to flatter them, even
equalize them to God himself.

In the same list does Cardinal Cusanus rank certain other Authors; Who
(says he) indeauouring more then befitteth, or beseems holy Church, to make
famous the Roman Sea (in truth worthy all commendation) spare not to ground
themselves upon Apocriphall writings. Verbum sapienti.

FINIS.

