A SPEECH DELIVERED IN THE CASTLE-CHAMBER AT DVBLIN, the XXII. of November,
Anno 1622. AT THE CENSVRING of certain Officers, who refused to take the Oath
of SUPREMACY. BY JAMES Bishop of Mead.

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for the Partners of the Irish Stock. 1631.

A Speech delivered in the CASTLE-CHAMBER concerning the Oath of SUPREMACY.
WHat the danger of the Law is, for refusing this Oath, has been sufficiently
opened by my Lords the Judges; and the quality and quantity of that offense
has been aggravated to the full by those that have spoken after them. The part
which is most proper for me to deal in, is the information of the Conscience,
touching the truth and equity of the matters contained in the Oath: which I
also have made choice the rather to insist upon, because both the form of the
Oath it self requires herein a full resolution of the conscience (as
appears by those words in the very beginning thereof; I do utterly testify
and declare in my conscience, etc.) and the persons that stand here to be
censured for refusing the same, have alleged nothing in their own defense but
only the simple plea of Ignorance.

That this point therefore may be cleared, and all needless scruples removed
out of men's minds: two maine branches there be of this Oath, which require
special consideration. The one positive: acknowledging the Supremacy of the
government of these Realms, in all causes whatsoever, to rest in the Kings
Highness only. The other negative: renouncing all jurisdictions and
authorities of any foreign Prince or Prelate within his Majesty's dominions.

For the better understanding of the former, we are in the first place to call
unto our remembrance that exhortation of St. Peter. 1 Per. 2. 13, 14.
Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it
be unto the King, as having the pre-eminence; or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well. By this we are taught to respect the King, not as the only
governor of his dominions simply (for we see there be other Governors
placed under him) but (...) as him that excels, and has the preeminence
over the rest, that is to say, (according to the tenure of the Oath) as him
that is the only supreme Governor of his Realms. Upon which ground we may
safely build this conclusion; that whatsoever power is incident unto the King
by virtue of his place, must be acknowledged to be in him supreme: there being
nothing so contrary to the nature of Soveraigntie, as to have another superior
power to overruled it.

Qui Rex est, Regem (Maxim) non habeat.

In the second place we are to consider, that God for the better settling of
piety and honesty among men, and the repressing of profaneness and other
vices, has established two distinct powers upon earth: the one of the Keys,
committed to the Church; the other of the Sword, committed to the Civil
Magistrate. That of the Keys is ordained to work upon the inner man; having
immediate relation to the John 20. 23.
remitting or retaining of sins. That of the Sword is appointed to work upon
the outward man; yielding protection to the obedient, and inflicting external
punishment upon the rebellious and disobedient. By the former, the spiritual
officers of the Church of Christ are enabled to ^. Tim. 5. 17.
govern well, to Tit. 2. 15.
speak and exhort and rebuke with all authority, to Matthew. 16. 19. and 18. 18.
loose such as are penitent, to commit others unto the Lords prison, until
their amendment, or to bind them over unto the judgment of the great day, if
they shall persist in their wilfulness and obstinacy. By the other, Princes
have an imperious power assigned by God unto them, for the defense of such as
do well, and executing Romans 13. 4.
revenge and wrath upon such as do evil; whether Ezra 7. 26.
by death, or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, according
to the quality of the offense.

When St. Peter, that had the Keys committed unto him, made bold to draw the
Sword; he was commanded to Matt. 26. 52.
put it up, as a weapon that he had no authority to meddle withal. And on the
other side, when Vzziah the King would venture upon the execution of the
Priests office, it was said unto him; 2. Chr. 26. 18.
It pertains not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense. Let this
therefore be our second conclusion: that the power of the Sword and of the
Keys are two distinct ordinances of God; and that the Prince has no more
authority to enter upon the execution of any part of the Priests function,
than the Priest has to intrude upon any part of the office of the Prince.

In the third place we are to observe, that the power of the civil sword, (the
supreme managing whereof belongs to the King alone) is not to be restrained
unto temporal causes only; but is by Gods ordinance to be extended likewise
unto all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things and causes. that as the
spiritual Rulers of the Church do exercise their kind of government, in
bringing men unto obedience, not of the duties of the first Table alone (which
concerns piety and the religious service which man is bound to perform unto
his Creator) but also of the second (which respects moral honesty, and the
offices that man does owe unto man:) so the civil Magistrate is to use his
authority also in redressing the abuses committed against the first Table,
as well as against the second, that is to say, as well in punishing of an
heretic, or an idolater, or a blasphemer, as of a thief, or a murderer, or a
traitor; and in providing by all good means, that such as live under his
government 1 Timothy 2. 2.
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all piety and honesty.

And howsoever by this means we make both Prince and Priest to be in their
several places Custodes utriusque tabulae, Keepers of both Gods tables: yet do
we not hereby any way confound both of their offices together. for though the
matter wherein their government is exercised may be the same; yet is the form
and manner of governing therein always different. the one reaching to the
outward man only, the other to the inward: the one binding or loosing the
soul, the other laying hold on the body and the things belonging thereunto:
the one having special reference to the judgment of the world to come, the
other respecting the present retaining or loosing of some of the comforts of
this life.

That there is such a As on the other side, that a spiritual or
ecc^esiasticall government is exercised in causes civil or temporal. For is
not Excommunication a maine part of Ecclesiastical government, and Forest
laws a special branch of causes Temporal? yet we see in Sententia lata super
chartas, anno 12. R. H.; that the Bishops of England pronounce a solemn
sentence of Excommunication against the infringers of the liberties contained
in charta de Foresta.
civil government as this in causes spiritual or Ecclesiastical, no man of
judgment can deny. For must not Heresy (for example) be acknowledged to be a
cause merely spiritual or Ecclesiastical? and yet by what power is an
Heretic put to death? The officers of the Church have no authority to take
away the life of any man: it must be done therefore per brachium seculare; and
consequently it must be yielded without contradiction, that the temporal
Magistrate does exercise therein a part of his civil government, in punishing
a crime that is of it own nature spiritual or Ecclesiastical.

But here it will be said. The words of the Oath being general; that the King
is the only supreme governor of this Realm and of all other his highness
dominions and countries: how may it appear that the power of the civil sword
only is meant by that government, and that the power of the Keys is not
comprehended therein? I answer: first, that where a civil Magistrate is
affirmed to be the governor of his own dominions and countries; by common
intendement this must needs be understood of a civil government, and may in
no reason be extended to that which is merely of another kind. Secondly I
say, that where an ambiguitie is conceived to be in any part of an Oath; it
ought to be taken according to the understanding of him for whose satisfaction
the Oath was ministered. Now in this case it has been sufficiently declared by
public authority, that no other thing is meant by the government here
mentioned; but that of the civil sword only.

For in the book of Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops and
the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London anno 1562. thus we read.
Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, (by which
titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended:) we
give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word or of the Sacraments
(the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen
does most plainly testify:) but that only prerogative which we see to have
been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself,
that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their
Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil sword the stubborn and evil doers.

If it be here objected that the authority of the Convocation is not a
sufficient ground for the exposition of that which was enacted in Parliament: I
answer, that these Articles stand confirmed not only by the Royal assent of
the Prince, (for the establishing of whose Supremacy the Oath was framed) but
also by a special Act of Parliament; which is to be found among the statutes
in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, chap. 12. Seeing therefore the
makers of the Law have full authority to expound the Law; and they have
sufficiently manifested, that by the supreme government given to the Prince
they understand that kind of government only which is exercised with the Civil
sword: I conclude, that nothing can be more plain than this; that without all
scruple of conscience, the Kings Majesty may be acknowledged in this sense to
be the only supreme governor of all his Highness dominions and countries, as
well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as temporal. And so
have I cleared the first maine branch of the Oath.

I come now unto the second; which is propounded negatively: that no foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have any
jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence or authority, Ecclesiastical or
spiritual within this Realm. The forreiner that challenges this
Ecclesiastical or spiritual jurisdiction over us, is the Bishop of Rome: and
the title whereby he claims this power over us, is the same whereby he
claims it over the whole world; because he is S. Peter's successor, forsooth.
And indeed, if S. Peter himself had been now alive, I should freely confess,
that he ought to have spiritual authority and superiority within this
kingdom. But so would I say also, if S. Andrew, S. Bartholmew, S. Thomas, or
any of the other Apostles had been alive. For I know that their commission was
very large; to Mark. 16. 15.
go into all the world, and to preach the Gospel unto every creature. so that
in what part of the world soever they lived, they could not be said to be out
of their charge; their Apostleship being a kind of an Universal Bishopric. If
therefore the Bishop of Rome can prove himself to be one of this rank: the
Oath must be amended; and we must acknowledge that he has Ecclesiastical
authority within this Realm.

True it is, that our Lawyers in their Yearbookes by the name of the Apostle do
usually design the Pope. But if they had examined his title to that
Apostleship, as they would try an ordinary man's title to a piece of land: they
might easily have found a number of flawes and maine defects therein. For first
it would be enquired, whether the Apostleship was not ordained by our Savior
Christ as a special Commission; which being personal only, was to determine
with the death of the first Apostles. For howsoever at their first entry into
the execution of this commission, we find that Acts 1. 25, 26.
Matthias was admitted to the Apostleship in the room of Judas: yet afterward
when James the brother of John was slain by Herod, we do not read that any
other was substituted in his place. Nay we know that the Apostles generally
left no successors in this kind: neither did any of the Bishops (he of Rome
only excepted) that sat in those famous Churches, wherein the Apostles
exercised their ministry, challenge an Apostleship or an Universal
Bishopric, by virtue of that succession.

It would secondly therefore be inquired, what sound evidence they can
produce, to show that one of the company was to hold the Apostleshipp as it
were in fee, for him and his successors for ever; and that the other eleven
should hold the same for term of life only. Thirdly, if this state of
perperuity was to be cast upon one: how came it to fall upon S. Peter, rather
than upon S. John; who outlived all the rest of his fellows, and so as a
surviving feoffee had the fairest right to retain the same in himself and his
successors for ever? Fourthly, if that state were wholly settled upon S. Peter:
seeing the Romanists themselves acknowledge that he was Bishop of Antioch
before he was Bishop of Rome; we require them to show, why so great an
inheritance as this, should descend unto the younger brother (as it were by
Burrough-english) rather than to the elder, (according to the ordinary manner
of descents.) Especially seeing Rome has little else to allege for this
preferment, but only that S. Peter was crucified in it: which was a very
slender reason to move the Apostle so to respect it. Seeing therefore the
grounds of this great claim of the Bishop of Rome appear to be so vain and
frivolous: I may safely conclude, that he ought to have no Ecclesiastical or
spiritual authority within this Realm; which is the principal point
contained in the second part of the Oath.

FINIS.
JAMES REX.

RIght Reverend Father in God, and Right trusty and welbeloved Counselor, we
greet you well. You have not deceived our expectation, nor the gracious opinion
we ever conceived both of your abilities in learning, and of your
faithfulness to us and our service. Whereof as we have received sundry
testimonies both from our precedent Deputies, as likewise from our Right trusty
and welbeloved Cousin and Counselor the Viscount Falkland our present Deputy
of that Realm; so have we now of late in one particular had a further evidence
of your duty and affection well expressed by your late carriage in our
Castle-Chamber there, at the censure of those disobedient Magistrates, who
refused to take the oath of Supremacy. Wherein your zeal to the maintenance of
our just and lawful power, defended with so much learning and reason, deserves
our Princely and gracious thanks; which we do by this our letter unto you,
and so bid you farewell.

Given under our Signet at our Court at White Hall the eleventh of January,
1622. In the 20. year of our Reign of great Brittaigne, France and Ireland.
To the right Reverend Father in God, and our right trusty and welbeloved
Counselor, the Bishop of Mead.

