APPROVED Directions for Health, both Natural and Artificial: Derived from
the best Physicians as well modern as ancient.

Teaching how every Man should keep his body and mind in health: and sick,
how he may safely restore it himself.

Divided into 6. Sections
1. Air, Fire and Water. 2. Meat, drink with nourishment. 3. Sleep, Early
rising and Dreams. 4. Auoidance of excrements, by purga. 5. The Souls
qualities and affections. 6. Quarterly, monthly, and daily Diet.
Newly corrected and augmented by the Author.

The fourth Edition.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop
near the Conduit in Fleetestreete. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY GRACIOUS MOTHER in Law, the Lady Lettice, Wife to
the valerous and Heroical Knight, Sir Arthur Chichester, Lord Duputie of his
Majesty's Kingdom^ of Ireland.
MADAME, it has ever been a customary fashion among Students, to choose out
some noble Personage, eminent for virtue, under the glory of whose name, their
Books might walk up and down on the worlds Theater, secured from that
spiteful Spirit of Detraction, whose blustering blasts of Blasphemy, I lately
endeavored to conjure and convict. After the like manner, to be somewhat in the
fashion, lo here I submit before your eyes of Grace this saplesse Work of
mine, that the starry influence of your ancient love may reflect upon the
darkest parts thereof, where perhaps the distance of Climate withholds your
directest beams. I know your Ladyship is stored with far more precious
presents: only Duty herein seems to free me from Presumption, in dedicating
the blossoms of my youthful Studies to One, who is as wise as I am mindful,
as favorable as I am faithful, and ever will continue

At your Ladyships command WILLIAM VAVGHAN.

A Table, declaring the Contents of the Sections and Chapters of this Book.
The first Section.
Chief causes and Rules for preservation of man health.
Chapter 1. OF Airs for pleasure, health, and profit. Fol. 1 Chapter 2. Of
Waters, with their kinds. 9 Chapter 3. Of Fire, and what kind is best. 12
The second Section.
Food and nourishment what is good and bad.
Chapter 1. OF Bread and Drink of all kinds. Fol. 13 Chapter 2. Of Wines of
all kinds, and how to choose the best. 19 Chapter 3. Of Diet drinks for the
sick and healthy. 28 Chapter 4. Of Cider and Perry, with the use thereof. 31
Chapter 5. Of Flesh, and which is best, and how to preserve it sweet. 33
Chapter 6. Of Fish of all sorts, and which is best. 40 Chapter 7. Of Milk,
Butter, Cheese and Eggs. 44 Chapter 8. Of Sauces, best and most sauory. 49
Chapter 9. Of Herbs, with their uses. 54 Chapter 10. Of common Fruits, with
their uses. 56
The third Section.
Sleep, Early rising and Dreams.
Chapter 1. OF Sleep, with the commodities and discommodities thereof. Fol. 58
Chapter 2. Of Early rising. 60 Chapter 3. Of Dreams. 61
The fourth Section.
Euacuations.
Chapter 1. OF Exercise, and which is best. Fol. 64 Chapter 2. Of Vrines. 67
Chapter 3. Of Fasting. 68 Chapter 4. Of Venery. 69 Chapter 5. Of Bathes. 70
Chapter 6. Of Excrements and Blood letting. 72 Chapter 7. Of Purgations, with
the use of Tobacco. 74 Chapter 8. Of Vomits. 82 Chapter 9. Of common
sicknesses. 84
The fifth Section.
Infirmities and death.
Chapter 1. OF the causes of hot infirmities, and of cold. Fol. 87 Chapter 2.
Of the wicked motions of the mind. 89 Chapter 3. Of the age of man, and how
his life is divided. 112 Chapter 4. Of the four Humors. 121
The sixth Section.
Restoration of Health.
Chapter 1. OF the four parts of the Year. Fol. 123 Chapter 2. Of Monthly
Diet. 129 Chapter 3. Of medicines and means to prolong life. 138 Chapter 4. Of
Mirth, and the effects thereof. 141 Chapter 5. Of daily Diet. 143
FINIS
NATVRALL AND ARTIFICIAL DIRECTIONS FOR HEALTH.
The first Section.
What be the causes of the preservation of Man's health?
CHAP. I.
THE causes of the preservation of man's health be four; The first, Air, Fire,
and Water. The second, meat and drink, and such as we use for nourishment.
The third, mirth, exercise, and tranquillity of the body. The fourth, auoydance
of excrements, under which Phlebotomie, purgations, vomits, urine; sweat,
bathes, carnal copulation, and such like are contained temperately.

What is Air?
Air naturally by it self, is an element hot and moist, whereupon the whole
constitution of our lives depends. The attraction of this natural body is so
necessary unto us, that if any one of the instruments of our bodies be stopped,
we cannot choose but forthwith be strangled. In respect whereof, the choosing
of a good air must (for the preservation of health) obtain the chiefest place.

Which is the best air?
That which is a man's native soil, and Countries air is best. This by the
Philosophers is approved in this principle: Every man's natural place
preserves him, which is placed in it. And by the Poet confirmed: Sweet is the
smell of Countries soil.

Also a good Air may be known both by his substance (as when it is open,
pure, and clean, free from all filthy dunghils, noisome channels, Nut trees,
Fig trees, Coleworts, Hemlocks, Mines and Forges; for these have a contrary
quality unto the animal spirit, and make men to fall into consumptions) and by
his qualities: as extremity of cold, heat and moisture.

What is the cause, that the Air changes so often?
The Air receives sundry alterations, not only according to the sundry
aspects of the stars and of the heavenly planets: but also by reason of the
diversities of Countries, and of the particular situations of some places, as
well upon the water as upon the land. Do but mark, how feauers, rheumes, and
plagues are engendered by reason of troubled air, and of low marshie grounds:
And on the contrary, how our health is continued, refreshed, and recovered in
dry or sandy Countries.

What shall a man do, if the Air be either too hot, too cold, or too corrupt?
He must use cold things to keep away the heat, and hot things to expel the
cold. He must add dry things to moist, and moist to dry. To depart thence into
another place were not amiss. For oftentimes it is seen, that sick folks
do recoure their former health only by change of air. But if the air be
corrupt, and that a man cannot remove thence very quickly, he must
artificially rectify it by perfuming his Chamber with Juniper, Rosemary, Bay
tree, or with wood of Aloes: and then by sprinkling vinegar here and there in
his chamber. In brief, a man in such cases must get him a Nosegay composed of
Roses, Violets, Maioram, Marigold, and such like* And when he goes abroad he
must hold in his mouth either the pill of an Orange, or a piece of the root of
Angelica. Likewise, he must have an especial regard, that his Chamber be at
least once a day neatly swept. Our Mariners lately returned from their East
Indian voyage confess, that their only remedy against the Callentura, the
Scuruie, and other diseases at sea, is the juice of ^emons. At my being in
Hungary, I saw the fiery Fever, a disease infectious in that Country, cured
only by salt niter prepared with sulphur, and given in water as drink to the
patient: a thing very strange, that fire should quench fire.

Show me particularly, how the Air may be corrected for the recovery of sick
folks, according to the diversities of places, times, and seasons?
Art may moderate all this by accommodating the Air in respect of the sick.
For if it be in Summer, that the Air be too hot and sultrie, as the vulgar
say, and that the patient is affected with some ague or with some other burning
disease, he must be placed in some lower room or some cool chamber, where
the heat of the Sun comes not so forcibly. In Winter time let fire correct
the raw and cold air, specially for them, that be afflicted with cold
sicknesses. For such, a close warm room must be prepared, secured from winds,
where a good fire may be made.

Advise me how I should build me an house for pleasure, health and profit?
First, you must choose out a fine soil, which has water and wood annexed
unto it, and forecast in your mind whether the prospect too and fro be decent
and pleasant to the eye. For I am of this opinion, that if the eye be not
satisfied, the mind cannot be pleased: if the mind be not pleased, nature
does abhor, and if nature does abhor, death at last must consequently
follow. Next you must mark, whether the air which compasses the situation of
your house, be of a pure substance, and that shortly after the Sun is up
grows warm; and contrarily grows cold after the Sun is set. Thirdly, you
must make your foundation upon a gravel ground mixed with clay, upon a hill, or
a hills side. Fourthly, look that your windows be Northward or Eastward.
Lastly, when your house is finished, you must prepare a Garden replenished with
sundry kinds of herbs and flowers, wherein you may recreate and solace your
self at times convenient.

Does the nature of places alter the quality of the Air?
Yea doubtless. Either by reason of marshes, as I said before, which commonly
are corrupted with rotten vapors, and exhalations, or else of Churchyards
subject likewise to the same mutations, we see by experience that the air,
which compasses us about, does change his temperature: As also when it becomes
either excessiuely hot or cold, dry or moist, we do find our selves in much
travel and alteration.

Does the nature of the time of the year alter the Air?
The like mutations does the air infer unto us in the four seasons of the
year, according to the course of the Sun: for in the Spring time the Air is
nearer unto his own nature, to wi^, reasonably hot and moist: in Summer
further heated by the Sun, it becomes, hot and dry: in Harvest, cold and
dry: in Winter, cold and moist. And not only the Sun in the four seasons
of the year brings such alterations in the air, but likewise the Moon in her
four quarters, causes four differences: for the first seventh day from the
new Moon until the next seventh day, is like the Spring time, being hot and
moist. The second seventh day until the full of the Moon is like Summer. The
third day, the Moon decreasing, is correspondent unto the Autumn. And the
fourth and last quarter is like the Winter: Even so again the morning is hot
and moist like the Spring time: noone is compared to Summer: the Evening to
Autumn: and the night to the Winter.

What sicknesses does the Air cause?
The air causes sicknesses according to the variety of the climate. In cold
Countries, I mean, from the fiftieth degree to the Pole Northward or
Southward, few sicknesses abound; except they happen through excess or
distemperature of diet, or vnwholesomnesse of the air, as above written.

In hot Countries, specially between the both Tropickes, the air is more
intemperate and pestilent. Here-hence spring plagues, Callenturaes, and Lues
Venerea, insomuch as a certain Writer affirms by experience, that an
Europaean can hardly live in Aethiopia, or under the Equinoctial line above
five years, whereas on the contrary we hear that men live in Swethland, in
the North parts of Ireland, and in other cold places, where the air is pure
and Notherly, till they attain to a hundred or six score years.

Of Water. CHAP. 2.
What is water?
WAter is an Element cold and moist, and does not nourish, but help digestion.

How many kinds of waters be there?
To discern good waters from bad, you must learn, that there be four
differences of waters, namely, Rain water, River water: fountain water: and
stange water. By Rain water I mean all that falls from the Region of the air
upon the earth in form of water. And this is either sweet when if falls
without a storm; or else troublesome, when it falls with storms and tempests.

Is not Snow water as good as Rain water?
Snow waters, albeit they be counted among those waters which are light, as
having been sublimed, purified, and as it were distilled, yet notwithstanding
they be not so good: For they engender feauers and morphewes.

What is the nature of fountain water?
Fountain water is the best water for preservation of health. But you must
observe, of what side it springs, for if it comes from the East, it excels the
rest as well in moisture and thinness of substance, as in pleasant smell, and
it does moderately comfort the spirits: Contrariwise those fountains, which
spring out of rocks, toward the North, and which have the Sun backward, are
of a hard digestion, and nothing so pure as the other.

Whether water being drunk does nourish? And whether the same be wholesome for
sick persons?
Surely water cannot nourish, because of it self it is of no substance to
fortify or increase the vital faculties. For which cause the wisest
Physicians advised men to drink it honied, which they called Oximell and
Hodromel; or with wine; or with sugar, or with white wine vinegar. Being drunk
alone, it never quenches the drowth nor heat of the lungs, but rather
hinders the spetting up of phlegm. Yet notwithstanding, at meals in Summer
time it may be drunk of hot complexioned people, rather to help digestion,
then to nourish the body.

How shall I know good water?
By the clearenesse of it. That water is best, which runs from an higher to
a lower ground, and that water, which runs upon clay, is better clarified
then that which goes upon the stone.

When is water wholesomest?
In Summer time it is most wholesome: yet notwithstanding, seldom to be
drunk. But if at any time you be compelled to drink it, see first that you
sees your water gently: for by seething, the gross substance of it is taken
away.

How shall I revive waters that begin to putrify?
This is performed by the addition of some small proportion of the oil of
Sulphur, or else of Aqua vitae well rectified, incorporating them both together.

Of Fire. CHAP. 3.
What is fire?
FIre is an element hot and dry, which dissolueth the malicious vapors of the
air, stirs up natural heat in man's body, and expels cold.

What kind of fire is best?
That fire is best, which is made of dry and sweet wood. For wet and green
wood is discommodious: and so are all coals except chark-coales, because they
make the head heavy, and dry up natural moisture.

Turfes likewise are very dangerous, because they stop the windpipes, and make
the skin yellow.

In Germany they use Stoues, which questionless cannot but dull the spirits,
and offend the purer faculties. There may be a kind of fuel made of the
cinders of coals, or old burnt sea-coale, or stone-coale incorporated with
Sawiers dust and Cow Dung, which being formed in balls and dried in the wind,
will burn very clear.

Are not sweatings and hot-houses wholesome?
No, because they exhaust the good humors together with the bad. But in Spring
time they may be used against the itch and small Pockes.

The second Section, concerning food.
Of bread and drink. CHAP. 1.
What is the use of bread?
BRead made of pure wheat flower, well boulted from all branne, and finely
molded and baked, comfort and strengthens the heart, makes a man fat,
and preserves health. It must not be above two or three days old at most,
for then it waxes hard to be concocted. Above all things it is fit, that it be
firmented with sower leaven: for certainly this leauening though it puff up
the paste, yet notwithstanding, it makes the bread light and sauourie, which
otherwise would be heavy, and very hard to be digested. As for raw corn and
unprepared, it is noisome unto the strongest labourer, even unto the stoutest
mower. Let men therefore take heed, how they eat it either of wantonness or
of appetite.

What is Rye Bread?
Rye bread well sifted not made of entire meal and new-baked, is in Summer
time highly commended, specially in the beginning of meat, for it keeps the
belly loose, and for this cause it is so used at the tables of Princes, it must
not be eaten but in small quantity, rather for diet and health sake then to
satisfy hunger.

What is barley Bread?
The ancient Romans utterly forbad the use thereof, for it makes men cowardly
and fearful, by reason that it does not nourish, but weaken the body, yet
notwithstanding some Physicians were of opinion, that it helps them that be
diseased of the gout, by force of a cleansing faculty which it has.

How is wheaten bread and pastery to be used in Physic?
Biscuit, crust, or tosted bread, being eaten dry with a fasting stomach,
staieth, stops, and dries all distillations, Rheumes, and humors fallen or
gathered in any part of the body: some say, that it causes far people to be
lean, but certainly experience teaches that it be taken after all other meat,
it dries a moist body, and hinders fatness and all diseases exceeding from
moisture, because it keeps the meat from being too suddenly and quickly
conveyed into all the parts of the body. Toasted bread steept in white wine
with Cinnamon, Honey, or Sugar, prouokes a good appetite, and a lively spirit
unto a man which is naturally sluggish drowsy, or weak; and for pastrie it is
rather gluttonous, than healthie, not easy to digest, fitter to be taken at
the end of meals, to prevent the Gout or the Dropsy.

What is the use of Beer?
Beer which is made of good Malt, well brewed, not too new, nor too stale,
nourishes the body, causes a good color, and quickly passes out of the
body. In Summer it avails a man much, and is no less wholesome to our
constitutions then wine: Besides the nutritive faculty, which it has by the
malt, it receives likewise a certain property of medicine by the Hop.

What is the use of Ale?
Ale made of barley malt and good water, does make a man strong: but now a
days few Brewers do brew it as they ought, for they add slimie and heavy
baggage unto it, thinking thereby to please tosse-pots, and to increase the
vigor of it.

How shall I discern good Ale from bad?
Good Ale ought to be fresh and clear of color. It must not be tilted, for
then the best quality is spent: It must neither look muddie, nor yet carry a
tail with it.

Show me a wholesome diet drink.
The most precious and wholesome ordinary drink, as well for them that be in
health, as for sick and impotent persons is made after this manner.

Take half a pound of barley, four measures of water, half an ounce of
Licoras, and two drachmes of the seed of Violets, two drachmes of Parsley
seed, three ounces of red Roses, an ounce and a half of Hysopand Sage, three
ounces of figs and raisins well picked; Sees them all together in an earthen
vessel, so long till they decrease two fingers breadth by seething: then put
the pot in cold water, and strain the ingredients through a cloth.

Show me a speedy drink for travelers, when they want Beer or Ale at their
Inn.
Let them take a quart of fair water, and put thereto five or six spoonfuls
of good wine vinegar, or of Aqua Composita; a small quantity of Sugar, and
some Borrage, or a branch of Rosemary: Let them be brued well out of one pot
into another, and then their drink is ready.

What shall poor men drink when Malt is extreme dear?
They must gather the tops of Heath, whereof the usual brushes are made, and
dry them, and keep them from moulding. Then they may at all times brue a
cheap drink for themselves therewith. Which kind of drink is very
wholesome as well for the Liver, as the Spleen; but much the more pleasant, if
they put a little Licoras unto it. There is another sort of drink, of Water
and Vinegar proportionably mingled together, which in Summer they may use.

How shall I help Beer or Ale, which begin to be sour, or dead?
Put a handful or two of Oatmeale, or else of ground Malt into the barrel of
Beer or Ale, stirie the same well together, and so make it revive a fresh. Or
else if you please, bury your drink under the ground in the earth for the
space of four and twenty hours: Or else put into the vessel the roots of
Iroes, Bay berries, Organy or Isop.

Teach me a way to make beer or Ale to become stale, within two or three days.
This is performed, if you bury your Beer or Ale being filled into pots in a
shady place somewhat deep in the ground.

What is Mead?
Mead is made of honey and water boiled both together. This kind of drink is
good for them, which enjoy their health; but very hurtful for them, who are
afflicted with the strangury or colic. Braggot does far surpass it in
wholsomnesse.

What is Meatheglin?
Meatheglin is made of honey, water, and herbs. If it be staile, it is passing
good.

Of Wine. CHAP. 2.
What is the property of wine?
Wine temperately taken refreshes the heart and the spirits, tempereth the
humors, ingendereth good blood, breaks phlegm, conserueth nature, and makes
it merry, as the Princely Prophet speaks, wine rejoices the heart of man.
Being moderately drunk, it forces the soul to partake with the body, so that
both of them together being full of animal spirits, might join in one
pleasing sound, for the glorifying of their Sovereign Benefactor.

What is the use of white wine?
White wine drunk in the moring fasting, cleanses the lungs: Being taken with
red Onions bruised, it pearceth quickly into the bladder, and breaks the
stone. But if this kind of wine be drunk with a full stomach, it does more hurt
then good, and causes the ^eat to descend, before it be fully concocted.

What is the use of Rhenish wine?
Rhenish wine of all other is the most excellent, for it scoureth the raines of
the back, clarifieth the spirits, provoke urine, and drives away the
headache, specially if it does proceed from the heat of the stomach.

What is the use of Mascadell, Malmesie, and brown Bastard?
These kinds of wines are only for married folks, because they strengthen the
back, yet I wish them to be very chary in the drinking thereof, least their
often use fill the raines and seed vessels with unnatural, accidental,
windy, puffed, or as the Logicians speak, with aduenticious heat, which in time
will grow to a number of inconveniences.

What is the use of Sack?
Sack does make men fat and foggy, and therefore not to be taken of young
men. Being drunk before meals it provoke appetite, comfort the spirits
marueilously and concocteth raw humors.

How shall I know whether honey or water be mingled with wine?
Vintners I confess in these days are wont to iuggle, and sophistically to
abuse wine, namely Alligant, Muscadell and brown Bastard, but you shall
perceive their deceit by this means; take a few drops of the wine, and power
them upon a hot plate of iron, and the wine being resolved, the honey will
remain and thicken. If you suspect your wine to be mingled with water, you
shall discern the same by putting a Pear into it: for if the Pear swim upon
the face of the wine, and sink not to the bottom, then it is perfect and
unmingled but if it sink to the bottom, water without doubt is added unto it.

Show me a way to keep Claret wine, or any other wine good, nine or ten years.
At every vintage, draw almost the fourth part out of the hogshead, and then
roll it upon his lee, and after fill it up with the best new wine of the same
kind that you can get. Your caske ought to be bound with iron hoopes, and kept
always full.

How might I help wine that reboyleth?
Put a piece of cheese into the vessel, and presently a wonderful effect will
follow: Or else put a bunch of Peniroyall, Organy, or Calamint about the hole,
at which the new wine comes forth, but if your wine be new, and you will have
it quickly purged, you must put half a pint of vinegar in every 15, quarts of
new wine.

Show me how to separate water from wine?
Doctor Liebault a learned Physician of France, says, that if it come to
pass that wine have water in it, and that we find it to be so; to separate
then this water from this wine, you must put into the vessel of wine, melted
Allom, and after stopping the mouth of the said vessel with a sponge drenched
in oil, to turn the mouth of the vessel so stopped, downward, and so the
water only will come forth* or else cause a vessel of Iuy wood to be made,
and put therein such quantity of wine as it will be able to hold, the water
will come forth presently, and the wine will abide pure and neat. Some do use
presently to change the wine so watered, and to draw it out into another
vessel, and then to put a pint and a half of salt to every fifteen quarts of
wine; others do boil the wine upon the fire so long until the third part be
consumed, and the rest they use three or four years after.

Show me a way how a man may drink much wine and yet not be drunk.
To drink great store of wine, and not to be drunk, you must eat of the
roasted lungs of a Goat: or otherwise, eat six or seven bitter Almonds
fasting: or otherwise, eat raw Coleworts before you drink, and you shall not
become drunk.

How many sorts of Drunkards are there?
So many men, so many minds. The soul being once depraved, and deprived (for
want of grace) of her uniform and melodious harmony, becomes tainted with
diverse and discording affections, insomuch that in their very drinking they
show of what base alloy they are composed. Some kind of Drunkards we see
laughing out of all measure, others we see weeping. Some are dumb, some
talkatiue. Some hop and dance, some on the contrary lie still, as if they were
without feeling. One more watchful then the rest drinks more then twenty,
deserving well the garland of Bacchus, Another sleeps and wallowes like a
filthy Hog. One flatters, another fights. In brief, one is Lion drunk,
another Sow drunk. One apish drunk, another Parrot drunk.

How to make them which are drunk sober.
You must make them eat Coleworts, and some manner of confections made of
brine; or else drink great draughts of vinegar.

Show me a way how to make Tossepots and drunkards to hate wine.
Cause a Drunkard to drink with white wine the blossoms of Rye, gathered at
such time as the Rye blossometh: or else take three or four Eeles alive, and
let them lie in wine till they die, and afterward cause this wine to be drunken
off by such as are given to be drunk: or else take a green Frog, which is
ordinarily found in fresh springs, and let the same lie in wine till she die;
otherwise mark diligently where the Owl haunteth, that so you may get some of
her eggs: fry them and give them the drunken gallant to eat. But in vain
labors the Physician to cure the bodies intemperance, while the soul sleeps
in sin, while the reasonable faculties lie troaden and trampled under these
worldly pleasures. Awake then, thou sensual man, and shoot inwardly into the
lightsome cause of health, which is no other then sobriety, fashioned after
the spiritual image of the Trinity. But if thy nature be so stern, if thy
souls advantage be no solid reason in thy judgment to convert thy brutish
living, yet let examples of the bodies griefs terrify thy lustful thoughts
from such vain dregs. Look but on the countenance of a drunkard, and is not
he disfigured? Does not his nose seem rotten, withered, or worme-eaten? Does
not his breath stinck, his tongue falter? Is not his body crazed, subject to
gouts and dropsies? It is written of old Father Ennius, that by emptying of
bottels he got the gout and many other dolours. As Mounsieur du Chesne out of
Celius Rhodiginus translated these verses into French: Le bon pere Ennius
seicha tant les bouteilles,
Qu'il fut geine de goutte et douleurs nompareilles.
More would I inueigh against the Lapithes of our age, had not I of late taxed
them in my first Circle of the Spirit of Detraction.

Show me a way to make old wine to be new out of hand.
Take bitter Almonds and Melilot, of each an ounce; of Licorice three ounces,
of the flowers of Alexander as much, of Aloes perepatick two ounces, bray them
all and tie them together in a linen cloth, and so sink them in the wine.

At what time are Wine and Beer ready to turn and change?
About the midst of June, when the Sun enters into the Tropicke of Cancer,
and somewhat before the Dog days begin, wine and Beer are apt to become
eager and corrupt, and likewise when the Southern wind blows, whether it be
in Summer time or Winter, when it is great rain, lightning, thunder, or
earthquakes, then are wine and Beer subject to turn.

Show me how to keep wine and Beer without turning.
Above all things, have a special regard that you lay your vessels in vaulted
sellers, and then cast into your said vessels, either Roach Allome done into
powder, or the ashes of Oaken wood, or beaten Pepper, or else put into your
vessels so corrupted, a good quantity of Cowes milk somewhat salted, or if
none of these serve, draw the drink into an other vessel that is sweet and
untainted, using a composition of the foresaid remedies, intermingling it four
or five times a day, for the space of a sennight.

Is wine hurtful to sick folks?
Hypocrates writes, that to give wine or milk to them that be sick of agues
or headaches, is to give them poison, yet nevertheless it does agree with some
kind of diseases: as for example, it is permitted to them that be troubled with
dropsies, with ill dispositions of the body, and with the rawnesse and
weakness of the stomach: to be brief, wine is an excellent restoratiue for
old age, which of it self is a great and troublesome sickness; and for this
cause some Physicians advised old men to drink wine in the midst of Summer,
I mean to use Bacchus for their Physician twenty days before, and twenty
days after the dog days, to the end that in the heat and siccity of that
fiery star, their lungs should be overflowed: but howsoever, wine reuiueth
feeble spirits, and makes the heart light, specially of an old man, according
to the Italian saying: A vecchio infunde lolio ne la lampada quasi estincta.
Unto an old man it infuseth oil in his decayed lamp.

Of diet drinks as well for them that be sick as in health. CHAP. 3.
Show me how to correct the malicious vapors of wines?
FOr the correction of medicinable wine, you must put and infuse Burrage,
Buglos, and Pimpernell in your wine, for the space of four and twenty hours
before you drink of it. Some use to temper the force of wine by putting a toste
in it: Some take the leaves of Isop well powned made fast in a fine cloth, and
put into new wine against the diseases of the lungs, shortness of the breath,
and the cough, which they call Isop wine: some take dry Roses, Anise, and honey,
together, with one pound of the leaves and seed of Betony, one pound of Fenell
seed, and a little Saffron, these ingredients they put in twenty quarts of new
wine, and after four months are past, they change the wine into a new
vessel, this kind of wine is very expedient to be drunk for the clearing of
the eyesight, for Pleurisies, and for the coroborating of the stomach: Others
make wine of Wormwood for the pain of the stomach and liver, and for the
worms of the guts, which wine is made after this manner: eight drams of
Worme-wood, stamp them and strain them, and so cast them into three pints of
wine.

Show me how to make Ipocras and wine of Scene?
Common Ipocras is made after this manner: take nine pound of the best white
wine or Claret that you can get, an ounce and a half of Cinnamon, one pound of
Sugar, three drams of Ginger, and two scruples of Nutmegs, beat all these
somewhat grossly, then let them soake three days in the said wine, and
afterward strain it and use it, for the heating and comforting of a cold and
a weak stomach, but if you fear sickness, prepare wine of Scene after this
manner: take an ounce of the leaves of Scene well mundified, half a dram of
Cinnamon, sees them in a quart of white wine, with a soft fire, till it come to
a pint, afterward put a little Sugar unto it, and in three days after it has
been steeped and so continuing, you may strain it and use it, by taking of
three spoonfuls in the morning, and three spoonfuls when you go to bed, until
your body be sufficiently purged.

Show me a diet drink against Melancholy
Take two ounces of the leaves of Scene, of Fumitory, green Hops and Borrage,
of each a pound, sees them to the third part in fair water, with a soft fire,
or else till two gallons come to one gallon, strain them, and sweeten them
with Sugar or honey, and after a sennight, you may drink thereof every morning a
draught fasting, and so before supper one hour.

Show me a diet drink against the consumption.
Take two gallons of small Ale; half a pound of blancht Almonds, a quarter of
a pound of Annise seeds, three or four sticks of Licoras sliced or bruised,
one pound of Red Roses, Isop, and Parsley, bruise and strain what is to be
bruised and strained, after you have, let them boil to one gallon, and when it
is ready, add unto it a quart of Malmesie, and drink thereof morning and
evening two hours before you eat: this drink preserves a man from the
cough, makes a man of a strong constitution, and cures the consumption.

Of Cider and Perry. CHAP. 4.
What is Cider?
MOnsieur (Libault) in his third book of his mayson rustique, writes, that
Cider most commonly is sour: yet notwithstanding whether it were made such, by
reason of the sowernesse of the Apples, or become such, by reason of the space
of time, in as much as it is very watery; and somewhat earthie, as also very
subtle and pearcing, and yet therewithal somewhat astringent, and
corroboratiue, becomes singular good to cool a hot liver and stomach, to
temper the heat of boiling and collerick blood, to stay collerick and adust
vomiting, to assuage thirst, to cut and make thin gross and slimy humors,
whether hot or cold, but chiefly the hot. Such drink falls out to be very
good and convenient, and to serve well in place of wine for such as have any
ague, for such are subject to a hot liver and hot blood, for such as are
scabbed, or itchy, for such are rheumatick upon occasion of hot humors, and it
needs not that it should be tempered with water.

What is the use of Perry?
Perry is a sweet kind of Cider, either pressed from Pears or from sweet
Apples: such Cider therefore as is sweet, because of his sweetness, which
comes of temperate heat, heateth in a mean and indifferent manner, but
cools least of all: and again, it is the most nourishing of all Ciders, and
the most profitable to be used of such as have cold and dry stomachs, and on
the contrary, but smally profiting them which have a hot stomach, whether it
be more or less, or stomachs that are full of humidity, very tender and
queasie, and subject unto chollerick vomits; so that in such complexions as are
hot and chollerick: it is needful as with wine, so with Cider to mix water in
a sufficient quantity with sweet Cider when they take it to drink: especially
when such persons have any ague withal, or and if it be the hot time of
Summer, foreseen that he that shall then drink it thus, be not subject to
the pains of the belly or collicke, because that sweet Cider pressed new from
sweet apples is windy by nature, as are also the sweet apples themselves. This
is the cause why Physicians counsel and advise that sweet apples should be
roasted in the ashes, for them that shall eat them, that so their great
moystnes and watrishnes which are the original fountain of windiness, may be
concocted by the means of the heat of the fire.

Of Flesh. CHAP. 5.
What Flesh is best to be eaten?
BEfore your be resolved if this, I must declare unto you the sorts of flesh,
and the natures of it. There be two sorts of flesh, the one foure-footed, and
the other that of Foul. Among those that be foure-footed, some are young, some
are of middle age, others are old: the young are moist, and do commonly cause
excrements and loosenes in the belly, old flesh is dry, of small nourishment
and of hard digestion, therefore I take that flesh to be best which is of
middle age, if not to the taste, yet at the least to nourish soundly and
profitably, according to the French Proverb: He that loves young flesh and
old fish loves contrary to reason.

Qui veut ieune chair et vi eux poisson,
Se troue repugner a raison.
Certainly that of the male, does far excel the flesh of the female, as for
example: the Ox flesh is better then the Cowes flesh: a fat Wether is better
then a fat Ewe, but this is to be understood of those males which are gelt: for
I cannot deny but Bull beef and Ram mutton is far worse then the flesh of
the Cow and the Ewe, and to them which observe diet, I must needs say that all
flesh whatsoever, be it Beef, Mutton or other that is bred on dry places or
mountainous, where there is any reasonable pasture, is always better and more
wholesome, then that which is bred in valleys, or on low and marshie grounds,
where there grow bulrushes, and other weeds and herbs, cold moist, and of
little substance: To conclude this flesh of foure-footed beasts, I have found
that Mutton, Beef Kid, Lamb, Veale, Pigges and Rabbets, are meats easy to be
digested, and do engender good blood; whereas on the contrary, I find that
Martlemasse Beef, Bacon and Venison, together with the kidneyes, livers and
the entrals of beasts, do breed raw humors in the stomach, and fl^xes. In
like manner, fat meat is fulsome and takes away a man's stomach.

Among foul we count the Capon, the young Pigeon, the Partridge, the Woodcocke,
the Peacocke, and the Turkey cock, to be meats of an excellent temperature,
and fit to continue the body in health: and contrariwise that Hares, Duckes,
Geese (young Goselings only excepted) and Swans do dispose the body to
Melancholy.

Show me a way to preserve flesh and foul sound and sweet for one month,
notwithstanding the contagiousnesse of the weather.
Master Plat, whose authority not only in this, but in all other matters I
greatly allow of, counsels Huswiues to make a strong brine, so as the water
be ouer-glutted with salt, and being scalding hot, to perboyle their mutton,
veale, venison, foul or such like, and then to hang them up in a convenient
place; with this usage they will last a sufficient space, without any bad or
ouersaltish taste: some have helped tainted venison, by lapping the same in a
course thin cloth, covering it first with salt, and then burying it a yard
deep in the ground.

What is the use of our common meats?
Young mutton boiled and eaten with opening and cordial herbs, is the most
nourishing meat of all, and hurts none, but only phlegmatic persons, and
those which are troubled with the dropsy.

Young beef bredde up in fruitful pasture, and other whiles wrought at plow,
being powdered with salt four and twenty hours, and exquisitly sodden, is
natural meat for men of strong constitutions. It nourishes excedingly, and
stops the flux of yellow choler: Howbeit Martlemas beef (so commonly
called) is not laudable, for it ingendereth melancholic diseases, and the
stone.

Veale young and tender, sodden with young pullets, or capons, and smallage, is
very nutritive and wholesome for all seasons, ages and constitutions.

The lean of a young fat Hog eaten moderately with spices, and hot things,
does surpass all manner of meat, except Veale, for nourishment; it keeps
the paunch slipperie, and provoke urine; but it hurts them that be subject
to the Gout and Sciatica, and annoyeth old men, and idle persons. A young Pig
is restoratiue, if it be flayed and made in a ielly. To be short, Bacon may be
eaten with other flesh to provoke appetite, and to break phlegm coagulated and
thickened in the stomach.

The hinder part of a young Kid roasted is a meat soon digested, and
therefore very wholesome for sick and weak folks. It is more fit for young
and hot constitutions, then for old men or phlegmatic persons.

Young fallow Dear very well chased, hanged up until it be tender, and in
roasting being thoroughly basted with oil, or well larded, is very good for them
that be troubled with the rheum or palsy, Yet notwithstanding it hurts lean
folks and old men, it disposes the body to agues, and causes fearful
dreams.

Some say that venison being eaten in the morning, prolongeth life; but eaten
at night it brings sudden death. The horns of Dear being long and slender,
are remedies against poisoned potions; and so are the bones that grow in their
hearts.

Hare and Conies flesh perboyled, and then roasted with sweet herbs, Cloves,
and other spices, consumes all corrupt humors and phlegm in the stomach, and
makes a man to look amiably, according to the proverb, He has swallowed up a
Hare: But it is unwholesome for lazy and melancholic men.

What is your opinion of Foul?
A fat Capon is more nutritive then any other kind of foul. It increases
venerie, and helps the weakness of the brain. But unless a man after the
eating of it, use extraordinary exercise, it will do him more hurt then good.
As for chickens they are fitter to be eaten of sick men, then of them that be
in health.

Pigeons plump and fat, boiled in sweet flesh-broth with coriander and vinegar,
or with sower cheries and plums, do purge the raines, heal the palsy
proceeding of a cold cause, and are very good in cold weather for old
persons, and stomachs full of phlegm.

A young fat Goose farsed with sweet herbs and spices, does competently
nourish. Notwithstanding, tender folks must not eat thereof; for it fills
the body with superfluous humors, and causes the fever to follow.

Young Ducks stifled with Borage smoke, and being eaten in cold weather,
strengthen the voice, and increase natural seed.

Young hen Partridges, eaten with vinegar, do heal all manner of fluxes, and
dry up bad humors in the belly.

Quails eaten with coriander seed and vinegar, do help melancholic men.

Woodcocks and Snites are somewhat lightly digested: Yet hurtful for collerick
and melancholic men.

Swans, Turkies, Peacocks, Hearnes, and Cranes, if they be hanged by the necks
five days with waights at their feet, and afterward eaten with good sauce, do
greatly nourish and profit them, which have hot bellies.

Larkes and Sparrowes are marvelous good for them, that be diseased of the
colic.

Show me a way to fatten great Foul in most short time.
You must follow Master Plats advise, namely, to take the blood of beasts,
whereof the Butchers make no great reckoning, and boil it with some store of
branne amongst it (perhaps grains will suffice, but branne is best) until it
come to the shape of a bloud-pudding, and therewith feed your foul so fat as
you please. You may feed Turkies with bruised Acornes, and they will prosper
exceedingly.

Of Fish. CHAP. 6.
Show me how to feed fishes in Ponds.
IN the fourth book of the maison rustique, lately translated out of French
into English by Master Surphlet, I find these means for the preserving of
Fish Ponds laid down. It will be good sometimes to cast in some sorts of small
fishes; the bowels and entrails of great fish, cracked walnuts, fresh cheese,
lumps of white bread, certain fruits chopped small, all sorts of salt fish, and
such other like victual; and sometimes it will be good to cast upon the pooles
and ponds, the fresh leaves of Parsley, for those leaves do rejoice and
refresh the fishes that are sick.

Since it is most certain that the fishes abiding in the sea or streams and
running rivers have greater store of victual, than those which are shut up in
pooles and ponds, for such as have their full scope of liberty in the sea and
streams, do always meet with one relief or other, brought unto them by the
course of the water, besides the small fishes, which are the food and
sustenance of the greater: but the other shut up and enclosed in safeguard,
cannot go forth a hunting after any pray.

What is the best fish?
A fresh Carpe salted for the space of six hours, and then fried in oil and
besprinkled with vinegar, in which spices have boiled, in all men's censure is
thought to be the wholesomest kind of fish. It may not be kept long, except it
be well covered with bay, myrtle, or Cedar leaves.

Salmon and Trouts well sodden in water and vinegar, and eaten with sour
sauce, do help hot livers and burning ag^es.

Barbles roasted upon a gridiron, or broyled in vinegar are very wholesome. If
any man drink the wine, wherein one of them has been strangled to death, he
shall ever after despise all manner of wines. Which conclusion were fit to be
put in trial by some of our notorious swil-boules.

River sturgeons sodden in water and vinegar and eaten with fennel, do cool
the blood, and provoke lechery.

Cuttles seasoned with oil and pepper, do provoke appetite and nourish much.

River Lampreyes choked with Nutmegs, and Cloves, and fried with bread, oil,
and spices, is a Princely dish, and does very much good.

Female Tenches baked with Garlic, or boiled with Onions, oil, and Raisins,
may be eaten of vouth, and collerick men.

Pikes boiled with water, oil, and sweet herbs will firmly nourish.

Eeles taken in Spring time, and roasted in a leaf of paper with oil,
Coriander seed, and Parsley, do break phlegm in the stomach.

River Perches will provoke appetite to them that be sick of the hot ague.

Oysters roasted on the imbers, and then taken with oil, pepper, and the juice
of Orenges, provoke appetite and lechery. They must not be eaten in those
month, which in pronouncing want the letter R.

Cra fish roasted in the imbers, and eaten with vinegar and pepper purge the
reins, and help them that be sick of the consumption or Ptisick.

Show me a way to keep Oysters, Lobsters, and such like sweet and good for
some few days.
Oysters as master Plat says, may be preserved good a long time, if they be
barrelled up, and some of the brackishwater, where they are taken, powered
amongst them, Or else you may pile them up in small roundlets, with the hollow
parts of the shells upward, casting salt amongst them at every lay which they
make. You may keep Lobsters, Shrimps, and such like fish: If you wrap them
severally in sweet and course rags first moistened in strong brine, and then you
must bury these clothes, and cover them in some cool and moist place with
sand.

Of Milk, Butter, Cheese and Eggs. CHAP. 7.
What is the use of milk?
THere be many kinds of milk according to the diversities of the nature of
living things. The milk of kine, and sheep, is the most butterish and
nourishing; next unto it, goats milk is chief, saving woman's milk, with
which there is no comparison, as being the most agreeable to the Sympathy of
our natures, and proper to dry and melancholic persons; yea and a remedy
against the consumption. There be three sundry substances, which lie hidden
within the nature of milk, even as they do within all other natural things
whatsoever they be, namely a sulphurous substance which is the butter,
conceiving a flame, much differing from that whayish or mercuriall part which
is the thin milk, next, it conceiues cheese, which represents the salt: and
lastly, the thin milk (being the remainder of both) being made into pottage
with Rice and Sugar, it increases the generatiue seed, and strengthens the
body. Buttermilke in which Fumitorie have been steeped and drunk in the
Summer time, or rather in the Spring time, is an excellent remedy against all
diseases exceeding of collar and melancholy, yet notwithstanding with this
caveat, that after the taking of it, you do neither eat any other thing, nor
sleep within three hours after. To conclude, it must not in any case be taken
of them which are subject to feauers, headaches, or fluxes: according to that
vulgar saying: Dare lac aut vinum febricitantibus and capite dolentibus est
dare venenum.

What is the use of butter?
Butter, whether it be fresh or salt purges mildely, and helps the
roughness of the throat: fresh butter being taken fasting with a little Sugar,
hinders the ingendring of the stone: and cures the shortness of breath, that
butter is best which is made in May.

What is the use of Cheese?
Cheese being the thickest part of the milk is most nourishing, but it makes
the body bound and stipticke: Old cheese all moldy, brayed and mixed with the
decoction of a salt gamon of bacon, and applied in form of a Cataplasme, does
soften all the hard swellings of the knees.

What is the use of Eggs.
There are three things worthy of consideration to be marked in eggs; the
first is, their proper substance and quality, for eggs of some fowls are
better than of some others, Hen eggs are the best, and of better nourishment
then the eggs of Duckes, Geese, or other foul: the second thing remarkable
in eggs is, the time, to wit, whether they be fresh or stale, whether they be
laid of a young Hen or of an old Hen, for experience teaches us that these
last do quickly corrupt within the stomach, and be nothing so good to
nourish. Likewise it has been noted that eggs laid after the new of the
Moon in the month of August, or in the wane of the Moon, in the month of
November, as those likewise which are laved on Christmasse day or on
Whitsonday, are lasting and durable, and not easily corrupted. Whereof there
cannot be devised any other reason, than that in some of them the shel is made
hard and not to be pierced through of the air by the coldness of the time:
and in the other, there is a most quick exhaling and expending of that which
might be corrupted within the egg, by the heat of the time, and season then
being. The third and last observation is the dressing and making ready of
eggs, some are sodden or roasted hard which the French men call Dursis; and the
Greeks (...), that is, Eggs boiled till they be very hard, some are boiled to
a mean, to wit, neither soft nor hard, which the Latins call Iremula: Others
be but warm only or soft and supping Eggs, which the Latins call Oua
sorbilia. Above all, Eggs poached with Parsley are the most wholesome.

Show me a way to make Hens to lay good and great Eggs.
Though this receipt be homely, yet because it makes for our bodies nourishment
and contentment, I will not conceal it from good Huswiues.

Hens will lay great eggs, if you pound bricks and mix them with bran and
wine, bray them all very well, and give them to the Hens to eat: or else make a
fine powder of brick, mix it with barley bran, and give it them to eat: some
for the very same purpose do mollify the Fullers earth that is red, and mix
it among the Hens meat. The Hen will sit all Winter as well as in Summer, if
she have meat made of bran, mixed with the leaves and seed of dry Nettles.

Show me how Eggs are to be prepared for Physic?
The yolk of an egg swallowed alone, stays the cough, and such other
distillations as fall down upon the lungs and other parts of the breast. The
white of an egg beaten, and with the powder of Frankincense, Mastick, and
Galls applied to the brows, does stay the bleeding at the nose. A Cataplasme
made of the yolke and white of an egg well beaten, the juice or water of
Plantaine and Nightshade applied unto burnings, does quench and extinguish
them. A hard roasted egg eaten with vinegar, stays the flux of the belly, if
you mix with it the powder of Harts-horne.

Of Sauces. CHAP. 8.
What be the best and sauory sauces for our meats?
FOr the seasoning of such meats both flesh and fish as we have spoken of
before, and to make them agreeable as well for our health as for our nourishment
and appetites, we must use now and then sauces with our meats: And these in
particular are salt, Sugar, Pepper, Cynamon, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron,
Honey, Oil, Vinegar and Veriuice.

Salt, is of a hot and dry quality, endued with a purging, cleansing, and a
seasoning faculty, most fit to preserve meat from putrefaction, and to
consume their moist excrements and superfluities. And for this cause we are
advised of the ancient Physicians, not to eat Beef, Venison, or any other
meat strong of digestion, before the same be seasoned with salt two or three
days at the least.

Sugar is of a hot quality, and is quickly converted into choler: for which
cause, I cannot approve the use thereof in ordinary meats, specially to young
men, or to them which are of hot complexions, for it is most certain, that they
which accustom themselves unto it, are commonly thirsty and dry, with their
blood burnt, and their teeth blackned and corrupted: In medicine wise, it may
be taken either in water for hot feauers, or in syrops for some kind of
diseases.

Pepper is the best and wholsomest of all spices, as being of least heat in
operation, though in taste it seem over hot, being taken, I mean three or
four grains of it, swallowed down with a fasting stomach, it preserves a
man from the palsy, and from griefs in the stomach, the oil of it extracted,
and taken with some convenient liquor, is a most ready and sovereign remedy
against the tertian and quartaine agues, by reason that the said oil
dissolueth and rooteth out the seminary causes of such fevers, and does cause
the same to be euacuated by sweates, urine, or owise.

Cynnamon is of a very thin substance, yet notwithstanding, very cordial,
comfortable and corroboratiue, there is a water distilled from it, known by
the name of Cynnamon water, which is exceeding good for women in childbed, for
weak stomachs, for the falling sickness, Apoplexies, and all windy
collickes.

Ginger approaches somewhat nigh to the nature of Pepper, but it is of a
thicker substance, and does not penetrate so soon as the Pepper, which has a
sustance more thin, it avails against obstructions, and Fever quartains.

Cloves are seldom used alone, but with other spices: they serve for the
interlarding of Turkycocks and Salmon alone, without any other spice.

Nutmegs and Mace are spices of a most temperate nature, and may be used in
winter time with moist meats.

Saffron rejoices the heart, comfort the stomach, and procures sleep,
but you must look that you take not too much of it; for according to the
vulgar French Proverb: La qualite ne nuit pas, ains la quantite Exceeding one
or two drachmes, his narcotique smell does offend the brain in such wise, that
it makes it dull and stupied.

Oil is more wholesome and necessary then butter, as well for a man's health, as
for the preparing of sundry meats and sallades, and better resists
corruptions then butter: we see another difference in this, that oil is of it
self reserved for a long time without change, whereas butter is nothing worth
if it be not fresh eaten or salted; being applied outwardly, it has a singular
virtue, as appears by the answer of an ancient Philosopher, who being asked
of the means to continue a man in perfect health, and to live long; said, that
it was to use honey within, and oil without; being inwardly taken, it loses
the belly, it causes one to vomit up malignant humors; yea, poison it self,
if a man has drunken of it, or taken it but a small time before: one or two
ounces of it taken with the juice of Lemonds, cures the worms in childrens
bodies, and the disease commonly called the Scuruie, which kind of oil I
hold best: for I confess that there be many kinds of oil, yet none like to
the oil Olive, which I here do only commend, in respect that the Olive does
yield more Oil then any other seed or fruit, it has deserved the name of
excellency above all the rest, for the fat and unctuous liquours of other
seeds and fruits, are not like to have any other name bestowed upon them, then
that which belongs of right unto the liquour which is pressed out of the
Olive, for which reason when we speak of the Oil of the Olive, we only say,
Oil: but when we speak of other oils, we add the name of the seed or
fruit from which it was pressed, as for example, oil of Vitriall, oil of
Sage, oil of Wormwood, oil of Cloves, and so of the rest.

Vinegar prouokes appetite, tempereth hot choleric humors, and keeps back
corruption and infection in the plague time, but it hurts them that be
sorrowful except they correct it with Sugar. Veriuyce is of the same nature as
vinegar is.

Show me a way to make wholesome and good vinegar in a short time.
Take stale drink, and cast into it salt, pepper, and sour leven mingled
together, afterward heat red hot some Tyle, or gadd of Steel, and put it hot
into the drink. In like manner, a Radish root, a Beete root, and a shiue of
Barley bread new baked, put into stale drink, and put forth in a glass in the
Sun, or in the chimney corner, to the heat of the fire, will make good
vinegar in a short time; or if you will have it better, and to provoke
appetite, infuse into your said vinegar the leaves or juice of red Roses dried,
the juice of Mints and Centorie.

Show me a way to make vinegar with corrupted and marred wine.
Take rotten and marred wine, and boil it, taking away all the scumme that
rises in the boiling thereof, thus let it continue upon the fire, till it be
boiled away one third part, then put it up into a vessel wherein has been
vinegar, putting thereto some cheruile, cover the vessel in such sort, that
there get no air into it; and in short time it will prove good and strong
vinegar.

Of Herbs. CHAP. 8.
What is the use of our ordinary herbs and roots.
BOrage is a cordial Herb. It purget blood, makes the heart merry, and
strengthens the bowels.

Cabbages moderately eaten do mollify the belly, and are very nutritive. Some
say, that they have a special virtue against drunkenness.

Radish roots do clear the voice, provoke urine, and comfort the liver.

Cucumbers are of a cold temperature, and fit to be eaten only of choleric
persons.

Onions, Leekes, and Garlic, are only fit to be eaten of flegmaticke folks.
They clarify the voice, extend the winde-pipes, and provoke urine, and
menstruall issue. But men subject to the headache must not adventure to eat
such vaperous nutriments.

Show me the best Sallet.
The best Sallet is made of Peniroyall, Prasley, Lettice, and Endive: for it
opens the obstruction of the Liver, and keeps the head in good plight.

Of Fruit. CHAP. 9.
What is the use of Fruit?
ALL Fruit for the most part are taken more for wantonness then for any
nutritive or necessary good, which they bring unto us. To verify this, let us
but examine with the eye of reason what profit they cause, when they are eaten
after meals. Surely we must needs confess, that such eating, which the French
call desert, is unnatural, being contrary to Physic or Diet: for commonly
fruits are of a moist faculty, and therefore fitter to be taken before meals
(but corrected with Sugar or comfits) then after meals: and then also but very
sparingly, least their effects appear to our bodily repentance, which in women
grow to be the green sickness, in men the morphew, or else some flatuous windy
humor.

White figs pared, and then eaten with Orenges, Pomegranats, or seasoned in
vinegar, in spring time do nourish more then any fruit, break the stone in the
rains, and quench thirst.

Raisins and curranes are very nutritive, yet notwithstanding they putrify the
raines and the bladder.

Sebastian Prunes do loose the belly, and quench choler.

Red garden Strawberries purified in wine, and then eaten with good store of
Sugar, do assuage choler, cool the liver, and provoke appetite.

Almonds and Nuts are very nutritive, and do increase grosnesse; they
multitiply sperme, and provoke sleep. But I would not with any to eat them
that are short winded, or troubled with headaches.

Old and ripe Apples roasted, baked, stewed, or powdered with Sugar and Annise
seed, do recreate the heart, open the wind-pipes, and appease the cough.

Ripe Pears eaten after meat, and powdered with Sugar, cause appetite, and
fatten bodies. And if you drink a cup of old wine after them, they will do
thee much good.

Weighty Orenges are very good for them that be melancholic, and keep back
the rheum.

Cheries, Plums, and Damsons, do qualify blood, and repress choleric
humors.

The third Section.
Of sleep, early rising, and dreams. CHAP. I.
What be the commodities of sleep?
MOderate sleep strengthens all the spirits, comfort the body, quieteth
the humors and pulses, qualifieth heat of the liver, takes away sorrow, and
asswageth fury of the mind.

What be the discommodities of sleep?
Immoderate sleep makes the brain giddie, ingendereth rheum and impostumes,
causes the pasie, brings oblivion, and troubles the spirits.

How many hours may a man sleep?
Seven hours sleep, is sufficient for sanguine and choleric men; and nine
hours for phlegmatic, and melancholic men.

Upon which side must a man sleep first?
Upon his right side, until the meat which he has eaten, be descended from
the mouth of the stomach (which is on the left side:) then let him sleep upon
his left side, and upon his belly, that the meat may be the more easily sodden
and disgested in a more hot and fleshly place.

May a man conveniently lie upright on his back?
No, for it heateth the raines, hurts the brain and memory, and oftentimes
breeds the disease, which is called the riding Mare.

Show me some remedies to procure sleep.
Take a little Camphire, and mingle it with some woman's milk, and anoint your
temples therewith, or else take an ounce of the oil of Roses, and three drams
of vinegar, stir them both together and use them.

What think you of noone sleep?
Sleeping at noone is very dangerous, But if you judge it good by reason of
custom, then do off your shoes, while you sleep: for when the body and
members be heavy with deep sleep, the thickness of the leather at the soles
does return the hurtful vapors of the feet (that else should vanish away) in
the head and eyes. Also, you must (if you can possibly) sleep in your chair,
and let your head be meanly covered according to the time. For as too much
cold, so too much heat, does astonish the mind and spirits.

Of early rising. CHAP. 2.
What are the commodities of early rising?
EArly rising is healthful for the blood and humors of the body, and a thing
good for them that be studious of weighty affairs, for the animal spirit is
then more ready to conceive. Yet notwithstanding it is not amiss to consider,
and serve the time and place: because if the air be corrupt, as in plague
time, or inclined to moistness, as in raynie and mistie weather, or thundering,
it is better to abide either in bed with some light, or to sit in the chamber
by some sweet fire.

Of Dreams. CHAP. 3.
What are Dreams?
Dreams are either tokens of things past, or significants of things to come.
And surely if a man's mind be free from cares, and he dream in the morning,
there is no doubt, but the affairs then dreamed of will truly come to pass.

How many sorts of dreams be there?
There be three sorts of Dreams.

To wit, divine, supernatural, and natural.

Divine dreams, are they which were sent by inspiration from God to his
Prophets, and faithful servants, and as God is the Author of truth, so are
they true and certain.

Supernatural dreams are placed in the midst, between the divine dreams
and the natural, for they may happen without being precisely sent from God,
and their cause comes not only by the sole deprauation of humors, as natural
dreams do, but by the rauishment of the spirit, which wakes, while the body
reposeth, and which being oftentimes helped by the inspiration of some good
Angel or Genius, does represent by such Dreams, things which commonly come to
pass. These kind of dreams chance in the morning, when the brain is more
free from the vapors of the meat, which before had dulled it: Among many
examples which I have read of, this one seems most strange unto me.

Two friends travailing together to a certain City, by the way at a little
village, parted the one to his friends house, and the other to an Inn. He
which lodged at his friends house, saw in his dream, his companion defiring
him, that he would come to help him, or else he was to be killed by his host,
which when he saw, he awaked, and rose out of his bed and was about to go to
the Inn, but coming to himself, and thinking how it might be a false dream,
returned to his bed, and slept; then again his friend appeared unto him, and
seemed to request him more earnestly that he would succor him, but he making
no account likewise of this dream, slept again; to whom in like manner the
third time, his companion with a great complaint desiring him because he had
neglected to help him in his life time, that now he would at last, not deny
to seek revenge on the murderer, saying, that his murdered body was brought
out of the gate of the City upon a Cart, covered over with dung to hide the
offense. By this means God disclosed the murder, which well might be termed
sera numinis vindicta.

Natural dreams are they which represent the passions of the soul and body,
the imaginations of such dreams come to pass, either by reason of outward
causes, or inward; the outward, are vaporous meats, which engender corrupt and
burnt blood: For the use of Coleworts, Beans, Pease, and Pottage, causes
sorrowful and troublesome dreams, like as Garlic and Onions, being eaten at
supper, does make a man to dream of terrible things. The inward causes of
which dreams, are evil humors, specially melancholicke, which through the
blackness thereof, does darken the light of the understanding (which is seated
in the brain, and there-hence as a candle imparts light unto the whole body)
and there they imprint troublesome dreams. To hinder a man from dreaming, let
him avoid bad and windy meats, let him purge melancholy, and at convenient
season, if need be, let him bleed. Likewise it is expedient to temper and
correct the humors by sound antidotes and preparatiues, to use revulsions and
deriuations to withdraw some of the fumes and vapors, which ascend up into the
head, filling the brain with many such troublesome conceits.

The fourth Section.
Of Euacuations. CHAP. 1.
How many kinds of Euacuations are there?
EVacuations are either natural or artificial: the one usual, as exercise,
urine, fasting, and venerie: the other compelled as by Bathes, bloodletting,
Purgations, vomites, glysters.

What be the commodities of Exercise?
Exercise is that which makes the body light, increases natural heat, and
consumes superfluous humors, which otherwise would clotter and congeale
within the body. For in every concoction some excrements are engendered, which
being left alone, may be the roots of diverse sicknesses. Now the thicker sort
of excrements are avoided by sensible euacuations. But the thinner may be
wasted and purged by exercise.

At what time is it best to exercise?
It is best to exercise when the body is fasting and empty, least after meats
by violent and vehement motions, digestion be hindered, and putrefaction
follow. In Summer, exercise is to be used an hour after Sun rising, for
fear of a double heat. In Spring and Harvest time, it is to be used about an
hour and a half after Sun rising, that the morning cold may be avoided:
for as the heat at midday is hurtful, so the morning cold, especially in
Autumn is to be eschewed.

What kind of Exercise is good?
Walking, if it be not too slow, is a commendable exercise, and may be used in
hot months, specially of choleric persons. To hang by the hands on a thing
above your reach, so that your feet touch not the ground, is good. To climb up
against a steep hill, till you pant, and fetch your breath often with great
difficulty, is a fit exercise to be frequented in cold seasons. Old men must
content themselves with softer Exercises, least that the small heat which they
have, should be spent. They must only every morning have their joints gently
rubbed with a linen cloth. To be brief, they must be combde, and cherished up
with fine delights.

Unto what complexion does Exercise most appertain?
Unto the flegmaticke, rather then the choleric.

What exercise should short winded men use?
They must use loud reading, and disputations, that thereby their wind pipes
may be extended and their pores opened.

Of Vrines. CHAP. 2.
What is Urine?
Urine is the clearer and lighter part of blood proceeding from the raines;
which if a man forces to suppress, he is in danger of the collicke or stone,

What color of urine is most commendable?
That Urine is most laudable, which is of color somewhat red and yealow like
gold, answering in proportion, to the liquour which you drink.

Teach me to prognosticate by Vrines.
White urine signifies rawnesse and indigestion in the stomach. Red urine
betokens heat. Thick urine, and like to puddle, shows sickness or
excessive labor. If white or red gravel appear in the bottom of your
vrinall, it threatens the stone in the raines. In brief, black or green
colored urine, declares death most commonly to ensue.

Of Fasting. CHAP. 3.
Is moderate fasting good?
MOderate fasting, as to omit a dinner or a supper once a week, is wonderful
commodious for them that are not choleric or melancholicke, but full of raw
humors. This, Anthony the Emperor knew very well, when he accustomed to
drink naught save one cup full of wine, with a little pepper after he had
surfetted.

Of the commodities of Fasting I have written more largely in my second book
of the Golden Grove: and now of late in my first Circle of The Spirit of
Detraction coniured and convicted.

Show me a way to preserve my life, if perhaps I be constrained to straggle in
Deserts.
Take Licoras or Tobacco now and then, chew it, and you shall satisfy both
thirst and hunger: or else, mix some suet with one pound of Violets, and you
shall preserve your life thereby, ten days. Or to conclude, take a piece of
allome, and roll it in your mouth when you wax hungry: By this means, you
may live (as some write) a whole fortnight without sustenance.

Of Venerie. CHAP. 4.
What is the use of Venery?
MOderate Venerie is very expedient for preservation of health. It opens the
pores, makes the body light, exhilerateth the heart and wit, and mitigateth
anger and fury.

When is the best use of carnal copulation?
It is best to use carnal copulation in Winter, and in Spring time, when nature
is desirous without the help of Arts dregs, and at night, when the stomach is
full, and the body somewhat warm, that sleep immediately after it, may
lenifie the lassitude caused through the action thereof. In Summer in June and
July when the spettle thickens on the ground, it cannot be good.

What be the inconveniences of immoderate Venerie?
Immoderate venerie weakeneth strength, hurts the brain, extinguisheth
radical moisture. and hastneth on old age and death. Sperme or seed of
generation is the only comforter of nature, which wilfully shed or lost,
harmeth a man more, then if he should bleed forty times as much.

Teach me how wiuelesse batchelers, and husbandlesse maids, should drive away
their unclean dreaming of venery at nights.
First, they must refrain from wine, and venerous imaginations, and not use to
lie in soft down beds. Secondly, they must addict themselves to read the Bible
and moral Philosophy. Thirdly, they must exercise often their bodies. Lastly,
if none of these prevail, let them use the seed of Agnus castus, in English
Park seed, and they shall feel a strange effect to follow.

Of Bathes. CHAP. 5.
What is the use of Bathes?
COld and natural bathes are greatly expedient for men subject to rheumes,
dropsies and gouts. Neither can I easily express in words how much good cold
bathes do bring unto them that use them: howbeit with this caveat I commend
bathes, to wit, that no man distempered through Venery, Gluttony, watching,
fasting, or through violent exercise, presume to enter into them.

Is bathing of the head wholesome?
You shall find it wonderful expedient, if you bath your head four times in
the year, and that with* hot lee made of ashes. After which, you must cause
one presently to pour two or three gallons of cold fountain water upon your
head. Then let your head be dried with cold towels. Which sudden pouring down
of cold water, although it does mightily terrify you, yet nevertheless, it is
very good, for thereby the natural heat is stirred within the body, baldness
is kept back, and the memory is quickened. In like manner, washing of hands
often, does much avail the eyesight.

How shall a man bathe himself in Winter time when waters be frozen?
In Winter time this kind of artificial bathing is very expedient and
wholesome: Take two pound of Turpentine, four ounces of the juice of Wormwood
and wild mallows, one ounce of fresh butter, one drachme of saffron: mingle
them and sees them a pretty while, and being hot, wet four linen clothes in
it, and therewith bath your self.

Or else make a bath after this manner, take of Fumitory, and Enula Campana
leaves, Sage, Fetherfue, Rosemary and Wormwood, of each a handful or two,
sees them in a sufficient quantity of water till they be soft, and put as much
as a walnut of Allome, and a little brimstone in powder, and therewith bath the
places of your body affected. He that uses these bathes in times convenient,
shall live healthfully, for by them superfluous excrements are extracted in
sweat.

Of Excrements and Bloodletting. CHAP. 6.
What be Excrements?
OF excrements some be necessary, and some superfluous: those be necessary
which spring of superfluous blood, and that notwithstanding can nourish, when
nourishment fails; as seed, sperme, milk and fat. Those be superfluous,
which do not proceed from blood, nor can nourish, but rather separated from
the blood as not able to nourish, and these are either moist or earthy; moist
as black melancholy, sweat, urine, matter of the nose, spettle, etc: Earthy or
dry excrements, as nails, corns, and such like.

Aristotle reckons the marrow in the body, the marrow among the excrements:
2 Libr. de generat* animal. cap. 6. But I take it to be a nourishment, because
the bones are nourished by it, even as the body is nourished by blood.

What think you of bloodletting?
Blood is the very essence of life: which diminished, the spirits must
consequently be dissolved. In consideration whereof, I counsel them, that use
any moderate exercise, not in any case to be let blood; least that corrupt
water succeed in the place of the pure blood. But if they abound with blood;
or their blood be putrified and burnt (if other medicines avail not) this law
of mine must needs be infringed.

Show me a way to discern the effects of bloodletting?
If the blood, which is let out, appear red of color, and white water flow
with it, then the body is sound: if bubbling blood issue, the stomach is
diseased: if green, the heart is grieved.

Of Purgations. CHAP. 7.
What is the use of Purgations?
PVrgations, as sometime they be very necessary, so often taking of them is
most dangerous. He that uses exquisite Purgations, and especially electuaries
soluble, shall quickly wax old and gray headed. All Purgations (a few simples
only excepted) have poisoned effects.

Besides, nature above measure is compelled by Purgations, and the vital
powers are diminished. In respect of which reasons, let every man take heed of
those butchering Surgeons and bloud-sucking Empiricks, who rogueing up and
down Countries, do murder many Innocents, under pretext of Physic. He that
observes a good diet, and moderately exercises his body, needs no Physic.
Moist and delicate viandes eaten in the beginning of meals, do sufficiently
loose the belly. Sweet wines perform the very same. Also the leaves of Scene
sodden in water with Sebastian Prunes, will make the belly soluble. Why then
will men be so headie, as to take their own destruction, seeing that they may
live in health without Phisick-helpe?

Who are apt to take Purgatians and who not?
They are apt to take Purgations, who are strong of constitutions, and who are
willing. And again, they are unapt for Purgations, which are either too fat or
too lean. Likewise children, old persons, women with child, and healthful
folks are not to be purged.

What humors are fittest to be purged?
Those humors, which molest the body, and offend either in quality or
quantity. If choler happen to offend you, it is convenient, that you purge the
same: if phlegm trouble you, then by medicine it must be undermined: if
melancholy does abound, it is expedient, that you fetch it out.

What must I do before purging?
Before you purge, you must attenuate the slimy humors, open the pores,
through which the purgation is carried, and extract the whayish humors by some
mild sirupe. Moreover, you must diligently mark the place, where you are
agrieued, namely, whether of the headache, or else sick in the stomach, liver,
kidneyes, or the belly: and then whether by reason of phlegm, choler, or
melancholy. Which being known; according to the humor and place, you must
mingle sirups fit for the part affected, with waters of the same nature, that
the humor may be aforehand concocted; but in such wise; that the measure of
the water may double the measure of the sirupe, and that the measures of both,
exceed not four ounces.

How many things are to be considered in purgations?
Eight things. First, the quality of the purgation. Secondly, the time of the
year. Thirdly, the climate of the Country. Fourthly, the age of the patient.
Fifthly, his custom. Sixthly, the disease. Seauenthly, the strength of the
sick. Eighthly, the place of the Moon.

Show me the best and safest purgation for phlegm.
Take one drachme of Turbith, four drachmes of vinegar and Sugar; make them
into powder, and use it in the morning with hot water: But eat not till three
hours be expired.

For Choler.
Take two drachmes of good Rheubarbe beaten into powder, and incorporate the
same with five ounces of hot water, wherein Damask Prunes have been sodden;
and use it hot in the morning. Or else take half an ounce of Cassia fistula, a
drachme of Rheubarbe, and infuse them in water of Endive with an ounce of the
sirupe of Limonds: The next morning mingle all these with three ounces of
Ptisan or Whay, and drink this infusion warm. Others of the poorer sort purge
themselves only with half an ounce of Diaprunis laxanice, mixed with Succory
water and drunk warm; or else with half an ounce of Electuarium de succo
Rosarum, and three ounces of the decoction of French Prunes.

For melancholy.
Take three drachmes of the leaves of Scene, two drachmes of Cinnamon and
Ginger, one drachme of Sugar, and sees them in Goats milk, woman's milk,
whay, or in some other like thing. It is also good to anoint the side of the
spleen with vnguentum Dialthaeae. Or else with the oil of Lillies, oil of
Dill, Hens grease, and the marrow of an Ox.

Show me how I may mundifie blood?
Take two drachmes of Time and Scene, one drachme of Myrobolane, one drachme of
Rheubarbe, white Turbith, and Ginger, two drachmes of Sugar; let them be done
all into powder, and given in water wherein Fennel or Annise seed have been
boiled.

What shall I do, if the Purgation will not work?
If after the taking of a Purgation, the belly be not loosed, that
inconvenience happens chiefly for these causes; either through the nature of
the sick, or for the slenderness of the Purgation, or because nature
conuerteth her endeavor into urine, or else by reason that the belly was
before hand too hard bound, which by a glyster might be helped* When therefore
the belly after the Purgation is not soluble, it procures grievous malady in
the body: But if a man takes a small quantity of Mastick lightly pounded and
ministered in warm water, he shall be cured of that infirmity. Likewise, it
much avails, presently to eat an apple.

Seeing that glisters be very commodious, show me a way to make some.
Take honey sodden till it be thick, and mingle the same with wheaten meal,
then add a little freshbutter, and make your glister into a long form: Which
done, dip it in oil, and use it. Or else take half an ounce of the roots of
Succory and Licoras, two drachmes of Endive, one handful of Mallows, one
drachme of the seed of Succory and Fennel, two drachmes of Fennigreeke, half
a handful of the flowers of Cammomel; sees them, and then a most wholesome
glister is made.

What if the purgation does euacuate too much?
You must infuse three drachmes of the powder of Mastick in the juice of
Quinces, and drink it: or else eat a Quince alone. Or else anoint the mouth
of the stomach or the upper part of the belly, with this precious ointment
following. viz. with oil of Roses, and Quinces, of each an ounce, with oil of
Mastick half an ounce; mingle these with the powder of Coral and Wax, and
use it to stop the flux, whether it be sudden, or humourall, or dissenteriall.

What is the use of Tobacco?
Cane Tobacco well dried, and taken in a clean Pipe fasting, in a moist
morning, during the Spring or Autumn, cures the megrim, the toothache,
obstructions proceeding of cold, and helps the fits of the Mother. After
meals it does much hurt, for it infecteth the brain and the liver, as
appears in our Anatomies, when their bodies are opened, we find their
kidneyes, yea and hearts quite wasted: For as all other things, which God gave
for our necessities, are superfluously employed, apparel, meats, drinks, and
such like: so this Indian weed, whose proper use is to purge the body of thin
water, which we call distillations or slender rheumes, and that in medicine
manner in moist weather. I say, Tobacco is mightily abused, and by the Devils
temptations turned to Bacchanalian beastly custom, to serve Tosse-pots in
stead of salt meats, caueare, and other enducements or drawers on of drinks.
Sometimes our swaggering cast-awayes take it after the example of Politicians
to temporize and dally away the time, that they might rest in their counterfeit
trance, when they want matter of discourse, until after a thorough
perambulation of their barren wits, they have coined some strange accident or
answer worthy the rehearsal among their boon companions. Then after long
houghing, halking, and hacking: Mobile colluerint liquido cum plasmate guttur,
Having their throats well washed with dreggish drugges.

They recount tales of Robin Hood, of Donzel del Phoebo, etc. as I have
elsewhere written in my Preface to my first Circle of the Spirit of
Detraction. To conclude, the abuse of this foreign herb, I wish the Reader
to ruminate and repeare over these modern rythmes: Tobacco that outlandish weed
Does spend the brain and spoil the seed.
It dulls the spright, it dimmes the sight,
It robs a woman of her right.


Of Vomites. CHAP. 8.
What is a vomit?
A Vomit is the expulsion of bad humors (contained in the stomach) upwards.
It is accounted the wholesomest kind of Physic: for that, which a purgation
leaves behind it, a vomit does root out.

Which are the best vomites?
Take of the seeds of Dill, Attripplex, and Radish three drachmes, of Fountain
water one pound and a half: sees them all together, till there remain one
pound: strain it, and use it hot. Or else make you a vomit after this manner:
take three drachmes of the rind of a Walnut, slice them, and steep them one
whole night in a draught of white wine, and drink the wine in the morning a
little before dinner.

What if the vomites work not?
If they work not within an hour after you have taken any of them, sup a
little of the sirupe of Oximel, and put your left middle finger in your mouth,
and you shall be helped.

What shall I do, if I vomit too much?
If you vomit too much, rub and wash your feet with hot and sweet water: and
if it cease not for all this: apply a gourd to the mouth of the stomach.
Sometimes without any Physic at all, one shall fall to a customarie vomiting.
And then it proceeds either of the cold complexion of the stomach, or of hot
complexion. If of cold complexion, you may help it by making a bag of
Wormwood, dry Mints, and Maioram, of each a like one handful, of Nutmegs,
Cloves, and Galingall half a drachme of each one. Let all of them be dried and
powdered, and put betwixt two linen clothes, with Cotton interposed and
basted. And then let them be applied upon the stomach; Or else you may apply
the said herbs alone dried on a hot Tilestone, and put betwixt two linen
clothes upon the stomach. Let them fortify their stomachs with the sirupe
of Mints or of Wormwood, or eat Lozenges called Diagalanga.

If vomiting proceeds of hot complexion, you may cure it by a plaster
applied to the stomach, of oil of Roses, Wormwood, Mints, and Barley flower
with the white of an Egg. Some in such a case take the water of Purselane in
their drink to quench their thirst.

Of Common sicknesses. CHAP. 9.
Show me how to cure such common sicknesses, as daily annoy our bodies.
ALL sicknesses whatsoever spring out of the head distempered; and there-hence
they arise in one of the four humors, which by the distemperature of the
head, become likewise distempered: so that all sicknesses abound either of the
blood depraved, or of choler infected, or of phlegm coagulated, or of
melancholy empoysoned: Or (perhaps) they spring by the mixed corruption of two
or more of these humors. Wherefore it behooves us to be wise in the very
beginning of our sicknesses, and to prevent their theeuish intrusion. Above all
vomites or purgations, I see none comparable to Stibium or Antimonie prepared,
which I dare boldly commend as a most sovereign and cheap remedy for agues,
dropsies, fluxes and distillations unto the poorer sort. The taking whereof I
wish to be only three grains infused for a whole night in a glass of Sack,
with a little Sugar or clear Ale, and to be drunk up the next morning. As for
rich men, let them fee the Physician, least that noble trade decay for want of
maintenance: according to that old saying: Stipends do nourish Arts. The
Seminaries of diseases after this manner rooted out by Antimonie. Let every
particular grief be suited thereafter: for agues, let them cool the liver
with Ptisans, Endive, or Succorie waters. For the stone, let them take Goats
blood dried into powder in a hot Oven, or otherwise as they please within
their pottage, or liquour, seeing that the hardest Adamant is dissolved with
this kind of blood: why may not the stone in man's body be likewise bruised
therewith? For the Gout, let them exercise if they can, or else ^e let blood
very often in the place affected, or let them reserve Horse-leaches for that
purpose.

I might here commend diverse local medicines, as oils of Roses, of Mirtilles,
of Cammomill, or wild Mallows, of Turpentine, or such like. I might advise
them to lay emplaisters on the goutie joints, made of Mellilote, of vnguentum
Populeum, of the flowers of Cammomill, of red Roses, with Bean flower. I might
wish them to apply the Colewort leaf, and then to stop the flux with that
precious and admired salve commonly called Paracelsus his stiptick plaster,
which I have found by experience to heal any wound, whether it be old or
green, sooner in one week then any other in a month, by reason of the
binding, drying, and strengthening virtue, which it has, being likewise able
to stop the concourse or falling of humors into the sore. This salve I praise
above all others, as that, which breeds none but good flesh, and as
Apothecaries say, it will keep forty years without putrefying. But indeed,
because all sicknesses proceed from the brain, it were fit to purge the
superfluous moisture thereof once a month, either with a drachme of Pills
Imperial, or of Pillulae sine quibus, or of Pillulae Cochiae. From the brain
they flow into the musckles of the back, and from thence they descend into the
feet, which is termed Podagra, or to the hucklebone, which is called Sciatica,
or else from the back into the hands, and then it is called Chiragra. For a
preservative against the plague, let them now and then take Pillulae communes,
or the above said Antimony, which is also good against poison drunk: whereby
they may note, that whatsoever helps the one, helps the other.

The fifth Section.
Of infirmities and Death. CHAP. 1.
What be the causes of hot infirmities.
THE causes of hot infirmities be six: The first are, the motions of the
mind: as love, anger, fear, and such like. The second, the motions of the
body; as, immoderate carnal copulation, vehement labors, strayning, hard
riding. The third, long standing, or sitting in the sun, or by the fire. The
fourth cause of infirmities is the use of hot things, as meats, drinks, and
medicines untimely used. The fifth, closing or stopping of the pores; which
happens by immoderate anointing, bathing, or otherwise thickning the skin:
so that the holes whereby the sweat and fumes do pass out, be stopped. The
sixth, putrefaction of humors by distemperature of meats and long watchings.

What be the causes of cold infirmities?
The causes of cold infirmities be eight: the first is, the cold air: the
second is, too much repletion: the third is want of good meat: the fourth is,
the use of cold things: the fifth is, too much quietness: the sixth is, opening
of the pores: the seventh is oppilation in the veins or arteries: the eight
is unseasonable exercise.

What is the chiefest cause of death?
The chiefest and unavoidable cause of our deaths is the contrariety of the
Elements, whereof our bodies be compounded. For the quality, which is
predominant over the temperature (or mediocritie) begins to impugn and
fight with his contrary, which is more weak, until it see the utter
dissolution of the same.

Of the wicked motions of the Mind. CHAP. 2.
What be passions of the mind?
THe passions, motions, or perturbations of the soul, which otherwise may be
called the accidents of the spirit, are strange or sudden insurrections, and
rebellious alterations of a tumultuous troubled soul, which with draw it from
the light of reason, to cleave and adhere unto worldly vanities.

Wherein consists the cure of the spiritual maladies?
As the cure of the bodies griefs consists chiefly in the knowledge of those
causes which engender them: so in like manner for the cure of spiritual
maladies, we must search out the causes from whence they do proceed. And as the
causes of the bodies griefs are two, outward and inward: so the causes of
spiritual diseases are likewise two, outward and inward. The outward are
disgraces, injuries, hatred, misery, loss of honor and such like accidents:
which we call outward; because they arise out of our bodies, able to stir up
a world of troubles in our Spirits. The inward causes of spiritual maladies
are two fold: the one corporal, which presently at the first bickering do
torment the body: the other merely spiritual, rightly termed the passions of
the soul, which torment the soul it self. The Physician therefore that will
cure these spiritual sicknesses, must invent and devise some spiritual
pageant to fortify and help the imaginatiue faculty, which is corrupted and
depraved; yea, he must endeavor to deceive and imprint another conceit,
whether it be wise or foolish, in the Patients brain, thereby to put out all
former fantasies.

Which are the chiefest passions of the soul?
The chiefest spiritual passions are voluptuous Love, Jealousy, Anger,
Choler, Sorrow, Fear, and Envy.

What is Love?
Love is an affection, whereby the mind lusts after that, which is either
good indeed, or else that which seems unto it to be so. Among other causes
which besot men toward this affection of Love, I find idleness to be one of
the principal, which being taken away, the force of love presently decays,
according to that of the Poet: Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus.

Next, I find that mortification of the flesh weakeneth nature, and
consequently subdueth lust. Last of all, time and age do conquer this
tyrannous motion: but indeed the Grace of God, which enlighteneth the eyes of
our understanding, to regard and meditate on the holy Scripture, is the most
sovereign and comfortable water of life, which cools and alayeth the fiery
stings of unlawful love.

What is the cause of love?
The cause of love among fools is beauty: but among good men the virtues of
the mind are the principles of love for they are everlasting: and when all
other things, as beauty and riches, do decay, yet they become more fresh, more
sweet, and inestimable then before. Hence it is, that we are counseled to
choose wives, not by our eyes, but by our ears, that is, not by prying into
their fairness of bodies, but by inward contemplating of their honest deeds
and good huswiueries. Ordinarily the most beautiful and goodly sort of men,
and such as are decked with bodily gifts, are most deformed and vicious in
their souls. There is always a great combat betwixt chastity and beauty, so
that we seldom see fair women to be honest matrons: the reason is, because
they prefer the fantastical pleasures of their bodily senses, before the true
and right noble virtues of the mind: such (as the Spanyard says) are like an
apple which is fair without and rotten within: La muger hermosa es como la
mancana, de dentro podrida, y de fuera galana.

Show me some other means to remedy the stinges of unlawful love.
Forasmuch as examples, are the most familiar means to edify and arm a
diseased mind against the assaults of invisible temptations, I will lay down
some, which our modern Writers have recorded for true. The Passion of Love
has been so violent and vehement in some, that the wisest, as Solomon, have
turned to be Idolaters: and brave Martialists, as Hercules and others, have
become fools or mad men. Saint Augustine Libr. 11. Trinitat. cap. 4.
rehearses a story of one in his time, that had such a strong and strange
apprehension of his mistress body imprinted in his brain, that he imagined
himself really present with her, and committing of carnal copulation with her
so sensibly, that his very seed did spend in the said imaginary act. vt ei se
quasi misceri sentiens etiam genitalibus flueret, that I may use his own words.

For the cure of this beastlike and slouenly sin, I will content my self
with three famous examples.

There dwelt in Alexandria a dame of great beauty, and of greater learning,
called Hippatia, which publicly read unto Scholars. It came to pass, that
one of her chiefest Scholars became so inamoured of her, that the ardent
desire of love compelled him to discover unto her his passion, entreating her
to pity his languishing state. Hippatia a very wise woman, and loath to cast
away so worthy a Scholar by a cruel disdain, bethought her self of this
subtle and sudden remedy: she out of hand provided her of a filthy, bloody,
and mattry smock: and after she had invited him to her chamber, fayning her
self willing to give him contentment, she took up her peticote, and showed
him her flowery contagious smock, speaking unto him after this manner: My
friend, I pray thee see here how thy judgment has been abused; see what
thing thou love so precious: examine more straightly, what motive induced
thee to love such filthy trompery ouer-cast and disguised with a glozing
beauty. At these words, the young man began to be ashamed, to repent himself,
and thenceforth to become more wise and sober.

It is reported of that great Scholar Raimundus Iullius, that falling in love
with a fair Gentlewoman, he pressed her very earnestly to respect him. She to
dispatch and to ease his passion, concluded to lie with him: but when she
came, she presently showed him her left dugge most ugly to behold by reason of
a canker which had almost rotted it. At which hideous sight his courage
suddenly quailed, and cooled in such sort, that his lustful love was converted
into a charitable love to study for some extraordinary Physic to help her.

A Lawyer of Tholouza for his further learning having travailed into Italy, was
at length ensnared with love at Venice. Whereupon he often passed by the door
of his mistresses house, and made many tokens of his good will toward her. He
attempted by the assistance of Bawdes to corrupt her with gifts, and in the end
with much ado found means himself to impart his love unto her. The
Gentlewoman with bitter threatening repulsed him. All which could not cause him
to desist from his idle exterprize, so unbridled was his affection, so violent
his motion. But at the last perceiving his purpose frustrate and hopeless, he
fell into a frantic humor, and one morning among the rest, in the Church of
Saint Mark, casting himself through the Guard, endeavored to murder the
Duke* but this amourous fool, as God would have it, was resisted and led into
prison. The matter was examined very straightly, and at the last it was found
that Love had made him mad.

The wise Senate upon grave deliberation dismissed him, committing his cure to
that famous Physician Pracastorius, who at that time dwelt in Venice. This
learned man undertaking his charge and cure, disguised a Courtizan like the
Gallants mistress to lie with him a whole night, and to yield him his amorous
contentment, until he was weary. Then he caused him to be well covered with
clothes, till he fell into a sweat. His fantasy and lust being thus partly
pleasured, he proceeded to other remedies, to purge him of his melancholicke
humors, so that at length he restored him to his former state. I write not
this, to the intent it should serve for a precedent, (the same being
diameter-wise repugnant to our Makers Commandment) but because our Physicians
should counsel the youthful amorous to marry, rather then to burn in
unlawful desires: and the amorous married to content himself with the wife of
his youth, giving her due benevolence, and satisfying his burning lust upon her
body, whom God had joined with him for that purpose: for surely, by this
carnal copulation the vaporous fumes of the seed are taken away from the
Patient, which do infect his brain, and lead him into melancholy. By how much
the more and longer they continue in the body, so much the more thoughts do
they engender, which at last will turn to folly or madness.

What is Jealousy?
Jealousy is a doubtful quandarie of the mind, for that the soul suspects a
corriuall or copartner in the thing beloved. Our ignorance in discerning
spirits, and the discording tunes of our souls affections occasion this
strange breach, or suspicious scruple in our Consciences. Wherefore ye
husbands, begin betimes to admonish your Wives of the souls salvation. Let
no day escape without prayers and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Join together as
true yoak-fellowes in Gods service, daily prostrating your selves before his
omniscient presence, least Satan creep into your careless hearts, and
minister just cause of Jealousy unto you. If the head gets in, the whole body
follows. If the head be well, the body can hardly be distempered: so if
Husbands do their duties toward GOD, their Wives will imitate them in time,
and conform their lives according to the square of unity. O noble unity
which shapest this individual union betwixt man and wife, not only in their
bodies constitutions, but in their souls conjunctions, firm, stable, never to
be removed: Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh: Tu nostra de carne caro, de
sanguine sanguis, sumptaque de nostris ossibus ossa geris.

As Adam spoke to Euah. Away therefore ye jealous Italists with your golden
locks, with your artificial chains, with your straight mewings. If Pasip^ac
cannot have the company of a man, she will yield her body to a wanton Bull. If
Ariostoes Queen be restrained one way, she will satisfy her appetite another
way with a deformed dwarf: Qui era tanto dotto, per mettre la Regina sotto.
There is no lock, nor chain comparable unto the fear of the Lord, whose
wrath is a consuming fire. The very thought of Hels torments terrifies the
conscience more then all the worldly devises of flesh and blood.

What is Anger?
Anger is a vehement affection, because it sees things fall out contrary and
crosselike to reason.

Why do some look red, and others pale when they be angry?
Some when they are angry become red, because their blood ascends up into the
head: and these are not so much to be doubted. Others wax pale when they are
angry, because the blood is retired unto the heart; whereby they become full of
heart, and very dangerous.

What is Choler?
Choler is a fiery passion of the mind, because it sees all things fall out
contrary to reason or wit: there are two sorts of Choler abounding in every
man; the one open, the other hidden: whereof this latter is more dangerous. From
both of them, being terrible ebullitions and motions of the spirit, all the
body, the blood, and humous become heated and chafed: insomuch, that they grow
to be sulphurous, kindeling of fiery fevers, pleurisies, gall in the stomach,
yealow iaundises, tumors, Erisipelaes, itch, and innumerable other maladies,
as well external as internal: whose chiefest and specifique cure consists
that Christian Virtue Patience: as for other Physic to cool the violence
thereof I leave to greater Clerks.

What is sorrow?
Sorrow is an affection of the mind, whereby it is oppressed with some present
evil, and languisheth by little and little, except it find some hope or other
to remedy the grief thereof.

What is the effect of Sorrow?
Sorrow stifleth up the purer faculties of the soul, causes a man to fall
into a Consumption and to be weary of the world, yea and of himself.

How many kinds of Sorrows are there?
There be two kinds of sorrows: the one deep and heavy, the other short and
temporary. The former is properly termed Sorrow, the latter Mourning.

What be the causes of both these kinds?
Their causes are outward and inward. The outward are grieuances, which happen
upon diverse occasions: either for the loss, which Husbands receive by reason
of their Wives deaths; or by reason of some dear friends death, which in
nature we love extremely; or else by reason of the shipwreck or discredit of
our name, fame, and goods. To these outward causes I adioyne the depraved diet
of the melancholicke, which engender melancholicke humors: as those evil
weeds and seeds, which our Farmers gather among their corn, grinding the same
with the rest, into bread or malt. Out of these corrupt seeds malignant vapors
arise up into the head, which intoxicate the brain, whirling about the
imaginatiue faculty, straying up and down along the memory, and eclipsing
the light of the understanding. The inward causes spring from melancholic or
burnt blood, contained within an inflamed brain, and there-hence tainting the
veins and whole body. Of this black and enraged blood, which originally
proceeded from the diversities of vapors or exhalations, there grow
diversities or diverse sorts of Sorrows, which diversely work upon the functions
of the imagination.

For if it be true, that the soul is in the blood, and dispersed through every
part of the same, (as God is wholly in the world, and wholly in every part of the
same) then surely must it follow, that the variety of the blood does change and
diuersifie the understanding, and also that the acts of the understanding
soul does change the humors of the body: so that out of these diversities of
tainted humors there are engendered strange and wandering fantasies, caused by
reason of such black blood, smoke and sweat, which is crept into the humor
of melancholy.

Some of extreme sorrow have turned mad, famishing themselves to death: some
imagined themselves to be Vrinals of glass, expecting when they should be
broken through some accident: some thought that they were become Owls, and
therefore feared to be seen abroad in the day time. Among these sorrowful
sots, I cannot but remember a Gentleman of Venice, with whom I was familiarly
acquainted at the City of Noua-palma in Italy, about nine years past. This
Gentleman by reason of crosses, having fallen into a sorrowful coffeehouse,
began to scorn all of his rank, and grinding the world as it were into
oatmeale, would either be aut Caesar, aut nihil, either a Monarch, or a
Molecatcher. And to this end he studied by what means he might aspire to the
Empire. At the last, having wearied his brain with the loss of many a nights
sleep, to his bodies annoyance, he imparted his mind unto me: whereupon, to
put him out of dumps by degrees, I advised him to leave off his solitary
walks, and to betake himself to reading, or to some outward exercise, thereby
to banish away his inward thoughts, or rather doting Dreams. This counsel of
mine, he accordingly followed for a time: but at length he fell into his
wonted fantasies, and persisted so strongly therein, that he wrote very
learned letters and pathetical unto the Electours, for his advancement into the
throne Imperial, very earnestly soliciting me to become his Agent in the
business.

What is the reason that men imagine such impossible and vain things?
When God with-drawes his Spirit from the sinful Sons of Adam, then the
world, the flesh, and the Devil glad of such advantage and opportunity, do
mutually conspire against them, diversely seduce their brittle thoughts and
wills. Some they possess with imaginations according to the course of the lives
which they lead: Others imagine of sorrow and coffeehouse such strange
matters, that not only the spirit is assailed, as I have written, but also the
body is assaulted, that it becomes unprofitable unto al seemly actions. And
that so violently, that it procures and prefers Death it self.

Now since you have discoursed of natural and Melancholicke Sorrows, tell me
what harm happens by the other sorrow, which we term mourning.
This latter kind of sorrow being accidental, chances to our conceit by
Desteny, which is no other then the will of God the Father, limitting the end
of all things by measure, number, and weight, not blind-foldly as the Poets
fained of Fortune, but necessarily and prouidently. Upon the death of some
dear and near friend, our minds are deeply touched, that we manifest the
effects thereof, in our very outward countenance and apparel, by reason of the
weakness of flesh and blood, which can in no wise brook a sudden or violent
alteration: but commonly such mourning is short and momentarie, according to
that Maxim of the Philosophers: nullum violentum est perpetuum. No violent
thing can last long: which likewise may be confirmed by the observation of our
outward habits.

Impletur lachrimis, egrediturque dolor.
The more tears we shed, the less is our sorrow, for tears cause
weariness, weariness procures sleep, and sleep asswageth sorrow; new
objects also coming in by process of time to affect the Patient.
Nevertheless for all this, neque mihi cornea fabra est, my heart is not so
rigorous and hard, as to condemn utterly our mourning use, when we have lost
our dearest friends: nay, I commend it highly, so that it be accomplished with
moderation, and accompanied with Hymns and Psalms to GOD for the honor of
his mercy, with charitable Epitaphes for the memorial^ of the deceaseds
honesty, and with cheereful almes-giuing for a monument of Christian charity.
But what is the reason, that some were black, and some white at the funeral of
their friends? The moral is this, that the black betokens the corruption of
the body. The white signifies the souls freedom out of the bodies prison.
Happy is that soul, which can contemn the frailety of the flesh, loathing to
deface the handie-worke of God. Happy I say, and fraught with true magnanimity
is that spirit, which can make profitable use of his visitation, not grudging,
not murmuring, not mourning out of measure. These restoratiues I ministered to
my self at the death of my dear Wife, who of late was suddenly stricken dead
with lightning, as I have showed at large in my work, called the Spirit of
Detraction coniured and convicted.

And because I am fallen at this present into a mourning vein, I will
reiterate my Christian farewell, wishing that the same might become a precedent
to an afflicted spirit in the like case. Adieu thou Servant of Christ, thou
Pattern of Piety. Adieu thou Map of Gods miracles. Adieu my Joy, my Love, my
Comfort. Adieu, and rest thee henceforth among the Heavenly Roses: rest in
peace for ever free from the thorns of malice. Adieu again and again, Adieu
dear wife for a while, and welcome sweet Jesus my Savior for ever.

What is Fear?
Fear is a grief which the mind conceiueth of some evil that may chance
unto it.

Why do fearful men look pale?
The reason why fearful men look pale and wanne, is, because nature draws
away that heat, which is in the face and outward parts, to relieve and comfort
the heart, which is welnigh stifled and stopped up.

How many sorts of fearful persons are there?
There be two sorts of fearful persons; the one Naturally fearful, the
other Accidentally fearful. Among those, which are naturally fearful I
range children, who are subject to this passion by reason of the sudden
commotion of the humors, and of the blood descending into the sensitive
organs, be-dazeling their sights with a false suffusion. Likewise I place aged
people in the number of the most naturally fearful, which by the means of
their ouer-spent natural moisture and wasted brains do again play the
babies, and as the Latinists say, repuerascunt, and as the Greeks (...).
Thirdly, I account Women by nature fearful, whose sex, as the weaker
vessels, is much defective and impotent, in courage ever doubtful and
distrustful almost of their own shadows. Fourthly, superstitious persons, as
Papists, who by reason of their natural fragilitie, do forge a thousand
fantasies in their brains. To these I add the melancholicke, as a kind of
humourous dark spirits, which because they shoot inwardly, abhorring outward
objects, do fear the very noise of reeds and fall of leaves:

Now it is time that I discourse somewhat of that fear, which is Accidental,
no less penetrating into the minds of men, then that which is Natural, and
chiefly, when God does manifestly cooperate and work together with it; whereof
no mortal man can well declare the solid and true cause. The first
Accidental fear is that, which befalles to multitudes at once, yea even to a
whole camp of hardic soldiers: which kind of fear is termed Panick,
etymologized of Pan, because he being Bacchus his Lieutenant in the Indian war,
with Art and politic stratagems, almost beyond wit surprised them with great
fear and wonder. Secondly, malefactors terrified with the guilt of their
evil consciences, do imagine a world of fears. And no marvel, seeing that
all creatures serve to revenge sin committed against the Creator. Offenso
Creatore, offenditur nobiscum omnis creatura. Sometimes this Accidental fear
proceeds of sickness, sometimes it comes by a false suggestion or alarm, as
that fear wherewith a Gentleman of Padua was possessed, when his youthful
hair in one night converted into gray and hoarie, only by a false report,
that he should be put to death the next day after.

What is Envy?
Envy is a grief arising of other men's felicity. It makes a man to look
lean, swart, hollow eyed, and sickly.

Do these affections hurt the soul, as well as the body?
Yea doubtless: For if the body be replenished with these diseases, the soul
cannot be whole, nor sound. And even as vices cause disorders and diseases both
in the body and soul: so likewise they cause the one to destroy the other,
whereas there should be an unity and harmony, not only of the corporal
qualities among themselves, and so of the spiritual among themselves, but also
of their joint qualities one with another. And no marvel; seeing that God
has sowed and planted the seeds and sparks of affections (to move us) not
only into our souls, but also into our bodies.

How do the temperature of the bodily affections, and the souls affections
agree together?
There is great concord betwixt the bodies qualities, and the souls
affections: insomuch that as our bodies are compacted of the elemental
qualities, namely, of moisture and dryness, heat and cold: So among the souls
affections are some moist, some dry, some hot, and some are cold. This we might
see by instance made. The affection of mirth is hot and moist, whereas sorrow
is cold and dry. The one is proper to young men, and the other to old men, who
are cold and dry.

Why is there so great a diversity among men?
There be diverse reasons alleged of this by men of diverse professions. First,
the Divines say, that original sin and temptation of wicked spirits, make
men vicious: faith and grace make them righteous and holy: Politicians and
Statesmen hold, that bad company and ill education, cause men to be ill
disposed: the Astronomer he says, that they which are borne under Jupiter
shall be wise and fortunate, under Mars soldiers, under Venus adulterers,
under Mercury, Merchants, or very covetous, under Taurus industrious, under
Libra just men, under Aries wise Counselors, under Aquarius fishers. S.
Augustine on the 63. Psalm, tells of a Mathematician, who said, that it was not
a man's own will, which made a leacher, but Venus: a murderer, Mars: not his
own proper will made him just, but Jupiter. The natural Philosopher auerreth,
that they who excel in imagination, are fit to be Linguists, Artizans, Poets,
and Painters: the means to descry, whether they be imaginatiue or no, is thus:
if he be well conceited of himself, if he loves to go richly attired, and
oftentimes looks in a looking glass, if he plays well at Chesse, Cards,
and Dice, etc. They that excel in understanding are fit to be Judges: they who
have the faculty of memory, will prove good Atturnies, and practicioners in Law
and Physic. Physicians hold, that men be diversely affected according to the
diet which they use, as Venison, Conies, and Hares-flesh, make men
melancholic, and consequently envious and froward: those meats which engender
good blood, make men of a sanguine complexion and free hearted. Excess of meat
make men riotous and drunkards.

Of the Age of Man. CHAP. 3.
Into how many ages is man's life divided?
Man's life by the computation of Astrologers, is divided into seven ages: over
every one of which, one of the seven planets is predominant. The first age is
called infancy, which continues the space of seven years. And then the
Moon reigns, as appears by the moist constitutions of children, agreeing
well with the influence of that planet.

The second age named childhood, lasts seven years more, and ends in the
fourteenth of our life. Over this age, Mercury (which is the second sphere)
rules; for then children are unconstant, tractable, and soon inclined to
learn.

The third age endures eight years, and is termed the strippling age: It
begins at the fourteenth year, and continues until the end of the two and
twentieth. During which time, governs the planet Venus: For then we are prone
to prodigality, gluttony, drunkenness, lechery, and sundry kinds of vices.

The fourth age contains twelve years, till a man be four and thirty, and
then is he named a young man. Of this age the Sun is chief Lord. Now a man
is witty, well advised, magnanimous, and come to know himself.

The fifth age is called man's age, and has sixteen years for the continuance
thereof, subject to Mars; for now a man is choleric and covetous.

The sixth age has twelve years, that is, from fifty till threescore and two.
This age is termed (although improperly) old age: of which Jupiter is master,
a planet significant of equity, temperance and religion.

The seventh and last (by order) of these ages continues full 18. years,
ending at fourscore, to which few attain. This age, by the means of that
planet Saturn, which is melancholic and most slow of all other, causes man
to be drooping, decrepit, froward, cold, and melancholic.

Why did men live longer before the flood, then they do now?
The principal reason, why men in those days lived longer then we do, is,
because they had not then any of the causes, which engender in us so many
maladies, whence consequently ensues death. Their lives were vpholden by the
course of the heavens, with the qualities of the planets and stars, being at
that time far more glorious and gracious then now. There were not so many
meteors, comets, and ecclipses past, from whence now diverse and innumerable
circumuolutions proceed.

We must also understand, that our first Parents were created of God himself
without any other isntrumental means, And again, the earth in those days
was of greater efficacy to bring forth necessaries for man's use, then it is
in this crooked and outworne age. The soil was then gay, trim, and fresh:
whereas now by reason of the inundation (which took away the fatness thereof)
it is barren, saltish, and unsavory.

To conclude, they knew the hidden virtues of herbs and stones, using great
continence in their dyets and behauiours. They were ignorant of our delicate
inventions and multiplied compounds. They knew not our dainty cates, our
marchpanes, nor our superfluous slibber sauces. They were no quaffers of wine
or Ale, nor were they troubled with so many cares, and vain glorious pompes.

Tell me the certain time, wherein man must of necessity die?
To die once, is a common thing to al men. For that was ordained as a
punishment of God for our fore-parents, when they transgressed his
commandment, with longing and lustful thoughts touching the fruit in
Paradise: but to tell how, and at what time, that is a secrecy never disclosed
to any creature. Such as the man's life is, such is his death. A Righteous man
dies righteously. But a wicked man has a wicked end dying without repentance.
Death is a so daine and a sullen guest, never thought on, before he
apprehends us as his slaves. When we think our selves safely mounted on the
pinnacle of worldly felicity, he unawares suppresseth us rudely, and smites us
deadly.

For which consideration, O mortal men, lead your lives uprightly, hearken not
unto the counsels of the ungodly, nor like greedy Cormoraunts snatch up other
men's rights. Rather know your selves contentedly: which done, be vigilant, well
armed in Christ Jesus, and always meditating on your deaths.

Which be the most dangerous years in man's life?
The ancient Sages, by curious notes have found out, that certain years in
man's life be very perilous. These they name climactericall or stayrie years,
for then they saw great alterations. Now a climactericall year is every
seventh year; The reason is, because then the course of the planets return
to Saturn, who most commonly is cruel and noisome unto us. And even as the
Moon, which is the next planet unto us, and swiftest of course, passes almost
every seventh day into the contrary sign of the same quality, from whence
she came forth, and there-hence brings the critical days: so Saturn, which
is the planet furthest from us and slowest of course (for he rests in one
sign so many years, as the Moon does days) brings these climactericall
years, and causes sundry mutations to follow. Hence is it, that in the
seventh year children do cast and renew their teeth. In the fourteenth year
proceeds their strippling age. And betwixt that and the fifteenth year there
falls out in the body a tumultuous whurly-burly or wambling commotion of
humors, which in some breaks out into scabs or hot watery issues, in others
into kinds of agues. In the one and twentieth, youth. And when a man has past
seven times seven years, to wit, nine and forty years, he is a ripe and
perfect man. Also, when he attaineth to ten times seven years, that is, to
the age of threescore and ten, his strength and chiefest virtue begins to fall
away. And again, every seventh year was by Gods own institution pronounced
hallowed; And in it the Israelites were prohibited to manure their grounds or
to plant vineyards.

Aulus Gellius mentions, that the Emperor Octauian sent a Letter unto his
step-sonne to this effect: Rejoice with me my Son, for I have past over that
deadly year, and enemy to old age, threescore and three. In which number the
seauenths and ninths do concur.

The six and fiftieth year is very dangerous to men borne in the night
season, by reason of the doubled coldness of Saturn. And the threescore and
third year is very perilous to them that be borne in the day time, by reason
of the dryness of Mercury and Venus. It is also observed, that the nine and
fortieth year composed of seven times seven is very dangerous.

Others again of our late Critics collect by experience, that in the seventh
year more unnatural ill humors are engendered, then the true and natural
constitution of the body can possibly digest, because the liver and heart
being the radical Fountains of the blood, by little and little, are so
corrupted within the compass of six or seven years, which cannot choose but
at the last break out, like the Paroxismes or fits of an ague tertian or
quartane, in some kind of bodies at the seventh year, and in others of a
stronger ability at the ninth year. So when these steps are past, the liver
and heart do prepare humors for the years or steps following, until it burst
out into a remarkable event.

Finally, whenever any man enters into these climactericall years (if
certain tokens of imminent sickness do appear, as wearisomnesse of the
members, grief of the knees, dimnesse of sight, buzzing of the ears,
loathsomeness of meat, sweating in sleep, yawning, or such like) then let him
incessantly pray, and beseech God to protect and guide his heart; let him be
circumspect and curious to preserve his health and life, by Art, nature,
policy, and experiments. Or if no eminent cause appear, let him purge
aforehand, the better to prevent the increase of humors.

Which be the critical days?
The critical days are the first and seventh of January. The third and fourth
of February. The first and fourth of March. The eigth and tenth of April. The
third and seventh of May. The tenth and fifteenth of June. The tenth and
thirteenth of July. The first and second of August. The third and tenth of
September. The third and tenth of October. The third and fifth of November. The
seventh and tenth of December.

Which humors are predominant in the night season, and which in the day time?
Every one humor reigns six hours. Blood is predominant from nine a clock
in the night, until three a clock in the morning. Choler from three a clock in
the morning, till nine. Melancholy rules from nine a clock in the morning,
till three in the evening. Likewise phlegm governs from three in the evening,
until nine a clock at night. So that phlegm and melancholy do reign at
night, and blood and choler in the day time. Also blood has his dominion in
the Spring time; choler in the Summer; melancholy in Autumn, and phlegm in
Winter. For which respects, I advise you (if perchance you fall into a disease)
to mark well, in the beginning of your sickness, the hour and humor then
reigning, that thereby you may the sooner find out remedy. In conclusion, you
must consider of the Critical days: in which, great alterations either toward
your recovery, or toward your further sickness willensue. Most commonly the
critical day happens, the seventh, the fourteenth, the one and twentieth,
or the eight and twentieth day from the beginning of your sickness.
Notwithstanding, according to the course of the Moon, the fourth day, the
eleauenth, the seventeenth, and the four and twentieth day from the beginning
of your sickness will foretell you, whether you shall amend or wax worse.

Of the four Humors. CHAP. 4.
What is an Humor?
AN humor is a moist and running body, into which the meat in the Liver is
converted, to the end that our bodies might be nourished by them.

What is the nature of the sanguine humor?
The sanguine humor is hot, moist, farty, sweet, and seated in the liver,
because it waters all the body, and gives nourishment unto it: out of which
likewise issue the vital spirits, like unto small and gentle winds, that
arise out of rivers and Wels.

What is the flegmaticke humor?
The phlegmatic humor is of color white, brackish like unto sweat, and
properly placed in the kidnyes, which draw to themselves the water from the
blood, thereby filling the veins, in stead of good and pure blood.

What is the Choleric?
The Choleric humor is hot and fiery, bitter, and like unto the flower of
wine. It serves not only to cleanse the guts of filth, but also to make the
Liver hot, and to hinder the blood from putrefaction.

What is the Melancholicke humor?
The Melancholic humor is black, earthly, resembling the lees of blood, and
has the Spleen for a seat assigned unto it. Howbeit Physicians say, that
there be three kinds of melancholy: the first proceeds from the annoyed
brain: the second comes, when as the whole constituion of the body is
melancholicke: the third springs from the bowels, but chiefly from the Spleen
and liver.

Show me a diet for melancholicke men?
First, they must have lightsome chambers and them often perfumed. Secondly,
they must eat young and good meat, and beware of Beef, Porke, Hare and wild
beasts. Thirdly, let them use Borrage and Buglosse in their drink. Fourthly,
Music is meet for them. Fifthly, they must always keep their bellies loose
and soluble.

Of the restoration of health. The sixth Section.
Of the four parts of the year. CHAP. 1.
What is the nature of Spring time?
THe Spring time begins, when the Sun enters into the sign of Aries,
which is the tenth day of March. At this time the days and nights are of
equal length, the cold weather is diminished, the pores of the earth (being
closed and congealed with cold) are opened, the fields wax green, herbs and
flowers do bud, beasts rut, the birds chirp, and to be brief, all living
Creatures do recover their former vigor in the beginning of the spring. Now a
man must eat less, and drink somewhat the more. The best meats to be eaten
are Veale, Kid, young Mutton, Chickens, dry foul, potched eggs, figs, raisins,
and other sweet meat: and because the Spring is a temperate season, it
requires temperature in all things. Use competent Phlebotomy, purgation, or
such like. Venery will do no great harm.

As the Sun by steps and degrees makes his power manifest abroad: so within
our bodies he works strange and marvelous effects after his cloudy absence.
Sweet meat must have sour sauce: after our gurmundise and gluttonous fare, let
us now likewise imitate these degrees, and by little and little weane our
bodies from such luxurious cheer. We see Nurses anoint their teates with
Wormwood juice, to terrify and withdraw their froward Children from their
ancient sustenance: so in like manner, let us in this season begin to
sequester our wanton wills (being the bodies rulers) from persisting in their
former lavishness: for which purpose, I advise the temperate to abstain from
immoderate drinking of wine, from immoderate spiced meat; specially toward
the midst of this season, and if they be choleric, hot and dry of
constitutions, I advise them to cool themselves now and then with waters of
Endive and Succory, or with fountain water, together with a little Comfits to
expel inflammation and windy pestilent humors. In any case let them which
regard their health, take heed of salt Herrings and slimy Fish, as a meat
fitter for laborers, then for tender natures. Or if their longing wantonness
be such that they must needs eat them, let them exercise, or omit their next
meal, whereby those ill humors may be spent or digested, which were caused by
reason of the unwholesome nutriment. For assuredly, the blood of idle people
will be quickly tainted and corrupted, so that the bad excrements will break
out into itch, tetters, the small pockes or meazels: or else they will descend
from the head into the eyes, teeth, or lungs, and there engender a fearful
cough. In old persons these brackish, viscous, and salt humors will congeale
and harden into the stone of the bladder or reins.

What is the nature of Summer?
Summer begins, when the Sun enters the Sign of Cancer, which is the
twelfth day of June. In this time Choler is predominant, heat increases, the
winds are silent, the sea calm, fruits do ripen, and Bees do make honey.
Now a man must drink largely, eat little and that sodden: for roast meat is
dry. It is dangerous taking of Physic, and specially in the Dog days. To
heal wounds is very difficult and perilous.

All these inconveniences happen because of the dog days, to last for the
space of those forty days, wherein that Constellation called the Dog, meeting
with the Sun in our Meridian, doubleth his heat, by whose burning influence,
Frenzies, the Pestilence, Calenturaes, and other hot choleric sicknesses are
bred in our bodies.

What is the nature of Autumn?
Autumn begins when the Sun enters the first degree of Libra, which is
the thirteenth day of September. Then it is Equinoctial, Meteors are seen,
the times do alter, the Air waxes cold, the leaves do fall, corn is
reaped, the earth loses her beauty, and melancholy is engendered. For which
cause, such things as breed Melancholy are to be avoided, as Fear, Care,
Beans, old Cheese, salt Beef, broth of Coleworts, and such like. You may
safely eat Mutton, Lamb, Pigges, and young pullets. Take heed of the morning
and evening cold.

What is the nature of Winter?
Winter begins when the Sun enters the Sign of Capricorn: which is
commonly the twelfth day of December. Now the days are shortened, and the
nights prolonged, Winds are sharp, Snow and sudden inundations of waters
arise, the Earth is congealed with frost and Ice, and all living creatures do
quiver with cold. Therefore a man must use warm and dry meats: for the
cheerful virtues of the body are now weakened by the cold air: and the
natural heat is driven into the inward parts of the body, to comfort and
maintain the vital Spirits. We must expel the cold air with warm
drinks, wines, braggot, metheglin, malmesie, and such like, and above all with
warm clothes, which I wish to be of wool, rather then of any other stuffes.
In this season, we may feed liberally on strong meats, as Beef, barren
Does, gelt Goats, and on spiced or baked meats: for whose better digestion,
and to shut the orifice or mouth of the stomach, some use to eat Comfits of
Anise-seedes presently after meals: some other having weak stomachs, take
digestive pouders made of sweet Fenell seeds, Coriander seed, Corrall
prepared, a little masticke, Sinnamon and Rose sugar within the conserues of
Roses. Others again, content themselves with a powder composed of Rose Sugar,
Annise-seede, Sage, and a crust of fine bread, whereof they take a spoonefull
in a cup of drink.

At nights be sure to keep your self warm, and specially your head and feet.
In this case I cannot but commend the Dutchmens providence above our own, who
continually in cold weather wear furs about their necks, and cover their
feet with woollen sockes.

Now Wardens, Apples, and Pears may be used with wine or with salt, for
swelling: or with comfits, for windiness. To use carnal copulation is
expedient, if the weather be moist, and not very cold. Astronomers auerre, that
if the first day of December be foul and tempestuous, it will not be calm
thirty days after, and so on the contrary.

Of monthly Diet. CHAP. 2.
Show me how to order my body in every particular Month.
In January.
IN this Month, man's inward parts, become replenished with more heat, then at
any other time. The reason is, because our bodies being in health, receive into
them more abundance of food, whereby they are strengthened and comforted in
their constitutions and principal powers. So that we may adventure to eat
grosser meats as baked Venison of barren Does, gelt Buckes, gelt Goats, Brawne,
Beef, and such like, in this month then in any other Month, for that our
natural hear in warmer weather is dispersed, and so digestion hindered: now
fasting is very hurtful. But spiced drinks and wines are highly commended.
Beware of Physic, and chiefly of bloudletting.

In February.
Because this season is very raw and watrish, keep your neck and feet warm,
and imitate the Dutch, who use to wear furred collers as a sovereign remedy
against the cold Air. Toward the latter end of this month, it will not be
amiss to eat now and then, I mean in the beginning of meals, those meats
which are of a laxatiue substance, as a pared pippin, or a few stewed prunes,
and raisins. It is good now and then to drink a a cup of good Mead, or white
wine: some use to break their fast with the pith of white bread, bespread with
honey, for the purifying of their breast and bladder. All kind of Physic is
dangerous in this Month, excepting pills to purge the head, which now seems
more heavy then at other seasons.

In March.
In this month it is good to eat cleansing things, for our bodies having
been glutted with diversities of meats in the winter, cannot but break out
into some outward part by itch, biles, pockes, issues, plagues, morphew,
iaundise, green sickness, or such like: or else inwardly by impostumes,
fevers, catarres, etc. Wherefore let us use pottage made of leekes, Alisander,
Peniroyall and Betony, and above all things let us beware of salt fish. And for
our Physic let us content our selves with bathes, either natural or
artificial: or with sweat natural or artificial The natural sweat if it be
not excessive or violent in the opening of the pores, will cleanse the blood,
make light the spirits, dissolve thick and raw humors, and assuage the
dropsy, the Scuruy, and all such sicknesses as proceed of laziness. The
artificial sweat will cure the itch, and mundifie the skin. In a word, now
is the best time to remove the roots of diseases, and to prevent their further
stealth.

In April.
Now with the warm weather, our blood begins to heat and wax rank. And
therefore it is expedient to eat meat of a light digestion, and sallets to
cool our blood. Salt meats are very hurtful, specially for them which do
not travel, by reason that the blood becomes tainted with them, and will
quickly engender the itch. If there be urgent need, a man may in this Month
purge, or be let blood. But for blood letting I could wish these rules to be
first practiced: first, that the body be made soluble: secondly, that it be
done in the morning before any exercise or commotion of the humors: thirdly,
that the certainty of the vein be regarded: fourthly, that the quantity be
considered according to the Patients complexion and age, not under fourteen,
nor above five and fifty: fifthly, that he observe a very sparing vary diet for
three days after, whereby pure and good blood may succeed in the corrupteds
place.

In May.
As this Month is the most moderate season of the year, free from
extremities, hot or cold, so that we seem to live in tera florida: so ought we
chiefly now to observe measure and moderation in our diet, for our blood being
lukewarm may easily be overtaken with any excess, through that sudden
alteration, which Philosophers term (...). Before meat Exercise is most
expedient. To drink Wormwood wine is accounted very healthful: and so to
drink sour whay clarified with Sage and Parsley is an excellent diet drink
for hot Choleric stomachs. Some use in this Month to break their fast with
old Cheese or Parmizan grated with Sugar and Sage, as a restoratiue for weak
spirits. Now Horse-leaches may be applied to our feet, or to such parts of the
body, where we suspect the concourse of moist humors.

In June.
Early rising profits much in this warm time, for which cause good husbands
do fetch a long vagari through the pleasant fields to provoke appetite, which
otherwise with laziness would be corrupted with satietie and sultry
loathsomeness. A little meat will serve; but we may drink the more freely (so
that it be not strong) and recompense nature this way, for the easier digestion
of our meats. For even as the heat of the Sun breeds chaps, clefts, and
dust in the ground: so likewise would it engender burnt choler (as dry soot in
a chimney) in our sparing bodies. Cheries by reason of their piercing virtue
are thought commodious to appease thirst. Sallets perform the very same. To
bath in cold water is esteemed a sovereign remedy against all outward griefs
or tumors proceeding from heat.

In July.
Now arriues the Summers Solstice, which with the fiery Dog turns the
moisture of our bodies into parched exhalations, which we commonly call
choleric symptoms. And therefore shun roast or broyled meats. Shun salt
meats, Bacon, and strong Beef. Spare not to drink Ptizans, Endive, or
Succory waters, which cool the liver. Now you may boldly sleep in the after
noone, so that it be not presently after dinner, and not above an hour. Beware
of bloodletting, Physic, and venerous acts. When you are empty, bath your
self in cold water, for that recreates the animal powers.

In August.
In this month begin to withdraw your custom from drinking by little and
little, converting the same to a temperate, least the unseasonable Accidents,
which awayte upon this month, do seize on thy moist body, and so bestow a
gift, which will not easily be clawed off, a tyrannous ague tertian or
quartane. Beware of fruit, specially Apples or Pears, which now are wont to
tempt want on bodies. Beware of them, ye nice Maids, whose God is your
longing will, least ye meet with the green sickness by eating such green
fruit. Beware of Eeles and of all fish that are taken in Ponds or in muddy
places Some use to anoint their bodies with this precious oil, to prevent the
theeuish intrusion of diseases in this threatening season. Take oil Olive, and
incorporate it with the juice of Sage, Smallage, Angelica, Rose Water, and Rue.

In September.
Some accustom themselves to drink a draught of Goats milk lukewarm in
the morning, to increase radical moisture, while this month continues. But
in any case take heed of excess, least the fruit and drink, which thou
tookest so liberally in the Summer do work some treason against thy careless
body in the Autumn. In any case beware of the nights cold. Walk as little as
thou can after Sun set. Now is the proper time to take Physic either by
Pills or Gargarismes for the head, by vomites, purgations, or electuaries for
the stomach, or by glisters for the bowels, or by bloodletting for the
Pleurisy, or by sweats for the itch.

In October.
This month has great affinity with March, so that whatsoever is good in the
one, is good in the other. Arm your body soundly with pleasant wines or spiced
drinks against the ensuing Winter. Arm your mind with study, for now this
temperate time inuites thee to read without impediments either of violent cold
or of violent heat.

In November.
In this season the humor of Blood decreaseth, and black melancholy endeavors
to domineere in our bodies, which varies like the time. Let thy body be well
clothed for fear of the nipping weather. Now you may adventure to eat salt
meats, powdered Beef, and Mustard. In the morning it auailes much to eat a
hot loaf buttred and seasoned with Sugar and Cinnamon; which also serves as an
excellent receipt to prevent the cough. Now you may safely drink a pipe of
Tobacco fasting, if you fear theumes.

In December.
In this cold Month imitate the Spanish Diet. In the morning break your fast
with a bit of Marnelad. or Sucket, with a draught of Aqua vitae. Use Pepper in
your meats; And what other spice you please for the seasoning of your Cates.
Now you must eat more and drink the less. Eat roasted Apples or Wardens to
close up the mouth of your stomach after meals. Or else now and then drink
off a Cup of good Claret wine with a roasted Apple in it. For the body being
benumbed and as it were made senseless with frost and shauing winds, had need
to be refreshed and cherished with such comfortable allurements. For this cause
it fell out by discreet tradition, that the twelve days were allowed us to
feast in, that our bodies might enjoy the fruit of our travail, that a forced
sanguine complexion by reason of such cheerful prouocations might down weigh
the natural melancholic power. But for all this, let us not forget our
Christian duties, in spending wastfully that which might benefit us a far
longer term, like unto swinish Epicures, whose thoughts intend on their
present prouender, of whom Saint Paul wrote: Edamus, Bibamus, ludamus, cras
moriemur. Let us eat, drink, and play, for to morrow we shall die. And as
another of late verified: Dulcia, dum fas est, fugitiuae gaudia vitae
Carpe, volubilibus labitur annus equis.


Of medicines and means to prolong Life. CHAP. 3.
Show me certain remedies to prolong life.
TO live for ever, and to become immortal here on earth, is a thing
impossible: but to prolong a man's life, free from sicknesses, and to keep the
humors of the body in a temperate state, I verily believe it may be done,
first by Gods permission, by observing a good diet, and sometimes by using of
some Treacle, Methridate, or such like in the Spring time and Autumn.

Show me a Syrup against hot diseases, and to preserve health.
For the preserving of a man's health free from hot diseases, use this sirup
fasting: take of clear fountain water two quarts, put into it the roots of
Smallage, Borrage, Buglosse, Endive and Parsley, of each three ounces, of good
Tobacco leaf half a pound, sees them with a soft fire until they come to
one quart, and then put unto them two pound of Sugar, and mingle it with a pint
of good white wine vinegar, and if you please to add some juice of Lemonds
thereto, it will prove a rare help against gross choler and phlegm, it will
scour and open obstructions and opilations about the Spleen, liver, and
raines.

Show me preservatives against cold diseases.
Doctor Steuens water is an excellent preservative to prolong life, and against
cold diseases, and is made after this manner: take a gallon of gascoigne wine,
then take ginger, gallingall, Cammomill, Sinnamon, nutmegs, grains, cloves,
mace, anise-seede, carrawayseed, of each of them a drachme; then take sage,
mints, red roses, time, pellitory of the wall, wild marioram, rosemary,
penny-mountaine, otherwise wild time, cammomill, Lauender, of every of them
one handful, then bruise the spices small, bruise the herbs, and put all into
the wine, and let it stand twelve hours, stirring it diverse times, then
distill it in a limbeck, and keep the first pint of the water, for that is the
best: and then will come a second water, which is not so good as the first. The
virtues of this water are these; it comfort the spirits, it preserves the
youth of man, it helps old gouts, the toothach, the palsy and all diseases
proceeding of cold: it causes barren women to conceive, it cures the cold
dropsy, the stone in the bladder and the raines of the back, it heals the
canker, comfort the stomach, and prolongeth a man's life. Take but a
spoonful of it once in seven days; for it is very hot in operation. Doctor
Steuens who used this water, lived one hundred years wanting two.

The sublimated wine of M. Gallus, Physician to the Emperor Charles, the fifth
of that name, is most admirable: for the use thereof caused him to live
sixscore and nine years without any disease: which I think to be better then
Doctor Steuens water: it is made in this sort; Take of Cubebs, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Mace, Ginger; Nutmegs, and Galingall, three ounces, of Rubarbe half an
ounce, of Angelica two drachmes, of Mastick four drachmes, and of Sage one
pound and two ounces: steep these in two pound and six ounces of Aqua vitae,
which was six times distilled: then distill them altogether. This wine
comfort the brain and memory, expels Melancholy, breaks the stone,
provoke appetite, reuiueth weak spirits, and causes a man to wax young and
lusty: It may be taken twice every week, and not above one spoonful at each
time, and that but in a cup of drink fasting.

Of Mirth. CHAP. 4.
What is the principal natural means to prolong life?
MIrth, which is a motion of the mind, whereby it takes delight, and stays
it self in that good which is offered unto it.

What are the effects of Mirth?
Mirth enlarges the heart, and disperseth much natural heat with the blood,
of which it sends a good portion to the face; especially if the mirth be so
great, that it stirs a man to laughter. Mirth I say, makes the forehead
smooth and clear, causes the eyes to glister, and the cheeks to become ruddy.

Wherefore did God give affections unto men?
God afforded Mirth and such like, unto men, that thereby they might be induced
to seek after his divine Majesty, in whom alone they should find all mirth
and comfort.

What mirth do the common people love best?
Ignorant men do delight in corporal and outward things, which move their
bodily senses. As in beholding of fair women, pleasant Gardens, rich attires,
or else in eating or drinking.

What mirth do wise men like?
Wise men receive pleasure by contemplation: which is proper to the mind and
spirit. This Aristotle approved, when as he placed the end and sovereign Good
in contemplation.

Show me a way to make the heart merry.
You must use to carry about you a sweet Pomander, and to have always in your
Chamber some good perfumes; Or you may wash your face and hands with sweet
waters: for nothing in the world can so exhilarate and purify the spirits, as
good odours.

Of daily Diet. CHAP. 5.
Declare unto me a daily Diet, whereby I may live in health, and not trouble my
self in Physic.
I Will: first of all in the morning when you are about to rise up, stretch
your self strongly: for thereby the animal heat is somewhat forced into the
outward parts, the memory is quickened, and the body is strengthened.
Secondarily, rub and chafe your body with the palms of your hands, or with a
course linen cloth: the breast, back, and belly gently, but the arms,
thighs, and legs roughly, till they seem ruddy and warm. 3. Euacuate your
self. 4. Put on your apparel, which in the Summer time must be (for the most
part) silk, or buffe, made of Buckes skin, for it resists vermin and
contagious airs: in Winter your upper garment must be of Cotton or Frizeadow.
5. When you have apparrelled your self handsomely, comb your head softly and
easily with an Iuorie comb, for nothing recreateth the memory more. 6. Pick
and rub your teeth; and because I would not have you to bestow much cost in
making dentrifrices for them, I will advertise you by four rules of importance
how to keep your teeth white and vncorrupt, and also to have a sweet breath.
First, wash well your mouth when you have eaten your meat: secondly, sleep
with your mouth somewhat open. Thirdly, spet out in the morning that which like
the scum of a pot, is gathered together that night in the throat: then take a
linen cloth and rub your teeth well within and without, to take away the
fumosity of the meat and yellowness of the teeth: For it is that which
putrifieth them, and infecteth the breath. But least (perhaps) your teeth
become loose and filthy, I will show you a water far better than pouders,
which shall fasten them, scour the mouth, make sound the gummes, and cause the
flesh to grow again, if it were fallen away. Take half a glassefull of
vinegar, and as much of the water of the Mastick tree (if it may easily be got)
of Rosemary, Mirh, Mastick, bole Armoniack, Dragons herb, roach Allome, of
each of them an ounce: of fine Cinnamon half an ounce, of Fountain water
three glass fuls: mingle all well together, and let it boil with a small
fire, adding to it half a pound of honey, and taking away the scum, then put in
a little Benguine, and when it has sodden a quarter of an hour, take it from
the fire, and keep it in a clean bottle, and wash your teeth therewithal as
well before meat as after: if you hold some of it in your mouth a little
while, it does much good to the head, and sweetneth the breath. I take this
water to be better then a thousand of their dentifrices.

7. Wash your face, eyes, ears, and hands with Fountain water. I have known
diverse Students which used to bath their eyes only in Well water twice a day,
whereby they preserved their eyesight free from all passions and bloud-sheds,
and sharpened their memories meruailously. You may sometimes, bath your eyes in
Rose water, Fennel water, or Eyebright water, if you please: but I know for
certainty, that you need not, as long as you use good Fountain water.
Moreover, least you by old age or some other means do wax dim of sight, I
will declare unto you, the best and safest remedy which I know, and this it is:
take of the distilled waters of Verueine, Bettony, and Fennel one ounce and a
half, then take one ounce of white wine, one drachme of Tutia (if you may
easily come by it) two drachmes of Sugarcandy, one drachme of Aloes Epaticke,
two drachmes of woman's milk, and one scruple of Camphire; beat those to powder
which are to be beaten; and infuse them together for four and twenty hours,
and then strain them, and so use it when you list. Or if you abhor
Artificial means to clear your sight, suggested by the spirit of
incredulity, that a Decipe might be inserted in stead of a Recipe, hold fast on
natures documents, and follow these plain rules to prevent sore eyes: First,
keep your belly always soluble: Secondly, abstain from wind, dust, smoke,
fire, sorrow, watching; from eating of Mustard, Beans, Onions, Garlic,
Leekes, and gross meats: from wine bibbing or strong drink, and reading of
small printed letters. Thirdly, sleep not after meals presently. Fourthly,
use to regard green or yellow colors. Fifthly, hold not down your head too
much. Sixthly, touch them not with your hands, specially unwashed. Lastly, keep
your feet clean and dry.

8 When you have finished these, say your morning prayers, and desire God to
bless you, to preserve you from all dangers, and to direct you in all your
actions. For, the fear of God (as it is written) is the beginning of wisdom:
and without his protection whatsoever you take in hand, shall fall to ruin.
Therefore see that you be mindful of him, and remember that to that intent you
were borne, to wit, to set forth his glory and most holy name.

9 Go about your business circumspectly, and endeavor to banish all cares
and cogitations, which are the only baits of wickedness. Defraud no man of
his right: for what measure you give unto your neighbor, that measure shall you
receive. And finally, imprint this saying deeply in your mind: A man is but a
Steward of his own goods; whereof God one day will demand an account.

10 Eat three meals a day, until you come to the age of 40 years: as your
breakfast, dinner and supper; yet that between breakfast and dinner there be
the space of four hours, and betwixt dinner and supper seven hours: the
breakfast must be less then the dinner, and the dinner somewhat less then
supper. In the beginning of meals, eat such meats as will make the belly
soluble, and let gross meats be the last. Content your self with one kind
of meat, for diversities hurt the body, by reason that meats are not all of
one quality. Some are easily digested, others again are heavy, and will lie a
long time upon the stomach. Also the eating of sundry sorts of meat require
often pots of drink, which hinder concoction; like as we see often putting of
water into the meat-pot to hinder it from seething. Our stomach is our bodies
kitchen, which being distempered, how can we live in temperate order? drink not
above four times, and that moderately, at each meal: least the belly-god hale
you at length captive into his prison house of gurmundise, where you shall be
afflicted with as many diseases as you have devoured dishes of sundry sorts.
The cups, whereof you drink, should be of silver, gold, or silver and guilt,
or Venice glass, or of Chinaes mould, and those without couers, that the
breath may not be restrained within.

Labor not either your mind or body, presently after meals: rather sit a
while and discourse of some pleasant matters: when you have ended your
confabulations, wash your face and mouth with cold waters, then go to your
chamber, and make clean your teeth with your tooth-picker, which should be
either of Iuory, silver, or gold. Watch not too long after supper, but depart
within two hours to bed. But if necessity compel you to watch longer then
ordinary, then be sure to augment your sleep the next morning, that you may
recompense Nature, which otherwise through your watching, would not a little be
empaired.

12 Put off your clothes in Winter by the fire side: and cause your bed to be
heated with a warming pan: unless your pretense be to harden your members, and
to apply your self unto military discipline. This outward heating does
wonderfully comfort the inward heat, it helps concoction, and consumes
moisture.

13 Remember before you rest, to chew down a dozen grains of Mastick, either
alone, or in the conserues of Roses, for it will preserve your body from bad
humors.

14 Pray fervently to God, before you sleep, to inspire you with his grace, to
defend you from all perils and subtilties of wicked fiends, and from their
spiritual temptations, and to prosper you in all your affairs: and then lay
aside your cares and business, as well public as private, for that night: in
so doing you shall sleep more quietly.

15 Make water at least once, and cast it out: but in the morning make water in
an vrinall, that by looking on it, you may guess somewhat of the state of your
body, by noting the quantity and color: sleep first on your right side with
your mouth open, and let your night cap be somewhat thick quilted, have a hole
in the top, through which the vapor may go out.

16 In the morning remember your affairs, and if you be troubled with rheumes,
as soon as you have risen, use diatrion piperion, Pellitory of Spain, Tobacco
snuft up into the nostrils, or eat white Pepper now and then, and you shall be
helped.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, for Chap. 8. in Page 54. put Chap. 9. And Chap. 9. in Page 56.
make it Chap. 10. and so adieu.


