THE HISTORY Of Astrea.

The First Part.

In Twelve Books: Newly Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by N. Oaks for John Pyper. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILIP, LORD HERBRT, BARON OF Sherland, Earl of
Mountgomery, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc. And to the
Right Noble and vert^ous Lady, the Lady Susan, Countess of Mountgomery.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
AStrea finding so good entertainment in her own Country, as having passed
the Press in the 3. principal Cities of FRANCE, namely, PARIS, ROAN and
LIONS, is now encouraged to cross the seas, and to try what welcome she shall
meet with here in ENGLAND. And though it cannot be, but her riding-suite will
take much away from her original beauty (it being the fortune of few Books to
be bettered by the translation) yet she is so confident of her own Worth, that
she expects acceptance only for herself, and not for her ornaments. And as at
home she went abroad under the protection of a mighty King; so being abroad,
and a stranger, she is desirous to shelter her self under the Honorable
Patronage of your Lordship, and your right noble Lady, against the aspertions
of the ouer-curious. In which choice joining with her, and presenting her to
your favorable acceptance, I am in all humility to crave your honorable
pardons for my presumption, and do rest

Your Honors in all service to be commanded, John Pyper.

A Table of the Histories contained in the first Part of Astrea.
THe history of Alcippe. 35 The history of Siluie. 59 The history of Astrea and
Phillis. 98 The history of the deceit of Climanthe. 136 The history of Stelle
and Corilas. 137 The history of Diane. 170 The history of Tircis and Laonice.
224 The Oration of Hylas for Laonice. 236 The Answer of Phillis for Tircis. 238
The Judgment of Siluander. 240 The history of Siluander. 248 The history of
Hylas. 264 The history of Galathee and Lindamor. 288 The history of Leonide.
331 The history of Celion and Bellinde. 346 The history of Ligdamon. 6. lib. 11
The history of Damon and of Fortune. 20. lib. 11 The history of Lidias and
Melander. 35. lib. 12
A Table of the Letters.
THe Answer of Celadon to Licidas. 11 A Letter of Celadon to Astrea. 13 A
Letter of Amarillis to Alcippe. 39 A Letter of Astrea to Celadon. 52 Another
Letter of Astrea to Celadon. 52 A Letter of Astrea to Celadon. 53 A Letter of
Ligdamon to Siluie. 62 The answer of Siluie to Ligdamon. 64 A Letter of
Aristander to Siluie. 70 A Scroule from Leonide to Ligdamon. 73 A Letter of
Celadon to Astrea. ^06 A Letter of Licidas to Phillis. 112 A Letter of Astrea
to Celadon. 116 A Letter of Celadon to Astrea. 117 The counterfeited Letter of
Astrea to Celadon. 125 A Scroule of Celadon for Astrea. 128 A Letter of Astrea
to Celadon. 129 A Letter of Corilas to Stell^. 164 A Letter of Filander to
Diane. 179 A Letter of Hylas to Carlis. 270 The answer of Carlis to Hylas. 270
An answer of Stilliane to Hylas. 271 A Letter of Lindamor to Galathee. 302
Another Letter of Lindamor to Galathee. 306 An answer of Leonide to Lindamor.
307 A Scroule of Leonide to Lindamor. 308 A Scroule of Lindamor to Leonide. 313
The answer of Leonide to Lindamor. 317 The Reply of Lindamor to Leonide. 317 A
Letter of Celion to Bellinde. 348 A Letter of Amaranthe to Celion. 349 The
answer of Celion to Amaranthe. 350 A Letter of Celion to Bellinde. 363 Another
Letter of Celion to Bellinde. 361 A Letter of Bellinde to Celion. 362 A Letter
of Lindamor to Leonide. 2. lib. 11 A Letter of Lindamor to Galathee. 3. lib. 11
A Letter of Ligdamon to Siluie. 16. lib. 11 A Letter of Astrea to Celadon. 62.
lib. 11
THE HISTORY OF Astrea and Celadon.
The First Book.
NEAR the ancient Town of Lions, on that side where the Sun sets, there is
a Country called Forests, which in the small circuit of it, contains in
it, what so ever is most rare in all Gaul, for being divided into plains and
mountains, the one and the other are so fertile, and situate in an air so
temperate, that the ground is capable of all that which the Husbandman can
desire. About the heart of the Country is the most beautiful part of the
plain, compassed as with a strong wall by mountains near enough, and watered
with the river of Loyer, that taking his head not far from thence, passes
almost through the midst, yet neither violent nor muddy, but sweet and
peaceable. Many other rivers run there in diverse places, washing them with
their clear streams: but one of the fairest is Lignon, which wandering in his
course, and doubting of his original, goes creeping through this plain among
the high mountains of Ceruieres and of Chalmaset, as far as Flens, where
Loyer receiving it, and causing it to lose his name, carries it for tribute to
the Ocean. Now on the banks of these pleasant rivers, a man may see always
store of shepherds, that what for the goodness of the air, what for the
fertility of the soil and their own sweet nature, they live in so great good
fortune, that they take small knowledge of fortune. And be assured that they
need not envy the contentment of the former age, if love would as well have
suffered them to conserve their felicity, as the heavens were truly prodigal
unto the^: but being asleep in their repose, they submitted themselves to this
flatterer, who shortly after turned his authority into tyranny. Celadon was one
of them that felt it to the quick, overtaken in such sort with the perfections
of Astrea, that the hatred that was between their parents, could not hinder
him from losing himself wholly in her. And it is true, that if in the loss of
himself, a man may gain any thing that may content him, he may call himself
happy, to be so luckily lost, to get the good will of Astrea, who having
assurance of his love, would not requite it with ingratitude, but rather with a
mutual affection, with which she entertained his love and service. So that if
you see any change between them afterward, you are to think that the heavens
permitted it, only to manifest that there is nothing constant, but inconstancy
only durable in her changes: For having lived happily enough, the space of
three years, when they least feared the mischievous accident that befell them,
they found themselves cast by the treasons of Semire, into the profound
misfortunes of Love; so that Celadon desirous to hide his affection, to deceive
the importunity of their parents, who out of an ancient hatred between them,
interrupted by what means they could their amorous designs, enforced himself
to make show, that the account he had of this shepherdess was rather ordinary
then particular. A device truly good enough, if Semire had not ma^^^i^usly
disguised it, grounding upon this dissimulation, the treason by which he
deceived Astrea, and for which afterward she paid such sorrow, so much grief,
and so many tears.

By fortune one day the amorous shepherd having risen very early to intertaine
his thoughts, leaving his flocks to fresh pastures, went to sit down on the
bank of the winding river of Lignon, waiting for the coming of the fair
shepherdess, who stayed not long after him: for being kept waking with an
ouer-thoughtfull suspicion, she had not closed her eyes all the night. By that
time the Sun began to gild the tops of the mountains of Isour and Marsellyes,
the shepherd might perceive from far, a flock which within a while he knew to
belong to Astrea: for besides that Melampe, the so beloved dog of his
shepherdess, came fawning on him as soon as it saw him, he noted that the
sheep which his Mistress made so much of, had not that morning the ribons of
diverse colors which it was wont to wear on the head, in fashion of a garland,
because the shepherdess ouercharged with deep displeasure, had not the
leisure to dress it up after her manner: she followed after with a soft pace,
and as a man might judge by her behavior, she had somewhat in her mind, that
much ravished her, and so entirely took up her thoughts, that whether of
neglect or otherwise, passing hard by the shepherd, she cast not her eyes to
the place where he was, and went to sit down far enough from him, on the
bank of the river. Celadon not much heeding it, supposed she saw him not, or
that she went to seek him where he was accustomed to attend her, hearding his
flocks with his sheep-hooke, drove toward her, who being set under an old
tree, her elbow resting on her knees, and her hand sustaining her head, seemed
so pensive, that if Celadon had not been bewitched with his own misfortune,
he might easily have perceived, that this sadness could not grow, but from an
opinion of the change of his love, al other displeasures being unable to work
so sad and pensive thoughts. But for that a misfortune unexpected, is most
difficult to be borne, I think, fortune purposed suddenly to assault him,
that she might rob him of all means of resistance.

Not knowing then the mis-hap that was so near, after he had made choice of a
commodious place for his sheep, nearest to the flock of his shepherdess, he
came to her to give her the good morrow, full of contentment that he had met
with her: whom she answered both with countenance and speech so coldly, that
the winter brings not with it more chillness and frost. The shepherd, that was
not wont to see her in these terms, grew much astonished at it, and though
he did not forecast the greatness of his disgrace, such as he found
afterward; yet the doubt that he had offended her whom he loved, so filled
him with sorrow, that the least part of it was enough to take away his life.
But if the shepherdess had vouchsafed to hear him, or if her jealous
suspicion had suffered her to consider, what a sudden change the coldness,
of her answer caused in his countenance, out of question, the knowledge of such
an effect had made her lose all her mistrust: but it must not be, that Celadon
prove a Phoenix of good fortune, as he was of love, nor that fortune do him
more favor then other men, whom she never leaves long in assurance of
contentment. Having then stayed some while thus pensive, at last he came to
himself, and turning his eye toward his shepherdess, he saw by hap that she
beheld him, but with a look so sad, that it left no kind of comfort in his
soul; so forgetful had the doubt wherein he was, made him. They were so near
the river of Lignon, that the shepherd might have touched it with his hook,
and the stream held so strong a course, that all glorious and charged with the
spoils of his banks, he descended very mainely into the Loyre. The place
where they were set, was a piece of earth somewhat mounted, against which the
fury of the water beat in vain, sustained in the bottom with a naked rock,
but on the top covered with a little moss. From this place the shepherd
struck the river with his hook, wherewith he raised not more drops of water,
then he found diverse sorts of thoughts that assailed him, which dashing on him
like water, were no sooner come, then they were driven away by others more
violent. There was no one action of his life, nor one thought of his, that he
called not into his mind, to enter into account with, and to know wherein he
had offended; but not being able to charge any one of them, his Love
constrained him to demand of her the cause of her anger. She that either saw
not his actions, or if she saw them, construed them to the disadvantage of the
shepherd, went forward to fire his heart with a more burning despite, so that
when he would have opened his mouth, she would not give him leisure to bring
forth his first words, without interruption, saying, Is it not enough,
perfidious and dissoyall shepherd, to deceive and coozen the party that
deserves it so little, but that going forward in thy unfaithfulness, thou
stickest not to abuse her that has obliged thee to al fair courses? How have
you the hardness to come in my sight, when you have so much offended me? How
dare you show, without blushing, that dissembling countenance, which hides a
soul so double, and forsworn? Go, go, deceive another, faithless, be gone,
and address thy self to some one, to whom thy perfidious dealings are
unknown, and no longer think thou can disguife thy self to me, that have
found too much, to my cost, the effects of thy unfaithfulness and treasons. In
what case this faithful shepherd was, he which has truly loved may best
judge, if ever such a reproach has been unjustly fastened on him. He fell on
his knees pale and ghastly, like a man dead. Is this, fair shepherdess (said
he) to try me, or to cause me to despair? Neither for the one nor other, said
she, but for the truth, there being no necessity to try a thing so well known.
Ah! said the shepherd, why have I not put this unlucky day out of my life? It
had been for the good of us both (said she) that not one day, but all the
days that I have seen thee, had been put out both of thine and mine. It is
true, that thy actions have made me hold my self discharged of one thing,
which having done, displeases me more then thy unfaithfulness: That if the
remembrance of that which is passed between us (which I desire for ever might
be defaced) have left me any power; be gone, dissoyall, and have a care I see
thee not, until I command otherwise. Celadon would have replied, but love,
which usually hears readily enough, at this time, for his great hurt, had
stopped his ears, and for that she would have been gone, he was constrained
to hold her by the garment, saying unto her: I keep you not back, to ask your
pardon for the fault I know not of, but only to make you see that it is the
end I choose to put him out of the world, whom you make show to have in such
horror. But she whom choler had transported, without turning her eyes to him,
struggled with that fury, that she escaped from him, and left nothing but a
ribon, on which by chance he had laid his hand. She was wont to wear it on her
garment before, sometimes to set out her partlet with, sometimes to wind about
flowers when the season served: at this time it had a ring at it which her
father had given her. The sorrowful shepherd seeing her depart in such
choler, stood a long time without moving, not knowing what he held in his
hand, though he had his eyes on it. At last with a deep sigh, coming out of
his pensiveness, and knowing the ribon: Be witness, said he, O dear string,
that rather then I would break one of the knots of my affection, I choose to
lose my life, to the end, that when I am dead, and that the cruel shall see
thee about me, thou may assure her, that there is nothing in the world can be
better loved, then she is of me, and a Lover worse understood then I. And then
fastening it about his arm, and kissing the ring; And thou (said he) the token
of an entire and perfect amity, be content not to part from me at my death, to
the end that this may remain with me, at least for a gage from her, who has
made me such promise of affection. He had scarce ended these words, when
turning his eyes toward Astrea, he cast himself into the river with his arms
acrosse.

In this place was Lignon very deep, and the stream strong; for there was a
world of waters, and the casting back of the rock made a kind of
counter-mount, so that the shepherd was long before he could sink to the
bottom, and yet longer before he could rise up; and when he appeared, the
first was a knee, and after an arm, and then ouer-whelmed suddenly with the
working of the waves, he was carried far off under the water.

In the mean time was Astrea set on the bank, and seeing that which she had
so dearly loved, and which she could not yet hate, so near to death for her
cause, was surprised with such fear, that in stead of giving help, she fell
into a swoune, and so near the brink, that at her first moving which she made
when she came to her self (which was long time after) she fell into the
water, with such danger, that all that some shepherds that were there could
do, did but save her: with the help of her clothes, which held her above the
water, they had leisure to draw her to the shore, but so far besides her
self, that without any feeling of her part, they brought her to the next
Lodge, which they found to belong to Phillis, where some of her companions
shifted her wet clothes, she not being able to speak, she was so much
dismayed, both for the danger her self had run into, and for the loss of
Celadon, who in the mean time was carried by the water with such violence,
that he was driven aland a far off, on the other side of the river, among
some little shrubs, but with small sign of life.

As soon as Phillis (who at that time was from home) knew the accident befalne
her companion, she set her self to run with all her might; and had it not
been that Licidas met her, she could not have been stayed by any other
whosoever he had been: yet she told him in few words, the danger into which
Astrea had run, not speaking any thing of Celadon, and indeed she knew
nothing of him. This shepherd was Celadons brother, between whom the heavens
had tied a knot more strait then that of parentage: on the other side, Astrea
and Phillis, besides that they were cousin germans, were so linked with so
strait an amity, that it well deserves to be compared to that of the two
brethren: that if Celadon had simpathy with Astrea, Licidas had no less
inclination to serve Phillis, nor Phillis to love Licidas.

By fortune at this time that they came in, Astrea opened her eyes, and they
were very much changed from that they were wont to be, when victorious Love
showed it self triumphant over all those which saw them, and which they saw,
their look was slow and abated, their lids heavy and sleepy, and their
brightness turned into tears, but tears holding of a heart all inflamed,
whence they came, and of those eyes scorching as they passed by, which burnt up
both with love and pity all those that were near her: when she perceived her
companion Phillis, it was a new cause of astonishment, and much more when she
saw Licidas: and though she were unwilling that they which were by, should
know the principal cause of her evil, yet was she compelled to tell him, that
his brother had endangered himself while he sought to help her. This
shepherd at these news was so amazed, that without longer stay he ran to the
unlucky place with all the shepherds, leaving Astrea and Phillis alone, who
afterward set themselves to follow them, but so sadly, that though they had
much to say, yet were they not able to speak. In the mean time the shepherds
coming to the bank side, and casting their eyes now this way, and after that
way, found no show of that they sought for, except it were some that falling
more low, found a great way off his hat, which the stream of the water had
driven down, and which by chance was stayed among some trees, which the
washing of the river had loosened at the root, and impaired. This was all the
news they could meet with of that they sought; for he was far enough
driven away in a place where it was impossible for them to find him, because
that before Astrea could be recovered of her swounding, Celadon, as I have
said, driven by the water, fell on the other shore among some trees, where he
might hardly be seen.

And while he was thus between death and life, there came to that place three
fair Nimphs, whose loose hair hung wauing on their shoulders, crowned with a
garland of diverse pearls, they wore their bosom bare, and the sleeves of
their garments trust up to the elbow, from whence issued a very fine lawne,
that gathered up, ended toward the hand, where two great bracelets of pearl
seemed to fasten it. Every of them had at their side a quiver full of arrows,
and bore in her hand a Bow of Iuory, the lower part of their garment before,
turned up behind, that their gold-wrought buskins were seen to the mid-legge.
It seemed they came thither for some desire; for one of them spoke thus: This
is the place, see here the bending of the river: behold where it comes with
violence from above, dashing against the other shore, which breaks the force
of it, and turns it short another way. Consider this tuft of trees; without
doubt, this is it which was shown unto us in the glass. It is true, said the
former, but there is no appearance of all the rest, and me think it a place
somewhat too much with-drawne, to find that which we come to seek. And the
third, which had not as yet spoke, There is, said she, appearance enough of that
he told, for as much as it represented this place so fully to you, that I do
not think there is a tree here, which you have not seen in the glass: with
such words they came so near Celadon, that a few leaves only hid him. And for
that upon particular marking of every thing, they knew that without doubt this
was the place that was showed them, they agreed upon deliberation, to see if
the end would prove as true as the beginning: but they no sooner looked down
where to fit, but the principal among them spyed Celadon, and because she
thought it to be a shepherd fallen asleep, she thrust forth her hand every
way, over her companions: after, without speaking a word, putting her finger on
her mouth, poynted with her other hand to that which she saw among the little
shrubs, and rose as softly as she could, for fear of waking him: but seeing
him somewhat nearer, she took him to be dead, for he had yet his legs in the
water, his right arm raised gently over his head, the left turned half
behind him, and as a prop under his body, the neck was wryed by the weight of
the head, that let it self hang backward, the mouth half open, and almost
full of sand, dropped apace, the face in many places scratched and fullyed, his
eyes half shut, and the hair (which he wore long) so wet, that the water
ran down as from two fountains along his cheeks, whose live color was so
defaced, that a dead man looks no otherwise: the mid part of his reins were
so rased, that they seemed to be broken, and that made his belly show more
swolue, though by reason of the fullness of water, it was big enough of it
self. The Nymphs seeing him in this plight, took pity of him, and Leonide
that spoke first (as the most pitiful and careful) was the first that laid
hold on the body to draw it on shore, when presently the water which he had
swallowed, powered forth in such abundance, that the Nymph finding him yet
warm, was of opinion he might be saved. Then Galathea, who was the principal,
turning toward the other that stood looking on, but not offering any help;
And you, Siluia, said she, what will my mynion say that you be so dainty? Lay
your hand to the work, if not to help your companion, yet at least for pity
of this poor shepherd. I am busied (says she) in confidering, that though he
be much altered, yet me thinks I should know him: and then stooping down, she
turned him on the other side, and looking nearer on him, Certainly (said she)
I am not deceived, this is the man I meant, and indeed he is worthy to find
succor, for besides that he is of one of the principal Families of this
Country, he is of such desert, that our labor shall be well bestowed. In the
mean time the water issued forth in such plenty, that the shepherd being well
lightened, began to breathe, yet neither opens his eyes, nor comes wholly to
himself. And because Galathea was of opinion, that this was he of whom the
Druide spoke, she began to help her companions, saying: They were best carry
him into the Palace of Isouer, where they might best succor him. And so not
without pain, they conveyed him to the place where the little Merill waited
with the Coach: into the which all three having mounted, Leonide was she that
guided them; and lest their prey might be espied by the warders of the Palace,
she went about to enter at a privy gate.

By that time that they were gone, Astrea coming out of her swounding, where
she lay in the water, as I told you, while Licidas nor those that went to seek
for Celadon, could hear other news then that I spoke of. Whereupon Licidas
finding but too great certainty of the loss of his brother, came back to
bewail with Astrea their common mishap. All that she did, was to get to the
b^im of the river; where enforced with grief, she sat down so full of sorrow
and amazement, that a little before she had been of so small confideration,
and so jealous. She was alone, for Phillis seeing Licidas returned, was gone to
learn some news as well as the rest.

This shepherd ariuing, what with weariness, what with desire to know how
this mischance befell, sat down by her, and taking her by the hand, said, O
God, fair shepherdess, what a mishap have we? I say we, for if I have lost a
brother, you have likewise lost the man that was not so much his own as yours.
Whether it were that Astrea heeded some other thing, or that this speech vexed
her, she made no manner of answer, whereat Licidas being amazed, by way of
reproach held on, Is it possible, Astrea, that the loss of this miserable
son (for so she called him) touches your soul no more to the quick, to make
you accompany his death at least with some tears? If he had not loved you, or
his love had been unknown to you, it might be borne with, if we saw you have
no feeling of his evil: but since you cannot be ignorant of it, that he has
loved you more dearly then himself, this is a cruel thing, Astrea, believe
me, to see you so little moved as if you knew it not.

The shepherdess then turning a sad look toward him, after she had
considered awhile, answered, Shepherd, I am sorry for the death of thy
brother, not for that he loved me, but because he had other conditions which
may make his loss worthy to be lamented, for as for the love you speak of,
it was so common to other shepheardesses my companions, that they are to take
it as heavily as I. Ah unthankful shepherdess (presently cried out Licidas)
I shall hold the heavens to be partakers with thee, if they punish not this
injustice in thee. You have small reason to think him inconstant, when the
displeasure of a father, the hatred of kindred, the cruelties of your rigor,
could not lessen the least part of that extreme affection, which you cannot
dissemble to have a thousand, and a thousand times acknowledged apparently in
him. Truly this is a misunderstanding, which surpasses the greatest
ingratitudes, since his actions and his services have given you no less
assurance of the thing, which no body but your self make doubt of. So
(answered Astrea) is there no body whom it concerns as it does me. Out of
question it should (replied the shepherd) since he was so thoroughly yours, that
I know not (and if he did I should know) that he was more ready to disobey the
high God, then the least of your desires. Then the shepherdess answered in
choler, Let us leave this discourse, Licidas, and think it cannot turn to
your brothers benefit: but if he have beguiled me, and left me, displeased that
I no sooner found out his deceits and craft, he is gone with a great spoil,
and fair marks of his unfaithfulness. You make me amazed, replied Licidas:
wherein have you found that which you reproach him with? Shepherd (added
Astrea) the story would be too long and grievous; content your self if you
know it not, you only are in ignorance, and all along this river of Lignon,
there is not a shepherd but can tell you, that Celadon loved in a thousand
places; and not to go far, yesterday I heard with mine own ears, the
discourse of love which he had to his Aminthe, for so he called her, whereto I
had made longer stay, but for shame: and to tell true, I had some business
elsewhere, that stood me more upon. Then Licidas, as one transported, cries
out: I will no more enquire the cause of my brothers death, it is your
jealousy, Astrea, and jealousy grounded on great reason, to be the cause of
so great evil. Alas, Celadon, at this time I see well, thy prophecies fall out
true of thy suspicions, when thou saidest this wench will put thee to so much
pain, that it will cost thee thy life: yet knew thou not on which side this
blow should be given. Afterward addressing himself to the shepherdess: Is it
credible (said he) Astrea, that this disease is so great, that it can make you
forget the commandments which you have so often enjoined him? I can witness,
that five or six times, at the least, he has fallen on his knees before you,
to entreat you revoke them. Do you not remember, that when he came out of
Italy, it was one of your first ordinances, and that within yonder bower, where
I saw you meet together so often, he besought you to award him death, much
rather then to make show to love any other? Astrea, would he say (while I live,
I shall remember the very words) it is not for that I refuse, but because I am
unable to observe this iniunction, that I cast my self at your feet, and
beseech you, that to make proof what power you have over me, you command me to
die, rather then to ferue any other whomsoever, but Astrea. And you answered
him (my son) I require this proof of your love, and not your death, which
cannot be without mine own: for besides, I know it is most hard to you, yet
will it bring us a commodity, which we especially are to look after; which is,
to shut up both the eyes and mouths of the most curious and reproachful,
whether he oftentimes replied hereto, and whether he made all the refusal
which the obedience (to which his affection bound him unto you) might permit, I
refer to your self, if you have the mind to remember it: so far am I from
thinking he ever disobeyed you, but for this only cause, and in truth it was
so heavy an imposition, that at all times when he returned from the place,
where he was enforced to dissemble, he was compelled to take his bed, as if he
came from some great piece of service, and there he would rest himself some
while, and then he undertook it afresh. But now Astrea, my brother is dead, so
it is, whether you believe it, or not believe it, it will do him neither good
nor hurt, so that you are not to think that I speak to you in his behalf,
but only for the truths sake, yet may you credit me as you think good: if I
swear unto you, that it is not above two days, since I found him engrauing of
verses on the bark of these trees, that stand by the great meddow, on the left
hand of the Beech, and I assure my self, that if you will vouchsafe to turn
your eyes, you may perceive it was he that cut them, for you may too well know
his characters, if forgetful of him and of his passed services, you have not
lost the remembrance of whatsoever concerns him: but I am assured the gods
will not suffer it, for his satisfaction, and your punishment. The verses are
these:

MADRI^AL.
I Have my self at such a bent,
Although my Love be violent,
That I can gain this favor small,
To say, I do not love at all.
But to dissemble love elsewhere,
T^ adore an eye the conquering part,
As I do yours, with trembling fear,
I know not how to have the heart:
And if it must be that I die,
Dispach me hence then presently.
It may be some seven or eight days past, that having had occasion to go for a
time, over the river of Loyre, by way of answer he wrote me a letter, which I
am willing you should see, and if in reading it, you confess not his
innocence, I will believe that you have purposely lost, for his sake, all kind
of judgment: and then taking it out of his pocket, he read it to her. It was
thus:

INquire no more what I do, but know that I continue always in my ordinary
pain, To love, and not to dare show it; not to love, and swear the contrary;
(dear brother) is all the exercise, or rather the punishment of thy Celadon.
They say true, contraries cannot be at one time in one place; yet Love and
dissembled love are ordinarily in my actions: but wonder not at it, for I am
compelled to the one, out of perfection; and to the other, by the commandment
of Astrea. If you think this manner of life strange, remember that Miracles
are the ordinary works of gods, and what would you my Goddess should work in
me, but Miracles?

It was long before Astrea would answer, because the words of Licidas had
almost put her beside her self. So it was, that jealousy, which as yet hel^
some force in her soul, made her take the paper, as doubting if Celadon writ
it.

And although she well knew it was he, yet argued she the contrary in her mind,
following the custom of many more persons, who will always strongly maintain
a thing, as if it were their opinion. And much about that time came diverse
shepherds from seeking Celadon, where they found no notice of him, but his
hat, which was nothing to the sad Astrea, but a fresh renewing of sorrow. And
because she remembered her self of a slight which love made them devise, and
she was loath it should be known, she made sign to Phillis to take it; and
then every one betook them to their lamentations and praises of the poor
shepherd: and there was not any that repeated not some virtuous action, only
she that felt most, was enforced to fit mute, and to make less show, knowing
well, that the maine wisdom in love, is, to hold affection hidden, or at
least, not to discover it unprofitably. And because the violence she did her
self herein, was great, and she could hold out no longer, she drew near to
Phillis, and prayed her to leave her, that the rest might do so likewise: and
taking from her the hat she held in her hand, she went from them alone, and
took the path she lighted upon, without any heed to her way. Now there was not
a shepherd in the company, but he knew of Celadons affection, because his
parents by their displeasures discovered more then their own actions, but it
was carried with such discretion, that except S^mir^, Licida^ and Phillis,
there was not any that knew the good will she bare him, and though they knew
well this loss afflicted her, yet did they attribute it rather to a good
nature, then to love (such profit comes of the good opinion they have of a
man:) in this mean time she held on her way, all which time a thousand
thoughts, or rather so many displeasures, tormented her pace after pace, in
such sort, that sometimes doubting, sometimes assured of the love of Cel^do^,
she knew not whether she had more cause to complain of him, or of her self.
When she remembered what Licidas came to tell her, she judged him innocent: but
when the words which she heard him use to the shepherdess Aminthe, came into
her mind, she condemned him as guilty. In this laborinth of diverse thoughts,
she went a long time wandering through the woods, without election of way; and by
fortune or the will of heaven, that would not suffer that the innocence of
Celadon should remain longer doubtful in her soul, her paces conducted her,
before she was aware, along a little brook, among those trees that Licidas
spoke of, where the verses of Celadon were engraven. The desire to know whether
he said true, was of power sufficient in her to provoke her to seek for them
very curiously, although they were much shaddowed: but the cutting, which as
yet was fresh, discovered them soon enough. O God, how soon she found them to
be Celadons, and how quickly she ran to read them, but how to the quick,
did they touch her soul? She sat down on the ground, and laying in her lap
the hat and letter of Celadon, she held some while, her hand clasped together,
and her fingers locked one in another, holding her eyes upon that which only
remained to her of her shepherd and seeing that the hat was bigger about the
place wherein he used to put his letters, when he would give them her in
secrecy, she felt with her hand very curiously, and thrusting her fingers
under the lining, she found the bare felt: wherein loosening the butto^, she
drew forth a paper, which that day Celadon had put in. This device they
invented between them, when the evil will of their Parents hindered them from
talking together; for casting this hat from one to the other in sport, they
might easily take and give their letters. All trembling she took this out of
this pretty packet, and clean besides her self, spreading it abroad, she cast
her eye on it to read it, but she had so scared the powers of her soul, that
she was forced diverse times to wipe her eyes before she could do it, in the end
she read these words:

MY Astrea, if the dissembling which you enjoin me to, be to cause me die of
pain, you may more easily do it with a word: If it be to punish my arrogancy,
you are a ludge too gentle, to appoint me a less punishment then death. But if
it be to try what puissance you have over me, why do you seek out for me a
readier witness then this, whose length may be so trouble some to you? for I
cannot think it is to conceal our dess^ine, as you say, for that not being
able to live in this constraint, my death (no doubt) will give a more speedy
and deplorable a demonstration. Judge then (my fair Astrea) that this has
been long enough endured, and that it is now time you should permit me to act
the personage of Celadon, having so long, and with such pain, represented that
of the person in the world, that is most contrary to him.

Oh! what cutting rasors were these words to her soul, when they brought into
her memory the commandment which she had given him, and the resolution which
they had taken to hide by this dissimulation their love? But see what the
bewitchings are of love! she rooke extreme displeasure for the death of
Celadon, and yet she was not without some contentment in the midst of so great
sorrow, knowing that in truth he was not unfaithful; and of which she was
assured, the many proofs whereof had cleared the cloudy mist of her ielously:
all these considerations joined themselves together, to have the more force to
torment her in such sort, that not being able to run to other remedy then
tears, as well to bewail Celadon, as to weep for her own loss, she gave
beginning to her grief with a river of tears, and after, with a thousand
pitiful alasses, distempering the quiet of her stomach with infinite sighs
gasping for life, and with vnpittifull hands beating her fair hands, she
called to remembrance the faithful amity which she had formerly found in this
shepherd, the extremity of his affection, her despair for having so readily
thrust from her the life of her repose: and then were represented the happy
time of his service, the pleasures and contentment which the honesty of their
devices had wrought her, and what beginnings of sorrow she met with, since by
his loss, which though she found very great, yet did she not judge it equal
to her folly, since the continuance of so many years might have given her
assurance enough of his fidelity.

On the other side, Licidas, that was so little satisfied with Astrea, not
being able with patience to suffer this grief, rose up hard by Phillis, but
not to tell any thing of her companion, which displeased him, and went with a
stomach so swollen, his eyes so filled with tears, and countenance so changed,
that his shepherdess seeing him in this plight, and giving him some token of
her love, followed him without fear of what men might say of her. He went with
his arms cross his breast, his head hanging down, his hat pulled about his
ears, but his soul more overwhelmed with sorrow. And because the
commiseration of his evil bound the shepherdess that loved him, to take part
in his sadness, they followed him, and lamented behind him: but this pitiful
office of theirs was but a renewing of his grief. For extreme sorrow has this
going with it, that solitariness is his first garment, because that in company
the soul dares not freely disgorge it self of the venom of the evil; and
until that be vented, it is never capable of any remedy by consolation. Being
thus pained, by fortune they met a young shepherd lying along on the grass,
and two shepheardesses with him: the one holding his head in her lap, and the
other playing on an Harp, while he went breathing out these verses, his eyes
lifted up to heaven, his hands laid on his breast, and his face covered with
tears.

Stanzaes on the death of Cleon.
THe beauty which to cinders death does turn,
Despoyling it of mortal state so soon,
Like lightning mounts, and does like fire burn:
So short a life has so great beauty won.
Those eyes, late authors of sweet undertakings,
From more dear Loves are closed for ever fast,
Fair eyes that were of such a wondrous making,
That none beheld, but loved them e're they past.
If this be true, beauty from us departs,
Love vanquished weeps, that conquered heretofore,
And she that gave life to a thousand hearts,
Is dead, yet lives in my heart evermore.
What good henceforth is worthy of our love?
Since perfectest is soonest ranisht still,
As shadow does after the body move,
So every good is seconded with ill.
Cleon, it seems, thy destiny has sworn
Even in thy East to finish up thy day,
And that thy beauty dead, as soon as borne,
Should meet her coffin in her cradles way.
No, thou die not, it is much rather I,
Since all my life I living took from thee,
If lovers life in thing beloved lie,
I having loved thee, thou reuiu'st in me.
So if I live, Love gives the world to know,
That his command he can to death impart,
Or being God, his mighty power to show,
Makes Lover live without or soul or heart.
But Cleon, if the will of Fate be so,
Of humane frailty that the smart you try,
Love wills to yours my fortune equal grow,
You by my plaints, I by your death do die.
Thus I power forth my plaints, that new life brings,
Death to surprise my sorrow being lame,
And my two eyes changed to lasting springs,
Bewail mine ill, but cannot less the same.
When Love with me (to show compassion)
Laments this fair loss, whence my pains d^still,
Dr^e (says he) tears, mourn in another fashion:
So much all tears are lesser then our ill.
Licidas and Phillis were very curious to know the grief of this shepherd, if
their own would have given them leave; but seeing he had as much need of
consolation as themselves, they would not join another man's evil to their
own, and so leaving the other shepherds attentive to find it out, they held
on their way, no man following them: for the desire every one had to know what
this unknown company might be, Licidas was not gone far, before they heard
another voice some good way off, which seemed to come toward them, and they
willing to harken, were hindered by the shepherdess, who held the shepherds
head in her lap, with these complaints: Well, thou cruel, well, shepherd
without pity, how long shall this obstinate humor of thine endure against my
prayers? How long have thou determined that I should be disdained and contemned
for a thing that is not? and for the sake of one dead, I should be deprived of
that which cannot profit it? Consider Tyrcis, consider, thou Idolater of the
dead, and enemy to the living; what the perfection of my love is, and begin at
last, begin to love the person that lives, and not them that are dead, whom you
must leave in rest to God, and not disquiet their happy cinders with
unprofitable tears, and take heed, lest in holding on thus, you draw not on
you the vengeance of your cruelty and injustice.

The shepherd not turning his eyes to her, answered coldly, Would to God,
fair shepherdess, I might be suffered to give you satisfaction with my
death: for to free you and my self also of the pain wherein we are, I would
choose it rather then my life: but since, as you have told me, this were but to
increase your grief; I beseech thee, Laonice, enter into thy self, and
consider how small reason thou have, to make my dear Cleon dye twice. It is
sufficient (since my mis-hap will have it so) that she has once paid the
tribute of her humanity; then, if after her death she be revived in me by force
of my love, why (cruel) will you have her dye again, by the forgetfulness
which a new love will cause in my soul? No, no, shepherdess, your reproaches
shall never have such power over me, to make me to consent to so wicked a
counsel, because that which you call cruelty, I name faithfulness; and that
which you think worthy punishment, I judge it to deserve high commendation. I
have told you, that in my Tomb, the memory of my Cleon shall live by my bones:
that which I have said to you, I have a thousand times sworn to the immortal
gods, and to this fair soul which is now with them: and think you that they
will suffer Tyrcis to go unpunished, if forgetful of his oath, he become
unfaithful? Ah! I shall sooner see the heavens cast forth their lightning on
my head, then ever offend either my oath, or my dear Cleon. She would have
replied, but that then the shepherd that went on singing, interrupted them, by
coming upon them with these verses:

The Song of Hylas.
IF she disdain me, then adieu,
I leave the cruel with her scorn,
Not staying till the morrow morn,
Before I choose a mistrisse new.
It were a fault my self to pine,
By force to draw her love to mine.
They for the most part are so wise,
They make no reckoning of our loves,
Wherein their heart a fire moves:
But that the flame must not arise;
So that we kindle other fires,
While we pursue our own desires.
The ouer-faithfull vow-keeper,
Abused by his loyalty,
Loves beauty stuffed with cruelty*
Seems be not I doll worshipper,
That from an Image nothing strong,
Never finds succor for his wrong?
They say, Who open passage leave
To be importunde every day,
At last must give himself away.
But so we little good receive,
When we may easly meet some one
To be importunate upon.
These Lovers, lo, that faithful are,
Are always full of dolorous fears,
Deep sighs, complaints, and showring tears,
Are commonly their daintiest fare.
It seems the Lovers chiefest part,
Is only to weep out his heart.
A man, how can you call him well,
That manly honor laid aside,
Cries like a boy, cannot abide
Apples loss, or Wall-nuts-shell
May you not rather call him fool,
That loves such displing in Loves school?
But I, who all such follies fly,
That nothing bring with them but care,
By others harms warned to beware,
Do always use my liberty,
And am not discontent at all,
That they do me inconstant call.
At these last verses the shepherd was come so near to Tyrcis, that he might
discern the tears of Laonice, and because, though they were strangers, yet
they knew one the other; and to busy them a while by the way, the shepherd
knowing the sorrow of Laonice and Tyrcis, rowsed himself to accost them in
this manner: O desolate shepherd (for by reason of this sad time of life,
such was the name that every man gave him) if I should be like you, I should
think my self most unhappy. Tyrcis hearing him speak, rose up to answer him.
And I, Hylas, if I were in your place, how might you call me unhappy? If I must
lament (reioyned he) as you do for all the Mistresses that I have lost, I
should have cause to complain longer then I have to live. If you do like me,
answered Tyrcis, you should lament but only for one. If you do like me,
replied Hylas, you should lament for none of them all. Herein it is, said the
desolate, that I account you miserable: for if nothing can be the sufficient
price of Love, but Love, you were never loved of any, seeing you never loved
any; and so you may trade in many loves, but not buy any, not having the money
which is paid for such a commodity. But how know you (answered Hylas) that I
never loved? I know it (said Tyrcis) by your perpetual changes. We are (said
he) of a differing opinion; for I believe, the more expert the workman is, the
more he exercises the mystery whereof he makes profession. It is true,
answered Tyrcis, when one follows the rules of Art, but when they do
otherwise, it falls out to them as to men out of their way, the further they
go, the more they wander from it. Therefore it is, that as the stone that
continually roules, gets no moss, but rather dirt and filth; in like manner,
your lightness may gain you shame, but never love. You must know, Hylas, that
the stripes of love will never be healed. God keep me (said Hylas) from any
one such stripe. You have reason, replied Tyrcis, for if every time you are
struck with a new beauty, you had received an incurable wound, I know not
whether in all your body you had had a free place. But so you should be
deprived of those sweetes and happinesses which love brings to the true lovers,
and that miraculously (as all his other actions) by the same stroke that he
gave them, so that if the tongue were able to express that which the heart
cannot entirely relish, and it were permitted you to hear the secrets of this
god, I do not believe but you would willingly renounce your infidelity. Then
Hylas smiling, Without faining (said he) you have reason, Tyrcis, to put your
self into the number of them whom Love uses so kindly. As for me, if he use
all others as he does you, I will willingly forgo my part, and let you enjoy
alone your felicities and contentments, and fear not that I shall ever envy
you. It is above a month since we ordinarily met together; tell me the day,
the hour, or the moment, in which I could see your eyes without the wished
company of tears; and on the contrary, name me the day, the hour and moment,
in which you heard me only sigh for my loves. Every man that has not his
taste perverted, as you have your judgment, will he not find the delights of
my life more pleasing and lovely then the ordinary pangs of yours?

And turning to the shepherdess which had complained of Tyrcis: And you
(insensible shepherdess,) will never take the courage to free your self of
the tyranny, in which this unnatural shepherd makes you live. Will you by
your patience make your self companion in his fault? Know you not that he
glories in your tears, and that your supplications raise him to such an
arrogancy, that he thinks he binds you wonderfully to him, when he hears
you with misprisall? The shepherdess with a great alas answered him, It is
easy, Hylas, for him that is in health, to counsel the sick; but if you were
in my place, you would know how vain it is thus to advise me, and that this
grief may well drive my soul out of my body, but not by reason chase this
ouer-strong passion out of my soul: So that if this beloved shepherd exercise
any tyranny over me, he may do it with more absolute command when it pleases
him, not having power to wish more of me, then his authority over me reaches
to already. Then give over your counsels, Hylas, and cease your reproaches,
which can but increase my evil, without hope of asswaging. For I am so
entirely the possession of Tyrcis, that I have not command of mine own will.
How (said the shepherd) is not your will your own? What will it profit to
love and serve you? Laonice answered, As much as the amity which I tender to
this shepherd auayles me. That is to say, replied Hylas, I shall lose my time
and my pains; and when I discover unto you my affection, this is but to waken
in you the words wherewith you may serve your own turn when you speak to
Tyrcis. What would you, Hylas, that I should say more to you, but that it is
long since I have gone bewayling this mis-happe, but much better in my
consideration then in yours? I doubt not (said Hylas) but since you be of this
humor, and that I have more power over my self then you can over yours: Go
take the shepherdess (said he) reaching forth his hand, or give me leave, or
take it of me; and be assured, that if you will not, I will not be long before
I go back, as being ashamed to serve so poor a Mistress. She answered him
very coldly, Neither you nor I shall receive any great loss, at the least I
assure you, this shall never make me forget the hard usage which I have from
this shepherd. If you have (answered he) as much knowledge of that which you
lose in losing me, as you show small reason in the pursuit you undertake, you
will rather complain for the loss of me, then to wish for the affection of
Tyrcis? But the sorrow which you take for me shall be very small, if it can not
equal that which I have for you; and then sung out these verses as he went
away.

A SONNET.
SInce we must needs pull up that deep-set root,
Which Love, in seeing you, plants in my breast:
And which Desire, with so great longing thirst,
Has with so great care nur^'d to so small boot.
Since it must be, that Time which saw it borne,
Must triumph in the end as Conqueror:
Attempt we bravely freed from Sorrows power,
Let us at one blow cut both flower and thorn.
Chase we all these desires, those fires put out,
Break we those lines knotted with many boughs,
And of our selves let us take free farewell.
So shall we vanquish Love, that untamed Lord,
And wisely do out of our own accord,
That whereto Time at last will us compel.
If this shepherd had come into this Country, in a time less troublesome,
without doubt he had found many friends; but the sorrow for Celadon, whose
loss was so fresh, as it made all them that dwelt thereabout so heavy, that
they could not attend his conceits, and therefore they let him go without being
curious to question either him or Tircis, what was the cause that led them
thither. Some of them returned to their lodging, and others continued on their
search for Celadon, and coasted now on this side, and then on that side the
River, not leaving even a brier, nor tree, nor bush, whose shaddowed
hollownesse they discovered not. Yet was this in vain, for they found no more
news for all their search; only Siluander met Polemas alone, not far from that
place, where a little before Galathe and the other Nymphs had taken up Celadon,
and because he had the command of all the Country, under the authority of the
Nymph Amasis, the shepherd, who had often seen him at Marsellis, did him all
the honor he could in his salutation: and for that he asked, what it was he
searched for along the shore, he told him of the loss of Celadon: whereat
Polemas was displeased, having always loved them of that family.

On the other side, Licidas, which was wandering with Phillis, after he had
been somewhile silent, at last turning to her: Well, fair shepherdess what
think you of the humor of your companion? She which as yet was ignorant of the
jealousy of Astrea, answered; It was the smallest displeasure that might be
fall her, and that in so great sorrow he might well be permitted to avoid and
fly from all company. For Phillis thought he had complained, for that she was
come forth alone. It is true, said Licidas, it is small, but yet I hold, that
in truth it is the greatest, and I must tell you, she is the most unthankful
in the world, and most unworthy to be beloved. See, for Gods sake, what her
humor is; my brother never had any desire, nay, so far was he of, he had not
the power to love any but her only: she knew it well enough, cruel as she is;
for the proofs which he has given her, leave nothing in doubt, the time has
been ouerpast, the difficulties, or rather the impossibilities contemned, the
absences overcame, the parents anger neglected, her rigors, her cruelties, her
disdaines sustained, and that for so long time, that I know no man could do
more then Celadon, and yet for all this will not this fickle piece, who, as I
think, having ingratefully changed her mind, is sorry to see him longer live,
whom at other times she has done little less then cause to dye by her
rigours, and whom at this time she knew she has unworthily offended: this
fickle piece, I say, will not, who dissembling under a new pretense of hate and
jealousy, commands him to eternal exile, and a despair even to seeking out
of death. O God, said Phillis all amazed, what do you tell me, Licidas? is it
possible that Astrea should commit such a fault? It is too true, answered the
shepherd, she told me a part of it her self, and the rest I may easily judge
of by her discourse. But well, though she triumph over the life of my brother,
and that her perfidiousnesse and ingratitude give a vizard to her fault, as if
she had ouerloued him, yet will I swear unto you, that never Lover had more
affection and fidelity then he, not that I care she should know it, unless it
might bring her some extreme displeasure by the knowledge of what might have
fallen our by her error: for hence forth I will be as much her mortal enemy,
as my brother has been her faithful servant, and she un worthy to be beloved.
So went Licidas and Phillis discoursing, he infinitely displeased with the
death of his brother, and as much enraged against Astrea, and she sorry for
Celadon, troubled with the grief of Licidas, and astonished at the jealousy of
her companion: but seeing that the stroke was yet very sensible, she would not
as yet apply any strong remedies, but only gentle preparatiues, to sweeten and
not to confound; for in any case she would not that the loss of Celadon,
should cost her Licidas: and she considered well, that if the hatred should
continue between him and Astrea, of necessity she must break with one of
them: and yet love was unwilling to give place to friendship, and friendship to
love; and so the one would not consent to the death of the other. On the other
side, Astrea even full with so great occasions of sorrow as I have told you,
giving such way to her tears, and so languished in her dolors, that for not
having tears enough to wash away her error, nor words to express her sorrow,
her eyes and mouth gave up their office to her imagination, so long, that
weakened with overmuch grief, she fell asleep with such thoughts.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of Astrea and Celadon.
WHile these things passed in this sort among the shepherds and
shepheardesses, Celadon received, from the three Nymphs in the palace of
Isour^, all the best helps that possibly they might: but the weakness which
the water brought him, was so great, that notwithstanding all the remedies they
applied, he could not open his eyes, nor give other sign of life, but by the
beating of his heart. In this sort he passed the rest of the day, and a good
part of the night, before he came to himself, and then when he opened his
eyes, it was not without great astonishment, to find himself where he was;
for he remembered well enough what befell him on the shore of Lignon, and that
despair had made him leap into the water, but he knew not how he came into
this place: and after he had stayed some while confounded with these thoughts,
he asked himself whether he were alive or dead? If I live (said he) how is it
possible that the cruelty of Astrea does not cause me to die? Or if I be dead,
what is it, O Love, that thou come to search for in darkness? Art thou not
contented to have had my life, but thou will among the cinders kindle afresh
the ancient flames? And because the busy care wherein Astrea had left him, was
not abandoned, called to his mind all his thoughts, he went on: And thou,
most cruel remembrance of my passed good, why do thou represent unto me,
the displeasure which she sometimes had for my loss, to make my too true hurt
worse by her thoughts: whereas in place thereof, for mine ease, thou should
rather tell me the contentment she has for the hatred she bears me? With a
thousand such imaginations, this poor shepherd fell into so sound a sleep,
that the Nymphs had leisure to come and see how he did: and finding him
asleep, they softly opened the windows and the curtains, and sat down about
to view him the better. Galathee, after she had somewhile considered, was the
first that said in a low voice, that they might not awake him: How is this
shepherd changed from that he was yesterday? and how fresh a color is come
into his face in so short time? For my part, I am not sorry for the travail of
my journey, since we have saved his life: For as you say, maid (turning to
Siluie) he is one of the principal of that Country. Madame, answered the
Nymph, it is most true, for his father is Alcippe, and his mother Amarillis.
What, said she, that Alcippe, of whom I have heard so much, and who to rescue
his friend, brake up the prison of the Visigots? It is the very same, said
Siluie: I saw him about five or six months agon, at an Holy-day-Feast, in the
Hamlets that stand along the river of Lignon, and for that, above all the rest,
Alcippe in my judgment, was most worthy to be respected. I long time held mine
eyes on him: for the gravity of his beard and venerable old age, made him to
be honored and esteemed of every man. But as for Celadon, I remember, that of
all the young shepherds, none but he and Siluander durst come near me. By
Siluander I knew what was Celadon, and by Celadon what Siluander was. Both the
one and the other had in their behavior and discourse, somewhat more generous
then the name of Shepherd required. While Siluy was thus speaking, Love, to
make sport with the deceit of Climanth and Polemas, which were the cause of
Galatees going forth that day, to the place where she took up Celadon,
began to make the Nymph feel the effects of a new desire. For while Siluy
spoke, Galatee had her eyes fast upon the shepherd; and the praises she gave
him, were the cause, that at the same time, his beauty, and his virtue, the
one, by the view, and the other, by the hearing, gave a blow to her soul, and
that more easily, for that she was prepared by the practices of Climanthe, who
seeming to be a divine, had foretold her, that he whom she should meet with,
where she found Celadon, was to be her husband, unless she would be the most
unfortunate person in the world, having before laid a plot, that Polemas (as it
were by chance) should be there going at the hour which he had appointed him,
that being deluded by this trick, she might be made willing to marry him,
which otherwise, the affection which she bare to Lindamor, would not suffer.
But Fortune and Love mocking at this wisdom, made them find Celadon by the
chance which I told you of. So that Galatee determining, in any sort to love
this shepherd, went purposely to represent to her self every thing in him more
lovely. And seeing that he awaked not, that she might leave him to his more
quiet rest, she got out as softly as possibly she could, and went to intertaine
her new thoughts.

There was by her chamber a pretty staire, which descended into a lower
gallery, where by a drawbridge they might enter into a garden furnished with
all the rarities which the place could admit, were it in Fountains, in
quarters, were it in allies and arbours, nothing being forgotten that art
could add to it. At the going out of this place, one might enter into a great
wood of diverse sorts of trees, whereof one was of Hasels which altogether made
so pleasing a Labyrinth, that though the paths by their diverse turnings lost
themselves confusedly, the one within the other, yet were they very delightsome
for their shadows.

Not far off within another quarter, was the fountain of the truth of love, a
spring indeed very marvelous: for by the force of enchantments, the lover when
he looked into it, might see her whom he loved: if he were beloved of her, he
should see himself hard by her: if it fortuned she loved another, the other
should be represented, and not himself: and because it discovered the deceits
of lovers, they named it The truth of Love. In another of the quarters, was the
den of Damon and Fortune; and lastly, the hole of Mandrague, full of such
rarities and so many sorceries, that hour after hour there falls out always
some new thing: besides that, thorowout the rest of the wood, there be many
other diverse caves lively counterfayted, that the eye often beguiles the
judgment.

Now it was within this garden that the Nymph came out to walk, attending for
the awaking of the shepherd; and because her new desires would not suffer her
to hold her peace, she fained to have forgotten something, which she commanded
Siluie to go and seek for, for that she put the less trust in her for her
youth, then in Leonide, who was much elder; both these Nymphs were trusted with
her greatest secrets. And being her self alone with Leonide, she said to her,
What think you, Leonide? has not the Druyde great knowledge of things? and
do not the gods very liberally communicate with him; since the things that are
to come, are better known to him, then the present to us? Without doubt
(answered the Nymph) he made you see right truly, in the glass, the very place
where you found this shepherd: and he told you truly the time, in which you
met with him; but his speeches were so doubtful, that I can hardly believe he
understands himself. Why say you so (answered Galathee) since he told me so
particularly all that I have found, that I know not now to say more then he
did? So me thinks it was (answered Leonide) that he only told you, you should
find in that place there, a jewel inestimable, which when it came to pass,
was a thing to be scorned. Galathee then laughing at her, said, Why, Leonide,
know you nothing else? Then must you learn what he told me in particular.
Madame, you have two influences quite contrary; the one, the most unfortunate
that may be under heaven; the other, the most happy that a man may desire: and
it depends of your own election, to take that which you will; and that you
may not deceive your self, know that you are, and shall be served of many great
Knights, whose virtues and merits may diversely move you; but if you measure
your affection either to their merits, or to the judgment which you shall give
of their love, and not by that which I instruct you, on the behalf of the
gods, I foretell you, you shall be the most miserable that lives: and that you
be not deceived in your election, remember that on such a day, that you see at
Marsellys a Knight attired in such a color, who seeks, or shall seek to
marry you (for if you admit him from thence, I shall ever bewail your
misfortune, and I cannot sufficiently threaten against you the incredible
disasters which attend you) and therefore I advise you to flee from that man
whom you may rather term your misfortune then your lover. But contrarily,
mark well the place which is represented within this glass, to the end you
may know to find him along the river of Lignon. For such a day, at such an
hour, you shall meet a man, in the love of whom the heavens have placed all
your felicity. If you can so work that he may love you, think not the gods
good of their word, if you can wish for more contentment then you shall have;
but have care, that the first of you two that first sees the other, be the
party that first loves. Think you not, that this is to speak plainly and
clearly; especially for that I have since felt these predictions true which he
gave me. For, having seen this shepherd first (I must not lie) me thinks I
find in me certain sparkles of goodwill to him. How Madam! (said Leonide) will
you love a shepherd? Do you not remember who you are? I do so Leonide, said
she, I remember my self well enough, but you must also know, that these
shepherds are as good as Druides or Knights, and their Nobility is as great as
others, being all descended from the antiquity of the same stock, so that the
exercise where to they addict themselves, cannot make us others then we are
from our birth; so that if this shepherd be well borne, why should not I think
him as worthy of me as any other? Finally, Madam (said she) he is a shepherd,
how ever you disguise him. In fine, said Galathee, he is an honest man, how
ever you will qualify him.

But Madam (answered Leonide) you that are so great a Nymph, the Lady after
Amasis, of all these goodly Countries, will you have a mind so base, to love a
man borne of the meaner sort of people, a clown, a shepherd, a fellow of no
worth? My friend (replied Galathee) leave these reproaches, and remember that
Enone made her self a shepherdess for Paris, and when she had lost him, she
lameuted, and wept away in hot tears. Madame (said Leonide) he was the son
of a King; and besides, the error of another ought not to cause you to fall
into the same fault. If it be a fault, answered she, I refer my self to the
gods, who have counseled me by the Oracle of their Druide: but that Celadon is
not borne of as good blood as Paris, my friend, thou have no brayn if thou
say so; for, are they not sprung of one original? Moreover, have you not
heard what Siluie talked of him and his father? You must know that they are not
shepherds, for not having means to live otherwise, but to buy by this sweet
life, an honest quietness. And how, Madame, reioyned Leonide, have you also
forgot the affection and services of the gentle Lindamaur? I would not, said
Galathee, that forgetfulness should be the reward of his services, neither
would I also, that the love Lought to bear him, should be the ruin of all my
contentments. Ah Madame, said Leonide, remember how faithful he has been. Ah
my friend, said Galathee, consider that this is the way to be eternally
unhappy. For my part, answered Leonide, I shrug with my shoulders at these
judgments of love, and know not what to say, but only, that extreme
affection, and entire fidelity, the employment of an whole age, and a
continual service, should not be so long received; or received, deserve to be
paid with other money then a change. For Gods sake, Madame, consider how
deceitful they are, that tell other men's fortunes, that for the most part,
they are but slight imaginations which their dreams brought forth; for the
most part lying, that of an hundred accidents which they foretell, hardly one
falls out to be true, and for the most part, ignorant, since busying themselves
to know the fortune of another, they cannot find their own. And do not you,
for the fantastical discourse of this fellow, make so miserable the man that
is so dear to you. Set before your eyes how he loves you, in what dangers he
has been thrust into for you; what combat he had with Polemas, and what his
despair has bin; what griefs do you now prepare for him, and what deaths
will you cause him ^oinuent for his destruction, if he have knowledge of this.
Galathee wagging her head, answered her: You see, Leonide, the business is not
now about the choice of Lindamaur, or Polemas, as here to fore, but of my well,
or evil doing. The considerations which you have, are good to you whom my
misfortune touches not, but by way of compassion, yet to me they are exceeding
dangerous, since it is not for a day, but for ever, that this misfortune
threatens me. If I were in your place, and you in mine, it may be, I would
advise you as you do me. But undoubtedly an everlasting misfortune terrifies
me: as for the lies of these men you speak of, I will believe for your sake,
that it may be it will not so fall out, yet it may be also, that it will fall
out; and then tell me, I pray you, think you that party for wise, that for the
contentment of another, will leave on the balance (it may be) all his good or
evil? If you love me, hold not on this discourse, otherwise I must think that
you respect more the contentment of Lindamaur, then mine. And touching him,
make no question but he will seek his consolation by some other means then
death: for both reason and time are both sovereign helps to this fury; and
indeed, how many have you seen of these great despairers upon like occasion,
that, some while after, have not repented of their despaires?

Thus did these fair Nymphs discourse, when far off they saw Siluie return,
from whom, because she was so young, Galathee was desirous to conceal it, as I
said. This was the cause she cut off her discourse so short: yet she forbear
not to say to Leonide, If ever you loved me, you would make it appear to me at
this time, since it is not only far from my contentment, but from my felicity
also. Leonide could not answer her, because Siluie was so near that she might
ouerheare. Being come, Galathea knew that Celadon was awake: for at the door
she heard him groan and sigh. And it was true: for in a while after they were
gone out of the chamber, he waked suddenly, and because the Sun shone full on
his bed, through the glass, at the opening of his eyes, he was so dazeled and
confounded with so great brightness, that he knew not where he was, the
travail of the day passed had so weakened him; yet by this time he felt no
manner of grief: so that calling into his mind his fall into Lignon, and the
opinion that he had had a little before of being dead, seeing himself now in
so confused a brightness, he knew not what to judge, except it were that Love
had taken him up into heaven for a reward of his faithfulness: and that which
abused him more in this point, was, that when his sight began to extend it
self, he saw nothing about him, but the deckings of gold and of lightsome
pictures, with which all the room was adorned, and which his feeble eyes could
not as yet discern from counterfeit.

On the one side, he saw Saturn leaning on his sickle, with his hair long,
his forehead rough, his eyes hollow, his nose hooked like an Egle, his mouth
dropping with blood, and full with the morsels of his children, whereof he held
one half eaten in his left hand; in which, in the opening which he had made on
the side with his teeth, a man might see the lights, as it were to pant, and
the heart to tremble. A sight indeed full of cruelty: for that child had the
head writhed over the shoulders, the arm hanging forward, and the legs
stretching out one way and other, all red with the blood which issued from the
wound which the old man had made, whose long beard and locks, in many places,
were stained with the blood which fell from the morsels which he tore out to
devour; his arms and legs full of nerves, and were in diverse places covered
with hair, his thighs lean and flesh-falne, under his feet lay great pieces
of bones, where of some were white for age, some began but to be bare, and
others joined with a little skin and flesh half consumed, showed that they
were but lately laid there.

Near him one might see nothing but Scepters in pieces torn, Crowns, great
buildings ruined, and that in such sort, that hardly remained any lively
resemblance of what they had been.

Not far from thence, one might see the Corebantes with their Cymballs and
Hoboyes, hide the little Jupiter in a den, from the devouring teeth of that
father. Then a little besides, you might see him grown great with a visage
enflamed, but grave and full of maiestly, his eyes mild, but striking an awe,
a Crown on his head, in his left hand a Scepter, which he rested on his thigh,
where was yet to be seen the skarre of the wound which he made, when through
the imprudence of the Nymph Semele, that he might save the little Bacchus, he
was constraind to open that part, and to bear him until the end of the term.
In his other hand he had the lightening cast into three points, which was so
lively represented, that it seemed then to fly in the air. He had his feet
on a great Globe, and by him you might see a great Eagle, that bare in his
hooked beak, a thunderbolt, and came near him, raising the head toward him,
as high as his knees. On the back of this Bird was the young Ganimede, attired
after the fashion of the^ that dwell in the mount Ida fat, plump, white, his
locks golden and frizled, that with one hand stroked the head of the Bird, and
with the other, reached forth to take the lightening from Jupiter, who with
his elbow, and not otherwise, gently thrust aside his feeble arm. A little
aside might one see the Cup and Ewre, in which this little taster that served
Nectar to his Master, so lively set out, that this young seruitour striving to
wait at Jupiters hand, stumbled with one foot, it seemed to be ready to fall,
and the little one purposely turned his head, to see how it came. At the foot
of this god was a great vessel, on the right hand was the good, and on the
other the evil, and within were vows, prayers and sacrifices, diversely
figured: for the sacrifice was represented by the smoke, intermingled with
fire; and within, the vows and supplications seemed like quick Ideaes, and
half marked, but so, that the eye might discern it.

It would be too long a Discourse, to relate particularly all those pictures.
So it was, that every part of the Chamber was full: even Venus her self within
her marine shell, among other things, casts her eye on the star the Greeks
had made her in the wars of Troy. And on the other side, you might see little
Cupid making much of her, with the hurt on his shoulder, from the lamp of the
curious Psiche: And this so well represented, that the shepherd could not
discern it from counterfeit. And after he had been long in these thoughts,
the three Nymphs entered the Chamber, the beauty and majesty of whom ravished
him yet into a greater admiration. But that which persuaded him the rather to
the opinion that he was dead, was, that when he saw the Nymphs, he took them
to be the three Graces, and especially, seeing the little Merill come in with
them, whose height, youth, beauty, with his hair frizled, and lovely fashion,
made him judge him to be Love. And though he were confounded in himself, yet
so it was, that that courage which he had always greater then fitted the name
of a shepherd, gave him assurance (after he had saluted them) to demand in
what place he was. Where to Galathee answered: Celadon, you are in a place
where they have a desire to recover you wholly: we are they, that finding you in
the water, have conveyed you hither, where you have all at your command.

Then Siluia raising her self, Celadon, said she, is it possible you should
not know me? do you remember you have seen me in your hamlet? I know not,
fair Nymph (answered Celadon) if the state wherein I am, may excuse the
feebleness of my memory. How, said the Nymph? remember you no better, that the
Nymph Siluie, and two of her companions went to see your sacrifices and sports,
the day that you consecrated to the Goddess Venus? The accident befalne you,
has it made you forget, that after you had won the prize from your fellows,
at the Lute, Siluie was she that gave you for reward a garland of flowers,
which presently you see on the head of Astrea? I know not if all these things
be blotted out of your memory: but this I know well, that when you laid the
garland on the f^ire hair of Astrea, every one wondered, because of the hatred
that had been between your two families, and particularly between Alcippe you
father, and Alce the father of Astrea. And then was I desirous to know the
occasion: but they so confounded me, that I could know nothing else but that
Amarillis having bene^ beloved of these two shepherds, and that between the
riualls there has always been small friendship, they came oftentimes to
handblowes, until Amarillis espoused your father, and then Alce, and the wise
Hipolita whom he after married, nourished so great hatred against them, that
it would never after suffer them to converse together. Now see, Celadon, if I
know you not well enough, and if I give you not good tokens of that I say. The
shepherd hearing these words, by little and little, came to memory of that
which she said, and yet he was so astonished, that he knew not what to answer.

For not knowing Siluie, but for the Nymph of Amasis, and by reason of his
country life, having had no familiarity with her, nor with her companions, he
could not judge for what cause, nor how he was at this present among them. In
the end he answered: That which you say (fair Nymph) is very true: that on
Venus her day three Nymphs gave the three prizes, whereof I had that for the
Lute; Licidas my brother that for the course, which he gave to Phillis; and
Siluander, that for the song, which he presented to the daughter of the fair
Belinde; but remember the names which they had, I can not: so that being
hindered from our sports, all that we were content to know, was, that they
were the Nymphs of Amasis and Galathee. For as for us, as our bodies part not
from our pastures, so our sports make us nothing curious. And then (replied
Galathee) Have you known no more? That which informed my knowledge (answered
the shepherd) was the discourse which my father made me often of his fortunes,
in the which I have often heard him make mention of Amasis; but not of any
thing particularly that concerned her, though I have earnestly desired him.
This desire (replies Galathee) is very commendable, to give him satisfaction,
and therefore I will tell you particularly, both what Amasis is, and what we
are.

Know then (gentle shepherd) that of antiquity, this Country which at this
present is called Forests, was covered with great Lakes of water, and that
there was nothing but the high mountains that you see round about that was
uncovered, except some points within the middle of the Plain, as the rock of
the wood of Isoure, and of mount Verdun, so that the Inhabitants abode on the
tops of the mountains: And therefore it is, that even yet the ancient
families of this Country have the buildings of their names in the more lofty
places, and in the high mountains. And for proof of that I say, you may yet
on the top of Isoure, and mount Verdun, and about the Castle of Marsellis,
see great* rings of iron in the rock where the vessels were fastened, there
begin no likelihood they could serve for any other use. But, it may be, about
some fourteen or fifteen ages since, a certain Roman, who in ten years
conquered all the Gauls, caused some mountains to be cut down, by which the
water voyded away; and not long after, the bosom of our Plains were
discovered, which seemed so pleasant and fertile, that he purposed to have it
inhabited; and for this purpose, he made all those that lived in the
mountains, and within the forests, to descend, and willed, that the first
building that was then made, should bear the name of Julius, which he had; and
because the place was moist and slimy, it yielded great store of trees. Some
say the place was called Forests, and the people, Forresters, in stead of
Segusiens, which they were named before: but they are much deceived. For the
name of Forests comes of Forum. which is Feurs, a little town which the
Romans caused to be built, and which they named Forum Segusionorum, as if they
would say, The place or the March of the Segusians, which properly is but the
place where they kept their armies, during the time that they gave order to the
neighbor countries.

See, Celadon, what they hold for certain, of the Antiquity of this Province:
but there are two opinions contrary to this, which I would tell you. The
Romans say, that from the time that our plain was yet couerd with water, the
chaste Goddess Diana delighted so much in it, that she abode in it almost
continually: for her Driades, and Amadriades lived and hunted in this great
Wood, and high mountains which environed this great quantity of waters: and
because there were store of fountains, she came often to bathe her self with
her Nayades, which kept there ordinarily. But when the waters were voyded, the
Nayades were constrained follow them, and to go with them into the bosom of
the Ocean, so that the Goddess found her self at one instant destitute of the
half part of her Nymphs. And this was the cause, that not being able with so
small a troop to continue her ordinary pastime, she chose out some daughters of
the chief Druides and knights, whom she joined with the Nymphs that remained,
to whom she gave likewise the name of Nymph. But it fell out, as in the end,
the abuse peruerts all order, that many of them, which in their youth had been
bred in the house, some among the commodities of a loving mother; others, among
the allurements of sights and services of Lovers, not able to hold out in the
travail of hunting, nor banish out of their memories, the honest affections of
those, that sometimes made suite unto them, would retire to their own home,
and marry: and some others, whom the Goddess denied leave, failed in their
promises, and in their honesty; which so much provoked her, that she resolved
to forsake that profane country, as she took it, for this vice, which she so
much abhorred. But because she would not punish the virtue of some, with the
error of others; before she went away, she ignominiously chased out, and for
ever banished out of the Country all those which had offended, and made choice
of one, to whom she gave the same Authority, which she had over all the
Country; and willed, that for ever the race of her should have all the
command, and then permitted them to marry, but with express prohibition, that
the men should never succeed. Since that time there was never any abuse among
us, and the laws have inuiolably been observed. But our Druides talk in
another manner; for they say, that our great Princess Galathee, the daughter
of the King Celtes, wife of the great Hercules, and mother of Galathee, who
gave name to the Gauls, who formerly had been called Celtes, full of love to
her husband, followed him, whither his courage and virtue carried him, among
the Monsters, and against the Giants.

And by fortune, at that time the mountains which separated us from Auerne,
and those which bend toward the left hand, which they call Cemene and Gebenne,
served for a place of retrait to some Gaints, which by their force made
themselves terrible to all men. Hercules being advertised hereof, came; and
because he loved very tenderly his dear Galathe^, he left her, in this country
which was next neighbor, and wherein she took great pleasure, what for the
game, what for the company of the daughters of that country. And for that she
was Queen of all the Gauls, when Hercules had vanquished the Gaints, and that
the necessity of his affairs compelled him to go other where, before their
departure to leave an eternal memory of the delight she took in this country,
she made those ordinances, which the Romans say, the Goddess Diana did. But
were it Galathee or Diana, so it is, that by a supernatural privilege we have
been particularly maintained in our franchises, since that of so many peoples,
which like a torrent, were powered out over all Gaul, there was not one that
has disquieted us in our repose, Even Alarick^ king of the Visigots, when with
Aquitaine he had conquered all the Provinces on this side Loyre, having known
our statutes, confirmed our privileges, and without usurping any authority
over us, left us in our ancient franchises. It may be you may think it strange
that I talk to you so particularly of the things, which are beyond the
capacity of those of my age: but you must know, that Pimander, who was my
father, has been curious to search out the antiquities of this Country, in
such sort, that the more understanding Druides discoursed to him ordinarily,
while he was at his meal: and I, that almost always was with him, remembered
that which liked me best. And thus I knew, that in one continued line, Amasis
my mother was descended from them, whom the goddess Diana or Galathee made
choice of. And therefore it is, that being Lady of all those Countries, and
having yet a son called Clidaman, she brings up wi^h us a number of maidens
and daughters of the Druides and knights, who being in so good a school,
learn all the virtues which their age will permit. The maids go attyred as
you see us, which is a kind of habit that Diana or Galathee used to wear, and
which we have always maintained in memory of her. See, Celadon, that which
you desire to know of our estate, and I make account before you go away, (for
I would you will see us all together) that you might say that our company
gives place to none other, neither in virtue nor yet in beauty.

Now Celadon knowing who these fair Nymphs were, knew also what respect he
was to show them; and though he had not been accustomed to be among others
then Shepherds his like, yet such was the good breeding that he had, that it
taught him well enough what was due to such personages. Then, after he had done
them the honor which he thought he was bound to: But (said he, holding on) I
can not but be astonished, to be among so many great Nymphs, I that am but a
simple shepherd, and to receive so many favors of them. Celadon (answered
Galathee) in what place soever Virtue is, it deserves to be loved and honored,
as well under the habit of shepherds, as under the glorious purple of kings;
and for your particular, you are with us of no less account, then the greatest
of the Druides or knights in our Court: for you are not to give place to them
in favor, since you do not in merit. And for your being among us, know you,
that it is not without a great mystery from our gods, which have appointed it,
as you may know at leisure, whether it be, that they will no longer, that so
many virtues remain among the Savages in the forest and country towns, or
whether it be, that they will work a dessigne in you, aduauncing you greater
then you are, to make most happy by you, the person that loves you. Live only
in rest, and look to your health. For there is nothing you should more desire,
in the state wherein you are, then health. Madam (answered the shepherd, who
understood not the words well) If I be to desire health, the chief cause is,
that I may be able to do you some service, in exchange of so many favors,
which it has pleased you to do me. It is true, that I need not tell you that
I came from the wood or pastures, otherwise the solemn vow which our fathers
have made unto the gods, will accuse us to them, as unworthy children of such
fathers. And what oath is it, answered the Nymph? The history, replied Celadon,
would be too long, if I should tell you the cause that my father Alcippe had to
hold it. So it is, that many years since, of a general accord, all those that
kept along the rivers of Loyre, of Lignon, of Furan, of Argent, and of all
other rivers, after he had well understood the discommoditie, which the
ambition of a people called Romans, made their neighbors feel, out of desire
of dominion, assembled together in a great Plain, which is near the mount
Verdun, and there by a mutual agreement swear all, to fly for ever from all
sort of ambition, for that it alone was cause of so much pains, and to live,
they and theirs, under the peaceable habit of shepherds, and since that, it
has been observed (the gods so well liked this vow) that none of them that
made it, nor their successors, but he had travel and pains incredible, if he
observed it not; and among all, my father is an example most remarkable, and
most new: So that having known, that the will of heaven is, that we should
keep in rest that which we have to live on; we have of late renewed this vow,
with so many oaths, that he that breaks it, shall become most detestable.
Truly (said the Nymph) I am well pleased to hear that you tell me, for it is
long since I heard them talk of it, and I could never yet know, why so many
good and ancient Families as I he are there are among you, employ themselves
out of the towns, to spend their age in the woods and places most solitary.
But, Celadon, if the case wherein you are, will suffer, tell me, I pray you,
what has been the fortune of your father Alcippe, to make him take again
that kind of life, which he had so long time left; for I assure my self, the
discourse is worthy to be known. Then, though he felt himself yet evil of
the water which he had swallowed, yet he constrained himself to obey her, and
began in this sort:

The History of Alcippe.
YOu command me (Madame) to tell you the fortune most cross and diverse of any
man in the world, and in which one may learn, that he that will work trouble
to another, prepares a great part to himself. But since you will have it so,
and that I may not disobey you, I will tell you briefly, that which I have
learned by ordinary discourse from himself, to whom al these things have
befalne: For, that we might understand how happy we were to live in quietness
of spirit, my father has often recounted unto us his strange fortunes. Know
then (Madame) that Alcippe, having been bred by his father, in the simplicity
of a shepherd, had a spirit so differing from his education, that every thing
pleased him better then that that sauoured of the village. So that this young
Infant, for a presage of what he would come to, and to which when he was in
years, he addicted himself, had no greater delight, then to make assemblies
of other children like himself, whom he took upon to set in order, and to
arm some with staves, some with bows and arrows, whom he taught to draw
right, the menaces of the old and wise shepherds not being able to divert him.

The ancients of our Hamlets seeing his actions, foretold of great troubles in
these countries; and above all, that Alcippe would be of a turbulent spirit,
that would never rest with in the limits of a shepherd. When he came to the
balfe part of his age, by chance he fell amorous of the shepherdess Amarillis,
who at that time was secretly wooed of another shepherd his neighbor, called
Alce. And because Alcippe had so good an opinion of himself, that he thought
that there was not any shepherdess, who would not as freely entertain his
affection as he offered it, he resolved to use no great Art to tell her it: so
that meeting her at the sacrifice of Pan, as she returned home, he said unto
her, I never thought I was of so small force, that I could not resist the
blows of an enemy, that wounds me unawares. She answered; He that wounds by
mistaking, should not be called an enemy. No, answered he, which rest not on
deeds, but on words only; but (for my part) I find that he that offends,
howsoever it be, is an enemy, and therefore I may well give you that name. To
me (replied she?) I would neither have the deed nor the thought, for I make too
great account of your merit. See (adjoined the shepherd) one of the blows
wherein you offend me more, in telling me one thing for another, then if
truly you would acknowledge in me that which you say, for that I hold my self
wronged by you, in as much as you say you favor me. But I see well, you think
it enough, to bear Love in your eyes, and in your mouth, without giving him
place in your heart. The shepherdess then finding her self surprised, as not
having understood his speech of love, answered him: I make account, Alcippe, of
your virtue, as I ought, and not beyond my duty; and touching that you talk of
love, believe it, I will have it neither in mine eyes, nor in my heart for any
man, and much less for those base spirits, which live like Savages among the
woods. I know well (replied the shepherd) that it is not the election of Love,
but my destiny, which compels me to be yours, since that if Love ought to arise
from the resemblance of humor, it would be very hard, that Alcippe should not
be for you, who from his Cradle has hated this country life, and protests
unto you, if I must change my condition, to have a part in your love, from
henceforth I forsake the Sheephooke and my Flocks, and will live among men,
and not among Savages.

You may well (answered Amarillis) change your condition, but not make me
change, being resolved to be never less mine own, then I am now, to give
place to any stronger affection: if you will, we should continue, the life
which we have led, for the time past; change this discourse of affection, and
of Love, into that you were wont to use to me heretofore, or else think not
strange, that I banish my self from your company, it being impossible that
Love, and the honest Amarillis should remain together. Alcippe, that looked for
no such answer, seeing himself so far from his hopes, was so confounded, that
he staid somewhile before he could answer. In the end, being come to himself,
he began to persuade himself, that the bashfulnesse of her age, and sex, and
not want of good will toward him, had made her hold this course: Therefore it
was that he answered her; Whatsoever you think of me, I shall never be other
then your servant; and if the commandment you give me, were not disagreeing
with my affection, you were to think, that there is nothing in the world that
might make me contradict it: you must then excuse me, and suffer me to hold on
my purpose, which is but a testimonial of your merit, and wherein, will you,
nill you, I am resolved. The shepherdess turning her eyes sweetly toward
him, I know not, Alcippe, said she, whether for a wager, or out of obstinacy
you talk thus. It is (answered he) for both, for I have laid a wager with my
desires, to conquer you, or to dye; and this resolution is changed into
obstinacy, there being nothing that can divert me from the oath which I have
made. I would be well pleased, replied Amarillis, that you had taken any other
for the But of such importunities. You may name my affections (said the
shepherd) as it pleases you: yet shall not this make me change my mind. Nor
you must not think much, replied Amarillis, if I be as firm in my obstinacy,
as you in your importunity. The shepherd would have answered, but that he was
interrupted by many shepheardesses that came to them. So that Amarillis for
conclusion said very softly to him, You may do me a displeasure, if your
purpose be known: for I am contented to know your follies, and it will be
small pleasure that any others should understand it. So ended the first
discourse between my father and Amarillis, which did but increase the desire
in him to serve her; for nothing adds so much to Love, as honesty: And by
fortune in the way, this company met with Celion and Bellinde, who were stayed
to behold two turtles, who were cheering and making love each to other, no whit
afraid to see many about them. Then Alcippe remembering the commandment which
Amarillis had given him, could not hold from sighing out these verses:

A Sonnet of the restraint of Honor.
VEnus dear birds doves, loving over all,
That double without end your kisses true,
And tyrde with cares, do still by them renew,
Now your sweet peace, and sometime your sweet brall.
When I behold you rest, or stir your wings,
As ravished with the ease wherein you are,
O God, then us, how be you happier far,
That freely'nioy the sweets your true love brings:
Your fortune gives you leave, freely to show
The thing which we must hide, that none may know,
By laws unjust which honor grants us;
Faint honor that makes us turn our own foes,
For cruel reasonlesse, she wills it thus,
That stealth in Love alone with pasport goes.
After this time he so suffered himself to be transported with his affection,
that there was no bound which he ouer-passed not, and she, on the contrary,
showed her self always more cold and icy to him, and one day when he was
requested to sing, he said such verses:

A Madtigall on the coldness of Amarillis.
HEr heart of ice, her eye all fire,
And mine directly contrary;
I freeze without, but inwardly
I scorch with flame of my desire:
Alas! that Love has chosen to possess
My heart, and th^eies of my fair shepherdess
Gods grant, that once it may be well reuerst,
I, in mine eyes, she have it in her breast.
At this time, as I told you, Alce made suite to Amarillis, and because he was
a right honest shepherd, and esteemed wise, the father of Amarillis inclined
rather to give her to him, and not to Alcippe, because of his turbulent
courage; and on the contrary, the shepherdess better loved my father, because
his humor came nearer to hers; which the wise father well perceiving, and not
willing to use any violence, nor absolute authority over her, he thought, that
far distance might divert her from this will, and so resolved to send her for
some time to Artemis, the sister of Alce, who dwelt about the banks of the
river of Allier. When Amarillis knew the deliberation of her father, as always
they endeavor to things forbidden; she took a resolution not to go away,
before she had given Alcippe assurance of her good will: in this dessigne she
wrote these words:

YOur obstinacy has ouer-passed mine, but mine shall likewise ouer-passe that,
which constraines me to advertise you, that to morrow I go away, and that this
day, if you may find me on the way, where we met yesterday, and that your love
can content it self with words, it shall have occasion to be there, and
adieu.

It would be ouer-long, Madame, to tell you all that passed particularly
between them, besides, that the case wherein I am, makes me unable to do it.
It shall be sufficient in abridging it, to tell you that they met in that
place: and this was the first time when my father had assurance that he was
loved of Amarillis, and that she counseled him to leave the Country life,
wherein he was bred, because she disdained it, as unworthy a noble courage,
promising that there should be nothing so strong, that might divert her from
her resolution. After they were parted, Alcippe engraues these verses on a tree
in the wood:

A Sonnet on the constancy of his Love.
Fair Amarillis, full of lovely graces,
As she went cropping of the flowers from stalks,
Under her hand that gathered, as she walks,
Sprung others suddenly up in their places.
Those beauteous locks where Love did interlac^,
Himself heauing them up with gentle air,
If he spyed any of them out of square,
Right curiously he set them in their place.
S^rare a sight Lignon stood still to see,
Offers his waves her Looking-glass to be,
And after says, So fair aportraiture,
When thou art gone, my stream may bear away:
But from my heart there shall not slip for aye,
The fatal draught of thy face (Nymph) be sure.
After she was gone, and that he began to feel the displeasures of her
absence, going often to the same place where he had taken leave of his
shepherdess, he sigheth forth these verses:

A Sonnet on absence.
River of Lignon, whose eternal stream,
Through gracious forests runs, watring her bre^^,
Wave upon wave driving, and take norest,
Until thou entrest to thy fathers realm:
See thou not how Allier snatcheth from thee
Thy fair, like wrongful laws of mighty strong,
And from thy banks their honor bears along,
To drive thee to inst plaints for remedy?
Against this Rauisher call to thine aid,
Those, that for her departure all dismayed,
Pay tears, that thou may see thy channel swell.
Dare only that those eyes and hearts of ours,
May power out for thy help, thousands of showers,
That shall not dry, till thou be venged well.
But not being able to live without sight of her there, where he had been used
to the good of her view, he resolved, howsoever, to depart from thence; and
while he searched for some occasion, he met with one as good as he could wish.
Some little while before the mother of Amasis died, and they made preparation
in the great town of Marsellis, to receive her as their new Lady with much
triumph. And because the preparations which they made, drew for curiosity,
almost all the Country, my father so wrought, that he had leave to go
thither. And there it was whence the beginning of all his travails proceeded.
He was about his half age, some Moons more, his face fair among those of
that Country, his hair yellowish, curled, and crisped by nature, which he
wore long: and briefly, Madam, such, as to whom Love (it may be) owed some
secret vengeance. And see how he was seen of some Lady, and so secretly
beloved of her, that we could never yet know her name. At the first that he
arrived at Marsellis, he was clothed like a shepherd, but handsomely enough,
for his father made much of him: and that he might not commit some foolish
trick, as his manner was, in the Hamlet, he set two or three shepherds about
him, to have a care of him; principally one, called Cleante, a man whose humor
pleased his father well, so that he loved him, as if he had been his son.
This Cleante had one called Clindor, of my fathers age, who, by nature, seemed
to have the same inclination to love Alcippe; Alcippe, who on the other side,
knew his affection, loved him above any other; which was so pleasing to
Cleante, that he had nothing that he could deny to my father. This was the
cause, that after they had some days seen how the young Knights, who were at
the Feast, went attired, how they armed themselves, and fought at the Barriers,
and having showed his mind to his friend Clindor, they both together besought
Cleante, to give them means, that they might show themselves among the other
Knights. And how, said Cleante to them, have you the courage to equal your
selves to them? And why not, said Alcippe? have I not as much arm and leg as
they? But you have not learned the ciuilities of the Town. We have not learned
them, said he, but they are not so hard, that they should put us out of hope to
apprehend them soon enough; and me thinks there is not such difference
between theirs and ours, but we may readily change them. You have not, said
he, been used to Arms. We have, replied he, courage enough to supply that
want. And how, adjoined Cleante, would you leave the Country life? And what,
said Alcippe, have the woods to do with men? and what can men learn in
conuersing with beasts? But, answered Cleante, this will be no great pleasure
to you, to see your selves disdained by the glorious Courtiers, which will
always reproach you that you are shepherds. If it be a shame, said Alcippe,
to be a shepherd, we must be such no more: if it be no shame, the reproach
cannot be hurtful: or if they dis-esteeme me for my name, I will strive by my
actions, to make my self esteemed. In the end, Cleante seeing they were
resolved to lead other lives then their fathers: But well, said he, my
children, since you have taken this resolution, I will tell you, that though
you be taken for shepherds, your birth always came from the most ancient
stock of this Country, and from whence desc^^ded as many brave Knights, as of
any other in Gaul; but a consideration contrary to that you have, made them
choose this retired life. Therefore fear not that you shall be welcome among
those knights; the principal of which are of the same blood that you are.
These words served for no other use, but to inflame them the more; for this
knowledge bred in them a desire to put their purpose to effect, without
considering what might come of it; whether for the discommodities which that
life brings, or for the displeasure that the father of Alcippe and his kindred
might conceive. Afterword Cleante was at charge to provide for all things
necessary. They were both so well borne, that quickly they wo^ne the
acquaintance and friendship of the principal: and Alcippe gave himself in
that sort to Arms, that he became to be one of the good Knights of his time.

During these Feasts, which lasted two months, my father was beheld, as I told
you, of a Lady, whose name I could never know: and because he seldom was
wanting in any thing that might make him beloved, she was in such sort
overtaken, that she invented a slight good enough to bring about her intent.
One day, as my father stood in the Temple at the Sacrifices which they made for
Amasis, an old woman came near him, and fayning to be at her prayers, she said
twice or thrice, Alcippe, Alcippe, not looking on him. He hearing himself
named, was about to ask her, what she would with him; but seeing her eyes
turned another way, he thought she spoke to some other. She that perceived he
harkned, went on, Alcippe, it is to you I speak, though I look not upon you:
if you desire to have the best fortune that ever knight had in this Court, be
between day and night at the great cross way, which leads to the place of the
Palace, and there you shall know the rest of me. Alcippe seeing her speak in
this manner, without looking on her, likewise said, he would be there; wherein
he failed not: for the evening approaching, he went to the place assigned, where
he stayed not long, but the aged woman came to him, almost hidden under a
Tastata that she had on her head, and drawing him aside, said to him, Young
man, thou art the most happy that lives, being beloved of the most fair, and
most lovely Lady in this Court, and with whom (if thou will promise that, that
I shall demand of thee) at this hour I bind my self, to make thee enjoy all
contentment. The young Alcippe hearing this proposition, asked who the Lady
was. See, said she, the first thing that I would have you promise me, is, not
to inquire after her name, and to keep this fortune secret: the other, that
you suffer me to cover your eyes, when I bring you where she is. Alcippe said
to her, Not to enquire after her name, and to keep this affair secret, I will
willingly perform: but to blindfold mine eyes, I will never suffer. And what
is it you fear (said she?) I fear nothing, answered Alcippe: but I will have
mine eyes at liberty. O young man, said the old woman, that art yet to learn,
why will thou procure the displeasure of a person that so loves thee? and will
not this displease her, to desire to know more of her, then she would have thee?

Believe me, make no difficulty, doubt nothing, what danger can it be to thee?
Where is that courage that thy presence promises at the first sight? Is it
possible that a peril imagined, can make thee forsake an assured good? And
seeing that he moved not, Cursed be the mother, said she, that made thee so
fair, and so little hardy; without doubt, both thy visage and thy courage are
more of the woman, then of that thou art. The young Alcippe could not hear,
without laughing, these words of the old woman uttered in such choler. In the
end, after he had sometime thought in himself, what an enemy he might have,
and finding that he now had none, he resolved to go, provided, she would suffer
him to carry his sword, and so let her blind his eyes; and taking her by her
garment, followed her whither she would lead him.

I should be too long, Madam, if I should tell you all the particularities of
this night. So it was, that after many turnings, and having (it may be) many
times passed one way, he found himself in a chamber, where, his eyes yet
bound, he was unclothed by the same woman, and laid in bed; awhile after,
came the Lady, that had sent for him, and coming near him, uncased his eyes,
because there was no light in the chamber: But for all that he could do, he was
not able to get one word from her: So that he rose from her in the morning,
without knowing who she was; only he judged her fair, and young: and an hour
before day, she that brought him, came to carry him back, and lead him with
the same ceremonies. From that day, they resolved between them, that
whenever he was to return, he should find a stone at a certain crosse-way
before day.

While these things thus passed, the father of Alcippe dies, so that he is now
more Master of himself, then he was wont to be; and had not the commandment
of Amarillis been, and his private intent, which he held, the love which he
bare to his shepherdess, might happily have called him back into the woods:
for the favors of this unknown Lady could not put her out of his remembrance,
that if the great gifts which he had ordinarily of her, had not retained him in
this practice, after the two or three first voyages he had retired, though it
seemed, since that time, he was come into the favor of Pimander and Amasis.
But for that a young heart can hardly keep any thing hidden long, it fell out,
that Clindor, his dear friend, seeing him spend more then of custom, demanded
of him, how he came by his means. Whereto, at the first, answering diversely,
in the end he discovered all his fortune: and after, told him, that for all the
Art he could use, he could never know who she was. Clindor being very curious,
counseled him to cut out some half a foot of the frindge of the bed; and in
the day he should resort to the greatest houses which he might best suspect,
and there he might know her, either by the color, or by the piece. This he
did, and by this craft, my father had knowledge of her that thus favored him.
Yet he has closely concealed her name, that neither Clindor, nor any of his
children could ever know it. But, the first time that he went thither after
that, when he was about to rise in the morning, he coniured her, that she would
no longer hide her self from him, that it was labor lost, for he knew
assuredly that she was such an one.

She hearing her self named, was about to speak, yet held her peace, and
stayed till the old woman came: to whom, when Alcippe was risen from the bed,
she used such threatenings, thinking it was she that discovered it, that this
poor woman came trembling to my father, and swear he deceived himself. He
then laughing, told the craft he had used, and that it was the invention of
Clindor. She well eased with that which he had discovered, after a thousand
oaths to the contrary, returned to tell this to the Lady, who was risen of her
self, to hear their discourse: and when she knew, that Clindor was the
inuenter, she turned all her choler against him, easily pardoning Alcippe,
whom she could not hate; notwithstanding, after that day, she never sent more
for him. And because a spirit offended has nothing so sweet as revenge, this
woman turned so of every side, that she wrought a quarrel against Clindor; for
which he was enforced to combat with a cousin of Pimander, whom he slew; and
though he were pursued, yet he saved himself in Auverne, by the help of
Alcippe. But Amasis so wrought, that Alaricke, King of the Visigots, being then
at Toulouse, sent him prisoner to Vsson, with commandment to his Officers, to
deliver him over into the hands of Pimander, who looked for nothing more, then
to find commodity to send for him, that he might put him to death. Alcippe
left nothing unattempted to procure his pardon; but all was in vain: for he
had too strong a party against him. Therefore, seeing the assured loss of his
friend, he resolved upon any danger whatsoever, to save him. There was at Vsson
(as I told you) a place so strong, that it might seem a folly to any other to
undertake to get him out; yet his friendship, that found nothing so difficult,
as to live without Clindor, was such, as he made an assault to defeat them
which were of Pimanders part. So, making show to retire himself as discontent,
he went with twelve other, and one day of March, presenting themselves at the
Port of the Castle, in the habit of clownes, and carrying under their
garments, short swords, and baskets on their arms, as men that went to sell; I
have heard him say, there were three fortresses, one within another.

These resolute Pesants came to the utmost, where few of the Visigots remained;
for the most part were gone down to the base town, to see the market, and to
provide themselves of what was necessary for the garrison. Being there, they
offered their wares at so good a price, that (almost) all that were within, drew
down to buy. Then my father seeing the occasion good and fit, laying hold of
the neck of him that kept the gate, thrust his sword into his body. And every
of his companions (at the same instant) did like him, and entering in, put the
rest to the edge of the sword; and suddenly shutting the gate, they ran to
the prisons, where they found Clindor in a corner, and so many others, that
they judged (being armed) sufficient to defeat the rest of the garrison. To
make short, I tell you Madame, that though by the alarm, the gates of the
town were shut, yet they got out, without the loss of a man, though the
Governor (that in the end was slain) made all the resistance he could.

Thus you see Clindor saved, and Alaricke advertised, that it was my father
that had done this enterprise; whereof he was so much displeased, that he
demanded justice of Amasis: and she which would not lose his amity, was
willing enough to content him, and sent presently to apprehend my father; but
his friend gave him such aduertisements, that having set his battle in order,
he went out of this Country: and being incensed against Alaricke more then is
credible, went to put himself to a Nation that but lately was entered into
Gaul; and who being warrelike, seized on both the sides of Rosue and Arar, and
a good part of the Allobroges, and being desirous to enlarge their bounds, they
made continual war on the Visigots, Ostrogots and Romans. He was welcome
with all those whom he would conduct: and being known for a man of valor, he
was presently honored with diverse charges. But some years being passed,
Gondioch king of this Nation coming to die, Gondebaut his son succeeded to
the Crown of Bourgonny: and desirous to assure his affairs, at the beginning
made a peace with his neighbors, marrying his son Sigismund with one of the
daughters of Theodoricke king of the Ostrogots: and to please Alaricke, who was
infinitely offended with Alcippe, promised him to keep him no longer with him.
So that (with his leave) he withdrew to another people, which on the side of
Rhenes was seized of another part of Gaul, in despite of the Gauls, and of
the Romans. But this discourse would be cumbersome to you, if particularly I
should recount all his voyages. For from them he was constrained to go to
London, to the great King Arthur, who at the same time (as I have heard him
often tell) instituted the Order of the Knights of the Round Table.

From thence he was enforced to go to that Realm, which bears the name of
Port du Gaulois: and in the end, being sought for by Alaricke, he resolved to
pass the Sea, and to go to Bisantium, where the Emperor gave him charge of
his Galleys. But because the desire of returning into our Country, is above
all others, my father (though very great with these great Emperors) yet had
nothing nearer his heart, then once more to see his own chimnies smoke, where
so often he had been made a wanton; and it seemed Fortune gave him a fit
mean, when he least looked for it. But I have heard say sometimes by our
Druides, that Fortune is delighted to turn on the other side, when the change
is least expected. Alaricke came to die, and Thierry his son succeeded him,
who for that he had many brethren, had much to do to maintain his estate,
without heeding the hatred of his father. And so desirous to give content to
every man (for Bounty and Liberality are the two lovers that draw all loves to
them) at the entrance to his reign, he proclaimed a general abolition of all
offenses done in his kingdom. See a good beginning to compass the return of
Alcippe; yet might he not return, because Pimander had not forgotten the
injury received: notwithstanding, as the Visigots were the cause of his
banishment, so Fortune would have them serve as the instrument of his calling
back. Some little time before (as I told you) Arthur king of great Britain
had instituted the Knights of the Round Table, which was a certain number of
virtuous young men, obliged to go seek adventures, to punish evil doers, to
do justice to the oppressed, and maintain the honor of Ladies.

Now the Visigots of Spain, which then abode in Pampal^ne, in imitation of
that, chose out Knights, who were to go diverse ways, to show their force and
help. It fell out, that at this time one of the Visigots, after he had run
through many countries, came to Marsellis, where having made his defiance
accustomed, he overcame many of Pimanders Knights, whose heads he cut off, and
out of extreme cruelty, for proof of his valor, sent them to a Lady, whom he
served in Spain. Among others, Amarillis lost an uncle, who like my father,
unwilling to abide the quiet of the country life, had followed the mystery of
arms: and because that while he was abroad, she had been curious to have of
ordinary some news of him, by means of some young boys, which he and she
had appointed for it, as soon as this mis-hap was come to her knowledge, she
wrote to him, not in mind that he should return, but as acquainting him with
her displeasure. Love, which is never in a good soul, without replenishing it
with a thousand generous dessignes, would not suffer my father to know, that
Amarillis was offended with any man; but presently he takes a resolution to
chastise this wrong: and so, with the leave of the Emperor, came disguised
into the house of Cleante, who knowing his deliberation, attempted many ways
to divert him, but Love had stronger persuasions then he. And in a morning, as
Pimander was going to the Temple, Aloippe presents himself before him, armed
throughout, and though he had his vizard up, yet was he not known for his
beard, which grew since his departure. When Pimander knew his resolution, he
made much of him, for the hatred he bare to this stranger, by reason of his
arrogance, and cruelty, and presently caused the Visigot to be advertised by an
Herald of arms.

To make short, my father over came him, and presented the sword to Pimander;
and without the knowledge of any body, but Amarillis that saw him out of
Cleantes house, he returned to Bisantum, where he was received as before. In
this space, Cleante, that desired nothing more then to see him at liberty in
Forests, discovered him to Pimander, who was very desirous to know the name of
him that fought with the stranger. He at the first astonyed, in the end moved
with the virtue of this man, demanded if it were possible he should be alive?
Whereto Cleante answered, recounting to him all his fortunes, and all his long
voiages, and in the end, what account he was of, with all the Kings whom he
served. Without doubt (then said Pimander) the virtue of this man merits to be
esteemed, and not to be banished, besides the great pleasure he has done me;
Therefore let him return, and assure himself, that I will esteem of it, and
love him as he deserves: And hence forth I pardon him all that he has done
against me. Thus my father, after he had stayed 17. years in Greece, came into
his country, honored of Pimander and Amasis, who gave him the chief charge,
that was about their persons: But see what we are of our selves! One may
delight him, with all things in abundance, and the desire satiated remains
without force. As soon as my father enjoyed the favors of fortune, as he
could desire, behold, he lost the taste, and disdained them. And then some good
Angel, that was willing to draw him out of this gulf, where so often he was
like to make shipracke, represented to him (as I have heard him say) these
considerations: Come hither, Alcippe, what is thy desire? Is it not to live
happily, so long as Clotho spins out thy life? If this be it, or think thou
to find this good, but in quiet rest, or it may be, out of affairs, how can
they bear the ambition of the Court, since the happiness of ambition, is the
multiplicity of affairs? Have not thou sufficiently proved the inconstancy
whereof they are so full? at least have but this consideration in thee: Thy
ambition is to command many, every of them has the same desire that thou have;
these their desires propound the same ways; going the same ways, cannot they
come to the same that thou art, and attain it, since ambition is a place so
strait that it can hold but one alone, so that either you must oppose against a
thousand that will set on you, or else give way to them? If thou oppose, what
can be thy quiet, since you are to have an eye to your friends, and to your
enemies, and that day and night their weapons are whetting against thee? If
thou give way to them, there is nothing so miserable, as a country decayed.
Then, Alcippe, come again into thy self, and remember that thy fathers and
grandfathers have been much wiser then thou: be not more self willed, but fix
the diamond nail at the wheel of this fortune, which thou have so often
proved changeable: come back to the place of thy birth, leave this purple, and
change it into thy former habits; let thy lance be turned into a sheephook,
thy sword into a culter, to open the earth, and not the bellies of men; there
shall thou find that repose, which for so many years thou could never have
elsewhere.

See, Madam, the considerations which led my father to his forme^r profession.
And thus, to the great astonishment of all, but with the great praises of the
wiser sort, he came to his former estate, where he caused our ancient statutes
to be renewed, with so good liking of all men, that he might say he was at the
height of ambition, though he were impouerished, since he was so well beloved,
and honored of his neighbors, that they took him for an Oracle. And yet this
was not the end of his pains: for being after the death of Pimander retired to
himself, he had not been long in our grounds, but Lo^^e renewes his old
blows, there being of al Loves arrows, none sharper then that of
conversation. Then behold Amarillis so high in his thoughts, that she gave him
more pain then all his former travails. It was at that time that he took
again the device which he had borne, during all his voyages of the Pen of a
Iay, meaning to signify Peinjay. Of this love came great hatred; for Alce the
father of Astrea, was infinitely amorous of this Amarillis, and Amarillis,
during my fathers exile, had permitted this suite by the commandment of her
parents, and at this time she cannot withdraw it, without so great trouble,
that he is ready to despair. On the other side, Alcippe, that casting off the
habit of a knight, but had not left the courage, could not suffer a Rival,
came to handy strokes manytimes with Alce, who wanted not courage: and a man
may think, but for the parents of Amarillis, who resolve to bestow her on
Alcippe, there had been much mischief between them. But though by this
marriage they cut off the boughs of this quarrel; yet their hatred lived so,
and grew so high, that there was never familiarity between Alce and Alcippe.
And this is (said Celadon, addressing himself to Siluie) fair Nymph, which
you heard them talk when you were in our hamlet; for I am the son of
Alcippe, and of Amarillis, and Astrea is the daughter of Alce, and Hipolite. It
may be, you may think it strange, that not parting from our woods and
pastures, I know so many particulars of the neighbor Countries. But, Madame,
all that I have learned, was but from my father, who recounting unto me his
life, has been driven withal, to tell me the things you have heard.

So ended Celadon his discourse, and indeed, not without pain, for speaking
hurt him much, having his stomach as yet distempered: and this was the cause
that he recounted the History much shorter then otherwise he could. But
Galathes rested more satisfied then he imagined, for that she knew of what
Ancestors this shepherd was descended, whom she loved.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
WHile the day lasted, these fair Nimphs yielded so good company to Celadon,
that had he not been displeased with the change of Astrea, he had had no cause
of grief; for these were both fair and full of judgment: yet in the case
wherein he was, all this was not enough to stay him from wishing himself to be
alone. And because he saw it could not be without the help of the night, that
would constrain them to withdraw, he wished for it every hour. But when he
thought to have been alone, the^ found he more company: for the night being
come, and these Nimphs go^ into their chambers, his thoughts came to accompany
him with so cruel remembrance, that they made him feel their coming
otherwise then he wished. What despaires presented not themselves to him? None
that Love might bring forth, especially to a love so hopeless. For if against
the unjust sentence of his Mistrisse, he opposed his innocence, suddenly the
execution of the arrest came before his eyes. And as he fell out of one
thought into another, his hand, by chance, touched the ribon where Astreas ring
was, which he had wound about his arm. Oh! what deadly remembrances came into
his spirit? He represented to himself all the anger, which at that instant she
had painted in her face; all the cruelty his soul could invent, both by words
and actions, and all the disdaines, with which she had pronounced the award of
his banishment.

Staying somewhile on that last mischance, he began to remember the change of
his fortune, how happy he had been, how highly she had favored him, and how
long it had lasted; from that he came, to what she had done for him; how for
his sake she had scorned diverse honest shepherds; what small reckoning she
made of her fathers will; the displeasure of her mother; and the difficulties,
which arose against their loves: then he went on, bethinking himself, that the
fortunes of Love are more assured then of other things, and what a little
remained to him of so many favors, which at last came but to one bracelet of
hair which he had on his arm, and a little picture which he hung at his
neck, the case whereof he often kissed: as for the ring which he had on his
other arm, he conceived that rather of force, the^ of good will, she gave him
that. But then, at that instant he remembered the letters she had written to
him, during his good fortune, and which he bare ordinarily about him, in a bag
of silk. Oh! how great was his anguish? for he feared, that the Nymphs
searching his clothes, had found it. In this doubt he calls loud upon little
Merill, for he was lodged in a Wardrobe hard by, to attend him. The boy hearing
him call twice or thrice, came to know what he would. My little friend (said
Celadon) know thou not what are become of my clothes? for I have something
thereabout, that I would be sorry to lose. Your clothes (said he) are not far
off, but there is nothing in them: for I have searched them.

Ah, said the shepherd, thou deceiuest thy self, Merill, I have something
there that I had rather keep then my life; and then turning on the other side
the bed, begun to bewail and torment himself some good while. Merill, that
heard him, one way, was loath to displease him; and on the other, stood in
doubt, whether he should tell him what he knew. In the end, not being able to
suffer to see him any longer in this pain, he told him he need not so much
disquiet himself, and that the Nymph Galathee loved him too well, not to
restore him the thing he made show to be so desirous of. Then Celadon turning
toward him, And how (says he) has the Nymph that which I demand? I believe
(said he) it is the same. At least, I found nothing but a little bag full of
papers; and as I was about to have brought them before you slept, she spyed
them, and took them from me. O Lord, then (said the shepherd) all things fall
out the worst they may; and turning on the other side, would talk to him no
more. In this mean time had Galathee read the letters of Celadon: for it was
true that she had taken them from Merill, following the ordinary curiosity of
them which love: But she had straightly charged him to say nothing, because she
had a purpose to give him the^, but he should not know she had seen them. At
that time Siluie carried a light before, and Leonide was somewhere else, and of
necessity, now she was to be of counsel. We shall see (said Siluie) if this
shepherd be the merchant he would seem to be, and if he be not amorous: for I
assure my self, these papers will tell tales, and then set it on the table. By
this had Galathee undone the string, which was so well tied, that the water had
done no hurt; yet there were some papers wet, which she drew out as leasurely
as she could, lest she might tear them, and having spread them on the table,
the first she laid her hand on, was a letter in this sort:

What is it you undertake, Celadon? into what confusion go you about to thrust
your self? Believe me that counsel you like a friend; give over your
dessigne to do me service: it is too full of discommodities. What contentment
hope you for? I am so insupportable, that you were as good undertake a thing
impossible; you must serve, you must suffer, you must have neither eyes nor
love, but for me; for think not that I will have part with any other, nor that
I will receive a good will that is but half mine. I am suspicious, I am
jealous, I am hard to be won, and easy to be lost; soon offended, but very
hardly appeased; the least doubt in me, is assurance. My will must be as the
Destinies, my opinions as from reason, and my commandments laws inviolable.
Believe me, for this once, retire thy self, shepherd, from this dangerous
Labyrinth, and fly from a dessigne so curious. I know my self better then you
do: do not you imagine in your self, that in the end you can change my nature;
I shall break sooner then bend. And do not you hereafter complain of me, if
now you believe not what I tell you.

Never think me to be that I am (said Galathee) if this shepherd be not in
love; for see a beginning which is not small. There is no doubt (said Siluie)
being so honest a man. And how (replied Galathee) are you of opinion, that he
must of necessity love, being so? Yes, Madam, (said she) as I have heard them
say, Because that the lover desires nothing more then to be beloved; to be
beloved, he must show himself amiable: and that which makes a man amiable, is
that which makes him honest. At this word Galathee gave her another letter,
which was wet, to dry at the fire, and in the mean time she took another,
which was thus:

You will not believe that I love you, but desire that I should believe you
love me: if I love you not, what will you gain by the belief which I have of
your affection? It may be this opinion may bind me to do so. Hardly, Celadon,
would this weak consideration effect it, if your merits and services which I
have received of you, had not already done it. Now, behold in what state your
affairs are, I would you should not only know that I believe you love me; but
moreover, I will that you assure your self, that I love you. And among other
things, one only should make it unquestionable: if I loved you not, what would
make me neglect the contentment of my parents? If you consider how much I do
owe them, you may (in some sort) know the quality of my love, since it not
only counterpoyses, but weighs down so great a weight. Farewell, and be no
more incredulous.

By this time Siluie brought back the letter, and Galathee told her (with
great grief) that he loved, and more, that he was infinitely beloved, and read
the letter to her again, which struck her to the heart, seeing she was to
assault that place where so strong an enemy was already victorious: for by
those letters she judged that the humor of this shepherdess was not to be an
half Mistress, but with a right absolute power commanded over those, whom she
vouchsafed to entertain for hers: she liked well of this judgment; when she
read the letter that had been dried, it was thus:

Licidas told my Phillis, that yesterday you were in a naughty humor; am I the
cause, or you? if I, it is without cause: for would not I always love you, and
be beloved of you? And, have you not a thousand times sworn to me, that you
desire but this, to be content: if you, then you do me wrong, to dispose,
without my knowledge, of any thing that belongs unto me; for by the donation
which you have made, and which I have received, both your self, and all that
is yours, do appertain to me. Advertise me then, and I shall forthwith
perceive whether I may give you permission: but in the mean season, take this
as a forbidding.

With what empery (said then Galathee) does this shepherdess deal? She does
him no wrong (answered Siluie) since she gave him warning from the beginning;
and without fiction, if it be she that I think, she has some reason, being
one of the most fair, and complete persons that ever I saw. Her name is
Astrea, and that which makes me think so, is this word of Phillis, knowing
that these two shepheardesses are sworn friends: and yet, as I may tell you,
though she be so extreme fair, yet this is that that makes her least amiable;
for she has so many other perfections, that this is least apparent in her.
This discourse served but to wound the deeper, since they discovered nothing
but the greatest difficulties in her dissigne. And because she would not that
Siluie as then should know, she shut up the papers, and went to bed, not
without a great company of sundry thoughts, among which, sleep came stealing
by little and little.

It was hardly day, when the little Merill went out of the shepherds chamber,
who had complained all night, and his travel and his sickness had but little
asswagement till the coming of the morning. And because Galathee had
commanded him to mark particularly whatsoever Celadon did, and to repeat it
to her, he went to tell her what he had learned. At that time Galathee being
awaked, talked so loud with Leonide, that Merill hearing them knocking at the
door, Madame (quoth he) all this night could I not sleep, for the poor
Celadon is almost dead, by reason of the papers which you took from me
yesterday; and because I saw him very desperate, I was constrained to give him
some ease, by telling him you had them. How? (says the Nymph) knows he that
I have them? Yes certainly, Madam (answered Merill,) and I assure my self, he
will entreat you to restore them; for he esteems them very dearly: and if
you had heard him, as I did, I doubt not but he would make you pity him. Ah!
tell me, Merill (said the Nymph) what he said. Madame (said he) after he had
asked, if I had not seen his papers, and that in the end he knew you had them,
he turned like a man transported on the other side, and said: Now all things
fall out the worst they may: and after he had been silent some while, and that
he thought I was in my bed, I heard him sigh very loud, and after uttered
these words: Astrea, Astrea, ought these banishments to be the recompense of my
services? If your love be changed, why do you blame me, to excuse your self?
If I have failed, why tell you me not my fault? Is there no more justice in
heaven, then there is pity in your soul? Alas! if there be, why feel not I
some favor, that having no power to die, as despair will have me, I may do so
at least as the rigor of Astrea commands? Ha rigorous! If I may not call it
cruel commandment in such an accident as this, who could take a less
resolution then that of death? would it not give sign of less love, then of
great courage? And here staying a while, he thus began again:

But wherefore (my traitorous hopes) come you flattering to me? is it possible
you should dare to come near me? do you say she will change? Consider then
(enemy of my repose) what likelihoode is there, that so much time spent, so
many services and affections acknowledged, so many disdaynes borne up, and
impossibilities overcome, have done so little, and yet only absence may? Hope
rather for a favorable tomb at thy death, then a favorable repentance from
her. After many such discourses, he held his peace a great while: but when I
was gone back, I heard him shortly after begin again his complaints, which
he held on until day; and all that I could observe, was but his complaints
which he made against one Astrea, whom he accused of change and cruelty.

If Galathee had known less of Celadons affairs by the letters of Astrea,
she had learned so much from the report of Merill, that for her own rest, it
had been good for her to have been more ignorant. Yet in flattering her
self, she conceited to her self, that the disdain of Astrea might make the
way more easy to that which she desired. Young Scholar in love! that knows
not that Love never dies in a generous heart, till the root be wholly plucked
up. In this hope she wrote a little scroule, which she folded up, and put among
the papers of Astrea. After, giving the bag to Merill: Hold here (said she)
Merill: restore this bag to Celadon, and tell him, I would I were able to
give him all the contentment he wants; that if he be well, and would see me,
tell him that I am not well this morning. She said this, that he might have
leisure to ouerlook his papers, and read that which she had written to him.
Merill went forth; and because Leonide was in an other bed, she could neither
see the bag, nor hear the charge which she had given him: but as soon as he
was gone, she called her, and made her come to bed to her: and after some other
talk, she spoke in this sort to her: You know, Leonide, what I told you
yesterday of this shepherd, how much it imports me that he love me, or that
he not love me; since that time I have understood of his businesses, more then
I would I had: you have heard that which Merill has reported to me, and that
which Siluie said of the perfections of Astrea: so that (she went on) since the
place is taken, I see a double difficulty arise against our enterprise.

This happy shepherdess has much offended him, and a generous heart will
hardly suffer a disdain without any sense of it. Madam, answered Leonide, on
the one side, I wish you were contented: and on the other, I am well pleased
with the disco^modities, for you do your self so much wrong, if you continue
thus, that I know not if ever you can deface it. Think you, though you be
never so secret, that this life of yours will not be known? and what will
become of you, if it be discovered? the judgment which was never wanting in
the rest of your actions, is it possibile that in this accident it should fail
you? what would you judge of another, that should lead this life? You will
answer, you do no evil. Ah, Madam, it is not sufficient for a person of your
quality to be void of crime, but you be so also of blame. If this were a man
worthy of you, I could brook it well: but though Celadon be one of the chief of
this country, yet is he but a shepherd, and is known for no other: And this
vain opinion of good, or ill luck, shall it have such power over you, that it
shall so much abate your courage, that you will equal these keepers of sheep,
these Rusticks, and these halfe-Sauages, to yourselfe? for Gods sake come to
your self, and consider with what mind I speak these words. She had gone
forward, had not Galathee in choler interrupted her, I have told you, I would
not have you use this discourse: I know not on what I shall resolve: when I
ask your counsel, give it me, and once for all, talk no more to me of it, if
you will not displease me.

At this word, she turned on the other side, in such fury, that Leonide knew
well she had thoroughly angered her. Indeed there is nothing strikes more to the
quick, then to oppose honor against Love: for though all the reasons of Love
be vanquished, yet will Love still be strong in his will. Soon after, Galathee
turns again and says: I never thought, till now, that you had had a mind to
be my governor: but now, I begin to have such a belief, that you figure such a
thing to your self. Madam, answered she, I never mistook my self so much,
but I know what I owe to you: but since you take in so ill part, that which my
duty made me speak, I protest from henceforth, I will never give you occasion
for this cause, to enter into choler against me. This is a strange thing in
you, replied Galathee, that you must always have reason in your opinion: what
likelihood is there, that any should know that Celadon is here? There are no
more then we three, Merill and my Nurse his mother: as for Merill, he goes not
forth: and besides he has discretion enough for his age; for my Nurse, her
fidelity is well known to me, and it is partly by her desire, that all is thus
carried: for as having told her what the Druide foretold me, she that loves me
more tenderly, then if I were her own child, counseled me not to contemn
this aducrtisement: and because I propounded the difficulty of the great
number, which would resort to the place where I am, her self advised me to
make show, that I would take physic. And what is your purpose, said Leonide?
To work so (answered she) that this shepherd may wish me well, and till that
be, not to let him go away; that if once he come to love me, I may leave the
direction of the rest to Fortune.

Madame, said Leonide, God give you all the contentment you desire. But suffer
me to tell you this once, you go about to ruin your self in your reputation.
What time must there be to the rooting out of an affection so thoroughly
grounded, which he bears to Astrea, whose beauty and virtue, they say, is
without a second? But presently interrupted the Nymph, She scorns him, she is
angry with him, she has driven him away: think you not, he will have courage
enough to leave her? Oh! Madam, put this out of your hopes (said Leonide:) if
he have no corage^, he will never feel this: and if he have, a man generous
will never turn aside for the difficulties. Remember your self, for example,
how many contempts have you laid on Lindamer, and how cruelly have you handled
him, and what has he done the less, for these disdaines, or cruelties. But be
it so, that Celadon, because he is a shepherd, have not the courage of
Lindamor, and that he has bentat the blows of Astrea, what good hope you
there of? think you that a spirit once deceived, will easily be deceived the
second time in one kind? No, no, Madam, howsoever he be both by birth and
conversation of the homelier sort, yet can he not be so, but he will dread the
fire when the smart of it is yet in his soul. There must be (and that is it
which you may best hope for) some time allowed to heal him soundly of this
burning, before he can turn his eyes upon some such like object. And what time
will it ask? and in the mean time can it be possible to let, but that the
guard which is in the base court, will come to the knowledge of it, or in seeing
him (for you cannot always keep him close in one chamber) or by the prattle
of Merill, who as discreet as he is for his age, yet is but a child? Leonide,
said she, cease to travel longer in this business; my resolution is such as
I told you: if you will make me believe you love me, favor my design in what
you may, and for the rest, refer it to my care. This morning, if the
weakness of Celadon permit it (me thought yesterday he was reasonable well)
you may lead him into the garden; for this day I find my self not well, and I
shall hardly rise out of my bed, tell toward night. Leonide being very sad,
gave no other answer, but that she would be ready to do that, that might be to
her content. While they were thus discoursing, Meril did his message, and
having found the shepherd awake, gave him the good morrow, in the name of the
Nymph, and presented to him the papers. Oh! how presently he raised himself in
the bed? he made him open the curtains, and windows, not having the leisure
to rise, such haste he made to see that, which had cost him so much sorrow. He
opened the little bag, and after he had many times kissed it; O secretary
(said he) of my life most happy, how came thou into the hands of strangers!
At this word he laid all the letters on the bed; and that he might see if he
wanted any one, he placed them in their order according to the time he received
them, and seeing there remained a little scrowle, he opened it and read these
words:

CEladon, I would have you know, that Galathee loves you, and that the heavens
have permitted the disdain of Astrea, for that they like not, that a
shepherdess should any longer possess that which a Nymph desires:
acknowledge your good hap, and refuse it not.

The astonishment of the shepherd was great: notwithstanding, seeing that
Merill observed his actions, he would make no show of it. Then locking them
again together, and lying down in his bed, he asked who gave them to him? I
took them (said he) out of my Ladies deske; and but for the desire I had to
put you out of the pain wherein I saw you, I durst not have gone for them, for
that she is not well at ease. And who is with her (demanded Celadon?) The two
Nymphs which you saw yesterday, where of the one is Leonide, the Niece of
Adamas, the other is Siluie, the daughter of Diante the glorious: and indeed,
she is not his daughter, without reason; for she is the most lofty in her
behavior that you shall lightly see.

So received Celadon the first advertisement of the good will of Galathee, for
though there were neither cipher nor seal to the scroule he had received, yet
judged he that it would not have been done without her knowledge. And then he
foresaw that this would be a surcharge to his sorrows, and that he must
undergo it. Seeing then, that half of the day was almost passed, and finding
himself in good case, he would keep no longer in bed; thinking, that the
sooner he left it, the sooner he might take his leave of these fair Nymphs.
And being risen in this deliberation, as he was ready to go out to walk, he
met with Leonide and Siluie, whom Galathee (not daring to rise, nor yet show
her self to him, for shame of the scroule she had writ) had sent to give him
entertainment. They went down into the garden: And because Celadon would hide
his sorrow, he showed a countenance as pleasant as he could dissemble: and
seeming to be curious to know every thing he saw, Fair Nymphs (said he to
them) is it not heereabout that the Fountain of the truth of Love is? I am
very willing, if it be possible, to see it. It is hard by, answered the Nymph,
for we must go down but this great Wood. But it is impossible to see it, and
you must thank this fair that is the cause, poynting to Siluie. I know not
(replied she) why you accuse me: For, for my part, I never heard the sword
blamed which cut the fool that laid his finger under it. It is true, answered
Leonide: but if I be not deceived, that which wounds, and your beauty, are not
in the number of those, that are seen without homicide. Such as it is
(answered Siluie, with a little blushing) it has lines strong enough, ever to
let that go, that it has once tied up.

She said this vpbrayding her with the infidelity of Agis, who having sometimes
loved her, for aielousie, or for an absence of two months, was entirely
changed: and for Polemas, whom another beauty had robbed her of, the which she
understood well enough. So I confess, my sister, replied she, my lines are
easy to slide, but that is, because I would never take the pain to stiffen
them. Celadon hearing, with great pleasure, their pretty disputation, that they
might not break off too soon, he said to Siluie, Fair Nymph, since from you
the difficulty proceeds, of seeing this admirable Fountain, we shall a little
be obliged unto you, if from your self we know how this fell out. Celadon,
answered the Nymph, somewhat smiling, You have business enough of your own,
without need to search into any other: yet if curiosity can have any place in
your love, this prattler Leonide, if you request her, will tell you the end,
since without any motion, she has so well told the beginning. Sister, answered
Leonide, your beauty makes all them to speak much better that discourse of it:
and since you give me leave to tell of one effect the world should take
knowledge of, yet lest we too much should trouble the shepherd, I will abridge
for this bout as much as I can possibly. Not for that, interrupted the
shepherd, but to give leisure to this Nymph, to yield you the like. Make no
doubt of that, replied Siluie, but according to her usage of me, I shall see
what I have to do. So what by the one, and what by the other, Celadon shall
learn from their own mouth, their life in particular: and that in the
delivery he might better hear them, they placed him between them, and walking
a soft pace, Leonide began in this manner:

The History of Siluie.
THey that say, that to be beloved, there needs nothing but to love, have not
tried it neither in the eyes, nor courage of this Nymph, otherwise they were to
know, that as the water of the Fountain runs incessantly from the spring, so
the Love which rises from this fair, wanders from her as far as it can. If
when you have heard the discourse which I am to make to you, you will not
auerre that that I say, I am willing you should accuse me of small judgment.

Amasis, the mother of Galathee, has a son, named Clidamon, accompanied with
all the amiable virtues, that a person of his age and quality may have; for he
seems to be borne to all that pertain to Arms or Ladies. It is about three
years since, that to give some proof of his gentle nature, with the
permission of Amasis, he became servant to all the Nymphs, and that not by
election, but by lot: For, having put all the names of the Nymphs into a
vessel, and all the young Knights into another, before all the assembly he
took the youngest among us, and the youngest among them; to the man he gave
the vessel of the Nymphs, and to the maid, that of the men. And then after the
sound of the trumpets, the Youth drew, and the first name that came out, was
Siluie: and the same instant the lot was drawn by the youngest Nymph, who drew
that of Clidamon. Great was the applause of every one, but greater the
gentleness of Clidamon, who after he had received the scroule, came with one
knee on the ground, to kiss the hands of this fair Nymph, who out of
shamefastness would not suffer him, without the commandment of Amasis; who
said, it was the least part of service that was due unto her, in the honor of
so great a god as Love. After her all the rest were called: to some it fell out
as they desired, to others not: so it was, that Galathee had a most
accomplished person, named Lindamor, who as then was but lately come from the
Army of Meroue. As for mine, he was called Agis, the most inconstant and
deceitful that ever was.

Now of those that were thus bestowed, some served only in show, others of
good will, ratified to these fair the devotion which fortune had made of them:
and they that maintained themselves best, were such as before had conceived
some affection. Among others, the young Ligdamon was one; this man fell to
Siluie, a Nymph indeed amiable enough, but not for him, who had formerly set
his mind otherwhere. And certainly, it was his good fortune to be absent
then, for he would never have done the fained homage to Siluie that Amasis
commanded, and that might happily have wrought him some disgrace: for you must
know, (gentle shepherd) that he was brought up very young among us, being not
above ten years of age, when he was placed here; for the rest, so fair and
direct in all his actions, that there was not a woman that thought not well of
him: and above all, Siluie being very near his age. At the beginning, their
ordinary conversation engendered the amity of a brother to a sister, such as
their knowledge was capable to receive. By degrees, as Ligdamon grew in age, so
likewise he increased in affection, so that his childhood changing into a state
more settled, about the age of fourteen or fifteen years, he began to
change his will into desires, and by little and little, his desires into
passions: and yet he lived with that discretion, that Siluie had never
knowledge that her self caused this desire. When he attained to some good
understanding, and that he knew his evil, he judged within a while, what small
hope there was of healing, not one of Siluies humors being likely to be hid
from him: So that the joy and liveliness which was in his countenance, and all
his actions, were turned into sadness, and his sadness into so heavy a
melancholy, that there was no body but might perceive the alteration. Siluie
was not one of the last that asked him the cause, but she could draw out
nothing but broken answers. In the end, seeing him continue still in this
manner of life, one day when she began to complain of his small amity, and
reproching him that she had obliged her to conceal nothing from her, she heard
that he was no more able to restrain himself, but that a deep sigh escaped
from him in stead of answer. This brought her to be of opinion, that love might
be the cause of his evil. And, see, if the poor Ligdamon did not discreetly
carry his actions, since she was never able to imagine her self to be the
cause.

I believe well, that the humor of this Nymph (which shrunk not a jot from
this purpose) might be, in part, the occasion. For hardly do we think of a
thing estranged from our own intents. But, it must be confessed, that herein
his wisdom was great, and his coldness also, that it could so wholly cover
the heat of his affection. She then pressed him more then before, that if it
be love, she promised him all the assistance, and all the good offices that
might be hoped for from their amity. The more he did to avoid it, the more
she desired to know it: in the end, not being able to defend it any longer, he
protested to her, it was love: but he had made an oath never to name the party.
For (said he) to love, is a great presumption in me; but constrained by so many
beauties, it may be excused: and to dare name her, what excuse can cover the
discovery of my rashness? Is this the friendship (presently answered Siluie)
which you bear me? Truly (replied Ligdamon) I have done it, and your
commandment also, which I beseech you set before your eyes, and this glass,
which will make you see what you desire to know. At that word he took up that
which hung at her girdle, and held it before her eyes. Think you how she was
surprised, incontinently knowing what he would say; and she has since sworn
to me, that she thought at first it had been Galathee, of whom he would have
spoken. In the mean time that he had stood to behold her, she stood as
ravished to consider his simplicity in choler against him, but much more
against her self, seeing well she had drawn this declaration by force from
his mouth. Notwithstanding, her high courage would not suffer her to make any
long defense for the lustice of Ligdamon. For at an instant she lifts her self
up, and without speaking to him, departs full of despite, that any durst
presume to love her arrogant beauty, that judges none worthy of it. The
faithful Ligdamon stayed, but without a soul, and as an insensible Statue. In
the end, coming again to himself, he went as well as he could, to his
lodging out of which he went not some good time, because the knowledge which he
had of the small love of Siluie touched him so to the quick, that he fell
sick, so that there was small hope of life, when he resolved to write her such
a letter.

The loss of my life was not of force sufficient to discover unto you the
rashness of your servant, without your express commandment; yet, if you
judge that I must die and hold my peace, say also, that your eyes must have had
less absolute power over me. For if at the first summons which their beauty
made me, I could not defend my self from giving them my soul, how having
been so often urged, could I have refused the acknowledgement of that gift?
yet, if I have offended in offering my heart to your beauty, I am willing, for
the fault I have committed, in presenting to such merits, a thing of so small
value, to sacrifice unto you my life, without sorrowing for the loss, either
of the one, or of the other, since they be no more pleasing unto you.

This letter was brought to Siluie, when she was alone in her Chamber. It is
true, that I came in at the same time, and indeed well for Ligdamon; for behold
the humor of this fair Nymph: She had conceived so great a despite toward
him, after he had discovered his affection, that not only she blotted out the
remembrance of the amity passed, but so lost her will, that Ligdamon was like a
thing indifferent to her. So that, when she heard that every one despaired of
his recovery, she was no more moved at it, then if she had never seen him. I,
that particularly observed it, could not tell what to judge of it, but that her
youth made her easily lose the love of men absent. But when now I saw her
refuse that which one delivered her in his behalf, I knew well that they
needed no bad messenger between them. This was the cause that I took the letter
that she had refused, and which the young boy that brought it (by his masters
commandment) had left on the table. She then less heedfull then she would
have been, ran after me, and entreated me not to read it. I will see it
(said I) and it be but for the denial you make. Then began she to blush, and
said, Read it not, good sister, bind me to you for it, I conjure you by our
friendship. And what shall that be then (answered I) if it may suffer you to
conceal any thing from me? Think you, that if it allow you dissimulation
enough to hide from me, it shall not give me curiosity enough to discover you.
And how then (said she) is there no more hope of your discretion? No more (said
I) then of sincerity in your amity. She staid some while silent, looking on me,
and drawing near me, said, At least promise me, that you will not look on it,
till I have discoursed to you all that is past. I am content (said I) provided
that you prove not a liar. After she had sworn to me, she would tell me all
truly, and I sworn, not to make show of it, she recounted unto me all that I
have said of Ligdamon: and at this present (going forward) he comes to send me
this letter, and I have enough of his complaints, or rather, of his faynings.
But (answered I) what if they be true? And if they be (said she) what have I to
do with his follies? For that reason (said I) that they are bound to help the
miserable, that have thrown him down headlong. And what can I do to his
evil (replied she?) Can I do less then live, since I am in the world?
Wherefore has he his eyes? Why comes he where I am? All these excuses (said I)
are nothing worth: for you are (without doubt) accessory to his evil. If you
were of less perfection, if you could make your self less lovely, think you
he would be brought to this extremity? And truly (said she, smiling to me) You
are very pleasant, to charge me with this fault. What would you have me to be,
if I should not be the same that I am? And why, Siluie (answered I?) Know you
not that he that puts a weapon in the hands of a mad man, is in part culpable
of the harm he does? And why should not you be so, since this beauty, which
the heavens, at your birth, have given you, has been by you so curiously
sharpened with so many virtues and amiable perfections, which no eye (without
being stricken) can look on? And shall not you be blamed for the murders which
your cruelty commits? Behold your self (Siluie) there is no necessity that you
should be less fair, nor less replenished with perfections, but you are to
study the more to make your self good, as you are fair, and to put as much
sweetness into your soul, as the heavens have in your face. But the mischief
is, your eyes, to do the more hurt, have taken all away, and have left nothing
at all but rigor and cruelty.

Now gentle shepherd, that which makes me so affectionate to the defense of
Ligdamon, was, that besides that we are some what allied, he was also well
esteemed of all that knew him, and I knew he was brought to very hard terms.
Then after such like talk, I opened the letter, and read it aloud that she
might understand it: but she cast not so much as her eye to it, which I found
very strange, and well foresaw, that if I used not wondrous great force, I
should hardly draw from her any good remedy for my sick patient: which urged
me to tell her, at the first blow, that in any case I would not suffer Ligdamon
to undo himself. Good sister, said she, since you are so pitiful, heal him
your self. It is not of me, said I, that his healing depends; but I assure
you, that if you hold in this sort toward him, as you have done for the time
passed, I will cause you to have some displeasure: for I will make Amasis
understand of it, and there shall be no one of our companions, to whom I will
not tell it. So you shall play the fool well enough, replied she. Doubt not,
answered I: for to make short, I love Ligdamon, and I will not see him lost, so
far as I can help it. You speak very wisely, Leonide, (said she in choler:)
these are the offices that I always expected from your amity. My amity,
answered I, should be the same for you against him, if he had done the wrong.
At this we stayed some good while without speaking. In the end, I asked her
what her resolution was. Such as you will, said she, provided, you do me not
the displeasure, to publish the follies of Ligdamon; for, though I cannot be
blamed, yet it would trouble me to have it published. See (cried I out the^)
what humor is this of yours, Siluie? You fear it should be known that a man
loves you, and you fear not to have it known that you have caused his death.
Because (said she) they may suspect the former to be produced by some consent
on my part, but not the latter. Let us leave this, replied I, and resolve your
self, I will that Ligdamon for the time to come, be entertained in another
sort. And then I went on, that she should assure her self that I would not
suffer him to die, and that I would have her write to him in such a fashion,
that he might no more despair, that when he were recovered, I was contented
she should use him as she list, provided, that she let him live. I had pain
enough to obtain this grace from her, though I threatened to make it known:
so, after long debate, and having made her begin again, once, twice or
thrice, in the end she wrote in this sort:

IF there be any thing in you that pleases me, your death is the least of all
other, the acknowledgement of your fault has satisfied me, and I will have no
other revenge of your boldness, then the pain which you shall have. Know your
self hereafter, and you shall know me. Farewell, and live.

I wrote these words at the end of the letter, to the end he might hope for
better, having so good a second.

LEonide has put the pen into this Nymphs hand. Love wills it; your justice
requires it; her endeavor commands it: but her obstinate conceit has great
defense: since this favor is the first I could procure you, cherish your self
and hope.

These letters were brought him so luckily, that yet having strength enough to
read them, he saw the commandment that Silue had given him to live: and
because till then, he would never use any remedy, that he might not disobey the
Nymph, he governed himself so, that in short time he was better, were it for
that his disease having spent its force, was declining, or that the contentment
of the soul was a good remedy for the pains of the body: so it was, that
after that, his disease daily lessened. But this so little moved this cruel
beauty, that she changed not one whit toward him, and when he was well, the
most favorable answer he could have, was; I love you not, neither do I hate
you, rest contented, that of all those which seek me, you are he that
displeases me least. If he or I requested some better declaration, she uses
such cruel words to us, that no other but her courage could imagine, nor other
affection bear them, then that of Ligdamon.

But not to draw this discourse in length, Ligdamon loves, and served always
after, without any likelihood of hope, but that which I have told you, until
the time that Clidaman was chosen by fortune to serve her, then he had almost
lost resolution; and had it not been, that he knew by me, that he should be no
better used, I know not what would have become of him. Yet though this gave him
some comfort, the greatness of his Rival gave him more of jealousy. I
remember once he gave me this answer, upon that which I told him, that he
should not grieve so much for Clidaman: Fair Nymph (answered he) I will freely
tell you whence my care proceeds, and then judge if I have wrong. It is long
time since I have proved, that Siluie cannot be moved, neither by fidelity of
affection, nor by extremity of Love, that it is without doubt that she will
never be wounded on that side. Notwithstanding, as I have learned of the wise
Adamas, your uncle, every person is subject to one certain force, the stroke
whereof they cannot avoid, when ought it is touched. And what may I think, may
be that of this fair, if it be not the greatness and power, and, as I fear,
the fortune and not the merits of Clidaman; his greatness, and not his
affection? But indeed, herein he has wrong: for neither the love of Ligdamon,
nor the greatness of Clidaman, can ever move one glance of good will in
Siluie. And believe not but love reserues her for an example to others,
purposing to punish her by some unusual means, Now at that time there fell out
a great testimony of her beauty, or at least of the force she has to make her
beloved.

It was the day so celebrated, which every year we make holy, the sixth of the
Moon of July, and on which Amasis used to make that solemn sacrifice, as well
for the honor of the Feast, as for being the day of Galathees brith. When they
were at Sacrifice, there came into the Temple, a number of men, clad in
mourning, in the midst of whom was a Knighr, so full of Majesty above the
rest, that he was easily judged to be their master. He was so sad and
melancholy, that it appeared that he had somewhat in his soul that troubled
him. His habit black, infashion of a mantle, trayning on the ground, which
kept the beauty of his proportion from sight, but his face uncovered, and his
head bare, the hair where of yellow and crisped, shamed the Sun, and drew the
eyes of all men to him. He came with a stately pace to the place where Amasis
was, and after he had kissed her robe, he withdrew, waiting till the sacrifices
were done, and by fortune, whether good or bad for him, I know not, he stood
right ouer-against Siluie. A strange effect of love! He had no sooner set his
eyes upon her, but he knew her, though he never saw her before; and to be
better assured, he demanded of one of his followers, who knew us all: his
answer was accompanted with a deep sigh from the stranger: and all the while
the sacrifice lasted, his eye never went off her. At last, the sacrifice being
ended, Amasis returns to her Palace, where audience being given him, he spoke
before them all in this sort:

Madam, though the mourning you see in my garments, be much more black in my
soul, yet can it not equal the cause I have. And though my loss be excreme,
yet think I not I am the only man that have lost; for you are particularly
weakened in your faithful servants, of one, which (it may be) was not the least
affectioned, nor the most unprofitable in your service. This consideration has
made me hope to obtain of you some revenge of his death against his murderer.
But since I entered into this Temple, I have lost all hope; judging, that if the
desire of revenge die in me, that am the brother of the wronged, by much
stronger reasou should it shrink in you, Madame, in whom the compassion of the
dead, and the service which he vowed you, may without more ado, cause some
good will to arise. Notwithstanding, since I see the arms of my brothers
murderer, prepared already against me; not to avoid such a death, but to
instruct others, I will tell you as briefly as I can, the fortune of him whom I
lament. Though, Madame, I have not the honor to be known to you, yet, I assure
my self, that at the naming of my brother, who never loved but your service,
you will acknowledge me for your most humble servant. His name was Aristander,
and we were both the sons of that great Cle^mire, which for your service
visited so often the Tyber, the Rhine, the Danu^y: and for that I was the
younger, it may be, about nine years, as soon as he saw me able to bear
Arms, he sent me into the Army of the great Meroue, the delight of men, and
the most pleasing Prince that ever came into Gaul. To tell you why my father
sent me rather to Meroue, then to Thierry, King of the Visigots, or to that of
the Burgonyans, it will be hard for me. Yet I am of opinion, it was, that I
might not serve a Prince so near your estates, that fortune might make your
enemy.

So it was, that my success was such, that Childerick his son, a Prince
warlike, and of great hope, seeing me near about his age, was pleased more
especially to favor me with his love, then any other. When I came first to
him, it was about the time, that great and wise Aetius treated of a peace with
Meroue and the Franks (for so he called all that followed him) to resist that
scourge of God; Attilla, king of the Huns, who having gathered together, from
the Deserts of Asia, an incredible number of people, even to 500000. fighting
men, descended like a deluge, sacking furiously all the countries, where he
passed; and though this Aetius Lieutenant general in Gaul of Valentinian, was
come with a purpose to make war on Meroue, who during the government of
Castinus was possessed of a part of Gaul, yet thought he it better to make him
his friend, and the Visigots and Burgonians like wise, rather then to be
overthrown by Attilla, who lately having trauersed in Germany, was about the
ba^ks of Rine, where he stayed not long without advancing himself so into
Gaul, that he besieged the town of Orleance, where the coming of Thierry,
king of the Visigots, made him raise his siege, and take another way: but beset
by Meroue and Aetius, with their co^federates in the field of Cathalona, he was
defeated more by the valiance of the Franks, and the wisdom of Meroue, then
all the other force. Since Aetius having been killed, it may be, by the
commandment of his master, for some coffeehouse, Meroue was received at
Paris, Orleance, Sens, and other neighbor towns, for Lord, and King, and all
that people have since borne him such affection, that they will not only be his,
but cause themselves to be called by the name of Franks, and to please him the
better, and their country, in stead of Gaul take the name of Frannce. While I
was entered into arms among the Franks, the Gauls, the Romans, the Burgonians,
the Visigots, and the Huns, my brother was among them of love: arms so much
the more offensive, for that they turn all their blows upon the heart: his
disaster was such, (if now I may be suffered to call itso) that being bred up
by Clidaman, he saw the fair Siluie; but seeing her, he saw his death also,
not having lived since that, but as drawing toward his tomb; t^ tell you the
cause I cannot: for being with Childerick, I knew nothing but that my brother
was in extremity, though I found all the co^tentments that might be, as being
regarded of my Master, beloved of my companions, cherished and honored
generally of all, for a certain good opinion they conceive of me, for affairs
that fell out, which (it may be) got me with them, more authority and credit,
then my age and capacity might merit. I could not, knowing the sickness of my
brother, stay longer time with Childerick, but taking leave of him, and
promising him to return very shortly, I came back with the haste that my love
required. As soon as I was come, many ran to tell him that Guymantes was
come: for so they call me. His love gave him strength enough to lift up
himself in his bed, and he embraced me with the most entire affection, that
one brother could do to another.

It would serve but to trouble you, and wound my self afresh, to recount unto
you the things, which our amity wrought between us. So it was, that either 2.
or 3. days, after my brother was brought to that extremity, that he could
hardly draw his breath, and yet that cruel love inclined him more to sighing,
then to the necessity he had of breathing, and in all his raging fits, we
could hear nothing, but the name of Siluie: I, to whom the displeasure of his
death was so violent, that I could hardly dissemble, wished so much evil to
this unknown Siluie, that I could not hold from cnrsing her; which when my
brother heard, and his affection as yet greater then his disease, he enforced
himself to speak this: Brother, if you will not be my greatest enemy, for
bear, I beseech you, these imprecations, which cannot but displease me much
more then my disease. I had much rather not be at all, then that they should
take effect, and being unprofitable, what will it avail you, unless it be to
witness to me, how much you hate that which I love? I know well, my loss will
trouble you, and therein I have more feeling of our separation, then of my end.
But since every man is borne to dye, why with me do you not thank the heavens,
which have chosen me the fairest death, and the most fair murderer that ever
man had? The extremity of my affection, and the extremity of the virtue of
Siluie, are the arms by which her beauty is served, to put me into my grief;
and why do you bewail me, and wish evil to her, to whom I wish more good then
to my soul? I think he would have said more, but his strength failed, and I
more wet with tears of pity, then when against Attila I was all on a sweat
under my armor, and my arms sprinkled with blood, all over me. Brother, she
that takes you from yours, is the most unjust that ever was: and if she be
fair, the gods have done the injustice in her; for either they should have
changed her face or her heart. Then Aristander, having gotten a little more
strength, replied to me, For Gods sake, Guymantes, blaspheme no more in this
sort, and believe that Siluie has an heart answerable to her face, that as the
one is full of beauty, so the other is of virtue; that if for loving her I die,
do not you wonder, because that if the eye cannot, without dazeling, abide the
beams of one Sun without cloudy, how may not my soul remain dazeled at the
beams of so many Suns, which glister in this fair? that if I have scarce
tasted such diuinities, without death, I may have the contentment of him, that
dies to see Jupiter in his divinity? I would tell you, that as her death gives
witness, that no other had ever seen so much of divinity as she; so, that no
man ever loved so much of beauty, nor so much of virtue, as I. Now I that came
from an exercise, that made me believe there was no love forced, but
voluntary, with which men go on flattering themselves in idleness, said to
him, Is it possible, that one sole beauty should be the cause of your death? My
brother (answered he) I am in such extremity, that I think I cannot answer
your demands: but (said he on, taking me by the hand) for brotherly love, and
for our particular, which binds us yet faster, I adjure you to promise me one
gift. I did so. Then he said on, Bear as from me, this kiss to Siluy: and
then he kissed my hand: and observe that which you find of my last will; and
when you see this Nympho, you shall know that which you demand of me. At this
word, with a blast his soul flew up, and his body lay cold in my arms.

The affliction that I felt in this loss, as it cannot be imagined but by him
that has been in it, so it cannot be conceived, but by the heart that
suffered it, and hardly can the word reach that, which the thought may not
attain: so that without longer abode in bewailing this disaster, I will say,
Madam, that as soon as my dolours would suffer me, I have set my self on the
way, as well to render you the homage which I owe you, and to demand justice of
you for the death of Aristander, as to fulfill my promise which I made him
against his homicide, and to present that which by his last will he left in
writing, to the end that I may call my self as just an obseruer of my word, as
his affection has been inviolable. But at the instant when I was presented
before you, and that I meant to open my mouth against this murderer, I have
found my brothers words so true, that not only I excuse his death, but desire
and require the like. This shall be then, Madam, with your permission, which I
will perform: and then making a great reverence to Amasis, he chose from among
us Siluie, and resting one knee on the ground, he said, Fair murderer, though
on this fair breast there fall but one tear of pity, at the news of the
death of the person which was so much yours, you cease not to have entire and
honorable victory; yet, if you judge that to so many flames which you have
lighted in him, so small a drop shall not be a great asswagement, receive at
least the burning kiss which he bequeaths you, when presently his soul
turned into this kiss, which he set in this fair hand, rich indeed with the
spoils of many other men's liberties, but in none more fully then that of his.
At this word, he kissed her hand, and then held on thus after he was risen:

Among the papers where Aristander put his last Will, we have found this here;
and because it is enclosed in the fashion you see, and that he directed it to
you, I bring it you, with the protestation which by his testament he commanded
me to make before you open it; that if your will be not to grant the request he
has made you, he beseeches you not to read it at all, to the end, that as
well in death, as in life, he may not feel the strokes of your cruelty. Then
he presented her a letter, which Siluie, troubled with this accident, would
have refused, but for Amasis commandment: And after, Guymantes began his
speech again thus: I have hitherto performed the last Will of Aristander:
there remains, that I should pursue upon his homicide his cruel death; but if
at another time the offense have given me the command, at this time Love
ordaines, that my most fair vengeance be the sacrifice of my liberty, on the
same Altar that yet smokes with that of my brother, who being ravished from me,
when I breathed nothing against you, but blood and death, gives witness, that
every eye that sees you, owes you his heart for tribute, and that unjustly
every man lives, that lives not in your service. Siluie somewhat confounded with
this accident, stayed some long while from answer; so that Amasis took the
paper which she had in her hand, and having said to Guymantes, that Siluie
should make answer, she withdrew aside with some of us, and breaking the box,
read these words:

If my affection have not made my service pleasing, nor my service mine
affection, at the least, either this affection shall make my death in you more
pitiful, or my death assure you of the fidelity of my affection; and that as
no man ever loved more of perfections, so did never any love with more passion.
The last testimony which I will give you, shall be the gift by him whom I hold
most dear next you, who is my brother; for I know well, what I give you, when
I ordain, that he should see you, knowing well by experience, that it is
impossible he should be, and not love you. Desire not (my sayre murderer) that
he should be inheritor of my fortune, but hear of this, that I have less
justly merited of all others then of you. He that writ it, is a servant, who
for having less of love then one heart was capable to conceive, would rather
die then diminish.

Amasis then calling Siluie, demanded what so great cruelty she had used
against Aristander, which brought him unto that extremity. The Nymph blushing,
answered, that she knew not whereof he might complain. I would (said she) that
you receive Guymantes into his place: then calling him before them all, she
asked if he would observe his brothers will? He answered, Yes, so it be not a
thing contrary to his affection. He requires this Nymph (said Amasis) to
receive you into his place, and that you have better fortune then he. To
receive you, I command her; for the fortune whereof he speaks, it is neither
the prayer, nor the commandment of another that can frame that, but the
proper merit, or the fortune it self. Guymantes, after he had kissed the robe
of Amasis, came to do as much to the hands of Siluie, in sign of servitude:
but she was so displeased with him for the reproaches which he had given her,
and with the declaration of his affection, that without the commandment of
Amasis, she would not have permited him.

As they were ready to depart, Cl^daman coming from hunting, was advertised of
this new servant of his mistress, for which he made so loud a complaint, that
Amasis and Guymantes h^ard him; and because he knew not whence it proceeded,
she told it him: and she had scarcely ended, when Clidaman snatching at her
word, complained that she had permitted a thing so much to his disadvantage,
that this was to call back those ordinances, which the Destinies had chosen
for him, which none, nor she knew how to infringe, without life. Words which he
spoke with affection and vehemence, because that out of good judgment he had
loved Siluie. But Guymantes, who, besides his new love, had so good an opinion
of himself, that he would give no place to any person in the world, answered,
addressing his speech to Amasis: Madam, there be that would not I should be
servant to the fair Siluie: they that speak it, know little of love,
otherwise they would not think, that your ordinances, nor of all the gods
together, were of sorce sufficient to divert the course of our affection:
therefore it is that I declare covertly, that if they deny me that which
heretofore has been allowed me, I shall disobey and turn rebel, and that no
consideration ought to change me. And then turning toward Clidaman, I know the
respect I owe you (said he) but I feel withal, the power that Love has over
me. If the Destinies have given you to Siluie, her beauty is it that has
gott^n me judge, whether of these two gifts ought to be most allowable.
Clidaman would have answered, when Amasis said to him, Son, you have reason
to grieve, if they altered our ordinances, but they have not infringed them.
You were commanded serve Siluie, but they denied to others. Sweet ointments
give the better smell when they are chased. A lover likewise having a Rival,
gives more proof of his merits. So Amasis ordained, and now behold Siluie
well served. For Guymantes forgot not any thing that his Love commanded: and
Clidaman, out of envy, studied to appear more careful.

But above all, Ligdamon served her with such discretion and respect, that
oftentimes he durst not come near her, left he should give notice of his
affection to others. And in my mind, his service was as pleasing as any of the
rest. But indeed one time he almost lost his patience. It happened, that Amasis
hand lighted on a bodkin made in the shape of a sword, wherewith Siluie was
wont to raise and dress her hair, and seeing Clidaman near her, she gave it
him to bear to his mistress, but he kept it all the day, to put Guymantes to
some pain. He doubted not Ligdamou: and see how often one may hurt one man for
another; for the poison which was prepared for Guymantes, went to the heart of
Ligdamon, who not being able to dissemble it, that knowledge might not be taken
of it, he withdrew himself to his lodging, where, after he had some-while
in^enomed his evil by his thoughts, he took his pen and writ this verse:

A Madrigall on the Sword of Siliuie in the hands of Clidaman.
Love, that lay hid in treason
Of weapon stained with blond:
But not without all reason,
Cuts from my hope the good:
For wanting means to pay
My heavy seruitud^,
With wages that would way,
To cover his ingratitude
He entertaines me cunningly,
Though not in love, in soldiery.
And at the end of these verses he adds these words:

ONe may auerre (fair Leonide) that Siluie does like the Sun, that casts
his beams as well on the most vile things, as on the more noble.

Himself brought me this paper, I could not with all my study understand, nor
draw other thing from him, but that Siluie had given him a blow with a Sword:
and leaving me, he went away the most lost man on the earth. See how
artificial a sencer is Love, that with so small weapons can make so great
gashes! It grieved me to see him in this case. And to know if any new accide^t
had befallen him, I went to Siluie; but she swore she knew not what it might
be. In the end, having stayed some time to read the verses; on a sudden she
lifted up her hand to her hair, and not finding her bodkin, she began to
laugh, and said, That her bodkin had been lost, and some body had found it,
and without doubt (it^ might be) Ligdamon knew it. She had scarcely said this,
when Clidaman came into the room with this murdering sword in his hand. I
desired her to let him keep it no longer. I see (said she) his discretion,
hereafter I will use the power I have over him. She failed not of her purpose:
for being near him, she said; See a Sword that is mine. He answered, So is he
that bears it. I would have it, said she. I would, answered he, you would all
of me that is yours. Will you not give it me (said the Nymph?) How (replied
he?) can I will any thing, since I have no will at all? And (said she) what
have you done with that which you had? You have snatched it from me (said he)
and now it is changed into yours. Since then (continued she) that your will is
but mine, give me that bodkin, because my will is so. Since (said he) that I
will that thing that you would, and that you will have this bodkin, it must of
necessity be, that I will have it also. Siluie smiled a little, but in the end
she said: I will that you give it me. And I also (said he) will, that you give
it me. Then the Nymph thrust forth her hand, and took it. I will never refuse it
(said he) though you will take it from me, and it were this heart for once.
Siluie had her Sword, and I writ this scroule to Ligdamon:

THe good which without knowledge has been done to your Rival, with his
knowledge is taken from him: judge in what terms his affairs are, since the
favors he has, proceeded of ignorance, but the disfavors, of deliberation.

So Ligdamon was healed, not by the same hand, but by the same weapon that hurt
him. In the mean time, the affection of Guymantes came to such an extremity,
that (it may be) it came nothing short of that of Aristander; on the other side
Clidaman, under the cloak of courtesy had let grow, in his soul, a most
ardent and true love. After they had many times assayed, out of envy, who
should be the most welcome to Siluie, and knew that she favored and
dis-fauoured them both alike, they resolved one day, because that otherwise
there was mutual love between them, to know which of the two was most
beloved, and came for that cause to Siluie, from whom they had such 'cold
answers, that they could not assoile the judgment. Then, by the counsel of a
Druyde, who (it may be) was displeased to see two such persons lose their time
so unprofitably, which they might much better employ for the defense of the
Gauls, whom so many Barbarians attempted to ouer-run, they came to the
fountain of the verity of Love. You know what the property of this water is,
and how it declares, against their will, the most secret thoughts of Lovers;
for he that looks in it, sees his Mistress; and if he be loved, he sees
himself hard by; and if she love any other, that is his figure that he sees.
Now Clidaman was the first that presented himself, he laid his knee to the
ground, kissed the side of the fountain: And having besought the Demon of that
place, to be more favorable to him then to Damon, he bent himself somewhat
into it. Presently Siluie presented her self so fair and admirable, that the
lover transported stooped to kiss her hand: bat this contentment was well
changed when he saw no body near her. He wichdrew himself, much troubled,
after he had stayed some while; And unwilling to speak any thing, he made
sign to Guymantes, that he should prove his fortune. He with all the
ceremonies requisite, having made his request, cast his eye on the fountain,
but was served like Clidaman, because that Siluie alone presented her self,
burning (almost) with her fair eyes, the water which seemed to play about her.
They were both astonished at this accident, and demanded the cause of this
Druyde, which was a great Magician. He answered, that it was, for that Siluie
as yet loved no person, as being not capable to be burnt, but only to burn.
They that thought they could not be so much neglected, having gone before
severally, now returned both together, and suddenly both the one and the other
shifted on diverse sides; yet the Nymph appeared alone. The Druyde smiling came
to withdraw them from thence, and told them, that they should believe they
were not beloved at all, and that the shifting from side to side, could not
represent their figure in the water. For you must know (said he) that as other
waters represent the bodies, which are before them, this represents the spirits.

Now the spirit, which is but the will, the memory and the judgment, when it
is beloved, transformeth it self into the thing beloved; and therefore it is,
that when you presented your selves here, it received the figure of your
spirits, and not of your body; and your spirit being changed into Siluie, it
represented Siluie, and not you. Whereas, if Siluie had loved you, she should
as well have been changed into you, as you into her: and so representing your
spirit, you saw Siluie; and seeing Siluie changed, as I told you by this love,
you should have seen your selves also. Clidaman stood very attentive to this
discourse; and considering the conclusion was an assurance of that he feared,
being full of choler, drawing out his Sword, he struck two or three blows
with all his might on the marble of the fountain: but his Sword being at the
first resisted, in the end, it brake in the middle, not leaving any mark of
his blows; imitating herein the angry dog, that biteth the stone one flings
at him. The Druyde gave him to understand, that he travailed in vain, because
that his enchantment could not be ended by force, but by extremity of love: yet
if he listed to make it unprofitable, he knew the mean. Clidaman nourished for
rarity within great Cages of iron, two Lions, and two Unicorns, which he
oftentimes caused to fight with other beasts.

Now this Druyde demanded them to keep this fountain, and enchanted them in
such sort, that although they were set at liberty, yet could they not leave the
entry of that Cave, but only when they were to seek their food. For in that
while there stayed but two, and ever since they have done no hurt to any, but
those which attempted to go to the fountain; but they assailed them with such
fury, that there is no likelihoode that any will hazard himself. For the Lions
are so large and terrible; they have their claws so long and so piercing; so
nimble and swift, and so animated to this defense, that they do deeds
incredible. On the other side, the Unicorns have their horns so poynted, and
so strong, that they will pier^e a very rock: they strike with such force and
swiftness, that no man can avoid them. As soon as this guard was thus
ordered, Clidaman and Guymantes departed away so secretly, that Amasis nor
Siluie knew nothing, until they were far off. They went to seek out Meroue
and Childericke. For they have told us since, that since they were so equally
handled by their love, they would try if Arms would favor them as equally.

Thus (gentle shepherd) have we lost the commodity of this Fountain, which so
well discovered the secrets of deceiving thoughts, that if all were as
Ligdamon, they would not have made us lose it: For, when I knew that Clidaman
and Guymantes were gone, I counseled him to be the third, assuring my self
he should be the more favored; but he made me this answer: Fair Leonide, I
always counsel them that are in doubt of their good or evil, that they
hazard themselves sometimes, to know the truth. But would not this be folly for
him, that having never conceived any hope of that he desires, to seek for a
more sure knowledge of his disaster? As for me, I am not in doubt, whether the
fair Siluie love me, or not; I am but too assured of it, and when I would know
more, I need not ask but of her eyes and her actions. Since that time his
affection has still increased, like the fire, when they lay on more wood: For
this is the property of that faculty, to make that which pleases, more
delightful, and that which offends, most offensive: and God knows how this
cruel has handled him. The time is yet to come, that she would look on him
without disdain or cruelty: and for my part, I know not how a generous man can
have such patience, because indeed, the offenses which she has done him, touch
more of outrage then of rigor. One day, when he met her going out to walk
alone with me, because he had a sweet voice, I prayed him to sing: he said
these verses:

A Song on a desire.
What is this ill that troubles me,
And will not give me leisure still
To find anayling remedy?
Alas, it is a burning will,
Which, like a flame, always aspires
To place most high, and hard to gain;
For that the good I most desire,
Is it that I cannot attain.
Desire has, since first it bred,
For mother and for sister dear,
An hasty hope, right strong of head,
That gives possession wel-neere.
But though of course a woman's heart
Takes never any hold of Love,
Desire will not from my soul part,
Though Hope from ^e have made remove.
But if all Hope be clean put out,
Wherefore desire so labor you
To bring a greater work about?
This will but show small virtue true.
And she is always flinty hard,
Without or favors or regard.
So, though my Hope be fully dead,
Yet will Desire lift up his head.
He had no sooner ended, but Siluie takes him up thus: Ha! tell me, Ligdamon,
since I am not the cause of your evil, why do you lay it on me? It is your
own desire which you should accuse; for it is it that makes you travail in
vain. The passionate Ligdamon answered, Desire, indeed, is chat which torments
me: but it is not that which should be blamed, but that which gives it birth,
and that is the virtues and perfections of Siluie. If the desires, replied she,
be not irregular, they torment not: and if they be irregular, and go beyond
reason, they ought to be borne of another object then of virtue, and are not
the true children of such a father, since they resemble him nothing. Till this
time, answered Ligdamon, I never heard say, that any disauowed a child, for not
resembling his father; and yet the extreme desires are not against reason: for,
is it not reasonable to desire all good things, according to the degree of
their goodness? and so an extreme beauty should be reasonably loved in
extremity: so that if they must be blamed in any thing, a man should not say,
they are against reason, but beyond reason. Let this suffice, replied this
cruel, I am not more reasonable then reason: therefore it is, that I will not
auow for mine, that which exceedes. At this word, not to leave him the mean to
answer, she turned to meet some of her companions that followed her.

One time, when Amasis returned from that little place of Mont-brison, where
the pleasure of the garden, and solitariness, had stayed her longer then she
meant, the night came on her before she came to Marsellis. And because the
evening was cold, as we went, I asked him on the way, of purpose to make him
speak before his mistrisse, if he felt not the cold and humidity of the
evening? Whereto he answered, that of long time the cold nor heat outward had
done him hurt. And asking him, why, and what his receipt was? To the one, he
answered me, I oppose my burning desires; and to the other, my frozen hopes. If
it be so (said I suddenly) whence came it, that I have so often heard you say
you burn, and sometime, that you freeze. Ah! (answered he) with a great sigh:
Courteous Nymph, the evil whereof I complain, torments me not outwardly, but
inwardly; and yet so deeply, that there is no secret part of my soul so
retired, where I feel not the grief. For you must know, that above all other,
that the fire and cold are incompatibles alike. But I have had within my heart
continually the fire on a flame, and the cold frozen, and only feel the
discommodity without any mitigation. Siluie could hold no longer from making
him feel her accustomed cruelties, but till that word was ended. Yet me
thought, she would scarce give him the leisure to bring forth, that so full of
envy she was, to make him feel her stings, when turning toward me with a
smile, she said disdainefully, casting her head on his side. Oh! how happy is
Ligdamon, to have both cold and heat when he will? at least, he has no cause
to complain, nor to feel many discommodities: for, if the cold of his hope
freeze, he may chafe himself with the heat of his desires; if his ouer-ardent
desires do burn him, he may cool himself with the ice of his hopes. It is
very necessary (fair Siluie, answered Ligdamon) that I should use this remedy
to maintain me, otherwise I had not been long since; but this is but a small
asswaging of so great a fire: so that the knowledge of these things is a fresh
wound which offends me the more, for that in the greatness of my desires I
know their weakness, and in their weakness their greatness. You figure
your evil (replied the Nymph) such as you please: but I believe not, that the
cold being so near the heat, and the heat so near the cold, neither the
one, nor the other will suffer his neighbor to be much offended.

Indeed (answered Ligdamon) to make me burn and freeze at one time, is not
one of the least maruels that proceed from you; but this is the greatest, that
it is of your cold, that my heat comes, and of my heat, your ice. But yet
it is more marvelous, to see a man have such imaginations, added the Nymph:
for they conceive such impossible things, that he that believes them, may
as well be taxed for want of judgment, as you that tell them, for want of
truth. I confess, answered he, that my imaginations conceive things
impossible; but that proceeds from my ouer-great affection, and from your
ouer-great cruelty: and as this is one of your least effects, that you reproach
me with, so it is not one of my least tonments. I believe, said she, that your
torments, and mine effects, are of greatest force in your discourse. Hardly,
said Ligdamon, can a man say that which he does not well understand. Hardly
(replied the Nymph) may the conceits and vain Ideaes of a distempered
imagination come to be known. If the truth, adjoined Ligdamon, accompany not
this imagination, I should hardly stand in so great need of your compassion.
Men (answered the Nymph) make their trophies of our bounty. Do you any whit
better, said he, out of our loss? I never saw (replied Siluie) any so undone,
but they shifted wellenough, as you do all.

The more I tell you of the cruelties of this Nymph, and of the patiences of
Ligdamon, the more comes into my memory. When Clidaman was gone, as I told you,
Amasis would send after him the greatest part of the young Knights of this
Country, under the charge of Lindamor, to the end he might be taken by Meroue
for the man he was. Among other, Ligdamon, as a right gentle Knight, was not
forgot. But this cruel would not bid him adieu, faining to be sick: yet he
that would not go, without she knew of it in some sort, writ me these verses:

On a Departure.
Why Love, since thou do so desire
That I should s^^r^h in so great fire,
Why must I go far from my Dame?
I answered him.
TO work in her some mysteries,
Know thou not thus from ashes rise
The Phoenix, which dies in the flame?
He had been an happy man with this answer, but this cruel having found what
I writ, and unwilling to do him good her self, and not suffering any other
should do it, snatched the pen with great strength out of my hand, telling me,
that the flatteries which I use to Ligdamon, were the cause of the continuance
of his follies, and he had cause more to complain of me, then of her: At last
she writ this:

Siluies answer.
THe Phoenix from the cinders rise,
Because that in the flame it dies.
Absence gives a mortal stroke,
If presence no more comfort cause.
Never by cold there will be broke,
The ice which fire never thawes.
You may think with what contentment he parted: It was to some purpose, for
him to be accustomed of long time to such blows, and that he remembered the
disgraces which came from them whom they serve, ought often to take the place
of favor. And I remember, that on this discourse, he called himself the most
happy man in the world, since the ordinary disgraces which he received from
Siluie, could not make him doubt that she had him in any great good memory,
that she would not acknowledge him for her servant, and that since she used not
to deal so with others that were not particularly affectioned to her; he made
himself believe, that money was that wherewith she paid those that were
toward her, and such as it was, he was to make reckoning of it, because it had
her mark: and on this subject he sent these verses before he parted.

A SONET.
THis sovereign beauty she will have it so;
What is impossible, not what I can,
To make good trial, that I am the man:
Such is her will, and mine with hers shall go.
She shall at last see, that my Love for store,
Is at the spring, like to a springing well:
The more of me she draws, by sorrows fell,
The more she shall perceive, I love her more.
The spring that brings forth my affection,
Is without more of her perfection:
Eternal in effect, and so is she.
Assay then (rigorous) from my hard fate,
To draw incessantly; my love wants date:
The more you draw, the greater it will be.
Leonide had held on discourse, if a far off she had not see^ne Galathee come,
who after she had long stayed alone, and not able longer to deprive her self of
the sight of this shepherd, she was dressed the best to her advantage that her
glass could give counsel, and came forth without any other company then the
little Merill; she was fair, and worthy to be beloved of an heart, that had
not already had another affection. At that time, by the confusion which the
water had wrought in Celadons stomach, he felt himself ill at ease, that by
that time they came at the Nymph, they were constrained to carry him back, and
the shepherd soon after went to bed, where he remained some days down
lying, and vp-rising of his infirmity, without being either grievously sick,
or very thoroughly recovered.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
GAlathee, that was thoroughly taken, so long as the sickness of Celadon lasted,
stirred not ordinarily from his beds head; and when she was constrained to
remove from thence, either to rest, or for some other occasion, she left him
Leouide for the most part, whom she gave in charge to lose no opportunity, to
give the shepherd to understand of her good will, believing that by this
means, she might, in the end, give him hope of that which his condition
denied. And indeed, Leonide deceived her not; for though she were desirous,
Lindamor might me satisfied; yet she that looked for all her advancement from
Galathee, had no greater desire then to content her: but love, which ordinarily
makes pastime with the wisdom of lovers, and delights to conduct his effects
contrary to their purposes, made Leonide, by conuersing with the shepherd, to
stand in more need of one to speak for her, then any other in the company. For
the ordinary view of this shepherd, who wanted nothing that might win love,
made her know, that beauty has ouer-secret intelligences with our soul, to
suffer it so freely to come near his powers, without suspicion of treason. The
shepherd soon perceived it, but the affection which he bare to Astrea, which
yet exceedingly raged, would not suffer him to endure this growing love, with
patience. That was the cause that he resolved to take his leave of Galathee,
when he began to find himself somewhat better. But as soon as he opened his
mouth about it, How is it, said she, Celadon, are you hardly used by me, that
you will be gone before you be thoroughly recouerd? And when he answered, it was
for fear of troubling her; and for some business he was constrained to return
to his Hamlet, to assure his parents and his friends of his health: she
interrupted him, saying, No, Celadon, doubt not my trouble, so I see you want
nothing: and as for your affairs, and friends, without me, whose company (it
seems) mislikes you much, you shall not be in this pain, since you will no
longer. And me thinks the greatest business that you have to do, is to
satisfy the obligation which you have to me, and that your ingratitude should
not be small, if you grudge me some moments of your life, which you hold all of
me. Henceforth you must not fet your eyes on things so base, as your life
passed, but you are to leave your hamlets, and your flocks to them that have
not the merits that you have; and for the time to come, you must place your
eyes on me that can, and will do for you, if your actions alter not my mind.
Though the shepherd seemed not to understand this discourse, yet he conceived
it easily enough, and from that time avoided, what he could possibly, to talk
with her in private. But the displeasure which this life brought him, was such,
that almost losing all patience, one day Leonide hearing him sigh, demanded the
cause, seeing he was in place where they desired nothing more then his
contentment. He answered her (fair Nymph) among all miserable men, I may hold
my self to be the most extremely handled by fortune; for commonly they that
be in grief, have permission to complain, and have the comfort to be moned:
but I dare not, for that my misfortune comes covered with the most of the
contrary, and therefore in stead of being bemoned, I am rather blamed, as a man
of small judgment, that if you, and Galathee knew how bitter the wormwood is,
wherewith I am fed, in this place, happy indeed to any other but me, I assure
my self, you would take pity of my life. And what want you (said she) to
comfort you? At this time (said he) I only want leave to be gone. Would you
(replied the Nymph) I should speak of it to Galathee? I beseech you (said he)
by whatsoever you hold dearest. Then it must be as by your self (said the
Nymph) blushing: and not turning her head toward him, she went out of the
chamber to seek where Galathee was, whom she found alone in the garden, and
who now began to suspect there was love on Leonide's part, fearing she nothing
forwarded the charge she had given her, though she remained since all the day
from him, for that knowing how sharp the weapons of the beauty of the shepherd
were, she thought it might as well part two as one: yet being constrained to
pass through her hands, she went about to deceive her self, as well as was
possible; and so set on the same countenance toward the Nymph, as she had
accustomed; and when she saw her coming toward her, she raised her self to
ask how the shepherd did; and having known he was in the same state she
left him, she held on her walk, and having gone some paces, without speaking,
she turned to the Nymph, and said, But tell me, Leonide, was there ever man so
insensible as Celadon, since neither my actions, nor your persuasions, can give
him any feeling of that he ought to render me? For my part (answered Leonide)
I had rather accuse him of want of spirit, and courage, then of understanding;
for I think, either he has not the judgment to know, whereto my actions
tend, or if he know my words, he has not the courage to attempt so high: and
so, how much the love of your perfections and favors may raise him to you, so
much the weight of his own small merit and condition may abase him. But you
must not think this strange, since the Appletree bears Apples, and the Oak
Acornes; for every thing brings forth according to his nature: So, what can
you hope the courage of a villain can produce, but the designs of a weak and
base soul? I think well, answered Galathee, the great difference of our
conditions do work in him a great respect, but I shall never imagine, if he
knew the difference, but he has spirit enough to judge, to what end I use him
with this sweetness, except it be, that he be so far engaged to Astrea,
that he cannot go back.

Assure you, Madame, replied Leonide, it is not respect, but sottishness,
which makes him so misprising. For I may auerre, as you say, that it is true he
loves Astrea; but if he had judgment, would he not contemn her for you, who
deserve so far beyond comparison? Yet is he so ill advised, that at every
turn, when I speak to him of you, he answers me but with grief, for being
so far removed from his Astrea, with such displeasure, that one may think,
that his stay here is infinitely troublesome to him. And this morning, hearing
him sigh, I asked him the cause. He made me answer, which would move the stones
to pity; and in the end, the conclusion was, that I should desire you he might
be gone. Yes, replied Galathee, red with choler, no longer able to dissemble
her jealousy: Confess the truth, Leonide, he has moved you. It is true,
Madam, he has moved me to pity; and me thinks, since he has such a desire
to be gone, you ought not to hold him by force. For Love never enters into the
heart for the blows of a whip. I think not, replied Galathee, but he had
moved you to pity; but speak no more of it: it may be, when he is recouerd,
he shall sooner find the effects of despite, which he has caused to be bred
in me, then those of love, which he has wrought in you. In the mean time, to
speak freely, let him resolve not to go hence at his own pleasure, but at
mine. Leonide would have answered, but the Nymph interrupted her. No more,
Leonide, said she, it is enough, content your self that I say no more, but
that this is my resolution. So Leonide was forced to hold her peace, and to be^
gone, taking this injury so to heart, that she resolved to go to Adamas her
uncle, and to take no more care of Galathees secrets, who at that time called
Siluie that was walking in another alley alone; to whom against her former
purpose, she could not hold, in complaining of Leonide, from making her know
that, which till then she had hid from her. But Siluie, although young, yet
full of judgment, to pacify all things, endeavored to excuse Leonide what she
could possibly; knowing well, that if her companion meant a despite, and it
should come to be known, they could not but bring much shame to their Mistress.
And therefore she said unto her, after many words: You know well, Madam, you
never acquainted me with this business; and yet I must tell you, of these
particulars you may not judge me so ignorant as I seemed to be; but my humor
is not to thrust my self into things, where I am not called. It is some pretty
while since, seeing my companion so diligent about Celadon, I suspected that
Love was the cause, and not Compassion of his disease: and because it is a
thing that touches us all, I resolved to be assured before I would speak of
it; and after that, I began to look into her actions more narrowly then of
wont, and wrought so, that yesterday I got on the further side of the shepherds
bed, while he slept, and by and by Leonide came in, who by opening the door,
waked him, without knowing any thing. After many common discourses, she came to
talk of the love he bareto the shepherdess Astrea, and Astrea to him: But
(said she) believe me, this is nothing to the price of the affection that
Galathee bears you. To me, (said he?) Yes, to you (replied Leonide:) and make
it not so strange, you know how often I have told you; yet is she greater then
my words. Fair Nymph, answered the shepherd, I can neither merit, nor believe
I shall have so great happiness. Besides, what should her meaning be to me,
that am a shepherd borne, and desire to live and die so? Your birth (returns
my companion) cannot but be great, since it has given beginning to so great
perfections. O Leonide, said then the shepherd, your words are full of
mockery; but were they plain, have you an opinion, that I know not what
Galathee is, and who I am? I know it indeed, fair Nymph, and can well measure
my meannesse, and her greatness with duty. True (answered Leonide) I think
you will use the measure that men do, that is good for them that will buy and
sell. And do not you know that gifts will not be measured? and Love being
nothing but a gift, why will you draw it to the ell-wand of duty? Doubt no more
of that which I tell you and not to be wanting in your duty, render her as much
of love and of affection, as she has given you. I swear unto you, Madam, till
that time, I imagined that Leonide spoke for her self, and I have no cause to
lie; from the beginning this discourse astonished me: but since, having seen
with what discretion your actions have been carried, I much commend the power
you have over them; knowing very well, that it is an harder matter to have
absolute command over ones self, then over any other.

Maid (answered Galathee) if you knew the occasion I have to seek the love of
Celadon, you would commend it, and advise me to the same desseigne: For, do
you remember that Druyde that foretold us our fortune? I remember it well, said
she, it is not so long since. You know (continued Galathee) how many true
things he has told you, and Leonide also. Now know withal, that he assured
me, that if I married any otherthen Celadon, I should be the most unhappy
person on earth; and do you think it fit, that having had such proof of his
predictions, I should contemn them that touch me so near? And this is it,
that I find such fault with, that Leonide should be so much misaduised, to
march my pace, making the same declaration to him. Madam, said Siluie, enter
not into that doubt, for in truth I lie not. And me thinks you should not
anger her too much, for fear that in her complaints she discover this dessigne
to any other. Friend (said Galathee, embracing her) I doubt not of that you
told me, and I promise you, I will deal with Leonide, as you have advised me.

In the mean time that they discourse thus, Leonide goes to seek out Celadon,
to whom she recited, word for word, the talk that Galathee and she had for his
cause, and that he was to think that the place where he was, bare the show of
liberty, but indeed it was a prison: which struck him so to the quick, that
whereas before his disease, he went but as it were creeping, now it grew so
violent, that that very night the fever took him again so burning, that
Galathee being come to see him, and seeing him so much impaired, was in great
doubt of his life. The next morning his disease increasing so fiercely, he
swowned away twice or thrice between their arms: and albeit these Nymphs were
never further off, but that the one was at the head, and the other at the feet
of the bed, without other repose, then that by broken sleeps extreme
heaviness came stealing on them: yet so it was, that he was very poorly
attended, having there nothing fit for a sick man; and not daring to fetch it
elsewhere, for fear of being discovered. So that the shepherd ran in great
hazard of his life, and in such sort, that that one night he felt himself in
great extremity, so that the Nymphs esteemed him as a dead man; but in the end,
he came back to himself, and shortly after lost a great deal of blood, which
weakened him so, that he desired to rest. That was the cause that the Nymphs
left him alone with Merill. And being retired, Siluie all afraid at this
accident, addressing her self to Galathee, said: Me thinks (Madam) you are
ready to fall into a great confusion, if you take not the better order: Judge
how great pain it will be to you, if this shepherd perish in your hands for
fault of succor.

Alas (said the Nymph) since the relapse of his disease, I found it too true,
that which you say: but what remedy is there? We are here altogether
unprovided of things necessary for him, and to have them from elsewhere, if my
life lay on it, I would not do it, for the fear I have it would be known.
Leonide, whom affection had made more resolute then Siluie, said: Madame, these
fears are good, when they touch not the life of a man; but where it does, we
are not so much to consider or prevent other inconveniences which may arise. If
this shepherd die, think you, his death can be kept unknown? Since it can
sort but to punishment, you must believe, the very heavens will discover: but
let us take it at the worst, and that it be known the shepherd be here. What
of that? May you not cover it with the cloak of Compassion, whereto Nature
inclines us all? And if it please you to refer this business to me, I assure
my self to carry it so discreetly, that no man shall discover any thing. For
Madam, I have (as you know) for my uncle, Adamas Prince of the Druydes, from
whom no secret of Nature, nor virtue of herbs are hid; he is a man of great
discretion and judgment: and I know, he has a particular inclination to do
you service: if you will employ him in this occasion, I make no question, but
it will sort to your contentment. Galathee stood some while without answer. But
Siluie, that saw it the most expedient, and foreiudged, that by mean of the
wise Adamas, they might divert Galathee from this shameful life, answered very
readily, that this way, in her opinion, was the safest. Whereto Galathee
consented, not being able to invent a better. There rests (says Leonide) to
know (that I go not beyond your commandment) what your will is I should say
to Adamas, and what I should conceal. There is nothing (answered Siluie,
seeing Galathee stand silent) that more binds a man to secrecy, then frankly
to discover an entire trust: and contrarily, nothing that more constraines to
bewray, then apparent mistrust: So that it seems best, to tie Adamas more
strongly to be secret, you must tell him before he comes, all things that he is
like to discover when he shall be here. I am (said Galathee) so quite besides
my self, that I hardly know what to say: and for that cause, I refer all to
your discretion. So departed Leonide with her desire, though the beginning of
the night were very dark, and rested not till she came to her uncle, whose
abode was at the turning of the mountain of Marsellis, not far from the
Vestals and Druides of Laignieu: but her journey was longer then she looked
for, for reaching thither by break of day, she found he was gone to Feurs, and
that he would not return of two or three days, which was the cause, that
without long abode, she set forward on her way, but so weary, that had not the
desire of the shepherds recovery been, which gave her no rest, without doubt,
she had stayed for Adamas there, whereas now she stayed but half an hour,
for that not having been used to such journey, she found it very hard; and
when she was a little refreshed, she went the same way shecame. But hardly had
she gone a mile, but she might see far often, a Nymph alone coming toward
her, the same way that she had gone, whom afterward she knew to be Siluie.
This meeting brought her but a little comfort; believing that she came to
deliver the death of Celadon, but it was contrary; for she understood by her,
that since her departure, he had taken good rest, and at his waking, he found
himself without the fever, and therefore Galathee had sent her to overtake her,
and to tell her so much; and to say, that the shepherd being in so good case,
there was no need to bring Adamas, nor to acquaint him with the business. It
will be hard to express the contentment that Leonide had, hearing of the
recovery of the shepherd, whom she loved. And after she had thanked God, she
said to her companion, Sister, since I know by your speech, that Galathee has
not concealed from you her desire which she has, touching the shepherd, it
is necessary, that I should frankly tell you, that this kind of life
infinitely distastes me, and that I hold it very shameful, both for her and
us: for she is so passionate, that for all the small reckoning the shepherd
makes of her, yet can she not withold her self; and so has before her eyes,
the predictions of a certain Druide, that she thinks all her happiness
depends upon this Love: and this is the good which she thinks every one ought
to affect as well as she, as if all looked with her eyes; and that is my
grief: for she is become so jealous of me, that she can hardly endure me to be
near him. Now, sister, if this life come to be known (as without doubt it
will, since there is nothing so secret, but shall be discovered) judge you what
they will talk of us, and what opinion we shall have of all others that hear
of it. I have done what I could possibly to divert her from it, but all to no
purpose. Therefore am I resolved to let her love, since she will love;
provided, that it be not at our cost. I have made you this discourse, to show
you, that it is very expedient, we should seek some remedy; and that I find no
mean more ready, then by making my uncle a party, who will bring it to good
pass by his counsel and wisdom. Sister, said Siluie, I infinitely commend
your desine; and to give you the commodity of bringing Adamas to her, I will
return back, and say, I have been at Adamas his house, but could neither
find you nor him. It were very fit (answered Leonide) that we go to rest our
selves in some thicket, that as it seems, you have long sought for me; so am
I so weary, that I must sleep a little, if I mean to finish my voyage. Let us
go, sister (replied Siluie) and believe you shall effect no small matter, to
free us of Celadon: For, I well perceive the humor of Galathee, that with the
time, will turn to your great displeasure. At this word they took hands, and
looking about for some place to spend a part of the day in, they spyed one on
the other side of Lignon, which they thought fit for their purpose. Passing
over the bridge of the Botresse, and leaving Bonlieu, the place of the Druides
and Vestals on the left hand, and going down along the river, they came to
bestow themselves in a thick grove, which joined hard on the highway, and
wherein there was an Arbor, that affoorded a pleasant seat at all times; out
of which, when they had made choice of the most shadowed corner, they fell
asleep one after another.

And while they thus rested, Astrea, Diane, and Phillis, came by chance,
driving their flocks into that place, and not seeing the Nymphs, they sat
down near them: and because the amities which are begun in bad fortune, are
more straightly riuited in, then those that are conceived in happy times,
Diane, who was tied in a fast league with Astrea and Phillis, since the mis-hap
of Celadon, bare them so great good will, and they to her, that almost all the
day they left not each other: and, indeed, Astrea had great need of
consolation; the rather, for that about that time, she lost Alce and
Hippolite, her father and mother: Hippolite, for the fright shotooke for the
loss of Astrea, when she was in the water; and Alce, for grief, at the loss
of his dear companion: which yet was a poor help to Astrea, who might
bewail the loss of Celadon, under the cover of that of her father and mother:
and, as I told you, Diane, the daughter of the wise Bellinde, that she might
not be wanting in the duty of a neighbor, went often to visit her, and found
her humor so pleasing, and Astrea again hers, and Phillis that of them both,
that they swear so firm a league between them, that they never after
separated: and this was the first day that Astrea came out of her lodging. So
that these her two faithful companions were now with her: but they were no
sooner set down, but they might perceive far off, Semire, who came to find
her. This shepherd had long time been amorous of Astrea, and knowing that she
loved Celadon, thought that he was the cause of his bad success; being now
persuaded, that having driven away Celadon, he might easily obtain his place,
he came to seek her out, that he might begin his design, but he was much
deceived; for Astrea having found out his craft, conceived such an hatred
against him, that when she spyed him, she would lay her hand over her eyes,
that she might not see him, and desired Phillis to tell him from her, that he
should never present himself to her. And these words were spoken with such a
change of look, and so great a vehemence, that her companions easily found out
her great stomach, which more readily incensed Phillis against the shepherd.
When he heard this message, hestood so confused in his thoughts, that it seemed
he could not move. At last, overcome, and enforced by the acknowledgement of
his error, he said, Discreet Phillis, I protest, the heavens are just, in
giving me more sorrow then an heart is able to bear, since they cannot equal
their punishment according to mine offense, having been the cause of the
breach of the fairest and most entire love that ever was. But that the gods may
not more rigorously chastise me, tell this fair shepherdess, that I ask
pardon both of her, and of the cinders of Celadon, assuring her, that the
extreme affection which I bare her, without more, was the cause of this fault;
that banished from her, and from her eyes, justly offended, I may go lamenting
all my life long. At this word he went away so uncomfortable, that his
repentance moved Phillis to some pity: and being come back to her
companions, she told them his answer. Alas! sister, said Astrea, I have more
reason to fly this wicked man, then to weep; judge you if I ought not, this is
he, without more, that has been the cause of all my sorrow. How? sister, said
she, is Semire the cause of your sorrow? Has he such power over you? If I
durst tell you his wickedness, said Astrea, and mine own folly, you would say,
that he has used the greatest Art, that the craftiest spirit could invent.
Diane knowing that that was the cause that she spoke no more plainly to
Phillis, for that it was yet but eight or ten days that they grew to that
familiarity, said to them, that it was no part of her purpose, to take any
thing from them by constraint. And you, fair shepherdess (said she, turning
to the sad Astrea) give me occasion to think that you love me not, if you be
more reserved to me then to Phillis; for that, though it be not long, that I
have inioyed the good of your familiarity, yet are you to be no less assured
of my affection, then of hers, Phillis then answered, I assure my self, that
Astrea will always speak as freely before you, as before her self; her humor
being not to love by halues; and since she has sworn to be such, she has
nothing in her soul to conceal. It is true (continued Astrea) and that which
held me from saying more, was only for that the putting the weapon again into
the wound, will but poison it. Yet so it is, replied Diane, that oftentimes you
must use the weapon to heal it: and for me, I think, that to speak freely of
the disease to a friend, is, to make him a party: and if I durst desire you, it
would be a great satisfaction, to know, what your life has been, as my self
also will not make it dainty, to tell you mine, when you shall be desirous to
know it. Since you will have it so, answered Astrea, and that you have a mind
to partake in my sorrows, I will, so that afterward you impart to me of your
contentments, and that, in the mean time, you suffer me to use that breuity in
the discourse, which you desire to understand from me; and truly, an history so
unfortunate as mine, will not please, but by being short: And being all three
set in a round, she began to speak in this manner:

The History of Astrea and Phillis.
THey that know what it is, when friendship or hatted pass from father to son,
may well conceive Celadons fortune and mine, and without doubt, may affirm,
that they be not deceived: For (fair Diane) I believe you have often heard
speech of the old hatred between Alce and Hippolite, my father and mother, and
of Alcippe and Amarillis, the father and mother of Celadon, their displeasures
accompanying them even to their grave, which has been cause of so great
trouble among the shepherds of this Country, that I assure my self, there is
no man ignorant of it along the shore of the cruel and dishonored Lignon. And
yet it seems that Love, to show his power of persons so opposite, would unite
two so straightly, that nothing could break the lines, but death. For, hardly
had Celadon reached to the age of fourteen or fifteen years, and I of
twelve or thirteen, but that at an assembly which was had at the Temple of
Venus, which is on the top of this mountain, seated in the Plain, right over
against Montsur, about a mile from the Castle of Monbusor, this young shepherd
saw me: and as he has told me since, he had long before conceived a good
liking, upon the report which was made of me. But the let which I told you, our
fathers took from him all means, and I must tell you, that I do not think he
bare a greater liking, then did I; for I know not how, when I heard speech of
him, my heart danced in my belly; and this was but a presage of the troubles,
which since befell me on that occasion, Now at the instant, when he saw me, I
know not how he found matter of love in me, so that within a while after, he
resolved to love me, and to serve me.

And it seems that at this first view, both the one and the other of us was
at this pass, that we must love, so that as often as it was told me, that
he was the son of Alcippe, I found a certain change in my self, which was
not ordinary, and thenceforth all his actions began to please me, and much more
agreeing to my liking, then of all the other young shepherds of his age: and
for that as yet he durst not come near me, and that speech was denied him, his
looks at his commings and goings spoke to me so often, that at last I knew he
had a longing to tell me more; and to effect it, at a game that was kept at the
foot of the mountain, under the old elmes, that yielded a pleasant shade, he
used such art, that before I was aware, and seeming to be through want of
heed, he got under my hand; for my part I seemed not to note it, and used him
as I did all the others; but he on the contrary, took me by the hand, so that
making show to cast down his, I perceived his mouth on mine. This act made me
blush, and making show not to heed it, I turned my head away as hearkening to
the brawle: we danced. This was the cause that he stayed somewhile before he
spoke to me, not knowing as I think where to begin. At last unwilling to lose
this opportunity, which he had so long sought, he advanced himself before me,
and rounded in the care of Corilas, that led me in that da^ce, so loud, yet
faining to whisper, that I heard these words: I would to God, Corilas, the
contention between the father of this shepherdess, and mine, might be ended
in us two: and then went to his place. And Corilas answered him loud enough:
Make not you this attempt, Celadon; for it may be, you never attempted any
thing more dangerous. What hazard so ever it has (answered Celadon aloud) I
will not deny that I have spoken, and give my heart in pawn. In such promises
(replied Corilas) they use not to offer less assurance then that: and yet
within a while after, it is gainesaid. Whosoever (reioyneth the shepherd)
makes difficulties to run such a fortune as you threaten, I shall hold him for a
man of small courage. It is a virtue (answered Corilas) to be courageous, but
it is also a folly to be rash. By proof (replied Celadon) you shall know what
I will do, and in the mean time, I promise you at a word, that I will never
gainesay it. And because I made show, not to heed their discourse, directing
his words to me, he said, And you, fair shepherdess, what is your opinion? I
know not, answered I, of what you speak. He has told me, said Corilas, that to
draw a great good out of a great evil, he wishes your fathers hatred were
changed into love between their children. How (answered I, seeming not to know
him) are you the son of Alcippe? And having answered me, Yea, and moreover,
my servant? Me thinks said I, it were fitter for you to join to some other,
that may have more occasion to agree with you, then I. I have heard it said
(replied Celadon) that the gods do punish the offenses of the fathers on their
children; but among men, it has not been the custom: which is not, for that
it is not allowed to your beauty, which is divine, to use the same preuiledges
that the gods do: but if it be so, you are like then to grant pardon, when it
is demanded of you. Is it so, shepherd (interrupted Corilas) that you begin
your combat with crying mercy? In this combat (answered he) to be overcome, is
a kind of victory: and for my part, I am willing enough, provided that she will
take the spoil. I think they had continued their discourse longer, if the
dance had held out longer, but the end of it separated us, and every one went
to his place.

Somewhile after they began to propound prizes, for diverse exercises which they
were accustomed unto, as the Lute, to Run, and cast the Bar; whereto
Celadon, for being too young, was not admitted but only to the course whereat he
won the prize, which was a garland of diverse flowers, which was set on his head
by the whole assembly, with great commendation, that being so young had overcome
so many shepherds: He, without any long dreaming, took it off, came to me to
set it on my head, saying very low, See the confirmation of what I said! I was
so surprised, that I could not answer: and had it not been for Artemis your
mother, Phillis, I had given it him again; not for that coming from his hand,
it pleased me not, but because I feared Alce and Hippolite would not think well
of it. But Artemis, that rather desired to quench, then kindle these ancient
hatreds, commanded me to take it and to thank him: which I did so coldly, that
every one might well think it should not have been done, but by the command of
my Aunt. All this day passed thus, and the next day also, the young shepherd
losing no occasion to make his affection appear to me. And because that on the
third day they had a custom to represent, in honor of Venus, the judgment
which Paris gave of the three goddesses, Celadon resolved to thrust himself
among the maids, under the habit of a shepherdess. You know well, that on
that third day, about the end of the feast of the great Druide, they have used
to cast among the maids an apple of gold, whereon are written the names of the
three shepheardesses whom they think to be the most fair in the company, with
this word, Be it given to the most fair of the three:


And that, after they have dressed her, which is to represent the person of
Paris, who with the three shepheardesses enter into the Temple of Beauty,
dedicated to Venus, where, the doors being shut, she gives judgment of all
three, when she sees them naked, but only a thin Lawne, which couers them,
from the girdle-stead, almost to the knees. And for that once it was abused,
and that some shepherds had thrust themselves among the shepheardesses, it was
ordained by a public Edict, That he that did commit the like fault, should
(without remission) be stoned by the Maids at the gate of the Temple:

Now it happened, that this Youth (without consideration of the great danger)
that day attired himself like a shepherdess, and forcing himself into our
company, was taken for a maid; and as Fortune would favor him, my name was
written on the Apple, and Malthe and Stella; and when they came to set down
the name of her that bare the personage of Paris, I heard him name Orithee,
which was the name that Celadon had taken. God knows if his soul received not
all the delight it was capable of, when he saw his dessigne succeed so well.
In the end, we were brought into the Temple, where the Judge being set in his
seat, the doors being shut, and we three only remaining with him, we began,
according to the order, to unclothe ourselves; and because every one must go
apart, and speak to him, and make the offers that the three goddesses had
sometimes made to Paris; Stelle, who was most forward to put off her clothes,
went first to present her self to him, whom he beheld some while: And after he
had heard what she would say, he caused her to return, to give place to
Malthe, who was got before me, for that ashamed to show my self naked, I
delayed (as much as I could) the putting off of my clothes. Celadon, thinking
the time long, and after he had some short while entertained Malthe, seeing
that I came not, called for me. In the end, not able to delay it no longer, I
was constrained; but, O God, when I think on it, I am yet ready to die for
shame: yet my hair was dispersed, and almost covered me, on it I had no other
ornament, then the garland, which the day before he had given me. When the
others were gone back, and when he saw me in this sort; by him I observed that
twice or thrice he changed color, but I never suspected the cause: for my
part, shamefastness had tainted my cheek with so fresh a color, that he has
since sworn unto me, he never saw me so lovely: and he would have been
contented, he might have been suffered to stay all the day long in that
contemplation: but fearing to be discouerd, he was compelled to shorten his
contentment: and when he saw I said nothing, (for shame had tied up my tongue)
And how, Astrea, said het, hinke you your cause so good, that you need not as
well as others, seek the Judges good will? I doubt not, Orithee, answered I,
that I shall have more need to seduce my Judge by my words, then Stella or
Malthe: but I know well also, that I must as well give place to them in
persuading, as in beauty: so that but for the constraint whereto the custom
ties me, I had never come before you, in hope to win the prize. And if you
bear it away (answered the shepherd) what will you do for me? I shall have,
said I, the greater obligation to you, by how much I think it merits less.
How then, replied he, will you make me no other offer? The demand (said I) must
come from you, for I cannot teach you who deserves to be received. Swear to
me, said the shepherd, you will give me that which I shall demand, and my
judgment shall be to your advantage. After I had promised him, he asks of
my hair, to make him a bracelet: which I did; and after he had folded it in a
paper, he said to me: Now, Astrea, I will keep these hairs for a pledge of
the oath which you have made, that if ever you gainesay it, I may offer it to
the goddess Venus, and demand vengeance of her. That, said I, is superfluous,
since I am resolved never to fail. Then with a smlling countenance, he said
to me, God be thanked, fair Astrea, that my design has fallen out so
prosperously: for know, that which you have promised me, is to love me above
any in the world, and to receive me as your faithful servant, who am Celadon,
and not Orithee, as you suppose; I say, that Celadon, by whom love has given
proof, that hatred is not of power sufficient to disappoint his effects, since
even among the displeasures of our fathers, he has made me so yours, that I
had no fear to dye at the gate of this temple, to give you testimony of my
affection. Judge, wise Diane, what became of me: for love forbade me to seek
revenge of my shamefastnes; and yet shame encouraged me against love: at last,
after a confused disputation, it was impossible for me to consent to cause him
dye, since the offense which he made, proceeded not but of too great love to
me: yet knowing him to be a shepherd, I could no longer stay before his eyes;
and without making other answer, I ran to my companions, whom I found almost
dressed; and taking up my garments, scarce knowing what I did, I made my self
ready as soon as was possible. But to be short, when we were all ready, the
dissembled Orithee placed her self at the entry of the gate; and having us all
three before her: I ordain (says she) that the prize of beauty be given to
Astrea: in witness whereof I present her the golden apple: and there is no
cause any body should doubt of my judgment, since I have seen her; and though
a maid, yet, I have felt the force. In saying those words, he presented me
the apple, which I received, being much troubled; and the father, when with a
loud voice he said, Receive this Apple as a pawn of my affection, which is as
infinite, as this is round. I answered him, Be content, rash man, that I
receive it to save thy life: and that otherwise I would refuse it, as coming
from thy hand. He durst not reply, for fear he might be heard and known: and
because the custom was, that she that received the Apple, was to kiss the
Judge, by way of thankfulness, I was constrained to kiss him: but I assure
you, had I not known him until then, I should then have discovered him to be
a shepherd: for it was not the kiss of a maid.

Presently, the noise, and the applause of the company separated us, because
the Druyde having crowned me, caused me to be borne in a chair to the place
of the Assembly, with so much honor, that every one wondered I was no more
cheerful. But I was so troubled, and so sore beaten, between Love and
Despite, that I scarce knew what I did. As for Celadon, as soon as he had
finished the ceremonies, he lost himself amongst the other shepheardesses, and
by little and little, without the heeding of any body, got out of the company,
and put off his borrowed garments, to put on his own natural clothes, with
which he came again to us; with a face so confident, that no man would ever
have suspected him. As for me, when I saw him, I might scarce turn mine eyes
to him, being full of shame and choler. But he that noted it, and made no show
of it, found the means to come to me, and to say loud enough; The Judge which
has given you the prize of beauty, has showed good judgment; and me thinks,
that albeit the Justice of your cause do well deserve so favorable a sentence,
yet must not you be failing to bear him some kind of obligation. I believe,
shepherd, answered I softly enough, that he is more obliged to me, then I to
him: for that if he gave me an apple, which (in some sort) was due to me, I
have given him life, which his rashness merited to lose. So he told me
(answered presently Celadon) that he would preserve it only for your service.
If I had not more respect (replied I) to my self, then to him, I had not let
him go without chasticement for so great a presumption. But enough, Celadon,
let us cut off this discourse, and content your self, that if I have not
punished you as you deserve, it was only for fear of giving occasion to
others to talk their pleasure of me, and not for want of will to see you
punished. If there be nothing but that (said he) to hinder my death, tell me in
what fashion you will have me die, and you shall see I have no less courage to
satisfy you, then I have had of love to offend you. This discourse would be
too long, if I should tell you all our talk in particular.

So it was, that after many replies now on the one side and the other, whereby
it was impossible for me to doubt of his affection, if at least the diverse
changes of countenance might bewray any thing I said to him seeming to be in
choler: Bethink you, shepherd, of the hatred of our fathers, and believe,
that that which I bear, shall not turn to nothing, if you ever more importune
me with your follies, which your young age, and my honor, pardon for this
time. I used these last words, to give him the less courage. For it is true,
that his beauty, courage, and affection pleased me; and that he might make no
further answer, I turned to talk with Stella, who was not far off. He all
astonished with this answer, withdrew from the company, so sad, that in few days
he was scarce to be known, and so solitary, that his haunt was in the places
most desolate and savage of all our woods. Whereof being advertised by some of
my companions, who told me, without conceit, that I was the cause; I began to
think of his pain, and resolved in my mind, to search some means to give
him satisfaction. And because (as I told you) he forsook all company, I was
constrained (that I might meet him) to drive my flock that way where I knew he
resorted most. And when it fell out twice or thrice to be in vain, at last,
one day, as I was seeking for him, me thought, I heard his voice among some
trees: and I was not deceived; for coming softly toward him, I saw him lie
along on the ground, and his eyes wet tears, so bent upward to heaven, that
they seemed immovable.

The sight of him moved me so to pity, being somewhat inclined thereto
before, that I resolved no longer to leave him in this pain. Therefore, after
I had considered of it awhile, and not willing it might appear to him that I
sought him out, I withdrew some good way from the place, whereseeming not to
heed him, I sung so high, that my voice came to his ears. As soon as he
heard me, I might see he raised up himself in a dumpe, and turning his eyes
to the place where I was, he stood like one ravished to hear me, which when I
marked, that I might give him commodity to come near me, I made as though I
would sleep, and yet I held mine eyes half open, to see what it would come
to; and, indeed, it failed not of that I purposed: for coming softly toward
me, he came and kneeled as close to me as he could, and after he had long
time stayed in this sort, when I made show to be fast asleep, to give him the
more hardines, I perceived, that after some sighs, he stoopes down softly
against my mouth, and kisses me. Then thinking he had taken courage enough, I
opened mine eyes, as if I had been waked when he touched me; and rising up, I
said to him, seeming to be angry, Uncivil shepherd, what has made thee so
unmannerly, to come to disquiet my sleep in this sort? He then, al trembling,
and not raising his knees, It is you, fair shepherdess, said he, that have
constrained me, and if I have offended, you must punish your own perfectio^s,
which are the cause. These are always, said I, the excuses of your
malipertnesse: but if you hold on to displease me thus, believe it,
shepherd, I will not bear it. If you call it a displeasure, answered he, to
be loved, and adored, in good time begin to study, what punishment you will
inflict on me; for, now I swear unto you, that I shall displease you in this
sort all my life, and no rigor of your cruelty, nor enmity of our fathers, nor
any let in the world can divert me from this design.

But, fair Diane, I must shorten these pleasing discourses, being so contrary
to the unfortunate season wherein I am, and must only tell you, that in the
end, being overcome, I said to him, But, shepherd, what end is your design
like to have, since that they which may frame you to their pleasure, disallow
it? How, replied he presently, Frame to their pleasure? So far is it that
Alcippe has power over my will, that I have it not my self. You may dispose
of your self, said I, at your own pleasure, but not of the obedience you owe
to your father, without committing a great fault. The obedience, answered he,
which I owe him, may not pass that which I can over my self: for this is no
faulting, not to do that which one cannot. But be it so, that I owe him it,
since of two evils we are to shun the greatest, I choose rather to be failing
toward him, that is but a man, then against your beauty which is divine. Our
discourse, in the end, held on so far, that I must suffer him to be my
servant; and because we were young, both the one and the other, so that we had
not Art enough to cover our design, Alcippe, within a while, took notice of
it, and not being willing that this love should pass further on, he resolved
with his old friend Cleante, to cause him to undertake a journey so long, that
absence might blot out this young impression of Love. But this distance auayled
as little, as all the other crafty tricks with which he served himself since.
For Celadon, though he were young, yet had a resolution to overcome all
difficulties: that, whereas others others meet their contraries with pain,
he took them for trials of himself, and called them the touchstones of his
faithfulness: and for as much as he knew, his voyage would be long, he desired
me to give him the commodity to bid me adieu. I did it, fair Diane, but if you
had seen the affection, wherewith he besought me to love him; the oaths, by
which he assured me never to change; and the coniurations, by which he bound
me never to love other; without doubt, you would judge, that things most
impossible, might fall out sooner, then the loss of this amity. In the end,
not daring to stay longer, he said, My Astrea, for so he did in private call
me, I leave you my brother Licidas, from who^ I have not concealed any one of
my designs; he knows what service I have vowed unto you: promise me, if it
please you, that I may depart with contentment, to receive, as coming from
me, all these services that he shall do you, and that, by his presence, you
renew the memory of Celadon. And, indeed, he had reason to make this request:
for Licidas, during his absence, showed himself so curious to observe what his
brother had given him in charge, that many thought he succeeded in the
affection which his brother bare me. That was the cause that Alcippe, after he
had kept him three years out of this Country, called him back, being of
opinion, that so long a time had defaced the light impression, which Love had
made in a soul so young; and that growing more wise, he might easily draw
Licidas from affecting me. But his return was a strong assurance to me of his
faithfulness: For the chillness of the Alps, which he had twice passed
through, could nothing diminish the fire of his love; nor the admirable beauties
of those Romans, divert him from the least part of what he had promised me. O
God, with what contentment came he to meet me! he besought me by his brother,
that I would give him opportunity to speak with me. I think I have yet his
letter. Alas! I have more charily preserved that which came from him, then
himself. And then she drew out letters which she had received from him, and
pulling out the first (for they were all laid in order) after she had wiped her
eyes, she read these words:

Far Astrea, my banishment has been overcome of my patience, God grant the
like of your love; I went out with such grief, and am returned with so great
contentment, that not perishing, neither in going nor coming, I shall always
give proof, that one may not die, neither of too much pleasure, nor too much
displeasure. Let me then see you, that I may recount my fortune unto you, that
are my only Fortune.

Fair Diane, it is impossible I should remember the discourse which we had,
without wounding my self, so that the least stroke is as grievous to me as
death. During the absence of Celadon, Artemis my Aunt, and the mother of
Phillis, came to see her kinsfolk, and brought with her this shepherdess,
poynting to Phillis. And because our fashion of living better pleased them then
that of the shepherds of Alleer, she resolved to dwell with us, which was no
small contentment to us: for by this means we grew familiar, and though the
friendship was not so strait, as it fell out afterward, yet her humor so
pleased me, that I passed over many unquiet hours reasonably well with her.
And when Celadon was returned, and that he had some while conuersed with her,
he gave so good a judgment, that I may truly say, he is the ground of the
strait amity which has since been between her and me. It was about this
time, that he being of the age of seventeen or eighteeneyeeres, and I of
fifteen or sixteen, we began to carry our selves with more wisdom, so
that (to hide our love) I entreated him, or rather, I constrained him, to make
love to all the shepheardesses that had any show of beauty, that the suite he
made to me, might be judged to be rather common then particular. I say, I
constrained him, because I think, but for his brother Licidas, he would never
have given his consent. For, after he had many times fallen on his knees before
me, to call back the charge I gave him, in the end, his brother told him, that
it was necessary for my contentment it should be so: and that if he knew no
other remedy, he might therein help himself by his imagination: and when he
spoke to others, he should conceit to himself, it was to me. Alas, the poor
shepherd had good reason to make such difficulty; for he ouer-well foresaw,
that from it would arise the cause of his death. Excuse me (wise Diane) if my
tears interrupt my discourse, seeing I have so just cause, that it were
impiety to forbid them me. And after she had dried her eyes, she renewed her
discourse in this manner:

And because Phillis was usually with me, it was she to whom, at the first, he
addressed himself, but with such inforcement, that I could hardly refrain
from laughter: and because Phillis thought he was in earnest, and that she used
him, as they ordinarily do him that begins to be a suitor, I remember, that
seeing himself rudely handled, he often sung this song which he made on that
subject.

A SONG.
Upon a certain fountains banks,
Which moldy moss all ouer-growes,
Whose water with a winding flows,
Wandering through plains in many crankes,
A shepherd gazing on the wave,
S^^g to his pipe these verses grave,
Cease, one day, cease, too fair for me,
Before my death cruel to be.
Can it be that this grievous pain,
Which I for loving you endure,
If gods be not called just in vain,
At last may ^e no good procure?
Or can it be, that such a Love
May never any pity move?
The rather being great and true,
As that with which I honor you.
Those eyes, whose wanton passages
Have often made me hope in vain,
Full of so many forgeries,
Will they forswear themselves so plain?
They often have told me, that her heart
At last would rigor force to part:
Agreeing to which false report,
The rest of her fair face consort.
But how, fair eyes of shepherdess,
Shall they to such false courses yield,
As are the Courtiers practices?
It seems these beauties of the field,
Though without fucus on their skin,
Yet can they paint their heart within,
And learn a lesson in their schools,
To give but words, the bane of fools.
Enough, it is high time, O fair,
To end this ouer-cruell fit,
And think that beauty, never so rare,
Which has not sweetness mixed with it,
Is as an eye that wants daylight,
And fair, that is without love quite,
As most unworthy of that cole,
Is like a body wanting soul.
Sister (interrupted Phillis) I remember it well you speak of, and I shall
make you laugh at the manner of his speech to me. For, for the most part, it
was with such broken language, that we had need of an Interpreter to make us
understand them; and usually when he was to name me, he would call me Astrea.
But see what our inclination is! I knew well that Nature had (in some sort)
preferred Celadon before Licidas, yet not being able to tell you the reason
Licidas was more welcome to me. Alas sister, (said Astrea) you bring to my
remembrance the speech, which he used about that time of you, and of this fair
shepherdess (said she) turning to Diane. Fair shepherdess (said he to me)
the wise Bellinde, and your Aunt Artemis, are infinitely happy, in having such
daughters: and our Lignon is much bound to them, since (by their means) it
has the happiness to see upon her shores these two fair and wise
shepheardesses. And believe me, if I know any thing, they only deserve the
amity of Astrea: and therefore I advise you to love them: for I perceive by
that little knowledge I have of them, that you shall find great contentment in
their familiarity. Would to God, one of them would vouchsafe to respect my
brother Licidas, with the like affection that I bear. And for that at that
time I had no great knowledge of you (fair Diane) I answered, that I desired
he should rather serve Phillis; and it fell out as I wished: for the ordinary
conversation he had with her, at the first brought forth familiarity between
them, and at last he loved in earnest. One day, when he found her at leisure,
he resolved to declare his affection with much love, and with the fewest words
he could. Fair shepherdess (said he) you have knowledge enough of your
selves to believe, that those which love you, can not but love you infinitely.
It can not be, that my actions, have given you any knowledge of my affection,
for the little you know of it, since none can love you but in extremity, you
may swear, that my love is wonderful great: and yet being such, I demand of
you, as yet, but a beginning of good will. Celadon and I were so near, that we
could well hear this declaration, and the answer also that Phillis gave him,
which indeed was more rude then I expected from her. For long time before, she
and I well enough knew, by the eyes and actions of Licidas, that he was in love
with her; and we have often talked of it, and I have found in her, rather
goodwill to him, then otherwise: yet at this brunt she answered him so
bitterly, that Licidas went away in despair. And Celadon, who loved his
brother more then ordinary, not able to endure to see him used in this sort,
and not knowing how to take it, grew almost angry with me; whereat, I could not
hold from smiling, and at last I told him:

Be not grieved at this answer, Celadon: for we are straightly tied to it, since
the shepherds of these times (for the most part) delight to make every one
believe, that they have better fortunes then indeed they have, thinking that
the glory of a shepherd shall be increased by the diminution of our honor.
And, that you may know, that I know well the humor of Phillis, I took the
charge upon me, to bring Licidas into her good grace: provided that he
continue, and that he have a little patience. But I must tell you, that when I
first talked with her, she put me off so far, that I could but only hope, so
that I resolved to win her in time. But Licidas, who had no patience, had a
purpose to love her no more; and at that time he would ordinarily go singing
these verses:

STANZA'S On a resolution, to love no more.
When I see those fair eyes that play the conqu'rers part,
I strait yield unto them, as princes of my heart.
Thinking that rigor should be banished from thence:
But finding now too well their cruelties offense,
(I think, to eternize on us their tyranny,)
This cannot well be love, but rather treachery.
It Is true, it is of them from whence always arise,
To meanest of their trains, some amorous novelties.
But whereto serves this, that like as from the head,
No sooner water springs, but instantly it is fled?
Right so it is with love, which with a ranging thirst,
Flies far from those same eyes that brought it forth at first.
By his example then, fly we from those fair eyes,
Fly them, and let us think, in it our safety lies,
And when they will have us to follow where they list,
Let us not stay for blows, which we cannot resist.
For better it is far to save our selves by flight,
Then to attend the death which we may well acquit.
I think Licidas had not so readily put end to the cruelty of Phillis, in
refusing his affection, if by fortune one day she and I, according to our
manner, going forth to walk by Lignon, had not met this shepherd in an I Will of
the river, in a place very dark, and where there was no appearance of
dissembling. We saw him from one side of the river, which was large and deep,
to hinder us from going to the place where he was, but not from hearing the
verses which he went with complaining; and drawing (as it seemed) some ciphers
on the sand with the end of his sheephooke, which we could not know, for the
distance between us: but the verses were these:

A MADRIGALL, That he should not hope to be beloved.
Think we, in loving her,
Our faithful love can cast
A groundwork that may last?
Alas, in vain it were.
I hold to my great pain,
That that which with my hand,
I write in flitting sand,
Will longer time remain,
Then I for my avail,
In her soul various,
Shall fix (in loving thus)
The hold, that will not fail.
Within a while we heard, after he had been silent some time, he took again
his speech in this manner, with a great alas, and lifting up his eyes to
heaven: O God, if thou be angry with me, for that I have adored with more
devotion, the work of thy hands, then thine own self; why have thou not
compassion of the error, which thou causest me to commit? Or if thou be not
pleased, that Phillis should be adored, either thou should have put less
perfection in her, or in me less knowledge of her perfections: for is it not a
kind of profaning a thing of that merit, to offer it less affection? I
think, the shepherd held on in such like discourses, but I could not hear
them, because Phillis, taking me by force by the arm, carried me away with
her. And when we were some pretty distance removed, I said, Naughty Phillis,
why have thou no pity on this shepherd, whom thou see ready to die for thy
sake? Sister, answered she, the shepherds of this country are such
dissemblers, that often their heart denies that which their mouth promises,
that if without passions we look into the actions of such as he, we shall
find nothing but cunning. And for the words we hear, (for my part) I judge,
that having spyed us afar off, he purposely set himself in our way, that we
should hear his dissembled complaints; otherwise, would they not as well be
spoken to us, as to these woods and wild rivers? But sister (answered I) you
have forbid him. See (replied she) a great proof of his small love! Is there
any commandment strong enough, to stay a violent affection? Believe me,
sister, the love that may bend, is not strong. Think you not, that if he
disobey my commandment, I should think he loved me the better? But sister,
in the end (said I) he obeyed you. And well (replied she) has he obeyed me;
and herein I held him very obedient: but in that he has quite given over his
suite to me, I hold him for a man very passionate. And why? was he of opinion,
that at the first discovery of his good will to me, I should have taken some
witness, that he might not hereafter gainsay it?

If I had not interrupted her, I think she had held on her discourse very
long; but because I desired that Licidas might be used in another fashion, for
the pain that Celadon suffered, I told her that these kind of speeches were of
some purpose to be used to Licidas, but not to me, who knew well, that we are
bound to show more coffeehouse, when they talk to us of love, then we
feel, that thereby we may try what mind they have that speak to us: that I
would commend her, if she used those terms; but it is great want of trust
toward me, who have not co^cealed from her that which was most secret in my
soul: and that (for conclusion) since it was impossible she could avoid the
being beloved of some, it was much better it might be by Licidas then by any
other, since she could not choose but be assured of his affection. Where to she
answered, that she never had the thought to dissemble with me; and she would be
very angry I should have that opinion of her: and to give me more proof, since
I desired she should intertaine Licidas, she would obey me, when she should
know that he loved her as he said. That was the cause that Celadon often
finding her after with me, gave her a Letter that his brother had written by my
advice.

A Letter of Licidas to Phillis.
IF I have not always loved you, let me never be beloved of any: and if my
aff^^tion do ever change, let my present misfortune never change. It is true,
that some-while I have hidden my love within my heart, so that I have not
suffered it to appear in my eyes nor words. If I have offended in it, accuse
the respect I carry you, who have ordained I should do so. If you believe not
the oath which I have made you, take what proof you will of me, and you shall
know that you have me more yours, then I can assure you by my true, but most
feeble words.


In the end (wise Diane) after many replies on both sides, we so wrought, that
Licidas was entertained; and from that time we began, all four, one life,
which was not unpleasing, either of us favoring the other, with the most
discretion we could possibly. And that we might the better cover our dessigne,
we invented many means, were it to talk, were it to write in secrecy.

It may be, you have noted that little rock, that stands upon the great way,
to the Rock: you must needs know that it is painful to get up: but being
there, the place is so fenced, that a man may be there unseen of any; and
because it stands on the hie way, we made choice of it to meet in, that none
might spy us; and if any met us going by, we made show to be on our way, and
that neither the one nor the other might go in vain, we put in the morning
some bough at the foot of it for a mark, that we had somewhat to say.

It is true that we were so near unto the high way; that our raised voice
might easily be heard of them that passed by: this was the only cause that,
usually we left either Phillis or Licidas to watch, that at what time soever
they saw any come afar off, they should cough to give us warning. And
because we were used to write always when we were let or hindered, and
could not come to that place, we chose out along that little river that runs
by the great way, an old Willow tree half eaten for age; in the hollow
whereof, we always laid our letters; and that we might more easily make
answer, we usually left some paper and an inkehorne.

To be short (wise Diane) we turned on every side that we possibly could, to
keep us from discovery: And namely, we forthwith took this course, not to
talk together, Celadon and I, nor Licidas and Phillis: so that there were many
that thought that Celadon had changed his mind, because that as soon as he
saw Phillis, he would haste to intertaine her, and she showed him all the good
countenance she could; and I likewise always, when Licidas came in place,
brake company from any other, to go talk with him. It fell out in success of
time, that Celadon himself was of opinion, that I loved Licidas; and I
believed he loved Phillis: and Phillis thought Licidas loved me; and Licidas
suspected that Phillis loved Celadon, in such sort, that unawares we found our
selves so cumbred with these opinions, that jealousy made us know, that a
little show will cause him breed in an heart that loves well. Indeed
(interrupted Phillis) we were Lovers and Scholars at that time: for, to what
purpose served it, to conceal that we truly loved, by making men believe a
love that was not, since you may as well fear, that men should think you
bear good will to Licidas, as to Celadon? Sister, sister, replied Astrea,
clapping her hand on her shoulder; we fear not when men do think of us that
which is not; and on the contrary, the least suspicion of that which is true,
gives us no rest. Truly jealousy (continued she, turning toward Diane) so
attached us all four, that I think that life had long lasted among us, if
some good spirit had not wrought in us a clearing in the presence each of
other. Some seven or eight days passed, that we saw not each other in the
rock, and that the letters which Celadon and I laid, were so differing from
those we formerly used, that it seemed they were differing persons. At last, as
I told you, some good spirit having care of us, caused us (by chance) to meet
all four in that place, without other company. And the love of Celadon
(therein more strong then the rest, in that it compelled him to speak first)
put these words into his mouth:

Fair Astrea, if I thought time could give remedy to the pain I feel, I
would refer my self to that which it might bring; but since the older it
grows, the more it increases, I am enforced to seek out a better, by the
complaint that I am to make to you of the wrong I receive, and I am more
readily brought to it, for that I am to make my complaint both before my
Judges, and my adversaries. And as he was going forward, Licidas interrupted
him, saying that he was in pain, that in greatness differed not from his. In
greatness (said Celadon) it is impossible: for mine is extreme. And mine
(replied Licidas) is without comparison. While the shepherds talked together,
I turned to Phillis, and said, You see (sister) these shepherds will complain
of us. Whereto she answered me, But we have more cause to complain of them.
But yet (said I) although I have great cause to complain of Celadon, yet I
have more of you, who under the color of the friendship you seem to bear me,
have drawn him from that he made show of to me; so that I may say, you have
robbed me. And for that Phillis stood so confused at my words, that she knew
not what to answer, Celadon turning to me, said: Ah fair shepherdess! but
fleeting as fair: Is it so, that you have lost the memory of the services of
Celadon, and of your own oaths? I complain not so much of Licidas, though he
have failed in his duty of proximity and amity between us, as of you to your
self: knowing well, that the desire which your perfections may bring into an
heart, may make it forget all respect of duty. But is it possible, that so long
a service as mine, so absolute a power as you have ever had over me, and so
entire an affection as mine cannot somewhat stay the inconstancy of your soul?
or in good time, if yet all that comes from me, be of so small force, how
comes it, that your faith so often sworn, and the gods so often called to
witness, cannot withold you from making a new election before my face? At
the same time Licidas taking the fair hand of Phillis, after a great sigh, he
said: Fair hand, wherein I had entirely placed my will, can I live, and know
that thou delightest to be borne to another heart, then mine? then mine, I say,
that have merited so much of fortune, if a man may be worthy by the most great,
most sincere, and by the most faithful love that ever was.

I could not hear the other words that Licidas went on with; for I was
constrained to answer Celadon. Shepherd, shepherd, said I, all these words of
faithfulness, and of amity, are more in your mouth, then in your heart: and I
have more cause to complain of you, then to hear you. But because I make no
more reckning of any thing that comes from you, I will not vouchsafe to
complain; so should you do, if your dissimulations would suffer you. But
since our affairs be at these terms, go on, Celadon, love Phillis well,
serve her well, her virtues deserve it: and if in speaking unto you, I blush,
it is for spite that I have loved that which was so unworthy, and has so
grossly deceived me. The astonishment of Celadon was so great, hearing the
reproaches I used to him, that he stayed a long time, not able to speak a word:
which gave me opportunity to hear what Phillis answered Licidas. Licidas,
Licidas, let him that ownes me, demand me. You call me fleeting, and you know
well, that that term agrees best with your actions. But, think you in
complaining first, you can purge the wrong you do me? I falter not, but your
self: for it is more shame to you to change, then it is loss to me in your
change. But that which offends me, is, that you will accuse me for your own
fault, and feign a good reason of your own unfaithfulness. Yet it is true,
that he that deceives a brother, may fail her that is not so near him. And
then turning her self to me, she said: And you, Astrea, think that the gain
you have made by diuerting him from my amity, can no longer last, then until
some other object present it self; though I know well, your perfections have
that power, that if it be not an heart all of feathers, they are able to slay
it. Phillis (replied I) the proof shall witness, that you are a flatterer,
when you speak so of the perfections which are in me; since having deprived me
of Celadon, they must needs be feeble, not being able to hold him, after they
had gotten him. Celadon falling on his knee before me: It is not (said he) that
I misprize the merits of Phillis: but I protest before all the gods, that she
has not kindled the least spark of love in my soul; and that I bear with
less grief, the offense you do me in changing, then that you commit against
my affection, in blaming it of inconstancy. It is to no purpose (wise Diane) to
particularize all our discourse; for they would be too long, and might offend
you; so that before we parted, we were so well reduced to our good senses, that
I must tell you, we acknowledged the small reason we had to suspect one
another. And we have good cause to thank heaven, that we made this declaration
all four together; for I think, otherwise it had been impossible to root
out this error from our soul: and (for my own part) I assure you, that
nothing could have made me understand reason, if Celadon had not spoken after
this manner before Phillis.

Now since that time, we went with less heed then we were wont. But to leave
this travail, I enter into another no less troublesome: for we could not so
well dissemble, but Alcippe, that lay in watch, knew, that his sons affection
to me was not altogether extinct; and for his more assurance, he looked so
heedfully to his actions, that noting with what curiosity he went always to
the old Willow, where we laid our letters; one morning he came first, and after
he had long sought, noting the path which we had made on the grass, by often
going, he took it for his guide; and the tract brought him right to the foot
of the tree, where he found a letter which I had laid there ouer-night: It was
thus:

The letter of Astrea to Celadon.
YEsterday we went out of the temple, where we were assembled to be present,
at the hours which they did to Pan and Siringue, celebrating their day: I
should have said feasting, if you had been there: but the love I bare you is
such, that not the divine things (if it may be lawful for me to say so)
without you can please me. I find my self so unfit, for our common
business, that but for the promise, which I made to write daily to you, I know
not if this day you should have heard any news from me. Receive them then at
this time, for my promise set.


When Alcippe had read this letter, he laid it in the same place again and
hiding himself to see the answer: his son was not slack in coming; and not
finding any paper, he writ on the back of my Letter, and has told me since,
it was thus:

The Letter of Celadon to the Shepherdess Astrea.
YOu bind me, and unbind me at one time: pardon me if this word offend you:
when you tell me you love me, can I have any greater obligations to all the
gods? But the offense is not small, that you had not written at this time, but
for that you promised me: For I am indebted to your promise, and not to your
love. Remember, I beseech you, that I am not yours, because I have promised
you, but because I am truly yours; and that in like sort I desire not Letters
for the conditions that are between us, but for the sole witness of your
goodwill, not welcomming them as merchandises, but as being sent me from an
entire good will.


Alcippe knew not who the shepherdess might be, to whom this letter was
directed, for there was no name to it: but see how it came from a spirit that
would be cross! he thought not much of his pain, to stay in that place above
5. or 6 hours, to see who she should be that would come to seek it: assuring
himself, the day would not be fully past, but some one would come fetch it. It
was late before I went: but presently, when he saw me, for fear lest I should
take him, he turned himself, and made show as if he were asleep. And I, that
I might give no cause of suspicion, turning my pace, feigned to take another
way. He contrarily well satisfied for his pain, as soon as I was gone, took
the Letter, and carried it with him. Whereupon incontinently he made his
dessigne to send away his son, for that he would not in any case, there
should be alliance between us, for the extreme hatred between Aloe and him,
but rather to the contrary, he had a purpose to marry him unto Malthe the
daughter of Forelle, for commodity (as he pretended) of their neighborhood.
The words which were used between us at our departing, have been but too much
published by one of the Nymphs of Belinde. For I know not how that day
Licidas, who was at the foot of the rock, fell asleep; and that Nymph, as she
went by, heard us, and wrote down in her Tables all our discourse. And what?
(interrupted Diane) are those the verses which I have heard sung to one of my
mothers Nymphs at the departure of a shepherd? These be they, answered
Astrea: and because I would not discover, that it any thing touched me, I durst
not demand them. Trouble not your self (replied Diane) for I will give you a
copy to morrow. And after Astrea had thanked her, she went forward.

Now, during this absence, Olympe, the daughter of shepherd Lupeander,
dwelling on the confines of Forest, on the side the river Furant, came with her
mother into our Hamlet: and, because this good old woman much loved Amarillis,
as having in their youth been bred together, she came to visit her. This
young shepherdess was not so fair as she was conceited, and had so good an
opinion of her self, that she thought all the shepherds that looked on her,
were in love with her; which is a rule infallible, for all those that love
themselves. That was the cause, that as soon as she came into the house of
Alcippe, that she began to busy her self with Licidas, thinking the ciuility
he used toward her, proceeded of Love. As soon as the shepherd perceived it,
he came to tell us, and know how he should behave himself: we gave advise
(that he might the better cover the affection he bore to Phillis) to maintain
Olympe in this opinion. And shortly after, it fell out by mischance, that
Artemis had some affairs on the coast of Allier, whither she carried Phillis
with her, notwithstanding all the cunning we could invent to keep her back.
During this absence, which might be about five or six months, the mother of
Olympe returned, leaving her daughter in the hands of Amarillis, with a purpose
that Licidas should marry her, judging, according to that they saw, that he
loved her very dearly. And because it was an advancement to her, she was
counseled by her mother, to carry her self as lovely as she could. And assure
you, fair Diane, she dissembled not, for thenceforth she rather sued unto him,
then was sued unto by him: So that one day, when she found him at leisure, as
she thought, within the inward parts of the wood of Bonlieu, where by fortune
he went to seek a wandering sheep: after some common, speeches she laid her
arm on his neck, and after she had kissed him, said, Gentle shepherd, I know
not what I have in me so unpleasing, that I cannot by any demonstrations of
good will, find place in your good graces. It may be, answered the shepherd
smiling, because I have none. He that should say as you do, replied the
shepherdess, may be thought to be as much blinded as your self, if you see
not the offer which I make of my amity; till when, shepherd, ordain you that
I love without being beloved, and that I shall still seek you, without finding
acceptance. I cannot think, that the other shepheardesses whom you make so
much of, are more lovely then my self, or have any thing above me, but the
possession of your good graces. Olympe uttered these words with that affection,
that Licidas was moved at it. Fair Diane, at all other times, when I remember
this accident that befell the shepherd, I could not refrain from laughter,
but now my misfortune forbids me, and yet me thought I could be angry with none
but Phillis, who had so charged him to love her: for this fayning at last
turned to earnest.

Hereupon this miserable Olympe, thinking by her favors to make her self
beloved the more, made her self to be so much dis-esteemed, that Licidas
having had of her all that he might, disdained her so, that he could not abide
she should be near him. Presently after this fortune befell, he came to tell
me with such appearance of displeasure, that (I think) he was sorry for his
fault; and yet it fell not out so: for this shepherdess committed such folly,
that she grew to be with child; and about the time she first perceived it,
Phillis returned from her journey: and if I expected her with great pain, I
likewise welco^med her with much co^tentment. But as commonly they first dema^d
of that which nearest touches the heart, Phillis, after two or three former
words, failed not to ask how Licidas did, and how he behaved himself with
Olympe. Very well (answered I) and I assure my self, he will not be long
before he come to tell you news. I cut my speech the shorter, for fear I
might tell her somewhat that might anger Licidas, who for his part was not
without pain, not knowing how to aboard the shepherdess: at last he resolved
to suffer al things rather the^ to be banished from her sight, and came to
find her in her lodging, where he knew I was. As soon as she saw him, she
ran to him with open arms to salute him: but giving a little back, he said,
Fair Phillis, I have not hardines enough to come near you, except you pardon
me the fault I have done you. The shepherdess thinking he had excused himself
for coming no sooner, as he was accustomed, (answered him) There is nothing
can hold me back from saluting Licidas; and when he has offended me, I must
pardon him always. At this word she came forward, and welcomed him with
great affection, but it was his pleasure when he brought her back to me, to
pray me tell his error to his Mistress, that he might speedily know to what
she would condemn him. Not for that the grief (says he) shall not accompany
me to my grave, but for the desire I have to know what you ordain of me. This
word brought color into the face of Phillis, doubting that her pardon was
greater then her meaning: whereof Licidas taking heed, I have not courage
enough said he to me, to hear the declaration you shall make of me. Pardon me
then, fair Mistress (turning to Phillis) if I break company so soon, and if my
life be unpleasing to you, and that my death may give you satisfaction, be not
covetous of my blood. At this word though Phillis called him back, yet would he
not come, but contrarily pulling the door after him, left us alone. You may
not think that Phillis made dainty, to ask if there were any news, and
whence so great fear came. Without stay in long discourse, I told her as it
was, and withal, laid all the fault on our selves, who did not foresee, that
his youth could no longer resist the assaults of this folly, and that his
displeasure was so great, that his error was pardonable. At the first I could
not obtain that I desired of her; but some few days after, Licidas, by my
counsel, came to cast himself on his knees, and she ran into another
chamber that she might not see him, and from thence into another, flying from
Licidas, who still followed her, and was resolved, as he said, not to let her
rest, till he had either pardon or death. In the end, not knowing whither to
fly further, she stayed in a closet; where Licidas entering, and shutting the
doors, he set himself on his knees before her, and without speaking any other
thing, attended the sentence of her will. This affectionate obstinacy had more
force in her, then any persuasions; and so staying some while without speaking
to him,

Go, said she to him importunate, it is thy importunity, and not the^e that I
pardon. At this word he kissed her hand, and came to open me the door, to
give me to understand, that he had got the victory; and then seeing his
affairs in so good case, I would not let them part asunder, until all actions
were entirely forgiven: and Phillis so pardoned the shepherd, that seeing him
distressed extremely, to hide Olympes belly, which now grew great to the view,
she offered to assist him in all that possibly she could. Certainly
(interrupted Diane) see a strange proof of good amity, to pardon such an
offense which is entirely against amity: and more, to provide that she which
caused it, take no displeasure. Without fayning, Phillis, this is too much; and
for me, I protest, my courage knows not how to brook it: yet my amity did so
then, answered Phillis, and by that you may judge of what quality it was in me.
Let us leave this consideration apart (replied Diane) for it would be too hard
for you, since the not feeling the offenses which be done against amity, is
rather a sign of defect, then the ouer-abundance of Love: and for my part, if
I had been one of the friends of Licidas, I should have interpreted rather to
the disadvantage of your good will. Ah! Diane, said Phillis, if you as well
knew what it is to love, as you do to cause your self to be beloved, you
will judge it needful the friend should know himself, but heaven is pleased
to have you be beloved, and not to love. If it be so, said Diane, I am more
bound to it for such a benefit, then for my life; but I may be capable without
loving, to judge of Love. It cannot be, interrupted Phillis. I had rather hold
my peace, answered Diane, then speak with so dear a permission: but if you
will allow me the favor that you give to the Physician, who talks and judges
indifferently of all sorts of diseases, though he never had them: I would tell
you, that if there be any thing in amity whereof we may make reckoning, it
ought to be the amity it self without more; for all other things that please
us, are but to be joined with it: and therefore there is nothing that more
offends him that loves, then to spy any defect in love: and not to feel such
offenses, is (indeed) to have a spirit feeble for that passion. And will you
have me tell you what I think of Love? It is a music of many voices, that
well concording, gives a right sweet harmony; but if there be but one discord,
it not only displeases, but makes you forget all the pleasure which they
yielded before. So said Phillis, Naughty Diane, you would say, that if a man
have served you long, the first offense must blot out all the memory of that is
passed. The very same said Diane, or little less. O gods, cried Phillis! shall
not he that loves you, have work enough? He that loves me (replied Diane) if
he will that I love him, must beware he offend not my love. And believe me
(Phillis) that at this bout, you have done more injury to Licidas then, when he
offended you before. Then said Phillis smiling, At another time I will say,
that it is Love that made me do it; but at this time I will say, it is Revenge:
and to the most curious, I will deliver the reason which you have taught me.
They will judge (replied Diane) that at another time you know to love; but at
this time you know what it is to love. Whatsoever it be (answered Phillis) if
it be of defect, it proceeds of ignorance, and not of want of love. For I
think I am bound: but if ever he return, I will look to my self for falling
back again. And you, Astrea, are ouerlong silent: then tell us what
assistance I gave for the birth of this child. Then Astrea took it up again
in this sort.

As soon as this shepherdess had made this offer of her self, Licidas
accepted of it very boldly; and after that sent a young shepherd to Maine to
bring with him, the wise woman of that place; her eyes being closed, that she
should not discern which way she went. Then Diane as astonished, laid her
finger on her mouth, and says, Fair shepherdess, this is not so secret as
you think: I remember I have heard them speak of it. I pray you, said
Phillis, tell us what you have heard, that we may know whether it has been
told you true; I know not, added Diane, if I well remember the poor Philander
was he that told it me, and I assure my self he had it from Lucina the wise
woman, to whose ear it came; and that she would never have spoken of it, if
any trust had been reposed in her. One day as she walked into the Park which
is between Mont-brison and Maine, with many other her companions, she saw
come toward her a man whom she did not know: who at his coming, did
commendations from diverse of her kins-folks that were at Feurs, and then he
told her some particular, that he might separate her a little from the other
women which were with her: and when he saw her alone, he gave her to
understand, that a better occasion had brought him to her; for it is (said he)
to conjure you by all the pity you ever had, to give your helping hand to an
honest woman, that is in danger if you deny your aid. The good woman was a
little surprised to hear him change his discourse at once: but the young man
besought her to hide her astonishment as well as she could; and that he had
rather dye, then any should suspect this business: Lucina being assured, and
having promised to be secret, and that he should only tell her at what time
she should be ready: You must make no journey for these two months, said the
young man; and that you may not lose by it, behold here the money which you
might gain elsewhere in that space. At that word he gave her some pieces of
gold in a paper, and returned without passing through the town: but after he
had known of her, whether she could travail by night, and she answered,
seeing the gain so great, No time could stay her: within fifteen or sixteen
days after, as she went out of Maine, about five or six of the clock at
night, she saw him come with a visage alcha^ged: and coming near her, he
said, Mother, the time has deceived us, we must be gone, the horses tarry for
us, and necessity presses us. She would have gone back to her house, to give
some order to her businesses: but he would not suffer her, fearing she should
speak to somebody. So being come into a valley far from the high way, she
found two horses with a man of some sort, and clothed in black, that held
them. As soon as he saw Lucina, he came to her with open face; and after many
thanks, he caused her to sit up behind him that went to fetch her; after,
mounting on the other horse, they rode a round trot overthwart the field; and
when they were some distance from the town, and that the night began to draw
dark, this young man taking an handkercher out of his pocket, bound it about
the eyes of Lucina, for all the resistance she could make; and after they had
twice or thrice turned about the horse whereon she rode, that she might have no
knowledge of the Way, which they meant to take; and then falling again to
their trot, rode a great part of the night, she not knowing which way she
went, but that they made her pass a river (as she thought) t(...) or thrice,
and then setting her on the ground, made her walk a while on her feet; and as
she could judge, it was through a wood, where at last she sp^^d a little light
a-crosse the ha^dkercher, which within a while after they took clean away.
And then she found her self under a tent of tapistry, fitted in such sort,
that the wind might not enter: on the one side she saw a young woman in a field
bed, that complained much, and was masked, at the beds feet she perceived a
woman who had likewise her face covered, and who by her habit seemed to be
aged, she held there hands joined together, and had tears in her eyes: on the
other side there was a young maid of the chamber masked, with a light in her
hand at the beds head stood leaning that honest man whom she found with the
horses, who seemed infinitely to feel the grief of this woman, which was
leaning upon her stomach; and the young man which brought her behind him, went
about to give that which was necessary, there being on the table in the midst
of the tent two great candles lighted. It may easily be believed, that Lucina
was astonished to see her self in this place; but she had not leisure to be
long so: for one may judge, that this little creature waited but for the
coming of this woman to come into the world. The mother felt the throws of
her down lying, which lasted but half an hour, before the delivery of a
daughter: but this was a diligence yet greater then ordinary, to deliver her,
and lay her in bed, and put the child into a cradle, and send away Lucina,
after they had well contented her, yet her eyes again closed as she came. Now
if they had trusted her, she swore she would never have spoken of it, but she
thought their mistrust gave her leave; and now you see all that I could know of
Philander. Astrea and Phillis, who had been attentive to her discourse, looked
one on the other much astonished, and Phillis could not choose but laugh; and
Diane demanding the reason: It is, said she, because you have told us a story
which we never knew, and for my part I cannot imagine how it may be: for, for
Olympe, she was never in that danger; and of necessity it must be some other
then a shepherdess that had so good furniture. Indeed (answered Diane) I take
this honest man for Licidas, the old woman for the mother of Celadon, and the
chambermaid for you; and judge you whether you disguised not your selves, that
you might not be known. I assure you, said Astrea, that this was not Olympe:
for Phillis used no other art, but to cause her come to her house, and by
chance her mother Artemis was then gone to the river of Alli^r; and because
Olympe was under the hands of Amarillis, of necessity she must feign to be
sick, which was easy for her to do, by reason of the disease she went with;
and after she had spent some time, she told the mother of Celado^, that the
change of the air might happily bring some asswagement, and that she was
certain that Phillis would be well pleased to have her near her. Amarillis,
that thought she should be charged with her sickness, was well contented
with this resolution; and so Phillis came to fetch her. And when the term
approached, Licidas went to bring the wise woman, and blind her eyes that she
might not know the way: but when she was come, he unbound her, knowing well
that she knew not Olympe, as having never seen her before. Thus you see all
the art that was used: and as soon as she was well delivered, she went home,
and they have told us since, that she used a pretty trick to bring up the
child; for, as soon as she came thither, she suborned a simple woman, that
fained to have borne it, to come to father it upon a shepherd, who used to
wait on her mother, saying that she had it by him. And for that this poor
shepherd knew himself innocent, her refused it, and reviled her; so that she
that was prepared for the purpose, followed him to the chamber of Lupander; and
there, though the shepherd refused it, yet she left the infant in the midst
of the chamber, and went her way. They told us, Lupander was very angry: but
the conclusion was, that Olympe turning to her mother: Must it be so (said she)
that this little creature should stay without nourishment? It cannot help
another fault, and it shall be a work pleasing the gods, to bring it up. The
mother, who was good and charitable, agreed; and so Olympe brought up her
child at home. In this mean time Celadon was with Forelle, where they gave
him all the good entertainment they might; and especially Malthe had
commandment from her father, to do him all the honest kindnesses she could:
but Celadon was so discontented with our separation, that all their honest
respects were in place of punishment to him, and he went about with such a
sadness, that Forelle not being able to brook the contempt he had of his
daughter, advertised Alcippe of it, to the end he might no longer expect this
alliance, who knowing the disposition of his son, moved (as I think) out of
pity, purposed once more to use some piece of cunning, and thenceforth never
to torment him any more. During the abode that Celadon made with Malthe, my
uncle Phocion so wrought, that Corebe a very rich and honest shepherd, became
a suitor to me; and because he had all the good parts that one might wish,
many men talked of it, as if the marriage had been resolved on. Whereupon
Alcippe meaning to make use of it, devised this crafty trick I tell you:

There was a shepherd named Squilinder, dwelling on the bounds of the Forest,
in an Hamlet called Argental, a cunning fellow, and untrusty, and who among his
other industries, knew so well to counterfeit all kind of Letters, that the man
whom he initated, can hardly discern thefalshood. To him Alcippe shows what
he found at the foot of the tree, as I have told you before, and causes him to
write another to Celadon (in my name) which was thus:

The counterfeited Letter of Astrea to Celadon.
CEladon, since I am compelled by my fathers commandment, you may not think
it strange, that I pray you to end this love which heretofore I have coniured
you to hold eternal. Alce has given me to Corebe; and though the match be to
my advancement, yet can I not leave to feel sensibly the separation of our
amity. Yet, since it is folly to contrary that which must not fall out
otherwise, I counsel you to arm your self with resolution, and so to forget
all that is passed between us, that Celadon have no more memory of Astrea, as
Astrea is constrained, from henceforth, to lose (for duties sake) all the
remembrance of Celadon.


This Le^tter was brought so sinely to Celadon, by a young shepherd unknown.
O God! what was he at the encounter, and how great was the displeasure that cut
his heart? Then said he by Astrea, It is true that there is nothing of dura^ce
in the world, since that firm resolution which you have so often sworn, is so
readily changed. Now you will make me be a witness, that what perfection
soever a woman may have, she can not bereave her self of her inconstancy by
nature. Have then the heavens agreed, that for my greater punishment, my life
should remain after the loss of your amity, to the end that I should only
live more extremely to feel my disastor? And then falling into a swowne, he
came no sooner to himself, but the complaints were in his mouth. And that
which most easily persuaded him of this change, was this, that the Letter did
but confirm the common report of the marriage between Corebe, and me. He lay
all that day on a bed, unwilling to speak to any person; and the night being
come, he deprived himself of his companions: he took to the largest and
desolatest wood, shunning the meeting of men, more like a sauge beast, desiring
to die far from the society and company of men, since they were the cause of
his sorrow. In this resolution he ran through all the mountains of Foreste,
on the side of Ceruieres, where at the last he chose a place which he thought
least frequented, of purpose to finish the rest of his sad and mournful days
there. The place is called Lapau, where rises one of the springs of the
disastrous river Lignon; for the other spring proceeds from the mountains of
Cholmesel.

Now on the sides of this fountain he built a pretty Lodge, where he lived
retired more then six months, during which time, his ordinary nourishment
were tears and plaints. It was at that time that he made this song.

A SONG Of Celadon upon Astreat change.
IT must be, that my constancy
Has quite bereaved me of sense.
If I feel not the injury
Your change has wrought to my offense:
And feeling it, I should remain,
Without recourse to your disdain.
For sworn, you have disdained me,
For one you scarce had in your eye:
Because he has more (it may be)
Of goods, and wealthier is then I.
Unfaithful, dare thou be so bold,
To sacrifice to Calfe of gold?
Where are the oaths which we did make?
Where are the tears that showring fell
To gods, when we our leave did take?
No doubt the heavens did mark them well.
Though your heart do it now forget,
Yet your own month did publish it.
Perjured eyes, unfaithful flame,
That love nothing but to change.
Let Love on beauty like the same
Of thine, for me, work vengeance strange,
That makes a show of bearing love,
Only the greater flame to move.
So ouer-prestwith sad distress,
In Love betrayed, one'gan complain,
When it was told him his Mistress
Did for another him disdain,
And thundering heaven for mere pity,
Promised to venge his amity.
The wretched down himself he threw,
Near Lignon flood, and as he sat,
Upon the sand with finger drew
There ciphers as he used of late.
This happy cipher, oh (said he)
To us no more will proper be.
And then a tear chilled of the pain,
Which dolor just thrust in his face,
Upon the sand dropping amain,
These double ciphers did deface.
Deface (said he) oh showring tear,
Them in my heart, but not these there.
Thou Lover, that right cowardly
So long bewayl'st so dolefully,
A soul all made of forgery,
Since thou her change know certainly,
Either thou shortly art to die,
Or else rec^^er presently.
The solitariness of Celadon had been much longer, but for the commandment
that Alcippe gave to Licidas, to seek out his brother, having a purpose in
himself (since he so well saw how unprofitable his travail was) no more to
cross this amity. Now Licidas had long sought him, but for a chance that
befell us the same day.

I was upon the banks of Lignon, and held mine eyes over his stream, thinking
at that time of the loss of Celadon; and Phillis and Licidas talked together
some good while, when we saw some little balls, that lay swimming on the
water. The first that took heed to it, was Phillis, who showed it to us, but
we could not guess what it might be. And because Licidas knew the curiosity
of his mistrisse, to give her satisfaction, he went as far as he could into the
water, and so reached with a long branch, that he took one; but seeing that it
was but wax, because he was wet, and angry that he took such pain for a
thing of so small worth, he cast it in a rage against the ground, and breaking
it upon a great flint stone, it fell all in pieces, and there remained nothing
but a paper, which had been put therein, which Phillis ran presently to take
up; and having opened it, we read these words:

Go, paper, more happy then him that sends thee, to see these shores so much
beloved, where my shepherdess dwells: and if accompanied with tears,
wherewith I make this River to swell, it chances thee to kiss the sands where
her steps are imprinted, stay thy course, and abide with good fortune, where my
mishap denies me to be. If thou happen to come to her hands, which have taken
from me my heart, and she demand of thee, how I do, tell her, O faithful
paper, that day and night I turn my self into tears, to wash away her
unfaithfulness: and if touched with repentance, she wet thee with some tears,
tell her, that by vnbending the bow, she can never heal the wound which she
has made in her faith and my Love and that my griefs are witnesses, both
before men and gods, that as she is the most fair, and the most unfaithful in
the world, so I am the most faithful, and most affectionate that lives; with
assurance, notwithstanding, never to have contentment but in my death.

We no sooner cast our eyes on this writing, but we knew it all three to be
from Celadon, which was the cause that Licidas ran to draw out the others which
floated on the water, but the stream had carried them so far, that he could
not come by them; yet we ghessed thereby, that he abode about the head of the
Lignon; which caused Licidas in the morning to go seek him luckily, and used
such diligence, that three days after he found him in solitariness, so
changed from that that he was wont, that he might scarce know him: but when he
told him that he must come to me, and that I so commanded him, he could hardly
be persuaded, but that his brother came to deceive him. At last, the letter
which he brought from me, gave him such contentment, that within few days he
came to his former countenance, and came to find us out: yet not so soon, but
that Alcippe dyed before his return; and some few days after Amarillis
followed him. And then we were of opinion, that fortune had done her worst
against us, since these two were dead that contraried us most. But it fell not
out so, by the mischief that the suite of Corebe went on so, that Alce,
Hippolite, and Phocion would give me no rest; and yet it was not from them
that our mischief came, though Corebe were in part a cause: for when he came
to make suite to me, because he was very rich, he brought with him many
shepherds, among whom was Semire, a shepherd indeed repleate with good
qualities, if he had not been the most pe^rfidious and subtle fellow that
ever was. As soon as he cast his eye on me, he had a purpose to serve me,
forgetting the friendship that Corebe bare him. And because Celadon and I, to
cloak our amity, had laid a plot, as I told you, to dissemble; he, to make love
to all the shepheardesses, and I, to suffer indifferently the wooing of all
sorts of shepherds: he thought at first, that the good acceptance that I gave
him, was the breeder of some greater affection; and he had not so soon known
what was between Celadon and me, if (by mischance) he had not found my
letters: For though, to his last loss, it was well known he loved me, yet
there were few that thought I loved him, I carried my self so coldly since
Celadons last return. And because the letters which Alcippe had found at the
foot of the tree, cost us dear, we would no more rely on those we wrote our
selves, but invented a new trick which we thought more assured. Celadon had
fastened to a corner of his hat, on the inside, a little piece of felt, so
cunningly, that he could hardly see it, and this was locked with a button on
the outside, where he feigned to bind up the brimme of his hat: in that he put
his letter, and making show to play, either he cast me his hat, or I took it
from him, or he let it lie; or fayning to run or leap better, cast it on the
ground, and so I took and returned the letter. I know not by what misfortune,
one day, when I had one in my hand to give him, running after a Wolf which
came near my flocks, I let it fall, unhappily for me, which Semire, that came
after, took up, and saw it was thus*

The letter of Astrea to Celadon.
Dear Celadon, I have received your letter, which was as welcome to me, as I
know mine are to you, and I find nothing that does not satisfy me, except the
thanks you give, which (me thinks) is to no purpose, neither for my love, nor
for Celadon, who of long time is wholly given mine. For, if they be not yours,
know you not, that whatsoever wants, that title can never please me? And if
they be yours, why do you give me separated that, which at once I have
received, when you gave your self to me? Use it no more, I pray you, if you
would not have me think, that you have more ciuility then Lou^e.


After he had found this letter, he purposed to speak to me no more of Love,
until he had done some evil to Celadon, and began in this sort. In the first
place, he besought me to pardon him for being so rash, that he durst raise
his eyes on me, which my beauty compelled him to do, but he well knew his small
merit, and therefore he protested to me, never to mistake more, only he
desired me to forget his boldness. And after that, he made himself so great a
friend and familiar to Celadon, that it seemed there was nothing which he
loved more; and to abuse me the more, he never met me, without finding some
occasion to speak to the advantage of my shepherd, covering his intent so
cunningly, that no man would think, that he had any such design.

These praises of the person whom I loved, as I told you, deceived me so, that
I took extreme pleasure to entertain him, and so two or three months passed
right happily for Celadon and me: but this was (as I believe) the more to make
me feel that, which since I cease not, nor ever shall cease to bewail. At this
word, in place of speech, her tears represented her displeasures to her
companions with such abundance, that neither the one nor the other durst open
their mouth, fearing to increase her sorrow: for the more you labor by Reason,
to dry the tears, the more they increase their springs. At last she began
again thus: Alas, wise Diane, how can I remember this accident and not die?
From that time Semire was so familiar, both with Celadon and me, that for the
most part, we were together. And when he thought he had gotten sufficient
credit with me, to persuade that which he meant to undertake: One day, when he
found me alone, after we had long talked of diverse treasons that the shepherds
did to the shepheardesses, whom they made show to love: But I wonder much, said
he, that there be so few shepheardesses that take heed to their deceits,
though otherwise they be very circumspect. That is, answered I, for that Love
has shut up their eyes. Without fayning, replied he, I believe so; for
otherwise it were not possible, but you should know what they would do to you:
and then holding his peace, he seemed to prepare himself to say more, but as
if he repented that he had told me so much, he began again in this sort:
Semire, Semire, what think thou to do? See thou not that she delights in
thy deceit? Why will thou trouble thy self?

And then addressing himself to me, he went on: I see well (fair Astrea) that
my discourse has brought you some displeasure. But pardon me, for that I have
bin compelled to it by the affection which I have to your service. Semire (said
I) I am bound to you for this good will; but I shall be much more, if you
finish that which you have begun. Ah shepherdess (said he) I have told you
too much; but, it may be, you shall (in time) know more of it, and then you
shall judge, that (indeed) Semire is your servant. Ah most malicious! how true
he seemed in his wicked promises! for I have since known but too much; to
leave in me only the desire to live. So it was, that at that time he would
tell me no more, to make me the more desirous; and he thought it was time, one
day when (according to custom) I pressed him to let me know the end of my
contentment: and I coniured him by the power which I had sometimes over him, to
tell me all that which he had begun. He answered, Fair shepherdess, you so
conjure me, that I hold it a great fault to disobey you: I would I had never
begun that discourse, which I foresee the end will bring you. And after I had
assured him of the contrary, he had the skill so well to persuade me, that
Celadon loved Aminthe the daughter of the son of Cleante; that Jealousy the
ordinary companion of souls which love dearly, began to persuade me, that
it might be true: and this was a mischief extreme, that then I remembered not
the commandment which I gave him, to make show of loving other shepheardesses.
Notwithstanding, desirous to make an end, to dissemble my displeasure, I
answered Semire, that I did never believe, nor would, that Celadon made
particular choice of me before others; that if it seemed we used any
familiarity, it was but by reason of the long acquaintance which we have had
together; but as for his loue-suites, they were indifferent. Now answered the
crafty companion, I thank God your humor is such: but since it is so, you
cannot choose but take pleasure to hear the passionate discourse which he had
to his Aminthe. I protest to you (wise Diane) when I heard him name his
Aminthe, I changed color; and because he offered me to hear their words, me
thought I was not to shun the knowledge of the perfidiousnesse of Celadon,
alas, more faithful then I well advised: and so I took his offer, and indeed
he failed not in his promise. For, within a while after, he came running to
me; and assuring me, that he left them close together, and that Celadon laid
his head in Aminthes lap, who sat and rubbed his head, telling me the
particulars, the more to torment me: I followed him so besides my self, that I
remember neither the way I went, nor how near he brought me to them; yet they
perceived me not, because, as I have judged since, they cared not who heard,
and therefore regarded not who hearkened. So it was, I found my self so near,
that I could hear Celadon say, Believe me (fair shepherdess) there is no
beauty can be more lively printed in a soul, then that which is in mine.

But Celadon (answered Aminthe) how is it possible that an heart stirring as
yours, can have the hardiness, to hold long that which love can grave? Naughty
shepherdess (replied my Celadon) let these reasons go by, measure not me by
your wand, nor weights of any other; honor me with your good graces, and you
shall see if I will not preserve them as well in my soul, and as long as my
life. Celadon, Celadon, (replied Aminthe) you shall be well punished, if your
jest turn to earnest, and if the heavens (in my revenge) make you love this
Aminthe, whom you now sport your self with. Hitherto there was nothing, but in
some sort it might be bom. But O God! to feign what was the answer he gave. I
pray Love, said he, (fair shepherd) if I mock, that he cause the mockery to
light on me; if I have deserved any grace from him, that he inflict on me the
punishment you threaten. Aminthe not able to judge his intent by this
discourse, answered him not but with a smile, and with a casting of her hand
over her eyes, which I interpreted in my language, that she refused not, but
that she believed his words for true: But that which touched me most to the
quick, was, that Celadon, after he had been some-while without speech, fetched
a deep sigh, which she accompanied presently with another. And when the
shepherd rose up to speak to her, she laid her hand over her eyes, and waxed
red, as half ashamed, that this sigh had so escaped her: which was the cause
that Celadon lying down in his former place, a little after sung these verses:

A Sonnet when he knew how they feigned to love.
FAyning to love me, she complains in want on wise,
And after me she sighs, when me she sighing spi^s:
And by her feigned tears, would witness to endure,
The heat which in my soul she knows is ouer-sure.
The lower most expert, when she the Mask puts on
Of her deceitful trains, knows no way to be gone:
He must be without heart, not to desire a whit,
To be so sweetly gull^d, by such her forging wit.
My self deceive my self, in fashood that I see,
And my contentments all confederate against me:
My hearts glass, traitors, lights that untrusty are.
I know you all right well, your iuggling tricks I spy,
But whereto serves it me, since Love does me deny?
Seeing your treasons tricks, I should thereof beware.
After he had held his peace awhile, Aminthe said, And why, Celadon, do you
trouble your self so much? I fear, said he, rather to trouble her, whom in
any sort I would not but please. And who is that, said she, since we are alone?
Ah! that she had deceived her self so: and it had been well for my part, as
any other in the company. It is but you, answered Celadon, that I fear to
importune, but if you command me, I will go forward. I dare not, replied the
shepherdess, use any commandment, where even the payer is indiscreet. You
may use, replied the shepherd, what terms please you, but in the end I am but
your servant. And then he began again in this sort:

A MADRIGAL. Upon a resemblance of his Lady and himself.
I May be bold to say our hearts
Are both made of the hardest rock;
Mine, that indures such rig'rous smarts,
And yours, in that it bears the shocke
Both of Loves blows, and of my tears.
But when the griefs I call to mind,
Which makes my sufferings ever be
In this extremity, I find
I am a rock in constancy,
And so are you in cruelty.
Fair Diane, it was beyond my power to stay longer there, and so stealing
softly from them, I returned to my flock, so sad, that from that day I opened
not my mouth. And because it was very late, I drove my sheep into their folds,
and passed a night, such as you may imagine: Alas! all this had been nothing,
if I had not joined thereto the folly, which I shall bewail as long as I have
tears, neither know I who inueigled me: for if I had had any judgment
remaining in me, for this new jealousy, at the least, I might have inquired of
Celadon, what his purpose was, and though he would have dissembled it, I should
easily enough have found out his fictio^. But without other consideration, the
next morning, when he came to look me at my flock, I talked to him with such
disdain, that desperately he cast himself into that gulf, where drowning
himself, he has at one blow drowned all my contentment. At this word she grew
pale like death; and had it not been for Phillis, who raised her up, pulling
her by the arm, she had been in danger of swouning.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
THe noise that the shepheardesses made, when Astrea fell into a swoune, was
such, that Leonide waked with it, and hearing them talk near her, her
curiosity gave her a mind to know who they were; and because after they had
refreshed themselves, these three shepheardesses rose to go away, all that she
could do, was, to awaken Siluie, to show them her. As soon as she saw them,
she knew Astrea, though she were much changed, for the displeasure she took
for the loss of Celadon. And the other two, said Leonide, what are they? The
one, said she, that is on the left hand, is Phillis, her dear companion; and
the other is Diane, the daughter of the sage Bellinde, and Celio^, and I am
angry that we have slept so long; for I am assured we should have heard some of
their news, there being some likelihood, that the occasion which withdrew them
from others, was but to talk more freely.

Truly (answered Leonide) I protest, I never saw any more beautiful then
Astrea, and comparing her with all others, I find her beyond them all. Guess
(replied Siluie) what hope Galathee may have, to divert the affection of the
shepherd. This consideration touched Leonide also to the quick, for her part,
as well as Galathee. But love, which never looks on the expense of any person,
without giving them, for their payment, some kind of hope, would not handle
this Nymph more niggardly then others: and so, though there were no great
likelihood, yet he would not fail to promise her, that the absence of Astrea,
and the love which she made show to bear him, might happily make a change of
will; and after some other such discourse, the Nymphs divided themselves,
Leonide taking the way of Feurs, and Siluie that of Isoure, in which mean time
the three fair shepheardesses, having gathered together their flocks, went
shortly after to their Lodges.

They had hardly set foot in the great pasture, where they were wont to
assemble, but they perceived Licidas talking with Siluander. As soon as the
shepherd saw Astrea, he became pale, and so changed, that for fear lest
Siluander should know any thing, he brake company with some bad excuse: but
desirous to avoid the meeting with them, Phillis went to cross his way with
Diane, after she had told Astrea the bad satisfaction this shepherd had of
her; and because Phillis would not lose him, having (till then) so charily kept
him, although he endeavored to pass beyond them, yet she ouertooke him, and
smiling, said: If in this sort you fly from your friends, what will you do to
your enemies? He answered, The company which you so cherish, will not suffer
you to hold that name. She (replied the shepherdess) of whom you complain,
suffers more pain for offending you, then your self do. That is (said the
shepherd) but to break the weapon, rather then heal the wound. By this time
Astrea came, and addressing her self to Licidas, said thus: I am so far
(shepherd) from saying, that the hatred you bear me, is unjust, that I
auerre, you know not how to hate me so deadly, as you have occasion.
Notwithstanding, if the memory of him which is the cause of this evil
satisfaction, be yet as lively in your soul, as it shall ever be in mine, you
should remember, I am that thing in the world he most loved; and it will be
evil for you to hate me, since yet there is nothing that he loved, more then
me. Licidas would you receive not this satisfaction, as you have had reason
hitherto, so may you be blamed as much for being unreasonable. Astrea not
resting on Dianes speech, took her hand from his mouth, and said: No, no,
(wise shepherdess) restrain not Licidas, let him use all the rigorous words
he pleases, I know they be the effects of his just grief: yet I know well
also, that therein he has no more loss then I. Licidas hearing these words,
and the manner in which she delivered them, gave testimony (with his tears)
that she had won him; and not being able to command himself so readily,
notwithstanding all the defense that Phillis and Diane could make, he freed
himself from their hands, and went on the other side; which Phillis
perceiving, that she might have the whole victory, followed, and knew so well
to represent him the displeasure of Astrea, and the villainy of Semire, that in
the end she brought him back to the company.

But in this mean time Leonide held on her way to Feur^, and though she made
great haste, yet could she not reach beyond Ponsius, because she had slept
ouer-long: that was the cause that she waked long before day, desirous to
return in good time, that she might stay some-while in her return with the
shepheardesses whom she left; yet durst she not go until the light might show
her the way, for fear of losing herself, though she could not possibly close
her eyes all the rest of the night. As she lay entertaining her thoughts, and
as she was heedfully hearkening, she heard one talk somewhat near her: for
there was but a slight partition that divided one chamber into two, for that
the Master of the house was an honest shepherd, that out of courtesy and the
laws of hospitality, freely entertained al passingers, without enquiring what
they were, and because his lodging was scant, he was feign to make that
division, to make the more chambers. Now when the Nymph came thither, there
were two stangers lodged, but because it was late, they were withdrawn already
and asleep, and by fortune the chamber where the Nymph was lodged, was of this
sort, and hard by theirs, without heeding it when she lay down, hearing one
murmr hard by her bed (for the beds head stood that way, that she might the
better understand) she laid her ear to an open place of the wall: and by
chance one of them lifting up his voice somewhat higher, she heard that he
answered the other thus, What would you I should say more, but that love makes
you so impatient? And well either she shall be found wearied, or sick, or
distempered with some accident that has made her stay. And must one despair
for that? Leonide thought she knew the voice, but she could not remember it so
well as the other, so soon as he answered. But look you, Climanthe, that is not
the thing that puts me to pain; for her, failing shall never hurt me so long
as I hope to have a good issue of our enterprise: that which I fear, and which
lays me on thorns as you see me, is, that you have not well instructed her
in what we deliberated, or else she gives no credit to your words. Leonide
hearing this discourse, and knowing him well that spoke, astonished and
desirous to know more, approached so near the wall, that she lost one word, and
then heard Climanthe answer, God speed me with this man. I have told you
diverse times heretofore, it is impossible. True, said the other, in your
judgment. Well answered Climanthe, to give assurance, and to free you of this
pain, I will once more tell you all the carriage.

The history of the deceit of Climanthe.
AFter we were parted, and that you made me know, Galathee, Siluie, Leonide
and the other Nymphs of Amasis, as well by sight as I understood before from
the discourse which you had made, I thought that one of the principal things
which might serve our purpose, was to know how Lindamor would be apparelled at
the day of his departure; for you know that Clidaman and G^yemantes were gone
to seek out Meroue: Amasis commanded Lindamor to follow with all the young
knights of that country, to the end that Clidaman might be made known to
Meroue to be what he was. And by mis-hap (it seems) that Lindamor had a
purpose to keep his clothes more secret then he did before. So it was, that
as I went spying out some occasion, one evening as he was in the midst of the
street, I heard him command one of his followers to go to the tailor that made
his clothes, to bring him the garment which he had caused to be made against
the day of show, for that he would assay it: and because he had expressly
forbidden him, to let any one see it, he gave him a ring for a token. I
followed this man a far off, to know the lodging, and the morrow after in good
time, knowing the name of the tailor, I entered boldly into his house, and told
him I came from Lindamor, because Amasis pressed him to be gone, and that he
feared those garments would not be made in time, and that I should not give
credit to that he should say, but I should see them my self to tell him the
truth. And then going on, I said, he would have given me the ring you wot: but
he said to me, it would be sufficient that I should tell you, that yester-night
he had sent for the garments, and marked the garments the best I could: and
when I made show of haste, he answered it was time enough, for that, that very
day he had seen a letter of Amasis in the assembly of the town, whereby she
ordained they should put themselves in arms within five weeks, because that
on the day which she had appointed, she would have the assembly in their town
to make the general muster, which Lindamor and his troops were to make, to go
to find Clidaman; and her will was, that the next morning you should be received
for General of this country in his absence. By this means I knew the day of
Lindamors departure; and moreover, that you were to stay in this country, which
was an accident that fell out very luckily for our design, though you were well
enough informed before. Following this, I drew aside into the great wood of
Sarignieu, where, on the shore of the little river that ru^s a-crosse, I made
me a cabbinet of boughs, but so close, that many passed by without seeing it;
and I concealed it, to the end that men might think that I had kept it long:
for, as you know, no man knew me in this country: and the better to show that
I had long stayed there, the leaves with which I covered this Lodge, had been
long dry, and then I took the great glass which I had caused to be made,
which I set on an Altar, which I raised of Hawes and Thorns, mingling them
with some herbs, as Veruaine, Suckary, and such other. On the one side, I
placed the Guy, which I said to be of Oak: on the other, the serpent of gold,
which I fained to have taken the sixth of the first moon, and in the midst, the
sheet in which I gathered it: and beside al these, I hung the glass in the
darkest place, to the end my craft might be the less perceived: and just
ouer-against it, but somewhat higher, I fitted the painted paper, where I had
drawn so lively the place which I meant to show Galathee, that there was no
body but might know it, and that those which were beneath, if they lifted up
their eyes, might not see it: on the side where I came in, I enterlaced boughs
and leaves in such fort together, that it was impassable; and because, if they
came on the other side, and turned to the contrary, without doubt they had
espied my craft, I made round about a reasonable great hedge, where I placed
the Censers on a row, and forbade every body to go beyond them. Just before
the myrrour there was a table, whereon Hecathe was painted; and this table had
the lower part of it wrought with steel, and, as you know, it hung by some
horse hairs, so slender, that by reason of the darkness of the place, there
was none could perceive the^: as soon as they were drawn away, the table falls,
and with the weight struck with the steel on a flint, so purposely placed,
that it never failed of striking fire. I had set in the same place a mixture of
brimstone and Saltpeter, which should take hold on the fire, in such sort,
that it would raise a flame with such suddenness, that there was not the man
that was not much astonished. This I invented, to make them believe that it was
either a divinity, or an enchantment. So it was, that I found all this so well
placed, that there was nothing to reform. After all these things, I began to
let my self be seen, but very rarely and suddenly: When I perceived any man
saw me, I drew to my Lodge, where I made show to sustain my life only with
roots, but in the night I went three or four miles off, in other habites, to
buy me all things necessary.

Within some few days after, they took notice of me, and the brute of my
life was so great, that it came to the ears of Amasis, who came often to walk
in those great gardens of Montbrison. And among others, one time when she was
there, Sylore, Siluie, and Leonide, and diverse other of their companions, came
walking along my little river, where, at that time, I made show to gather
herbs: as soon as I knew they perceived me, I went a great pace to my cabin:
they that were curious to see me, and talk with me, followed me to the great
trees. I had by this time set me on my knees: But when I heard they approached,
I came to the door, where the first that I met with, was Leonide: and for that
she was ready to enter, thrusting her back a little, I said to her very
rudely, Leonide, the Divinity which I serve, commands you not to profane his
Altars. At these words she stepped back half amazed: for my habit of a Druyde
made them give me honor, and the name of the Divinity gave me fear, and after
she was assured, she said to me: The Altars of your God, whosoever he be,
cannot be profaned by receiving my vows, since I come but to render the honor
which heaven demands of us. Heaven (answered I) demands, indeed, vows and
honor, but not differing from that they ordain: so that if the zeal of the
Divinity which I serve, has brought you hither, then must you observe that
which it commands. And what is his commandment, said Siluie? Siluie (said I)
if you have the same intent that your companion has, do you both that which I
tell you, and then your vows shall be pleasing to him. Before the Moon begin
to wane, wash your right leg to the knee before day, and the arm to the elbow,
within this river that runs before this holy Cave: And then, the leg and arm
being naked, come hither with a garland of Veruine, and a girdle of Succorie;
after that I will tell you what you are to do to be partakers of the sacred
mysteries of this place, which I will open and declare to you. And then taking
her by the hand, I said, Will you, for testimony of the graces wherewith the
divinity whom I serve, favors me, that I tell you part of your life, and what
shall befall you? Not I (said she) for I have no such curiosity. But you, my
companion (said she) (addressing her self to Leonide) I have seen you
heretofore desirous to know it. Now satisfy your desire, I beseech you (said
Leonide) presenting her hand to me. Then remembering that that you told me of
these Nymphs in particular, I took her hand, and asked her, if she were borne
in the day or night; and knowing that it was in the night, I took her left
hand, and after I had sometime co^siderd of it, I said, This line of life,
clean, well marked, and long, shows that you shall live, from the diseases of
your body, in good health: but this little cross which is in the same line,
almost at height of the angles, which has two little lines above, and three
beneath, and these three also which are at the end of the line of life toward
the turning, show in you the diseases which Love shall give you, which will
hinder you from that health of spirit, which you have of body. And those five
or six points, which (like little grains) are sowed here and there on the
same line, make me judge, that you never will hate them that love you, but
rather, that you delight to be beloved and served.

Now mark this other line, which takes his root from that we have already
spoken of; and passing through the middle of the hand, lifts it self against
the mount of the Moon, they call it the natural Mean: those cuttings that
you see, which skant appear, signify that you are easily angry with them,
over whom Love gives you authority. And this little star which turns against
the ground of the pulse, shows that you are full of bounty and sweetness,
and that quickly you will lose your choler.

But behold, this line which we call Mensale, that joins with the means
natural (so that they two make one angle) this shows you shall have diverse
troubles in plotting for love, which will make your life some-whiles
unpleasing; which I judge the rather, considering that soon after the mean
fails; and that meets with that of life, so that they seem to be the angle of
the Mensale and of the other; but this tells me, that late or never you shall
have the conclusion of your desires. I would have gone on, when she took away
her hand, and said, this was not the thing she demanded: for I speak too much
in general, but she would clearly know what would become of a dossigne which
she had. Then I answered her: The heavenly powers themselves only know that
which is to come: but only that that by their bounty they give knowledge of to
their servants, and that sometimes for the public good, sometimes to satisfy
the ardent supplication of them that often importune their Altars; and many
times to show, that nothing is hidden from them: and yet it is the part of a
wise Interpreter, to tell nothing but what he thinks necessary, because the
secrets of the gods are not to be divulged without cause. I tell you this, that
your curiosity might content it self, that I have discoursed with less
cleerenesse then you desire; for, it is not necessary I should say otherwise
unto you. And that you may know that God is not so sparing of his graces, but
that he talks familiarly with me: I will tell you the things which have
befalne you, by which you may judge how much I know.

In the first place (fair Nymphs) you know, I never saw you before, and yet
at the first meeting, I called you all by your names; which I did, for that I
am willing you should think me to know more then the common sort, not to the
end that any glory should befall me (that were too great a presumption) but to
the Deity which I serve in this place. Now you must believe, that all that I
shall say to you, I have learned from the same Master: and in this I lied not,
for it was you, Polemas, that told me it: but because (continued I) it may be,
the particularities will make me o^ex-long, it will not be amiss to place our
selves under these n^^ror trees. At this word we went, and then I began again
in this sort. Truly (interrupted Polema^) you could not carry this beginning
with more a^te. You will judge (answered Climanthe) that the proceeding was
with no less wisdom. I began my speech then in this sort:

Fair Nymph, It may be about three years, that the gentle Agis in a full
assembly, was given you for servant, at the beginning you were indifferent, for
till then, the young years of you both, was the cause that your hearts were
not capable of the passions which Love conce^ued: but since that, your beauty
in him, and his suite in you, began to kindle, by little and little, these
fires, whereof Nature gave the first sparks in us at the hour of our birth,
so that that which was indifferent, became particular to you both, and Love in
the end formed it self, and was borne in his soul, with all the passions
which usually accompany it, and in you a good will, which made you like better
of his affection and services, then of any other. The first time that in
earnest he made his ouerture, was, when Amasis going to walk in the fair
gardens of Montbrison, he took you under the arm, and after he had stayed
some while without speech, he told you at last, Fair Nymph, it is not for
nothing that I dispute in myself, whether I should, or whether I should not
declare that which I have in my soul; for to dissemble, may be allowed in
that which may sometimes be changed: but that which constraines me to speak
at this time, shall accompany me even to my Tomb. Here I stayed, and said to
her, Will you have me repeat (Leonide) the same words which you answered?
Without lie, then (said Polemas) you put your self into great hazard of being
discovered. Not a whit (answered Climanthe) and to give you proof of
perfection of my memory, I will tell you the very words. But (replied Polemas)
what if I had forgot to tell them you? Oh (adjoined Climanthe) I doubt not of
that: but so it is, that the subject of the words was that that you told me,
and she her self does not remember the words themselves: so that out of the
opinion that it was a god that had told me, she believed they were the very
same. If you had not (...) so famil^ar with her, as your secre(...) affection
made you, I had not so easily under taken it: but remembering that you had told
me that you had served her long, and that service was well accepted of, till
the time that you changed affection, and that you are become the servant of
Galathee: and namely, that that was the cause, that to do you a displeasure,
she held on Lind^^^ors part against you. I boldly told her all that had passed
at that time, knowing, Love would not suffer that one should conceal any
thing, from the person whom they love. But to come again to our purpose, she
answered, I am willing you should say what you please, but we will believe what
we list. This she said, as being a little pricked with that which she would
should have been concealed from her companions. I went on: Well, Leonide, you
may believe what you please, for I assure my self, that I have said nothing,
which in your soul you have not found for true. You answered him as seeming
not to understand what he would say. You have reason, Agis, not to hide by
dissimulation, that which must accompany you so long as you live; otherwise it
being impossible but it must be discovered, you shall be taken for a double
person, a name which is honorable to no sort of people, but much less to them
who make the profession that you do. This counsel then (answered he) and my
passion, constrain me to tell you (fair Nymph) that neither the inequality
of your merits to me, nor the small good will which I have found in you, could
not hinder my affection nor my boldness, that they have not raised me up to
you, so that if not the quality of the gift, but the will is to be received, I
may say with assurance, that none can offer you a greater sacrifice: for that
heart which I give you, I give with all the affections, and with all the powers
of my soul: and so all that, which after this devotion is not found to be
yours, I disauow and renounce it as not appertaining to me.

The conclusion was that you answered, Agis, I will believe these words, when
the time and your services shall have told me them, as well as your mouth. See
the first declaration of amity which you had of him, whereof afterward he gave
you such proof, as well by suit he made to marry you, as by the quarrels
which he had against many, whom he was jealous of. It was at that time, that
when you would have frizeled your hair, you burnt your cheek, whereupon he
made this verse.

A SONG Of Agis, on the burning of Leonides cheek.
While Love did please himself to play,
Within the gold of your fair hair,
A sparkle of his fires rare,
Vnhapp'ly on your cheek did stay.
You cruel Nymph may judge thereon,
How s^re the smart of fire stings,
Since that but one small spark alone,
So much of dolor with it brings.
Mean while that your eye forth did dart,
When yet with it the conquest goes,
So many fires against my heart,
Your cheek was hurt by one of those.
You cruel Nymph may judge thereon,
How sore the smart of fire stings,
Since that but one small spark alone,
So much of dolo^r with it brings.
While that my heart, that flaming was,
To dart as you had purposed,
His fire that could no further pass,
Burned your cheek in your fowls sted.
You cruel Nymph may judge thereon,
How sore the smart of fire stings,
Since that but one small spark alone,
So much of d^^our with it brings.
And to make it appear to you, that I truly know these things by a divinity
which cannot lie, whose eye and ear perceth even to the depth of the heart, I
will tell you a thing on this subject, that no man could know but you and Agis.
She was afraid I would discover some secret which would anger he^; and it was
my purpose to give her that apprehension: and that was the cause that she said
to me (much disquieted) Man of God, though I believe not but that you and
others may say that on this subject which imports me, yet this discourse is so
sensible, that it will be hard to handle it with so gentle an hand, but the
wound will bleed: therefore I beseech you to make an end. She uttered these
words with such a change of countenance, and a voice so broken, that for her
better assurance, I was constrained to say, You are not to think me of so
small a consideration, that I know not how to conceal that which may offend
you; nor that I am ignorant, that the least wounds are sensible enough in that
part which I touch; for it is to the heart that all these strokes are directed:
but because you will know no more, I will hold my peace. And it is time that I
go to the Divinity that calls me. And at that instant I arose, and gave them
the good day. Then after I had made some shows of ceremonies over the river, I
said very loud; O sovereign Deity! which abidest in this place, behold, how
with this water I cleanse my self, and unclothe me of all the profaneness
which the conuersing among men might leave in me, since I came out of thy holy
Temple. At these words I dipped my hands thrice into the water: and then taking
up in the hollow of the one, I received it thrice into my mouth, my eyes and
hands lifted up to heaven, and so went to my Cabin without speaking to them,
and because I doubted they had the curiosity to come see what I did, I went
before the Altar, where making a show to cast my self on the ground, I drew
out the horse hairs, which taking their effect, let the little steel table
that stood before the glass, fall, which fell so to purpose on the flint, that
it struck fire, and instantly took hold on the composition which was under
it, so that the flame burst forth so suddenly, that the Nymphs which were at
the door, seeing at the first the Mirror glister, and presently the fire so
sudden and violent, took such a fear, that they returned with great opinion
both of my holiness, and of the respect to the divinity which I serve. Could
this beginning be better carried then it was? No certainly (answered Polemas)
and I think well, for my part, that every body which had not known of it
before, might be easily deceived.

While Climanthe talked thus, Leonide harkened to it, so ravished from her
self, that she knew not whether she slept or waked: for she saw well, that all
that he told her, was very true, yet could she not well believe that it was so;
and while she disputed in her self, she heard Climanthe begin again. Now
these Nymphs went away, and I could not know what report they would give of me,
yet by conjecture, there was no likeli-hood, but they: would tell to every one
the admirable things which they had seen, and as renown increases always,
the Court was full of nothing but of me. And at that time I had much ado to
continue my enterprise, for an infinite company came to see me; some of
curiosity, others to be instructed, and many to know, if that which they talked
of me was so: And I was driven to use great cunning. Sometimes to avoid them, I
gave out that that day was a mute day for the Deity that I served; another
time, that some body had displeased it, and that it would not answer until I
had appeased it by fasting: another time, I set down conditions for the
ceremonies which I caused to use, which they could not perform without some
good time: and sometimes when all was finished, I found matter to say, that
either they had not well observed all, or that they had done too much or too
little; and so I made them begin again, and went winning time. As for them
whom I knew any thing by, I dispatched them quickly, and that was the cause,
that others desirous to know as much as the former, submitted themselves to
what I would. Now during that time, Amasis came to see me* and with her
Galathee. After I had satisfied Amasis about that which she de maunded, which
was in sum, to know what the voyage should be that Clidaman had undertaken,
and I had told her, that he should run an happy fortune, that he should be
wounded, and be in three battles with the Prince of France, but that in the
end, he should return with all sort of honor and glory: she went from me
wonderfully contented, and desired me to commend her son to the Deity which
I served. But Galathee much more curious then her mother, drawing me aside,
said; Father, bind me, intelling me, what you know of my fortune. Then I said,
she should show me her hand: I stood looking on it some-while, and made her
scratch thrice upon the ground: and having set the left foot forward, I turned
her toward the East, and there made her look upward. I took the measure of
her foot, and of her hand; after that, the compass of her neck: and with
that measure I measured the girdle, in height: and in the end, looking at once
on both her hands, I said, Galathee, you are happy, if you knew your hour, and
thrice-happy, if you let it not pass, either out of coldness, or for love, or
want of courage. But if you make not your self incapable of that good whereto
heaven has destinated you, you can not wish to attain to more happiness, and
all that good, or all that evil is prepared you by love. Be advised then to
take firm resolution, not to suffer your self to be entangled with the
persuasions of Love, nor the counsel of friends, nor commandment of parents;
which unless you do, I think there is not any thing under heaven so miserable
as you shall be. O God! said Galathee, you amaze me.

Be not amazed, said I: for that which I tell you, is but to your good, and
that you may carry your self with all wisdom, I will discover unto you all
that the Divinity that instructed me shall permit; but remember to keep it so
secret, that you trust no living creature with it. After she had promised me,
I continued in this sort: Daughter, for the office whereunto the gods have
called me (suffer me so to name you) you are, and shall be served of many
great and worthy Knights, whose virtues and merits may diversely excite and
move you; but if you shall measure your affection, either by your merits, or
by the judgment you shall have of their love and favor, and not according to
that that I shall declare unto you, you fill your self as full of misfortune,
as any creature out of the graces and favors of the gods may in any wise be.
For I which am the Interpreter of their will and pleasure, in telling you this,
I take from you all excuse of igaorance, so that now you are disobedient to
them, if you do contrary; and you know, that the heavens rather demand
obedience and submission, rather then any other sacrifice: and therefore
bethink your self well of what I am to tell you. That day that the Bacchanals
run through the streets raging and storming, full of the Euthusiasme of their
god, you must be in the town of Marseilles, where many gallant Knights shall
see you. But take good heed to him that is clothed with cloth of gold, and
green, and whose whole suite shall be of that color: if you love him, I
henceforth bewail your misfortune, and you cannot say other, but that you
shall be the mark of all disasters, and of all misfortune, for you shall then
feel that which I may not tell you. Father, answered she (somewhat astonished)
I know a good remedy for this, not to love at all. My child (replied I) this
remedy is very dangerous, for that, not only you may displease the gods, in
doing that which they will not, but also, in not doing that which they will.
Therefore take heed to your self. And how (replied she) must I behave my
self? I have told you heretofore (answered I) what you ought not to do: at
this time I will tell you what you ought to do.

It is necessary in the first place, that you know that all things corporal or
spiritual, have every one their contraries, and their sympathisants, from the
least we may come to the proof of the greatest: but for the knowledge which
you ought to have, this discourse may be unprofitable; and, this that I say to
you, is to no other end, but to cause you give the better heed, that as you
have this misfortune contrary to your happiness, so have you a destiny so
capable of making you happy, that your felicity can not be expressed; and in
this the gods will recompense that, to which they have subjected you. Since it
is so (answered she) I conjure you, father, by the Divinity which you serve, to
tell me what it is. It is (said I) another man, whom if you espouse, you shall
live with all the happiness that a mortal may have. And who is he? Presently
answered Galathee: Fair Nymph, that which I speak, comes not from my self,
but from Hecate, whom I serve. So that if I say no more, think not it comes
from want of will, but it is because she has not, as yet, discovered it unto
me.

But if you have a longing, observe the things that I shall tell you, and you
shall know what shall be necessary. For though the gods do good to men that
please them liberally; yet will they be known to be gods, and the sacrifices
of mortals delight them as acknowledgements which they give, not to be
vnthanke^ull for the benefits received. After some other talk, this Nymph,
being much provoked, said unto me, that she desired no more, and that she
would observe all that which I should ordain. Now is time, at this instant
(said I) for the Moon is at the full, or little wanting; and if you suffer it
to wane, you can do no more. And then I gave her the same commandment, which
I had done before to Siluie and Leonide, to wash before day in the next river,
the leg and the arm, and to come in that sort, with a garland of Veruine,
and a girdle of Succory, before this cave, and that I would prepare things
necessary for the sacrifice: but there must be care that those which be
present, be in other state then she. Well, said she, I will come with two of my
Nymphs, and that so secretly, that no man shall know of it; but take heed you
speak not before them, so that they take knowledge of this affair, for they
will labor to divert me. I was much eased at this advertisement, having had
the same fear; so that seeing her to have such providence, I judged she had a
purpose to follow my advice, otherwise she would never have been so careful.
Then went she away, with assurance to return the third day after. Now that
which made me say, that it must be before the Moon wane, was, that if any
others came to importune me in the like things, I might find excuse by the
wane of the Moon, and so I said, it must be before day, that there might be
the fewer persons: and for the day of Bacchanals, I made account, that it would
be the day when Lindamor was to take his leave of Amasis at Marsellis, and
consequently, of her, and that he should be clad in green. Now all these
things thus resolved and prepared, I gave order to provide that which should be
needful for the sacrifice which we were to make the third day. For though I
knew not that mystery very well, yet must I make my self seem expert therein,
that they that were better acquainted with it, might find nothing to gainsay.
You know, that from the beginning we had made our preparation, and we had given
order to provide all that was necessary.

The morning being come, the day began scarce to peep, before I found her in
state I ordained her with Siluie and Leonide, and without fiction, I wished
then, that you had been there, to have enjoyed contentment, to behold that
fair, whose hair (at the pleasure of the wind) hung wauing about uncovered;
but with a Garland of Veruine you should have seen that arm naked, and that
leg white like Alabaster, all full and polished, so that there was no
appearance of bone; the thigh, long and straight, the foot small and fine,
which shame^ those of Thetis. I must tell you true, I delayed the time the
more, that I might the better behold those beauties; so that I told them that
they were to perfume all their body with Incense, mixed with brimstone, that
the visions and deities of Stix might not offend them, and showed them a fit
place for that purpose, some what removed aside, where they could hardly be
seen.

Upon the winding of the next hill, whose feet this little river waters, there
grows a Box tree, spreading branch upon branch, with diverse leaves, whose
twigges having never been rounded with any tool, because that wood is
dedicated to Diane, the one reaching and shaddowing the one the other; so that
hardly can the Sun pierce through, either at his rising or setting, and at
noone, a kind of twilight compasses it ordinarily.

This place thus fit, encouraged them, but much more the curiosity of knowing
what they desired. Then after they had taken the perfumes necessary, they went
to unclothe themselves all three. And I, which well knew the place, stepping
over the river, came on the other side where they were, and had the commodity
to see them naked. Without faining, I never in my life saw any thing so
beautiful: but among all, I found Leonide admirable, what for the proportion
of her body, what for the whiteness of her skin, or soundness of
complexion, she surpassed them much, so as I condemned you as a man inexpert in
beauties, for leaving her for Galathee, who in truth has some good favor in
her face; but for the rest, so poorly sorting with that she would seem, that
in reason she may call her self an abuser. O God, Climanthe, then (said
Polemas) who can hear one speak thus of her he loves* If you will please me,
leave these (...)es, and hold on your discou^se, for there is great difference,
if you compare Leonides face with Galathees. In that (said Climanthe) you may
have some reason, but believe me that know it by sight, the face of Leonide is
that which is least beautiful in all her body. Then would I counsel her (said
Polemas, all in choler) to hide her face, and to show what she has more
beautiful. But see you, you had your eyes so troubled with the darken^sse of
the place, and your mind so wholly on your enterprise, that hardly can you
show any good judgment. But let this go by, and on with your discourse, I
pray you. Leonide, that heard all this talk, seeing with what disdame Polemas
spoke of her, grew so much displeased with him, that never since she could
pardon him: and on the contrary, though she wished evil to the impostures of
Climanthe, yet loved she him in some sort, when she heard him praise her: for
there is nothing that more wins a maid, then the commendation of her beauty,
and especially, when she is out of suspicion of slattery* While she was in
these thoughts, she heard him go on thus: Now these three fair Nymphs carne
back to me, and found me before my Cave, where I made a ditch for the
Sacrifice: for that presently when they began to cloth themselves, I
returned and had the leisure to make a good party. I dug a trench some four
foot about, and then I made three fires about it, with Incense of Smallage and
Poppey, and with a Censer I perfumed the place three times about, and as often
my Cabin; and then I covered the body with Veruine, and made every one of them
a Crown of Poppeys, and put in their mouth some salt, which I made them chew.
Afterward, I took three black Heyfers, and the fairest that I could choose,
which had never been known of the Ram, whose hair black and long was like
silk, it was so soft and pleasant: I drove these beasts, without felling, to
the ditch, where turning me to the East side, I took hold on them on the head
with my left hand, and with my right, I took the hair which grew between the
horns, and put it into the Cruze, mingling it together with milk, flower,
wine, and honey; and after I had four times called Hecate, I thrust the knife
into the heart of the Beasts, one after another, and saved the blood in a basm;
and then calling again on Hecate, I powered it by little and little. Then
thinking there remained nothing to do more, I raised my self on tip-toe, and
doing like one transported, I said to the Nymphs, It is time, and taking
Galathee by the hand, we entered all four in. I was made ghastly, I looked
staring, mine eyes rolling in my head, my mouth gaping, and my body shaking
with the holy Eutheusiasme. Being near the Altar, I said, O holy Deity, which
abidest in this place, grant me, that I may answer this Nymph truly, about
that which she demands. The place was dark, and there was no light, but that
which two little candles gave, which were (...) on the Altar; and the morning,
which by this time was clear, gave a little light to the painted paper, that
it might be the better represented in the Looking-glass. After I had said some
words, I fell on the ground, and hol^ing down my head some while, I raised it,
and turning to Galathee, I said, Nymph, beloved of heaven, d^y (...) and thy
sacrifices are received; the Deity which we have called on, w^ls, that by
sight, and not only by the ear, thou should know where thou art to find
thy good. Come near this Altar, and say after me, O great Hecate, which art
resiant at the Lake of Stix, let the dog with three heads not bark at thee,
when thou descendest; so let these Altars always s^oake with pleasing
Sacrifices, as I promise every year to charge them with the like, provided,
great Goddess, that by thee I may see that which I desire.

At this last word I touched the horse hair, wherewith the little table ^ung,
which falling, and nothing hindering it from striking on the flint, made the
fire accustomed, with a flame so quick, that Galathee was surprised with
fear. But I held her, and said; Nymph, be not afraid, this is Hecate, who
shows you that which you demand. Then the smoke, by little and little,
vanishing, the Looking-glass might be seen, but somewhat troubled with the
darkness of the smoke, which was the cause, that taking a wet sponge which hung
by for that purpose upon a Cane, I wiped twice or thrice on the Glass, which
made it clear; and by fortune, the Sun rose at that time, shining so fitly
on the painted paper, that it showed so lively in the Glass, as I could wish.
After they had beheld it some-while, I said to Galathee: Remember (Nymph) that
Hecate makes thee know by me, that in that place which thou feast represented
in this myrrour, thou shall find a Diamond half lost, which a fair and
ouer-scornefull has dis-esteemed, thinking it to be false, and yet it is of
inestimable value: take it, and keep it curiously.

Now this river is Lignon, this is Sanlag which is there, this is the coast of
Mont-verdun, under that hill, where it seemed the river had his course
heretofore. Mark well the place, and remember it. Afterward, leading the
Nymph aside, I said: My child, you have (as I have told you) an influence
infinitely malicious, and another most fortunate as one would wish; the
malicious I have told, keep you from it, if you love your contentment. The
good is that which you see in this Glass: mark then well the place which I
have caused you to see: and that you may the better remember it, after I have
done speaking to you, return to see it, and note it well: for the day that the
Moon shall be in the same state that it is in now, about this very hour, or a
little sooner or later, you shall find him whom you ought to love. If he see
you before you see him, he shall love you, but hardly shall you love him: on
the contrary, if you see him first* he shall have somewhat to do to love you,
and you shall presently love him. Now must you, by your wisdom, overcome this
contrariety; resolve then, both to vanquish your self, and him (if need be,)
for without doubt, in time, you shall hit on him: if you find him not the first
time, return the next Moon after at the same day, about the same hour; and
do so the third time, if you meet him not at the second. Hecate will not make
the day certain to me.

It pleases the gods to mix pain in that they give us, that obedience which
herein we render them, may witness how we esteem them. Then taking a little
stick, I came to the looking glass, and pointed with it to every place.
Behold (said I) the mountain of Isoure, see the Mont-uerdun, see the river of
Lignon. Here see you a lake on the shore of it there, and a little lower la
Pra: you may well remember it, having passed often that way as you hunted. Now,
Nymph, Hecate sends you word by me, that if you observe not that which she sets
down to you, as you have promised her, she will augment the misfortune which
the Destinies threaten. And then a little changing my voice, I said, And I am
right glad, that before my departure I have bin so happy too, as to give you
this advice: for though I be not of this country, yet so it is, that your
virtue, and your piety to the gods, have bound me to love you, and to beseech
Hecate that she would preserve and make you happy; and by this you may see I am
wholly belonging to that goddess, since she, having commanded me to
departhence, to morrow without gaine-saying I am resolved, and bid you adeiu.
At this word I led them out of my cabin, and taking from them the herbs I had
set about them, I burnt them in the fire, which as yet was flaming, and then
withdrew my self.

I will now tell you, why I said, It was at the full moon, for you were angry
that I gave her so long term: I did it, to the end that Lindamor might be
gone before she went, there being no likelihood that Amasis would suffer her
before: and then, you that were to take the charge of all the Province, must
have some time to stay about Amasis, after the going away of all the knights,
to begin to set things in order; whereas if so presently you should have gone
to hunt, every one might have murmured: for you know how much a man that deals
in matters of state, is subject to envy and slander. I gave three moons
after, to the end that if you fall one day, you might be there another. I told
her, that if she saw you first, that she should easily fall in love with you;
that if it were you, it should be otherwise: and that only, because I knew well
that you should see her first: so that she should find this difficulty of Love
true in her self; for as you know, she loved Lindamor. I told her I must be
gone the next day, that she should not think it strange, if she came to seek
me out for some curiosity: for having performed that which we resolve on, I
had reason to make haste, that I might not be known of any Druide, who would
have caused me to be punished, and you know well, that has always been my
fear. Think you, I have forgot any thing? No certainly, said Polemas: but
what might that be, that has kept her back so long time? For my part (said
Climanthe) I know not, except it be, for that she has mis-taken the days of
the moon: but since no business presses you, and you may yet stay here the
time that I have set her, I would advise you to do it, and every morning two
days before, and after, you fail not to go in good time; for it is true,
that the first day we were too late. And what will you (said Polemas) that I
should do? The loss of the shepherd that drowned himself, was the cause: and
you know, the shore of the river was so full of folk, that I could not stay
there alone without suspicion: but we have not foreslowed much, and there is
no likelihood that she was there that day: for I assure my self, that the
same occasion which hindered me, has likewise stayed her, lest she should be
seen. You shall never persuade me so, (replied Climanthe) she was too desirous
to observe that which I appointed. But it seems to be time to rise that you
may be gone: and then opening the windows, he saw the day break. Without
doubt (said he) before you be at the place where you should be, the hour will
be past: make haste; for it is better to have many hours to spare, the^ a
moment too short. And will you (said Polemas) that we go now, being more then
15. days since the time is past? It may be, she has reckoned wrong: let us
not fail to find her. Leonide, who feared to be seen either of Polemas or
Climanthe, durst not rise before they were gone: and that she might know the
face of Climanthe, when it was day, she beheld him so, that she thought it
impossible he could disguise himself to her: and as soon as she saw they
were out of the house, she dressed her self, and having taken leave of her
host, held on her voyage so confused in her self, at the malicious impostures
of these two persons, that she thought any other might as well be deceived as
she: so it was, that the small esteem which Polemas made of her beauty,
struck her so to the quick, that she resolved to prevent his malice with her
wisdom, and to work so, that Lindamor, in his absence, might not feel the
effects of this treason, which she thought she could not better do, then by the
mean of her uncle Adamas, to whom she had a purpose to declare all that she
knew. In this resolution she hasted to go to Feurs, where she thought to find
him, but she came too late: for that morning he was gone homewards, having
the day before dispatched that which belonged to the sacrifice. And the Sun
began to wax hot, by that time he came into the plain of Mont-Verdun: and
because on the left hand he perceived a tuft of trees, which as he thought, gave
a lovely shadow, he turned his step thither to rest himself a little. As
soon as he was there, he spied afar off a shepherd coming, that seemed to
seek out that place for the same cause that brought him: and because he
seemed to be very sad when he came, lest he might draw him from his thought,
he would not salute him, but without showing himself to him, he would harken
what he went talking to himself: and shortly after he was set down on the
other side of the bush, he heard him use these words, And why should I love
this fleeter? In the first place her beauty cannot constrain me: for it is not
enough to give her the name of fair, and then her merits are not such, as if
they be not aided with other considerations, may hold an honest man in her
service: and lastly, her love, which was all that bound me to her, is so
changeable, that if she have any impression of love in her heart, I think, it be
not only of wax, but of wax newly wrought, she so easily takes the figures of
al novelties; and it is like her eyes, that receive the figures of all that is
represented to them, but lose them, as soon as the object is no more before
them, that is, I love her, I must avow, it is because I think she loves me:
but if it be not so, I excuse her, for I know well, she thinks she loves me.
This shepherd had gone on, but a shepherdess by fortune came to him, who
seemed to have followed him afar off; and though she heard some words of her
self, yet made she no show, but now contrary sitting down by him, she said,
Well, Corilas, what new care is this that makes you so sad? The shepherd
answered her as disdainefully as he could, without turning his head on that
side: It is that which makes me search, with what new deceit you will bear
them, whom from this time you shall begin to love. And why, said the
shepherdess, can you believe that I affect any other then you? And you, said
the shepherd, can you believe that I think you affect me? What think you
then of me, said the shepherdess? All the worst (answered Corilas) that you
can believe from a man whom you hate. You have (added she) strange opinions of
me. And you (said Corilas) strange effects in you. O God (said the
shepherdess) what a man have I found in you? It is I (answered the shepherd)
that with more reason may retort it on you, Stelle, what a woman have I found:
for there is nothing more capable of love the^ you, you, I say, who take no
delight but to deceive those that trust in you, and who imitate the huntsman,
who pursues the beast with such care, whose heart afterward he gives to his
dogs. You have, said she, so small reason in that you say, as he should have
less that will stay to answer you. I would to God (said the shepherd) I
might always have as much in my soul, as I have now in my words; I should not
have that sorrow that afflicts me. And after they had both held their peace
awhile, she raised her voice, and spoke, singing to him in this sort, and he
likewise, that she might not want answer, replied.

A Dialogue between Stelle and Corilas.

STEL. What, will you then, my shepherd be,
For want of an inconstant love?

COR. To follow your quick spirit free,
Requ^^^ a wing (...)ble ^o ^^ue,
Much rather then a courage high,
To follow you, were foolery.

STEL. You have not always thought it so,
That loving me is such a crime.

COR. Speak not of times past long age,
He lives not well, m^nds not in time.
Nothing returns that is past before,
And I remember it no more.

STEL. What Is this, but not to know to love,
Yet brag the contrary thereto?

COR. Wherefore will you me so reprove,
For that your self knows not to do?
You love out of opinion,
And not out of election.

STEL. I love you, and will love you still,
Though your love changed be in this wise.

COR. Mine^ no, no: change I never will
Her, where my soul engaged lies.
Think not, that every day like you,
I change my old love for a new.

STEL. What, are you then resolved, tell,
To seek a love that is fresh and rare?

COR. If heretofore you pleased me well,
I judged you, then to be more fair,
But now in very deed I see,
Your beauty in a poor degree.

STEL. Will you unfaithful bring to naught,
An amity that was so great?

COR. You charge me with your own default,
So makes an ends he, whom you ^eate:
But you may say what fit your bra^u^:
The thing that was, comes not again.

STEL. But if you loved me indeed,
What makes you then so soon to start?

COR. When one his error better heeds,
To change his mind, is wisdoms part:
It Is better to repent, though late,
Then still to h^ld a wandering gate.

STEL. Can neither duty nor yet honor,
Know such an humor to subdue?

COR. What if I can see in you more,
That may this amity renew,
Wherein your fainings s^ared me,
Which I mistook so sillily?

STEL. I may (you see) for my revenge,
Another love, and not be loved.

COR. Right soon of such disease to change,
Shall heal me, as in yours I proved:
And if I then do otherwise,
I must have l^st my Judgments (...).

STEL. Have you then no kind of r(...)se,
For so great infidelity.

COR. I have pr^n^^nst, that love of forc^,
She owes me hers that asks me,
But you may ask and make your mo^^,
All L^^^ 'twixt us is dead and gone.

The shepherdess seeing he stood not without reply to her demands, leaving
to sing, said: And why, Corilas, is there no more hope in you? No more (said
he) then faithfulness in you; and think not that your fained nor fair words
can change my resolution. I am too much grounded in this opinion, so that it is
in vain for you to try your arms against me, they are too feeble, I fear
their blows no more: I counsel you to prove them on others, whose knowledge
may make them misprize them as I have done. It cannot be but you shall find
some, whom the heavens (to punish some secret fault) have ordained to love you,
and they shall be the more pleasing to you, for that nouelty delights you above
all things. At this bout, the shepherdess was stung in earnest: but fayning
to turn the offense into laughter, she said as she was going away, I make good
sport, Corilas, both at your self and your choler, we shall see you shortly in
your good humor. In the mean time, be content that I patiently suffer your
fault, which you cast on me. I know (replied the shepherd) it is your custom
to make sport with them that love you. But if the humor which I have, last, I
assure you, you may longer play upon me, then on a man that shall love you. So
parted these two enemies; and Adamas, who had heard them, having knowledge by
their names, of the families of which they were, was desirous to know more of
their affairs: and calling Corilas by his name, made him turn to him: and
because the shepherd seemed to be astonished at this surprise, for the respect
which is had to the habit and quality of a Druyde, that he might be more
assured, he caused him to sit down by him, and then talked thus unto him: My
child, (for so I may call you) for the love I have always borne to them of
your family, there is no cause you should be sorry for your speaking so freely
to Stelle before me. I am glad that I have seen your wisdom: but I desire to
know more, that I may the better counsel you in this affair, that thereby you
may commit no error. And for me, I know not that there should be any
difficulty, since the laws of coiuility and courtesy do more bind me (it may
be) then you may imagine. As soon as Corilas had the sight of the Druyde, he
knew him well, having often seen him at diverse sacrifices; but having never
spoken to him, he had not the boldness to tell thorowout what had passed
between Stelle and him, though he much desired, that every one might know the
justice of his cause, and the unfaithfulness of this shepherdess: which Adamas
perceiving, that he might encourage him, gave him to understand, that he knew a
good part already, and that many had reported it to his wrong, which he heard
with no great pleasure, for the love he had always borne to his. It will (said
Corilas) be loss of time for you to hear the particularities of our villages.
So far is it (replied he:) it shall be a great satisfaction, to know that you
have not been wronged; and besides, I mean to pass away some part of the
heat here, and so the time may be employed.

The History of Stelle and Corilas.
SInce you command it so (said the shepherd) I must begin my discourse
somewhat higher. It is a good while since Stelle remained the widow of an
husband whom the heavens had given her, rather for name sake, the^ effect; for
besides that he was sickly, his age, which drew near to 75. years, so weakened
his forces, that it constrained him to leave this young widow, almost before
she was truly married: the love she bare him, wrought in her no great feeling
of his loss, no more did her humor, which was never wonted to take near to
heart, the accidents that befell her. Remaining then well satisfied in her
self, so see her self freed at one blow, of two so heavy burdens; to wit,
the importunity of an angry husband, and the authority which her parents
accustomed to have over her, presently she thrust her self in good earnest,
into the world: and though her beauty such as you see, be not of that sort
that may tempt men to love her, yet her behavior, for the most part,
displeased not them that saw her. She might be about 17. or 18. years: an age
fit enough to commit many follies when they be at liberty. This was the cause,
that Saliam her brother, an honest and wise shepherd, and one of the best
friends I had, not able to endure her licentious and usual behavior, that he
might deprive her of such occasions, resolved to send her far from her
Hamlet, and place her in such company, where she might pass her more
dangerous age without reproach. For effecting this, he prayed Cleanthe to like
well, that she might be a companion to his little daughter, Aminthe, because
they were about an age, though Stelle were some deal older. And because
Cleantho liked well of it, they began a life so private and so familiar, that
these two shepheardesses were never the one without the other, many wondering,
that being so differing in humor; they could be so straightly joined; but the
sweet behavior of Aminthe, and the supple nature of Stelle, caused it, and so
Aminthe never withstood the deliberations of her companion, and Stelle never
found evil in what* Aminthe willed. In this sort they lived with such priuacy,
that there was nothing hidden between them. But at last, Lisis, the son of
shepherd Genetian, leaving the frosty places of Mount-Lune, descended into our
plains, where having seen her in a general assembly, which was had at the
Temple of Venus, just ouer-against Mount-Su^, then when Astrea got the prize
for beauty: he grew so amorous of her, that I cannot tell whether he be in his
grave; and she found him so to her liking, that after many voyages, and many
messages, their affections were so forward, that Lisis began to talk of
marriage, where to she made as good an answer as he could desire. In this
space Saliam was constrained to make a long journey, so that he knew nothing
of this treaty: besides that, she had now taken so great authority over
herself, that she would impart none of her affairs to him. On the other side,
Aminthe seeing her so soon resolved on this marriage, many times asked her, if
it were in good earnest, and it seemed fit, in a matter of so great importance,
to be well advised. Trouble not your self, said she, I will easily dispatch
this business. Hereupon Lisis, who served with great eagerness, set down a
day assigned, to make the assembly, and put himself to the expenses usual in
such occasions, holding his marriage most assured: but the accustomed humor of
many women, to make no man master of their liberty, let her from going on
with her former purpose, which she endeavored to break, by demands most
unreasonable, that she thought the parents and friends of Lisis would never
give their consent. But the love which he bare her, being stronger then all
difficulties, she was (in the end) constrained to break it, without other
cloak, then the smalnesse of her good will. If Lisis were offended, you may
judge, receiving so great a wrong: yet could he not drive away this love, but
he would be the conqueror. And, I remember, that upon this discourse he made
these verses, which since (when we were friends) he gave me.

A SONNET On a despite of Love.
Despite, weak Warrior, captain auda^ious,
That leadst me to the field, under so feeble ar^es,
Against a Love so armed with arrows, and with char^es,
Love so accustomed to be victorious,
If Love but of his wing (when first alarm appears)
Do melt the Icicles which fill mine eyes like rhu^^e,
What will the fires do, which even the gods consume,
And which bear down ^maine by torrent of their t^^res?
I mercy come to cry, vanquished, I heave my hands,
Stooping unto her yoke, that so inhumane stands,
Which of thine own defense shall much increase the glory.
For safely I do^ wish that pity armor proo^^,
And of my shepherdess if she prou^ke the Love,
My blood, my triumph, ^e my death my victory.
That which caused this change in Stelle, was a new affection, which the wrong
of a shepherd called Semire, bred in her soul, whereof Lisis was the last
that knew it, because she kept it rather from him then any other. This
shepherd, amongst all the men that ever I saw, is the greatest dissembler,
and most crafty, otherwise an honest man, and a person that had many lovely
parts in him, which gave occasion to this shepherdess to refuse (contrary to
promise) the alliance of Lisis, setting that in place of a favor to her new
lover, who yet triumphed not long in this victory. For it fell out, that
L^pander making an affembly for the marriage of his daughter Olymp^, Lisis and
Stelle were called thither: and because we were near of kin, Olympe and I,
I would not fail to be there. I know not if it were the revenge of love, or
the inconstant nature of the shepherdess, by her uncertain carriage, brought
it about where she was party: so it was, that as soon as she saw Lisis
again, she took a fancy to recall him: and to effect it, forgot none of
those allurements, wherein Nature had been unwisely prodigal unto her. The
displeased courage of the shepherd gave him armor enough, not to love her,
but only to hide his affection.

In the end, toward evening, that every one is busied, either in dancing, or
in entertaining the person he likes best of, she followed him in such sort,
that thrusting him against a window, from which he could not honestly escape,
he was constrained to sustain the forces of his enemy. On the other side,
Semire, who had always his eye on her, having marked the pursuites that she
made all that evening to this shepherd, following the nature of every lover,
began to let some jealousy breed in his soul, knowing well, that the Candle
lately put out, will easily be lighted again; and seeing that she had shoued
him up against the window, that he might hear what she said to him; making
show of talking with some other, he came so near her, that he heard her ask
him, why he did fly from her so mainely. Truly (said Lisis) this is a strange
kind of pursuing me, and with too brazen a brow. But though I know (said
Stelle) whence these injuries grow, it may be, that hearing me, and judging
without passion, all the wrong will not lie on that side you think. For Gods
sake (answered Lisis) shepherdess, ^eaue me in peace, and let it suffice,
that these injuries proceed from the hatred I bear you, and the occasion of my
hatred from your fickleness, which makes it justifiable, that may it please
heaven, that he that has done all the wrong, may likewise feel all the
displeasure. But let us tread all these things under foot, and lose you as
well the memory, as I have lost the will to love you. I understand (answered
Stelle) whence your anger grows; and indeed you have reason to carry your
self in this manner. Behold, I beseech you, the great wrong which is done, not
to take one for an husband, as soon as he is tendered. Is it not the custom,
always to make a demand twice? Indeed, if I had not taken you at a word, I had
done you great wrong. But how apparent is it to refuse a man so constant, that
had loved me but three months? Lisis seeing before his ey^s, that which her
outrage would not suffer him to love, and which his love would not permit him
to hate, knew not with what words to answer her: yet to interrupt this torrent
of words, he said, Stelle, it is sufficient we have long since proved, that you
do know better what to say, then to do, and that words flow highest in your
mouth, when reason in you is at the lowest ebb. But, hold that which I tell
you for inviolable; as much as I have heretofore loved you, so much at this
hour do I hate you: and there shall never be day of my life, that I will not
proclaim you for the most ungrateful and deceitful woman that is under
heaven.

At this word, offering violence to his affection, and the arm of Stelle,
wherewith she leaned on the wall, to keep him in against the window, he left
her alone, and went amongst the other shepherds, that (for that time)
warranted him against his enemy. Semire (as I told you) heard all this
discourse, and remained so astonished, and so ill satisfied with her, that from
that time, he resolved never to make account of a spirit so flitting. And that
which yet gave him more will, was, that by chance, having long sought occasion
to speak to her; and seeing Lisis had left her alone, I went to her: for I
must confess, that her allurements and tricks had more force in my soul,
then the wrong she had done to Lisis: had given me knowledge of the
imperfection of her spirit; and as every man goes flattering his desires, I
went fancying, so that that which the merits of Lisis could not obtain of her,
my good fortune might procure me. So that, so long as his wooing lasted, I
would never let my affection appear; for besides the kindred that was between
him and me, there was a very strait amity: but when I saw that he went off,
thinking the place to be void (I never took heed to the suite of Semire). I
thought it to some purpose to discover somewhat to her, rather then to attend
till she had another dessigne. So then, addressing my self to her, and seeing
her very pensive, I said, It must needs be some great occasion which made her
so changed, for this sadness was not usual to her quick humor. It is the
rage of Lisis (answered she) that will always remember the time passed, and
walks reproching me, for the refusal I made of him. And that, said I, shall
it grieve you? It cannot be otherwise, answered she, for we cannot put off our
affection, as we may our smock. And he takes in so evil part my delay, that
he always calls it a farewell. Truly (said I) Lisis deserves not the honor
of your good graces, since that, not being able to win them by his merits, he
ought at least to endeavor it by his long services, accompanied with a strong
patience; but his boiling humor, and it may be, his little love will not
suffer him. If this good luck might befall me, with what affection would I
receive it, and with what patience would I attend it? Father, it may be, you
will think it strange, to hear me tell you the sudden change of this
shepherdess; and yet I swear unto you, that she received the ouerture of my
love, so soon as I made it; and so, that before we parted, she liked well of
my offer of the service which I made her, and gave me leave to call my self
her servant. You may well think, that Semire, who was listening, remained no
more satisfied with me, then he had been with Lisis, and indeed from that
time he withdrew his suite; yet so discreetly, that many thought Stelle had
been the cause by her refusal: For she made no show of grieuing much at it,
because the place of his love was filled with a new dessigne which she had in
me, which was the cause that I received more favors from her then otherwise I
should. Which Lisis soon perceived. But love, which will always triumphs over
friendship, withheld me from speaking to him, fearing to displease the
shepherdess; and though he were very angry that I concealed it from him, yet
should I never have spoken to him of it, without the permission of Stelle, who
made show to desire that this business might pass by his hands. And since (as
I have noted) she did it with a purpose to reimbarke him once again with her.
But I, who then took no heed to all her tricks, and who sought after nothing
but the means to content her; one night when Lisis and I lay together, I used
this language to him, I must confess (Lisis,) that at last Love sports
himself with me: and more, there is nothing can defer my death, but that
which shall come from you. From me (answered Lisis?) You may be assured that I
will never be wanting to our friendship, though your mistrust has made you
commit as great an offense; and think not but I have known your love: but
your silence, which displeased me, made me hold my peace. Since you (replied I)
have known it, and have not spoken to me of it, I have the more cause of
offense. For I confess, I have failed in some things against our friendship in
my silence, but you must consider, that a lover is not himself, and in all his
errors you are to accuse the violence of his disease: but you that have no
passion, can have no excuse, but the want of friendship.

Lisis began to laugh, when he heard my reasons, and answered me: You are
pleasant, Corilas, to pay me with a demand; yet will I never gainsay you:
and since you have this opinion, see wherein I may amend this fault. In doing
for me (answered I) which you could not for your self: that is, (I must tell
you at last) that if I attain not the love of Stelle, there is no hope in me.
O God, then cried Lisis, to what passage has your misfortune led you? Fly
(Corilas) this dangerous sea, where indeed there are nothing but rocks and
banks, marked with the shipwreck of those which have taken the same course. I
speak out of experience, as you know. I hope your merits may elsewhere gain
you a better fortune then me, but neither virtue nor reason can do it here. I
answered, It is no small contentment to me, to hear you use this language: for
till now I was in doubt you had yet some feeling, and that made me the more
reserved; but since (God be thanked) it is not so, I desire in this love to
draw out an extreme proof of your friendship. I know that the hatred which
succeeds love, measures it self after the greatness of the fall, and having
so dearly loved this fair shepherdess, coming to hate her, the hatred
should thereby be the greater: yet having known by Stelle her self, that I
cannot come to that I desire, but by your means, I adjure you by our
friendship, to assist me, be it by persuading her, be it by entreating her, or
in any sort that may be; and I call it an extreme proof. For, I doubt not, but
that hating her, it will grieve you to speak to her: but it is my amity, which
desires it might be manifested, that it is greater then your hatred. Lisis was
surprised, expecting from me another prayer then this, whereby, besides the
displeasure which he had to speak to Stelle, he now saw himself bereaved
for ever of the person he loved most. Yet he answered, I shall do all that you
will: you cannot promise more to your self of me, then I have of good will:
but bethink you of what is passed between us, and that I have always heard
them say, that for messages of Love, you must not serve your self of persons
that are hated. It is true, there is no necessity to look on Stelle so near,
since I can assure you, you may as well dispatch your business of this kind,
as well as any other. Behold then, the poor Lisis, instead of a Lover, becomes
messenger of love, a mystery which his friendship commanded him to do for me,
not of his own seeking, but with an intent to serve me as a friend, though
since (it may be) Love caused him to change (in some sort) his purpose, as I
will tell you. But in this we must accuse the violence of Love, and the
ouer-absolute power he has over man, and admire the friendship he bare me,
which suffered him to agree to the bereauing of himself for ever of that which
he loved, that I might possess it.

Some days after, seeking occasion to speak with her, he found it so fitly to
his purpose with her, that there was no body by, to interrupt their discourse,
so long as he pleased to make it; and then renewing the remembrance of the
injury he received, he so armed himself against her allurements, that Love
had small hope he could vanquish him at that bout: which was not, for that the
shepherdess studied not as much to surmount him, as he did to find sureties
for his liberty: but because he opposed against love, despite and friendship;
the first armed with offense, the other with duty, he remained unconquered at
that combat. Before he began to speak, she seeing him to approach, went to
meet him, with words of the same fashion. What good luck (said she) is that
which brings me the much desired Lisis? what unhoped for favor is this? I begin
to have good hope of my self, now you are come back: for I may truly swear,
that since you left me, I never found entire contentment. Whereto the shepherd
answered, More affected, then faithful shepherdess, I am more satisfied with
the confession you make, then I have been offended at your infidelity. But let
us leave this discourse, and forget it for ever, and answer me to that I
demand. Are you yet resolved to deceive all them that love you? For my part, I
know well what to believe, none of your humors to my cost being unknown to me:
but that which I must demand of you, is to know at your shop, if a man may
part at a better rate: for if you speak with affection oath, or other sort of
assurance, that no man shall be deceived by you, for certain they are of my
rank. The shepherdess looked not for these reproaches, notwithstanding she
forbore not to answer him, If you come but to iniure me, I thank you for this
visitation* but you have good occasion to complain of me. I complain,
(answered the shepherd?) I beseech you set that aside. I complain no more
then I do iniure you, and so far am I from using complaint, that I commend your
humor: for if you should longer make show to love me, I should live the longer
time in deceit: and did it please God, that the loss of your love brought me
no more grief then damage, you should have no cause to say, I complained, no
more then I will iniure you, since injury and truth can be no more together,
then you and faithfulness. But it is true; that you are the most deceitful
and ungrateful shepherdess of Forests. Me thinks (answered Stelle) little
courteous shepherd, this discourse might better fit another man's mouth then
yours. Then Lisis changing a little his fashion, Hitherto (said he) I have used
my tou^g for the most despite of Lisis: now I will use it for one that has more
business with you, that is a little wise shepherd that loves you, and holds
nothing at so high price as your good graces. She thinking that he mocked her,
Let us leave this discourse, said she; and let it suffice, Lisis, that you have
loved me, being at this hour unwilling to renew the remembrance of your
error. Indeed (replied suddenly the shepherd) they were indeed errors that
compelled me to love you but you err no less, if you think I speak of my
self: it is for poor Corilas, who is so subjected to that that is not in you,
that for any thing that I can say of your humor, it is impossible to withdraw
him. I have told him that I have proved in you, the small love the little
assurance that is in your soul, and in your words. I have sworn unto him,
that you will deceive him, and I know you will not keep me from being
perjured: but the poor miserable is so entangled, that he is of opinion, that
what I could not attain, his merits may reach to; and yet, to free him of
deceit, I cold him, that the greatest impediment to obtain any thing of you, is
merit; and that you may credit that I tell you, see a letter which he has
written to you. I make no question but if he have failed, you will make him do
penance. And because Stelle would not read my letter, Lisis opening it, read it
aloud.

The lettter of Corilas to Stelle.
IT is impossible to see you, without loving you, but much more to love,
without being extreme in that affection: so that if for my defense in please
you to consider this truth, when this paper shall present it self before your
eyes, I assure my self, that the greatness of my hur^ shall obtain by pity, as
much pardon from you, as the boldness which has raised me to this worth, may
merit of just punishment. Attending the judgment which you shall give, suffer
me a thousand and a thousand times to kiss your fair hands, without being
able by such a number to equalize the death, which the refusal of this
supplication shall give me, nor the felicities which shall accompany me, if
you receive me, as truly I am, for your affectionat^ and faithful, servant.


As soon as Lisis had done reading, he held on, Well, Stelle, what death shall
he die? of how many shall he be quit? for me, I begin to complain, and you to
think by what means you may hold him in the opinion he is in; and after, how
you may make him find your denial more bitter. This speech touched the
shepherdess in good earnest, seeing how far he was gone off from loving her;
so that to interrupt him, she was constrained to say, Me thinks, Lisis, that if
Corilas be of the mind this paper makes show of, he was ill advised to employ
you, since your words are more able to win hatred then love, and you seem
rather a messenger of war then peace. Stelle (replied the shepherd) he was so
far from being ill advised in this election, that if he had showed as much
judgment in the rest of his actions, he should not stand in so great need of
your succors: he has had trial of your fancies; he knows what your
allurements are; and of whom might he better serve himself, without suspicion
of making himself a competitor, then of a loving friend, such as I am, whom
you hate more then death? And yet the Art wherewith I serve my self, is not
bad: for representing you so lovely as you are, you may the better acknowledge
the honor he does you to love you. But let us leave this talk, and tell me, in
good earnest, whether he be in your good grace, and how long he shall
continue; since, in truth, I dare not return to him, without bringing him some
good answer: I conjure you by his love and ours passed. To this reason the
shepherd added some others, with so many prayers, that the shepherdess
believed he spoke in good earnest; whereto she easily persuaded her self,
according to her good nature: for it is the custom of them that easily affect
themselves, to think that they are more easily affected. It was so, that for
this time Lisis could obtain of her nothing, but that the love of his cousin
for default of his own, should not be unpleasing to her; but Time should be
her counceller. And after, at diverse times he solicited her, so that he had
what assurance he would: and because he remembered her flitting humor, he
labored to bind her with a promise written with her own hand, and knew so
well to turn her on every side, that he had what he would. He came back in
that sort to me, and discoursed unto me all that he had done, except this
promise; for knowing the humor of Stelle, he doubted always that she would
deceive him, and if he spoke to me of that paper, I might be further engaged,
and so more painful to withdraw me. All this was without the knowledge of
Aminthe, from whom Stelle concealed it, rather then from any other. When I had
received such assurance of that which I most desired, after I had thanked the
shepherdess, I began, with her permission, to give order for the marriage,
and made no difficulty to speak openly of it, though Lisis always foretold
me, that in the end, I should be deceived: but the appearance of the good we
desire, so flatters us, that hardly give we care to them that tell us the
contrary.

While this marriage was divulged, Semire, who, as I told you, had left his
suite, by reason of Lisis and me, being provoked with a speech which she had
used of him, resolved (to make the contrary appear, at what price soever) to
return into her good graces, with a purpose to leave her in the end, with that
boldness, that she might never say more, that this separation proceeded from
her. There was no need to use any great Art, for her changing humor easily
suffered her to return to her nature: and so at a blow, behold her resolve to
forsake me for Semire, as a little before she had left Semire for me, yet was
she not altogether without pain, because of the promise which she had
written, not knowing how to gainsay it. In the end, the day of marriage
being come, when I had assembled the most part of my kindred and friends, I
held my self so assured, that I received the reioycings of all the world: but
she, that had another thought, while I was busied in welco^ming those that were
come, brake all this meeting, with excuses more poorly grounded then the
former; wherewith I was so enraged, that getting from her without bidding
adieu, I conceived so great disdain of her lightness, that never since she
could cope with me.

Now judge, father, if I have cause to complain of her, and, if they that tell
it to my disadvantage, were well informed. Indeed (answered Adamas) you may see
a woman unworthy of that name, and I wonder how it is possible that having
deceived so many, there should be any that would trust her. I have not yet told
you all (replied Corilas:) for after every one was gone but Lisis, she so
wrought, that Semire stayed with her until evening. In the mean time, as I
think, she labored to use some art to have her promise back, because she
saw well he was thoroughly angry with her. In the end, very boldly she spoke to
him thus: Is it possible, Lisis, that you have so forgotten the affection which
so often you have sworn to me, that you have no mind to please me? I, said
Lisis, the heavens sooner kill me.

At this word, what impediment soever she used, he got out of the house to be
gone: but she took such hold on him, and taking his hand between hers, she
went with him, clasping in such a fashion, that every one might judge, that
there was love, and though he right well knew her humor and her deceits, yet
could he not contain himself from being pleased with her slatteries, though
he gave no credit to them, which he well witnessed, when considering her
actions, he said, O God, Stelle, how do you abuse the graces, wherein the
Heavens (without reason) have been so prodigal to you? If this body did
enclose a spirit which had any resemblance with the beauty, who is he that
could resist you? She, who knew what force her allurements had, placed all her
art in her eyes; all her fictions in her mouth; and all her malice in her
invention, wherewith she so turned him on all sides, that she almost set him
besides himself, and then she used these words: Gentle shepherd, if it be
true, that you be that Lisis, which sometimes have so dearly affected me, I
conjure you by the remembrance of the time so happy for me, that you will hear
me in private, and believe, that if you have had any occasion to complain, I
will make it plain unto you, that this second fault, or at least, as you
esteem it so, was not committed but to remedy the former. At these words Lisis
was overcome; yet, that he might not show his weakness, he answered, See,
Stelle, how far you are gone from your opinion; so far am I from desire to
do any thing that might please you, that there is nothing displeasing, which I
will not endeavor to do. Since there is no other remedy (answered the
shepherdess) come back into the house to displease me. With this intent,
answered he, I will. So then they went in: and as they stood by the fire, she
began to speak thus: In the end (shepherd) it is impossible I should longer
live with you and dissemble: I must put off the mask to al my actions, and so
you shall know, that poor Stelle, whom you have accounted so slitting, is more
constant then you imagine, and desires only that you should know it, that for
the satisfaction of the wrongs you have done me, you would freely confess you
have wronged me. But (said she) (suddenly breaking off that speech) what
have you done with the promise which you have had of me in the behalf of
Corilas? for if you have delivered it him, that only may break off our
affairs; who being in the place of Lisis, would not believe she loved him,
and would not be deceived like him. This shepherd being of opinion, that she
would do that for him for which she refused me, without difficulty gave her
this promise, which he had always kept most charily and most secretly: as
soon as she had it, she tore it, and going near the fire, made it a
sacrifice: and then turning toward the shepherd, smiling, she said. There is
no more for you to do, gentle shepherd, but you may hold on your way, for it
is ouer-late. O God, cried Lisis (finding her practices) Is it possible that
the third time I should be received by one person? And what cause have you
(said Stelle) to say you are deceived? Ah! perfidious and disloyal (said he)
did you not come out to tell me, that you would make it plain, that this last
fault was to repair the former, and to make proof that you are constant, you
laid open your naked heart and intentions? Lisis (said she) you come always
with your injuries; if I never loved you, am I not constant, not to love you
now? And have I not made you see what my heart is? and whereto tend my actions,
but having that I would of you, I leave you in peace? Believe, that all the
words which you have made me lose for an hour together, was, but to recover
this paper; and now (since I have it) I pray God to give you the good night.
What an amazement, think you, was the shepherd in? It was so great, that
without speech, or spending further time, half besides himself, he went
homeward: But certainly, he has had since good occasion to be revenged: For
Semire, as I have told you, which was the cause of my evil, or rather of my
good, so I may call that separation of amity, feeling in himself yet the
displeasure of the first disgrace which she had done him, seeing this extreme
leuity, and considering that (it might be) she might serve him so, he resolved
to prevent it: and so having abused her, as we were (Lisis and I) he broke the
treaty of marriage, in the midst of an assembly, which he had purposely
caused to be made, which procured many to say, that by the same weapon whereby
a wound is given, oftentimes the punishment is received.

Corilas ended in this sort; and Adamas smiling, said, My child, the best
counsel that I can give you herein, is, to shun the familiarity of this
deceiuer, and to keep your self from her practices, and to give contentment to
your parents, that with great impaciency desire to see you married, and when
any good proffer is offered, receive it, and stay not on these youthful tricks
of Love: for there is nothing that can better warrant you from the plots and
surprises of this deceiuer, nor which will make you more esteemed among your
neighbors, then to marry, not so much by Love, as by reason; it being one of
the most important actions that you can ever do, and wherein all the
happiness or misfortune of a man may depend. At this word they parted, for it
began to wax late, and every one took the way to his lodging.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
ON the other side, Leonide not having found Adamas at Feurs, went back the
same way she came, not staying, but the time she was to dine: and because she
resolved, that night to abide among the shepheardesses, which she had seen
the day before, for the desire she had to have more particular knowledge of
them, she came back to that place where she met them, when looking about her,
she seemed to see some; but not being able to know them, for they were so
far off, with a great compass she came as near to them as she might, and
then looking on their faces, she found they were the same whom she sought for.
She might be glad of this meeting; for by fortune they were come out of their
Hamlet, with a purpose to pass the rest of the day together; and the better to
spend the time, they had a meaning there should be no more then they three,
that they might more freely speak of their greatest secrets; so that Leonide
could not have come in a better time to satisfy her curiosity; especially,
since they were but newly come. Lying then to listen, she heard Astrea (taking
Diane by the hand) say, Now is the time, wise shepherdess, that you should
pay us that which you promised; since upon your word, Phillis and I have not
made dainty, to tell you all that you desired to know of us. Fair Astrea
(answered Diane) without doubt, my word shall bind me to discourse unto you my
life, but much more the amity that is between us; kowing well, that to
conceal any thing in the soul from the person we love, is to be guilty of a
very great fault: that if I have been so slack to satisfy that which you
desire of me, it was, for that leisure would not permit me: for, though I be
most certain, that I know not how to relate to you my youth, without blushing,
yet it will be easy for me to overcome this shame, when I shall think it is
to please you. Why should you blush (said Phillis) since there is no other
fault but to love? If it be not (replied Diane) yet, at least, it is a
resemblance of a fault; and they are so like, that oftentimes they are taken
one for another. They (replied Phillis) which deceive themselves so, have a
very ill sight. It is true, answered Diane, but it is our misfortune, that
there are more of that sort then of the good. You will displease us
(interrupted Astrea) if you have that opinion of us. The love which I bear to
you both (answered Diane) may assure you, that I know not how to give bad
judgment. For it is impossible to love that which we esteem not. Moreover,
that which puts me to pain, is not the opinion which my friends may have of
me, but all the world besides; for that with my friends I live always so, as
my action may content them: and by that means, opinion cannot be very strong
in them, but with others it is impossible; so that with them reports may
greatly prejudice one: and for this cause, since you appoint me to tell you a
part of my life, I conjure you by our love, never to speak of it; and both of
them having sworn, she took again her discourse in this sort.

The History of Diane.
IT would be very strange, if the discourse which you desire to know of me,
might not be offensive to you, since (fair and wise shepheardesses:) it has
made me endure so much displeasure, that I think not I shall at this time use
more words in telling it, then it has cost me tears in suffering it. And
since it pleases you, that at last I shall renew that grievous remembrance,
suffer me to abridge it, that I may (in some sort) lessen the happiness,
wherein I am by the memory of passed troubles. I assure my self, that though
you never saw Celion and Belinde, yet you have heard they were my father and
mother; and (it may be) have known the crosses which they had for the love of
the one to the other, which lets me from telling them, though they were
presages of those I met with. But you must know, that after the cares of love
were ended in marriage, that they might not remain idle, suites of law and
sundry troubles began to grow, and so plentifully, that wearied with charge
of process, to make an accord, many, among the rest, a neighbor of theirs
named Phormion, trauayled so, that their friends were of advice at last, that
to end all suits, they should give some promises of future alliance between
them: and because neither the one nor the other, as yet, had any children, as
having not been long married, they swore by Theurales on the Altar of Belenus,
that if they both had but one son, and one daughter, they should marry
together; and ratified this alliance with so many oaths, that he which brake
them, should be the most perjured creature in the world. Some time after, my
father had a son, which was lost, when the Goths and Ostrogots ransacked
this province. Somewhat after that was I borne: but so unluckily for my self,
that my father never saw me, being borne after his death.

This was the cause that Phormion seeing my father dead, and my brother lost
(for these Barbarians had carried him away, and it may be, killed him, or left
him to die for want;) and that my uncle Dinamis was gone out with displeasure
of this loss, resolved (if he might have a son) to pursue the effect of
those promises. It fell out, that some while after, his wife lay down, but it
was of a daughter; and because his wife was old, and he feared he should have
no more by her, he made it be given out, that it was a son, and used so
great wariness, that never any body heeded it; a trick easy enough, because
there was no person that would suppose that he would use such a deceit; and
until a certain age, it is hard (by the face) to know any thing: and the
better to deceive the most crafty, he called her Filidas: And when she came to
age, he caused her to use the exercise fit for young shepherds, whereto she
was not very vn^^t.

The dessigne of Phormion was, seeing me without father and without uncle, to
make himself master of my good by this feigned marriage: and when Filida^ and I
should be greater, to marry me to one of his nephews, which he loved best. And
indeed he was not deceived in his former dessigne. For Belinde was too
religious toward the gods, to fail in that whereto she knew her husband was
bound. It is true, that seeing me taken out of her own hands (for presently
after this dissembled marriage) I was delivered into them of Pharmion: she
took so great grief, that not being able to stay longer in this country, she
went to the lake Leman, to be mistress of the Vestals and Druydes of Euiens, as
the old Cleo^tin informed her from the Oracle.

Now behold me in the hands of Phormion, who shortly after brought me home to
him his nephew, to whom he meant to give me, who was named Amidor. This was the
beginning of my pains, because his uncle let him know, that by reason of our
young age, the marriage of Filidas and me was not so assured, but if the one
could not like of the other, he could not well break it: yet if it should
happen, he wished rather he should marry me then another, that he should make
use of this advertisement with so much discretion, that no man might take
notice of it, endeavoring, in the mean time, to win me to his love (in such
sort) that I gave my self to him, if ever I came to be free. This young
shepherd had so good a conceit of this dessigne, that as long as this fancy
lasted, he could not tell how good occasion I had to rejoice my self for him.
About this time Daphnis, an honest and wise shepherdess, came from the coast
of Furan, where she had abode many years; and because we were neighbors, the
conversation which we had together (by chance) made us so good friends, that I
began to be more vexed then of wont: for I must confess, that the humor of
Filidas was so unsupportable to me, that I could not almost endure it; so that
the fear which she had, that I might come to more knowledge, made her so
jealous of me, that I might not scarce speak to any body. Things standing on
these terms, Phormion on a sudden fa^leth sick, and the same day was choked
with a Catar, that he could not speak, nor give any order to his affairs nor
mine. Filidas, at the first was astonished; at last, seeing her self absolute
mistress of her self and of me, resolved to keep this authority, considering
that the liberty which the name of a man brings, is much more pleasing then the
servitude to which our Sex is more subjected. Besides that, she was not
ignorant, that when she should discover her self to be a maid, she should
give no small cause of talk to all the country. These reasons made her
continue the name which she had during her fathers life: and fearing now more
then ever, that some one might discover what she was, she held me so strait,
that I was seldom without her. But (fair shepheardesses) since it pleases
you to know my young passages, you must, when you hear them, excuse them; and
withal, have this belief of me, that I have had so many and so great troubles
for loving, that I am no more sensible on that side, having been so hardened,
that love has, neither so strong, nor so sharp arms, that he can pier^^ ^e.
Alas! it is the shepherd Filander of whom I will speak: Filander, that first
could give me some feeling of love, and who being no more, has carried away
all that that might be capable in me.

Truly (interrupted Astrea) either the love of Filander has been very
little, or you have used great discretion; for that indeed I never heard speech
of it. Which is a rare thing, for that the evil ^ongue will pardon nothing,
no, not that which is not. That men have not spoken of it (answered Diane), I
am more bound to our good intent, then to our discretion: and for the affection
of the shepherd, you may judge what it is by the discourse which I shall make.
But the heavens, which knew our pure and clean intents, would favor us from
that good houte. The first time that I saw him, was on the day we celebrate to
Apollo and Diane, when he came to the game with a sister whom he resembled so
much, that they held on them the eyes of the greatest part of the assembly. And
because she was near of kin to my dear Daphnis, as soon as I saw her, I
embraced her, and I welcomed her with a face so open, that from that time she
thought her self bound to love me: her name was Callyre, and was married on
the coast of Furan, to a shepherd called Gerestan, whom she had never seen
until the day whereon she was married, which was the cause of the little love
she bare him. The entertainment which I used to the sister, gave occasion to
the brother to tarry by me so long as the sacrifice lasted; and by fortune, I
know not whether I should call it good or evil for him: I set out my self
that day as well as I could, thinking (by reason of my name) that this feast
concerned me more particularly then others.

He that coming from far, had no other knowledge of the shepherds nor
shepheardesses, then that which his sister gave him, for sooke us not all that
day, so that in some sort, thinking my self bound to entertain him, I did
what I could to please him, and my labor was not unprofitable: for from that
time this poor shepherd gave birth to an affection, which never ended but
with his death. And even yet I am assured, that if in the grave they have any
remembrance of the living, he loves me; and in the very ashes conserues the
pure affection he swore to me. Daphnis took note both of the day and the
deed, being that night in bed (because that Filidas not being well, could not
come to the games) she told me it; but I rejected this conceit so long, that
she said, I see wall (Diane) that this day will cost me many prayers, and
Filander much pain: but howsoever it happen, you shall not be quite exempted.
She used to war on me with such assaults, because she perceived I feared them;
this was the cause that I stayed not to give her answer. So it was, that this
advertisement was cause, that the next day, me thought, I found some appar^^e
of that which she had told me. After dinner we used to gather together under
some trees, and to dance to the voice, where we sat down in a round, and
spent the time with the discourse which we liked best of, that we might
disquiet our selves in that assembly, as little as possibly we could. It fell
out, that Filander being unknown but to Daphnis and me, came and sat between
her and me: and attending to know whereto all the troop would resolve, not
to be dumb, I began to enquire of that which I I thought he could best
answer, which Amidor taking heed of, entered into so great jealousy, that
forsaking the company, without showing the cause, he went singing this
Towne-song, having before cast his eyes on me, to make it known that it was
of(...)e he meant to speak.

A TOWNE-SONG Of Amidor.
THat man shall have h^^ in the end,
That serves her last in place of friend.
Of heart that hundred time is moved,
More shifting then the nimble wind:
Who thinks himself to be beloved,
May not be held for wise of mind.
For he shall have her in the end,
That serves her last in place of friend.
The weather-cocke to all winds moves,
That stands on top of Tower tall.
So she to every proffering lone,
Turns both her heart, her head and all.
For he shall have her in the end,
That serves her last in place of friend.
The Hunter does not much esteem
That which he takes, though fat it were.
The Inconstant ouerpasseth him,
Disliking such as hold her dear.
But he shall have her in the end,
That serves her last in place of friend.
As one nail drives another forth,
The last, that comes into her grace,
Shall of the first for all his worth,
Right suddenly usurp the place.
Therefore shall he have her in the end,
That serves her last in place of friend.
I had had sufficient command over my self, to stay me from giving knowledge
of the displeasure which this song brought me, had it not been that every one
looked on me, and without Daphnis, I could not tell what would have become of
me. But she full of discretion, not staying for the end of this song,
interrupted it in this sort, addressing her self to me.

A MADRIGALL Of Daphnis, on the love which she bare to Diane.
SInce at your birth, beauteous Diane,
Love made you Loadstoone of all hearts,
Why should they say that I profane
Such beauty, when my love imparts
Worship to you by destiny?
If Love, that is most absolute,
Of likeness grows as it is said:
Then ours should be of strongest suit,
Since you and I one sex are made.
And that I might better hide my blushing, and make them think I took no heed
to the words of Amidor, as soon as Daphnis had made an end, I answered her
thus:

A MADRIGALL Of the same substance.
Wherefore should it be thought so strange,
That being as you are a maid,
My Love on you should be so stayde?
If Lover to be loved change,
The change in me were not so hard:
A shepherdess to shepherdess,
As shepherdess unto a shepherd.
After we had every one, as we sat on a row, sung some verses, and Filander,
who had a good voice, when it came to his turn, said this with a good grace:

STANZA'S Of Philander, on the birth of his affection.
THat his desires are great, and his attempts in vain,
His Loves full of great fires, and fuller much of pain,
That loves, and cannot find requital of desire,
Or if he be beloved, he takes but small delight,
Unless he might have hope, or if he hope (oh spite!)
It is but to the end to set him more on fire.
Thus on my cradles head, by fatal ordinance,
Hard Destiny it self did nine sad times pronoun^e,
What should infallibly accompany my days:
Upon the right hand, heaven thick clouded thunder had.
And since I knew too well, that these presages sad,
Cast eye on my designs, and follow them always:
Then be not you amazed if after this decree
My Love commencement take, when I your beauty see,
That if I must be beat out of design foretold,
It to my solace is, that men shall guilty find
The Love of my hard Fate, and praise my faulty mind;
Saying, A heart that is base, durst never be so bold.
So, when the thoughtfull care of an vnfertile Love
Consumes it self in beams of that worlds star above,
It seems in following it to say, Sun of my sky,
Burn me with thine own rays, make that I die by thee;
At least, in dying so, this pleasure rests with me,
That other fire could not burn me, but thine eye.
When Phoenix bird alone out of composure rare,
By Nature taught thereto, does first her self prepare,
From relickes of her tomb, her cradle yet to have,
She^ says to that great fire, the garden of her soul,
I shall in glory rise, by dying in thy cole,
And take my life again from ashes of my grave.
He said some others, but I have forgotten them, so that me thought it was I,
to whom these words were directed: and I know not if that which Daphnis had
told me, made me think so, or his eyes, which yet spoke more plainly then his
mouth. But if this verse gave me knowledge, his discretion witnessed it much
more afterward: for it is one of the effects of true affection, to serve with
discretion, and not to give knowledge of his disease, but by effects, over
which they can have no power. This young shepherd finding the humor of
Amidor, and for that Love had made him curious, and inquiring if it were but of
Filidas, he thought that the best point of Art, to shut up the eyes of them
both, was to compass a strait league with them, not giving any show of that he
bare me. Love made him so cunning and wise, that holding on his design, he
deceived not only Amidor, but my eyes also; because that usually he would
leave us to go to him, and he would never come but in his company. It is true,
that the crafty Daphnis found it presently; because (said she) that Amidor is
not so lovely, that he can draw so honest a shepherd as Filander, to use so
careful a search; so that it must needs be for a more worthy subject.

She was the cause that I began to have a care of my self: and I must
confess, that then his discretion pleased me; and if I could have suffered my
self to be beloved, it should be of him: but the hour was not then come, that
I should be struck on that side; yet did I not forbear to please my self
with his actions, and to approve his design in some sort. When he was to take
his leave of us, he accompanied us a good way; and at our parting, I never
heard such assurance of amity as he gave to Amidor, nor so many offers of
services, as to Filidas: and the fool Daphnis, unhappy, whispered in mine
care, Conceive you that it is to you that he speaks; and if you do not answer
him, you do great wrong. And when Amidor began to thank him, she said, Oh
what a fool he is to believe, that these offerings are ordained for his Altar!
but he could so well dissemble, that he made Amidor wholly his, and got such
ground on his good will, that when he returned, and was to deliver that which
Filander had on his part desired him to say to Filidas, that this maid had a
desire to see him; and some days after, he added so many ouer-lashing
commendations, not saying any thing to me of it (because, that when I spoke of
him, it was with such a coldness, that it seemed to be out of neglect) they
sent for him, desiring him to come and see them: God knows whether he need
be solicited more then once, for it was the thing he desired, thinking it was
impossible that his design should have a better beginning. And by fortune, the
day that he was to come, Daphnis and I went out to walk under some trees,
which are on the other side of that pasture that is next to this; and scarce
knowing to whom to go, while our flocks were feeding, we went, uncertain
whither our feet without election guided us, when we heard a voice far
enough off, and we thought it some strangers. The desire to know it, made us
turn directly to the place where the voice conducted us, and by reason Daphnis
went first, she spied Filander before me, and made a sign to me to tread
softly: and when I came near her, she whispered in mine ear, naming Filander,
who sat leaning against a tree, entertaining his thoughts, wearied, as it
seemed, with the length of his way, and by chance, just as we came, he began
in this sort:

A SONNET.
IN pride of heart I did misprize
Love, with his crafts and sorceries,
When changing arms to these of yours,
The crafty greater aid procures:
And yet before he did me wrong,
He used this language with his tongue.
A God against my Laws grown proud,
For having got the victory
Over a serpent, disallowde
The glory that is due to me.
But what? I made him Daphne love,
On him my greater force to prove.
The fire that burnt that glorious,
Came but from Nymphs eyes beauteous,
Whom he without her feeling loved:
But I will yours more fiery proved,
Comes not from Nymph, but Dian self.
When I heard my self named (fair shepheardesses) I trembled, as if I
unawares had set my foot on a serpent, and without longer stay, I went away as
softly as I could, that I might not be seen; albeit Daphnis (to cause my
return) suffered me to go a great way alone. At last, seeing I kept on my
way, she stole away from him by little and little, that she might not be
heard, and at last ouertooke me; and being scarce able to take her breath, she
went crying out a thousand broken reproaches. And when she could speak,
Unfeignedly, says she, if the heavens do not punish you, I shall believe they
are as unjust as you: and, what cruelty is this of yours, not to hear him that
complaynes? To what end (said I) should I have stayed longer? To hear (said
she) the evil you have done him. I? (answered I) You jest, in saying, that I
do hurt the man that I think not of. That is (replied she) whereof you labor
most: for if you thought often of him, it were impossible but you should have
pity. I blushed at that word, and the change of color gave Daphnis to
understand, that these words offended me. This was the cause that smiling she
said: I am pleasant (Diane:) that I said, was but to pass the time away: and
believe not that I think it: and concerning that he sung when he named your
name, it is for certain, that it was for another that bare your name, or to
refresh himself, he sung these verses, which he had received of some other. We
went discoursing in this sort; and so long, that being weary of walking, we
came back another way, to the same place where Filander was: For my part it
was by error: it may well be, that Daphnis did it of purpose; and finding him
so near us, I could not choose but look on him: at the first he was sitting,
and leaned against a tree: but now we found him laid all along on the ground,
one arm under his head, and it seemed he was awake, for he had a Letter all
be-wet with tears, which ran down his face; but indeed he slept, being
likely, that while he read the paper, the travel of the way, and his deep
thoughts, by little and little, made him slumber. But we were more certain,
when Daphnis more bold then I, stowped down, reached me the Letter (wet with
tears) which found passage through the paper badly folded: This sight touched
me with pity, but much more the Letter, which was thus:

Filanders Letter to Diane.
THey who have the honor to see you run a dangerous fortune, if they love
you, they are saucy: if they love you not, they are without judgment: your
perfections are such, that with reason they may neither be beloved, nor not be
beloved: and I being enforced to lie down in one of these two errors, have
chosen that which is most after my humor, and from which it is impossible for
me to withdraw my self. Think^ it not hard (fair Diane) since none can see
you without loving you; that having seen you, I love you. If this boldness
deserve punishment, remember you, that I love rather to love you in dying, then
to live without loving you. But why say I, I love rather? It is no more in my
choice. For I must (while I live) as well be your true servant, as you know not
how to be such as you are, without being the most fair shepherdess that
lives.


I had scarcely read over this Letter, but that I found my self all on a
trembling, and Daphnis so softly laid it in the place where she found it, that
he awaked not: and coming toward me, and I being hard by, Will you suffer me
to speak (said she?) Our love (answered I) gives you all power. In truth (said
she) I bewail Filander, for it is very true he loves you: and I persuade my
self, in your soul you doubt not of it. Daphnis (said I) he that committed
the fault, must do the penance. If it be so (replied she) Filander must not:
for I will never confess it to be a fault, to love you, but think rather it
is an offense, not to do it, since the fairest things had not been made but to
be beloved and cherished. I refer my self to your judgment (said I) if my
face may be numbered amongst the things that are fair. But I conjure you only
by our love, never to let him know, that I take any notice of his intent. And
if you love him, advise him, not to speak to me: for esteeming of you and
Callire, as I do, I am sorry that I must banish him from our company: And you
know well I shall be constrained so to do, if he have the hardiness to speak
to me of it. Then, how will you have him live (said she?) As he lived (said I)
before he saw me. But (said she) that he cannot do hereafter, for that then
he was not attached with this fire which now burns him. Let him seek out the
means himself, without offending me, by remoouing this fire. The fire (said
she) that can be quenched, is not great, and yours is extreme. The fire (said
I) how great soever it be, will not burn him that comes not near it. Though
(said she) he that is burnt, fly from the fire, yet will not the burning leave
him, and by flying, he brings more smart, For conclusion (said I) if it be so,
I choose rather to be the fire then the burning.

With such discourses we returned to our flocks, and toward night we drove
them into our Hamlet, where we found Filander, to whom Filidas made so good
cheer, and Amidor also, that Daphnis believed he had bewitched them, it not
being their humor to deal so with others. He stayed some days with us,
during which time he made no offer of speech, living with so great discretion,
that, but for that which Daphnis and I had seen, we should never have
suspected his meaning. At last, he was coustrayned to depart, and not knowing
to whom to break it, he went to his sister, because he loved her, and trusted
her as himself. This shepherdess (as I told you) had been constrained by
authority to marry, and found no other contentment, but that which the love
which she bare her brother might give her. As soon as she saw him, she was
curious after the first salutations, to know what the cause of his journey was:
and he having answered her, that he came from Filidas: she demanded what
news of Daphnis and me. Whereto having given satisfaction, and hearing him
speak with so great commendations of me; she told him in his ear: I fear
(brother) you love him more then me. I love her (answered he) as her merit
binds me. If it be so (replied she) I have diuined well: for there is not a
shepherdess in the world that deserves better; and I must confess unto you,
that were I a man, would she, or would she not, I would be her servant. I
believe, sister (answered he) you speak in good earnest.

I swear unto you, (said she) by that which I hold most dear. I think
(replied he) if it were so, you should not be without business; for by that
that I can judge, she is of an humor that is not easy to bend: besides that,
Filidas is ready to die of jealousy, and Amidor so watches her, that she is
never without one of them two. O brother, cried she, you are taken: since you
have noted these particularities, hide it no longer from me: and without
fiction, if it be a fault to love, it is very pardonable. And without leaving
him, she so pressed, that after a thousand protestations and so many
supplications, never to be known of it, he confessed it to her, and with words
so affectionate, that she had been very incredulous, if she had doubted it.
And when she asked of him, how I received the declaration: O God (said he!) if
you knew what her humor is, you would say, that never man enterprised a more
difficult attempt. All that I could do till now, was to deceive Filidas and
Amidor, that made me believe there is nothing in the world so dear to them as
I; and I am come to this, that they sent for me, purposely to see me, and then
told her all the discourse, which had passed between them. But, said he,
holding on his speech, though I went with a purpose to discover to Diane, how
much I was hers, yet durst I not, (respect had such force ouerme,) which made
me despair ever to perform it, unless some long practice gave me the
boldness; but this cannot be, but that Filidas and Amidor will take notice of
it: So that (sister) to tell you the estate wherein I am, it is very near to
despair.

Callire that loved her brother more then any other thing, took his grief so
to heart, that, after she had thought of it a while, she said, Will you,
brother, that in this occasion I give you some proof of my good will? Sister
(answered he) though I be in no doubt, yet heyther in this, nor any other
accident will I refuse you ever. For the apparances of that we desire, will not
suffer us to please our self, though from elsewhere we have sufficient
assurance. Well, brother, since your will is so, I will do that for you, which
shall not be small, what hazard soever I thrust my self into. And then she
went on: You know the likeness of our faces, of our stature and speech; and
but for our habit, they that are ordinarily with us, would take us the one for
the other. If you think the only mean to come to your purpose, is to
converse with Diane without suspicion, how can we find one more easy, or
more secret, then to change habits, you and I? For, being taken for a maid,
Filidas will never conceive evil opinion, how near soever you come to Diane:
and I returning to Gerestan in your habit, will tell him, that Daphnis and
Diane keep you there ^erforce: and we must invent some good excuse for me to
get leave of my husband, to go see them: but I know not what were best, since
he is (as you know) so hard to be entreated. Indeed, sister (answered
Filander) I never doubted of your good nature; but at this time I must
consesse, there was never a better sister: and since it pleases you to take
this pain, I beseech you, if I enjoy her, to accuse my love which constrained
it, and to believe that it is the only mean to conserve the life of that
brother whom you love. And then he embraced her with so great an
acknowledgement of the obligation which he has had, that she became more
desirous to pleasure him then before.

At last she said, let us leave these words to those that love less, and let
us only look to set our hand to the work. For leave (said he) we shall
easily get it, dissembling that all the good cheer which was made me by
Filidas, was to no other purpose, then that Amidor had to woo the niece of your
husband. And because this charge will trouble him, I assure my self, it will
be easy for you to go, if we give him to know, that you and Daphnis together
may well treat of this marriage. But what order shall we take for our hair,
yours being long, and mine ouer-short, which will be a great inconvenience?
Trouble not your self for that (said she:) if you suffer yours to grow a
little, it will be enough to serve under a coife, as I use; and for mine, I
will cut them like yours. But, said he, Sister, will you not be loath to clip
your head? Brother (said she) think not, I hold any thing dearer then your
contentment; besides that, I shall avoid many importunities while you wear my
clothes, and not lying near Gerestan; so that if I must have my head shorn, I
will not make difficulty to do it. With this word he embraced her, saying,
that God would one day deliver him of that torment. And not to lose time,
Filander on the first occasion that he thought fit, spoke with Gerestan,
representing to him that alliance so easily to be compassed, and so profitable,
that he will suffer himself easily to be led. But, because Filander would
give time to let his hair grow, he made show to go to give order to his
affairs, and that he would return very shortly. And Filidas no sooner knew
of Filanders return, but she went to see him, accompanied only with Amidor,
and would not leave him, without bringing him to us, where he stayed seven or
eight days, not having the hardiness to show himself to me more then at the
first.

During this time, to show how hard a thing it is to force nature long, though
Filidas counterfeited the man as well as s^^^e could, yet was she constrained
to feel the passions of a woman; for the courage and merits of Filander
wrought the same effect in her, that he desired they should in me. But Love,
which takes delight to turn the actions of the most advised, contrary to their
purpose, made him give the blow on the side he least looked for: So behold the
poor Filidas, so far besides her self, that she could not live without
Filander, and wooed him with such apparent shows, that he was astonished at
it; and, but for the desire he had to be near me, he would never have endured
that fashion of life. In the end, when he thought his hair was long enough to
put under a coife, he returned to Gerestan, and told him he had made a good
entrance to their business: but that Daphnis thought fit, before she spoke,
that Amidor might see his niece in some place, that they might know if she
pleased him: and that the better way was, that Callire should bring her, that
so there might be a beginning of amity, that could not choose but be auaylable.
Gerestan, which desired nothing with more passion, then to be discharged of his
Niece, thought this proposition very good, and gave absolute commandment to
his wife; who to egg him on the better, made show of not liking it well at the
first, propounding some difficulty in the journey, and seeming to be sorry to
depart from him, saying, that she knew well, that such affairs would not fall
out as we would, nor so readily as was expected; and that in the mean time,
their affairs would speed the worse at home. But Gerestan, that would not have
her have any other will then his, was so earnest, that three days after, he
caused her to go with her brother and his Niece. The first day she went to
lodge at Filanders house, where in the morning they changed habit, which fell
out so well for the one and the other, that they which conuersed with them,
knew it not: and I must tell you, I was deceived as well as others, there being
no difference between them, that I could observe. But I may easily be
deceived, since Filidas was so, though she looked but with the eyes of Love,
which are said to be more piercing then those of Linxe's: For, presently after
their coming, they left us the fained Callire, I would say Filander, and led
the true into a chamber to rest in. As they were in the way, her brother
instructed her what to answer; and especially, informed her of the Loue-tricks
she should use, resembling (said he) those that are in love; whereby, both
the one and the other were offended: and, though Callire were fully resolved to
bear all his importunities, for the contentment of her brother; yet so it was,
that she, thinking Filidas to be a man, that it was no small horror to her,
that she was constrained to speak to him. As for us, when we were withdrawn
alone, Daphnis and I did all the kindnesses that are usual among women, I
mean, among those where there is Love and priuacy, which this shepherd took
and gave with that transport, that, as he since swore, he was quite beside
himself. If I had not been a very child, it may be, his actions might have
made me know him, and yet Daphnis made no question, he knew so well to
counterfeit. And because it was late, after supper we withdrew apart, whilst
Callire and Filidas walked up and down the chamber: for my part, I knew not
their discourse, but ours grew only from assurances of Love, which Filander
used to me, out of so entire affection, that it was easy to judge, that if so
often, and in another habit, he said nothing to me, we must not blame his want
of will, but of boldness only. And I likewise made the same show to him: for
taking him for a woman, I thought my self bound for his good will, for his
merit, and for the kindred between her and Daphnis. From that time Amidor,
that formerly had borne me good will, began to change his love, and to love
the fained Callire, for that Filander, who feared lest his abode might
displease that young man, did what he could to give him contentment. The
flitting humor of Amidor, could not permit him to receive these favors,
without becoming amorous: which I thought not strange, for that the beauty,
the judgment, and the curiosity of the shepherd, which in nothing belied the
perfections of a maid, had given him ouer-great cause.

See what a fool Love is, and how he passes his time, Filidas! that is a
maid, he caused to fall in love with a maid, and Amidor a man; and that in such
passion, that for one particular, that only subject was sufficient to
entertain us. God knows if Filander knew how to play the maid, and if Callire
counterfeited well her brother, and whether they wanted wisdom to draw on
either his new Lover. The coldness that Callire used to me, was cause that
Filidas had no jot of suspicion; besides, that his love was a sufficient
hinderance. And I must confess, that seeing her so strongly to draw toward
Filidas, Daphnis and I were of opinion, that Fi^^nder had changed his mind;
whereupon I received extreme contentment, for the love I bare his sister. Seven
or eight days passed in this sort, no one thinking the time too long, because
every one had a particular defigne. But Callire, who feared, her husband might
be grieved at this stay, solicited her brother, to make his purpose known to
me, saying, there was no likelihood, but that the familiarity between him and
me, might have permitted me to have refused his service: but he assaying on
all sides, had never the hardiness to discover himself, and to abuse
Gerestan. He desired her to go to her husband in the habit which she had,
assuring her, he would find out nothing; and to let him know, that by the
advice of Daphnis, she had left Callire at Filidas house, that at more
leisure, she might treat of the marriage of Amidor and his Niece. At the first
his sister was astonished, for her husband was very froward. At last, desirous
to give all contentment to her brother, she resolved; and to make this excuse
seem more probable, they spoke with Daphnis about the marriage of Amidor,
which she long time misliked, for many considerations which she laid before
them: but knowing they took this course to get leave from Gerestan, which
otherwise they could never have had, she, that delighted in their company,
acquainted me with it; and we were of opinion, that it was needful to make
show, that this alliance might be easily compassed: and on this resolution,
she wrote to Gerestan, counselling him to let his wife stay somewhile with us,
that our friendship might be a mean, that this alliance might find the less
difficulty, and that she believed all things should be well ended.

With this resolution, Callire so attyred, goes to find out her husband, who
being beguiled by the habit, took her for her brother, and received the
excuses for the stay of his wife, being well pleased she should stay there
for that cause. Judge, fair shepheardesses, if I might not be deceived, when
her husband could not know her. So it was, that by this, the good will he bare
me, so increased, that there was no other mean to conceal it, whatsoever he
could do, the conversation having that virtue with it, that it makes that which
was loved, to be more beloved, and more hated what is found evil. And
acknowledging his own weakness, he advised himself to persuade me, that
though he were a woman, yet he failed not to be in love with me, with such a
passion, and more then if he had been a man; and spoke it so feelingly, that
Daphnis that loved me dearly, said, Until that time, she never knew him:
But that it was true, that she likewise was in love, which one might not think
strange, since Filidas, who was a man, in such sort loved Filander: and the
dissembled Callire swore, that one of the most forcible occasions which
constrained her brother to go away, was the suite he made to him, whereof
they could allege me so many reasons, that jealousy suffered my self to be
persuaded that it was so, determining with my self, that there was nothing in
it that imported me. Having then received this fiction, she made no difficulty
to speak freely to me of her passion, but yet like a woman: and because she
swore unto me, that the same feeling, and the same passions that men have for
love, were in her, and that it was a great solace to her, to express them
often being alone, represent unto me her true affections; and even Daphnis,
who liked well of it, would sometimes auow it.

Twelve or fifteen days passed thus, with such pleasure to Filander, that as
he since swore to me, he neuerspent more happy days, though his desires gave
him extreme impaciencies, and that was the cause of the daily increase of his
affection; and pleasing himself in his thoughts, he would oftentimes withdraw
himself alone, to entertain them: and because he would not remove from us in
the day, many times in the night, when he thought every body was asleep, he
went out of his chamber, and entered into a garden, where under some trees he
passed a great part of time in these his considerations; and for that many
times he went out in this sort, Daphnis observed it, who lay in the same
chamber: and as commonly we sooner suspect evil then good, she had some
conceit of her, and Amidor, for the kindness which the young shepherd did her;
and for more certainty she watched so, that seeming to sleep, she perceived
the feigned Callyre to steal out of her bed, and followed her so close, that
she was almost as soon in the utter yard, as the young shepherd, casting over
her but one garment for haste; and following her, step by step, by the light of
the Moon, she saw her go out of the house through a door not well locked,
and enter into a garden, which was under my chamber window; and passing into
the midst of it, saw her sit down under some trees, and lifting his eyes up to
heaven, heard him say aloude:

So my Diane does surpass
In beauty, other beauties far:
As does the Moon by night, deface
The brightness of each other Star.
Though Filander spoke these words high enough, yet Daphnis heard but some of
them, by reason she was far off; but taking it somewhat remote, she drew
toward him without being seen, as softly as she could, though he were so
intentive to his imagination, that had she been before him, he would not have
perceived it, as he since swore to me. Hardly had she got near him, but she
might hear him fetch a deep sigh, loud enough, and after with a low voice
say: And why will not my fortune have me as fit to serve her, as she is worthy
to be served? and why may not she as well receive the affections of them that
love her, as she give them extreme passions? Ah Callyre! how pernicious to my
repose has your disguising been, and my boldness punished with a right just
infliction?

Daphnis heard Filander very attentively, and though he spoke plain, yet could
she not comprehend what he meant, abused by the opinion that he was Callyre:
this was the cause, that bending an care more curiously, she heard him lifting
his voice somewhat higher, say, But ouer-bold Filander, who shall ever excuse
thy fault? or, what great chastisement shall equal thine error? Thou love
this shepherdess, and see not, that how much her beauty commands, so much
her virtue forbids thee: how often have I warned thee, and yet thou would
not believe me? Accuse none other of thine evil, but thine own folly. At this
word his tongue stayed, but his eyes and sighs, in stead of it, began to
give testimony what her passion was, whereof he had discovered but a little.
And to divert him from his thoughts, or rather, to continue them more sweetly,
he rose up to walk (as he used) and so suddenly, that he perceived Daphnis,
though to hide her self, she fled away. But he that had seen her, to know who
it was, pursued her to the entry of a very thick wood, where he ouertooke her;
and thinking she had discovered that which he had so concealed, half in
choler, said: What curiosity (Daphnis) is this, to come and spy me out in the
night here? It is, answered Daphnis smiling, to learn of you (by craft) that
which I should not know otherwise (and herein she thought she spoke to Callyre,
not having yet discovered that it was Filander.) Well (held on Filander)
thinking to be discovered) what great news have you learned? All (said
Daphnis) that I desired to know. Will you then (said Filander) satisfy your
self with your curiosity? As well (answered she) as you; and you are like to
find hurt of your deceit. For this keeping about Diane, and this great
affection which you make show of to her, will bring you (in the end) but
trouble and displeasure. O God! (cried Filander) Is it possible I should be
discovered? Ah discreet Daphnis) since you know so well the cause of my abode
here, you have in your hands my life and my death; but if you will bethink
you of what I am, and what offices of amity you have received from me, when
occasion is presented, I will rather believe, that you wish my good and
contentment, more then my despair and ruin.

Daphnis as yet thought she spoke to Callyre, and had opinion, that this fear
was because of Gerestan, who would take it evil, if he understood, that she
did this office to her brother; and to assure him, said: You ought to be so
far from doubting that I know of your affairs, that if you had informed me,
I should have yielded all the counsel, and all the assistance which you could
desire of me. But tell me this dessigne from point to point, that your
freeness may bind me more to your service, than the mistrust you have had of
me, gave me offense. I will, O Daphnis (said he) provided, that you promise me,
not to tell it to Diane, until I give consent. This is a discourse (answered
the shepherdess,) which we shall make to no good purpose to her, her humor
herein being more strange then you are aware of. That is my grief (said
Philander) having from the beginning known, that I enterprise a dessigne
almost impossible. For, when my sister and I resolved to change habit, she
taking mine, and I hers, I well fore-sawe, that all that would be to mine
advantage, was, that I might converse more freely with her, for some few days,
(so disguised) that she might not know me for Filander. How! (interrupted
Daphnis all surprised) how, for Filander? and are not you Callyre? The
shepherd, that thought she had known it before, was half mad to be
discovered so foolishly; but seeing the fault was past, and that he could not
call back the words he had spoken, thought it to some purpose to prevent her,
and said: You may see (Daphnis) if you have cause to be sorry for me; and to
say that I trust you not, since so freely I discover unto you the secret of my
life. For, that which I will tell you, is of that moment, that as soon as any
other knows it, there is no more hope of health in me: but I will rely, and so
refer my self to your hands, that I cannot live but by you. Know then
(shepherdess) that you see before you Filander in the habit of his sister;
and that love in me, and compassion in her, have been the cause of our
disguising: and after went discoursing unto her his extreme affection, the
favors he had of Amidor and Filidas, the invention of Callyre to change habit,
and the resolution to go to her husband, attired like a man: Briefly, all that
had passed in this affayre, with such demonstration of love, that though, at
the beginning, Daphnis wondered at his hardiness, and at his sisters; yet so it
was, that she lost that wonder, when she knew the greatness of his affection,
judging that they might draw him into more great follies. And albeit that if
they had called her to their counsel, when they undertook the enterprise, she
would never have advised them to it: yet seeing the effect had sorted to some
good, she resolved to assist him in all that was possible, sparing neither
labor, nor care, nor art, which she judged fit to employ; and having made
promise, with all assurances of friendship, she gave the best advice she could,
which was (by little and little) to engage me into his love. For (said she)
Love among women, is one of those wrongs, the words whereof offend more then
the blow. It is a work that none is ashamed to do, provided the name be
hidden: So that I hold them the best advised, which cause themselves to be
beloved of their shepherds, before they speak a word to them of love. So that
I oue is a creature that has nothing rude in it, but the name, being otherwise
so pleasing, that there is none offended at it. And therefore, that Diane may
entertayne it, it must be without naming it, especially without seeing it, and
such wisdom must be used, that she must love you, as soon as she may know
that you love her out of love. For being once embarked, she cannot retire her
self into the haven, though she see likelihood of torment round about her.

It seems hither to you have been guyded by great wisdom: but you must
proceed. The show which you have used, to be in love with her, although you be
a woman, is to good purpose; it being certain, that all love which is
suffered, in the end, will prove answerable. But you must go forward. We do
easily many things, which we thought very hard, if Custom had not made them
easy. Therefore it is, that they which are not acquainted with a meat, find
it at the first, to be of an harsh raste, which by little and little
(afterward) becomes pleasing to the usage. You must frame your self to use
amorous discourses to Diane, to make it more easy, that by custom, that which
she has not bin used unto, may be ordinary: and the better to attain it, you
must devise some invention to make her more to delight in your wooing; and that
you may do, though you be a woman, in the same terms that the shepherds use.
For as the ear which is accustomed to music, is capable to fit his voice both
by raising and abasing it to tunes that be harmonious, though otherwise they
know nothing in that art: In like manner, the shepherdess, which often
hea^es the discourse of her lover, yields the powers of her soul, albeit she
know not how to love, letting her self to be carried in an insensible manner
to the feelings of love. I mean, she loves the company of that person, in
feeling a far off some pity of his evil; and in conclusion, loves (in
effect) without thinking so much. Look to it (Filander) you make profit of
these instructions elsewhere, and think, that if I loved you not, and did not
pity you, I would not discover this secret out of the school: but take that
which I say, as an earnest of that I desire to do for you.

With such words, seeing the day approached, they returned into their lodging,
not without jesting at the love of Amidor, who took him for a maid, reporting
some part of his speech to laugh at it. And about morning falling asleep in
this resolution, they lay longer in bed, to recompense the loss of the night;
which gave commodity to the young Amidor to surprise them. And had it not
been, that at that time I came into their chamber, I believe, he had found out
their deceit; for, addressing himself to the bed of the feigned Callire, though
she played her part well, speaking with as great modesty as was possible,
setting on it a severe countenance, to put him by the hardiness to hazard
himself; yet it may be, his affection would have found license, and his unwise
hands might have discovered her bosom. But immediately upon my coming in,
Daphnis desired me to stay him, which I did, to the great contentment of
Filander, who sayning to thank me for it, kissed my hand with so great
affection, that if I had been any thing suspicious, I should have perceived,
that indeed it had come of love. After I had given them the good day, I took
Amidor away with me, that they might have leisure to clothe themselves.

And because they had a purpose to perform that which they had propounded,
presently after dinner, when we were withdrawn (as of custom) under some
trees, to enjoy the fresh air, though Amidor were there, Daphnis thought the
occasion fit, being well pleased that it was in his presence, to put him from
all suspicion: and that if at any time, by mischance, he heard them speak
like a man, he should not think it strange; when, making a sign to Filander,
that he would further this dessigne, she said to him: And what is it, Callyre,
can make you dumb in the presence of Diane? Because (answered he) I go making
many wishes to my self for the desire I have to the service of my mistress; and
among others, one which I never thought to desire. What is that, interrupted
Amidor? That is, continued Filander, that I wish to be a man, to do more
service to Diane. How, added Daphnis, are you amorous of her? More, answered
Filander, then all the rest of the world is aware of. I rather desire, said
Amidor, you should be a woman, as well for my good, as for that of Filidas. The
consideration neither of the one nor the other, replied Filander, shall not
make me change my desire. And what, reioyned Daphnis, are you of opinion that
Diane loves you again? I am to hope, said Filander, by the laws of Nature, if
it be not, that as in her beauty she outgoes her forces, in her humor she
will not disdain her ordinances. You may think of me, as it pleases you,
said I: I truly swear unto you, that there is no man in the world, that I
love more then you. So (replied he to me) there is no person that has vowed
so much service to you: but this happiness, will last with me, but until you
find my small merit, or some other better subject present it self.

Do you think me, replied I, so flitting as you make me to be? It is not,
answered he, for that I suppose in you the imperfections of inconstancy, but I
know well, I am the cause of the defaults that be in me. The defaults, said I,
be rather on my side: and at that word I embraced him, and kissed him, with as
sincere an affection, as if he had been my sister. Whereat Daphnis smiled in
her self, seeing me so much abused. But Amidor interrupting us, jealous (as I
believe) of them both: I think (says he) it is in good earnest, and that
Callire mocks not. How (said he) I mook? Let the heavens punish me more
rigorously, then they ever chastised perjured wretch, if there were ever any
love more violent, nor more passionate, then that which I bear to Diane. And
you were a man, added Daphnis, you would learn well to use men's words, to
declare your passion. Though, said she, I have less spirit; yet so it is, that
my extreme affection will never suffer me to be dumb in such an occasion. Let
us see (fair) said Amidor, if it be no trouble to you, how you will behave
your self in such an enterprise. If my mistrisse, said Filander, permit me, I
will do it, with promise notwithstanding, that she condescend to three
supplications which I shall make to her. The first, that she answer that I
demand: the other, that she think it not dissembled, which under another
person then Callire, I shall represent unto her, but take them for true, though
feeble passions. And lastly, that she never suffer any other then me to serve
her in this quality. I, that saw they all took pleasure, and likewise in truth
loved Filander under his sisters habit, answered, that for the second and last
demand, they were granted as she desired: that for the first, I was so
unaccustomed to make such answers, that I assured my self she would take
small pleasure in them: yet, that I might deny him nothing, I assayed to acquit
my self the best I could. At this word, setting himself on one of his knees,
because we were set round, taking one of my hands, he began in this sort: I
should never have thought* fair mistrisse, considering so great perfections in
you, that it should be permitted to a mortal to love you, if I had not proved
in my self, that it is impossible to see you, and not to love you: but knowing
well, that heaven is too just, to command you a thing impossible, I have held
for certain, that it pleased you should be beloved, since it suffered you to
be seen. On this belief I have fortified with reason, the hardiness I had
to behold you, and in my heart bless that weakness, which as soon subjected
me to you, as my eye was turned on you. Now if the laws ordain, that to every
one is to be given that which is his, think it not evil, fair shepherdess,
that I give you my heart, since it is so acquired by you, that if you refuse
it, I will disauow it for mine. At this word he held his peace, to hear what I
would answer, but in such a fashion, that had he not been in the habit he
wore, hardly might one doubt he spoke in earnest. And not to contradict that I
promised him, I made him this answer: Shepherdess, were the praises which you
give me true, I might happily believe that which you tell me of your affection:
but knowing well, that they be but flatteries, I cannot believe, but that the
rest are dissimulation. This too much wounds your judgment (said he to me) to
doubt of the greatness of your merit, but with such excuses you are accustomed
to refuse the things which you like not of. I may truly swear by Teutates,
and you know well, I will not beperiured, that you never refused any thing that
was given you from a better, nor more entire good will. I know well (answered
I) that the shepherds of this country are accustomed to use more words, where
there is less truth; and that they keep among them as a thing approved, that
the gods do not harken to, nor punish the forswearing of the amorous: if it be
the peculiar fault of your shepherds, I refer my self to your knowledge:
but I, that am a stranger, should have no part of their blemish, no more then I
commit their fault, and yet from your own more cruel words, must I draw some
satisfaction for my self: for though the gods do not punish the oaths of
Lovers (if I be not, as it seems you make doubt of) the gods will not
forbear to send me the chastisement of perjury; and if they do forbear, you
shall be constrained to confess, that not being punished, I am then no
dissembler; and if I be a liar and am not punished, you must confess that I am
a Lover. And therefore, on which side soever your fair spirit turns it
self, it knows not how to deny, that there is no beauty on earth where Diane
is fair; and that never beauty was beloved, as yours is, of that shepherd
that lies at your knees, and in this case implores the succors of all the
Graces, to draw one from you, which he thinks he merits, if a perfect Lover
ever found merit. If I be fair, replied I, I refer it to the eyes which
behold me with sound judgment: but you cannot deny that you are perjured, and
a dissembler; and I must tell you, Callire, that the confidence with which you
spoke to me like a man, makes me resolve never to believe words, since being
a woman, you know so well to disguise. And why, Diane (said he then smiling)
interrupt you so often your servants discourse? Do you wonder, that being
Callire, I speak to you with such affection? Think that there is no
weakness of condition, that shall ever make me diminish, but it must rather
be an occasion of preserving it, both more violent, and more eternal, since
there is nothing which so much diminishes the heat of desire, as the inioying
of that which is desired: and this not being to be had between us, you shall
always, even to my coffin, be beloved, and I always a Lover. And yet if
Tiresias, after he had been a woman, became a man, why may not I hope, that
the gods may do me as great a favor, if it pleased you? Believe me, fair
Diane, since the gods do nothing in vain, there is no likelihood, that having
placed in me so perfect affection, they will suffer me to labor in vain: and
if nature have made me a woman, my extreme love will make me such, as shall not
be unprofitable. Daphnis, who saw that this discourse went sharply on, and
that it might be dangerous, that this Lover should suffer himself to be
carried so far, as to speak the thing that might discover him to Amidor,
interrupted him, saying, Without doubt, Callire, your love shall not
unprofitably be bestowed, so long as you serve this fair shepherdess, no
more then the candle which spends not it self in vain, so long as it gives
light to them that are in the house: for all the rest of the world, being but
to serve this fair, you shall have well bestowed your time, when you have
spent them in her service. But let us change our discourse, said Amidor: for
see, here comes Filidas, who will take no pleasure to hear it, though you be a
woman. And presently Filidas came, who made us all rise to salute him. But
Amidor, that passionately loved the fained Callire, when his cousin arrived,
made that use of the time, that stealing away with Filander from the company,
and taking her under the arm, began to speak thus: Is it possible, fair
shepherdess, that the words you use to Diane, be true? or have you only
spoken them, to show the beauty of your spirit? Believe me, Amidor (answered
he) I am no dissembler, and I never said any thing more truly, then the
assurance which I have given her of my affection; and if in any thing I have
failed in the truth, it was because I spoke less then I feel: but herein am
I to be excused, since there be not words good enough to conceive. Whereto
he answered with a great sigh, Since it is so, fair Callyre, I can hardly
believe, but you will much better conceive the affection is borne you, since
you feel the same blows wherewith you wound others, more then them that are
altogether ignorant; and that shall be the cause, that I will not go to seek
out other words, to show you what I suffer for you, nor other reasons to excuse
my boldness, then those you have used in your speech to Diane; only I will
add this consideration, to the end you may know the greatness of my
affection; that if the blow, which cannot be avoided, must be judged according
to the arm that gave it, the beauty of Diane, whose wound you feel, being
much less then yours, must have wrought less hurt in you then yours in me.
And yet if you love with so great violence, consider how Amidor ought to be
used of Callire, and what his affection may be; for he knows not how to
declare it better, then by the comparison with yours. Shepherd (answered he)
if the knowledge which you have of the love I bear to Diane, have given you
the boldness to speak to me in this fashion, I must bear the punishment,
which my want of consideration deserves, in speaking so openly before you: but
so likewise are you to regard, that being a woman, I cannot by that discourse
prejudice her honesty; but you do mine, in talking so to me, who have an
husband, that will not bear with patience this wrong, if he understood it.
But besides, since you speak of Diane, to whom (in truth) I am entirely given,
I must tell you, that if you will that I should measure your affection by mine,
according to the causes which we have to love, I do not think you love much,
since that which you name beauty in me, may not in any sort retain that name,
being by hers. Fair shepherdess (said Amidor) I never thought one could
offend you in loving you: but since it is so, I confess that I deserve
chastisement, and am ready to receive what you shall award. It is true, you
ought also to add to the same punishment all that I shall deserve in loving you
the rest of my life, for it is impossible I should live without loving you. And
do not think, the displeasure of Gerestan shall ever divert me: he that fears
neither hazard nor death, will never dread a man. But for that which touches
you, I confess I have failed in comparing you with Diane, being (without
doubt) ill proportioned on her side. It is true, that it is not as of a thing
equal, but as of the less with the greater: and being of opinion, that that
which you feel, may give you more knowledge of my pain, I have committed this
error, wherein, if you pardon me, I protest never to fall into it again.
Filander, which loved me in good earnest, and was of opinion, that Amidor did
so likewise, could hardly brook to hear him speak of me with such misprize,
if he had not had a purpose to discover what it was, but desiring to cleare^
himself, and thinking he found a good occasion, he had so much power over
himself, that without making show of it, he said, What, is it possible,
Amidor, that your mouth should utter those words, which your heart gives the
lie so strongly to? Think you that I know not well, that you are a dissembler,
and that long since, your affection has been for Diane? My affection (replied
he as surprised?) let never any love me, if I love other shepherdess then you.

I say not, but sometimes I have been one of her friends: but her unequal
humor, sometimes all on fire, sometimes cold like ice, has so removed me,
that at this time she is indifferent unto me. How (said Filander) dare you say
so, since I know, that indeed she has loved you, and does yet love you? I deny
not (said Amidor) but she has loved me: and going on somewhat smiling, I will
not swear she loves me not yet: but I can suffer it well, so she be not
beloved of me; and I leave all the care to her. This which Amidor spoke, was
much after his humor; for it was his usual vanity, to desire that men might
think he had great good fortunes: and for this cause it was his manner, to
make himself (of purpose) so familiar with them he conuersed with, that when
he would draw back, he could (with his smile and cold laughter) make men
believe what he listed of them. At this bout Filander found out his craft, and
had it not been that he feared to discover himself, he found himself so
touched with my wrong, that I think he had reproved him for his lie, yet
could he not forbear to answer him sowrely enough. Truly, Amidor, you are the
most unworthy shepherd that lives in so good company, you have the courage, to
talk in this sort of Diane, to whom you have professed so much goodwill, and
to whom you are so much obliged: What may we hope, we that come short of her in
merit, since neither her perfections, nor her friendship, nor your alliance can
curb your tongue? For my part, I suppose you to be the most dangerous person
living: and who desires quietness, must be careful to shun you as a disease
most contagious. At this word he left him, and came to seek us. His visage so
inflamed with choler, that Daphnis knew well he was displeased with Amidor, who
stood so amazed at this parting, that he knew not what to do. Afterward, in
the evening Daphnis enquired of Filander, of their discourse; and because she
loved me, and judged that she could not choose but increase the love which I
bare the feigned Callire; in the morning she told it me, with that sharpenes
against Amidor, and so co^modiously for Fila^der, that I must confess, that
since I could not easily hold my self from loving him, when I acknowledged (to
my thinking) that his good will had bound me to him.

But Daphnis, who knew well, that if I loved him then, it was because I thought
him to be Callire, and daily counseled him to discover himself to me, saying,
that at the first I would reject him, and be angry, but in the end, things
should be so orderd, and for her part, she would labor in that sort, that she
hoped it might be brought about. But she had not so strong persuasions, that
they could give him courage, which made Daphne resolve to do it her self,
without his knowledge, foreseeing well that Gerestan would have his wife home,
and then all this craft would be to no purpose.

In this resolution, one day, when she found me alone, after some ordinary
discourse, But what shall become in the end (said she) of this folly of
Callyre? I believe verily you will make her lose her right mind: for she loves
you so passionately, that I think she cannot live. If Filidas go one day
forth to lie abroad, and you will one night come out of your chamber, you shall
see her in that case that I have often found her in: for almost every night
that is fair, she spends them in the garden; and pleases her self so with
her own imaginations, that I can scarce draw her (but with force) to her rest.
I would gladly (said I) give her some comfort: but what would she have of me?
Do not I render her love for love? Do I not express it sufficiently in all
mine actions? Want I any kind of courtesy or duty toward her? It is true:
but (replied she) if you heard her discourses, I think not but you would have
compassion, and I beseech you, that, without her knowledge, you would come to
hear her one night. I promised her very freely, and told her, it should be
shortly: for Filidas told me the night before, she would go see Gerestan, and
fall in league with him.

Some days after, Filidas, according to his purpose, carrying Amidor with him,
departed to see Gerestan, resolving not to return of seven or eight days,
that he might give greater token of his love; and this remove fell out fitly
for us; for if he had been at home, hardly should we have concealed the
trouble wherein we were. Now the day of his departing, Filander following his
custom, failed not to go down into the garden, half undressed, when he thought
every body asleep. On the contrary, Daphnis that went first to bed, as soon
as she saw her go out, made haste to tell me; and hastily casting a cloak
about me, I followed her speedily enough, until we were in the garden. But
when she perceived where he was, she made sign to me to come softly after. And
when we were come near, so that we might hear, we sat down upon the
ground, and presently after I heard him say, But wherefore is all this
patience? to what end are all these delays? Must thou not die without succor?
or where may thou lay thy wound open to the Surgeon that can heal it? And
then resting a little while, he began again with a great sigh, Say not
thou, O troublesome fear, that she will banish us from her presence, and that
she will ordain us to a desperate death. Well, if we die, shall it not be a
great solace to us to abridge so miserable a life as ours is, and by death
satisfy the offense we have done? And as for banishment, if it come not from
her, how may we avoid it by Gerestan, whose impaciencie will not suffer us to
stay longer here? If yet we obtain a longer stay of this importunate man, and
that death do not befall us from the anger of the fair Diane, alas! can we
avoid the violence of our affections? What must I then do? that I tell her of
it? Ah! I shall offend her for ever, if it were possible for me. Shall I
conceal it? and why conceal it, when my death shall give her a speedy
knowledge? Why should I then offend her? Ah! Wrong and Love will never go
together. Let us rather die. But if I consent to my death, do I not make ^er
lose the most faithful servant that ever she had? I will tell it her then, and
at that time I will open my bosom, that the iron may more easily punish my
error, if she will. Behold (will I say) where the heart of the unfortunate
Filander is, who under the habit of Callire, in stead of gayning your favor;
has met with your displeasure; revenge your self and punish it, and be
assured; that if the revenge satisfy you, the punishment shall be welcome to
him.

Fair shepheardesses, when I heard Filander speak in this sort, I knew not
what became of me, I was taken with such an astonishment. I know well I would
have gone away, that I might see no more of this deceit, so full of despite
that I trembled again. But Daphnis, for the full accomplishment of her
treason, held me by force: and because (as I told you) we were very near the
shepherd, at the first noise we made, he turned his head, and thinking it
was but Daphnis; he came to her: but when he perceived me, and that he
thought I had heard him, O God (said he) what punishment shall wipe out my
fault? Ah Daphnis! I never looked for this treason from you. And, at this word
he ran up and down the garden like a mad man, although she called him
twice or thrice by the name of Callyre; but fearing to be heard of others, and
the rather, that despair might not make Filander do some evil to his own
person, she left me alone, and ran to follow him, saying to me in choler at
her going: You shall see (Diane) that if you deal hardly with Filander, it may
be you will ruin your self so, that you may feel the greatest displeasure.
If I were amazed at this accident (fair shepheardesses) you may well judge
when I knew not which way to return. At last, after I had some deal recovered
my spirits, I searched so on every side, that I got into my chamber, where
having laid me in my bed all trembling, I could not close mine eyes all that
night.

As for Daphnis, she made such search for Filander, that at last shee^ found
him rather dead then alive: and after she had chidden him, for not knowing how
to make use of so favorable an occasion, and yet assured him that I was not so
amazed at this accident as he, she brought him a little to himself, and in
some sort assured him, but not so, that the next morning he had the boldness
to go out of his chamber. I on the other side, infinitely offended with them
both, was constrained to keep my bed, that I might not give notice of my
displeasure to them that were about us; and particularly, to the niece of
Gerestan: but by good fortune, she was not more spritefull then reason would;
so that we easily hid from her this evil carriage, which was (almost)
impossible for us, especially for Filander, about whom she ordinarily kept.
Daphnis found her self not a little impeached by this occasion; for at the
first I could not receive her excuses. At last, she so turned me on all sides,
and knew so well to disguise this affection, that I promised her to forget the
displeasure which she had done me, swearing notwithstanding, as for Filander,
that I would never see him more. And I believe he had gone away without seeing
me, as not able to endure my anger, had it not been for the danger whereinto
he feared Callyre might fall; for she had to do with an husband that was
froward enough.

This was the consideration that held him back: but not rising from his bed,
fayning to be sick, five or six days passed before I would see him, what
reason soever Daphnis could allege in his behalf: and had it not been that I
was advertised, that Filidas would return, and Callire also, I had not seen
him of a long time. But the fear I had Filidas might not mark it, and that
which was so secret might not be^ published thorowout the country, made me to
resolve to see him, on condition that he should make no show of that which was
passed, having not sufficient power over my self, to stay me from giving some
knowledge of my displeasure. He promised it, and performed it: for he durst
hardly turn his eyes toward me; and when he did, it was a certain
submission, which gave me no small assurance of his extreme love. And by
fortune, presently after I was entered, Filidas, Amidor, and the dissembled
Filander came into the chamber, the windows whereof being shut, gave us good
commodity to hide our faces. Filander advertised his sister of all that had
happened: and that was the cause that the stay of Filidas was not so long as he
purposed; for seeing that her sister was sick, she constrained them to return.

But this discourse would be too tedious, if I should not abridge all our small
quarrels. So it was, that Callire knowing how things had passed, sometimes
turning them into sport, sometimes seeking out some likelihoods of reason, knew
so well to serve her turn by fair speech, especially being assisted by
Daphnis, that at last I consented, that Filander should stay until his sisters
hayres were grown, knowing well that it might ruin her, and my self also, if
I should be ouer-hasty of their return. And it fell out as she well foresawe,
that during the time that her head grew, the ordinary conuersing with the
shepherd, which at the last was not unpleasing to me, and the trial of the
greatness of his love, began to flatter me (in such sort) that of my self
I excused his deceit; considering withal, the respect and wisdom wherewith
it was carried: So that before he was to go away, he obtained this favor
which he so much desired, to wit, that I would forget his crafty deceit; and so
long as he went not beyond the terms of his duty, I loved his good will, and
would cherish it for his merit as I ought. The acknowledgement which he gave me
of his contentme^t, having this assurance from me, made me als as assured of
his affection, as I was before certain of his displeasure: for he was such an
one, that he could hardly dissemble. While we were in these terms, Filidas,
whose love went on still increasing, could no longer hide the greatness of it,
so that she resolved to set at once on the dissembled Filander.

With this purpose, finding her at leisure, one day as they walked together
under a tuft of trees, which took up one of the quarters of the garden, he
spoke unto her in this sort, after he had been long denied: Well, Filander,
shall it be true, that what love soever I can make show of, I cannot have the
happiness to be beloved of you? Callire answered him, I know not what more
love you can demand of me, nor how I can return you more, unless your self
give me the mean. Ah (said she) if your will be such as mine, I may well do
it. For that trial which you have had of me till now, why will you doubt me?
Know you not (said Filidas) that extreme desire is always attended by doubt?
Swear unto me, you will not be wanting in point of Love, and I will show you a
thing (it may be) you will be astonished at. Callire was somewhat surprised,
not knowing what she would say; yet, to know the conclusion, she answered: I
swear to you I do. At this word, for thanks, and almost besides himself for
joy; Filidas taking her by the head, kissed her with that vehemence, that
Callire waxed red, and in choler, thrusting her off, asked, what fashion this
was? I know (answered Filidas) this kiss amazed you, and my actions, till now
(it may be) have made you suspect some strange thing in me: but if you will
have the patience to hearken to me, I assure my self, you will rather pity than
have an evil opinion: and repeating from the beginning, till that bout, she
gave him to understand the law suite between Phormion and Celion, the accord
which was made to appease them, and lastly, the policy his father used to bring
him up as a man (though she were a woman,) shortly, our marriage, and all that
which I have told you, and then held on in this sort: Now that which I desire
of you in satisfaction of your promise, is, that finding the extreme affection
which I bear you, you will take me for your wife, and I will marry Diane to my
cousin Amidor, whom my father has purposely brought up in his house for that
cause. And then moreover, added such words to persuade her, that Callire
astonished more then I can tell you, and having some leisure to come to her
self, answered, that unfeignedly she had told him very strange things, and such
as she could hardly believe, if she did not assure them in another fashion then
by words. She then vnbuttoning her self, opened her bosom; Honesty (said
she) forbids me to show more: but me thinks this might satisfy you.

Then Callire, that she might win the leisure to take counsel of us, made
show to be well pleased, but that she had parents from whom she hoped to have
all her aduanceme^t, and without whose advice she was not to make a resolution
of that importance; and above all, besought her to keep this affair secret:
for, divulging it, would give men occasion of speech, and she should assure her
self, that when there remained nothing but her consent, she would give proof
of her good will. With such talk they ended their walk, and returned to their
lodging, where all that day Callire durst not come near us, for fear lest
Filidas might think she had told it us. But at night, she recounted to her
brother all the discourse, and then they both went to find out Daphnis, whom
they made acquainted with it. Judge, if the astonishment were great: but
whatsoever it were, the contentment of Philander surpassed it far, he
thinking the heavens had offered him a fair way to the conclusion of his
desires. In the morning Daphnis desired me to go see the feigned Callire, and
the true one abode near Filidas, to the end he might not doubt it. God knows
what became of me, when I knew all this discourse. I swear unto you, I was so
astonished, that I knew not whether it were a dream. But this was the sport,
that Daphnis complained infinitely of me, for having so long concealed it from
her, and what oaths I made her, that I knew nothing till that time. She would
not believe me to be such a child; and when I told her, I thought all men like
Filidas, she fell a laughing at my ignorance. In the end we resolved, for fear
lest Belinde would dispose of me at her pleasure, or that Filidas might make
some attempt for Amidor, that we must do nothing at randon, and without
fore-thinking. For as then, by the solicitation of Daphnis and Callire, I
promised Philander to marry him. This was the cause, that taking again their
own habits, after he had assured Filidas that he went to talk with his
parents, he returned with his sister to Gerestan, who never took notice of
this disguising. From that time it was permitted to Philander to write to me:
for sending ordinarily news to Filidas, I had always his letters, and that so
cunningly, that neither she, nor Amidor ever perceived them.

Now fair shepheardesses, till this time, this passage never brought me
sorrow; but alas! it is that which followed, that cast me into such a
bottomless pit, that even to my coffin I must never hope to taste any sweet
thing. It fell out to my misfortune, that a stranger passing through that
Country, spyed me sleeping at the fountain of Sicamores, where the coolness
of the shadow, and sweet murmuring of the water about the midst of the day
had made me sleep. He whom the beauty of the place had brought thither, to
spend the heat of the day, no sooner cast his eyes on me, but he noted some
thing that pleased him. O gods! what man, or rather, what monster was this? he
had a visage shining again for blackness, his hair curled, and like the wool
of our sheep, after they have been a month or two shorn, his beard in
little tufts about his chinne, his nose flat between his eyes, but high and
large at the end, his mouth great, his brows frowning and hanging over his
nose; but nothing was so strange as his eyes, for in all his face there
appeared nothing white, but that which he showed when he rolled them in his
head. This fair lover was destined me by the heavens, to put me quite out of
love with loving: For, being ravished to behold me, he could not contain
(transported, as I think, with this new desire) but approaches to kiss me.
But because he was in armor, and on horseback, the noise that he made, awoke
me, and in so good time, that as he was about to stoop to satisfy his will, I
opened mine eyes, and seeing this monster so near me, at the first I cried
out, and then laying my hand on his face, I struck him with all my might: he
that was half leaning, not looking for this defense, was so surprised, that
the blow made him stagger, and for fear (as I think) he should tumble on me,
he chose rather to fall on the other side, so that I had leisure to rise: I
think if he had touched me, I should have dyed of very fear. For imagine,
that whatsoever is most horrible, yet it comes short of the terriblenesse of
his fearful visage. I was gone a pretty way off by that time he could rise
up: and seeing that he could not ouer-take me, by reason he was heavily armed,
and that Fear tied wings to my feet, he mounted presently on his horse, and
with a full gallop followed me, when (almost out of breath) the poor Filidas,
which hard by entertained Philander, who was come to see us, and was fallen
asleep, as they talked, hearing my voice, ran to me, seeing this cruel
fellow pursue me with his naked sword in his hand, for the choler of his fall
wiped away all love, she generously opposed against his fury, manifesting to
me, by that last act, that she had loved me as much as her sex would permit,
and laid hold on the bridle of the horse; whereat this barbarous fellow was so
offended, that without regard of humanity, he struck him with his sword on
his arm, with such a force, that he cut it from the body; and she then almost
dead with smart, fell down under the horses feet, who began to bound so
roughly, that his master had much to do to stay him. And because Filidas (in
dying) gave a great cry, naming Philander aloude, he being near, heard her,
and seeing her in so pitiful a case, was extremely offended: but much more,
when he saw this barbarous companion, being alighted from his horse, ran
after me with his sword in his hand; and I, as I tell you, what with fear, and
what with the course I had made, so much out of breath, that I could scarce set
one leg before another: what became of this poor shepherd? I do not
think, that ever Lion robbed of her whelps, when she saw them carried away,
ran more mainely after them, then the courageous Philander after this cruel
wretch. And because he was laden with armor that hindered his running, he
ouer-tooke him quickly, and cried: Forbear, knight, forbear any more to
wrong her that deserves rather to be adored: and because he would not stay,
were it for that being in a fury, he heard not his voice, or being a stranger,
understood not his language, Philander putting a stone into his Sling, cast it
with such a force, that hitting him on the head, but for the armor which he
wore, without doubt, he had killed him at that blow, which was such, that the
stranger stooped again: but presently raising him self, and forgetting the
anger which he had against me, he addressed himself in a rage toward
Philander, who was so near, that he could not avoid the unhappy blow he
gave him in his body, having nothing in his hand, but his sheep-hooke for his
defense. Notwithstanding, seeing the sword of his enemy so high, his natural
generosity gave him that strength and courage, that instead of going back, he
advanced himself forward, and setting his sheep-hooke against his breast, ran
the iron end of it between his eyes, so far, that he could not draw it our,
which was the cause, that thus leaving it fastened, he took hold on his
throat, and with his hands and teeth finished the slaughter.

But alas, this was a victory dearly bought; for as this barbarous wretch fell
down dead on the one side, Philander (for want of strength) was feign to let
himself fall on the other; but so lighting ouer-thwart, the sword which lay
cross the body, hit in the point against a stone, and the weight of his body
made it come out of the wound. I that from time to time turned my head, to see
if this cruel monster had yet overtaken me, saw well where Philander ran,
and then an extreme fear took me. But alas, when I saw him wounded so
dangerously, forgetting all fear, I stayed my self; but when he fell down,
the fear of death could not hold me from running to him, and almost as dead as
he, I cast my self on the ground, and called him all be-blubbered by his name.
He had lost much blood, and still lost more from both ends of the wound. And
see what force Love has: I that could not look upon blood without swowning,
had then the courage to thrust my handkercher into the wound, to stop the
course of blood; and tearing a piece of my veil, I put it into the other part.
This little help stood him in some stead; for, having laid his head in my
lap, he opened his eyes, and came again to his speech: And perceiving me all
covered with tears, he enforced himself to say: If ever I hoped for an end
more favorable then this, I pray the heavens (fair shepherdess) that it
take no pity on me.

I saw well, that my small merit could not bring me to the happiness desired,
and I feared, that at the last, despair would constrayne me to some furious
manner of resolution against mine own person. The gods that know better what
is fit for us then we can desire, have well provided, that having of long time
lived but for you^, I should likewise die for you. And judge what my
contentment is, since I not only die for you, but withal, in preserving to
you the thing which of all the world you hold most dear, which is your
chastity. Now mistrisse, since there remains nothing more to my contentment,
but only one point, by the affection which you have found in Philander, I
heartily pray you to grant it me, to the end that this happy soul may go to
expect you in the Elisian fields, with this satisfaction from you. He spoke
this in broken words, and with much pain. And I that saw him in this case, to
give him all the contentment he could desire, answered him: Friend, the gods
have not raised in you so good and honest affection to extinguish it so
presently, and to leave us nothing but sorrow: I hope they will give you yet so
much life, that I shall make you know, that I give not place to you in love, no
more then you do to any other in merit. And for proof of that which I do
say, demand you that only thing which you would gladly have of me, for there
is nothing that I can or will deny you.

At these last words, he took me by the hand, and laying it to his mouth; I
kiss (says he) this hand by way of thanks, for the grace and favor you have
done me; and then lifting up his eyes to heaven: O God (said he) I desire of
you but so much life, as may serve for the accomplishment of the promise which
Diane comes to make me: and then addressing his speech to me, with such pain,
that he could hardly utter a word, he said thus unto me, Now (fair Mistrisse)
hear then what it is I require of you: Since I feel not the anguish of death,
but for you, I conjure you, by my affection, and by your promise, that I may
carry this contentment out of the world, that I may say, I am your husband; and
believe me, if I do obtain it, my soul shall most contentedly go into what
place soever it must pass, having so great a testimony of your goodwill. I
swear to you (fair shepheardesses) that these words struck me so to the
quick, that I knew not how I was able to sustain my self: and, I think (for
my part) it was only the desire I had to please him, that gave me the courage.
This was the cause that he had no sooner ended his demand; but I griping his
hand, said, Philander, I grant you that you demand of me: and I swear to
you, before all the gods, and particularly before the deities which are in this
place, that Diane gives herself to you, and that she takes you both in heart
and soul for her husband: and in speaking these words, I kissed him. And I
(said he) take you, my fair mistress, and give my self to you for ever, right
happy and content to bear the most glorious name of Diane. Alas, this word of
Diane was the last word he uttered; for having his arm about my neck, and
drawing me to him, to kiss me, he dyed, breathing his last upon my lips. How
I looked, when I beheld him dead, you may easily judge (fair shepheardesses)
since I so truly loved him. I fell groueling upon him, without pulse, and
without sense, and fell into a swowning, so that I came to my self without my
own knowledge. O God! how lives my heart since I felt this loss, and found
that to be too true, which so oftentimes he had foretold me, that I should love
him more after his death, then during life; for I have so lively preserved his
remembrance in my soul, that (me thinks) I have him always before mine
eyes, and without ceasing he says to me, unless I will be ungrateful, I must
love him. So I do (O good soul) and with the most entire affection that I
can: and if where thou art, there be any knowledge of that which is done here
below, receive (O dear friend) this good will, and these tears which I do
offer, in testimony that Diane loves even to her coffin, her dearest Philander.

The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK of Astrea and Celadon.
AStrea, to interrupt the sad thoughts of Diane, But fair shepherdess, said
he, who was that miserable wretch that was cause of so great misfortune? Alas,
said Diane, why would you I should tell you? He was an enemy that came not into
the world, but to be the cause of my everlasting tears. But yet, answered
Astrea, was it never known what he was? They said, replied she some time
after, that he came out of certain barbarous countries beyond the Straits, I
know not whether I can name the right, which they call the pillars of Hercules:
and the cause that brought him so far for my mischief, was, that he became
amorous of a Lady in those countries, who commanded him to seek throughout
Europe, to know whether there were any other as fair as she; and if he met
with any Lover that would maintain the beauty of his Mistrisse, he was bound
to fight with him, and to send her his head, with the picture and name of the
Lady. Alas! I would it had pleased the heavens that I had not been so ready to
fly when he pursued me to kill me that by my death I might have prevented that
of poor Filander. At these words she set her self on weeping with such
abundance of tears, that Phillis, to divert her, changed the discourse, and
rising up first, We have (said she) fate long enough, me thinks it were good to
walk awhile.

At this word they all three rose, and went toward that part of their Hamlet,
for it was well near dinner time. But Leonide, who was, as I told you,
harkening, lost not one word of these shepheardesses; and the more she heard of
their news, the more she desired to hear. But when she saw them go away
without speaking a word of Celadon, she was much troubled; yet in hope she
might (staying that day with them) discover somewhat, as before she purposed.
When she saw them gone a little off, she rose out of the bush, and making a
short turn, she set to follow them, for she would not have them think, she
had ouer-heard them. By chance, Phillis turning backward, as they were going,
espied her a far off, and showed her to her companions, who stayed; but seeing
she came toward them, to do her the duty which her condition merited, they
returned back and saluted her. Leonide, full of courtesy, after she had
returned them their salvation, addressing her self to Diane, said, Wise Diane,
I will this day be your gh^st, provided, that Astrea and Phillis be of the
company: for I came this morning from my uncle Adamas, with a purpose to pass
all this day with you, to know if that which I have heard of your virtue,
Diane; of your beauty, Astrea; of your merit, Phillis; answer the report that
is divulged of you. Diane seeing her companions referred themselves to her,
answered, Great Nymph, it were better for us, happily, that you had knowledge of
us only from report, since that is very favorable on our side; yet since it
pleases you to do us this honor, we receive it, as we are bound to receive
with reverence, the graces which the heavens are pleased to do us. At these
last words they took her to them, and led her to Diane's Hamlet, where she
was received with so good countenance, and with such ciuility, that she
wondered how it was possible, that persons so accomplished, should be brought
up among the woods and pastures. After dinner, they spent the time in devices
and demands which Leonide made; and among others, she enquired what was become
of a shepherd named Celadon, who was the son of Alcippe. Diane answered, that
some while ago, he was drowned in Lignon. And his brother Licidas, is he
married (said she?) Not yet (said Diane) and I think he has no great haste,
for the displeasure for his brother is yet too fresh in his memory. And by what
misfortune (said she) did he miscarry? He would have succored (said Diane)
this shopheardesse, who was fallen in before him; and then she showed her
Astrea. The Nymph, who without making any such show, took heed to Astreas
actions, seeing that on that remembrance, she changed her countenance; and to
hide this blushing, she held her hand before her eyes, knew that she loved him
in good earnest; and to discover more, held on, And was the body never found?
No (said Diane) only his hat was found, which was stayed at one of the trees,
which the stream of water had made bare at the root. Phillis, who knew, that
if this discourse held further, it would draw tears from the eyes of her
companion, who had much ado to restrain them; that she might interrupt it,
But great Nymph, said she, what good fortune for us was that, that brought you
to this place? At our first meeting (said Leonide) I have told you it. It was
only to have the good of knowing you, and to enter league with you, desirous
to have the pleasure of your company. Since that is it (replied Phillis) if you
find it good, it will be fit to go, as usually we do, to our accustomed
exercises, and so you shall take more notice of our fashion of life;
especially, if you will give us leave to use in your presence, the liberties of
our villages. That is it, said Leonide, I would have requested of you, for I
know, that co^straint is never pleasing, and I come not hither to displease
you. In this sort, Leonide taking Diane by the one hand, and Astrea with the
other, they went forth, and with many discoursings, came to a wood which runs
along to the bank of Lignon, and there having more moisture, grew thicker, and
made the place more like a forest. They were scarce set, when they heard one
sing near them, and Diane was the first that knew the voice: and turning
toward Leonide, Great Nymph (said she) do you take pleasure to hear the
discourse of a young shepherd, who has nothing of the village, but the name
and the habit? for having been always brought up in the great Towns, and
among civil persons, he has less touch of our woods, then of any other
thing. And who is he (answered Leonide?) It is (replied Diane) the shepherd
Siluander, who has made abode among us but 25. or 30. months. And of what
Family (said the Nymph) is he? It is an hard matter (added Diane) to tell you,
for himself knows not who is his father and mother, only he has some light
conjecture, that they were of the Forests: and for this cause, when he could,
he returned hither, with resolution to go no more away; and indeed, our
Lignon would have great loss if he should; for I do not think there was a
more accomplished shepherd of long time. You praise him too much (answered the
Nymph) to make me desirous to see him: let us go to entertain him. If he
perceive us here (said Diane) and he think you desire it, he will not fail to
come soon enough to us. And it fell out as she said, for the shepherd by
fortune walking abroad, seeing them, turned his pace toward them immediately,
and saluted them. But because he knew not Leonide, he made as though he would
hold on his way; when Diane said to him, Is it so, Siluander, that you have
learned this ciuility in the great Towns, to thrust your self into so good
company, and then to say nothing? The shepherd answered smiling, Since I have
offended by interrupting you, I may the less hold on in the fault, and so, as
I think, may my error be lesser. That is not it (answered Diane) that makes
you part hence so soon, but rather, for that you find nothing here worth your
stay; yet if you turn your eyes on this Nymph, I assure my self, that if you
have eyes, you will not think you can find better elsewhere. That which
draws any thing, replied Siluander, must have some sympathy with it: but you
may not think it strange, that being no such between so great worth and my
imperfections, that I have not felt this attract which you reproach me for.
Your modesty (interrupted Leonide) has made you put this unlikeness between
us; but think you it is in the body, or in the soul? For the body, your
countenance, and the rest which we see of you deny it; if it be in the soul,
it seems (if you have it reasonable) it differs nothing from ours. Sluander
knew well he was not now to talk to shepheardesses, but with a person of an
higher strain, which made him resolve to answer with stronger reasons, then he
was used to have among the shepheardesses, and therefore he said thus: The
price, fair Nymph, of all things in the world, is not valewed according to
that we see of them, but according to the proper use of them: for otherwise, a
man who is the most esteemed, should be the least; since there is no creature
which surpasses not him in some things peculiar: one in strength; another in
swiftness; another in sight; another in hearing; and such like privileges of
the body. But when we consider that the gods have made al these creatures to
serve man, and man to serve God; we must confess that the gods have thought
best of him. And by this reason I would tell you, that to know the price of any
thing, we must have an eye to the service the gods have appointed it: for there
is no likelihood, but that they know best the true value of every thing. Now in
doing thus with you and me, who would not say but the gods are much mistaken
in us, if being equal in merit, they serve themselves of you, as a Nymph, and
of me, as a shepherd? Leonide, in her mind commended the gentle spirit of this
shepherd, which so well defended so bad a cause: and to give him occasion to
speak on, she said, Though this may be allowed in respect of me, yet
wherefore is it that these shepheardesses cannot stay you, since according to
your speech, they are to have this conformity with you? Wise Nymph, answered
Siluander, the lesser yields always to the greater part; where you are, these
shepheardesses must do as you do. And why (added Diane) disdainefull
shepherd, esteem you so slenderly of us? You should rather think (answered
Sluander) that it is for the good opinion I have of you, that I thus speak:
for if I thought hardly of you, I would not say that you were a part of this
great Nymph, since that thereby I make you no whit her inferior, but that she
deserves to be beloved and respected for her beauty, for her merits, and for
her condition; and you, for your beauties and merits. You mock your self,
Siluander (answered Diane:) I would have you think that I have sufficient to
win the affection of an honest shepherd. She spoke thus, for that he was so
far from all Love, that among them, he was always called the insensible,
and she delighted to make him talk. Whereto he answered, Your conceit may be
as pleases you, yet I must tell you, that for effecting this, you want one of
the principal parts. And what is that, said Diane? The will (replied he:) for
your will is so contrary to this effect, that, said Phillis interrupting him,
Siluander would never love more. The shepherd hearing her speak, drew aside
to Astrea, saying, that they ouer-charged him, and that he was wronged, when
so many set against him. The wrong (said Diane) is turned only to me: for this
shepherdess seeing me in the hands of so strong an enemy, and conceauing a
sinister judgment of my courage and force, would have helped me: It is not in
this (said he) fair shepherdess, that she has offended you; for she had had
small judgment, if she thought not your victory certain: but it was, for that
seeing me already vanquished, she would rob you of the honor, in attempting
to give me a blow at the end of the combat; but I know not what her meaning
was: for if you meddle no further, I assure you, she shall not so easily get
this glory as she thinks. Phillis, who of her nature was pleasant, and who on
this day resolved to pass away the time for Leonide, answered him with a
certain lifting up of her head: It is good (Siluander) that you have an
opinion, that to vanquish you, is a thing to be desired, and honorable for me,
I say, for me, who will place this victory among the least that ever I wanne.
You should not so much vnder-valew it, said the shepherd, since this serves
not but to be the first that has conquered me. As much (replied Phillis) as
there is honor to be the first in that which is of worth, so much shameful
is it in the contrary. Ah shepherdess (interrupted Diane) speak not so of
Siluander: for if all the shepherds which are less then he, should be
vnder-valewed, I know not him that we are to esteem. See Diane (answered
Phillis) the first blows by which you come over him! without doubt, he is
yours. It is the custom of these haggard and wild spirits, to suffer
themselves to be taken at the first attracts; and for that they have not been
acquainted with such favors, they receive them with such a taste, that they
have not power to resist them. Phillis spoke these words to mock him: yet it
fell out, that the gracious defense of Diane, made the shepherd think, that
he was bound to serve her by the laws of courtesy. And after that, that
opinion, and the perfections of Diane, had that power over him, that he
conceived this bud of Love, that time and conversation might increase* as we
will tell you afterward. This disputation held some while among the
shepheardesses, to the good contentment of Leonide, who wondered at their gentle
spirit. Phillis, at last, turning her self to the shepherd, said, But whereto
serve so many words? If it be true that you are such, let us come to the
proof of it, and show me what shepherdess makes any special account of you.
She (answered the shepherd) whom you see me make especial account of. You
mean (added Phillis) that you seek not after any: but that proceeds from want
of courage. Much rather (replied Siluander) from want of will. And then going
onward, And you which vnder-valew me so much, tell us what shepherd it is whom
you love so especially? All them who have spirit and courage (answered
Phillis.) For whosoever sees that which is lovely, without loving it, wants
spirit or courage. That reason (said Siluander) binds you then to love me, or
accuse your self of great want. But let us not speak so generally: name one
in particular, whom you love. Then Phillis, with a countenance grave and
severe, I would with a good will there were boldness enough to undertake it.
That is then (added Siluander) for want of courage. Rather (said Phillis) want
of will. Wherefore then (cried out Siluander) would you it should be thought
more out of want of will in you, than in me? Would it be well (said the
shepherdess) that the actions which do besit you, should be permitted me?
Would you think well of it, if I should run, play on the Lute, or leap, as
you do?

But our disputation is too long about so bad a subject: let Diane set down
the conclusion, and see if I be not confident in the justness of my cause,
since I take a partial judge. I shall be always (answered Diane) according to
the reason of my knowledge. Well (said Phillis) when words cannot make good
that which they would uphold, is he not bound to come to his proofs? Yes
without doubt (answered Diane.) Condemn then this shepherd (said Phillis) to
give proof of the merit which he says is in him, and that on this occasion
to undertake to serve and love a shepherdess of that sort, that he will
enforce her to confess that he deserves to be beloved, that if he cannot,
that he freely acknowledge his little valor.

Leonide and the shepheardesses found this proposition so reasonable, that by a
common voice it was enacted; Not (said Diane smiling) that he be constrained to
love her. For in Love, Constraint can do nothing, and his birth must grow from
a free will. But I ordain, that he serve and honor her as you say. My Judge,
(answered Siluander) though you have condemned me without hearing me; yet will
I not appeal from your sentence: but only I require, that she whom I must
serve, may merit and know how to acknowledge my service. Siluander, Siluander,
(said Phillis) because your cunning fayles, you seek out starting-holes: But I
will put you besides all these means, by her whom I will name: for it is
Diane, in whom there is wanting neither spirit to know your merit, nor desert
to give you will to serve her. For my part (answered Siluander) I acknowledge
more then you can speak; provided that it be no profaning of her beauties, to
serve them for wages. Diane would have spoken, and excused her self of this
charge; but at the request of Leonide and Astrea, she consented, yet with this
condition, that this assay should last but three months.

This business being thus stayed, Siluander casting himself on his knees,
kissed the hand of his new mistrisse, as if he were to make the oath of his
fidelity: and then raising himself, Now (said he) that I have received your
ordinance, will you not suffer me (fair Mistrisse) to propound unto you a
wrong that has been done me? Diane answered, he had all liberty. He took it
again thus: If in speaking overmuch of my merits against one that vilified
me, I have justly been condemned to bring my proof, why may not this glorious
Phillis, who is more vain then I, and who has been the cause of this
discourse, be sentenced to bring forth a like witness? Astrea not staying for
Dianes answer, said, that she took this request to be so just and honest,
that she made no question but it should be agreed unto. And Diane having
demanded the advice of the Nymph, and seeing she was of the same opinion,
sentenced the shepherdess as he requested. I expect not (said Phillis) a more
favorable sentence, having such parties. But well, what must I do? You must
seek to get (said Siluander) the favor of some shepherd. That is not
reasonable (said Diane) for Reason is never contrary to Duty: but I ordain,
that she serve a shepherdess; and that as well as you, she be bound to make
her love her: and that party of you two that shall be less amiable, at the
pleasure of them whom you serve, be compelled to give place to the other. I
will then (said Phillis) serve Astrea. Sister (answered she) it seems you
doubt of your merit, since you go about a work done already. But it must be
the fair Diane, not only for the two reasons which you have alleged to
Siluander, which are her merits and her spirit: but besides that, for that she
may more equally judge of the service both of the one and other, so that you
must address your self to her alone.

This ordinance seemed equal to them all, that they should observe (after they
had drawn oath from Diane, that without regard of any thing, but the truth,
the three months being ended, she should deliver her judgment.) It was a
pleasure to see this new fashion of love: for Phillis played the servant very
well, and Siluander in dissembling, became so in good earnest, as we will tell
you afterward. Diane on the other side knew so well how to play the mistrisse,
that there was no body but would have thought her to be so without fayning. As
they were in this discourse, and that Leonide in her self had judged this life
to be most happy of all others, they saw come from the pastures side two
shepheardesses, and three shepherds, which by their habits showed to be
strangers: and when they were come somewhat nearer Leonide, who was curious to
know the shepherds and shepheardesses of Lignon by their names, demanded who
they were: whereto Phillis answered, that they were strangers, and that some
months are passed since they came into their company; and for her, she knew no
more of them. Then Siluander added, that she lost much, in not taking a more
particular knowledge of them: for among the rest there was one named Hylas, of
as pleasing an humor, as one would wish, for that he loves, as himself says,
all that he sees; but he has this good with it, that what does him the hurt,
gives him the remedy: for that if his inconstancy make him love, his
inconstancy likewise will make him soon forget it, and he will tell you such
extrauagant reasons, to prove his humor to be the best, that it is impossible
to hear him without laughter. Truly (said Leonide) his company must be very
delightful, and we are to put him to his discourse, as soon as he comes to
us. That will be (answered Siluander) without any great labor, for he will
talk everlastingly. But as he is of this humor, there is another with him
that is of a quite contrary, because he does nothing but bewail a dead
shepherdess whom he loved. This is a very stayed man, and seems to have
judgment; but withal, he is so sad, that there comes nothing from his mouth
that sauoureth not of the melancholy of his soul. And what is it (replied
Leonide) that stays them in this Country? To tell you true, said he, I have
not yet been so inquisitiue: but if you will, I will ask them the question;
for me thinks they come to us. At this word they were very near, so that
they might hear Hylas come chanting these Verses:

The Town song of Hylas upon his Inconstancy.
The fair that is able me to stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
I Love to change, it is liberty,
My humor bears me out in it:
But what? if I inconstant be,
That they misprize me, is it fit?
So far is it, who me can stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
To make a barbarous soul to love,
Is sign of beauty wondrous fair:
To settle mine so used to move,
Would be a work that is much more rare:
So that who ever can me stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
To stay the weight none has removed,
What weakeling cannot easily do?
But to stay that is always moved,
A harder labor longs thereto:
Therefore it is, who can me stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
And wherefore do you think it strange,
That for the better I should change?
He worthy is to want his eye,
That will not change so happily:
But she that is able me to stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
They may well say, that that fame fair,
That sets a stay unto my heart,
Must needs surpass all beauty rare,
Making me constant, used to start.
Even so that fair that can me stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
Then come, dear Mistresses, I pray,
That will of Beauty win the price:
And my too nimble spirits stay,
By favors and allurings nice:
For she that is able me to stay,
The bell of Honor bears away.
Leonide smiling upon Siluander, said to him, that this shepherd was not one
of those deceivers which dissembled their imperfections, since he went singing
them so. That is (said Siluander) because he believes it is no fault, and so
glories in it. By this they drew so near, that to salute them, the Nymph and
the shepherd were forced to break off their speech. And for that Siluander
kept well in his memory the Nymphs demand, of the state of these shepherds, as
soon as the first words of ciuility were ended, But Tyrcis (said Siluander)
for that was the shepherds name, if it be not unseasonable, tell us the cause
that made you come into this country of Forests, and what stays you here?
Then Tyrcis setting his knee to the earth, and lifting up his eyes and hands, O
infinite Goodness (said he) that by thy Providence gouernes the world, be thou
ever praised, for that which it has pleased thee to do to me. And then
raising up himself, to the amazement of the Nymph, and all the company, he
answered to Siluander: Gentle shepherd, you ask me what brought me, and what
holds me in this Country? Know, that it is no other then you, and it is you
alone, whom I have so long sought for. Me! (answered Siluander) how could that
be, by reason I had no knowledge of you? That is, in part, a cause, (said he)
why I seek you. If it be so (replied Siluander) it is a long while since you
were with us; who will say that you euerspake to me? Because (answered Tyrcis)
I know you not; and to satisfy the demand you have made me, for that the
discourse is long, if it please you, I will tell it, after you have again
taken your places under those trees which you had before our coming. Siluander
then turning to Diane, Mistrisse (said he) is it your pleasure to sit down
again? It is, Leonide (answered Diane) of whom you should have asked that
question. I know well, answered the shepherd, that Ciuility commands me so,
but Love ordains it otherwise. Leonide taking Diane and Astrea by the hand,
sat down in the middle, saying; That Siluander had reason, because Love, that
has any other consideration but of it self, is no true love: and after them
the other shepheardesses and shepherd sat in a round. And then Tyrcis turning
toward the shepherdess that was with him; See the happy day (said he)
Laonice, which we have so much desired, and that since our first entry into
this Country, we have expected with such impatiency! It concerns none more
then you, that we get out of this pain as the Oracle has ordained. Then the
shepherdess, without making him other answer, directing her self to
Siluander, spoke thus:

The History of Fyrcis and Laonice.
OF all friendship, there is none (so far as I can hear of) which is more
affectionate, then that which is bred in youth, because custom, which this
young age takes hold of, by little and little, grows to be changed into
Nature, which if it be hard to put off, they know, that endeavor to contrary
it. I say this, to serve my self of some kind of excuse then (gentle
shepherd) when you see me constrained to tell you, that I love Tyrcis; for
this affection was almost sucked in with the milk; and so my soul raising it
self with this nourishment, receives in her self (as her own) the accidents
of that passion; and it seemed, euerything from my birth gave agreement to it:
for we continued neighbors, the friendship between our fathers, our ages,
which were very even, and the gentleness of the young years of Tyrcis, gave
me but ouer-great commodity; yet misfortune would, that much about that time
Cleon was borne in our Hamlet, which (it may be) had more graces then I, but
out of question, with much more better fortune. For even when this Maid
began to open her eyes, it seemed that Tyrcis received the flame into his
heart, seeing that in the very Cradle he took pleasure to behold her.

At that time I might be about six years, and he ten years old, and see how
the heavens disposed of us without our consent! From the hour I first saw
him, I loved him; and from the time he saw Cleon, he loved her: and though our
lives were such as our years might bear, yet were they not so small, but
there might very well be found the difference between us. Afterward, as we
grew, so did our love likewise, and that to such an extraordinary height, as
(it may be) there was not any that might surpass it.

In this youth (you may we^lthinke) I went without any great heed taking to his
actions; but growing to more age, I noted in him such a want of good will, that
I resolved to turn another way; a resolution which many delights made me
conceive, but which no true Lover could execute, as I proved long time after.
Yet my courage being of^^^ded, had sufficient power to make me dissemble: and
if I could not indeed withdraw my self entirely; yet, at least, make show to
take some kind of leave. That which took from me all means to do it, was,
that I could not see that Tircis affected any other shepherdess; for all that
he did to Cleon, could not move suspicion that it was any thing but
childishness, for that as then she could not be above nine years old: and
when she began to grow, and that she could feel the tracts of Love, she so
removed from him, that it seemed, that this withdrawing would have warranted
her against all such blows. But Love, more crafty then she, knew so well to
come near, and set before her soul, the merits, the affection, and the
services of Tircis, that at last, she found her self in the very midst, and
so turned on all parts, that if she avoided wounding on the one side, the
stroke that she received on the other, was the greater and more deep: So that
she could not fly to a better remedy then dissimulation; not to avoid the
blows, but only to keep it from the knowledge of her enemy, or any other.
She might well use this dissembling, while it began to be but a little
scratch; but when the sore became great, then must she yield and confess her
self to be vanquished. Thus you see Tircis beloved of Cleon, and behold him
playing with the honest sweetness of an amity, though at the beginning he
scarce knew what his disease was, as these verses witness, which he made at
that time:

A SONNET.
O God, what ill is this thus tortures me?
Since time that first I did fair Cleon see,
I felt within my heart new rising pain,
Although her eye took it from me again.
Since by an hot desire I have been galde,
If such a motion may desire be calde,
Whose judgment is bewitched in such wise,
That it my will ioynes to his practices.
And from that spring my harm beginning takes,
For this desire so great increasing makes,
That I thereby lose both my sleep and food,
In place whereof grows an unquiet mood:
That helps desire to build my servitude:
Thus it the ill I feel not understood.
After Tircis had knowledge of the good will of happy Cleon, he received it
with so great contentment, that his heart being unable to hide it, he was
forced to impart it to his eyes; which God knows, how suddenly changed from
that they were, gave but too manifest knowledge of their joy. The discretion of
Cleon was such, that she gave no advantage to Tircis for his duty: so that
jealousy of her honor persuaded her to make show of loving me, that they which
noted her actions, might stop at those which were more evident; and go no
further to seek out those which she would conceal. She made choice of me
rather then any other, for that she had long before perceived that I loved him:
and knowing well, it is hard to be beloved, and not to love again, she thought
that every body would believe, that this friendship, not having been long
between us, might be thought to grow from the good will which I bare him.

He that had no design, but that which Cleon allowed, presently endeavored to
effect that which she had commanded him. O God, when I remember the sweet
words which he used to me, I cannot (though they were lies) contain my self
from entertaining them; and thank Love for those happy moments, wherewith he
delighted me at those times; and wish, since I cannot be more happy, that I
might at least, be always so deceived. And indeed, Tircis found it no great
pain to persuade me, that he loved me: for besides, that every one easly
believes the thing they desire, me thought it might have bin so, because I did
not judge my self to be so unlovely, but that so long a conuersing as ours
was, might have gained somewhat of him; especially with the care I had to
please him. Whereby this glorious Cleon oftentimes passed the time with him:
but if Love had bin just, he should have made the deceit fall on her self, by
suffering Tircis to come and love me unfeignedly: yet it fell not out so, but
contrarily, this dissimulation was so unsupportable, that he could not continue
it: and did not Love shut up the eyes of them that love, I could not choose but
have perceived it, as well as the greater part of them that saw us together; to
whom, as to my professed enemies, I would give no credit: and because Cleon and
I were very familiar, this cunning shepherdess feared, that time, and the
sight I had, might put me out of the error wherein I was. But gentle shepherd,
it had bin necessary that I had bin as forecasting as she: yet the better to
hide herself, she invented a slight, which was not evil. Her purpose, as I
have told you, was to shadow the love which Tircis bare her, by that which he
made show of to me: and it succeeded as she set down, for they began to
talk somewhat loud, and to my disadvantage, and though it were but they that
looked no further then to appearance, yet this number being greater then the
other, the bruit ran presently, and the suspision that they had before of
Cleon, died at that instant; so that I may say, that she loved at my cost. But
she that feared, as I told you, lest I should come to discover the practice,
would cloak it under another; and counseled Tircis to let me know, that every
body began to find out our love, and to censure it shrowdly enough, and that
it was necessary to cause it to cease by wisdom, and that it was fit he
should seem to love Cleon, that by this diuerting, they which talked the
worst, might reform themselves. And you may tell her, said she, that you have
chosen me rather then any other, for the commodity you have to be near her,
and to speak to her. I, that was all honest, and without craft, found this
counsel good, so that (with my permission) from that day, when we three were
together, he made not dainty to entertain Cleon as he was accustomed. And
indeed, it was very pleasing to them, and to any other that knew this
dissimulation: for, seeing the suite that he made to Cleon, I thought he
^ested, and could hardly hold my self from laughter. On the other side, Cleon
noting my fashions, and knowing the deceit wherein I thought her to be, was
extremely pained to dissemble it; especially, when this crafty companion made
certain winks with her eye, which oftentimes were so far from the purpose,
that I might accuse the love she bare to the shepherd, and the contentment
that this deceit brought him. And see if I were in my right mind, that of
pity I felt the displeasure which she should have, when she knew the truth!
But since I found, that I complain in her person, yet may I excuse my self;
for who has not been beguiled, since that Love, as soon as he gets entire
possession of a soul, spoils it presently of all distrust in the person
beloved? And this dissembling shepherd played his part so well, that if I had
been in Cleons place (it may be) I should have doubted his shows had been
true.

Being sometimes in the middle between us two, if he labored to make
ouer-great demonstration of his love to Cleon, he would instantly turn to me,
and ask me in mine care, if he had not done well. But his master-fraud stuck
not at so small a thing: hear you, I beseech you, whereto it passed. In
private he spoke more often to Cleon, then to me; he would kiss her hand; he
would be an hour or two on his knees before her, and would not conceal it
from me, for the cause I have told you: but generally he would never budge from
me; sued to me with such dissimulation, that the greatest part held on the
opinion they formerly had of our loves; which he did of purpose, desirous, that
I only should see his courting of her, because he knew well I would not
believe it: but he would not in any case, that they, who might judge rightly,
should come to the least knowledge. And when I told him, we could not put out
of men's heads the opinion of our love, and that none would believe it, when it
was told me that he loved Cleon: How (answered he) will you have them believe a
thing that is not? So it is, that our plots, in despite of the worst conceits,
shall be believed in general. But he, that was well advised, seeing an
occasion presented to pass yet further, said to me, That above all, we must
deceive Cleon; and if she were once deceived, we had then almost accomplished
our purpose; that for this cause, of necessity, I must speak to her for him,
and I should do it confidently.

She (says he) that already has this opinion, will with all her heart,
receive those messages which you bring her, and so we shall live in assurance.
Oh! what a miserable fortune do we oftentimes run into? for my part, I
thought that if at any time Cleon believed that I loved this shepherd, I
should make her lose that opinion, when I prayed her to love him, and
confidently spoke for him. But Cleon knowing what speech I had with the
shepherd: and seeing in what restraint she lived, judged she might by my
means have messages, and especially letters. This was the cause that she took
in good part the proposition which I made her; and from that time she treated
with him as with the man she loved and I served to no other use, than to carry
letters from the one to the other. O Love! to what an occupation did thou
then put me? Yet may I not complain, for that I have heard say, that I am not
tho first that have done such offices to others, thinking to work for
themselves.

About that time, because the Frankes, Romans, Goths and Burgonians raised a
cruel war, we were constrained to go into the Town, which bears the name
of that shepherd that was Judge to the three goddesses; for our place of abode
was not far from thence, upon the banks of the great river of Seyne. And for
that by reason of the great access of people, which from all parts came to
withdraw them there, and the want of those commodities which they were used
unto in the Champaine, the contagious sickness began to take so violent a
course throughout the Town, that even the great men could nor defend
themselves. It fell out that the mother of Cleon was attaynted with it. And
although that this disease were so fearful, that there was neither parentage,
nor obligation of love, that could retain the sound about them that were
infected; yet the good nature of Cleon had such power over her, that she would
not depart from her mother, whatsoever she said unto her: but on the cont^ary,
when some of her familiars would have withdrawn her, representing the danger
whereinto she thrust her self; and that it was offensive to the gods, to tempt
them in this sort: If you love me, would she say, use not this speech to me,
for, do I not owe my life to her that gave me it? and can the gods be offended
that I serve him, that taught me to worship them? On this resolution she would
never abandon her mother: and staying with her, served her as freely, as if it
had been no infectious disease. Tyrcis was all the day long at their door,
burning with desire to enter into their lodging; but the for bidding of Cleon
stayed him, who would not suffer him, for fear lest they that were ready to
think the worst, might judge his presence prejudicial to her chastity. He
that would not displease her, not daring to enter, caused to be carried to them
all things necessary, with so great care, that they were never in want of any
thing. Yet (as the heavens would) this happy Cleon would not escape the
infectio^ of her mothers disease, whatsoever preservatives Tyrcis could bring.
When this shepherd knew it, it was no more possible to keep him back from
entering into their lodging, thinking it was now no time to dissemble, nor to
fear the biting of the bad-speaker. He then set in order all his affairs,
disposed of his goods, and declared his last will: then having left a charge to
some of his friends, to send him succor, he shuts himself in with the mother
and the daughter, resolving to run the same fortune that Cleon did. It would
serve to no purpose, but to lengthen the discourse, to tell you, what were the
good offices, what the services that he did to the mother, for the
consideration of the daughter; for he could not imagine more then those which
his affection made him perform.

But when he saw her dead, and that there remained no more then his Mistress,
whose disease growing worse and worse, I do not think that this shepherd
rested one moment. He (...) her continually in his arms, or else dressed her
sores. She on the other side, who had always loved him so dearly,
acknowledged so great love in this last action, that her own was much
increased, so that one of her griefs was, the danger wherein she saw him for
her cause. He on the contrary side, took such satisfaction, that Fortune
(though his enemy) yet had offered him this mean, to give testimony of his
goodwill, that he could not give her thanks enough. If fell out, that the
disease of this shepherdess (being in case needful to be launced) there was
no Surgeon that would (for fear of danger) hazard himself to touch her.
Tyrcis, whose affection found nothing hard, being instructed what he was to
do, took the launcer, and lifting up her arm, launced it, and dressed it
without fear. Shortly (gentle shepherd) all the most dangerous things and
most noisome, were sweet unto him, and very casie. So it was, that the disease
hourly increasing, brought this Nymph (beloved Cleon) to that estate, that
there remained no more strength, but to speak these words: I am sorry that the
gods will no longer draw out the thread of my life, not that I have a desire to
live longer time; for this desire can never make me wish it, having had trial
of the discommodities which follow mortals: but only, that (in some sort) I
would not die so much obliged to you, but that I might have time to give you
testimony, that I am not attainted with Ingratitude, nor misprising. It is
true, that when I consider what are the obligations which I owe you, I think
the heavens are right just, to take me out of the world, since that if I should
live as many ages as I have done days, I know not how to satisfy the least of
that infinite number which your affection has brought forth. Receive then for
all that which I owe you, not an equal good, but indeed, all that I can, which
is an oath which I make you, that even death shall never wipe out the memory of
your love, nor the desire I have to make all the acknowledgements that a true
loving person may yield to him, to whom she is bound. These words were uttered
with much pain, but the love she bare the shepherd gave her the strength to
deliver them. Whereto Tyrcis answered (Fair Mistress) I can hardly think I
have bound you, nor that ever I shall, because that which I have hitherto done,
has not satisfied my self: and whereas you say, you are obliged to me, I see
well, you know not the greatness of the love of Tyrcis, otherwise you would not
think, that so small a thing was able to pay the tribute of so great duty.
Believe me (fair Cleon) the favor you have done me, so kindly to receive
the services which you say I have done you, charge me with so great a burden,
that a thousand lives, and a thousand such occasions know not how to discharge
me.

The heavens which have caused me to be borne but for you, will accuse me of
misprisall, if I live not for you: and if I have any dessigne to employ one
single moment of this life, other then to your service. He would have held on
longer, but the shepherdess (ouerladen with her sickness) interrupted him,
Cease, friend, and let me speak, to the end, that the small remainder of my
life may be employed, in assuring you, that you may not be better beloved, than
you are of me, who finding my self ready to depart, give you an eternal
farewell, and entreat you for three things, always to love Cleon; to cause
me to be buried near my mothers bones; and to take order, that when you are
to pay the duty of mortality, your body be laid near mine, that I may rest
with this contentment, that not having the power to be united to you in life,
yet I may be so at least in death. He answered, The gods should be unjust, if
having given beginning to so good an amity as ours, they should sunder it so
soon. I hope they will yet preserve you, or at least, they will take me away
before you, if they have any compassion of the afflicted: but if they will not,
I only desire of them so much life, as may satisfy the commandments which
you make me, and then permit me to follow you, that if they cut not off my
thread, and my hand be free, assure your self (fair Mistress) you shall not be
long without me. Friend (answered she) I enjoin you beyond this, to live as
long as the gods please; for in the length of your life, they shall show
themselves pitiful unto us, since that by this means I shall make relation
in the Elisian fields of our perfect amity, you may publish it to the living:
and so the dead and living men shall honor our memory. But friend, I perceive,
my disease enforces me to leave you; farewell, the most lovely, and the best
beloved among men. At these last words she dyed, leaning her head on the bosom
of her shepherd.

To tell you the displeasure he took, and the complaynts he made, were but
to strike the sword deeper into the wound; besides that, his gashes are yet so
open, that every man seeing them, may well judge what the blows were. O death,
cried Tyrcis, that have robbed me of the better part of my self! either
restore me that thou have taken, or take away the rest. And then, to give room
to tears and sighs, which this remembrance plucked from his heart, he held his
peace for a while: when Siluander told him, he was to resolve himself, since
there was no remedy: and that for things happened, and may no more be,
complaints were but witnesses of weakness. So much the rather (said Tyrcis)
find I occasion of complaynt: for if there were any remedy, it were not the
part of a man advised, or one of courage, to complain; but he may be well
allowed to bewail that, which can find no other asswagement. Then Laonice
taking again her speech, continued in this sort: At last this happy
shepherdess being dead, and Tyrcis having rendered the last offices of love,
he took order she should be buried by her mother, but the ignorance of them
to whom he gave the charge, was such, that they placed her elsewhere: for as
for him, he was so afflicted, as he stirred not from off his bed, there
beingnothing to preserve his life, but the commandments she had given him.
Somes days after, enquiring of those who came to visit him, in what place the
body so beloved was laid, he knew it was not by her mother; whereat he
conceived such a displeasure, that contracting for a great sum with those
that used to bury, they promised to take her up, and to lay her with her
mother. And indeed they went about it, and having opened the ground, they took
her up between three or four of them; but having carried her a little way,
the infection was so great, that they were compelled to leave her in midway,
resolved rather to die, then to carry her further.

Where of Tyrcis being advertised, after he had made them yet greater offers,
and seeing they would not respect it: And why (said he aloud) can thou hope,
that the love of gain may do more in them, than thine in thee? Ah Tyrcis! this
is too great an offense to thy Love. He spoke thus, and as one transported, he
runs to the place where the body was, and though it had been three days
buried, and that the stink was extreme, yet took he it between his arms,
and carried it to her mothers grave, which was by that time covered. And after
so good a deed, and so great a testimony of his affection, withdrawing himself
out of the Town, he stayed forty nights separated from all men. Now all these
things were unknown to me, for one of my Aunts being sick of the like disease
(almost) at that time, we conuersed not with any: and the same day that he came
back, I returned like wise. Having understood only of the death of Cleon, I
went to him to know the particularities; but coming to his chamber door, I
laid mine eye to the keyhole, because I came near, I heard him sigh: and I
was not deceived, for I saw him on his bed, his eyes lifted to heauen-ward, his
hands joined together, and his face covered with tears. If I were astonished
(gentle shepherd) judge you; for I did not think he had loved her, and came
(in part) to delight my self with him. At last, after I had beheld him some
while, with a sigh which seemed to part his stomach in pieces, I heard him
bring forth these words:

Stanzaes on the death of Cleon.
Why dowe hide our tears? this is no time to feign,
A Love, which her sad death, by my dole makes plain:
Whoceaseth to have hope, ought likewise cease to fear,
The hope that fed my life, lies closed in her bear.
She lived once in me, and I always in her,
Our sprites with thousand knots, so strait combined were:
Each knit to other so, that in their faithful love,
We two were but an one, and each as two did move.
But in the point that Love upon a firm laid ground
Assured me pleasures, I the quite contrary found:
For that my happiness had touched the point that was
Allotted me to reach, and not to ouer-passe.
It was in Paris town, that those delightful thoughts,
Which Love infusde in me, her death did bring to naught:
What time a man might see the Gauls right sore distressed.
Against th'inuading force of strangers do their best.
And must there be a tomb of less celebritie
Then Paris, holding that I nurc'd so charily?
Or that my ill should fall in times less sorrowing,
Then when all Europe stood at point of perishing?
But I am wide (O God) my Cleon is not dead,
Her heart to live in me, far from her self is fled:
Her body enely dies, and so by contrary,
My spirit dies in her, and hers dath live in me.
O gods! what became of me when I heard him speak thus? my amazement was such,
that unawares leaning against the door, I entered but half in, whereat he
turned his head; and seeing me, he made none other sign, but holding out his
hand to me, prayed me to sit on the bed by him: and then wiping his eyes, for
so he should always need an handkercher, he spoke to me in this sort: Well,
Laonice, the poor Cleon is dead, and we are left to bewail her rauishment.
And because the pain I was in, gave me no power to answer, he went onward: I
know well (shepherdess) that seeing me in this plight for Cleon, you are
amazed, that the feigned love I bare her should give me so true feelings. But
alas! leave that error, I beseech you, so me thinks I should commit a greater
fault against Love, if without cause I should hold on that dissembling, whereto
my affection (till now) commanded me: Know then Laonice, that I have loved
Cleon, and that all other suites were but to cloak that; and if you did ever
bear me friendship, for Gods sake, Laonice, condole with me this disaster,
that at once have laid all my hopes in her coffin. And if you be in any sort
offended, pardon Tyrcis the error which he has committed against you, that
he might not be wanting in that which was due to Cleon. At these words,
transported with choler, I went away (so far besides my self) that I could
hardly find out my lodging, from whence I stirred not of a long time. But
after we have crossed Love a thousand times, yet must we submit our selves:
and therefore, behold me as much to Tyrcis as ever I was. I excuse in my self,
the treasons which he had done me, and pardon him the wrongs and faynings where
with he offended me, naming them, in pardoning them, not dissemblings nor
treasons, but violences of love. And I was the easlyer drawn unto this pardon,
for the Love, who professes himself a party in this fault, went flattring me
with a certain hope to succeed in Cleons place. While I was in this thought,
behold, one of my sisters came to tell me, that Tyrcis was lost, so that he was
no more to be seen, and no body knew where he was.

This recharge of grief surprised me so forcibly, that all that I could do,
was to tell her, that this sadness being ouer-passed, he would return as he
went. But from that time I resolved to follow him, and that I might not be
hindered by any, I got out so secretly, about the beginning of the night, that
before day I found my self far off. If I were astonished at the first,
seeing my self alone in the dark, the heavens know it, to whom my complaints
were directed; but Love, which secretly accompanied me, gave me courage enough
to accomplish my purpose. So I pursued my voyage, following (without more ado)
the way which my seet met with, for I knew not whither Tyrcis went, nor my
self neither. So that I was a wandere more than four months, hearing no
news of him. At last, p^ss^^^ the mount Dor, I met with this shepherdess
(said she poynting to Malonthe,) and with her, that shepherd called
Thersander, sitting under the shadow of a Rock, waiting until the mid-dayes
heat were abated. And for that my custom was to demand news of Tyrcis of
all I met, I addressed my self to the place where I saw them, and knew that
my shepherd (by the marks they had given me) was in those deserts: and that he
went always bewayling Cleon. Then I told them what I tell you, and coniured
them to tell me the most certain news they could. Whereto M^donthe (moved
with pity) answered me with that sweetness, that I judged her stricken with the
same disease that (...) was; and my opinion was not false: for I knew since the
long history of her griefs, by which I found that Love strikes as well in the
Court as in our woods: and for that our fortunes had some sympathy betwixt
them, she desired me to tarry and end our iourny together, since we both made
one kind of search. I that was alone received (with open arms) this commodity;
and from that time we parted not asunder. But what serves this discourse to my
purpose, since I will only relate to you what concerns Tyrcis and me? Gentle
shepherd, this shall be enough, to say to you, that after we had stayed more
then three months in that country, at last, we knew he was come hither: where
we no sooner arrived, but that I met him, and so unseasonably for him, that he
stood as amazed. At the first he received me with a countenance good enough:
but at last, knowing the occasion of my voyage, he declared to me all at
length, the extreme affection he bare unto Cleon: and that it was not in his
power to love me. Love (if there be any justice in thee) I demand of thee, and
not of this ungrateful, some acknowledgement of so much travel passed.

So ended Laonice, and seeming she had no more to say, wiping her eyes, she
turned them pitifully to Siluander, as asking favor, in the justice of her
cause. Then Tyrcis spoke in this sort: Wise shepherd, though the history of my
misfortunes be such as this shepherdess has told you, yet is the story of my
griefs much more pitiful, wherewith yet I will entertayne you no longer, for
fear of troubling you and the company, only I will add to that which she
has said, that not being able to endure her ordinary complaints (by common
consent) we went to the Oracle, to know what he would ordain of us, and we had
such an answer by the mouth of Arontyne:

ORACLE.
On Lignons banks which glideth peaceably,
Lover, thou shall a curious shepherd see,
That first enquires the ill that tortreth thee:
Believe him. Heaven appoynts him Judge to be.
And though we have been long here, yet are you the first that asked of the
state of our fortunes; therefore it is that we cast our selves into your arms;
and we desire you to set down what you will have us do. And for that nothing
may be done, but according to the will of God, the old woman, who gave us the
Oracle, told us, that having met with you, we were to cast Lots, who should
maintain the cause both of the one and other: and for this effect, all they
whom we met, should put a gage between your hands in a hat. The first that
draws, shall be he that speaks for Laonice; and the last of all, for me. At
these words he desired them all to be willing to it; whereto every one
consented. By fortune, that of Hylas was the first; and that of Phillis the
last: Whereat Hylas smiling, Heretofore (said he) when I was servant to
Laonice, I should hardly have had the mind to persuade Tircis to love her; but
now, that I am for M^donthe, I willingly obey to that the god commands.
Shepherd (answered Leonide) you are to understand by the way, what the
providence of this divinity is, since to move each one to change of affection,
it has given the charge to inconstant Hylas, as to him, that by use well
knows the means: and to continue a faithful love, it has given the
persuasion to a shepherdess constant in all her actions: and to judge of them
both, it has chosen a person that cannot be partial; for Siluander is neither
constant, nor inconstant, since he never loved any. Then Siluander taking the
word, Since therefore you will, O Tircis, and you Laonice, that I be Judge of
your difference, swear both of you between my hands, that you will inuiolably
observe it; otherwise, it will be but more to displease the gods, and for us
to take pain to no purpose. Which they did, and then Hylas began thus:

The Oration of Hylas for Laonice.
IF I were to maintain the cause of Laonice, before a person unnatural, I
would fear (it may be) lest the want of my capacity, might lessen in some
sort, the justice which is in it: but since it is before you, gentle shepherd,
that have the heart of a man; I mean, which know what the duties are of an
honest man, I not only not mistrust a favorable judgment, but hold for
certain, that if you were in the room of Tircis, you would be ashamed to be
noted for such an error. I will hold my self then from seeking out more
reasons for this cause, which is so clear of it self, that all other light
would serve but for a shadow: and I will only say, that the name which he
bears of man, ties him to the contrary of that he does, and that the laws and
ordinances of heaven, and of nature, command him to dispute no longer about
this cause. Do not the duties of courtesy ordain to render good turns
received? Do not the heavens command, that for enery service some reward
should be given? And does not Nature constrain to love a fair woman that
loves him, and to abhor, rather then to cherish a dead body? But this quite
contrary; for the favors received of Laonice, he renders discourtesie; and in
stead of services, which himself confesses she has done him, serving him so
long under the couerture of Cleons love, he pays her with ingratitude; and for
the affection which she has borne him from her cradle, he makes no show but of
misprisall. Are you so honest a man, Tircis, and do you so seem to know the
gods? and yet me thinks, this shepherdess is such an one, that were it not
that her influence easts her into misfortune, it were more proper for her to
make others feel, then for her self to feel the wrongs where of she
complains. If thou be a man, know thou not that it is proper to a man to
love the living and not the dead? And if thou acknowledge the gods, know
thou not that they can punish them that contradict their ordinances? and that,
Love never pardons him that never loves?


If thou confessest, that from the cradle she has served thee, and loved thee,
O God, shall it be possible, that so long an affection, and so pleasing
services, should, at last, be paid with contempt?

But be it that this affection, and these services, being voluntary in Laonice,
and not sought for of Tyrcis, may weigh little with an ungrateful soul; yet
will I not believe that you will award (O just Siluander!) but that the
deceiuer is to give satisfaction to the party deceived: and as Tircis (by his
dissimulation) has so long time deluded this fair shepherdess, shall he not
be bound to repair this injury to her, with as much true affection, as he has
made her take lies and falshoodes? that if every one ought to love his like,
will not you (our Judge) ordain, that Tyrcis love a person living, and not one
dead, and place his love there where he may live, and not among the cold a shes
in a coffin? But Tyrcis, tell me, what may be thy dessigne? after thou have
met with a flood of tears, the sad relickes of the poor Cleon, think thou
that thou can raise her up again with thy fighes and tears? Alas! they pay
Caron but once, and they never but once enter into his boat: You may well call
her back from thence, but he is deaf to such cries, and never sends out
person that comes aboard him. It is impiety (Tyrcis) to go about tormenting
the rest of those whom the gods call away. Love is ordained for the living, and
the Coffin for those that are dead. Desire not to confound their ordinances (in
such sort) that to a dead Cleon thou give a living affection; and to a quick
Laonice, a grave. And herein do not arm thy self with the name of Constancy,
for it has no right to it. Do thou think it fit, that a man should go
naked, because he has worn out his first garments? Believe me, it is as much
worthy of laughter, to hear thee say, that because Cleon is dead, thou will
never love more. Re-enter, re-enter into thy self, confess thine error, cast
thee at the feet of this Fair, acknowledge thy fault, and so thou shall avoid
thy constraint, whereto our just Judge (by his sentence) will subject thee.
Hylas ended in this sort, to the great contentment of all but Tyrcis, whose
tears gave notice of his grief: Then Phillis (after she had commandment from
Siluander) lifting up her eyes to heaven, answered thus to Hylas:

The answer of Phillis for Tyrcis.
OFaire Cleon, which understand from heaven, the injury which they purpose
to do thee, inspire me with thy Divinity, for such I will esteem thee, if the
Virtues may ever make a mortal become divine; and work so, that my ignorance
may not weaken the reasons that Tyrcis has, that he should never love but thy
perfections. And you (wise shepherd) that knows better what I should speak
in her defense than I can conceive, supply the wants which are in me, by the
abundance of reasons which are in my cause; and to begin, I will say, Hylas,
that all the reasons which thou have alleged to prove, that being beloved,
one ought to love, though they be false, yet they are agreed upon for good: but
wherefore will thou conclude by it, that Tyrcis must leave the love of Cleon,
to begin a new with Laonice? Thou demaundest things impossible, and
contraries; impossible, because no man is bound to do more than he can: and how
would thou have my shepherd love, if he have no will? Thou laughest, Hylas,
when thou hear me say, that he has none. It is true (interrupted Hylas)
what has he done with it? He that loves (answered Phillis) has given his
very soul to the person beloved, and the will is but one power. But (replied
Hylas) this Cleon to whom you would he should be sent, being dead, has nothing
remaining of a person, and so Tircis is to take that again which was his. Ah!
Hylas, Hylas (answered Phillis) you speak as if Love were a Nouice: for the
donations which are made by his authority, are always irreuocable. And what
(reioyned Hylas) shall become of this will since the death of Cleon? This
little loss (said she) has followed that great extreme loss which he had in
losing her: for that if pleasure be the object of the will, since now he can
have no more pleasure, what has he to do with will? and it has followed
Cleon so, that if Cleon be no more, no more is his will, for he never had it
but for her: but if Cleon be yet in any place, as the Druides teach us, this
will is in her hands, so content to be in that place, that if she her self
would d^^^e it away, it would not return to Tircis, as knowing well, it should
be unprofitable, but would go into her coffin, to rest with the beloved
bones. And this being so, why accuse you the faithful Tircis of ingratitude,
if it be not in his power to love elsewhere? And see, how you command, not
only a thing impossible, but contrary to it self: for if every one be bound
to love that that loves him, why will you not that he love Cleon, who never
failed in love to him? And as for the recompenses which you demand for the
services, and for the letters which Laonice carried from one to the other, let
her remember the contentment which she received; and how many happy days she
passed, before this deceit, which otherwise she should have spent miferably:
let her balance her services with that payment, and I assure myself, she
shall be found their debtor. Thou say, Hylas, that Tircis has be guiled
her. This is no beguiling, but a just punishment of Love, that has made her
blows fall on her own self, since her purpose was not to serve, but to
delude the wise Cleon; that if she have cause to complain of any thing, it is,
that of two deceyuers, she has been the less crafty. See, Siluander, how
briefly I have thought fit to answer the false reasons of this shepherd, and
there remains nothing but to make Laon^ce confess, that she has done wrong
to pursue this injustice; which I will easily do, if it please her to answer
me. Fair shepherdess, said Phillis, tell me, do you love Tircis well?
Shepherdess, replied she, no man that knows me, doubted ever of it.

If it were of constraint (replied Phillis) that he were to go far off, and
that some other came in the mean time to woo you, would you change this love?
No (said she) for I should always hope he would come back. And, reioyned
Phillis, If you kn^w he would never return, would you cease loving him? No
certainly (answered she) O fair Laonice! (continued Phillis) think it not
then strange, that Tyrcis, who knows, that his Cl^on for her merits is lifted
up into heaven, who knows, that from above she sees all his actions, and
joys in his fidelity, will not change the love he bare her, nor suffer that
the distance of place should separate their affections, since all the
discommodities of life have no more to do? Think not (as Hylas has said) that
never any came back over the flood of Acheron, Many, who have been beloved of
the gods, have gone and returned: and whom shall we rather think than fair
Cleon, whose birth has been beheld by the Destinies with so sweet and
favorable an eye, that she never loved any thing, whereof she gained not the
love? O Laonice, if it were permitted your eyes to see the Divinity, you might
behold this Cleon, who (without doubt) is at this hour, in this place to
defend her cause, and is at mine ^are to prompt the words that I must speak.
Then you would judge that Hylas has done wrong, to say, that Tyrcis loves but
cold cinders. Me thinks I see her in the midst of us clothed with immortality,
in stead of a frail body, and subject to all accidents; which reproaches Hylas
for the blasphemies which he has used against her. And what will thou answer,
Hylas, if the happy Cleon say to thee; Thou (inconstant) would train up my
Tyrcis in thy unfaithfulness: if he have heretofore loved me, think thou
it was my body? if thou say, Yes: I answer, He ought to be condemned (since
no lover is ever to withdraw himself from a love begun) to love the ashes
which I have left him in my coffin, so long as they endure. If he confess he
loved my spirit, that is my principal part; then why (inconstant) will he
change that will at this time, when it is more perfect than ever it was?
Heretofore (so will the misery of the living have it) I might be jealous, I
might be importunate, I must serve, I was marked by more then him, but now
freed from all imperfections, I am no more capable to bear his displeasures.

And thou Hylas, thou would with thy sacrilegious inventions turn from me,
him in whom only I live in earth, and by a cruelty more barbarous than has
been heard of, assay to lay on me another death. Wise Siluander, the words
which I deliver, sound so sensibly in mine ears, that I do not think but you
hear them, and feel them at your heart. This is the cause, that to leave this
divinity speaking in your soul, I will hold my peace, after I have only told
you, that love is so just, that you are to fear the punishments in your
selves, if the pity of Laonice, rather than the reason of Cleon, move and
carry you. At this word, Phillis rising with a courteous reverence, made sign
she would say no more for Tyrcis. When Laonice would have made an answer,
Siluander forbade it, saying; It was not now time to defend her self, but to
hear only the sentence which the gods pronounced by his mouth: and after he
had some while considered with himself the reasons of them both, he
pronounced such a sentence:

The judgment of Siluander.
THe principal point of the causes debated before us, is, to know if Love may
die by the death of the thing beloved? Whereupon we say, that a love that may
perish, is no true love; for it ought to follow the subject that gave it birth:
Therefore it is, that they which love the body only, must enclose all their
loves of the body in the same tomb where it is shut up; but they that beyond
this, love the spirit, ought with their loves to fly after this beloved soul
to the highest heavens, no distances being able to separate them. Therefore,
all these things well considered, we ordain, That Tyrcis always love his
Cleon, and that of the two loves which may be in us, the one shall follow the
body of Cleon to the tomb, and the other the spirit into heaven. In like sort,
it is ordered, That suites of Laonice be forbidden, that she no longer
disquiet the repose of Cleon; for such is the will of the gods that speaks in
me.

Having said thus, without regarding the complaynts and reproaches which he
foresawe in Laonice and Hylas, he made a great reverence to Leonide, and the
rest of the company, and so went away without other companion than Phillis, who
would stay no longer to hear the sorrows of this shepherdess. And because
it was late, Leonide withdrew into the Hamlet of Diane, for that night; and the
shepherds and shepheardesses, as they were accustomed (except Laonice) who
infinitely offended with Siluander and Phillis, swear not to go out of that
Country, before she had done them some notable displeasure; it seemed that
Fortune brought her as she could have wished. For, having left that company,
and being placed in the thickest of the wood, to mourn at liberty, at the
last, her good spirit set before her eyes the insupportable contempt of Tyrcis,
how much unworthy he was to be beloved of her, and made her so ashamed of her
fault, that a thousand times she swear to hate him, and for his cause,
Siluander and Phillis.

It fell out while these things thus passed in her memory, that Licidas, which
some days before began to be evil satisfied with Phillis, by reason of some
coldness, which he thought he found in her, perceived Siluander to come
talking with her. It was true, that the shepherdess used more coldness
toward him, or rather, want of heat, then she had done before she frequented
the company of Diane, for that this new friendship, and the pleasure that
Astrea, Diane, and she took together, so possessed her, that she no more
heeded those small wanton tricks, wherewith the affection of Licidas was
nourished, and he which knew well, that a love cannot build up it self, but
with the ruin of the former, was of opinion, that that which made her more
lukewarm toward him, and less careful to entertayne him, was some new
amity, which turned her aside. And not being able to know who was the subject,
he went all alone gnawing upon his thoughts, and withdrew into the most covert
places, that he might complain to himself with most liberty, and by mis-hap,
when he was minded to return, he saw (as I told you) Siluander and Phillis
come along: a sight that brought him no small suspi^ion. For knowing the worth
of the shepherd and of the shepherdess, he easily supposed that Siluander,
having never yet loved any, was now given to her, and that she following the
humor of those of her Sex, had willingly enough received the donation. All
these considerations gave him much suspicion, but much rather, when passing by
him, without seeing him, he heard, or he thought he heard the words of love;
and that may well be, by reason of the sentence which Siluander came from
giving.

But to put him out of all patience, it fell out, that suffering them to pass
by, he went from the place he was in; and that he might not follow them, he
took the way they had come: and fortune would, that he went to sit down,
near the place where Laonice was, not seeing her. Where, after he had some
while rayled out of his displeasure, transported with overmuch grief, he
cried out aloude: O Love! is it possible thou should suffer so great an
injustice without punishing it? Is it possible, that in thy kingdom, wrongs
and services are equally recompensed? And then holding his peace for a while,
at last, his eyes lifted up to heaven, and his arms acrosse, letting himself
go backward, he began again thus: For conclusion, it pleases thee, Love,
that I must give witness, that there is no constancy in any woman; and that
Phillis, for being of that Sex (though furnished with all other perfections) is
subject to the same laws of natural inconstancy: I say, that Phillis, whose
love heretofore has been more assured to me than mine own will. But why, O
my shepherdess! am not I the sam^ Licidas, whose affection thou have made
show to nourish so much? That which you have at other times judged commendable
in me, is it so much changed that you take more delight in an unknown
Siluander, a vagabond, a man, whom the whole earth contemues, and will not
profess him for hers? Laonice, who heard this shepherd, and Phillis and
Siluander named, desirous to know more, began to give her ear in good
earnest, and so fitly for her, that she learned before she went from thence,
all that she could desire of the most secret thoughts of Phillis; and thereon
taking occasion to anger her or Siluander, resolved to set this shepherd yet
further into this opinion, assuring her self, that if she loved Licidas, she
would make him jealous; and if it were Siluander, she would publish the love,
so that every one might know it.

And as soon as this shepherd was gone, (for his evil would not suffer him
to stay long in a place) she also went from thence; and setting forward after
him, came very near him, talking with Corilas, whom he had met in the way, and
seeming to demand of them news of the desolate shepherd, they answered, they
knew none such. It is a shepherd (said she to them) that goes lamenting a dead
shepherdess, and who (as they tell me) is almost, ever since dinner, in the
company of the shepherdess Phillis, and of her servant. And, who is that
(answered presently Licidas?) I know not (continued the shepherdess:) If I
knew to tell his name right, I think he is called Silander, or Siluander, a
shepherd of a reasonable hansomnesse of visage, somewhat long, and of an
humor pleasing enough, when he list. Who told you (answered Licidas) that he
was her servant? The actions of them both (answered she:) for I have passed by
such straits; and I rememberyet upon what feet they go. But tell me if you know
any news of him I seek; for night draws on, and I know not where to find him.
Licidas could not answer her, he was so surprised: but Corilas told her, that
she must follow that path, and as soon as she was out of this wood, she
should see a great pasture, where doubtless she might learn some news; for
it was there that every night they met together, before they drew homeward; and
that for fear lest she might wander, he would bear her company, if she
pleased. She that was willing to dissemble yet more (fayning not to know the
way) received with great courtesy the offer he made her, and giving the good
night to Licidas, took the way which was showed her, leaving him so quite
besides himself, that he stood a great while immovable in one place; at last,
returning as out of a long swound, he went repeating the words of the
shepherdess, whereto it was impossible but he should give credit, not able to
suspect her of falsehood. It would be too long to repeat here the sorrow he
made, and the wrongs he did to his faithful Phillis. So it was, that all the
night he did nothing but go compass in the most retired part of the wood;
where toward morning (wearied with sorrow and long travail) he was constrained
to lie down under some trees, where all wet with tears, at the last, his
extreme grief enforced him to sleep.

The end of the seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
AS soon as the day appeared, Diane, Astrea, and Phillis, came together, to be
at the rising of Leonide, who not able to esteem sufficiently of their worth
and courtesy, was ready dressed, by that time the light shone full into her
chamber, that she might not lose one moment of the time, that she was to stay
with them; so that these shepheardesses were astonished, to see her so diligent.
When they had opened the door, and taken each other by the hand, they came out
of the Hamlet, to begin the exercise of the former day. They had hardly
passed beyond the uttermost houses of the Town, but they might perceive
Siluander, who under the dissembled wooing of Diane, began to feel a new
growing and true love; for troubled with this new care, he had not closed his
eyes all the night long, his thoughts were so busy in representing to him the
discourse, and all the actions which he had seen of Diane the day before, that
not being able to stay for the morning in his bed, he got him down, and had
till now waited about the village, to see when his new mistrisse would come
forth; and as soon as he spyed her, he came toward her, singing these verses:

STANZA'S On an high raised Desire.
HOpes like Ixions in boldness,
Disdaining heavens dire menaco^,
Will you aspire above your size?
With Icarus t'assaile the sky,
Is but to tumble from on hi^:
Forbear, not yet to enterpriz^^.
Even so sometimes, Prometheus
With breast peckt by birds ra^enous,
His torments did immortal make,
By stealing down Celestial fire,
He said, to this good I aspire,
To do what none dares undertake.
My heart on rock of constaney,
Devoured by my paciency,
Will say, The sprights of loftiest size
Have they not dared to steal that coal?
So may this glory take my soul,
To do what none dares enterprise.
Echo, that for Narcissus love,
Bewrayes her grief, the rocks to move,
Comforts her self in her dismay,
And tells them in her angry mood,
If I of this be not beloved,
There is no other else that may.
Phillis, that was of a pleasant disposition, and would well discharge her
self of the experiment whereto she had been enjoined, turning to Diane,
Mistrisse, said she, will you hereafter give any credit to the words of this
shepherd? Yesterday he loved you not at all: now he is dead, at least, for
love. Since he would say so much, he ought to begin in a better hour to serve
you, or pause somewhile before he proffer such words. Siluander was so near,
that he might hear Phillis, that made him cry out a far off, O mistrisse,
shut your ears against the evil words of mine enemy. And then being come at
them, Ah, naughty Phillis, said he, is it so, that by the ruin of my
contentment, you seek to build your own? You do well (answered) Phillis to
talk of your contentment; have not you with others, this perfection of the
most part of shepherds, w^o out of a vanity, say, they are infinitely content,
and favored of their mistrisse, though contrarily they be hardly used? talk
you of contentment? You, Siluander, have you the boldness to use these words,
in the presence even of Diane? what will you say in other places, when you have
the sauciness to talk so before her? She had gone on, but that the shepherd,
after he had saluted the Nymph, and the shepheardesses, interrupted her thus:
You would have my mistrisse mislike that I should speak of the contentment
which I have in her service: and why will you not have me say so, if it be
true? Is it true (answered Phillis?) see what vanity this is! will you say yet
that she loves you, and that she cannot live without you? I may not say
(replied the shepherd) that it is so: but I may well say, I wish it were so:
but you seem to think it so strange, that I say I have contentment in the
service which I tender my mistress, that I am compelled to ask you if you have
not? At least (said she) if I have, I do not brag of it. It is ingratitude
(replied the shepherd) to receive good from any, without thanks: and how is it
possible we can love that person to whom we are unthankful? By that
(interrupted Leonide) I judge that Phillis loves not Diane. There are few that
give not the same judgment (answered Siluander) and I believe she thinks so
her self. If you have reasons good enough, you may persuade me, replied
Phillis. If there want nothing but reason to prove it (said Siluander) I have
no more to do: for whether I prove a thing or deny it, it cannot make it other
then it is; so that since I want but reasons to prove your small love, what
have I to do to convince you? That that is to be done, that you love not
Diane, belongs to you to prove. Phillis here staid a little troubled to
answer: and Astrea said to her, It seems, sister, you approve that which the
shepherd says. I do not approve it (answered she:) but I am much troubled to
disprove it. If it be (added Diane) you love me not at all: for since Siluander
has found the reasons which you demand, and against which you cannot resist,
you must confess, that that which he says, is true.

At this word the shepherd came to Diane, and said, Fair, and just mistrisse,
is it possible that this enemy shepherdess has yet the hardiness, not to
suffer me to say, that the service which I yield to you, brings me contentment,
when this cannot be for the answer which you make so much to mine advantage? In
saying (answered Astrea) that Phillis loves her not, she does not say
therefore, you do love her, or that she loves you. If I could hear these
words, answered he, I love you, or you love me, out of my mistrisses mouth, it
should not be a contentment, but a transport, that rauisheth me from my self,
for ouer-great satisfaction: and yet if he that holds his peace, seem to
consent to that he hears, why may not I say, my fair mistrisse confesses that
I love her, since, without contradiction she hears what I say? If Love
(replied Phillis) consist in words, you would have more then all other men
together; for I do not think they will ever fail you, as bad a cause as you
have.

Leonide took wonderful pleasure at the discourse of these shepheardesses;
and, had it not been for the pain wherein she was for the disease of Celadon,
she would have tarried many days with them: for albeit she knew he was out of
his fever, yet she could not but fear his relapse. That was the cause she
desired them to take with her the way of Laigneu to the river, for that she
might the longer enjoy their company. They agreed willingly; for besides
courtesy so commanded them, they were exceedingly pleased with her company.
So then, taking Diane on the one side, and Astrea on the other, she went
toward the Buttresse. But Siluander was deceived, who (by chance) was gone
further from Diane than was Phillis, so that she took that place that he
desired. Whereat Phillis, being very glorious, went mocking the shepherd,
saying; that his Mistress might easily judge, that he was too slothful to
serve her. She may grant so much (answered he) to your importunity, but not to
your affection. For, if you loved her, you would not have left me the place
you had. That should rather be a sign of the contrary (said Phillis) if I
suffer another to come nearer than my self: for if the party that loves,
desires almost to be transformed into the thing beloved, he approaches
nearest, and so attaynes the perfection of his desires. The lover (answered
Siluander) that has more regard to his own contentment than of the person
beloved, deserves not that title at all. So that you which regard more the
pleasure which you take, in being near your Mistress, than you do her
commodity, may not say you love her, but your self only: For, if I were in
the place you are, I would help her to go, and you do but let her. If my
Mistress (replied Phillis) should handle me as you do, I do not know if I
should love her. I know then assuredly (replied the shepherd) that if I were
in your Mistrisses place, I could not love you. How now (said he?) have you the
hardiness to threaten her thus? Ah Phillis! one of the principal laws of
Love, is, that that party which can imagine, that he may (at some times) not
love, is no more a lover. Mistress, I demand justice of you, and beseech you in
the behalf of Love, that you would punish this offense of treason, and that
thrusting her out of the place, too honorable for her that loves not, you would
set me in it; me that would not live, but to love you.

Mistress (interrupted Phillis) I see well, that this envious person of my good,
will not let me be quiet, unless I quit him this place; and, I fear, with his
language, he will compel you to give consent: therefore it is that I desire
to prevent him, if you think good, and to leave it him on this condition, that
he declare one thing to you that I shall propound. Siluander then without
staying for Diane's answer, said to Phillis: Only go out, (you shepherdess)
of your own accord, for I will never refuse this condition, since without this
ado I will never conceal any thing from her that she desires to know of me.
At this word he set himself in her place: and then Phillis said to him.
Envious shepherd, though the place where you are, may not be bought, yet have
you promised more then you are aware of. For you are bound to tell us what you
are, and what occasion has brought you into this Country, since you have been
here so long, and we could never yet know but little of it. Leonide that was
of the same mind, taking hold of the words, Questionless (said she) Phillis,
you have not hitherto showed more wisdom than in this proposition. For at one
instant you have freed Diane and me out of some pain; Diane, for the
discommodity you did her, in hindering Siluander from supporting her as she
went; and me, for the desire I had to know him more particularly. I wish
earnestly (answered the shepherd) fetching a sigh, I were able to satisfy you
in this curiosity; but my fortune denies me it (in such manner) that I may
truly say, I am both more desirous, and almost as ignorant as you. For it
pleased her to cause me to be borne, and to make me know that I live, hiding
from me all other knowledge of my self. And that you may not think but that I
will perform my promise Isware unto you by Theutates, and by the beauties of
Diane, said he, turning to Phillis, I will tell you truly all that I know.

The History of Siluander.
When Aetius was made Lieutenant gene^rall in Gaul, by the Emperor
Valentinian, he found it very dangerous for the Romans, that Gondioch the
first king of the Burgonians, should possess the greatest part, and resolved
to chase him out, and to send him back over the Rheyne, from whence he was
lately come; when Stilico for the good service which he had done to the
Romans, gave him the ancient provinces of the Authunes, of the Sequans, and
Allobroges, whom from that time they called Burgonians, from their name, and
without the commandment of Valentinian: it is easy to believe what he would
have done, to get all the forces of the Empire into his hands: but the Emperor
seeing a great number of enemies at his elbow, as Goths, Hunnes, Vandals and
Frankes, which were all busy in diverse places, commanded Aeti^^ to leave them
in peace. Which was not so soon, but that the Burgonians were gathered
together into routes, and that so, that their Provinces, and those that
neighboured them, felt the smart of it, the enemies making waste, with so
gre^at cruelty, that whatsoever they found, they carried away.

Now I at that time being about five or six years old, was, with many
others, brought by the Burgonians into the uttermost town of the Allobroges,
who to revenge themselves, being entered into the Country, confederate with
their enemies, committed the same disorders they had received. To tell you what
was the meaning of them that took me, I know not, unless it were to have
some sum of money. So it was, that Fortune was so good to me, after she had
been my secret enemy, that I fell into the hands of an Heluetian, who had a
father that was an old man, and a right honest, who conceiving some good
opinion of me, as well for my countenance, as for some pleasant answers, which
in that age I had given him, took me to himself, with a purpose to make me a
student; and indeed, though his son contraried him what he could possibly,
yet for bare he not from following his former dessigne, and so spared no cost
to cause me to be instructed in all kind of learning, sending me to the
University of Marseilles, in the province of the Romans. So that I may say
with good reason, that I had been lost, if I had not been lost. And though
(according to my Genius) there was nothing more pleasant to me than letters,
yet was it a continual punishment to me, to think, that I knew not from
whence, nor who I was, imagining, that this misfortune never befell any other.
And being in this care, one of my friends advised me, to enquire of some
Oracle, to know the truth. For for my part, I was so young, that I had no more
remembrance than I have now, either of the place whence I was taken, or where I
was borne; and he that gave me this counsel, said, that there was no
likelihoode, but that the heavens, having had such a care of me, as I have
found since I was lost, they would yet show me more favor. This friend knew
so well how to persuade me, that we went both together, and the answer we had
was this:

Thou were borne in the Land where was Neptune,
From whom thou draw'st descent thou shall not know:
Until Siluander die, to such fortune
Thou were from cradle marked: Fate will's it so.
Judge (fair Diane) what satisfaction we had in this answer: for my part,
without longer stay I resolved never to enquire further, since it was impossible
I should know it without dying, and to liu^ ^fterward with much quiet of
spirit, referring my self to the guiding of heaven; and employing my self
only to my studies, wherein I made so good progress, that the old Abariel
(for that was the name of him who brought me up) had a mind to see me before
he dyed, presaging his end almost at hand. Being then come to him, and having
received the most sweet usage that I could desire: one day, when I was alone
with him in his chamber, he spoke to me in this sort, My son, (for as such I
have always loved you, since the rigor of war cast you into my hands) I do
not think you so misunderstanding what I have done for you, that you may make
question of my good will; yet, if the care I have had to instruct your youth,
have not given you sufficient knowledge of it, I would you should take notice
of it, because I desire to do for you. You know that my son Azahyde, who
took you, and brought you to me, has a daughter, whom I love as my self:
and because I determine to pass the few days behind, in quietness and
tranquillity, I have a purpose tomarry you to her, and to give you so good a
part of my wealth, that I may live with you, so long as it pleases God. And
think not, that I have had this purpose on a sudden, for it is long since I
prepared for every thing. In the first place, I was desirous to know what your
humor was, even when you were a child, to judge if you could frame your self
to be with me, for that in such an age there could be but little art, and so
might we see (as naked) all the affections of a soul; and finding you such as
I wished Azahyde to be, I thought good to settle the repose of my last days
upon you, and for that cause I put you to study, knowing well, that there is
nothing makes a soul more capable of reason, than the knowledge of things. And
during your long absence from me, I have determined to marry my young daughter
to you, who (to please me) desires it almost as much as my self. It is true,
she would gladly know, who, and of what place you are.

And to satisfy her, I have enquired of Azahyde many times, in what place he
took you; but he has always told me, that he knew nothing but that it was at
the river of Rosne, of the province of Viennois, and that you were given by one
that brought you two days journey, for exchange of some armors. But it may be,
you can remember better, for you might be about five or six years of age; and
when I asked him whether the clothes which you then wore, might not give some
conjecture of what parents you were descended, he answered no, for that you
were then so young, that hardly could one judge by your habit, of what
condition you were. So that, my son, if your memory do not help you herein,
there is no body can free us of this pain. So the good old Abariel held his
peace, and taking me by the hand, besought me to tell him all that I knew.
Whereto, after all the thanks I could give him, as well for the good opinion
he had of me, as for the nourture he had given me, and for the marriage which
he propounded, I made him answer, that in truth I was so young when I was
taken, that I had no remembrance neither of my parents, nor of my condition.
This is (replied the good old man) somewhat combersome, yet we will not let to
proceed further, provided you like of it, not greatly caring to speak with
Azahyde, but to know your good will. And when I had answered him, that I were
very ungrateful, if I did not wholly obey his commandment, at that instant
causing me to go aside, he sent to seek out his son, and to tell him his
purpose, which before my return he knew of by his daughter; and the fear of
losing the goods which Abariel would give us, made him so much to dislike it,
that when his father spoke to him of it, he so long rejected it, and with such
reasons, that in the end the good old man not being able to get his consent,
told him frankely, Azahide, if you will not give your daughter to whom I will,
I will give my goods to whom you would not; and therefore resolve to agree to
Siluander, or I will choose him to be mine heir. Azahyde, who was very
covetous, and fearing to lose that good, seeing his father in these terms,
came better to himself, and besought him to give him some few days space to
think of it; whereas his father being a good old man, easily condescended,
desiring to do all things with gentleness, and after told me of it: yet he
needed not have done it, for I perceived so much by the eyes and speech of his
son, who began to deal so roughly with me, that I could hardly endure it.
Now during the time that he had taken, he commanded his daughter, who had a
better mind then he, on pain of death (for he was a man of blood and
murder) to make show to the old man, that she was sorry her father would not
satisfy his will, and that she could not help it, but with her disobedience,
that she was ready to marry me secretly, and when it was done, time might work
her fathers content; and this he had in purpose to procure my death. The poor
wench was much enta^gled: for on the one side the ordinary threatenings of her
father, whose mischievous nature she knew too well, egged her on to play this
part; on the other side, the love which from her childhood she bare me, with
held her. So it was, that her tender years (for she had not passed above
half an age) would not let her have resolution enough to deny; and so, al
trembling, she came to use that speech to the good man, who received it with
that confidence, that after he had kissed her forehead twice or thrice, at
last he resolved to put it in practice as she had said, and enjoined me so
peremptorily, that notwithstanding all the doubts I had in it, I durst not
contradict it.

Now the resolution was taken in such sort, that I was to climb through a
window into the chamber, where I must marry her secretly. This Town is seated
on the utmost bounds of the Allobroges, on the side of the Heluecians, and it
is on the banks of the great lake Leman, in such sort, that the waves beat upon
the houses, and then disgorge themselves into Rosne, which passes through the
midst of it. The meaning of Azabyde was, because their lodgings were that
way, to draw me up with a cord, half the height of the wall, and then to let
me fall into the lake, where being drowned, they might never hear more news
of me; because that Rosne with his swiftness, would have carried me far
off, or touching on the hard rocks, I might have been so bruised, that no man
could have known me. And, without doubt, his design had taken effect, for I
was resolved to obey the good Abariel, had it not been, that the day before
this was to be done, the poor wench, that was commanded to show me good
countenance, that I might be the more abused, moved with compassion, and out of
horror to be the cause of my death, could not hold from discovering it to
me, all trembling, saying to me a little after, You see, Siluander, in saving
your life, I procure mine own death, for I know well, Azahyde will never
pardon me; but I had rather dye an innocent, then live guilty of your death.
After I had thanked her, I told her she should not fear the fu^y of Azahyde;
and that I would so provide, that she should have no displeasure; that for her
part, she must only do that which her father had given in charge, and that I
would find a remedy both for her safety and mine own: but above all things,
she must be secret. And then toward night I provided my self of all the money
I could get, without the knowledge of Abariel, and set so good an order to that
I was to do, that the hour being come when I must go to the place appointed,
after I had taken leave of the old man who came with me to the shore, I
mounted into a little bark which he had provided, and then going softly under
the window, I made show to tie up my self, but it was only my clothes filled
up with gravel: and suddenly withdrawing myself aside, to see what would
happen, I heard them fall at once into the lake, where, with the ore, I gently
beat the water, that they might think, when they heard the noise, that it was
I that beat so: but I was quickly compelled to be gone from thence, because
they cast down so many stones, that I could hardly save my self, and soon
after I saw a light set in the window, whereby fearing to be discovered, I hid
my self in the boat, lying all along groueling.

This was the cause, the night being very dark, and my self gotten a pretty
was off, that they could not see me, but thought the boat did float so of it
self. Now when every one was gone from the window, I heard a great noise about
the place where I left Abariel, and as I might judge, me thought I heard his
exclamations, which I took to be occasioned by the noise that he had heard in
the water, fearing I was drowned: so it was, that I resolved never to go to him
more, not that i^ grieved me to serve him in his old days, for the great
obligation that I was tied to him in, but for the ouer-great assurance of the
evil will of Azahyde. I knew well, that if it were not at this brunt, it would
be at another, that he would accomplish his wicked design. So then being come
to the chains which lock the port, I was forced to leave my boat, to go
swimming over to the other side, whither being come with some danger, by reason
of the darkness of the night, I went to that place where I had hid my other
clothes, and whatsoever I had of worth; and taking the way of Agaune, I came by
the point of day to Euians; and I assure you, I was weary: for having gone
fast, I was constrained to rest all that day there, where, by fortune not
being known, I was willing to take counsel, as others did in their most
urgent affairs, of the wise Bellinde, who is mistrisse of the Vestals which
are along the lake; and as I learned since, is the mother of my fair
mistrisse: so it was, that letting her know all my disasters, she consulted
the Oracle, and the next day she told me that the god commanded me not to be
distempered for so great adversities, and that it was necessary, if I would be
gone, to seek our the fountain of the verity of Love, because in that water
was my only remedy, and as soon as I should be there, I might know both my
father and my country. And asking her in what place this fountain was: she
gave me knowledge, that it was in this country of Forests; and then told me
the property and the enchantment, with that courtesy, that I am infinitely yet
bound unto her. From that time I resolved to come hither; and taking my way by
the town of Plancus, it is some month since I came, where the first that I
met with, was Celadon, who at that time was returned from a long voyage, by
whom I understood where this admirable fountain was: but when I should go, I
fell sick, so that I came not out of my chamber for six months together:
and somewhile ^fte^, finding my self strong enough, so that I set my self on
the way, I understood by them there-abouts, that a Magician, by Clidamans
procurement, had put it under the custody of two Lions, and two Unicorns,
which he had enchanted, and that the sorcery might not be undone, but with the
blood and death of two the most faithful Lovers that ever were in this
country. God knows whether this news brought not me sorrow, seeing my self
almost out of hope of that I desired: yet considering this was the Country,
which the heavens had destined for me to know my parents, I thought fit stay
here, and (it may be) these faithful in love may at last be found out; but yet
it is a merchandise so rare, that I dare not have too great an hope. With this
purpose I resolved to clothe my self in shepherds weeds, that I might more
freely live with such good companies which are along the river of Lignon; and
that I might not be idle, I employed all the remnant of my money which I had,
upon cattle, and a little cabin, to which I have since retired.

See, fair Leonide, that which you desired to know of me, and behold my
payment to Phillis for the place which she sold me, which hereafter she shall
not have the boldness to take, since she has given it for so good a price. I
am much delighted (answered Leonide) in hearing you tell your fortune; and I
must tell you, that you ought to hope well of your self, since the gods, by
their Oracles, show themselves to have such care of you: for my part, I pray
them for it with all my heart. And so do not I (comes in Phillis writhing her
self:) for if he were known (it may be) the worth of his father might make
him carry away our mistrisse; it being very certain, that good and alliance
may do more in marriages, then their worth or love. Take heed what you say
(said Siluander) you are so far from wishing me so much hurt, that I hope by
your means, to come to the knowledge I desire. By my means (answered she?) how
can that be? By your means (continued the shepherd:) for since it must be,
that the Lions shall die by the blood of a Lover, and of a faithful beloved,
why may not I think, that I am this Lover, and you the Beloved? Faithful I
am, it is true (answered Phillis) but valiant I am not; so that in well loving
my mistress, I will give place to none; but for my blood and life, talk no more
of it: for what service can I do her when I am dead? I assure you (answered
Diane) that I wish your life of the two, and not your death, and I desire
rather to be in danger my self, then to see you so by my occasion.

While they discoursed in this sort, and as they drew near to the bridge of the
buttresse, they might see sarre off, a man coming apace toward them, and
drawing nearer, was quickly known of Leonide; for it was Paris, the son of
the great Druide Adamas, who being returned from Feurs, and having known that
his Niece was come to seek him, and secing she came not back, he sent his
son to let her know he was returned, and to understand what occasion had
brought her so alone, for that it was not the custom to go without company.
As soon as the Nymph spyed him a far off, she told his name to the fair
shepheard^sses: and they, that they might not be wanting in their ciuility,
when he came near them, saluted him with so great courtesy, that the beauty
and pleasing fashion of Diane gave him that delight, that he stood as almost
ravished, and had it not bin that the welcomming of Leonide diuerted him a
little, the could hardly have hidden this surprise: yet after the first
salutation, and that he had told her what brought him to her, But sister (said
he) (for Adamas would have them call brother and sister) where found you this
fair company? Brother (said she) we have been together two days, and yet I
assure you, we are not weary.

This here (showing him Astrea) is the fair shepherdess, whom you have so
often heard speech of, for it is Astrea; and that there, is Diane, the daughter
of Belinde and Celeon, and the other is Phillis; and that shepherd is the
unknown Siluander, whose virtue is so well known here, that there is none in
this Court but loves him. Undoubtedly (said Paris) my father did not well, to
fear you were ill accompanied; and if he had known, that you had been so
well, he would not have been so disquieted. Gentle Paris said Slunder) a
person that has so much of virtue as this Nymph, can never be ill accompanied.
And yet much less (answered he) when she is among so wise and fair
shepheardesses. And as he spoke this word, he turned him to Diane, who
perceiving her self to be summoned, answered; It is impossible (courteous
Paris) that one can add to a thing that is accomplished. Yet so it is (replied
he) that (in my judgment) I love better to be with her, when you are near,
than when she shall be alone. This is your courtesy (answered she) that you
use these terms, in the behalf of strangers. You cannot (answered Paris) call
your selves strangers to me, but withal, you must term me a stranger to you,
which is a reproach to me, whereof I am much ashamed, because I cannot be freed
from blame, to be neighbor to such beauties, and so great merits, and yet be
almost unknown to them: but, to amend this error, I resolve to do better for
the time to come, and to converse with you, as much as without reason, I have
been removed from you heere^ofore: and in speaking these last words, he
turned toward the Nymph, And you sister, though I be come to seek you (said
he) yet shall you go alone, since it is not far from hence to the house of
Adamas. For, for my part, I will tarry till night with this good company. I
would I might do so too (said she;) but for this time I am constrained to make
an end of my iuorney. Yet am I purposed, so to order my affairs, that I may
live as well with them, as you: for I do not think there is a more happy life
than theirs. With such other like discourse she took her leave of the fair
shepheardesses; and after strait embracements, promised to come again to them
very soon: and so parted, much contented and satisfied with them, so that she
resolved to change the vanities of the Court, to the simplicity of that life:
but that which moved her most, was, that she had a desire to free Celadon out
of the hands of Galathee, and thought that he would presently return into the
Hamlet, where she determined to converse under the shadow of these
shepheardesses.

Thus you see what was the voyage of Leonide, who saw the birth of two great
loves, that of Siluander, under a feigned wager, as we have said, and that of
Paris, as we will speak of, to Diane. For since that day he grew so amorous,
that to be more familiar with them, he forsook the life he used, and attired
himself as a shepherd, and would so be called among them, that so he might
make himself more pleasing to his Mistress; who, for her part, honored him
according to his merit, and as his good will obliged her. But for that, in the
course of our discourse, we are to speak after of it, we will say no more at
this time. Then, returning to their Hamlets, as they drew near the great
meddow, where the most part of the flocks fed ordinarily, they might see come
from far, Tircis, Hylas and Licidas, whereof the two first seemed to disport
in good earnest; for the gesture of his arms, and the rest of the body of
Hylas showed as much: as for Licidas, he was by himself, his hat pulled down,
and his hands behind him; he went looking on his feet, showing well he had
something in his soul that much troubled him: and when they were so near that
they might know them, and that Hylas perceived Phillis among the
shepheardesses; and for that since the former day he began to love her,
leaving Tircis, he came to her, and without saluting the rest of the company,
took her under the arm, and in his accustomed humor (without other show of
words) told her the desire he had to serve her. Phillis, who began to know
him, and was contented to pass the time, said; I know not (Hylas) whence this
will springs, for there is nothing in me that may move it. If you think that
you say (said he) you owe me the greater obligation; and if you do not think
it, you may judge me a man of spirit, that can know what is worthy to be
served, and so you may esteem of me the better. Doubt not (said she)
howsoeuert it be, that I esteem you, and that I receive your love as it
merits; and were it not for any other consideration; yet at least, for that you
are the first that loved me. By fortune, while they were talking, Licidas comes
in, whose jealousy was so high grown, that it ouer-topped his affection; and
for his greater hurt, he came in evil time, so that he might hear the answer
that Hylas made to Phillis, which was thus: I know not (fair shepherdess) if
you will continue as you begin with me: but if you do, you shall be the
truer; for I know well, that Siluander, at least, will help to give you the
lie: and if he will not do it for fear of displeasing you, I assure my
self, that all that were here yesterday, will witness Siluander was your
servant. I know not whether he has left his love under his pillow. Siluander,
that thought not of the love of Licidas, thinking it would be a shame for him
to disprooue Hylas: and besides that, that he should offend Phillis, to say
otherwise before her, answered; Shepherd, you must seek no other witness
than me in this matter (...) and you are not to think that the shepherds of
Lignon can cloth and unclothe themselves so readily of their affections; for
they are gross, and therefore heavy and slow in that they do. But as a
nail, the grosser it is, and the more weight it holds, the harder it is to be
wrested out: so, the tougher and grosser our affections are in us, the longer
they last in our souls: so that if you have seen me seruitour to this fair
shepherdess, you may see me so still, for we change not every time we
sleep. But if this befall you, I say, you that have an hot brain, as well as
a balde head, and a red hair, bewrayes much, you are not to give the same
censure of us. Hylas hearing as his shepherd speak so frankly and so truly to
his humor, thought that either Tyrcis had told him somewhat, or that he must
know it elsewhere: and therefore all astonished; Shepherd (said he) have you
seen me at any time? or where learned you this you speak of me? I never saw
you (said Siluander) but your phisiognomy and your discourse made me judge that
I say. For hardly may a man suspect in another that fault, whereof he is wholly
exempted. Of necessity then (answered Hylas) you cannot be exempted from that
inconstancy which you suspect in me. The suspicion (replied Siluander) grows,
either out of some small likelihood, or of the appearance of that which is not,
but only in imagination, and that a man cannot have of another, without
himself be spotted. But that which I said of you, is not of suspicion, but of
a certainty.

Call you that suspicion, when we hear you say, that you have loved Laonice,
and leaving her for this second, who was here yesterday with her, now you have
left them both for Phillis, whom without doubt you will leave for the first
commer, whose eyes will vouchsafe to look on you? Tircis, who heard them thus
discourse, seeing Hylas stand as overcome, began to speak in this sort r
Hylas, you must no longer hide your self, you are discovered. This shepherd
has clear eyes to see the spots of your inconstancy, you must confess the
truth. For if you fight against it: besides that, at the last, you shall be
counted a liar, you being not able to resist, for that nothing is so strong as
Truth, you shall be feign to show your weakness.

Confess it then freely to be as it is, and to encourage you, I will begin.
Know (gentle shepherd) that it is true, that Hylas is the most inconstant, the
most disloyal, and the greatest traitor to shepheardesses, (to whom he
promises goodwill) that ever was. And so (added Phillis) that he will oblige
them whom he loves not at all. And Me? mistress, (answered Hylas) are you also
against me? will you believe the impostures of these malicious? Do you not see
that Tircis, finding himself bound to Siluander for the judgment he gave in
favor of him, thinks fit to pay him in some sort, by giving you an evil
opinion of me? What does this import, said Phillis to Siluander? What does this
import, said the inconstant? know you not it is harder to take a place
possessed, then that which no man holds? He would say (added Siluander) The
more you love him, the harder it will be for me to acquire your good graces.
But, my friend Hylas, how much are you deceived? so far, that when I see she
daines to cast her eye on you, I shall be assured of her love. For I know her
to be of so good judgment, that she has always knowledge to choose the
better. Then answered Hylas, It may be (glorious shepherd) you think to have
some advantage over me. Mistress, believe him not, for he is of no worth, and
indeed, what man can he be that never had the hardiness to love, nor to serve,
but one only shepherdess, and that so coldly, that you would think he
iested? Whereas I love as many as I see fair, and of them all I have been as
well entertained as I would wish. What service can you hope for of him that is
such a nouice, that he knows not how to begin? But I that have served of
all sorts, of all ages, and of all humors, know of what fashion, and what
ought, and what ought not to please her: and for proof of what I say, suffer
me to question him, if you would know his ignorance. And then turning toward
him, he went on, What is it (Siluander) that ought most to bind a fair
shepherdess to love us? That is (said Siluander) to love none but her. And
what is that (continued Hylas) that may please her most? That is (answered
Siluander) to love her extremely. Now see then (says the inconstant) how
ignorantly amorous is this man: so far is that which he says from truth,
that it ingenders contempt and hatred. For, to love but her alone, gives her
cause to think, that it is want of courage, that he dares not undertake: and
so thinking herself to be beloved for want of another, she will despise such a
lover: Whereas if you love in common, for the small worth of the thing, she
will not think when you come to her, that it is not for that you know not
whither else to go; and this will bind her more to love you, especially, if
you come to particulars, and make it appear to her, that you rely more upon
her: and to persuade her the better, you tell her all that you know of others,
and once in the week, you bring to her all that you have said, and what they
have answered, fitting the encounter as occasion requires, to the end you may
make her the more pleasing: and draw her to cherish your company. This way
(young lover) this way shall you bind her to any love. But to please her you
must on the contrary, fly, as from poison, the extremity of love, because
there is nothing more grievous between two lovers, than this so great
affection: for you that love in this sort, to please your self, labor to be
always near her, to be always talking with her: she cannot cough, but you
must ask her, what she ails; she cannot turn her foot, but you must do the
like. To be short, she is almost constrained to carry you, you press her, and
importune her so. But the mischief is, if she be sick sometimes, and that she
smile not on you, if she speak not to you, and intertaine you not as she was
wont, then you fall to whining, and to tears; but such plaints (I say) as
wherewith you so fill her ears, that to free her self of these importunities,
she is forced to restrain her self; and sometimes when she would be alone,
and lock up her self for a time to her own thoughts, she must be compelled
to come see you, to entertayne you, and tell you a thousand tales to content
you.

Think you this to be a good mean, to have her love you? You must do in
love, as in other things, the mediocrity is only commendable, so that you love
after an indifferent fashion, to avoid all those troublesome importunities:
neither yet is this sufficient for to please her: it is not enough not to
displease, but you must have some allurements which may be lovely; and that is,
to be pleasant, cheerful, to be always ready to tell a merry tale; and above
all, to be never silent before her. Thus, Siluander, must be bind a
shepherdess to love us, and so gain her good Graces. Now see, mistrisse, if
I may not go for a master, and what reckoning you are to make of my affection.
She would have answered, but Siluander interrupted her, beseeching her to
suffer him to speak. And then he questioned Hylas in this sort: What is it
(shepherd) that you most desire, when you love? To be beloved (answered
Hylas.) But (replied Siluander) when you are beloved, what do you wish for most
in this love? That the person whom I love (said Hylas) make more of me then of
any other; that she trust me, and endeavor to please me. Is it possible then
(inferrs Siluander) that to preserve life, you take poison? how will you have
her trust you, when you will not be faithful? But (said the shepherd) she
shall not know that. And see you not (answered Siluander) that you will do that
with treason, which you should do with sincerity? If she know not that you
love another, she will think you faithful, and so this dissembling may profit
you; but judge if dissembling may do you as much good as truth.

You talk of contempt and despite; and there is nothing that soone^r brings
them both in a generous spirit, than to think that he, whom now I see before
me on his knees, is weary with doing so before a score that may not compare
with me: that mouth, with which he kisses my hand, is dried up with the kisses
it gives to the first hand it meets; and those eyes, with which he seems to
commit idolatry to my face, are yet sparkling with the love of all those that
have the name of woman: and what have I to do with a thing so common? And why
should I make much of him, when he will do nothing more for me, then for the
first that vouchsafes to look on him? When he talks to me, he thinks it is to
such or such an one; and the words that he uses, he learned at the school of
such an one, or, he comes to study here, that he may go utter it there. God
knows how soon contempt and despite may make her conceive this thought: and so
for the second point, that to make himself beloved, he must love but a
little; he must be merry and pleasant. For, to be iocund and always laughing,
is fit for a Iester, and one of such a mould. But for a lover, that is, for
another our self, O Hylas, he must have other conditions. You say, that in
all things mediocrity only is good. That is it (shepherd) that has no part
of the extreme of the mean or defect, as faythfulnesse. For, he that is but a
little faithful, is not faithful at all; and he that is, is in the extreme,
that is to say, there can be none greater than other in faythfulnesse; so it is
of valiancy, and so it is of love: for he that can measure it, or that can
imagine any other greater than his own, loves not: So you see, Hylas, that
when you command to love in a mean, you set down a thing impossible; and
when you do so, you do like unto the melancholique fools, that think they
know all Sciences, and yet know nothing, when you have an opinion you love, but
indeed you love not.

But be it so, that one may love a little: and know you not, that Love has no
other harvest but love, and all that it sows, is but only to reap that
fruit? And how would you have her whom you love but a little, love you a great
deal, since it must fall out, that what she gayneth, she shall lose a part of
that which she sows in so ungrateful ground? She shall never know (says
Hylas) that I love so. See (said Siluander) the same treason which I reproached
you with before. And imagine you, whereas you say, the effects of an extreme
love, are the importunities which you have reckoned, that if you render them
not, she will not easily conjecture the feebleness of your love. O Hylas, how
little you know in love!

These effects which the extremity of Love brings forth, and which you call
importunities, are such (it may be) to those that, like you, know not to love,
and never approached near unto that god. Who has lost his sight, but they
that are thoroughly touched, they which do love in earnest, and know what are the
duties, and what the sacrifices which they offer at the Altars of Love? So
far are they from giving to such effects the name of importunities, that they
call them felicities and perfect contentments. Know you well, that to love, is
to die in himself, to revive in another, that it is not to love himself, but
so much as he is pleasing to the beloved; and shortly, it is to transform
himself entirely (if it may be) into her. And can you imagine, that one that
loves in this sort, can be combred with the presence of him whom she loves, and
that the knowledge which she has to be truly loved, is not a thing so
delightful, that all others in respect of it, cannot so much as be tasted?

And if you had at any time proved, that it is thus to love, as I say, you
would never think that he which thus loves, could do nothing but displease,
when that should not be but only for this, that whatsoever is marked with this
character of Love, cannot be displeasing; and your self will confess, that it
is so desirous to please, that if it commit a fault, even that error pleases,
seeing with what intent it is done; whereas the desire to be pleasing, gives
such force to a true love, that though he render himself not so to all the
world, yet is he never failing to her whom he loves.

Thence it comes, that many which are not judged in general more lovely then
others, yet are beloved and esteemed by some one. Now you see, Hylas, if you be
not very ignorant, that till now you believed you loved, and yet you did but
abuse the name of Love, and abuse them whom you thought you loved. How (said
Hylas) did I never yet love? What have I then done with Carlis, Amarauthe,
Laonice, and so many others? Know you not (said Silander) that in all sorts of
Arts, there be some that do right, and others wrong? Love is of that kind:
for one may love rightly, as my self, and wrongfully, as you; and so one may
call me a master, and you a marrer of Love. At these last words there were none
could hold from laughter, but Licidas, who hearing this discourse, could not
but more strengthen himself thereby in his jealousy, which Phillis greatly
regarded not, thinking she had given proofs great enough of her love; so that
in reason, he was not to doubt it; but ignorance knows not that jealousy in
Love is Iuie, that draws to it self the nourishment which should go to the
good branches, and good fruit; and the greater it is, the more it shows the
fertility of the place, and the strength of the plant. Paris, that admired the
great spirit of Siluander, knew not what to judge of him, and thought, that if
he had been bred among civil folk, he had been without parallel, since
living among shepherds, he was such, that he knew none more gentle. That was
the cause that he resolved to make friendship with him, more freely to enjoy
his company. And to procure the^ to hold on their disputation, he turned to
Hylas, and said, that he must confess he had taken the worse part, since he
stood so long mute. He need not be astonished for that (said Diane) since there
is not so violent a judge as the conscience; Hylas knows well, he argues
against the truth, and it is only to flatter his fault. And though Diane held
on this discourse some while, yet Hylas answered not a word, being busy in
beholding Phillis, who when she was near Licidas, entertained him coursely
enough: and because Astrea would not have him ouer-heare what she said to him,
she diverse times interrupted him, until at last she constrained him to say, If
Phillis be so importuned, I will not love at all. Truly shepherd, said she,
(expressly to hinder him from harkening) if you be as ungracious to her, as
uncivil to us, she will make no great account of you. And for that Phillis,
without taking heed to this dispute, held on her discourse, Diane said to her,
What, Phillis, do you thus show the duty you owe me? Will you leave me then
to entertain a shepherd? Whereat Phillis surprised, answered, I would not,
mistrisse, this error should displease you, for I was of opinion, that this
goodly discourse of gentle Hylas, would have kept you from heeding me, who in
the mean time was giving order to an affair that this shepherd spoke of to
me; and indeed she lied not, for she was much busied for the coldness she
^ound in him. It were good then Phillis (said Diane with the words of a true
mistrisse) you think to pay all your faults with excuses: but remember that
all these defects are but small proofs of your little love, and that in time
and place I shall remember in what fashion you serve me. Hylas had taken
Phillis by the waste, and not knowing the wager of Siluander and her, was
amazed to hear Diane speak so: therefore seeing her ready to begin her
excuse, he prevented her, saying, Who would say, fair mistrisse, that this
glorious shepherdess would handle you thus coursely? will you yield to her in
any thing? Commit not this fault, I beseech you: for though she be fair, yet
have you beauty enough, to make you a part, and which (it may be) gives no
place to hers. Ah! Hylas (said Phillis) if you knew against whom you speak,
you would rather choose to be mute the rest of your life, then to be provided
of a word that might displease this fair shepherdess, who in the twinkling
of an eye, may (if you love) make you the most unhappy m^n that ever loved. On
me, said the shepherd, she may raise or cast down, open or shut her eyes: but
my misfortune, no more then my happiness shall never depend^, neither of her
eyes nor of her whole face, and yet I love you and will love you. If you love
me (added Phillis) and I have any power over you, she has much more, for I
may be moved either by your love, or by your services, not to use you hardly:
but this shepherdess being neither loved nor served of you, will never have
pity.

And what need have I (said Hilas) of her pity? Yes certainly (replied
Phillis) you want her mercy: for I will nothing but what she wills, and can do
nothing but what she commands: for behold, the Mistress I love, whom I serve,
and whom I adore, so that she is all my love, all my service, and all my
devotion. Now fee, Hylas, whom you have offended, and what pardon you are to
sue for. Then the shepherd casting himself at the feet of Diane, all
astonished, after he had a little be held her, said; Mine own fair Mistress, if
he that loves, may behold any other thing then the subject beloved, I might
well have seen in some sort, that every one was to honor and do reverence to
your merit; but since I have mine eyes closed against al other things, but my
Phillis, you should show too great cruelry, if you pardon not the fault which I
confess, and for which ^^ry you mercy. Phillis that was sorry to be thus
p^stred with this man, that she might talk with Lieidas, as he had desired,
made haste to answer him before Diane, and to tell him that Diane would not
pardon him, but with condition, that he should tell them the suites and
adventures which he had had since he began to love; for it was impossible
but the discourse would be very pleasing; since he had served in so many sorts,
the accidents must needs be accordingly.

Truly Phillis (said Diane) you are a great diuiner: for I had a purpose never
to pardon him, but with that condition: and therefore, Hylas, resolve to do it.
How (said the shepherd?) will you constrain me to tell my life before my
Mistress? and what opinion will she have of me, when she shall hear say that
I have loved above an hundred? that to some I have bid farewell before I left
them, and left others, before I said any thing to them? when she shall know
that at one and the same time I was divided among many, what will she think of
me? Nothing worse then she now thinks (said Siluander:) for she will then but
judge you inconstant, as she does already. It is true (said Phillis) but that
you may not enter into this doubt, I have business elsewhere, whither Astrea
shall go with me, if she please, and in the mean time you shall obey Diane's
commandment. At this word she took Astrea by the arm, and withdrew to the
side of the wood where Licidas was even now gone: and because Siluander had
ouerheard her answer to Licidas, he followed afar off, to see what his
meaning was: whereto the evening somewhat served his turn that he might not be
seen, for it waxed late; besides that, he went behind the bushes hiding
himself so, that he followed them at pleasure unseen, and came so fitly,
that he heard what Astrea said to her: what humor is this of Licidas, to desire
to speak with you at this hour, and in this place, having so many other
commodities that I know not what he means to choose out so unfit a time? I
know not, said Phillis: I have found him very sad this evening, and I cannot
tell what has befalne him; but he has so coniured me to come hithor, that I
cannot delay it. I beseech you to walk ^here-about while we are together, for
above al, he desires I should be alone. I will do (answered Astrea) what
pleases you: but take heed it be not evil thought of, to see you talk with
him at so unfit hours, especially being alone in this dark place. It is for
that cause (answered Phillis) that I have put you to the pain to come hither;
and therefore, I pray you to walk so near us, that if any one come on us, he
may think that we three are together. While they talked thus, Diane and Paris
pre^ssed Hylas to tell them his life, to satisfy the commandment of his
Mistress; and though he made much difficulty, yet at last he began in this sort.

The History of Hylas.
YOu will then, mine own fair Mistress, and ge^ntle Paris, that I tell you the
adventures befalne me, since I began to love. Think not that my refusal was,
for that I knew not what to say: for I have loved too much to want matter, but
rather for that I have too little day to have the leisure not to tell you all
(that would be too long) but not to begin alone. Yet since for obedience I must
satisfy your will, I pray you harken to me: while I put you in mind, that all
things are subject to some superior power, which almost enforces us to
actions, which it pleases us, and that whereto mine enclines so violently, is
love, for otherwise, it may be you would wonder to see me so carried, that there
is no chain either of duty or obligation, that may withhold me. And I freely
confess, that if every one must have some inclination of nature, mine is of
inconstancy, for which I am not to be blamed, since the heavens ordain me
so. Have this consideration before your eyes, while you hear the discourse
which I am to make.

Among the principal Countries, that the Rosne in his swift course visits,
after it has received Arar, Isere, Durance, and other rivers, he comes dashing
upon the ancient walls of the town of Arles, chief of that country, and the
most peopled and richest of the Roman province. Near this fair town, there
encamped a great while since, as I heard our Druides tell, a great Captain,
named Cains Marins, before the notable victory which he got against the
Cimbres, Cimmerieux, and Celtoseites, at the foot of the Alps, who being
divided by the deep Scitique Ocean, with their wives and children, purposing
to sack Rome, were so overthrown by this great captain, that there remained
not one alive: and if the Roman arms had spared any one, the barbarous fury
that was in their courage, made them turn their own hands against themselves,
and in rage kill themselves, that they might not live being vanquished. Now the
Roman army, to assure their allies and friends of their common wealth, coming
to encampe, as I told you, near that town, and according to the custom of
that wary nation, compassing their camp with trenches, it fell out that being
nere to Rosne this river which is most violent, and which threatens and beats
incessantly his banks, by little and little in time met with these large and
deep ditches, and with maine strength entering into the channel which he found
already made; runs with such fury, that makes the ditches stretch out to the
sea, where he goes discharging himself by this means, two ways: for the
ancient course has always followed his ordinary way, and this new one is
grown so great, that it equals the greatest rivers, making between both a
most delectable and forcible Island, and because they were the trenches of Cains
Marins, the people by corruption of the word, call it Carmage, of his name: and
since, for that the place is environed with these two arms of Rosne, and the
midland sea they call it the Isle of Camarge. I would not have said so much
about the original of this place, had it not been that it was the country of
my nativity, and where they, of whom I am descended, have long time dwelt: for
by reason of the fertility of the place, and that it is as it were cut out from
the rest of the land, there is a number of shepherds that are withdrawn
thither, which for the abundance of pasturage, they call Pasture, and my
fathers have always been held in some consideration among the principal, were
it for that they were thought good and virtuous men, were it for that they had
honestly, and after their condition acquired the goods of fortune; so they left
me sufficiently provided: for, when they died, which was (without doubt) too
soon for me, for my father died the day that I was borne, and my mother bred
me up with all manner of delicateness, an only child, or rather a marred
child, endured but till I was twelve years of age. Judge what master of an
house I was like to prove: among other imperfectious of youth, I could not
avoid that of presumption, supposing there was not a shepherd in all Camarge
which ought not respect me. But when I was a little advanced, and that Love
began to mingle with this presumption, me thought all the shepheardesses were
in love with me, and that there was not one which received not my love with
obligation. And that which fortified me in this opinion, was that a fair and
wise shepherdess my neighbor, called Carlis, made me all the honest shows,
which neighborhood might challenge. I was so young as yet, that none of the
incommodities which love uses to bring to the lover, by his violent transports,
could reach me, that I felt nothing but sweetness, and on that subject, I
remember, that some time I went singing these verses.

A SONNET On the sweetness of Love.
When speaks my shepherdess, or rather when she sings,
Or with her eyes sweets gla^ce to mine she daz'ling brings,
Love seems to talk in her, and with her gracious sounds
Rauishes us by th^^are, with charms our sight confounds.
Not as you see him, when he cruelly torments
The hearts that are possessed with passions violent,
But then when like a child full wantonly he moves,
Plays on his mothers lap, and forms a thousand loves.
Nor when he sports himself with those the Paphean maids,
Nor when on graces lap himself to rest he laid,
You could see him so pleased as near my shepherdess.
But when he burteth so, may we him Love confess?
He is so when he plays, and makes his place of rest,
In Carlis bosom sweet, as on his mothers breast.
Though the age wherein I was, suffered me not to know that it was Love, yet
forbear I not to delight my self in the company of that shepherdess, and to
use those devices wherewith I understood, that they whom they call Lovers,
served their turn; so that the long continuance made many think, that I knew
more then my age would allow of. And that was the cause, that when I was come
to 18. or 19. years, I found my self engaged to serve her. But for that my
humor was not to care much for this vainglory, which the most part of them
which trade in Love, will arrogate to themselves, that is to be esteemed
constant: the good countenance of Carlis tied me more then this imaginary
duty. From thence it came, that one of my greatest friends took occasion to
divert me from her: his name was Hermante; and without any heed of mine, was
become so amorous of Carlis, that he took no contentment but to be near her.
I, who was young, never perceived this new affection, as I had but two little
craft to find it, since the subtillest in that mystery are scarce able to do
it. He was older then I, and by consequence wiser; so that he knew so well to
dissemble, that I do not think that any at that time suspected him. But that
which brought him most discommodity, was, that the parents of this
shepherdess desired there might be a marriage between her and me, for that
they were of opinion, that it would be for her advantage. Whereof Hermante
being advertised, especially knowing by the speech of the shepherdess, that
indeed she loved me, he thought she would withdraw from me, if I began to
withdraw from her. He well found out (as I told you) that I would change as
soon as occasion was offered. And after he had considered with himself, how
he might begin this design, he thought, that working in me an opinion of my
greater worth, he might ma^^me neglect, for uncertainty, that which was most
assured to me. He brought it about very easily: for besides that I believed
him as my friend, this good could not be very dear unto me, which befell me
without pain, and made me believe I might compass any thing of the best, if I
would bestow the study. He on the other side knew so well to persuade me, that
I held for certain, that there was not a shepherdess in all Carmage, that
would not more willingly entertain me, then I would make choice of her.
Assured by this belief, I thrust Carlis wholly out of my soul, after I had
made election of another, whom I judged the worthier: and, without doubt, I
deceived not my self, for she had beauty enough to win love, and wisdom to
carry it: her name was Stilliane, esteemed among the fairest and wisest of all
the Island, otherwise lofty, and such an one, as I must have to put me out of
the error wherein I was.

And see what my presumption was! Because she was served by many, and they all
lost their time, I began to woo her the more willingly, that the world might
take better knowledge of my merit. Carlis, which truly loved me, was astonished
at this change, not knowing what cause I might have, but she must needs suffer
it. She did much to recall me, and at the first used all forts of allurements
which she could think of: which I took no heed of to return, I was in the
deep seas, there was no mean to come back to land so readily. But if she
took displeasure at this separation, she was fully revenged on him that was
the cause of the evil: for conceiting to my self, that as soon as I assured
Stilliane of my love, she would more willingly give her self to me; at the
first time I met her, to talk within an assembly which was purposely made;
dancing with her, I said, Fair shepherdess, I know not what your force is,
nor with what charms your eyes furnish themselves; so it is, that Hylas sees
himself now so much become your servant, that no man can be more. She
thought I mocked her, knowing well the love that I had borne to Carlis, which
made her answer smilingly, These discourses, are they of those that you learn
in the school of fair Carlis? I would have answered, when acording to the
order of the dance, there were that separated us, and I could not come near
her afterward, howsoever I labored it: so that I was constrained to stay
until the assembly brake up. And seeing her go with the foremost, to withdraw
themselves, I advanced my self, and took her by the arm. She at the first
began to smile, and after said, Is it upon resolution, Hylas, or
commandment, that this night you have enterprized thus on me? Why (answered I)
make you this demand? Because (said she) I see so small likelihood of reason,
in that you do that I can not suspect, but from those two occasions. It is,
said I, for them both; for I am resolved never to love but the fair Stilliane,
and your beauty commands me to love none other. I believe (answered she) that
you think not that you speak to me, or that you know me not; and, that you
may no longer deceive your self; know that I am not Carlis, and that I call my
self Stilliane. I must be much deceived (answered I) to take you instead of
Carlis; for she is too imperfect, to be taken for you, or you for her. And I
know too well, for my liberty, that you are Stilliane, and it were more for my
rest that I knew less. We were come as far as her lodging, and yet could I
not find, whether she liked of it or no. The next morning, it was no sooner
day, but I went to seek out Hermante, to tell him what befell me. In the
evening I found him yet in his bed. And seeing me somewhat moved: How now, fayd
he! what news? Is the victory obtained without combat? Ah my friend (answered
I) I have found out one I may talk to; she disdaines me, she mockes me, she
sends me at every word to Carlis: to be short, she uses me like a Mistress. He
could not hold from laughter, when he had heard all the discourse at length,
for he expected no less. But knowing well my changing humor, he feared I
would go back to Carlis, and that she would entertain me, which was the
cause that he answered me: Did you hope for less from he^? Would you think
her worthy your love, if not yet knowing in truth, that you love her, she
should give her self to you? How may she give credit to a few words which you
have used, having heretofore heard so much, or that you swear the contrary to
Carlis?

Undoubtedly, it were a very easy conquest, that she should show herself
vanquished for so small a fight. But (said I) before I am beloved of her, if it
be needful that I tell her, what I have done to Carlis, when should this be by
your advice? Truly (answered Hermante) you little know what belongs to Love:
you must learn, Hylas, that when one says to a shepherdess, I love you,
especially when they make some demonstration, she does not so easily believe
it; for that it is the custom of shepherds well bred, to have it of courtesy,
and it seems their Sex, for the weakness of it, binds men to serve and
honor them. And on the contrary, upon the least show of mislike which one
gives them, they quickly think they are hated; because loves are natural, but
enmities are not so: and they that go against nature, it must be on a resolute
design: whereas they that follow that way, seem to do by custom. Therefore,
Hylas, I tell you, that you shall more easily make Carlis believe you hate her,
upon the least evil will you show her, then you can persuade Stilliane you
love her. And because you may see she has on her heart that you love Carlis,
believe me, that that which you have to do of most necessity, is to give her
knowledge that you no more love this Carlis: which you must do by some action,
known not only to Carlis, but to Stilliane, and many others. To be short
(fair shepherdess) he knew so well to turn me on every side, that at last I
writ to the poor Carlis this letter:

The Letter of Hylas to Carlis.
I Write not at this bout (Carlis) to tell you that I love you, for you have
believed it but too well; but to assure you that I love you no more; I know
certainly you will be amazed at this declaration, since you have always loved
me almost beyond my desire. But that which draws me from you, is, I must
confess, your misfortune, that will no longer continue to you the pleasure of
our amity, or rather, my good fortune, which will have me no longer stay at so
poor a thing. And to the end you may not complain of me, I bid you farewell,
and give you leave to take it as you think good: for you are to have no more
hope in me.


By fortune, when she received this Letter, she was in very good company; and
Stilliane her self was there, which so much misliked this action, that there
was none in all that troop that blamed me more. Which Carlis understanding, I
pray you, said she to her, bind me for ever, and make him an answer. For my
part (said Stilliane) I shall be a good Secretary; and then taking paper and ink
in the presence of all the rest, wrote thus to me in the name of Carlis.

The answer of Carlis to Hylas.
HYlas, thy arrogance has been such, that thou art persuaded thou art beloved
of me; and the knowledge which I have of thy humor, and my will, which have
always iarred, are such that they have kept me from loving thee, so that all
the love which I have borne thee, has been only in thy opinion, and such was
my unhappiness, and thy good fortune: and herein there is nothing of
certainty, but that indeed when thou thoughtst thou were beloved of me, thou
were deceived. I swear unto thee, Hylas, by all the merits which thou think
thou have, and which are not in thee, which are a greater number than those
that disable me from being worthy of thee:

The advantage which I pretend in all this, is to be exempted hereafter from
thy importunities, and not to be utterly unthankful for the pleasure thou
have done me in this; I cannot wish better for thee, nor for my self, but that
the heavens would make thee always hold on this resolution to my contentment,
as they have given thee the will to reject me for my importunities. In the
mean time, live content; and if thou have as much as I, being freed from so
combersome a burden, believe me, Hylas, it shall not be small.


I must not lie: the reading of this letter touched me a little, for I knew
well in my conscience, I had done wrong to this shepherdess; but the new
affection which Stilliane had bred in me, suffered me not to stay long; and at
last, howsoever it was, I cast the fault on her. For, said I, in my self, If
she be not so fair nor so lovely as Stilliane, is it I that am guilty? Let
her complain to them which have made her of less perfection: And for my part,
what can I contribute, but to be sorry, and bewail with her her poverty? But
this ought not to hinder me from adoring and desiring the riches of another.
With such reasons I endeavored to chase from me the compassion which Love had
made in me. And thinking I had no more to do than to receive Stilliane, who by
this time, me thought, was wholly mine; I desired Hermante to carry to her a
letter in my behalf: and withal, I let him see the Letter I writ to Carlis,
that she should no more doubt her. He that truly was my friend in every point
that concerned Carlis, made not dainty; and taking a fit time, when she was
alone in her lodging, as he pre^ented to her my Letters, he said smiling to
her: Fair Stilliano, if the fire burn the fool that comes too near it; if
the Sun dazzle the blind that dares look full on it; and if the sword give
death to him that receives it into his heart: you must not think it strange,
if the miserable Hylas coming too near you, is burned; if daring to behold
you, he be dazzled; and, if receiving the faral stroke of your eyes, he feel
the mortal wound in his heart. He would have gone on, but she all impacient
interrupted him: Cease, Hermante, you labor in vain, neither Hylas has worth
enough, nor you persuasion sufficient, to give me the will to change my
contentment for his: Nor wish I my self so much evil, nor so much good to
Hylas, that I will consent to mine own unhappiness, by believing your words.
It suffices me, Hermante, that the humor of Hylas is known to me at another
cost, without mine own trial: And it should be enough to you, that Carlis is
weakly deceived, though you serve not as an instrument for the ruin of some
other. If you love Hylas, I love Stillaine much more; and if you will give him
the counsel of a friend, counsel him as I counsel her, that is, that she
never love Hylas: say to him likewise, that he never love Stilliane. And if he
will not believe you, assure your self, to his confusion, he shall employ his
time in vain: and for the letter which you present me, I will make no
difficulty to take it, having so good defenses against his weapons, that I
fear not a whit the blows. At this word unfolding my letter, she read it
aloude, it was at last but an assurance of my affection by the Conge which I
had given to Carlis for her sake, and a right humble supplication, that she
would be pleased to love me. She laughed, after she had read it; and turning to
Hermante, asked him if he were willing she should make an answer. And he
answering that he desired it passionatly, she willed him to have a little
patience, and she would go write. It was thus:

The answer of Stilliane to Hylas.
HYlas, see how weakly founded your dessignes are, you would that in
consideration of Carlis, I should love you; and there is nothing that pronokes
me more to hate you, than the memory which I have of Carlis. You say, you do
love me. If a more credible person than you should tell me so, it may be I
might believe him: for I know well I deserve it. But I that never lied, assure
you, that I love you not at all, and therefore doubt not of it: so should I
seem to have small judgment, to love an humor so contemptible. If you find
these words somewhat t^o rude, remember, Hylas, I am constrained, to the end
you may not persuade your self, that you are beloved of me. Carlis is witness
to me of the condition of Hylas, and Hylas shall be of mine, if at least he will
at any time say true. If this answer please you, give thanks to the prayer of
Hermante: if it displease, remember, you accuse none but your self.


Hermante had not seen this Letter, when he delivered it me, and yet he had an
opinion there was much coldness in it, yet did not he think she should have
made it so strange, neither was he so much astonished as my self: for I stood
like a man bereaved of his wits, letting the Letter fall on the ground; and
after, being come to my self, I pulled down my hat over mine ears, cast mine
eyes down on the earth, crossed mine arms over my breast, and a great pace,
without speaking, began to walk about the chamber. Hermante stood immovable
in the midst, not so much as casting his eyes toward me. We stayed some time
in this manner, not speaking; at last, in an instant striking one hand against
the other, and making a leap in the midst of the chamber: At her peril, said
I aloude: let her seek who will love her, that she may know if there want in
Carmaine shepheardesses more fair than she; and who will be well pleased that
Hylas would serve them? And then turning to him; O what a fool is Stilliane,
said I, if she think I will love by force? and I shall have but little
courage, if I ever trouble my self for her: and why thinks she her self
better than another? It is true; she deserves one should suffer some pain for
her. I assure my self, Hermante, she resolved it while you talked with her;
and that could not be, without making at least her eyes narrow, without biting
her lip, and without rubbing one hand on another, to make them white. I scoff
at her fancies, and her self too, if she think I take more care for her, than
I do for the greatest stranger in Gaul. She knows not how to reproach me but
with my Carlis. True it is I love her, and in despite of her, I will love her
still; and I make no question, but she shall soon enough find her want of
wisdom, but she must never hope that Hylas can love her. I spoke such like
words: at which I saw Hermante change color; but I was then ignorant of the
cause: since, I have judged it was for the fear he had, that I might come
again into the good graces of his Mistress. Yet made he no other show, but that
he strained himself to laugh, and told me it would make them much amazed,
when they should see that change, if I took that resolution, as readily would
I execute it: and in that disseine I went to find out Carlis, of whom I asked
a thousand pardons for the Letter which I had written to her, assuring her,
that it was not want, but transport of affection. She that was angry with me,
as one may well think, after she had heard me quietly, at last, answered me
thus: Hylas, if the assurances you make to me of your good will be true, I am
satisfied; if they be false, think not that ever you can remove the amity
which for ever you have broken, for your humor is very dangerous. She would
have said on, when Stilliane, to show her the Letter I had written to her,
coming to visit her, interrupted us, when she saw me by Carlis. Wake I, or
dream I, (said she) all astonished? Is this Hylas that I see, or is it some
fancy? Carlis well pleased with this meeting, It is Hylas indeed (companion)
said she, deceive not your self: and if it please you to come near, you shall
hear the sweet words, with which he cries me mercy; and how he vnsayes all
that which he had written to me, submitting himself to such punishment as
shall please me. His chasticement (answered Stilliane) ought to be no other
than to make him continue the affection he bears me. To you (said Carlis?) so
far is it, that he swear when you entered in, that he loved none but me.
And since when (added Stilliane?) I know well, at the least, that I have a good
writing that Hermante an hour since brought me in his behalf: and, that you
may not doubt of that I say; read this paper, and you shall see if I lie. O
God, what became of me at these words? I swear unto you (fair shepherdess)
that I was not able to open my mouth for my defense. And that which ruined me
for ever, was, that by mis-hap many other shepheardesses came in at the same
time, to whom they told this tale, so much to my disadvantage, that I could not
possibly tarry there any longer, but without speaking a word unto them, I came
to tell Hermante my misaduenture, who had like to have dyed with laughter, as
indeed the matter deserved. This brute so spread over all Carmague, that I
durst not talk to any one shepherdess, that cast it not in my teeth, whereat
I conceived such shame, that I resolved to go out of the I Will for some time.
You may see, if when I was young, I took such thought to be called inconstant,
I ought not at this hour to give back a step. See what it is (said Paris) one
must be an apprentice before he be a master. It is true (answered Hylas) and
the worst is, we must often pay for our apprentiship. But to come to our
discourse, being no longer able to endure the ordinary war which every one
made on me, the most secretly I could possibly, I gave order for my business,
and referred the whole care to Hermante; and after I put my self into a great
vessel that lanched out with many others. I had then no other purpose, but to
travel and pass away the time, grieuing no more for Carlis nor Stilliane,
than if I had never seen them: for, I had so lost their remembrance, when I
lost their sight, that I had not the least sorrow. But see how hard it is to
cross the natural disposition! I had no sooner set my foot into the Bark,
but I saw a new subject of Love.

There was among many other passengers, an old woman which went to Lions, to
render her vows in the Temple of Venus, which she had made for her son, and
carried with her her daughter in law for the same cause; and who with good
cause might bear the name of fair, for she was no less then Stilliane, and
much more then Carlis: her name was Aymee, and could not reach above 18. or 20.
years, and though she was of Carmague, yet she knew me not, because her
husband being ielous (as ordinarily old men are, that have young and fair
wives) and her mother in law suspicious, held her so short, that she never came
into any assembly. At the instant that I saw her, she pleased me, and what
purpose soever I had to the contrary, I must love her; but I then foresaw well,
I should find some pain, being to deceive the stepmother, and the daughter in
law. Yet not to yield to the difficulty, I resolved to employ all my wits; and
iudgeing that I was to begin my enterprise by the mother (for she kept me
from coming near my enemy) I thought nothing fitter then to make my self
known to her: and that could not be, for that being of one place, no ancient
amity of our family, or some former alliance, would make easy the mean to
grow familiar with her; but the occasion afterward taught me what I had to
do; I was not deceived in this opinion: for as soon as I told her who I was,
and that I had fained some bad reason to cloak that I went about, which she
took for good, and that I had assured her, that that which made me discover
my self to her, was but to desire her freely to make use of me. My son
(answered she) I do not wonder that you should show such good will toward me,
for your father loved me so well, that you should much degenerate, if you had
not some sparks of that affection. Ah my child, thou art the son of an
honest, and the most loving man that was in all Carmague: and speaking these
words, she took me by the head, and holding me to her breast, and sometimes
kissing my forehead; and her kisses made me remember the harths that yet
retain a gentle heat after the fire is out: for my father should have married
her, and it may be, he had done her too much service for her reputation, as I
understood afterward: but I, that little cared for such kindnesses, but as they
might be profitable for my purpose, fayning to receive them with much
obligation, thanked her for the love she had borne my father, beseeching her to
turn that good will toward the son; and that since the heavens had made me
heir to the rest of his goods, she would not dis-inherrit me of that which I
esteemed most of, which was, the honor of her good graces; and that for my
part, I would succeed in the service which my father had vowed to her, as to
the best of all his fortunes. To be short (fair shepherdess) I knew how to
flatter my old woman; so that she loved nothing more then me: and contrary to
her custom, to gratify me, she commanded her daughter in law to love me. Oh
how well had she been advised, if she had followed her counsel! but I never
found any thing so cold in all her actions: so that though I were with her all
the day, yet had I not the hardiness to make my purpose appear by my words,
till we came near to Auignion; for Stilliane had made me lose much of that
opinion which I had of my self. But besides this, she was always at the feet
of the old woman, who entertained me with the times passed. It fell out, that
this company with which we went, as I have told you, and many merchants
assembled together, made a fair, to traffic in the Island near Auignion; and
for as much as we that were not used to such voyages, found our selves benumbed
with sitting so long, while the boatemen were about their business, we set
foot on land to walk about; and among others, the mother of Aymee was of the
company. As soon as my shepherdess was in the I Will, she began to run along
the river, and to play with the other wenches which were come forth of the
boat of that company, and I thrust my self among them, to have the mean to
take time for my purpose, while the old woman was walking with other women of
her age. And by hap Aymee being somewhat separated from her companions,
gathering flowers that grew by the waters side, I advanced my self, and took
her by the arm: and after we had gone some while without speech, at last, as
coming from a sound sleep, I said unto her, I should be ashamed (fair
shepherdess) to be so long mute so near you, having so good cause to speak
to you, if I had not more to hold my peace, and if my silence did not proceed
from thence, whence my words should arise. I know not, Hylas, said she, what
cause you have to hold your peace, nor what you may have to speak; and less,
what words or silences you mean. Ah, fair shepherdess (said I) the
affection which consumes me with a secret fire, gives me such occasion to show
my hurt, that hardly can I hold my peace; and on the other side, that affection
makes me fear so to offend her whom I love, in declaring it to her, that I
dare not speak: so that the affection which ought to put words into my mouth,
is that which denies me them when I am near you. Me, said she, presently?
Think you well, Hylas, of what you say? Yes: of you (replied I) and believe you
not, but I have well thought of what I say, before I durst utter it. If I
thought these words were true, I will speak to you in another sort. If you
doubt (said I) that these words be true, cast your eyes on your perfection, and
you shall be fully assured. And then with a thousand oaths, I told her all
that I had in my heart. She without being moved, answered me very coldly,
Hylas, accuse not that which is in me, for your own follies: for I know well
to remedy it, so that you shall have no cause: as for the rest, since the love
which my mother bears you, nor the condition wherein I am, cannot turn you
from your bad intent, believe that, that which duty cannot work in you, it
shall in me; and that I will avoid all manner occasions for you, to continue
that you shall know I am such as I ought to be, you see how coldly I speak to
you: it is not for that I feel not sencibly enough your indiscretion, but to
let you know, that passion transports me not, but that reason only makes me
speak thus, that if I see that this mean will nothing prevail to alter your
dessine, I will after run to some more extreme. These words delivered with such
coldness, touched me more to the quick, then I can tell you: yet could not
this withdraw me: for I knew well, that the first skirmishes are ordinarily
maintained in this fashion. But by chance, when Aymee seeing me without words,
and so astonished, turned away without saying more, there was one of her
companions, that seeing me so mated, came toward me; and blowing her nose,
passed by twice or thrice with her hand before her eyes, and afterward began
to run, as if she had allured me to run after her. At the first, I was so
amazed with the blow, I made as though I heeded it not: but when she came back
the second time, I fell on running after her: and she, after she had somewhat
run about her companions, started from them; and when she was a little from
them, faining to be out of breath, lay down behind a thick bush. I that at
first ran without any dessine, seeing her on the ground, and in a place where
she might not be seen, seeming desirous to be revenged for the pain she
had put me to, began to clap her: whereto she made a small resistance, but
so, that she showed this priuacy displeased her not, especially for that
seeming to defend her, she discovered purposely, as I think, to make her white
skin seem whiter by much, then one would judge by her face. At last being
risen up, she said to me, I did not think, Hylas, you had been so rude a
gamester, otherwise I would not have meddled with you. If this displease you
(said I) I crave pardon: but if it be not so, I was never in my life better
paid for my indiscretion then now. How mean you that, said she? I mean, said
I, fair Floriante, that I never saw fairer then that I spied eene now. See,
said she, what a lier you are! and at this word struck me gently on the
cheek, and ran back to her companions. This Floriante was the daughter of an
honest knight, that then was sick, and kept near the shore of Arar: and she
hearing of her fathers sickness, went to seek him out, having stayed
somewhile with one of her sisters, who was married in Arles: her face was not
very fair, for she was somewhat brown: but she had such conceits, and was of
so lively an humor, that I must tell you, this meeting made me lose the will I
had to Aymee, and that so quickly, that I felt little displeasure in leaving
her; so that the contentment in finding this, cleared me of all grief. I then
forsook Aymee, me thought, and addicted my self wholly unto Floriante: I may
say me thought; for it was not true altogether, seeing that often when I saw
her, I took pleasure to talk with her, though the affection which I bare the
other, drew me with a little more violence: but indeed when I considered
sometime what I said, I found, that whereas I was wont to love but one, I did
now serve two. It is true, that this was with no great pain: for when I was
near Floriante, I never remembered Aymee; and when I was near Aymee, Floriante
had no place in my memory. And there was nothing so much tormented me, as when I
was far from them both: for I was sorry for them both together. Now, gentle
Paris, this entertainment lasted with me to Vienna; but being by chance at our
lodging (for almost every night we went ashore, and specially when we passed by
any good towns) lo, there comes a shepherdess to entreat the master of the
boat where I was, to let her have a place, as far as Lions, because her
husband being wounded by some enemies, had sent unto her to seek him out. The
master, who was courteous, received her willingly, and so the next morning she
placed her self in the boat with us. She was fair, but somodest and
discreet, that she was to be no less commended for her virtue: otherwise so
sad and full of melancholy, that she moved pity from all the company. And
because I have always had much compassion on the afflicted, I had it
infinitely over this, and endeavored to comfort her the best I could: whereat
Floriante was not contented, what countenance soever she set on it, nor Aimee
neither: for conceive (gentle Paris) that though a woman dissemble, yet she
cannot choose but feel the loss of a lover; for that it seems to be a wrong
to her beauty; and beauty being the thing that this Sex most esteems, is the
most sensible part in her. Yet I that with my compassion began to mingle a
little love, not seeming to look on those two wenches, I held on talk with
her; and among other things, to the end our discourse might not fail, and to
have the greater knowledge of her, I entreated her to tell me the cause of her
sorrow. She then full of courtesy, began to speak thus:

The compassion which you have of my pain, binds me (courteous stranger) to
give you more satisfaction than that you demand; and you would think it a
great fault, if I refused so small a thing. But I beseech you to consider
withal, the state wherein I am, and to excuse my discourse, if I abridge it as
much as I can. Know then (shepherd) that I was borne about the banks of
Loyre, where I was as charily brought up to the age of fifteen years, as one
of my sort might be. My name is Cloris, and my father is called Leonce, the
brother of Gerestan, into whose hands I was delivered, after the death of my
father and my mother, being of the age I told you, and from that time I began
to feel the blows of Fortune; for my uncle having more care of his own
children than of me, thought himself ouer-layd with my charge. All the comfort
I had, was from his wife called Collire, for she loved me, and provided for
what she could possibly, without her husbands knowledge. But the heavens would
afflict me in all: for when Filander the brother of Collire was slain, she
took such a grief, that none could persuade her to survive him; so that
within few days after, she dyed, and I abode with her two daughters, who were
so young, that I had little contentment to be with them. It fell out, that a
shepherd of the province of Vienna, named Rosidor, came to visit the Temple of
Hercules, that stands on the shore of Furan, on the top of a rock that rises
in the midst of the mountains, much above them all that are there-about. On
that day there were together a great company of us young shepheardesses: For it
was a solemn day for for that place. I should use but needless words, to tell
you the speech we had together, and the fashion wherewith he showed me his
love. So it was, that from that day he gave himself to me so, that he never
made show of contradicting it. He was young and goodly: for his wealth, he had
much more than I might hope for; for the rest, his spirit so like that which
appeared outwardly in his body, and there was a perfect agreement. His suite
lasted four years, and I cannot say, that in all that time, he either did, or
thought any thing wherewith he acquainted me not, and asked my advice.

This extreme submission so long continued, made me most certain of his love;
and his merits, which then had not a little bound me to love him, have since
that time won me in such a fashion, that I may say with truth, there was
nothing in the world better beloved, then Rosidor was of Cloris, with which he
thought himself so strongly tied to me, that he increased his affection, if it
could have been increased. We lived so, more then a year, with all the
delight that so perfect a love might bring to two Lovers.

At last, the heavens seemed willing to make us entirely contented, and
suffered, that all the difficulties which impeached our marriage, were removed.
Behold us now as happy as mortals might be! for we were led into the Temple,
the voice of Hymen, Hymene, sounding on all sides. To be shor^, being returned
to our lodging, nothing might be heard, but instruments of rejoicing; nothing
seen but dances and songs; even then as mischief would, we were separated by
one of the most unlucky occasions that might befall me. We were then at Vienna,
where are the most part of the Rosidors possessions. It fell out, that some
forlorn young men of the villages without Lyoas, on that side where our
Druides went to lay the Guy, where they had used it in the forests of Mars,
called Ayrieu, meant to commit some disorder: my husband not able to brook it,
after he had gently admonished them, empeached them for executing it: where at
they were so enraged, that thinking the greatest offense they could do to
Rosidor, was to hurt me; there was one of them about to throw a vyole of ink
at my face: but seeing it coming, I turned my head aside, so that I was not
touched but on my neck, as (said she stooping down) you may yet see the
marks plain. My husband, that saw my breast full of ynke and blood, thinking I
had been grievously wounded; and besides, conceiving this outrage to be so
great, that taking his sword into his hand, he struck it through the body of
him that gave the blow, and then thrusting among the others, with the help of
his friends, he drove them out of his house.

Judge, shepherd, if I were troubled: for I thought I was worse hurt then
indeed I was, and saw my husband besmeared with the blood of him whom he slew,
as also of a wound which he had on his shoulder. But when this first fray was
in part passed, and by that the wound was dressed, and he apparelled, the
Justice came to seize on him, and carried him away with such violence, that
they would not suffer me to bid him farewell: but my affection more strong
then their defense, made me way at last to him; and casting my self on his
neck, clasped so fast about, that it was as much as they could do to put me
off. He on the other side, when he saw me in this case, desiring rather to dye
then to be separated from me, used all the violence which a great courage and
an extreme love was able to work, which was such, that all wounded as he was,
he got himself out of their hands, and went out of the Town.

This defense kept him from being a prisoner, but it made his cause the worse
with the Judge, who in the mean time sent out threatenings and Proclamations:
during all which, his greatest displeasure was, that he could not be with me;
and because that desire pressed him fore, he disguised himself, and came to me
one evening, and passed all the night with me. God knows what my contentment
was, but yet my fear was as great: for Iknew that they which pursued him,
understanding the love which was between us, did all they could to surprise
him; and it fell out as I always feared: for at last he was found, and brought
into Lions, where presently I followed him, and to good purpose for him, for
that the Judges whom at all hours I solicited, took such pity on me, that
they showed him favor: and so, notwithstanding all the pursuit of the
adversaries, he was set at liberty. If I found much sorrow in this accident,
and pain when I saw him, believe, courteous shepherd, that I had no less
satisfaction, to see him out of danger, and acquitted from all that had passed.
But because the displeasure which he had received in the prison, had made him
sick, he was enforced to stay some days at Lions: and I being always about
him, to give him the best comfort I could; at last, being past the danger, he
prayed me to set things in order at home, that we might entertain our friends
with that mirth that he desired, for the good success of his affairs: and
behold, these dissolute fellows, who had been the cause of all our pain,
seeing they could have no other remedy, resolved to kill him in his bed: and
being entered into his lodging, gave him 2. or 3. stabs with a poniard, and
leuing him for dead, fled away. Alas! courteous shepherd, judge what I ought
to be, and in what repose was my soul like to be, that in truth is touched
with the most sensible accident that could befall me.

So ended Cloris, having her face covered with tears, which seemed so many
pearls that rolled down her fair bosom. Now, gentle shepherd, that that I
will tell you, is a new head-spring of Love. The affection which I saw in this
shepherdess, touched me with so much compassion, that though her face had
not been able to have won my love, yet the pity struck me so to the quick,
that I must confess, that Carlis, Stilliane, Aymee, nor Floriante, never tied
me with a stronger chain then this desolate Cloris: Which was not, for that I
loved not the others, but I had yet besides their place this void in my soul.
Behold me then resolved into Cloris as well as into the others, but I knew
well it was to no purpose to speak to her, while Rosidor were either not dead,
or not healed; for the pain wherein she was, possessed her altogether. We
came in this sort to Lions, where presently every one parted. It is true, that
the new affection which I bare to Cloris, made me accompany her to her lodging,
where especially I visited Rosidor, to have some acquaintance with him, judging
it best so to begin, thereby to come to the good graces of his wife. She that
thought him worse hurt then she found it (for they always make the evil
greater then it is, and the apprehension much increases the accident which
they doubt) changed her countenance and behavior, when she found him up, and
walking about his chamber. But, see what befell me! the sadness which Cloris
had in the boat, was (as I told you) the cause of my affection: and when being
near Rosidor, I saw her joyful and content, look how the compassion had made
this love to grow, so also her ioyfulnesse and contentment caused it to dye:
proouing well as then, that every evil ought to be cured by the contrary. I
entered then a slave and captive into that lodging, and I came out a freeman,
and master of my self. But considering this accident, I endeavored to remember
Aymee and Floriante, and presently wished to find them at their lodging; and
turning on all hands, at last I met them by fortune together.

A good meeting: the next day was the great Feast of Venus, and because,
according to custom, the day before the solemnity, the young women sing in the
Temple, the Hymns which are made in the honor of the Goddess; and they watch
there until midnight: I heard them resolve with the mother of Aymee, to pass
the night as the others, that she might the better perform her vow. Floriante
at the secret request of Aymee, promised to do so too. And because they stayed
there a great liberty, I had a design, without any speech of it to go in
likewise, fayning to be a wench, when it should be dark: but knowing that the
Druides were themselves at the gate, when it waxed dark, I purposed to hide my
self some good while before. And indeed, being got into a corner little
frequented, and most dark, I tarried there till nine or ten of the clock in the
night. The^ the Temple was shut up, and there were no more men but my self,
unless there were some that were as curious as I: and by that time the Hymns
had long continued, I came out of my lurking place. And because the Temple was
great, and there was no light but that which the tapers lighted on the Altar,
might give all about, I easily fet my self among the weaches, without their
knowledge: and as I was searching with mine eyes for that part where Aymee
might be, I saw a little candle brought to a young wench, who rising up, went
with it to the Altar, and after di^ some ceremonies: she began to sing
certain couplets, to which at the end all the company answered. I know not
whether it were for that the light was dim (for sometimes they will help
themselves by hiding the imperfection of the painting) or that indeed she were
fair: yet so it was, that as soon as I saw her, I loved her. Let them now tell
me that say that love comes from the eyes of the party beloved, that canont
be: for she could not see me; besides that, she turned not her eyes toward
me; and hardly could I behold her so well, that I might know her another time:
and that was the cause that I thrust forward: by curiosity I crept gently among
those shepheardesses that were next her. But by mis-hap, being (with greater
danger) come hard by her, she ended her Hymn, and sent back the taper where
it was wont to be: so that the place was so dark, that hardly (though I might
touch her) could I see her.

Notwithstanding, the hope that she or some other near her, might begin
again to sing, I stayed there a while. But I saw to the contrary, that the
taper was carried into the other Quire, and presently after, one of those that
were there, began to sing, as my new and unknown mistrisse had done. The
difference that I noted, whether in voice, or face, was great; for she had
nothing that came near her whom I began to love: which was the cause, that
being no longer able to command my curiosity, I went to a Dame that was some
what far off, and counterfeiting the best I could, I asked what she was that
sung before the last. You must be a stranger (said she) if you know her not. It
may be, I know her (answered I) if heard her name. Who knows her not (said
she) by her face, demands her name in vain; yet to free you of your pain,
know, she is called Cyr^^^^, one of the fairest maids that dwell on the banks
of Arar, and so held in all this country; so that if you know her not, you
must be of another world. Till then I had so well counterseited my voice, that
as the night deceived their eyes, so my voice beguiled their eare^: but at that
time, not remembering where I was, after many other thanks, I said to her, that
if in exchange of the pain that she had taken, I could yield her any service,
I did not think any man happier then I was.

How now (said she) who are you that talk in this fashion? And looking more
he defully on me, she knew by my habit what I was. Whereat, all astonished
(said she) How come you to have the hardiness to break our laws in this
sort? Know you not, that you cannot pay this fault but with the loss of your
life? I must tell you true, that though I knew there was chastisement ordained,
yet I did not think it was such, whereat I was not a little astonished, yet
alleging unto her that I was a stranger, and knew not their Statutes, she
took pity on me, and said, that from the beginning she well perceived it; and
that I must know that it was impossible to obtain pardon for this fault, for
that the law was so rigorous, to free those watches from all the abuses which
were wont to be committed.

Notwithstanding, seeing that I came not of any wicked intent, she would do
what she could to save me. And therefore I was not to tarry till the midnight
bell rang, for then the Druides came to the gate with their torches, and looked
them all in the face. That now the gate of the Temple was shut, but she would
attempt to open it: and then casting a veil over my head, which covered me to
the hanches, she fitted my cloak so underneath it, that it could not be
discerned in the night from a gown: and having thus dressed me, she told some
of her neighbors, who came with her, that she was not well: and they all went
to require the key of the most ancient of the company; and we going together
toward the gate with a little waxe-candle only, which her self bare, and
which she almost covered with her hand, fayning, as if she would preserve it
from the wind, we went out of the prease: and thus happily I escaped out of
this danger through her courtesy: and the better to disguise me, and withal,
for the desire I had to know to whom I was so much bound, I went with the other
to her lodging.

But fair shepherdess (said he) turning to Diane, this discourse is yet but
half done, and me thinks the Sun is down long since; will it not be fit to
refer the rest to another time, when we have more leisure? You have reason
said she (gentle shepherd) one must not spend all his goods at once: that
which remains, may cause us make another pleasing journey; besides that Paris,
who is to pass the river, cannot stay longer without committing himself to
the night. There is nothing (said he, fair shepherdess) that can trouble
me, when I am near you. I wish (answered she) there were any thing in me that
might please you; for your worth and courtesy bind every one to yield you all
sorts of service. Paris would have replied, but Hylas interrupted him, when he
said: I would to God, gentle Paris, that I were you, and that Diane were
Phillis, and that she would use this language to me. When that shall be (said
Paris) you shall have but the more obligation to her. It is true (said Hylas)
but I shall not be afraid to bind my self in part to her, to whom I am
already so entirely. Your obligations (said Diane) are not of those that
continue for ever, you can revoke them when you will. If the one (answered he)
bring loss, the others have advantage; and ask Phillis if she be not well
eased, that I am of that humor: for if I were otherwise, she might make some
account of my service. With the like discourse Diane, Paris and many other
shepherdess; came to the great meadow, where they used to meet before they
went home; and Paris giving the good night to Diane, and the rest of the
company, took his way by the side of Laigneu.

But in the mean time Licidas was talking with Phillis; for the jealousy of
Siluander had tormented him so, that he could not stay until the next morning,
to tell her what was in his heart. He was so far besides himself, that he
took no heed who heard him; but thinking he had been alone with her, after
two or three great sighs he said; Is it possible, Phillis, that the heavens
have preserved my life so long, to feel thy vnfaithfullnesse? The
shepherdess that looked for some other discourse, was so surprised, that she
could not answer him. And the shepherd seeing her mute, and thinking it was to
invent some excuse, went on. You have reason (fair shepherdess) not to
answer, for your eyes say as much indeed, too plainly for my quie: And this
silence tells and assures me but too well of what I demand, and which I would
not know. The shepherdess that felt her self offended at these words,
answered him in anger: Since mine eyes speak so much for me, why will you have
me answer in another fashion? And if my silence give you more knowledge of my
small love, than my actions passed, could of my good will, think you I can
hope to give you better proof by my words? But I well see what it is, Licidas;
you would make an honest retreit; you have a design elsewhere: and because you
dare not, without giving your sicklenesse some reasonable couerture; you feign
to your self Chimres, and build up occasions of displeasure, where you know
well there is no cause, purposely to make me blamed for your fault. But,
Licidas, bring forth your reasons, let us see what they are: or if you will
not do it, give back, shepherd, without accusing me of the error which you
have committed, and for which I shall do long penance: but let it content you,
to leave the mortal displeasure, but not the blame which you go about to
raise by your ordinary complaynts, where with you importune both heaven and
earth.

The doubt which I have had (replied the shepherd) makes me complain, but the
assurance which you give me by your egre words, makes me die. And what is your
fear (answered the shepherdess?) Judge, replied he, if it may be small,
since the complaints that proceed of it, importune both heaven and earth, as
you cast in my teeth. If you will know it, I will tell you in few words. I
fear that Phillis loves not Lieidas. Yet, shepherd (said Phillis) you may
think I love you not, and bear in your memory what I have done for you, and
for Olympe. Is it possible that the actions of my life passed, should return
before your eyes, when you conceive these doubts? I know well (answered the
shepherd) that you have loved me; and if I had been in doubt, my pain should
not be such as I now seele: but I fear that a wound, as great as it is, if it
bring not death, may heal in time: so that which Love has made you do for me,
is by this time so fully healed, that hardly the skarre only may be seen.
Phillis at these words turning her head aside, and her eyes with a plain
gesture of coffeehouse: Since, shepherd, (said she) that until now by the
offices and those testimonies of affection which I have done you, I perceive,
I have got nothing, assure your self, that which I complain most of, is the
pain, and time which I have employed about it.

Licidas knevv well the shepherdess was much moved, but himself was so
overcome of jealousy, that he could not hold from answering her. This anger
(shepherdess) gives me, but more knowledge of that vvchich I feared; for to
trouble ones self for the speech which an ouer-great affection hat sometime
brought out, is it not a sign he was never touched? Phillis hearing this
reproach, came a little to her self, and turning her face to him; You see,
Licidas, all dissembling displeases me in any, but I cannot bear it in them
with whom I would live. How now? has Licidas the hardness to tell me, that he
doubts the love of his Phillis, and I not think he dissembles? and what
testimony may be given, that I have not given you? Shepherd, shepherd,
believe me, these words make me think hardly of the assurance which sometimes
you have given me of your affection. For it may be, you deceive me in that
which concerns you, as it seems you deceive your self in that that touches
me; or as you think you are not beloved, being, indeed, more then the rest of
the world: so you imagine you love, when indeed, you do not. Shepherdess
(answered Licidas) if my affection were of that common sort, that have more of
appearance then of effect, I would condemn my self, when the violence of it
did transport me beyond reason, or when I demand of you great proofs of a
great amity: but since it is not of that kind, and that you know well it
embraces whatsoever is greater, know you not that extreme love never goes
without this fear, though it have no cause? and for the little it has, this
fear changes it self into jealousy, and jealousy into pain, or rather into
madness, wherein I find my self.

While Licidas and Phillis talked thus, thinking their words were heard but of
them two, and that they had no other witnesses, but the trees, Siluander (as I
told you) lay like a skout, and lost not a word. Laonice on the other side,
which had been asleep in that place, awaked at the beginning of their speech;
and knowing them both, was infinitely glad to be found to so good purpose,
assuring her self, that they would not part until they had acquainted her
with much of their secrets, where with she happened to serve her own turn to
their ruin. And it fell out as she hoped; for Phillis hearing Licidas say that
he was jealous, demanded very loud, both of whom and wherefore? Shepherdess
(answered the foolish Licidas) ask you me that question? Tell me, I pray you,
whence proceeded that great coldness toward me of late, and from whence that
familarity which you have in so strait a sort with Siluander, if the love which
you were wont to bear me, be not changed to his benefit? Ah shepherdess! you
may well think, that my heart is without feeling of your blows, since it has
so lively felt those of your eyes. How long is it since to talk you have
withdrawn your self from me, since you took no pleasure to talk with me; and
that it seemed you send about for other company, that you may avoid mine? Or,
where is the care you were wont to have of my business, or the grief which my
stay from your presence brought you? You may remember how svveete the name of
Licidas has been to you, and how often it slipped out of your mouth, for the
abundance of your heart, when you meant to name some other. You may remember
your self, I say, and have at this time nothing in the same heart, and in the
same mouth, but the name and affection of Siluander, with whom you live in such
asort, that there is not so great a stranger in our Country but knovves that
you him. And think you it strange, that I which am the same Licidas, which I
have alvvayes yet been, and was not borne but only for you Phillis, have
entered into some doubt of you?

The extreme displeasure of Licidas raised so great abundance of words in his
mouth, that Phillis, to interrupt him, could not ge^t a time to answer him; for
if she opened her mouth to begin, he went on with the more vehemence, not
considering that his complaining made it worse: and if there were any thing
that might help him, it was only her answer, which he would not hear; and on
the contrary, not heeding, that this torrent of words took away all leisure
for the shepherdess to answer him, he judged that her silence proceeded of
the sense of her being guilty; so that he went on amplifying his jealousy at
all motions, and all actions that he savve her use. Whereat she found her self
so su^prized, and so much discontented, that she thus let, knevv not with
what words to begin either to complain of him, or to remove him out of the
opinion where in he was, but the passion of the shepherd, which was so
extreme, that it gave him not leisure to dream of i^; for though it were
almost night, yet he saw her blush, or at least he thought he savve her, which
was the conclusion of his impatience, holding that for certain, where of as
yet he had no cause to doubt. And so without further stay, after he had called
twice or thrice on the gods, as just p^nishers of the unfaithful, he ran
into the woods, unwilling to hear or tarry for Phillis, who went after him
to discover to him his error, but it was in vain. For he ran so svviftly,
that soon left him in the thicket of the trees. And in the mean time, Leonice
well pleased that she had discovered this affection, and savv so good a
beginning of her desseigne, vvithdrevv, as was the custom, with the
shepheardesses her companions; and Siluander, on the otherside, resolved with
himself, since Licidas took such jealousy at so cheap a rate, to sell him it
for the time to come at a dearer, making show to love Phillis in sadness, when
he should see him near her.

The end of the eight Books.
THE NINTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
LEonide, in the mean time arrived at the house of Adamas, and gave him to
understand, that Galathee had infinite occasion to use him; and upon urgent
cause which she would tell him by the way. That he might not disobey, he
resolved to be gone, as soon as the moon would shine, which was some half
hour before day. On this resolution, as soon as the light began to appear,
they set themselves on the way; and when they were come to the foot of the
little hill, having no more then one plain to bring them to the Palace of
Isour, the Nymph at the request of her uncle, began her speech in this sort:

The History of Galathee and Lindamor.
MY father (for so she called him) be not moved, I beseech you, to hear that
which I have to say to you, and when you have occasion, remember that the same
love caused this, which at some other time has driven you to the like or more
strange accidents. I durst not speak to you of it, if I had not a commission,
namely, if I had not been commanded: but Galathee, whom this business
concerns, is willing, since she has chosen you as the Physician for this
sickness, that you should know both the breeding, and the proceeding; yet has
she enjoined me to draw some words from you, that you will never speak of it.
The Druide, which well knew what respect he was to bear to his Lady (for so
he esteemed her) answered that he had wisdom enough to conceal that, which
he knew might concern Galathee; and that therein the promise was more then
needed. Upon this assurance (continued Leonide) I will attempt to tell you, what
you are to know. It is now a long time, since Polemas became to be in love with
Galathee: to tell you how it grew, were unprofitable: so it was, that he loved
her, so that in earnest one might call him amorous. This affection passed on so
far, that Galathee her self could not be ignorant of it, so much it wanted,
that in particular, she made it diverse times appear, that his service was not
displeasing to her, which tied him so fast, that nothing since could ever
withhold him; and without doubt, Galathee had some good occasion to favor
Polemas, for he was a man that merited much: for his race, you know he is of
the ancient stock of Surien, that in nobility gives not place to that of
Galathee: as for his person, he is very lovely, having both a face and fashion
able to win love: above all he has great knowledge, yet ashamed of it before
the wisest. But why go I about to tell you these things? Your father knows them
better then I. So it was, that these good conditions made him so commendable,
that Galathee vouchsafed to favor him more then any other in the court of
Amasis: yet it was with that discretion, that no man noted it. Now Polemas
having the wind so favorable, lived with that contentment to himself, as a man
founded upon hopes might. But this inconstant Love, or rather this inconstant
Fortune, which delights in change, as in her nourishment, was willing that
Polemas, as well as the rest of the world, should feel what the stripes are,
that come from her hand: you may remember that it is somewhile since Amasis
permitted Clidaman to bestow us on his servants: from this occasion, as from a
swarm, have issued so many loves, that besides that the court was pestered
with them, all the country feels them.

Now among others, by chance Lindamor was given to Galathee, he has much
worth, yet she received him so coldly, as the ceremony of that feast would
suffer. But he that before, it may be, had some such intention, which he durst
not make show of, beyond the bounds of his discretion, was well pleased, that
this subject presented it self so luckily, to unlock those dessines, which
love had made him conceal, and to give birth, under the veil of that fiction,
to most true passions. If Polemas felt the beginning of this new love, the
progress of it was troblesome to him, for that the beginning was covered with
the shadow of courtesy, and the example of all the other Nymphs; so that
though Galathee entertained him with that apparancy of delight, yet in reason
that might not offend him, because she was tied to it by the law, which was
common; but when this suite continued, and more then that, when passing the
limits of courtesy, he saw that it was in good earnest, then he felt the
effects which jealousy works in the soul that truly loves. Galathee, for her
part little thought, or at least believed not, it was so far gone, but the
occasions, as threeds sowed together, draw the one to the other, carried him so
far, that Polemas may be in some sort excused, if he would suffer himself to
be wounded with so sharp a blade; and if jealousy could do more then the
assurance which his services might give him. Lindamor was gentle, and there was
nothing which you could wish in a person welborn, wherewith he was not
furnished; courteous among the Ladies, brave among the warriors, full of
valor, and courage, as any that has been in our court these many years. He
was about 25. years of age, without feeling the effects which love is used to
work in hearts of that age, not for that out of nature he could not serve
Ladies, or that he wanted courage to hazard any one; but because he was
always busied in exercises, which drive out idleness, he had not given
leisure to his affections to fix their roots in his soul, for from the time
he was able to bear arms, thrust forward with that generous instinct, that
carries noble courages to the most dangerous enterprise, he let pass no
occasion of war wherein he gave not witness of what he was. Afterward being
returned to see Clidaman to perform duty to him to who^ he was obliged, at the
same time he gave himself to two, to Clidaman, as to his Lord, and to
Galathee, as to his Lady, and to them both without receiving disgrace.

But the courtesy of young Clidaman, and the merits of Galathee had too great
power over those Lovers, to be drawn from their service. Behold then (as I tell
you) Lindamor become amorous, but so, that his affection could no longer be
hidden with the veil of courtesy. Polemas, as he that had interest, found it
out soon enough: yet though they were friends, would he make no show of it,
but to the contrary, kept it close to himself: he labored nothing more, then
to get more assurance of this Love, to the end he might ruin him by all the
tricks he could, as he tried afterward. And because since the return of
Lindamor, he had (as I told you) made profession of friendship to him, he
thought fit to continue it. About this time, Clidaman began to delight in
Tourneys and Tiltings, wherein he profited well (as they said) for a beginner.
But above all, Lindamor bare away the glory of the goodliest and gentlest;
whereat Polemas was so vexed, that he could not dissemble his ill will, and he
thought that if he made a match with him, he might carry away the greater
glory, for that being older, and of longer abode in Court, he was alwais in all
the designs of his Rival: but Lindamor, that suspected not the occasions that
made him do so, went on freely, and that made his actions more pleasing, which
Polemas did not, who had a secret purpose where he must use some cunning, so
that he served but for a show. And especially, the last day of the Bacchanals,
when the young Clidaman made a Tourney, to maintai^e the beauty of Siluie,
Guymantes and Lindamor did as much as men might, but among all, Lindamor got
that grace and happiness, that if Galathee had not judged it, yet love had
given sentence against Polemas.

The Nymph, that then began to have eyes as well for other men, as till then
she had for none but Polemas, could not contain from speaking much to the
good of Lindamor. And see how Love mocks and sports with the wisdom of
Lovers! That which with such care and craft Polemas went about, seeking to
advance himself above Lindamor, hurts himself the more, and makes him almost
his inferior: for every one comparing their actions together, found such
difference, that it had bin better for him either not to have assisted him, or
to have bin declared his enemy at once. It was that very evening that Lindamor
thrust forward by his good Angel, (I think, for my part, there be good days,
and unhappy days) auowed himself, in earnest, servant to the fair Galathee;
but the occasion was also as good as he could wish: for, dancing a dance which
the Frankes have lately brought out of Germany, where one goes to take away her
whom he likes, led on by love, but rather spurred to it (as I think) by
destiny, he took away Galathee from Polemas, who more attentive to his
discourse then to the dance, took little heed, and was at that time
reproaching the Nymph for the new breeding love which he foresaw of Lindamor.
She, who till then never thought him to be in earnest, offended at his
discourse, took his words in so ill part, that she told him what words
Lindamor had used, which were so much the more pleasing, for that she thought
she was thereby revenged of him for his suspicion.

That which makes me speak thus, is, for that there is none that may know more
then I, who may seem to be destined to hear of all these Loves: for as soon
as we were withdrawn, and that Galathee was in bed, she willed me to stand at
the beds head, and hold the light, while she read the dispatches that came to
her, and specially those of importance. That night she caused the Nymphs to
leave her alone: and when they were all gone, she commanded me to lock the
door, then made me sit at the beds feet, and after she had smiled a while,
she said, You cannot choose but laugh, Leonide, at the gracious accident that
befell me at the dance. You know it is somewhile since Polemas had a mind to
serve me, for I concealed it not from you; and for as much as me thought he
carried himself toward me with that honor and respect (I need not lie) his
service was not unpleasing to me, and re^ceiued it with a better liking, then
from any others in the Court, not that he had yet any love of my part: I will
not say but that it may be (as Love always flatters his patients with hope)
he imagined that which he desired: but the truth is, that I never yet judged,
that he had never any thing able to make me love him. I know not what may fall
out her ea^ter, and I refer my self to that that shall be, but for that
which is yet, there is no likelihood.

Now Polemas seeing that I heard what he would say, and that I harkened to it
with patience, being there by made the more hardy, not marking that I lived
with others in the same sort, is gone so far, that he knows not what he does,
he is so much beside himself. And indeed, this night he daunced with me some
while, at the first so chiding, that I was constrained (without thinking of it)
to ask him what the matter was. Shall it not displease you (said he) if I
discover it? No, answered I, for I never ask for the thing I would not know.
Upon this assurance he went forward.

I must tell you, Madame, that it is not in my power, not to be offended at the
actions which I see ordinarily before mine eyes, and which touch me so to the
quick, that if I had as great assurance, as I have suspicion, I know not if
there were any thing able to keep me alive. In sadness I was yet so simple, that
I knew not what he would say; yet thinking his love had tied me to some sort
of curiosity, I asked what actions those were that touched him so to the
quick. Then pawsing a little, and looking steadfastly on me, he said: Is it
possible, Madame, that without fiction you ask me this? And why (answered I)
would you not have me do so? Because (added he) it is you whom all these things
concern, and it is from you that they proceed; and then seeing that I spoke
not a word, (for I knew not what he would say) he began togoe on, and told
me, I would not have you dissemble in this business, without blushing. For
resolutely I will enforce my self to tell you, though the discourse cost me my
life. You know (Madame) with what affection, since the heavens made me yours, I
have endeavored to give proof that I was truly the servant of the fair
Galathee: you can tell, if even vntill-now you have known any action of mine
tended to other end than your service. If all my dessignes have not taken that
point for their mark; and if all my desires arising from thence, have not
shevved themselves satisfied and contented, I assure my self, that if my
fortune deny me to deserve any thing more in serving you, yet at the least she
will not refuse me this satisfaction from you, that you will confess, that
truly I am yours, and no others but yours. Now if this be so, judge what grief
I ought to have, after so much time spent (not to say, lost) when (if there be
any reason in Love, I ought with greater reason to have expected some reward of
my affection: I see another favored in my place, and an inheritour (as I may
say) of my goods before my death. Excuse me for speaking in this manner: the
extreme passion draws these just complaints out of my soul, which though it
would, yet can it not longer be silent, seeing he that triumphs over me, has
got the victory, rather by destiny than merit. It is Lindamor, of whom I
speak; Lindamor, whose service is the more happily received of you, by that
that he is to give me place, both in affection and faithfulness. My grief is
not to see him more happy than he durst wish for: but indeed to see him so at
my cost. Excuse me, Madame, I beseech you, or rather accuse the greatness of
my affection, if I complain, since it is but a more manifest proof of the
power which you have over your most humble servant.

And that which makes me speak so, is, that I note you use toward him the
same words, and the same fashion of treaty that you did toward me, at the
first breeding of your goodwill, and when you permitted me to speak to you,
and that I might say to my self, you knew mine affection.

This puts me so far besides my self, with such violence, that hardly
can I command over these furious extremities which you put me to, and which
the offense brings to my soul, and can produce no effects of discretion. He
would have said more, but the passion wherein he was, so suddenly took from
him his voice, that it was impossible for him to hold on longer. If I were
offended at his words, you may judge, for they were both rash and full of
vanity, and not to be borne with: yet that I might not give knowledge of this
brabble to them that have eyes, but to spy the actions of others, I was
compelled to make him an answer a little less eager than I had done, had I
been elsewhere: and I said, Polemas, that which I am, and that which you are,
will not suffer me to doubt that you are my servant, so long as you stay in the
house of my mother, and perform the service of my brother; but I cannot wonder
enough at the follies which you mix in your discourse, in talking of heritage,
and of your goods. In that which is from my love, I know not by what right you
pretend yours.

My intention, Polemas, has been to love you, and esteem you as your virtue
deserves, and you are not to imagine beyond that. And for that you talk of
Lindamor, get out of that error, for if I use him as I have done you, you are
to think I will do so to all those that hereafter shall merit it, without
other design greater then to love and esteem him that deserves it, in what
subject soever it be found. And how, madame, said I then interrupting her,
think you this a gentle answer? I know not how you could have honestly said
more: for indeed, it must be confessed he is arrogant: but yet it may not be
denied, but this arrogance is bred in him, upon some show of reason. Of reason
(answered the Nymph prese ntly?) What reason can he allege? Many, Madame,
replied I, but to conceal them all but one, I may say to you, that truly you
have allowed him to serve in a more peculiar manner then any other. That is
(said Galathee) for that he pleased me more then the rest of my brothers
servants. I confess it, madame, said I, and seeing himself so far in your
good graces, how could he hope for less then to be beloved of you? He had
heard talk of so many examples of love between unequal persons, that he
could not flatter himself less, then to hope the same for himself, which he
heard spoke of others, and I remember, that upon that subject he made verses
which he sung before you: it is some while since you commanded him to conceal
his affection: they were these:

A SONNET.
Wherefore if you love me,
Fear you the world should know?
Then honest Amity,
What can make fairer show?
The spirits vertuons,
It each to other ties,
And far from humane hearts,
Expels vanities.
But if your choice be such,
That you displeased are,
And that you think me vile,
Unworthy such a share:
Disdainefull beauty, that
Lie hid from all men's eyes,
And never made appear,
That (...) thee pity lies:
Yet Dido did not scorn
A wanderer by sea.
Paris, a shepherd young,
Won love from Oenone,
Diane found some grief,
For her Endimion.
Love not regards the state,
Or pomp of any one.
The sheepehooke with the mace
Of Kings he equal makes:
And in the purest Love,
All his contentment takes.
Then Adamas asked her: And how, Leonide? it seems by the words of Galathee,
that she despised Polemas, and by these verses there is no man but will judge
she loved him, and that only he could not brook with patience, that she should
dissemble! Father (replied Leonide) it is true that she loved him, and she had
given him that proof, that if he gave credit to it, he was not so arrogant,
but that one might very well have thought him to be of small understanding, if
he did not believe it; and though she would dissemble with me, yet I know she
had drawn him by shows and hopes of good will, whereof the earnest was not so
small as the first, but that many others have been deceived, and I know not,
considering what assurances were given, that any would think she would lose
them, and gainesay her going forward, but he deserved this chastisement for his
unfaithfulness which he used to a Nymph, whose deceived affection cries
vengeance, so that love at last gave an care: for without faining he is the
most deceitful, the most unthankful, and most unworthy to be beloved for this
misprifall, of any under heaven, and deserves not to be pitied, if he now
feel the grief which other have suffered for him.

Adamas seeing her so much moved against Polemas, demanded who the Nymph was
that he deceived, and said, that she was some of her friends, since she took
the offense so to the quick. Then she perceived that she had yielded too much
to her passion, and that unawares she had made known that which she had kept
so long secret; yet as she had a quick spirit, and that would not lie long in
her fault, she covered by her dissimulation, this error so well, that Adamas
then took no great heed to it. And how, my daughter (said Adamas) know you
not, that men live with a purpose to overcome and finish all that they
undertake, and that the love which they make show of to other women, is but to
make the way easy? You may see, Leonide, that all love is for the desire of
the thing that is wanting; and the desire being satisfied, there is no more
desire; if there be no more desire, there is no more love: therefore you may
behold, that they which will be long loved, are they that give least
satisfaction to the desires of their lovers. But (added Leonide) she whereof I
spoke, is one of my particular friends, and I know, she never treated with
Polemas, but with as great coldness as she could. That likewise, replied
Adamas, makes the desire to be lost; for desire is nourished with hope and
favors.

Now look how the match of the Lamp goes out when the oil fails, so desire
dies, when the nourishment of it is put out: therefore it is, that we see so
many loves are changed, some for too many, othersome for too few favors. But
let us return to that you said to Galathee; what was that that she answered?
If Polemas (answered Leonide) had had (said she to me) as much judgment to
measure himself, as he had rashness to dare to love me, he would have taken
these favors as from my courtesy, and not from my love. But (continued
Galathee) this is nothing to the worth of the accident which befell at that
time; for I had scarcely answered Polemas, what you have heard, but Lindamor
following the course of the dance, was come to snatch or rob, and with that
dexterity, that Polemas could not avoid it, and by that means not answer me,
but with his eyes; but certainly, with a look so frowning, that I know not how
I held from laughter. As for Lindamor, whether he took heed to it, or
perceiving it, would not let it appear, so it was, that presently after he
spoke to me in that sort, it had been enough to have made the poor Polemas
mad, if he had heard it. Madame, said he to me, is it possible that all
things should go so quite contrary, and that jesting should turn to so true
earnest, and the presages likewise which your eyes speak of to me, when I
behold them? Lindamor, said I to him, so you may be punished as you deserved,
if jesting you meet with earnest. This punishment, answered he, is so welcome
to me, that I should beshrew my self, if I did not love and cherish it, as the
greatest happiness that might befall me. What mean you by that (said I) for
it may be we speak of diverse things? I mean (said he) that in this course
of the dance, I have stolen away you, and in the truth of love, you have stolen
from me both soul and heart. Then blushing a little, I answered him in
choler, How now, Lindamor, what discourse is this? remember you what I am, and
what you are? I do so, Madam (said he) and that is it that makes me speak so
unto you, for are you not my Lady, and am not I your servant? Yes (answered I)
but not as you take it, for you ought to serve me with respect, and not with
love: or if there be any affection, it should grow out of your duty. He
presently replied, Madam, if I serve you not with respect, never was divinity
honored by a mortal man: but whether this respect be the father, or child of
my affection, it concerns you but little, for I am resolved, whatsoever you
are to me, to serve you, to love you, and to adore you, and think not herein,
that the duty whereto Clidaman by the law of the game has subjected us, is the
cause, well it may be the couerture: but to conclude, your merits, your
perfections, or to say true, my destiny gives me to you, and thereto I assent:
for I must acknowledge, that what man soever sees you, and loves you not,
deserves not the name of a man. These words were delivered with such a
vehemence, that he made it appear to me, that he truly told me what was in his
soul; and behold, I pray you, this pleasant encounter. I never heeded this
affection, thinking that al he did, was in sport, and should have never
perceived it, but for the jealousy of Polemas: but since I have always had an
eye to Lindamor, and I should not lie, I have found him as well capable of love
as jealousy: so that it seames, that the other has whetted the knife,
wherewith he would cut the thread of the small love I bear him: for I know
not how Polemas has ever since so displeased me in all his actions, that I
could hardly endure him to be near me the rest of that night. On the
contrary, all that Lindamar did, came so kindly to me, that I wonder I marked
it no sooner. I know not whether Polemas, by reason of his being crossed, have
changed his behavior, or whether the evil opinion which I have conceived of
him, have altered my eyes when I behold him: yet so it is, that either mine
eyes see not as they were wont, or Polemas is no more the man he was wont to
be.

I must not lie to you, when Galathee spoke in this sort against him, I was no
whit sorry because of his ingratitude: on the contrary, the more to hurt him, I
said, I do not wonder, Madam, that Lindamor is more welcome to you, then
Polemas: for the qualitites and perfections of them both are not equal; every
one that sees them, will give the same judgment that you do of them. It is
true, that here in I foresee a great hurly burly, first, between them, and
after between you and Polemas. And why (said Galathee?) Are you of opinion he
has any power over my actions or of Lindamors. Not for that (said I) Madam,
but I knew the humor of Polemas so well, that he will leave nothing
unattempted, and will remove heaven and earth, to recover the happiness that
he thinks he has lost; and for it he will commit these follies which cannot
be hidden, but to those that will not see them, and so shall you have
displeasure, and Lindamor be offended: and God grant it fall not out worse. No
such thing, Leonide, answered she, if Lindamor love me, he will do as I
command him; if he do not love me, he will not care what Polemas does: and as
for him, if he pass the bounds of reason, I know how to reform him: leave
that labor to me, for I can provide well enough for that. At this word she
commanded me to draw the curtain, and let her rest, if at least these new
desseignes would suffer her. But at the breaking up of the dance, Lindamor,
who had noted what countenance Polemas had made when he took Galathee from
him, had a conceit that he loved her. Notwithstanding, having never perceived
any thing by his actions passed, he would ask him the question, resolved, that
if he found him in love, he would endeavor to divert himself, for that he
thought himself some what bound to it, for the love he made show of, which he
thought to be unfeigned; and so going to him, desired he might have a word with
him in private.

Polemas, who used al manner of cunning that a Courtier was capable of, painted
his face with a fained show of good will, and said, What is it that Lindamor is
pleased to command of me? I never use commoundement (said Lindamor) where my
prayer only may take place; and at this time I need neither of them, but
only as a friend, demand a thing of you which our friendship binds you to
tell me. What may it be (replied Polemas?) since our friendship so binds me,
you are to think that I will answer you with the same freedom that you desire
to know. This it is (replied Lindamor) that I have some while served Galathee,
as I was tied by the ordinance of Clidaman, at last, I am constrained so to do
by that of Love. For it is true, that after I had long time served her, by the
disposing of that fortune that gave me to her, her merits have since so won
me, that my will has ratified that gift with so great affection, that to draw
back, would be as much want of courage, as it is now arrogancy to say, that I
dare love her. Yet the friendship which is betvveene you and me, having been
of longer date, than this of Love, gives me resolution enough to tell you,
that if you love her, and have any pretention to her, I hope as yet to have
that power of my self, that I can withdravv, and give proof, that Love is
less in me than Friendship, or at least, the follies of the one shall give
place unto the Wisdom of the other.

Tell me then frankely that which you have in your soul, to the end that
neither your friendship, nor mine, may complain of our actions. That which I
say, is not to discover the secrets of your intentions: since I lay open to you
mine, you are not to be afraid that I should know yours: besides that, the
laws of friendship command you, not to hide them from me; provided, that not
curiosity, but the desire of preserving our goodwill, makes me demand it of
you. Lindamor spoke to Polemas with the same freedom that a friend should,
poor and ignorant Lover, that thought he could since it in love! On the
contrary, the dissembling Polemas answered him; Lindamor, this fair Nymph, of
whom you speak, is worthy to be served of all the world; but as for my self,
I have no pretention; yet this I will tell you, that as concerning love, I am
of opinion, that every one, for his part, should do what he can. Then Lindamor
repented that he had used a language so full of courtesy and respect, since he
required it so ill. Here solued to do his best to advance himself into the
good graces of the Nymph; and yet he answered him, Since you have no such
dessigne, I am right glad, as of the thing most welcome to me, for that to
have withdravvne my self, it would have been a pain to me, little less than
death.

So far off a^ I (added Poleman) from having any pretention of love, that I
never looked on her, but with an eye of respect, such as we are all bound to
give her. For my part (replied Lindamor) I honor Galathee as my Lady; but I
likewise love her as a fair Lady: and me thinks, my fortune mayayme as high
as it is permitted mine eyes to look; and that I shall offend no divinity by
loving her. With such like discourses they parted, neither of them well
satisfied, yet some what differing, Polemas out of iclousie, and Lindamor, for
having found the unfaithfulness of his friend. From that day they lived in a
pleasant fashion, for they were ordinarily together, and yet they concealed
their dessignes. Yet not Lindamor in appearance, but in effect, hid himself in
all he propounded and purposed to do: and knowing well, that occasions passed,
may not be recalled, he would not lose a moment of leisure, which he employed
not to make his affection apparent to the Nymph. In which he neither lost his
time, nor his pain; for she liked so well of this good will, which he made
show of, that if she had not so much love as he in her eyes, she had it at the
least in her heart. And because it is an hard matter to hide a great fire so
well, but something will discover it: their affections which began to burn
in good earnest, were hardly to be concealed for all the wisdom they could
use.

This was the cause that Galathee resolved to speak with Lindamor, as seldom
as she could, and to find some invention for him to send his Letters, and to
receive their secrets; and for this purpose she made a desseigne on Fleurial,
nephew to the Nurse of Amasis, and brother of hers, whose good will she had
long known, for that being Gardener of those fair gardens of Monbrison, as
his father during his life had been, when they carried Galathee abroad, he
took her often in his arms, and went up and down, gathering what flowers
she would; and you know that these loves of infancy, being as it were sucked
in with the milk, turn almost into nature: besides that, she knew well, that
all country swains are covetous; dealing bountifully with him, she won him
entirely to her. And it fell out as she purposed, for one day being some
distance removed from us, she called him to her, fayning to ask him the name
of some flowers which she held in her hand; and after she had asked him aloude
of them, somewhat abasing her voice, she said to him, Come hither, Fleurial,
do thou love me well? Madame (answered he) I should be the veriest wretch
living, if I loved you not above all the world beside. May I be assured (said
the Nymph) of what thou say? May I (replied he) never live a moment, if I
choose not rather to be wanting to heaven than to you. What, (answered
Galathee) without any exception, were it in a thing that might displease Amasis
or Clidamon? I care not then, said Fleurial, whom I displease in serving you:
for I am to none but to you: and whosoever pays me, yet it is of you that
this benefit befalles me, and when this shall cease to be: I always had such
an affection to you, that ever since your childhood, I gave my self entirely
to you. But, Madame, whereto serve these words? I shall never be so happy to be
able to give proof of it. Then Galathee said, Hearken, Fleurial, if thou live
in this resolution, and thou will be secret, thou shall be the happiest man (of
thy condition) in all the world: and that which I have done for thee
heretofore, is nothing to the value of that which heereaster I will do. But
look that you be secret, and remember, that if you be not, besides that of a
friend (as I am) I will henceforth become your mortal enemy; yet must you
assure your self, that it will cost you no less then your life. Go^ find out
Lindamor, and do what he shall bid you, and believe thou, that I will consider
better than thou can hope for, for the services which thou shall do for me
in this; and beware you have not a tongue.

At this word Galathee came to seek us out, and laughing, said, That Fleurial
and she had talked a good while of Love, but, said she, it was love of the
garden, for that is the love of the simple. Fleurial, for his part, after he
had turned some turns about the garden, went forth some what troubled with
this affair; for he was not so ignorant, but he knew well the danger into
which he put himself: whether with Amasis, if he should discover it, or with
Galathee, if he should not do as she commanded him, thinking it was about love:
and he had heard them say, that all the ofsences of Love strike to the heart.
At last, the amity he bare to Galathee, and the desire of gain, made him
resolve, since he had promised to perform his promise: and then he went to
seek out Lindamor, who expected him; for the Nymph had assured him that she
would send him, and that only he should direct him what he was to do.

As soon as Lindamor saw him, he made show before others, not to know the
cause, and asked him if he had any business with him. To who^ he made answer
aloud, that he came to beseech him to present to Amasis his long services, and
the small means he had to be paid that which was due to him: and at last,
speaking some what lower, he told him the occasion of his coming, and offered
him his service at his pleasure. Lindamor thanked him, and having shortly
instructed him what he was to do, he judged the thing so easy, that he made
no difficulty: from that time (as I told you) when Lindamor would write,
Fleurial made show to present some suire to the Nymph, and when she made
answer, she returned it back with such an order as she could obtain from
Amasis. And because ordinarily, these old servants have always some thing or
other to ask, this man never wanted matter to exhibit at all times of some new
request, which oftentimes received an answer beyond his hopes.

Now during this time, the love which the Nymph had borne to Polemas, lessened
in such sort, that hardly could she speak to him without disgrace, which he
could not bear: and knowing well, that all this coldness procceded of the
love of Lindamor, he suffered himself to be transported so far, that not
daring to speak against Galathee, he could not abstain from speaking many
things to the disadvantage of Lindamor: and among other, that though he were an
honest man, and accomplished with many remarkable parts, yet the good opinion
which he had of himself, was not like theirs that know how to measure
themselves; and for proof of it, he had been so proud as to raise his eyes to
the love of Galathee, and not only to conceive it in his soul, but to vaunt
of it in speech to him. A discourse, which at last came to the ears of
Galathee, namely, so far passed, that almost all the Court knew it. The Nymph
was so offended herewith, that she resolved to use Lindamor so, that hereafter
he should not have occasion to publish his vanities: and that was the cause,
that shortly after this bruit was extinct, for that she (who was in choler)
pake no more to him, and that they that observed his actions, finding no
appearance of Love, were constrained to believe the contrary: and at that time
was the sending away of Knights, which fell out fitly, and aided her much, for
that Amasis had sent him about a business of importance to the banks of Rhine.
But his departure could not be so sudden, bu^ he found occasion to speak to
Galathee, to know the cause of her change; and after he had spied out a time,
the morning as she went to the Temple with her mother, he was so near her, and
so in the midst of us, that hardly could Amasis perceive him. As soon as
she saw him, she would have changed the place, but holding her by the
garment, he said, What is my offense? or what is your change? She answered as
she went, Neither offense nor change, for I am always Galathee, and you ar^
always Lindamor, who are too base a subject to offend me. If these words
touched him, his actions gave witness; for though he were upon his departure,
yet could he give order to no other business, but to search in himself
wherein he had failed. At last, not finding himself guilty, he wrote her a
letter.

The letter of Lindamor to Galathee.
IT is not to complain of my Lady, that I dare take up my pen, but only to
deplore the misfortune which make me so co^^^m^ed of her, that at other times
was not wont to use me in this sort: I am the same man that have serve (you
with all sort of respect and submission, and you are the same Lady that first
was mine: si^ce you received me for yours, I am become no less, nor you
greater: if it be thus, why do you not judge m^ worthy of the same
entertainment? I have called my soul to account for her actions: since it
pleases you, I will display them all before your eyes: for my part, I cannot
accuse any one of them, if you shall judge otherwise, when you have heard them,
it shall be no small consolation to the poor condemned, to know, at least, the
cause of his punishment.


This letter was brought her as of custom by Fleurial, and so fitly, that
though she would, yet durst she not refuse it; and without lying, it was
impossible that any other could have played this part better then he: for his
request was so suited with words of pity, and reverence, so well sorting to
that which he seemed to demand, that there was (...) but might have been
deceived; and for my part, if Galathee had not told me, I should never have
regarded it: but for that it was hard, or rather impossible, but the tender
heart of the Nymph must discharge her sel^^ of it, to some trusty person, to
whom she might freely impart that which pressed her so sore; among the rest,
she chose out me as the most assured, as she thought, and most affectionate.
Now suddenly, as she had received this paper, faining to have forgot something
in her cabinet, she called me, and told the other Nymphs, that she would come
back presently, and that they should attend her there. She went up into her
chamber, and then into her cabinet, without saying any thing to me: I judged
she had somewhat that troubled her, but I durst not ask her, for fear of
troubling her: she sat down, and casting the request of Fleurial on the
table, she said, This beast Fleurial always comes to mollest me with the
letters of Lindamor: I pray thee, Leonide, bid him bring me no more. I was
somewhat astonished at this change: yet I knew well, that love could not long
last without brawles; and that these disputes are as bellows, that do more
kindle the coals: yet I forbear not to say to her, Since when, Madam, has he
done thus? Some good while (said she) and know you nothing of it? No truly,
Madam (said I.) Then she with a little frowning brow, It is true (said she)
that heretofore I have liked it, but now he has abused my fauoues, and
offended me by his rashness. And what is this fault, replied I? The fault (added
she) is not great, yet it displeases me more, then if it were of importance.
Think you what his vanity is, to make it known that he loves me, and that he
has told me so?

O Madam (said I) this cannot be true: his enemies have invented it to undo
him, both with you and with Amasis. It is well (replied she) but in the mean
time, Polemas talks of it every where; and is it possible any should know it,
and that he only should be deaf at this brute? or if he hear it, should not
remedy it? And what remedy (answered I) would you he should have? What (said
the Nymph) sword and blood. It may be (said I) ^e does it with great reason:
for I remember I have heard it said, that that which touches us in love, is so
subject to slander, that the less light is given it, the better it is. See
(said she) these good excuses, at least he should have demanded of me what my
will was he should do; herein he had done as he ought, and I should have been
satisfied. Have you seen the letter (answered I) which he wrote you? No (said
she) and I will tell you more, I will never see them more, if it be possible,
and will avoid as much as I can, to speak to him. Then took I the paper that
Fleurial brought, and opening the letter, I read aloud that which I told you
even now, and added at last, Well, Madame, ought not you to love the thing is
wholly yours? and not to be so soon offended with him that has not committed
any fault? Then it is well (said she.) Is there any likelihood that he alone
should not hear these bruits? But dissemble he as long as he will, at least I
will comfort my self, that if he love me, he shall truly pay the interest of
the pleasure which he has had in vanting of our love; and if he love me not,
let him assure himself, that if I have given him any subject for the time
passed, to concei^ue such an opinion, I will put him out of it hereafter, and
give him occasion to smother it, how great soever it has been. And to
begin, I pray you command Fleurial that he be not so hardy, to bring any
thing from this arrogant. Madame (said I) I will do what pleases you to
command me, yet it shall be very necessary, to consider ripely of this affair,
for you may do your self much hurt, thinking to offend another. You know
well, what manner of man Fleurial is, he has no more spirit then will serve to
keep his garden: if you let him know this evil carriage between Lindamor and
you, I am afraid, that out of pure fear he will discover it to Amasis, or else
run away, and that which shall make him discover it, shall be to excuse
himself of mischief: For Gods sake, Madame, consider what displeasure this
will bring: will it not be better, without breaking forth, to devise some means
to complain to Lindamor? And if you will not do it, I will, and I assure my
self, he will satisfy you: or if he do not, then shall you have occasion to
break off all love with him, telling him so much your self, without giving
Fleurial knowledge of it. How to speak to him I know not, said she, and to
hear him speak, my courage will not snffer me, for I wish him much evil.

Seeing her to have a heart so swollen with this offense, At the last, said I,
you must write to him. Talk no more of that (said she) he is too proud, he
has too many of my letters already. At the last, not being able to get other
thing at her hands, she suffered me to fold up a piece of paper in fashion of
a letter, and to put it in to the request of Fleurial, and to carry it to him:
And this that he might not perceive this dissension. What the astonishment was
of poor Lindamor, when he received this paper, it is hard to say to one that
never proved it. And that which afflicted him more, was, that he must of
necessity depart the next morning to go his voyage, where the affairs of
Amasis and Clidaman tied him to stay some long time. To defer his departure,
he could not; and to go, was death.

At last he^e resolved presently to write to her, yet a course rather to
hazard, then to hope for any good fortune. Fleurial did what he could to
present it speedily to Galathee, but he could not do it, for that she feeling
this displeasure at her heart, was not able to bear this disunion, but with
such grief, that she was constrained to keep her ^ed, out of which she rose
not many days. Fleurial, at last seeing Lindamor gone, took the hardiness to
seek her chamber: and I must tell you true, because I wished ill to Polemas, I
did what I could to piece up this affection of L^ndamor; and for this cause I
gave means for Fleurial to enter. If Galathee were surprised, judge you, for
she looked rather for any thing then that, yet she was constrained to
dissemble, and to take that which he presented, which were but flowers in
appeara^ce: I would be in the chamber, that I might be of the counsel, and to
bring somewhat that might be to the contentment of poor Lindamor. And indeed I
was not altogether unprofitable: for after Fleurial was gone, and that Galathee
found her self alone, she called me, and told me, she thought to have been
exempted from the importunity of the letters of Lindamor, when he had been
gone, but for ought she saw, he had nothing to be his warrant. I that would
serve Lindamor, though he knew nothing of it, knowing the Nymph to be in an
humor to talk of him, made it very cold, knowing well that if I contraried her
at first, it was the way to lose all, and to affirm that which she said,
would serve the more to punish her: for though she were not well satisfied
toward him, yet love as yet was the more strong, and in herself, she was
willing that I should take Lindamor^ part, not to give me way, but to have more
occasion to speak of him, and put her choler out of her soul: so that having
all these considerations before mine eyes, I held my peace, the first time she
spoke to me. She that would not have this silence, added, But what think you,
Leonide, of the arrogance of this man? Madame (said I) I know not what to say,
but if he have failed, he must do penance. But (said she) what may I think of
his rashness? why goes he disgracing me with his tales? had he no other
fitter discourse then of me? and then, after she had looked on the letter he
writ, I have some what else to do that he continues to write to me: to this I
answered nothing.

After she had held her peace a while (she said) And why, Leonide, answer you
me not? have I not reason to complain? Madame (said I) is it your pleasure I
should speak freely? You shall please me, said she. I must tell you then
(continued I) that you have reason in all, except it be when you seek for
reason in love: for you must know that he that referrs himself to the laws of
justice, puts the principal authority out of himself, which is to be subject
but to himself: so that I conclude, that if Lindamor have failed in that he
loves you, he is culpable, but if by the laws of reasou and providence, it is
you that deserve chastisment, that will put love that is free and commands
others, under the servitude of a superior. And why (said she) have I not heard
it said, that love, to make it praise worthy, must be virtuous? If this be so,
he must be tied to the laws of virtue. Love, answered I, is a thing some what
greater then this virtue, of which you speak, and therefore it gives it self
laws without the publishing of any other person: but since you command me to
speak frankly, tell me, Madam, are not you more culpable then he, both in
that for which you accuse him, and in that which concerns love? for if he
have had the hardness to say he loved you, you are the cause, in that you have
sufferd him. Though it be so, answered she, yet by discretion he was bound to
conceal it. Complain you then (said I) of his discretion, and not of his
love? But he has more occasion to complain of your love, since upon the
first report at the first conceit that has been given you, you have chased
from you the love you bare him, without taxing him that he has been wanting in
affection.

Excuse me, Madam, if I speak so frankly: you do the greatest wrong in the
world to use him in this sort: at least if you would condemn him to so great a
punishment, it ought not to be without co^uincing him, or at leastwise to make
him blufh at his error. She stood somewhile, before she answered me: at last
she said, Well, Leonide; the remedy shall be timely enough when he returns,
not that I am resolved to love him, nor to permit him to love me, but to tell
him where in he has failed, and so I shall content you, and bind him from
importuning me more, if he be not a^ impudent as rash. It may be, Madam, you
will deceive your self, to think it will be time enough at his return: if you
knew what the violencies of love are, you would not believe that these delays
were like other affairs: at least look on the letter. That is to no purpose
(replied she) for by this time he is well gone: and with that word she gave it
me, and saw it was thus:

The letter of Lindamon to Galathee.
Sometimes love, at this time the despair of love, has put the p^n into my
h^^d, with a purpose, if it return me no asswagement, to change it into a
sword, which promises (...) a full, though a cr^^ll healing. This bla^^^
paper, which you have sent me for an answer, is a true testimony of my
innocence, since it is as if it had said you have found nothing to accuse me
of, but it is also an assurance to me of your disdain; for from whence can
this silence proceed unless it be from ^t? the one contents me in my self
the other makes me despair in you. If you have any remembrance of my
faithful service, for pity I demand of you, or life or death. I depart, the
most desperate that ever had cause of despair.


It was an effect of Love which brought a change in the carriage of Galathee,
for I saw her much mollified; but this was no small proof of her lofty
humor, not to give knowledge of it, and not being able to command her
countenance, which was become pale, she so tied her tongue, that she spoke no
word which might accuse her of relenting; but going out of her chamber, to
walk in the garden, not speaking a word of the Letter: for the Sun began
to grow low, and her disease, which was but travail of spirit, might find
more refreshing out of the house, than in the bed: so, after she was quickly
made ready, she went down into the garden, and would have none but me with
her. By the way I asked if it pleased her to make an answer: and telling me no:
Will you (Madam) that I do it? See (said she next) what would you write? That
which you command in, said I. What you will (said she) so you speak not of me.
You shall see (answered I) what I write. I have nothing to do with it (said
she) I refer my self to you. With this leave, while she walked, I writ in
the same alley, in a pair of Tablets, an answer, such as I thought fittelt,
but she that would not see it, would not have the patience to let me make an
end, without reading it while I writ it.

The answer of Leonide to Lindamor for Galathee.
DRaw from your evil the knowledge of your good; If you had not been beloved,
there would never have been sense of any thing: you may not know what your
offense is, till you be here present, but hope in your affection, and in your
return.


She would not the Letter should be thus: but at last I prevailed above her
courage, and gave my Tables to Fleuriall, with the key, commanding him to
deliver them to the hands of Lindamor only. And drawing aside, I opened my
Tables, and added these words, without the knowledge of Galathee:

A Billet of Leonide to Lindamor.
I Was desirous to have known when you went away: the pity of your evil
makes me tell you the occasion of your disaster. Polemas has given out, that
you love Galathee, and you go about bragging of it. A great courage, as here
is, cannot suffer so great an offense without feeling. Let your wisdom direct
you in those affairs with the discretion which has always gone with you,
that for loving you, and taking pity of your evil, I may not have, in
exchange, matter to grieve for you, to whom I promise all aid and favor.


I sent this Billet, as I told you, to deceive Galathee, and indeed I repented
me of it shortly after, as I will tell you. It was about a month after
Fleurial was gone, when behold, there comes a knight, armed at all pieces, an
unknown Herald with him; and, to keep all men from knowledge of him he had
his visor down. By his port, every one judged of him as he was indeed. And
because at the towne-gate the Herald had demanded to be conducted to Amasis,
every one, desirous to hear some news, accompanied him. Being come up to the
Castle, the Guarde of the town left him to them of the Gate House. And after
they had given notice to Amasis, they were brought before her, who had sent for
Clidaman, to give audience to these strangers. The Herald, after the Knight had
kissed the robe of Amasis, and the hand of her son, said thus with words
half outlandish: Madam, this knight whom you see, being borne of the greatest
of his country, having known, that in your Court every man of honor may
demand reason of them that offend him, is come upon this assurance, to cast
himself at your feet, and to beseech you, that Justice which you never denied
to any, may be allowed him in your presence, and before all these fair Nymphs,
to draw reason from him, who has done him the injury, by the means usual to
persons so wronged. Amasis, after she had some while thought with herself, at
last answered, that it is true, that this sort of desence of honor had always
been used in this Court: but she, being a woman, did never suffer them to come
in arms, yet her son was of age to manage greater affairs than these, and
she would refer her self to that he should do. Clidaman, without staying for
the Heralds reply, turning to Amasis, said: Madame, it is not only to be
served and honored of all those that inhabit this Province, wherein the gods
have established you the Sovereign Lady, and your Ancestors also: but much
rather to punish them that are faulty, and to honor those that deserve well,
the best means of all is, by Arms, at the least, in those things that cannot
otherwise be searched out; so that if you abolish out of your estate this most
just fashion of discovering the secret practices of the wicked, you give way
unto licencious lewdness, that will never fear to do evil, so that it may
be performed in secret. Beside that, these strangers being the first, that in
your time have had recourse to you, have some reason to complain, to be the
first refused. So that since you have referred them to me, I will tell you
(said he) turning him about toward the Herald, that this Knight may frankely
and freely accuse whomsoever he will, for I promise him to assure himself of
the field.

The Knight then set his knee to the ground, kissed his hand, by way of
thanks, and made a sign to the Herald to hold on. Sir (said he) since you do
him this grace, I must tell you, he is here in search for a Knight called
Polemas, whom I desire may be showed me, that I may finish what I have
undertaken. Polemas hearing himself named, came forward, saying in a fashion
lofty enough, that he was the man whom he sought for. Then the unknown Knight
presented to him a piece of armor; and the Herald said: This Knight would say,
that he presents you this gage, promising that he will be tomorrow, by the
Sun rising, at the place that shall be appointed, to fight with you, to the
uttermost, to prove on you, that you have wickedly invented that which you
have said against him. Herald, I receive (said he) this gage; for though I know
not thy Knight, yet will I not leave to be most aslured to have justice on my
side, as knowing well, that I never said any thing against the truth: and let
the morrow be the day of trial. At this word the Knight, after he had saluted
Amasis and all the Ladies, returned into a Tent, which he caused to be spread
near the towne-gate. You may think that this put all the Court into diverse
discourses: especially Amasis and Clidaman, who loved Polemas well, had much
grief to see him in this danger, yet their promise bound them to grant the
field. As for Polemas, he prepared himself as full of courage to the combat,
without having knowledge of his enemy. And for Galathee, that by this time had
almost forgotten the offense that Lindamor had received from Polemas, (besides
that, she believed not that he knew his evil came from thence) she never
thought of Lindamor, nor I neither, who took him to be an hundred leagues from
us, and yet it was he, who having received my Letter, resolved to be revenged
in this sort, and so unknown, came to present himself, as I told you. But to
make short, for I am no great good warrior, and so I should (if I would
particularize this combat) talk somevvhat improperly.

After long combat, they had both of them equal advantage, and they were both
so laden with blows, that the soundest of the two was as much certain of
his death, as of his life, their horses began to sink under them; but they
on the contrary, so fresh, as if they had not fought all that day, began to
power out their blood, and to open wide gashes, with such cruel^y, that every
body took pity to see two persons of that valor to be so lost.

Amasis among others said to Clidaman, that it were fit to separate them: and
there was none that might better do it than Galathee. She that for her part
was already touched within, and waited but for this commandment, to effect it
with a good heart, with three or four of us came into the field. When she
entered, the victory lay on Lindamors side, and Polemas was brought to evil
terms, although the other were not much wounded, on whom, by chance, she
lighted, and taking him by the skarfe, which tied his helmet, and which hung
somewhat low behind him, she pulled him with some stresse. He that felt
himself touched, turned rudely on that side, thinking he had bin betrayed, and
with that fury, that the Nymph thinking to give back, lest she should be
hurt, trod on her robe, and fell down in the midst of the field. Lindamor,
who knevv her, ran presently to help her up; but Polemas, without any regard
to the Nymph, seeing this advantage, when he was in despair of the combat,
took his svvord in both his hands, and gave him, behind on the head, two or
three blows, with such force, that he constrained him with one great wound to
set one knee on the ground, from whence he rose so ince^sed, for the
discourtesie of his enemy, that afterward, though Galathee requested him, he
would not leave off until he had laid him at his feet; where leaping on him,
he dis-armed his head, and being ready to give him the last stroke, he heard
the voice of his Lady, that said to him: Knight, I ad^u^e you by her whom you
love best, to give me this Knight. I will (said he) Madame, if hae will confess
he has spoken falsely of me, and of he^ by whom you adjure me. Polemas being,
to his own thinking, at the last point of his life, with a loud voice
confessed what they would.

So Lindamor departed, after he had kissed the hand of his mistrisse, who never
knew him though he spoke to her, for the Helmet, and the fear wherein she was,
kept her from marking his voice. It is true, that passing by me, he said very
softly, Fair Leonide, I am much bound unto you, to conceal me to your self:
thus you see the effect of your letters: and without longer stay, mounted on
horse back, and though he were sore wounded, yet galloped he away, until they
lost the sight of him, unwilling to be known.

This travel of his did him much hurt, and brought him to that extremity, that
being arrived at the house of one of Fleurials Aunts, where he resolved before
to withdraw, if he were wounded, he found himself so feeble, that he stayed
more then three weeks before he could recover himself. In the mean time,
behold, Galathee returning in great choler against the unknown Knight, for
that he did not leave the combat at the second time, seeming to be more
offended in this refusal, then obliged, in that he gave him to her. And
because Polemas held one of the first ranks, as you know, Amasis and Clidaman,
with much sorrow, caused him to be carried out of the field, and looked unto
with such care, that in the end they began to have hope of life in him.

Every one was very desirous to know who this unknown Knight was, the courage
and valor of whom, had won him the favor of many. Galathee only was she that
conceived an evil opinion; for this proud beauty remembered the offense, but
forgot the courtesy. And because I was the party whom she trusted with her
most secret thoughts, as soon as she saw me in private, Know you (said she)
this discourteous Knight, to whom Fortune, not valor, gave the advantage in
this fight? I know (said I, Madam) this valiant Knight, and I know him to be as
courtcous as valiant. He has not showed it (said she) in this action,
otherwise he would not have refused to leave the combat when I requested him.
Madame, answered I, you blame him for that, for which you are to esteem him,
since that, to give you the honor which every one owes to you, he was in danger
of his life, and saw his blood power down on the earth. If (said Galathee)
therein Polemas did wrong he had the advantage shortly after, when
notwithstanding any prayer I could make, he would not give over. And had he
not reason (said I) to be desirous to chastise this pride, for the small
respect he bare to you? And for my part, I find, that in this, Lindamor has
done very well. How, (interrupted she) was it Lindamor that fought? Indeed I
was overtaken, for I named him before I thought it: but seeing it was done, I
resolved to ^ell her, Yes, Madame, it is Lindamor, who felt himself offended
at that which Polemas had spoke of him, and would make it apparent by Arms.
She stood as if she were besides her self: and after she had some while
thought of this accident, she said, Then is it Lindamor that has done me this
displeasure? Is it he that yielded me so small respect? Had he than so (...)
consideration, that he durst put my honor into the hazard of Fortune, or of
Arms? At this word she pawsed out of extreme choler: And I, that in any case
desired she should know he had done no wrong, answered, Is it possible, Madame,
that you can complain of Lindamor, without acknowledging the wrong you have
done to your self? What displeasure has he done you, since in vanquishing
Polemas, he has vanquiyour enemy? How, my enemy (said she?) Ah! Lindamor is
much more: for if Polemas talked, Lindamor gave him the subject. O God (said I
then) what is that I hear? Lindamor your enemy? that has no soul but to
adore you, and has not a drop of blood which he would not spend for your
service: and he your friend, that by his forged discourses, has endeavored by
practices to wound your honor? But who knows (said she) if it be not true
that Lindamor, thrust forward by his usual arrogance, has used such language?
Well then, replied I, how much are you bound to Lindamor, that he has made
your enemy confess that he invented it? Oh! Madame, pardon me, if you please:
but I cannot but herein accuse you of a great mistaking, that I may not say
ingratitude. If he hazard his life to make it appear that Polemas lied, do
you accuse him of inconsideration? And if he have made the liar confess it,
will you tax him of discourtesie? And if he had not committed his right to
Arms, how should the truth of this business have been found? And if, when
you commanded him the second ^i^e, he had left the battle, Polemas had never
confessed that you or any other should have heard. O poor Lindamor, how must I
bewail thy fortune? And what is it thou can do, when thy most notable
services are offenses and injuries? But well, Madame, it may be, you shall not
have long time to use these cruelties: for a most pitiful death may bring end
to your mistakings and his punishment; and (it may be) even now, when I speak,
he is no more; and if it be so, the Nymph, Galathee, is the only cause. Why
do you accuse me, said she? Because (replied I) that when you would have
separated them, and in recoyling, your knee touched the ground, he would have
helped you up: in the mean time that courteous Polemas, whom you commend so
much, wounded him in two or three several places, out of that advantage, where
I saw the blood make the ground red: but if he dye for this, it is less evil
then that he receives from you: for seeing himself mistaken, having done his
endeavor, this (me thinks) is a displeasure to which no other can be equalled.
But, Madame, may it please you to remember, that heretofore you have said to
me, in complaining of him, that to blot out these speeches of Polamas, he knew
no other remedy; he was to serve himself of sword and blood. And now he has
done that which you judged he should do, and yet you find it not well done.

If Siluie, and some other Nymphs had not interrupted us, before I had left off
my discourse, I had well aswaged this great mind of the Nymph; but seeing so
many persons, we changed our talk. And yet my words were not without effect,
though she would make no show of it to me, but by a thousand passages I found
the truth: for, from that day I resolved never to speak to her more of him,
unless she asked me some news. She on the other side, looked that I should
speak first, and so more then eight days passed without speech. But in the
mean time, Lindamor was not without care to know both what was said of him in
Court, and what Galathee thought of him. He sent Fleurial to me for this cause,
and to give me word in a letter. He did his message so well, that Galathe^
took no notice of it: his Billet was thus:

The Billet of Lindamor, to Leonide.
MAdam, who doubts of my innocence, shall be no less guilty against the
truth: yet if the closed eyes see not the light, though without shadow it shine
on them, I may be suffered to doubt, that my Lady for my misery, has her eyes
shut against the brightness of my justice, bind me, by assuring her, that if
the blood of my enemy cannot wash away the stain, with which he has gone
about to defile me, I will voluntarily add thereto mine own, that I no
otherwise preserve my life which is hers, but that her rigor shall make me
ready to render it.


I enquired particularly of Fleurial, how he fared, and if there were any that
knew him: and I understood that he had lost much blood, and that much hindered
his healing: but there was no danger: that to be known, it could not be,
because the Herald was a Frank of the army of Meroue, who kept about the banks
of Rhine at that time; and they that attended him, were not suffered to go out
of doors, and that his Aunt and Sister took him but for the knight that
fought with Polemas, whose valor and liberality won them to serve him with
that care, that they were not to doubt but he would be better; that he had
commanded him to come know of me, what the brute was in the Court, and what he
was to do. I answered him, that he should carry to Lindamor, that all the
Court was full of his valor, though he were unknown, that for the rest he
should look to his healing, and that I, for my part, would bring what I could
to his contentment. Thus, I gave him mine answer, and told him the day before
your departure, When Galathee comes into the garden, invent some occasion to go
to see your Aunt, and take leave of her, for it is necessary for our business,
that I speak with you again. He failed not, and by fortune the next day, the
Nymph being come toward evening into the garden, Fleurial came to make his
reverence, and would speak with her: but Galathee, that thought it was to
giver her letters from Lindamor, stood so confused, that I saw her change
color, and looked pale like death. And because I feared, Fleurial would
perceive it, I came forward, and said to her, Madam, here is Fleurial, that
would go to see his Aunt because she is sick, and desires you to give him
leave for some few days. Galathee turning her eyes and words to me, asked
what her disease was. I think (answered I) it is so many years passed, that
it takes from her all hope of recovery. Then she turned to Fleurial, and said,
Go and return quickly, but not before she be well if it be possible: for I
love her well, for the special good will, which she has always borne me.
At this word she held on her walking, and I set my self to speak to him, and
showed in my gesture more then indeed of displeasure, and admiration, that the
Nymph might note it: at last I told him, See, Fleurial, you (...) sacrer and
wise, thereon depends all our good, or all your evil, and above all, do what
Lindamor shall command you. After he had promised me, he went his way, and I
disposed my countenance the best I could to sadness and displeasure; and
sometimes when I was in place where the Nymph only might he are, I fained to
sigh, and lift up mine eyes to heaven, and strike my hands together, and to be
short, I did al I could imagine to give her some suspicion of what I would.
She, as I told you, that looked always when I should speak of Lindamor,
seeing I said nothing, but on the contrary avoided all occasions, and in stead
of that pleasant humor, which made me be esteemed of among my companions, I
had but a troubled melancholy, by little and little began to be of opinion,
that I would give it her, but not all: for my purpose was to make her believe,
that Lindamor going from the combat, was so sore wounded, that he was dead,
that pity might obtain that of that glorious soul, which neither affection
nor services could. Now, as I told you, my plot was so well fitted, that it
fell out as I did fore cast, for though she would dissemble, yet could she not
choose but be as lively touched for Lindamor, as any might be. And so seeing me
sad, and mure, she imagined either he was in very hard case, or some thing
worse, and felt her self so pressed with this unquietness, that she could not
possibly longer hold out her resolution.

Two days after, that Fleurial was gone, she made me come into her cabinet,
and seeming to talk of another matter, said to me, Know you how Fleurials Aunt
does? I answered, that since he went I knew nothing. Truly (said she) I would
be very sorry, if the old woman should not do well: you have reason (said I)
Madam, for she loves you, and you have had many services of her, which are not
yet fully acknowledged. If she live (said she) I will do it, and after her, I
will remember Fleurial for her sake. Then I answered, Both the services of the
aunt, and those of the Nephew, deserve some good recompense, and especially
Fleurial; for his faithfulness, and affection cannot be bought. It is true
(said she) but because you speak of Fleurial, what great matter had you to say
to him? or he to you, when he went away? I answered coldly, I recommended me
to his aunt. Recommendations (said she) were not so long: then she came nearer
me and laid her hand on my shoulder: Tell truth, continued she; you spoke of
some other thing. And what might it be (replied I) if it were not that? I had
no other business with him. Now I know (said she) that at this present you
dissemble: why did you say you had no other business with him, and have had so
much for Lindamor? O! Madam, I little thought you would have remembered a man so
unfortunate; and then holding my peace, I fetched a deep sigh. What is the
matter (said she) that you sigh? tell me true; where is Lindamor? Lindamor
(answered I) is no more then earth. How, (cried she out) Lindamor is no more?
No indeed (answered I) the cruelty which you have used toward him, has rather
slain him then the strokes of his enemy: for going from the combat, and
knowing by the report of many, the evil satisfaction which you had of him, he
would never suffer himself to be dressed; and because you have such a desire
to know, that was it that Fleurial told me, whom I commanded to assay, if he
could wisely withdraw the letters which we have writ him, to the end that as
you have lost the remembrance of his services by your cruelty, so might I
consume in the fire the memories which might remain. O God (said she) what is
that you tell me? Is it possible he should be so lost? It is you (said I) that
may say you have lost him: for his part, he has gained by dying, since by
death he has found rest, which your cruelty will never permit him, while he
lived.

Ah! Leonide (said she) you tell me these things, to put me to pain: confess
the truth, he is not dead. Would to God it were so (said I) but for what cause
should I tell you? I answer, his death or life are indifferent to you; and
specially since you loved him so little, you may be glad to be exempted for the
importunity he would have given you: for you are to believe that if he had
lived, he would never have ceased from giving such proofs of his affection,
as that of Polemas. Indeed then, said the Nymph, I am sorry for the poor
Lindamor, and swear unto you, that his death touches me more to the quick,
then I though it would: but tell me, had he never no remembrance of us at his
end? and did he not show to be grieved to leave us? See, Madam (said I) a
question which is not usual! He died for your sake, and you ask if he
remembered you? Ah! that his memory and his sorrow had not bin too great for his
health! I beseech you talk no more of him. I assure my self, he is in the
place where he receives the reward of his fidelity, and where it may be, he
shall see himself revenged at you cost. You are in choler (said she.) You must
pardon me (said I) Madam: but this is the reason that constraines me to speak
thus, for there is none that can give more testimony of his affection and
fidelity then I, and of the wrong you have done him, to give him so unworthy a
recompense for so many services. But (said the Nymph) let us set this aside;
for I know that in some thing you have reason: but I have not done so much
wrong as you impute. And tell me, I pray you, by the love you bear me, if in
his last words he remembered me, and what they were? Must you (said I) triumph
in your soul at the end of his life, as you have done over al his actions,
since he began to love you? If this must be to your contentment, I will
satisfy you. As soon as he knew that you went about to blemish the honor of
his victory, and that in stead of pleasing you, he has by this fight got your
hatred, it shall never be (said he) O injustice, that thou shall, for my cause,
lodge longer in so fair a soul. I must by my death wash away my offense. Then
he took all the clouts which he had on his wounds, and would no more suffer
the hand of the Surgeon: his wounds were not mortal, but the ranckling
brought it to those terms, that he perceived small strength in him to live: he
called Fleurial, and being alone, he said, My friend Fleurial, thou now lofest
him that had great care to do thee good: but you must arm your self with
patience, since it is the will of heaven: I would yet have one piece of service
from thee, which shall better please me, then that thou ever did, And having
drawn from him a promise that he would do it: he continued, You must not
fail in what I bid you. As soon as I shall be dead, rip up my belly, and take
out the heart, and carry it to the fair Galathee, and tell her that I send it
her, that at my death I may keep nothing that belongs to any other. At these
last words, he lost both speech and life.

Now this fool Fleurial, that he may not be wanting in that which was
commanded him, by a person whom he held so dear, has brought hither the
heart, and without me would present it to you. Ah! Leonide, (said she) is it
certain he is dead? Oh God, that I knew not his sickness! and you would never
tell me of it! I would have found some remedy. O what a loss have I sustained!
and how great is your fault! Madam, (answered I) I knew nothing: for Fleurial
stayed with him to attend him, because he had none of his own: but if I had
known, I think I should not have spoken to you of it, I knew your mind was so
far removed from that subject. At these words, resting her head on her arm,
she commanded me to leave her alone, to the end, as I thought, that I might not
see her tears which already increased their drops: but hardly was I gone,
before she called me back, and without lifting up her head, she bid me
command Fleurial to bring her that which Lindamor had sent her, in what fashion
he listed. And presently I went out, fully assured that the knights affairs
for whom I pleaded, would fall out as I had propounded. In the mean time, when
Fleurial returned to Lindamor, he found him in pain, for the long tarrying he
made at Mont-brison: but my letter rejoiced him so, that at an instant a man
might see him amended. It was thus:

The answer of Leonide to Lindamor.
YOur instice so cleeres, that the eyes fastest shut, cannot deny the
brightness. Content your self, that they whom you desire should see it by
me, having known your resolution, have found it most just: it is true, that
as the wounds of the body are not all healed, though they be out of danger, so
are they of the mind: but having removed the danger by your valor and
prudence, you must give time leave to work his ordinary actions, remembering
that the sores which heal ouersoone, are subject to putrify, which is
afterward more dingerous then the wound. Hope for all your desire: for you may
have it with reason.


I writ to him in this sort, that sadness might not hurt his wounds, and that
he might heal the sooner. He writ back to me thus:

The reply of Lindamor to Leonide.
SO, fair Nymph, may you have all sort of contentment, as all mine comes and
depends on you alone. I hope now you command me, but lone which is ever
accompanied with doubt, commands me to tremble: but let heaven do with me what
it pleases: I know, it will not deny me the grave.


Now, that which I answered (that I may not trouble you with so many letters)
was in sum, that as soon as he might endure travel, he should find means to
speak with me, that then he should know how true I was; and as shortly as I
could, I let him know all the talk that Galat he and I had, and the
displeasure she had of his death, and the will she had to have his heart. See
what the force is of a strong affection! Lindamor had been wounded in many
places, and lost so much blood, that he was in danger of his life; yet beyond
the hope of the Surgeous, as soon as he received the last letter, you might
see him walk, you might see him apparel himself, and within two or three
days after, he assayed to mount on horseback; at last, he hazarded himself
to come to me: and because he durst not come by day, that he might not be
seen, he clad himself like a Gardner, and calling himself the cousin of
Fleurial, resolved to come into the garden, and to behave himself as occasion
should be offered.

As he set down, so he put it to effect; and causing his clothes privily to be
made ready, he told the Aunt of Fleurial, that before the combat, he had made
a vow, and that he would render it before he went out of those parts: but
that fearing the friends of Polemas, he would go in that disguise, and desired
her to say nothing. The good old woman would have dissuaded him from the danger
wherein he was, counselling him, to put off his journey, till some other time.
But he that was carried with too ardent a devotion to break off, told her, that
if he did it not before he went out of the country, he believed, all the
misfortunes of the world would befall him. So about evening he departed, that
he might meet no body, and arrived so happily, that unseen, he entered into
the garden, and was led by Fleurial into the house, where (at that time) he
had but one servant to help him to work, whom he made believe, that Lindamor
was his cousin, whom he would teach the mystery of a Gardner. If the knight
waited for the morning with great desire, and if the night seemed not to him
longer than usual, he that has been in attempt of that he desires, may
judge.

So it was, that the morning was no sooner come, but Lindamor, with a spade in
his hand, enters the Garden. I would you had seen him with this tool: you
might well know he was not used to it, and that he knew better to carry a
lance. He has sworn to me an hundred times since, that he was never more
ashamed in his life, than to present himself thus attired before the eyes of
his mistress; and he was twice or thrice in mind to return. But in the end,
Love surmounted the shame, and made him resolve to stay our com^ing. By
fortune, that day the Nymph, to refresh her self, came down into the Garden,
with many of my companions. As soon as she saw Fleurial, she was glad, and
presently made a sign with her eye: but though I assayed to speak to him, yet
could I not do it, because the new Gardner was by, who was so changed in his
habit, that none could know him. For my part I excuse my self for not knowing
him. For I would never have thought that he would have done this define,
without acquainting me with it. But he has since told me, that he concealed
it from me, knowing well, that I would never have suffered him to come thither,
in that sort. Thinking then of any other rather than of him, I was very curious
to ask of Fleurial, who this stranger was? He answered me coldly, that he was
(...) son, whom he would teach what himself knew in gardening. At this word
Galathee, as curious, but less courageous than I, seeing me talk with him,
came to him, and hearing that he was Fleurial^ cousin, asked him how his mother
did. Then it was that Lindamor was much troubled, for he feared that that which
was covered by his habit, might be discovered by his speech; yet counterfeiting
as well as he could, he answered in a country language, that she was past all
danger, and then followed a reverence after the same fashion, with such a
grace, that all the Nymphs fell on laughing: but he, without show of ^eeding
them, put his hat upon his head with both his hands, and fell to his work.

Galathee smiling, said to Fleurial, If your cou^^^ be as good a Gardner, as he
is a speaker, you have gotten a good help. Madam (said Fleurial) he can speak
no better than those that taught him: in his village they speak also. Yes,
said the Nymph, it may be he is taken for some great man among them. At this
word she walked away. This gave me some commodity to speak to Fleurial. But
my companions, to pass the time, placed themselves about Lindamor; and every
one to make him speak, said somewhat: and he answered them all, but with
things so far from the purpose, that they could not choose but laugh; for he
sp^^e so, that he seemed to be in earnest: and though he answered, yet did her
never lift up his head, faining to be busy at his work. In the mean time,
going to Fleurial, I asked him how Lindamor did? He answered, he was yet ill
enough: Lindamor had willed him to say so. And whence comes his evil (said I)
for you told me his wounds were almost healed? You may know, answered he, by
the Letter he has written to my Lady. My Lady (said I) thinks he is dead;
but give it me, and I will let her see it, fayning that it was long since
written. I dare not (answered he) because he has expressly forbidden me, and
has tied me by oath. How (said I) is Lindamor entered into mistrust of me? Not
so, said he, but contrarily he prays you make the Nymph believe he is dead.
But for his good, and my advantage, the Nymph must receive the letter at my
hands. I was put into choler, and had said more, if I had not feared to be
perceived. But he did so well that he was commanded, that I could draw no
other thing from him; but for conclusion, that if the Nymph would have that
which Lindamor gave her, she must receive it at his hands. And when I told him,
that it might be long before he could speak with her, and that may do hurt:
he answered me not, but with nodding his head: by which he let me know he would
not do it.

Galathee perceiving that we talked, desirous to know the subject, returned
from her walk sooner than of custom; and having called me, would know what
it was. I said to her freely, I would tell her that which was the resolution of
Fleurial, but in stead of the Letter, I said it was the heart of Lindamor, and
that having been in any case commanded by him at his death, he thought he
should commit treason, if he did not perform his promise. Then Galathee
answered me, that she meant to speak with him particularly, and that she
thought he could not have a sitter mean than to feign the bringing of some
fruit in a basket, and in the bottom they might lay the heart. I answered,
This might well be so done: but I knew him to be such a beast, that he would
do nothing, because Avarice gave him hope to have much from her, if himself
presented (in delivering the heart into her hands) the services which in these
occasions he had done. O (said she) if he keep it but for this, let him tell
you what he will have only: for I will give it him. That shall be (replied I)
a kind of ransom which you must pay for that heart. That is not (said she) of
money that I must pay, but of my tears, and those drawn from my blood. It may
be, she was sorry she said so much. So it was, that she commanded me in the
morning to speak to Fleurial: which I did, and set before him all that which I
thought might move him to give me this Letter, even to threatening. But all was
in vain: for, for resolution he said, Look, Leonide, till the heaven and
earth meet together, I will do no otherwise. If my Lady will know what I have
to say to her, the euenings are so bright, that she may come with you to the
foot of the stairs, which descend from her chamber: the Moon shines, I have
seen her come often, the way is not long, no body shall know of it: I assure
my self, that when she has heard me, she will not complain of the labor she
has taken.

When he had said thus, I was in extreme choler with him, representing to him
that he was to obey Galathee, and not Lindamor: that she was his mistress, that
she could do him good or ill. Shortly, that there was no likelihood that she
would take the pain. But he, without being moved, told me, Nymph, it is not
to Lindamor that I obey, but the oath which I have made to the gods; if she
cannot in this sort^, I can soon return thither from whence ^^came. I left
him with his obstinancy so vexed, that I was half besides my self; for if I
had known the dessigne of Lindamor, since the matter was so forvvard, without
doubt I had helped him. But not knovving it, I found Fleurial with so small
reason, that I knevv not what to say. At last, I returned to give answer to
Galathee, who was in such choler, that she would make him be beaten, and
thrust out of her mothers service, if I had not set before her the danger
whereinto she put her self, that she discovered not what had passed. Three or
four days p^ssed while the Nymph remained obstinate, not to do as Fleurial
required: at last, Love being ouer-strong to conquer all things, forced her so,
that in the morning she told me, that all the night she had taken no rest;
the ghost of Lindamor was all night about her, so that she thought it was the
least thing she owed to his memory, to go down the stayres to receive his
heart from another; and that I should signify to Fleurial, that he should not
fail to be there. O God! what was the contentment of the new Gardner? He has
told me since, that in his life he never had such a surfeit of joy: because he
perceived his device began to take effect. And seeing the Nymph came no more
into the Garden, he was afraid that she knew him.

But when Fleurial advertised him of the resolution she had taken, this was a
new resurrection of Love, at least, if one may die for sorrow, and revive by
contentment. He prepared himself to go about what he had to do, with more
curiosity than ever against Polemas. The night being come, and every man
retired, the Nymph failed not to attire her self but only with a robe for the
night; and making me to open the for^er door, she made me go out first; and I
swear, she trembled so, that she could hardly go. She said she had a
certain pain in her stomach, which she was not used to, and took from her
all strength. She knew not whether it were for being abroad in the night
without light, or for going so late at an unfit hour, or because she was to
receive the present of Lindamor; but whatsoever it was, she was not well. At
the last, being somewhat assured, we went down, where we had no sooner opened
the door, but we found Fleurial, who had long waited for us. The Nymph went
out before, and going under a shelte^ of W(...)in^e, which for the largeness
might (...) v^ both from the (...) of the Moon, and from being (...), from the
windows of those ^^dgings that answer the garden, she began all, in choler
to say to Fla^^ial; Well, Fl^^^i^l, how long have you been, so firm in your
opinion, that though I command, yet you will do nothing? Madam (answered he)
without being moved, I have obeyed you in sailing you, if there be a fault:
for, have not you commanded me expressly, that I should do what Lindamer
appointed me? Now, Madame, it is he that has thus commanded me, and who
delivering me his heart, besides his commandment, bound me by oath, that I
should not deliver it into any other hands b^^ yours. Well, well, interrupted
she, fetching a sigh, where is the heart? Behold, Madame, said he, stepping
back three or four paces to a little Arbot, If it please you to come, you
shall see it better then where you are. She rose up, and came thither: bu^ when
she would enter, behold, a man that cast (...) her feet, and without saying
any thing, kissed her robe. O God, said the Nymph, who is this, Fleurial? see,
a man! Madame (said (...) (...)) it is an heart that is yours. How, said she,
an (...) And then she would have fled away for fear: but he that ^^ist her to
be, (...) her back. Hearing these words, I drew near and presently I knew it
was ^e, that Flourial said was his cousin. I knew not suddenly what to think:
I saw Galathee and my self in the hands of these women, the one of (...) was
unknown to us. What could we resolve to do? (...) we (...) to fly,
Galathee could not; to trust to ou^ own (...) there was no appearance. At last,
all that I could do, was to cast^^^ self into the hands of him that held the
Nymphs (...) not being able to do more, I began to scratch and to bite him.
That which I did, was with such speeds that the first thing that he felt, was
the biting. Ah, courmous (...) said he, how do you handle your enemies, when
you deal so ridely with your servants? Though I were almost besides my self,
ye I almost knew the voice, and asking him who liee was? I am (said her) the
man that bears the heart of Lindamon to this ^aire Nymph: and then not raising
him self from the earth, turning to her, he went on:

I must confess, Madam, that this rashness is great, yet is it no way equal
to my affection, which has caused it. See the heart of (...), which I bring
you: I hope, this present shall be as well accepted from the hand of the giver,
as from a stranger: yet it my misfortune deny me what Love has promised me,
having offended the divinity who^ I only adore, condemn this heart, which I
bring you to all the cruel (...) you please: for so the pain may satisfy
you, it shall bear it patiently; and with as much contentment as pardon it. I
easily knew him then to be Lindamor, and so did Galathee: she seeing him at her
(...) whom she bewalled for dead; and in the place of a Gardener, the Knight
that gives place to none in all the Country. And knowing that Galathee was so
surprised, I said, Is it so, Lindamer, that you surprise Ladies? This is not
the act of a Knight, especially such as you are. I confess, said he, gracious
Nymph, that it is not the act of a Knight, but withal, you cannot deny, but it
is of a Lover; and what am I more then a Lover? Love, that has taught others
to spnine, teaches me to be a Gardener. Is it possible (said he, turning to the
Nymph) that this extreme affection which you have caused, is so displeasing to
you, that you would have it end in my death? I have had the hardines to bring
you that which you would have of mine, this heart, is it not more welcome to
you in life then in death? Now, if it be your pleasure that it die, behold here
a dagger, which may abridge that, which your rigor in time may bring.

The Nymph to all these words made no answer, but Ah, Leonide, have you
betrayed me? and with these words went out into the Alley, where she found a
seat sit for the purpose; for she was so besides her self, that she knew not
where she was. There the Knight cast himself on his knees, and I came on the
other side, and said. How, Madame, say you you are betrayed? Why do you accuse
(...) so? I swear by the service I have vowed you, that I knew nothing of this
act, and Fleurial has deceived me as well as you. But God be praised that the,
deceit is so commodious to cuery one: behold one heart of (...), which Flourial
promised you; but see him in a state to do you service: may you not be glad of
this treason?

It would be too long, to tell you all the discourse we had. So it was, that
at last we made a peace, and so, that this love was more strongly tied then
ever before: yet with condition, that, for that present he should depart, to go
whither Amasis and Clidaman had sent him. This departure was unpleasing; yet
he must obey: and so, after he had kissed Galath^^^ hands, without any
greater favor, he departed. Well, he went in great assurance, that at his
return he might see her at that hour, and in that place. But to what purpose
should I particularize every thing? Lindamor returned to them that being his
followers expected him, and from thence, with great ^^^gence went where
Clidaman thought he was, and by the way he framed a thousand wise excuses of
his stay, sometimes accusing the incommodities of the mountains, and sometimes
the sickness which yet appeared in his face, by reason of his wounds, and
thinking that all the while he was absent from from his Lady, his business was
not worth the stay, he came back with the permission of Amasis and Clidaman,
into Forests, where being arrived, and having given a good account of his
charge, he was honored and made much of, as his virtue deserved. But all this
went not to his heart, in respect of that aspect, which he had from the Nymph,
who since his last departure increased so her good will, that I know not if
Lindamor had cause to call himself more loving, then beloved.

This suite passed so far, that one night being in the garden, he pressed her
oftentimes to permit him to demand her of Amasis, that he was certain he had
done such services to her and her son, that they would not deny him this
grace. She answered, You may more doubt of their good will then of your
deserts; and you may be less assured of your merits, then of my good will: but
I would not that you should speak of it, until Clidaman be married. I am
younger then he, I may stay so long. You may well (answered he) but so will not
the violence of my passion at least, if you will not agree to this remedy, give
me one that cannot hurt you, if your will be as you tell me. If I may (said
she) without offending my self, I will promise you. After he had kissed her
hand, Madam (said he) you have promised me to swear before Leonide, and the
gods, that hear our discourse, that you will be my wife, as I take an oath
before them; never to have any other. Galathee, was overtaken: yet fayning,
that it was partly for the oath she had taken, and partly by my persuasion,
though indeed it were her own affection, she was contented, and swearing
between my hands, with condition, that Lindamor should never come into that
garden, until the marriage were declared; and that to prevent the occasion that
may make them pass further; behold, Lindamor, the most content that ever was,
full of al sorces of hope, at least, of all those that a lover might have, that
was beloved, and waiting but for the promised conclusion of his desires, when
Love, or rather Fortune would mock him, and give him the most cruel
displeasure that any might have. O Lindamor, how vain are these thy
propositions?

At this time Clidaman being departed with Guymantes, to seek the adventures
of arms, and then he went to the army of Merone, and though he went
privately, yet his actions made him well enough known; and because Amasis
would not have him stay there in that sort, she levied all the forces she could
make, to send to him, and as you know, gave the charge to Lindamor, and kept
Polemas for gouerner under her of all her provinces, until the coming of her
son: which she did, as well to give satissaction to these two great
personage^s, as to separate them a little: for ever since the return of
Lindamer, they have had some brabble together, were it, for that there is
nothing so secret, which in some sort is not discovered; and for that Polemas
had some conjecture, that it was he against whom he fought, or that love only
was the cause: so it was, that all men knew how little good will, they bare
each to other. Now Polemas was well content, and Lindamor went away with no ill
will; the one, that he might be near his Mistrisse, the other, that having
occasion to do service to Amasis, he might thereby bind her, hoping by this
way to make easy the passage to that good which he aspired. But Polemas, that
knew by the eye, how much he was out of favor, and contrarily, how many
favors his rival had received, having now no hope, neither in his services
not in his merits, ran to subtilty. And behold how he sets up a man! but the
most crafty and deceitful that ever was in his mystery, whom, without
acquainting any in the Court, he caused secretly to see Amasis, Galathee,
Siluie, Silere, me and all the other Nymphs, and not only showed him their
face, but told him what he knew of the^ all, namely the things most secret,
whereof being an old Courtier, he was well informed, and after desired him to
feign himself to be a Druid or great divine. He came into that great wood of
Sauigneu near the fair gardens of Mont-brison, where by asmall river, where
he might pass over, he made his lodging, and tarried there some while, seeming
to be a great diuiner; so that the brute of him came to us, and specially
Galathee went to him to know her fortune. This crafty companion could so well
play his part, with such circumstances and ceremonies, that I must confess the
truth, I was deceived as well as others.

So it was, that the conclusion of his cunning, was, to tell her that the
heavens had given her by influence, the choice of a great good, or a great
evil, and it was wisdom to choose: That both the one and the other, was to
proceed from that which she should love; and if she neglected his advice, she
should be the unhappiest woman in the world: and contrarily, most happy, if she
made a good election; that if she would believe him, he would give her so
certain knowledge both of the one and the other, that she had no more to do,
but to discern them. And looking in her hand, and after on her face, he said,
Such a day being within Marsellis, you shall see a man clad in such a color:
if you marry him, you are the most miserable in the world. Then he let her see
in a mirror, a place which is by the river of Lignon, and said, You see this
place, go at such an hour, you shall find the man that shall make you most
happy, if you marry him. Now Climanthe (so is this deceiuer called) had
eunningly known both the day that Lindamor was to depart, and the color of
his clothes: and his dessine was, that Polemas seeming to go hunt, should be at
the place which he showed in the glass. Now hear, I pray you, how all fell
out: Lindamor failed not to come forth apparelled as Climanthe had foretold,
and that day Galathee, who had good remembrance of Lindamor, stood so astonished,
that she could not answer to what he said. The poor knight thought it was
for the grief of his departure so far off: so that after he had kissed her
hand, he went away to the Army more contented than his fortune required. If I
had known she had been of that opinion, I would have endeavored to have
diuerred her from it, but she kept it so secret from me, that as then I had no
knowledge of it. Afterward, the day drew on that Climanthe had told her, that
she should find about the Lignon, him that should make her happy. She would
not tell me all her dessigne, only she let me understand, if the Druyde were
true in that which he said: that the Court was so empty, that there was no
pleasure in it: that for a while Solitariness would be more pleasing: that she
was resolved to go to her Palace of Isour, as privately as she could
possibly: and that of her Nymphs she would have but Siluie and me, her Nurce
and the little Merill. As for me that was cloyed with the Court, I said, that
it would be fit to withdraw a while: and so letting Amasis know, that she would
take physic, she might be gone the next morning.

But it was her Nurce that confirmed her in that opinion: for this good old
woman that loved her Nurce-child very tenderly, easily being drawn to credit
these predictions, as (for the most part) all of her age are, counseled her to
it, and pressed her so that finding her already so inclined, It was an easy
thing to thrust her into this Labyrinth. For my part, I was never more
astonished: for suppose there be but three persons in this great building. But
the Nymph, which well marked the day that Climanthe had set, prepared the
evening before to go thither, and in the morning dressed her self, the most
to her advantage she could, and commanded us to do the like. In that sort we
went in a Coach to the place assigned: where being arrived, by chance, at the
hour which Climanthe had said, we found a shepherd almost drowned, and half
covered with mud and gravel, whom the fury of the water had cast on our shore.
This shepherd was Celadon: I know not if you know him, who, by chance, being
feign into Lignon, wanted of drowning himself: but we came so fitly, that we
saved him: for Galathee be leeuing it was he that was to make her happy, (...)
time began to love him so, as she thought (...) pain to her us lay him in
the Coach, and then to the Palace: he all this whi^^ not coming to himself. As
then the sa^^, the fright of death, and the scratch^^ he had in his face kept
him, that his beauty could not be perceived, And, for my part, I ourse the
Inchanter and Divine, which was the cause we took so much pain: for I
swear, I never had the like in my life.

But after he came to himself, and that his face was without soil, he seemed
the goodlieft man that I can tell of; besides that, he had a spirit savoring of
any thing, rather than of a shepherd. I have seen none in our Court mo^^
civil, nor more worthy to be beloved: in so much as I do not wonder that
Galathe should be strongly inamoured, that she can hardly go from him in the
night. But indeed she deceiues her self, because this shepherd is lost for
the love of a sheph ardesse called Astrea.

Thus, all these things gave no small blow to Lindamor, because the Nymph,
having found that true which this liar told her, is resolved to die, rather
than to marry Lindamor, and studies by all her skill to make her self amiable
to this shepherd, who does nothing, especially in her presence, but sigh his
absence from Astrea. I know not whether the constraint he is in, (for she will
not let him go from the Palace) or whether the water which he swallowed, when
he fell into the river, be the cause: so it is, that ever since he goes puling,
sometimes in bed, sometimes out, but at last, he has gotten a fever so
burning, that knowing no remedy for his health, the Nymph has commanded me
to seek you out diligently, that you may see what is necessary to save him
alive.

The Druyde was very attentive during this discourse, and gave diverse
judgments, according to the subject of his Nieces words, and (it may be) near
the truth: for he knew well, that she was not altogether exempted, neither
from Love nor fault; yet as well advised as he was, he dissembled it, and said
to his Niece, that it was no hard matter to serve Galathee, especially in the
person of Celadon, whose parents he had always loved, and though he were a
shepherd, yet descended he from the ancient line of Knights; and that his
Ancestors had chosen that kind of life, for the more quiet and happier then
that at Court, and therefore he was to be honored and well served. But this
fashion of life which Galathee used, was neither good for the Nymph, nor
honorable for her, that coming to the Palace, and having seen the manner of
things, he would tell her how she should govern her self. The Nymph, some
what ashamed, answered, It was some long time since she had a purpose to tell
him, but she neither durst, not met with opportunity: for indeed, Climanthe
was the cause of all the evil. O (answered Adamas) if I can catch him, I will
make him pay, with usury, the false title which he has usurped of a Druide.
That will be easy (said the Nymph) by a mean that I will tell you. He told
Galathee that she should return twice or thrice, to the place where she was to
find this man, if she found him not the first time: I know that Polemas and he
having bin so tardy the first day, will not fail to come the others following:
he that will take this deceiuer, he need but hide him in the place which I will
show you, whither, without doubt, he will come: and for the day, you may know
it of Galathee; for, for my part, I have forgotten it.

The end of the ninth Books.
THE TENTH BOOK OF Astrea and Celadon.
WIth this discourse the Nymph deceived, in part, the length of the way, both
of them being so attentive, that, almost before they were aware, they found
they were near the Palace of Isour. But Adamas, that desired in any wise to
remedy this life, instructed her what he would have her say to Galathee; and
above al, not to let her know that he disliked her actions: for (said he) I
know well, that the courage of the Nymph must be ouercom with gentleness, and
not with force. But in the mean time (my Niece) remember you to do your duty;
that these allurements are shameful, both to those that are attained with
them, and to them that favor them.

He had gone on with his aduices, if at the entry of the Palace they had not
met Siluie, who led them to the place where Galathee was. At that time she was
gone to walk into the next Garden, while Celadon rested. As soon as she saw
them, she came toward them, and the Druyde, with one knee on the ground,
saluted her, kissing her robe, and so did Leonide; but lifting them up, she
embraced them both, thanking Adamas for the pains he had taken in coming,
with assurance that she would requite it in those occasions which might turn
to his pleasure. Madame, said he, all my services cannot deserve the least of
these good words: I am only sorry, that that which is presented, is not a
stronger proof of my affection; to the end, that in any case you might know,
that if I be grown old without doing you service, it is not for want of good
will, but for that I have not had the happiness to be employed. Adamas
(answered the Nymph) the services which you have done to Amasis, I take for
mine; and those which I have had from your Niece, I take them as from you; so
that you cannot say, but in the person of my mother, you have well served me;
and in that of your Niece, you have been often employed. Always as I may, I
will acknowledge your services together. But in that which is offered at this
time, bethink your self; that since there is nothing more grievous then the
strokes that are laid on the part most sensible, that having my spirit wounded,
you cannot find the means to do me more acceptable service then in this. We
will talk of it at leisure, in the mean time, go to your rest, and Siluie
shall bring you to your chamber, and Leonide render account to me of what she
has done.

So the Druide went away: And Galathee using Leonide more kindly then of wont,
demanded the news of her voyage, wherein in she satified her willingly: But
(going forward) Madame (said she) I thank God, I find you more joyful then I
left you. Friend, said the Nymph, the likely healing of Celadon has brought
me this good: for you must know, that you were not gone above a mile hence,
before he waked without his fever: but since he is so much amended, that he
himself hopes to rise within two or three days. See (answered (...)!) the
best news that I could have wished to have had at my return, so that if I had
known it sooner, I had not brought Adamas hither.

But to the purpose, said Galathee, what said he of this accident? For I assure
my self, you have told him. Pardon me, Madame, said Leonide, I told him
nothing but what I thought could not be hidden from him when he was to be here.
He knows the love which you bear to C^ledo^, which, I have told him, proceeded
of pity: he knows well the shepherd, and those of his family; and assure
himself, he shall be able to porswade him to all things that he shall please:
and for my part, I think, if you will employ him, he will do you service; but
you must speak plainly to him. O God, said the Nymph, is it possible? I am
assured, that if he will undertake it, it cannot but all turn to my
contentment: for his wisdom is so great, and his judgment also, that he
cannot choose but bring about whatsoever he begins. Madame, said Leonide, I
speak not without ground: you shall see, If you will serve your self by him,
what will be. Now behold the Nymph the most contented in the world, already
figuring to her self the accomplishment of her desires.

But while they discoursed thus, Sil^y and (...) spent the time about the same
business: for the Nymph, who was well inquainted with the Druyde, talked of
them very openly. He that was very wary, that he might know if his Nee^e had
told him true, prayed her to tell him what she knew. Silay, that desired in any
case to break off this discourse. did it without dissimulation, and the
shortest she could, in this manner:

The History of Leonide.
KNow, that the better to instruct you of all that you demand, I am
constrained to touch the particulars of some other besides Galathee. And I
shall do it the more willingly, for that it may be behoouefull for the time to
come, that they should not be hidden from you. It is Leonide of whom I speak,
whom (it seems) destinies would entangle more than ordinary in the dessignes
of Galathee. This that I tell you, is not to blame her, or to make it known.
For telling it to you, I believe it is no less secret than if you had not
known it. You must then understand, that it is long time since the beauty and
merits of Leonide wanne her, after long suite, the affection of Polemas: and
because the deserts of that knight were not so slender, but they could procure
themselves to be beloved: Your Niece was not contented to be beloved, but she
would also love; but she carried it with such discretion, that even Polemas was
long without the knowledge of it. I doubt not but you have loved, and that you
know better than I, how hardly Love will be hidden: so it was, that at last it
burst out, and both knew they were lovers, and beloved: yet was this amity so
honest, that it would not suffer them to dare to show it. After the sacrifice
that Amasis made every year, on the day that she married Pimander, it fell
out, that after dinner we were all in the Gardens of M^nt-brison: the more
cheerfully to pass this happy journey, she and I to defend us from the Sun
(being set under some trees) which gave a pleasing shadow. We were scarcely
there, but Polemas came to sit by us, seeming that it was by chance he met us;
but I observed, that he had some good while followed us with his eye. And
because we sat without any words, and that he had a good voice, I said to him,
that he should bind us much to him, if he would sing. I will (said he) if
that fair will command me, poynting to Leonide. Such a commandment (said
she) would be a great indiscretion; but I will make use of my prayer,
especially if you have any new thing. I will willingly (answered Polemas;) and
moreover I assure you, that this which you shall hear, was made but in the
time of the Sacrifice, while you were in your prayers. And how (said I?) is my
companion then the subject of this song? Yes in deed (answered he) and I am
witness. And then he began to sing.

We sat very attenti^e, and (it may be) I had known more, had it not been
for Leonide, who fearing that Polemas would show that which she would hide
from me, suddenly as he had ended, took hold. I dare lay a wager (said she)
that I can divine for whom this Song was made: and then drawing near his ear,
made as if she named some; but indeed she bade him take heed what he said
before me. He being discreet, drew back, and answered; You have not diuined
right: I swear unto you, it is not for her whom you named. Then I perceived
she would hide her self from me, which was the cause, that fayning to gather
some flowers, I went from them on the other side, yet not without having an eye
to their actions. Now Polemas himself since has told me all, but it was after
his affection was passed over; for so long as that lasted, it was not in my
power to make him confess any thing. Being then alone, they took up again the
discourse which they had left, and she was the first that began.

And why Polemas (said she) do you jest thus with your friends? Confess the
truth, for whom are these verses? Fair Nymph (said he) in your soul you know
for whom they are as well as I. How! (said she) do you believe me to be a
diuiner? Yes certainly (answered Polemas) and of those that obey not the gods,
who speak by their mouth, but make themselves obeyed of him. What mean you by
that enigmaticall speech (said the Nymph?) I mean, said he, that Love speaks
by your mouth, otherwise your words would not be so full of fire and love, that
they can kindle in all that behold them, so burning coals, and yet you obey him
not, though he command, that he who loves, should be beloved: for
disobedient, you work that they who die of love for you, may well feel you
fair, but never loving, nor so much as only pitiful. I speak for mine own
particular, that may swear with truth, that in the world there was never
beauty better beloved than yours of me. In saying these last words, he blushed,
and she smiled, answering him, Polemas, Polemas, the old soldiers show their
skarres for witness of their valor, and complain not at all; you that
complain of yours, would hardly show them, if Love, as your General, to give
you a worthy reward, should demand to see them. Cruel Nymph, said the knight,
you deceive your self, for I may only say to him, Love, put away thy skarfe,
and behold the eyes of mine enemy, for he can no sooner open his eyes, but he
shall see the wounds that I bear in my heart, not as you say, in my complaint,
but in making it my glory, to have so worthy an Author of my wounds. So that
you may judge, that if Love will enter into reason with me, I can sooner
satisfy him than you, for he can perceive the blows which you cannot,
because that the fire cannot burn it self; no more are you: being insensible
of your own beauties, to be so of our tears, nor offended where the arms of
merit cannot resist; if those of pity at the least abate the sharpness of
your rigours, to the end, that they that adore you for fair, may commend you
for courteous. Leonide loved this knight, but would not he should know it as
yet. But she likewise feared, that putting him quite beside all hope, she
might also make him lose his courage: which was the cause that she answered
him, If your love be such, the time will give me more knowledge than these
words, too well delivered to proceed from affection. For, I have heard say,
affection cannot be without passion, and passion will not suffer the spirit to
have so free a discourse. But when the time shall have told me as much as you,
you are to believe, that I am not of stone, nor so void of understanding, but
your merits are known to me, and your love may move me. Till then, hope not
of me, no more than of the rest of my company in general. The Knight would
have kissed her hand for this assurance; but because Galathee looked on,
Knight, said she, be discreet, every one has eye on us, if you do thus, you
undo me.

And at this word she rose and came among us that were gathering of flowers.
Behold the first discovery that they had of their good wills, which gave
Galathee occasion to meddle in it. For, perceiving what had passed in the
Garden; and having of long time a purpose to win Polemas, she would know that
night, what was done between Leonide and him; and because she alvvaies made
her self very familiar with you Niece, and had acquainted her with the
particulars of her secrets, the Nymph durst not altogether deny the truth of
this loue-suite. It is true, that she concealed what concerned her own will:
and upon this discourse Galathee would know the very words that they had used;
wherein your Niece satisfied her in part, and in part dissembled. So it was,
that she said enough to increase the purpose of Galathee, so that from that day
she resolved to be beloved of him, and undertook this work with that cunning,
that it was impossible it should fall out otherwise. At that meeting she
forbade Leonide to go on in that affection, and after told her, that she should
cut off all the roots, because she knevv well, that Polemas had another
dessigne, and that this would serve but to delude her. Besides that, if Amasis
came to knowledge of it, she would be offended.

Leonide, who at that time had no more malice than a child, took the words of
the Nymph, as from her Mistrisse, without searching into the cause, which made
her say so, and so remained some days estranged from Polemas, who knevv not
from whence it might grovve. At the first this made him more earnest in his
suite. For it is the ordinary custom of young spirits, to desire with more
eagerness, that which is hard to come by; and indeed he went on in that sort,
that Leonide had much enough to do to dissemble the good will she bore him;
and at last, knew so little how to do it, that Polemas perceived he was
beloved. But see what Love had appointed!

This young lover, after he had three or four months continued this suite
with the more violence, as he had the less assurance of the good will he
desired: as soon, almost, as he was certain, lost his violence, by little
and little loved so coldly, that as Fortune and Love, when they begin to
decline, fall at once, the Nymph perceived not that she alone went on in this
affection. It is true, that Galathee, who came on, was, in part, the cause. For
having a dessigne on Polemas, she used such craft, and sped so well, what by
her authority, and what with time, that one might say, she robbed her
insensibly; for that, when Leonide handled him roughly, Galathee favored him:
and when the other fled from his company, she drew him to hers. And this
continued so long, and so openly, that Polemas began to turn his eyes
toward Galathee, and shortly after, the heart followed: For seeing himself
favored by a greater than her that neglected him, he blamed himself for
suffering it without sense, and minded to embrace the fortune which came
smiling on him. But O wise Adamas! you may see what a gracious encounter this
was, and how it pleased Love to play with their hearts. It is some while since,
by the ordinance of Clidaman, Agis was allotted servant unto your Niece, and
(as you know) by the election of Fortune.

Now though this young Knight was not given to Leonide out of his own choice,
yet he agreed to the gift, and approved it by the services which he afterward
did perform, and that she misliked not, was showed by her actions. But when
Polemas began to serve her, Agis, as a covetous man, that has his eyes
always on his treasure, took notice of the growing love of this new Lover,
and sometimes complained to her of it: but the coldness of her answers
(instead of extinguishing his iealousies only) by little and little deaded his
love; for considering what small assurance he had in his soul, he labored to
get a better resolution then formerly he had had; and so, that he might not see
another triumph over him, he chose rather to withdraw far off. A receipt, that
I have heard say, is the best that a soul infected with this evil, can have
to free it self: for as love, at the beginning, is brought forth by the eyes;
so it seems that the contrary should be for want of sight, which can be in
nothing more then absence, where the forgetful, covered as with ashes, the
ouer-liuely representations of the thing beloved. And indeed, Agis happily
attained his purpose: for he was hardly gone, but love likewise parted from his
soul, lodging in the place of it the neglect of this flitter: So that Leonide
purposing by this new plot to win Polemas, lost him that already was entirely
hers. But the confusions of Love ended not here: for he would, that Polemas
likewise for his part, should have sense of that which he made the Nymph to
feel. Almost about the same time, the affection of Lindamor took birth; and
it fell out, that as Leonide had disdained Agis for Polemas, and Polemas
Leonide for Galathee, so Galathee disdained Polemas for Lindamor.

To tell the follies of them all, would be an hard piece of work. So it was,
that Polemas seeing himself paid in the same money in which he paid your
Niece, yet could not lose not hope nor love, but contrariwise searched al sorts
of plotting, to enter again into her favor, but all in vain. It is true, that
as he could get nothing more to his own benefit, yet he has so wrought, that
he, who was the cause of his evil, is not come to be possessor of his good:
for whether it were by his cunning practices, or by the will of the gods, that
a certain devout Druyde has imparted to him, since that time Lindamor is no
more beloved: and it seems, Love has a purpose not to suffer the heart of
Galathee to be at rest, the memory of the one being no sooner defaced in her
soul, but another takes place. And now behold us at this hour reduced to the
love of a shepherd, who for a shepherd, in his quality may deserve well, but
not to be the servant of Galathee; and yet is she so passionate, that if her
evil hold on, I know not what will become of her: So as I may well say, I
ueuer saw such a curiosity, nor so strange a dream as she has had, since she
endured this evil. But this is not all: your wisdom (sage Adamas) in this
which I am to tell you, must work one of his ordinary effects. Your Niece is
so overtaken with Celadon, as I know not if Galathee be more. Above all,
^elousie is so mingled among them, and I have endeavored to excuse and abate
the blows of it, the best I could; yet I am out of hope for the time to come.
Therefore it is, that I thank God for your coming: for without fiction, I
know not how things can be carried without you: you must excuse me, if I speak
to you so freely of that which touches you: the (...) which I bear them both,
enforces me to it.

Thus ended Sil^^^ ^er discourse, with such a demonstration of mistake, to see
this evil life, that Adamas thought well of her for it: and to give beginning,
not to the healing of the shepherd, but of the Nymphs; for that evil was the
greater. Adamas asked what her advice was? For my part (said she) will you
begin to remove from them the cause of this evil, which is the shepherd?
but this must be done with some cunning: for that Galathee will not let him
go. You have reason, answered the Druyde; but while we labor to do that, we
must take heed that he fall not in love with them, for that youth and beauty
have no small sympathy, and so we travail in vain, if he happen to love them.
O Adamas, said Siluie, if you knew Celadon, as I do, you would never have this
fear: he is so far in love with Astrea, that all the beauty of the world
cannot please him, and after, we shall have enough to look to other things
than to his healing. Fair Siluie, said the Druide, you speak well, like one
that never knew what Love meant, and as one that never felt his forces: This
little god, the more power he has over every thing, the more sport he makes
with every thing; so that when there is least likelihood that he should do any
thing, it is then especially, that he is pleased to make his power to be
known. Live not you with that confidence, for that, as yet, there was never
any sort of virtue, that could be exempted from Love. Chastity it self could
not, witness Endymion. Why, presently said Silui^, O wise Adamas, do you
presage so great a disaster? To the end, said he, that you might arm your
self against the forces of that god, for fear, that being ouer-assured in the
opinion that it is impossible, you be not overtaken before you are prepared. I
have heard say, that Celadon is so goodly, so discreet, and accomplished, that
there is no perfection wanting in him which may win love. If it be so, there
is danger; for that the treasons of love are so hard to discover, that as yet,
there was never the man that could do it. Leave the pain to me, said she, and
only see what you will have me do in this business we talk of. Me thinks,
said the Druyde, this war must be made by the eye; and when I have seen how
the world goes, we will dispose of our affairs to the least hurt that we
can; and in the mean time let us keep our dessigne secret.

Then Silui^ left him to his rest, and went to seek Galathee, who, with
Leonide, was about the bed of Celadon, for having known he was awake, neither
of them had the power to stay longer from the sight of him. The welcomes that
he gave to Leonide, were not small: for, for the courtesy with which she bound
him, he loved and esteemed well of her, though Siluies humor pleased him
better. Within a while after, they fell in talk of Adamas, commending his
Wisdom, his Wit, and Bounty: whereupon Celadon asked if he were not the
Son of the great Pelion, of whom he had heard spoken so many maruailes. It is
the same, answered Galathee, who is come expressly for your disease. O,
Madame, answered the shepherd, it must be a good Physician that can heal
that, but, I think, when he shall know it, he will sooner despair of my
health, than dare to undertake the cure. Galathee thought he spoke of the
sickness of his body. But, said she, is it possible you should think you are
still sick? I assure my self, if you will, within two days you may leave
your bed. It may be, Madame, answered Leonide, he is never the better for
that; for sometimes we carry our sickness so hidden, that our selves know
nothing till we be in extremity.

Their discourse had held longer, had not the Druyde come to find them, that
he might see what was necessary for his purpose. He found him well disposed for
his body, for the disease had spent his fury and came to decline: but when he
spoke to him, he judged his spirit distempered, though he was not of belief
that it was for these Nymphs: and knowing, that the wise Physician ought
always to apply his remedy to the evil that is ready to offer violence, he
resolved to begin his cure on Galathee. And on this design, desirous, at once,
to be certified of the will of Celadon, at night, when all the Nymphs were gone,
and he took heed that Meril might not be by, having shut the door, he spoke
in this sort: I think, Celadon, your astonishment is not small, to see your
self suddenly raised to so good a fortune as that you now possess; for I
assure my self, it is beyond your hope, that being borne as you are, a
shepherd, and bred in the villages, you now see your self cherished of the
Nymphs, made much of, and served, I will not say of Ladies, that have been
used to be commanded, but by her, that absolutely commands over this Country:
A fortune, indeed, which the greatest have desired, but whereto none could
attain but your self; for which you are to praise the gods, and give them
thanks, that they may continue it to you.

Adamas talked thus to him, that he might draw him to tell the truth of his
affection; thinking, that by this means, making show to approve it, he should
make him best discover it. Whom the shepherd answered with a great sigh,
Father, if this be a good fortune, then must my taste be distempered, for I
never felt more bitter Wormwood, than that which this fortune, that you call
good, has made me taste, since I came to be in the state wherein you see me.
And how, (added the Druyde, the better to cover his craft) is it possible you
should have so small knowledge of your good, that you see not to what
greatness this adventure has raised you? Alas, answered Celadon, it is that
which threatens a greater fall. Why? do you fear (said Adamas) that this good
luck will not last? I fear, answered the shepherd, it will last longer then
I desire. But wherefore is it, that our sheep are astonished and dye, when they
be long in a great water, and yet fishes delight and are nourished in it?
Because, answered the Druyde, it is against their nature.

And think you, father (said he) that it is less against the nature of a
shepherd to live among so many Ladies? I am a shephard borne, and nothing can
please me, that is not of mine own condition. But is it possible (added the
Druid) that ambition which seems to be borne with man, cannot make you part
from your woods, or that beauty, whose allurements are so strong for a young
heart, cannot divert you from your former purpose? The ambition that every one
ought to have (said the shepherd) it is to do well that which we are to do, and in
that to be the foremost among them of his condition, and the beauty which we
are to regard, and which ought to draw us, is that which we may love, not that
which we should reverence, and may not look on but with the eye of respect.
Why (said the Druide) do you conceit to your self, that there is a greatness
among men, to which merit and virtue cannot attain? Because (answered the the
shepherd) I know that all things are to be contained within the terms that
nature has set them; and that as there is no likelihood that a Ruby fair and
perfect, though it be may beco^e a Diamo^d, so he that hopes to raise himself
higher, or to speak truer, to change nature, and make himself other then that
he is, loses in vain both his time and hispaines.

Then the Druide, astonished at the considerations of the shepherd, and well
pleased to see him so far removed from the dessines of Galathee, began again
in this sort: Now my child, I praise the gods for that wisdom which I find in
you, and assure you that if you carry your self thus, you shall give the
heavens cause to continue to you, all sort of felicity. Many borne up by their
vanity, have gone out of themselves, upon hope more vain then these that I
have propounded. But what is befalne them? Nothin, g but after a long and
incredible pain, repentance for being so long time abused. You may thank
heaven, that has given you this knowledge, before you have occasion to have
their repentance, and you are to entreat it to preserve you, that you may
continue in the tranquillity, and sweet life wherein you have lived hitherto.
But since you aspire not to these greatness nor these beauties, what is it then
O Celadon that may stay you here among them? Alas (answered the shepherd) it
is only the will of Galathee, who holds me almost like a prisoner. It is very
true, that if my sickness had permitted me, I had attempted to have escaped by
one means or other, though I knew the enterprise was full of difficulty; and
if I could not have the help of any other, setting all respects apart, I would
have gone away by force: for Galathee held me so short, and the Nymphs, when
she is not here, and little Merill, when the Nymphs cannot stay, that I know
not which way to turn my foot, but they are at mine elbow. And when I would
speak to Galathee, she sets on me with reproaches in such a choler, that I
must confess I dare speak no more to her; and this abode has been so
troublesome to me, that I may accuse it as the principal cause of my disease.
Now, if you ever had pity on a person afflicted, dear father, I adjure you by
the great gods, whom you so worthily serve, by your natural bounty, and by the
honorable memory of that great P^lion your father, to take pity on my life,
and join your wisdom to my desire, to setmee free from this offensive
prison: for so I may term the stay I make in this place. Adamas, very glad to
hear with what an affection he besought him, embraced him, kissed his
forehead, and after said, Yes my son, be assured I will do what you demand of
me; and as soon as your weakness will suffer, I will fit you with means to
go hence without violence, only hold on your purpose, and look to your health.
And after many other discourses, he left him: but with such contentment, that
if Adamas would have permitted him, he would have risen at that inastnt.

In the mean time, Leonide, that would not leave Galathee long in the error
wherein Climante had put her, that evening when she saw Siluie, and the little
Meril withdrawn, kneeled down by the bedside, and after some ordinary speech
she went on, O Madam, what news have I met with in this journey? and news
which concerns you? and I would not for any thing but I had known it, to
clear your error. And what is it, answered the Nymph? It is (added Leonide)
there has been put on you the cunningst practice that ever love invented; and
me thinks you should not grieve at my journey, though I had done no other
thing. That Druide, who is the cause of your stay here, is the wickedst man,
and the most crafty that ever set himself to beguile any. And then she told
her from point to point what she had heard from Clemanthe's mouth, and of
Polemas; and that all this practice was invented, but to dispossess Lindamor,
and set Polemas in his place.

At the first, the Nymph stood a little astonished, in the end, the love of the
shepherd that flattered her, persuaded, that Leonide spoke this out of
despite, and to turn her from the love of the shepherd, that she might
possess him alone. So that she believed nothing of that she had told her:
but contrarily turning into laughter, she said, Leonide, go to bed, it may be,
to morrow you will rise up more wife, and then you shall know better to hide
your craft; and with this word, turned to the other side, somewhat smiling:
which offended Leonide so sore, that she resolved to set Celadon at liberty,
whatsoever it might cost her. And in this purpose, the same evening she went to
seek her uncle, to whom she used this language: Father, since you see that
Celadon is so well, what would you have him do here longer? I have not
concealed from you, what Galathees will is.

Judge what mischief may befall. I would have freed the Nymph from the abuse
whereto this Impostor Climanthe had persuaded her, but she is so won to
Celadon, that all that labor to withdraw her, are declared enemies, so that
the surest way is to remove this shepherd from thence, which cannot be done
without you: for the Nymph has such an eye to me, that I can turn no way but
she heeds me, and suspects me. Adamas was some what astonished to hear his
niece talk thus, and was of opinion, that she feared, the good will which she
bare the shepherd, was perceived, and she would prevent it: yet judging that
to cut off the roots of these lovers, the best means was to remove Celadon,
and said to his niece, the sooner to discover her plot, that he desired that
she spoke of above all things: but he knew not the mean. The mean (said she)
is the most easy in the world, only get the clothes of a Nymph, and dress
him in them, he is young, and as yet has no beard: by this device he may
getaway unknown, and no body the wiser by whose help it was, and Galathee
shall neu^r know whom to blame. Adamas found this invention to be good: and
the sooner to execute it, resolved at that time, after the night were passed,
to go seek for such an habit, under pretense of seeking for remedies to heal
the shepherd, giving Galathee to understand, that though the shepherd were
freed from his fevers, yet he was not clear from danger of a relapse, and
they must prevent it with wisdom. And communicated this dessine to Siluie,
who approved it, provided that he slacked not his return. Celadon was not
thoroughly awaked, when Galathee, and Leonide came into the chamber, in show to
know how he did, and then Adamas, who knew well, seeing the great
watchfulness of the Nymphs, that delay was dangerous, after he had asked
Celadon some ordinary questions about his sickness, he drew near; and
turning to the Nymph, wished her to permit him to enquire of some particulars
which he durst not demand before her. Galathee, who believed it was concerning
his sickness, drew aside and gave way to Adamas, to acquaint the shepherd
with his dessine, promising him to come within two or three days at the
furdest. Celadon coniured him by the strongest prayers he could, knowing well
that without him this imprisonment would continue longer.

After he had given him assurance, he went where Galathee was, and told her
that the shepherd for the present was well: but as he had before told her, it
was to be feared lest he might relapse, and to prevent the evil, it was
necessary he should go seek that which was fit for him, and he would return
as soon as he had found them. The Nymph was well pleased with this, for on the
one side she desired the entire recovery of the shepherd: and on the other,
the presence of the Druide began to trouble her, foreseeing that she could not
converse so freely with her beloved Celadon, as before she had done, he knew
well what her purpose was: but he seemed not to heed it; and presently after
dinner, he set himself on the way, leaving the three Nymphs in some pain:
for every one had a differing dessine, and all three being desirous to effect
it, it was necessary they should be finely deluded. That was the cause, that
all three were more usually about his bed, but Siluie, above the rest, that she
might keep them from speaking in private to him: Yet could she not keep so good
watch: but Leonide found a time to tell him the resolution, which she had
taken with her uncle, and then she went on:

But tell true, Celadon, are you yet so without understanding, that when you
have received this good office from me, you will remember no more that you see
at this present, the love I bear you? At least, call to your mind the wrongs
that Galathee does me, for your sake; and if the love which in all others
meriteth love, growing in me, cannot bring it forth in you, let me have this
contentment, to hear once from your own mouth, that the affection of such a
Nymph as I am, is not altogether distastefull to you. Celadon, who had already
known this growing love, desired it might die in the cradle: but fearing lest
the despite which she conceived, might cause in her contrary effects to the
resolution which she had taken with her uncle, he purposed to give her some
words, that he might not lose her altogether, and thus answered her, Fair
Leonide, what opinion may you have of me, if forgetting Astrea, whom I have so
long served, I should begin a new amity? I speak freely to you, for I know
well, you are not ignorant of what I am.

O Celadon, answered Leonide, hide not your self from me, I know as much of
your affairs as your self. Then, fair Nymph, replied the shepherd, if you
know it, how can you wish that I should force this love which has such force
in my foul, that my life and my will depend of it? But since you know what I
am, read in my actions passed, and see what remains in me to satisfy you,
and tell me what you would have me do? Leonide, at this speech was not able to
hide her tears, as wise as she was: after she had considered how contrary to
her duty it was to live in this fashion, and that she traueld in vain, she
resolved to be mistress of her own will; but for that it was so difficult a
work that she could not attain to it at once, there must be some time to
prepare her humors, that they might be capable to receive the advice of
wisdom. And in this resolution she spoke to him thus: Shepherd, I cannot (at
this time) take the counsel that is necessary for me, to get sufficient force;
I must have leisure to gather together the powers of my soul: but remember you
the offer you have made me: for I mean to benefit my self by it. Their
discourse had held on longer, if Siluie had not interrupted them, who coming
upon them, and addressing her self to Leonide, Sister, said she, you know not
that Fleurial is come, and has so overtaken the Guard of the gate, that he was
with Galathee before we were aware. He has given her letters, and I know not
whence they come: But it must be from some good place, for she has changed
color twice or thrice. Leonide presently doubted it was Lindamor, which caused
her to leave the shepherd with Siluie, and went to Galathee to know the
certainty.

Then Siluie, seeing her self alone with him, began to entertain him with
that courtesy, that if there had been any place for Love, without doubt she
had had it. And see how Love sports himself with contrarying our dessignes!
The other two Nymphs, with all their Art, sought it, and could not effect it;
and she that regarded it nor, came nearer the mark than the others. By that, a
man may know how free Love is, since he will by tied to nothing, but what
pleases him. Whilst Celadon was in this thought, Siluie, that sought for
nothing more than occasion to set him into discourse, because she delighted
much in his conversation, and to hear him speak, said, You will not think,
shepherd, what pleasure this hap to have known you, brings to me; and I
swear to you, if Galathee would believe me, since her brother went out of this
Country, we have had your company more than heretofore. For, for aught that I
see in you, I think there is pleasure in your villages, and your honest
liberties, since you are exempted from Ambition, and consequently from
troubles, living without craft, and without backe-biting, which are the four
plagues that our life brings. Wise Nymph (answered the shepherd) this that you
say, is more than true, if we were out of the power of Love; but you must know,
that the same effects, which Ambition brings forth in Courts, Love causes
to grow in our villages. For the envy of a Rival, is no less than of a
Courtier: and the artificial practices of Lovers and Shepherds give no place
to others. And that is the cause that slaunderers retain the same authority
among us, to make good their own actions, as well as among you. It is true,
that we have one advantage, that instead of two enemies that you have, which is
Love and Ambition, we have but one; and from thence it comes, that there be
some things particularly among us, which we may call happy, but none (as I
suppose) among Courtiers; for they that love not at all, need not avoid the
allurements of Ambition: and whosoever is not ambitious, shall not for it have his
soul frozen, to resist the flames of many fair eyes: so that having but one
enemy, we may the more easily resist him, as Siluander has done hitherto, a
shepherd indeed repleate with many perfections, yet more happy (a man may
say, without offense,) than wise: for, though this may (in some sort) proceed
out of his wisdom, yet this is it that I hold, That it is a great happiness,
never to have met with a beauty that pleased him: and having never found the
beauty that drew him, he never had familiarity with any shepherdess, which is
the cause that he so preserues his liberty, because I think (for my part) that
if one love not elsewhere, it is impossible for him to converse long with an
amiable beauty, but he must love it. Sil^ie answered him, I have so small
knowledge in this learning, that I must refer my self to what you say: yet
do I think, that it must be some other thing than beauty that causes love;
otherwise, the Lady that is loved of one, should be so of all. There be many
answers (said the shepherd) to this objection. For all beauties are not seen
of one eye, so that as among colors, there be that please some, and displease
others, so we may say of beauties; for all eyes do not judge alike: besides
that, these fair look not on all with the same eye, and one shall please such
whom she indeuoureth to please, and another quite contrary, whom she seeks not
to be pleasing unto. But, above all these reasons, me thinks, that of
Siluander was very good, when one demanded of him, why he was not in love? He
answered, he never yet found his Loue-stone, and when he found such an one, he
knew well, he must infallibly love as others did. And (answered Siluie) whom
meant he by the Loue-stone? I know not (replied the shepherd) whether I can
better instruct you: For he is well studied, and among us we hold him for a man
of great understanding. He says he learned it from the Druydes, that when
the great God formed all our souls, he touched every of them with a piece of
a Loue-stone, and that after, he put all those pieces into a place apart; and
likewise those of the women, after he had touched them, he locked them into
another storehouse by it self. Afte, when he sent the souls into the body,
he brought forth those of women, where are the loue-stones, which touched
those of the men, and those of men to those of women, and caused them to fasten
each to other. If there be wicked souls, they take more pieces, which they
hide. It happens, that as soon as the soul is in the body, and that it
meets with it that is his loue-stone, it is impossible but he should love:
and from hence proceed all the effects of love. For, as for them that are
beloved of many, it is for that they were theeuish, and had taken more pieces;
as for that which loves every one, and is not beloved, it is for that he had
his loue-stone, and she had not hers.

Many oppositions were made, when he spoke these things: but he answered them
all very well. Among others, I said, But what would he say, that diverse times
one shepherd loves diverse shepheardesses? That is, said he, for that the piece
of love which touched it, being among others when the god mixed them, brake,
and being in diverse pieces, they all, as many as there were, drew to them that
soul.

But withal, mark, that those persons which are taken with diverse loves, love
not much: that is, for that these little pieces, being separated, have not
that force as if they were united. Moreover, he said, that hence it comes, that
we see often some in love with others, which in our eyes, have nothing amiable
in them: whence proceed likewise, those strange loves that fall out sometimes,
that a Gaul bred up among the most beautiful Ladies, came to love a barbarous
stranger. It was Dia^e that asked him what he said of Tymon of Athens, that
never loved any, nor any loved him? His piece of love, said he, either was in
the great gods Storehouse when he came into the world; or she which had it,
dyed in the cradle; or before that Tymon was borne, or of years to know her.
So that ever since, when we see any that is not beloved, we say, his piece of
Love was forgotten. And what said he (said Siluie) of that, that no man loved
Tymon? That sometimes (answered Celadon) the great god reckoned the stones that
remained, and finding the number disagreeing, because some of the theeuish
souls had taken more (as I have told you) that he might set the pieces in
their even number, the souls which were then ready to enter into the body,
carried none with them. And thence it comes, that sometimes we see
shepheardesses complete enough, which are so neglected, that none love them.
But the gracious Corilas asked him a question concerning himself at that time,
what he would say of one, that having long time loved, came to leave her and
to love another. Siluander answered to this, that the piece of Love that
changed, was broken, and that that which he first loved, should have had a
greater piece than the other for whom he left her. And as when we see iron
between two loadstones, suffers it self to be drawn by that which has most
strength, so the soul leaves it self to be carried by the stronger part of
his love. Truly, said Siluie, this shepherd must be gentle, having so good
conceits, but tell me, I pray you, what he is. It will be hard for me (answered
Celadon) to tell, for himself knows not; yet we hold him to be of a good
house, according to the judgment that may be made of his good qualities: for
you must know, that it is some years since he came to dwell in our village,
with small means, and without knowledge of himself, but that he said he came
from the Lake Leman, where he was bred a child.

So it was, that after he was known, every one helped him: besides that,
having knowledge of herbs, and of the nature of beasts, the beasts profited so
well under his hands, that there is none that desires not to put them to him,
whereof he makes so good an account, that besides the profit that he makes
thereof, there are few that gratify him not with something, so that at this
hour he is in good case, and may call himself rich: for, O fair Nymph, we
want not much to make us so: for that nature being contented with a few things,
we seek after nothing but to live according to it; we are as soon rich as
content, and our contentment being easily compassed, our riches are quickly
gotten. You are (said Siluie) more happy then we.

But you told me of Diane: I know her not, but by sight: tell me, I pray you,
who was her mother? That is Bellinde, answered he, wife of the wise Celion, who
dyed young. And Diane, said Siluie, what is she? and what is her humor? She
is, said Celadon, one of the fairest shepheardesses of Lignon; and, if I were
not partial for Astrea, I would say she were the fairest: for, in truth,
besides that she is to the eye, she has so many beauties in her spirit, that
there is nothing superfluous nor defective. Many times, three or four of us
shepherds, have been together, to consider of her, not knowing what
perfection might be wished for, that she had not: for though she love nothing
of love, yet loves she all virtue with so sincere a will, that she binds more
to her by that sort, then others most violent affections. And how, said Sil^ie,
is she not served of many? The deceit, answered Celadon, which the father of
Filidas did her, is the hinderance that there are none now, and indeed, it was
one of the most not able that ever I heard of. If it were not painful to you,
added Siluie, I would be glad to learn it of you, and also to know who this
Celion was, and who this Bellinde. I fear, answered the shepherd, the
discourse will be so long, that it will trouble you. On the contrary, said the
Nymph, We know not better how to employ the time, while Galathee reads the
letters that she went to receive. Then, to satisfy your commandment, answered
he, I will do it as briefly as I can: and then he held on in this sort:

The History of Celion and Bellinde.
IT is true, fair Nymph, that virtue spoiled of all other ornament, ceases not
to be of it self lovely, having so many allurements, with which as soon as
the soul is touched, it must be beloved, and followed: but when this virtue
meets with a body that is fair, it is not only pleasing, but admirable, for
that the eyes and spirit are ravished in the contemplation and vision of this
beauty: which shall be manifested by the discour^^ which I mean to make you
of (...).

Know then, that near the river of Lignon, there was a very honest shepherd,
named Philemon, who after he had been long married, had a daughter, whom he
called Bellinde, who coming to growth, made as great a show of beauty in her
spirit, as might be seen in her body. Hard by her house lodged another
shepherd, called Leon, with whom neighborhood had tied a strong bond of
amity: and fortune unwilling to do more for the one then for the other, gave
him likewise at the same time a daughter, whose youth gave great promise of
^^ture beauty; she was called Amaranthe. The friendship of the fathers caused
that of the daughters to increase, by frequenting together: for they were bred
up together from the cradle, and when their age permitted them, they led their
stlocks alike, and at night brought them in companies to their lodgings. But
because, as they grew in body, their beauty likewise increased to the view of
the eye, there were many shepherds that sought their love, whose feruices and
affections could not obtain more of them, then that they were received with
courtesy.

It fell out, that Celion, a young shepherd of those quarters, having lost a
sheep, came to seek it among Bellindes flock, whither it was strayed. She
restor it with such courtesy, that the recovery of his sheep was the beginning
of the loss of himself; and from that time he began to feel with what force
two fair eyes were able to offend: for before he was so ignorant, that the
very thought of it never came into his soul. But what ignorance soever was in
him, it brought him to that pass, that it made him by his wooing know what his
disease was, and the only Physician from whom he was to have his health. So
that Bellinde by his actions perceived it almost as soon as himself: for, at
the first he knew not what to say his design was: but his affect on growing
with his age, came to that greatness, that he found the discommodity in good
earnest, and then acknowledged it, being constrained to change the pastimes of
his youth into a very curious pursuit. And Bellinde on the other side, though
she were served of many, received his affection above any other, yet no
otherwise, then if he had been her brother, which she made appear one day,
when he thought to have found the commodity to declare his good will. She kept
her flock along the river of Lignon, and beheld her beauty in the water.
Whereupon the shepherd taking occasion, said to her, holding after an amorous
fashion his hand before his eyes, Take heed, fair shepherdess, withdraw
your eyes from this water, fear you not the dangers that others have run
into by such actions? Why say you so, answered Bellinde, that as yet understood
him not? Ah then, said the shepherd, fair and dissembling shepherdess, you
represent within this happy river, more beauty then Narcissus in the fountain.

At these words Bellinde blushed, and that increased her beauty the more, yet
she answered, Since whence, Celion, have you wished me so well? without
doubt, it is well done of you. To wish you well said the shepherd, it is long
time since I did it, and you are to believe, that this will shall be limited by
no other terms then that of my life.

Then the shepherdess casting down her head on this side, said, I make no
doubt of your amity, receiving it with the same good will, that I offer you
mine. Where to Celion presently answered, Let me kiss that fair hand by way
of thanks, for so great a good, and for an earnest of the faithful service,
which Celion is to render you the rest of his life. Bellinde, knew as well by
the fervor wherewith he uttered these words, as by the kisses which he
imprinted on her hand, that he figured to himself his amity, of another
quality then she meant; and because she would not have him live in this error,
Celion (said she) you are far from that you think: you cannot sooner banish me
from your company, then by this means, if you desire that I should continue
the amity I have promised you, continue likewise yours, with the same honesty
that your virtue promises me: otherwise, hence forth I break all familiarity
with you, and protest never to love you. I may as the custom of them that are
beloved, is, abuse you: but I use it not, because I freely wish you should
know, that if you live otherwise then you ought, you are never to have hope in
my amity. She added yet other words, which so astonished Celion, that he knew not
what to answer: Only he cast himself on his knees, and without other
discourse, with this submission demanded pardon, and then protested to her,
that his amity proceeded from her, and that she might rule it as that which she
had bred. If you use your self thus (replied then Bellinde) you shall bind me
to love you, otherwise you shall constrain me to the contrary. Fair
shepherdess (replied he) my affection is borne, and such as it is, it must
live, for it cannot die but with me, so that I cannot well remedy it but by
time: yet to promise you, that I will study to make such as you command, I
swear it unto you, and in the mean time, I desire never to be honored with
your good favor, if in all my life you knew any action, that for the quality
of my affection may displease you.

At last the shepherd consented to be beloved, on condition she might know
nothing in him, which might offend her honesty. So these lovers began an amity,
which lasted very long, with such satisfaction to them both, that they had
cause to rejoice therein for their fortune. Sometimes, if the young shepherd
were let, he sent his brother Diamis to her, who under the color of some
fruit, brought her letters from his brother. She often returned answer with
such good will, that he had cause to be contented, and this affection was
carried with that prudence, that few perceived it. Amaranthe, though she were
ordinarily with them, was ignorant of it, had it not been that by hap she found
a letter which her companions had lost; and see, I beseech you, what the effect
was, and how dangerous a thing it is for a young soul to come near these
fires! Until this time, the shepherdess had not, not only the lesst feeling
of love; but not a thought to be beloved; and as soon as she saw this letter,
were it for that she bare some envy to her companion, whom she estee^^d not to
be the fairer, and yet she saw her often wooed by this honest shepherd, were
it for that she was of an age which is proper to such burning, that they can no
sooner come near the fire, but they feel it, were it for that this letter had
so lively heates, that she had noyce to resist them. So it was, that she took
a certain desire not to love, for love it may be, would not attache her at the
first in extremity, but to be loved, and served of some shepherd of worth; and
in this point, she read the letter oftentimes, which was thus:

Celions letter to Bellinde.
Fair shepherdess, if your eyes were as full of variety, as they are to
cause love, the sweetness which they promise at the first, would make me adore
them, with as much of co^tentment, as they have produced in me of vain hope.
But so far are they from performance of their deceitful promises, that they
will not so much as confess them, and are so wide from healing my hurt, that
they will not call themselves authors. Yet can they hardly deny it, if they
consider well who she is, having no likelihood that any other beauty then
theirs could do so much. And yet, as if you had a purpose to equal your
cruelty to your beauty, you have ordained, that the affection which you have
caused to be borne, shall cruelly die in me. O God, was there ever a more
vnpittifull mother? But I, who held more dear that which comes from you, then
my life, being unable to suffer so great an injustice, am resolved to carry
this affection with me into the grave, hoping that the beauens moved at last
with my patience, will bind you at sometimes to be as pitiful, as you are
dear, and cru^ll to me for the present.


Amaranthe read this letter over diverse times, and without heed taking drank
up the sweet poison of love, no otherwise then one weary suffers himself by
little to fall asleep. If her thought set before her eyes the face of the
shepherd, oh! how full of beauty found she it to be? if his behavior, how
pleasing did it seem? if his spirit, how admirable did she judge it? briefly,
she saw him so perfect, that she thought her companion happy to be beloved of
him. Then taking again the letter, she read it over: but not without much
pawsing on the subjects that touched her most at the heart. And when she came
to the end, and that she saw the reproach of cruel, she flattered her
desires, which lately borne, call for foeble hopes as their Nurces, with
opinion that Bellinde, as yet loved him not, and so she might more easily win
him. But the poor soul heeded not, that this was the first letter that he had
written to her, and that since many things might be changed. The amity which
she bare to Bellinde, sometimes drew her back; but presently Love ouertopped
that amity. At last, the conclusion was, that she writ such a Letter to Celion.

Amaranthes Letter to Celion.
YOur perfections may excuse my error, and your courtesy receive the amity
which I offer you. I wish evil to my self, if I love any thing more than you.
But for your merit, I make my glory, whence would proceed my shame for any
other. If you refuse what I present you, it must be for want of spirit or
courage. From which of these two it is, it shall be as dishonorable to you as to
me, to be refused.


She gave this letter her self to Celion, who not able to imagine what she
would, as soon as he was in a private place, he read it, but with no less
astonishment than disdain, and had he not known her to be infinitely beloved
of his mistress, he would not have vouchsafed her an answer, yet fearing it
might offend her, he sent this answer by his brother.

Celions answer to Amaranthe.
I Know not what there is in me to move you to love me, yet I account my self
as happy, that such a shepherdess will dayne to regard me, as I am
unfortunate, in not being able to receive such a fortune. I would it pleased my
destiny, that I could as freely give my self to you, as I am wanting in power.
Fair Amaranthe. I should think my self the happiest that lives, to line in
your service, but being no longer at mine own disposition, accuse not, if it
please you, neither my spirit, nor my courage of that whereto necessity
compells me. It shall always be much to my contentment, to be in your good
grace, but yet more grievous to you, to note at all times the weakness of my
affection. So that I am enforced by your vertueite beseech you to turn this
ouer-ardent passion into a moderate amity, which I entertain with all my
heart. For this is not a thing impossible; and that which is not so, cannot be
ouer-hard to me for your service.


This answer had been sufficient to have diuerted her, if Love had not been of
the nature of powder, which is then most violent, when it is most restrained.
For against those former difficulties she opposed some sort of reason, that
Celion ought not so soon to leave Bellinde, it would be too great lightness,
if at the first summons he should be gone. But Time taught her to her cost to
deceive her self. For after that day the shepherd disdained her so that he
shunued her, and often chose rather to be absent from Bellinde, than to be
forced to see her. It was then that so easily she shipped her self on so
dangerous a sea, and so notable for the ordinary shipwracks of them that
ventured on them, and not long able to bear out this displeasure, she grew so
sad, that she fled from her companions, and the places where in before she
delighted, and at last, fell sick in good earnest. Her dear Bellinde went
presently to see her, and unawares desired the shepherd to bear her company.
But as the sight of the good we cannot get, does but increase the desire; so
this visitation did but make Amaranthes evil worse.

The night being come, all the shepheardesses withdrew, and there stayed but
Bellinde with her, so sorry for the evil of her companion (for she knew not
what it was) that she took no rest; and when she asked her of it, for answer
she had nothing but sighs. Whereat Bellinde at the first being astonished, in
the end, offended with her, said, I never thought, Amaranthe had so little
loved Bellinde, that she could have concealed any thing from her; but by that I
see I was deceived. And where as I might have said heretofore, I had a friend,
I may now say, I love a dissembler. Amaranthe, who for shame had shut up her
mouth until then, seeing they were alone; and being pressed with such an
affection, resolved to try the last remedy, which she thought fittest for her
defense. Casting from her all shame, as far off as she could, twice or
thrice, she opened her mouth to tell her all, but her words died so between
her lips, that this was all she could do, to bring forth these broken words,
laying her hand over her eyes, as not daring to look on her to whom she spoke:
My dear companion (said she) for so they called themselves: Our amity will not
suffer me to hide any thing from you, knowing well, that though it be told you,
what concerns me, shall be as carefully kept secret by you, as by my self.
Excuse then, I beseech you, the extreme error, which to satisfy our amity, I
am constrained to discover to you. You ask me what my grief is, and whence it
comes; know, that it is Love borne from the perfections of a shepherd. But
alas! at this word overcome with shame and displeasure, turning her head
another way, she held her peace with a torrent of tears.

The astonishment of Bellinde could not make her conjecture; yet to give her
courage to make an end, she said; I did not think that a passion so common to
all, would have brought you this trouble. To love, is a thing ordinary; but,
that it is from the perfections of a shepherd, this happens but to persons of
judgment. Tell me then who this happy man is. Then Amaranthe taking her speech
again, with a sigh drawn from the depth of her heart, said; But alas! this
shepherd loves elsewhere. And who is he, said Bellinde? It is (answered she)
since you will know, your Celion. I say yours (my companion) because I know he
loves you, and that this sole amity makes him disdain mine. Excuse my folly,
and without seeming to know it, leave me alone to complain, and endure mine
evil. The wise Bellinde was so ashamed when she heard this discourse of the
error of her companion, that though she loved Celion, as well as any might be
loved, yet she resolved on this occasion to give proof of that she was not.
And therefore turning toward her, she said: Indeed, Amaranthe, I suffer in
pain more than I can speak of, to see you so transported in this affection:
for it seems, our sex will not permit us so entire an authority of love; but
since you are in these terms, I thank God it lights in such a place, that I
may give proof of what I am to you. I love Celion, I will not deny it, as if
he were my brother. But I love you also as my sister, and I wish (for I know
he will obey me) that he love you more than me; rest your self on me, and
rejoice you alone, provided, you acknowledge when you are recovered, what
Bellinde has been unto you.

After some other like discourse, the night constrained Bellinde to withdraw,
leaving Amaranthe with such contentment, that forgetting her sadness, in few
days she recovered her former beauty. In the mean time Bellinde was not
without pain, who studying for some mean to make her purpose known to
Celion, found at last as fit a commodity as she wished. By fortune she met him,
as he was playing with his Ram in the great pasture, where the greatest part of
the shepherds fed their flocks. This beast was the leader of the troops, and
so well taught, that he seemed to understand his master when he spoke to him.
Whereat the shepherdess took such pleasure, that she stayed long at it. At
last she would try if it knew her as well as him; but it was much more ready
to every thing she willed; whereupon drawing aside from the company, she
said to Celion: What think you, brother, of the acquaintance between your
Ram, and me? It is the pleasantest that ever I saw.

Such as it is, fair shepherdess (said he) if you will do me the honor to
receive it, it is yours. But you are not to wonder that he gives you all
obe^sance: for he knows well, I would else disclame him for mine, having
learned by so many songs which he has heard of me, as I pass up and down,
that I was more yours then mine own. This well expresses (says the
shepherdess) the obedience of your Ram, which I will not receive to to be
employed, more for you then me: but since you give me so entire power over
you, I will try it, by joining to a commandment a most affectionat prayer.
There is nothing (answered the shepherd) which you may not command me. Then
Bellinde, thinking she had found the commodity she sought for, pursued her
discourse thus: from the day that that you assured me of your amity, I judged
the same good will to be in you, so also it binds me, to love and honor you,
more then any person living. Now, though I say thus to you, I would not have
you think that I have diminished this good will: for it shall accompany me to
my grave: and yet it may be you would do it, if I had not forewarned you: but
bind me by believing that my life, and not my amity may diminish. These words
put Celion into much pain, not knowing whereto they tended, at last he
answered, that he attended her will, with great joy and great fear; with joy,
for that he could imagine nothing more beneficial to him, then the honor of her
commandments; and with fear, for that he knew not for what cause she
threatened him: yet death it self could not be unwelcome to him, if it befell
him by her commandment. Then Bellinde held on:

Since, besides your sayings at this time, you have always given me that
witness of this assurance which you make me, that with reason I cannot doubt;
I will make no more difficulty, not to entreat, but to conjure Celion by all
the amity with which he favors his Bellinde, to obey her at this time. I will
not command him a thing impossible, much less draw him from the affection
which he bears me: rather on the contrary I will, if it may be, that he
increase it more and more. But before I pass further, let me know, I beseech
you, if ever your amity has been of other quallity then it is now, Celion,
then showing a countenance less troubled, then that which before the doubt had
constrained him to have, answered, that he began t^ ^^ope well, having received
such assurance, that to satisfy her demand, he would again auow that he
has loved her with the same affections and passions, and with the same desires
that youth did usually produce in hearts transported furthest by love; and that
therein he would not except any one, that since her commandment had such power
over him, it had got the like over his passion, that his sincere amity had so
far surpassed his love, that he did not think he should offend a sister, to
love her with that mind. On my faith, brother (replied the shepherdess) for
so I will hold you the remainder of my life, you so bind me by living thus with
me, that never any of your actions ever got more over my soul then this. But
I cannot see you longer in pain. Know then, that that which I would have of
you, is only, that preserving inuiolably this good amity which you now bear
me, you place your love on one of the fairest shepheardesses of Lignon. You may
say this is a strange office for Bellinde: yet if you consider that she, of
whom I speak, would have you for her husband, and that she is, after you, the
person whom I most love, for it is Amaranthe, I assure my self you will not
wonder at it. She has entreated, and I command you by all the power I have
over you.

She made haste to give him this commandment, fearing that if she stayed long,
she should not have the power to resist the supplications which she foresaw.
What think you, fair Nymph, became of this poor Celion? he grew pale like a
dead man, and so besides himself, that he could not for a good while bring
forth a word. At last, when he could speak, with such a voice as they have
that are in the midst of punishment, he cried out, Ah, cruel Bellinde, have
you preserved my life till now, to take it from me with such inhumanity? This
commandment is too cruel, to let me live, and my affection too great, to let
me die without despair. Alas, suffer me to dye: but let me die faithful:
that if there be no mean to recover Amaranthe, but by my death, I may
sacrifice my self most willingly for her health: the change of this
commandment shall be no less witness that I am beloved of you, then
whatsoever you shall be able to do to me. Bellinde was moved, but not changed.
Celion (said she) let us leave all these idle words, you shall give me less
occasion to believe what you say to me, if you will not satisfy the first
request, which I make you. Cruel, presently said the afflicted Celion, if you
will that I change this amity, what power have you more to command me? but if
you will not that I change it, how is it possible to love virtue and vice? and
if it be not possible, why for proof of my affection, will you have a thing
which cannot be? Pity thought to overcome her; and though she had ^uch pain
for the grief of the shepherd, yet was it some contentment which could not be
paralelled, to know her self so perfectly beloved of him, that she loved so
dear; and is may be, might have got something over her resolution, had it not
(...) that she would put from Amaranthe all opinion that she was attainted
with her evil: though she loved the shepherd, and was well beloved, yet she
enforced her pity, which already had brought forth some tears into her eyes,
to return into her heart, without giving knowledge that it was come: and in
the end, that she might not fall again into the same pain, she went away, and
at her departing, she said; Account of me, as pleases you, I am resolved never
to see you, until you have effected my prayer and your promise; and think,
that this resolution shall ouer-liue your obstinacy, If Celion were besides
himself, seeing himself so far from all consolation and resolution, he may
judge that has loved. So it was, that he stood two or three days like a man
lost, running into the woods, and flying from all those whom formerly he had
conuersed with. At last an old shepherd, a great friend of his fathers, one
indeed that was very wise, and who had always loved Celion passing well,
seeing him in this case, and doub^ing there was no passion strong enough to
work such effects, but love, so sifted him on all sides, that he made him
discourse his pain, where to he gave some asswagement by his good counsel:
for in his youth he had often passed through the same straights. And at last,
seeing him a little tractable, he mocked at him, for that he had such pain for
so small a matter, telling him that the remedy was so easy, that he might be
ashamed, that it should be known, that Celion esteemed wise by every man, and
a person of courage, should have so little understanding, that he knew not how
to resolve in an accident that was not very difficult, or at the worst, could
not dissemble; and then he went on: But it had been fit, that at the beginning
you had made these difficulties, for so she shall think your affection
extremee, and this shall tie her to love you the more: but since you have made
that demonstration, it will suffice that to content her, you make show of that
which she commands. This counsel at last was received of Celion, and executed
as it was propounded. It is true that he wrote this letter to Bellinde before.

Celions letter to Bellinde.
IF I have deserved to be soroughly used, as I have been by you, I choose
rather to dye, then to suffer it: but since it is to your contentment, I
received it with little more pleasure, then if in exchange you had awarded me
death: notwithstanding since I am dedicated to you, it is reasonable that you
should absolutely dispose of me. I will endeavor then to obey you: but remember
you that so long as this constraints lasts, so many days of my life must be
crossed out: for I can never call it life, that brings more grief then death.
Abridge it then, rig^^ous shepherdess, if there be any one spark, not of
amity, but even of pity.


It was impossible, but Bellinde must have feeling of these words, which she
knew came from an entire affection, but it was not possible for these words to
divert her from her dessigne. She advertised Amaranthe, that the shepherd
should love her, and that her health only kept back the knowledge of it. This
advertisement hastened her recovery so, that she gave proof, that for the
health of the body, the health of the mind is most profitable. How extreme was
this constraint to Celion, and what pain did he endure? It was such, that he
waxed lean, and so changed, that he might not be known. But behold what the
severity was of this Shepherdess! It was not sufficient to handle Celion
thus* for judging that Amaranthe had yet some suspicion of their amity, she
resolved to push those affairs so forward, that neither of them both might
gainsay it. Every man saw the apparent suit that the shepherd made to
Amaranthe: for it was openly declared, and the father of the shepherd knowing
the commendable virtues of Leon, and how much honored his family had always
been, did not mislike this suite.

One day Bellinde desirous to sound him, propounded it as a friend, and he that
judged it fit, agreed willingly to it: and this marriage was far forward
without the knowledge of Celion. But when he perceived it, he could not be
let from finding a mean to talk with Bellinde, to give her such reproaches,
that she was almost ashamed: and the shepherd seeing he must use other remedy
than words, ran presently to the best, that was, to his father, to whom he
made this speech: I shall be very sorry to disobey you at any time, and less
in this than any other. I see, you like well of the alliance of Amaranthe: you
may well know, that there is not a shepherdess that I affect more: yet I love
her for a mistress, but not for a wife; and I beseech you command me not to
tell the cause. The father at this speech, suspected that he had found some bad
condition in the shepherdess, and in his soul commended his sons wisdom
that had that command over his affections: so that blow was broken: and for
that the thing was so far passed, that many knew it; many also asked why it
proceeded so coldly? the father could not choose but say somewhat to his most
familiars, and they to others, that at last it came to Amaranthe, who at the
first tormented her self much, but afterward setting before her self what her
folly was, to seek to make him love her by force, by little and little she
fell off, and the first occasion that she saw fit and convenient to marry her
self, she took hold on. So these lovers were eased of a burden so hard to be
borne. But this was not, but that they might be ouer-charged with another much
more heavy.

Bellinde was now of age to be married, and Philemon infinitely desirous to
bestow her, to have in his old days the contentment to behold himself renewed
in that which might come of her. He would have received Celion; but Bellinde
that shunned marriage even as death, had forbidden the shepherd to speak,
only she had promised him, that if she were constrained to marry, she would
give him notice of it, that he might demand her: which was the cause, that
Philemon beholding the coldness of Celion, would not offer her unto him. And
in the mean time Ergaste, a principal shepherd of that Country, and who was
well esteemed of every one for his commendable virtues, procured that she was
demanded; and because he would not have it vented before he were assured; he
which managed the business, dealt so secretly and warily, as the promise of
marriage was as soon known as it was demanded. For Phil^m^^ assuring
himself of the obedience of his daughter, bound himself by word, and after
told her of it.

At the first she found the resolution hard which she was to take, because he
was a man whom she had never seen: yet that good spirit that never stoopes
under the burden of misfortune, raised up it self presently, ouercomming that
displeasure, and would not suffer only her eye to give figne of sorrow for
that consideration. But she could never obtain this over her self for Celion:
and of necessity, her tears must pay the error of her ouer-obstinate hatred
of marriage. So it was, that to satisfy (in some sort) her promise, she
advertised the poor shepherd, that Philemon would marry her. On the sudden,
having the permission so much desired, he so solicited his father, that the
same day he spoke with Philemon.

But now was no time, for which the father of Bellinde was much grieved, for
he loved him better than Ergaste. O God! what was the sorrow when he knew the
award of his misfortune? he went out of the house, and ceased not, until he
found out the shepherdess. At the meeting he could not speak, but his face
manifested well enough what Philemons answer was. And though she stood in as
great need of good counsel as he, and strength to support this blow; yet
would she declare her self as well vn-vanquished by this displeasure, as she
had always gloried to be in all others. But likewise would she not appear to
be so insensible, but the shepherd might have some knowledge that she felt her
evil, and that it displeased her. Whereupon she demanded, to what the demand
which he made to her father amounted? The shepherd answered her with the same
words that Philemon had said to him, adding so many complaints and desperate
laments, that she had been a Rock, if she had not been moved. Yet she
interrupted him, fighting against her self with more virtue than is credible,
and told him, that complaints are proper to weak spirits, and not to persons
of courage: That he did himself great wrong, and her also, to use that
language. And (said she) at last, what is become of that good resolution which
you said you would have against all accidents, but the change of my amity? and
can you have an opinion, that any thing can shake it? Do you not see that these
words can not boot us anything, but to make them that hear us conceive an
evil opinion of us? For Gods sake do not set a stayne in my forehead, which
with such pain I have hitherto avoided: and since there is none other remedy,
pacify your self, as I do; and (it may be) the Heavens will turn all things
more to our contentment, than at this time we are permitted to wish for. For
my part I will break this misfortune as much as I can possibly.

But if there be no remedy, yet must not we be without resolution, rather let
us part asunder.

These last words brought the despair of all, making him think, that this
great courage proceeded from small amity. If it were as easy for me, answered
the shepherd, to resolve against this accident, as you, I would judge my self
unworthy to be beloved; for so feeble an amity cannot merit so great
happiness. Well, for end and reward of my services, you give me a resolution
in the assured loss which I see of you, and secretly to say to me, that I must
not despair, though I see you become another. Ah Bellinde, with what eye will
you see this new friend? With what heart can you love him? And with what favors
will you entertain him, since your eye has a thousand times promised, that it
would look on none other with love but me; and since this heart has sworn to
me, that it could never love any but me; and since love has destined your
favors to no less affection then mine? Well, you command me to leave you: to
obey you, I will do so; for I will not at the end of my life, begin to
disobey. But that which makes me undertake it, is, to know assuredly, that the
end of my life shall not happen, before the end of your amity; and though I
call my self the most unhappy that lives, yet I cherish my fortune the more,
for that it has presented unto me such an occasion, to make my love known to
you, that you may not doubt of it: and yet I shall not be satisfied in my
self, if the last moment that remains, be not employed in assuring you. I
pray the heaven (see what my amity is!) that in this new election, it fill you
with as much happiness, as you cause in me despair. Live happy with Ergaste,
and receive him with as great contentment, as I have had will to do you
service, if my days would have permitted me, that this new affection, full of
pleasures, which you promise to your self, may accompany you to your grave, as
I assure you, that my faithful amity shall close mine eyes for your sake, with
extreme grief.

That Bellinde let Celion talk so long, it was for fear, that speaking, her
tears would do the office of words, and that, that would increase the grief
of the shepherd, or that it would give proof of the small power she had over
her self. Proud beauty, that love rather to be judged to have too little
love, then too little resolution! But at last, finding her strengthened enough
to give answer, she said, Celion, you think you give me proof of your amity,
and you do the contrary: for, how have you loved me, having so evil an opinion
of me? If since this last accide^t you have conceived it, believe the affection
was not great, which could so readily suffer a change: But if you had no evil
opinion of me, how is it possible you should believe that I have loved you, and
that now I love you no more? For Gods sake have pity on my fortune, and
conspire not with her to increase my sorrow: consider what small likelihood
there is, that Celion, whom I love above the rest of the world, and whose life
pleases me as much as mine own, may be changed for an Ergaste, who is
unknown to me, and in whose place I choose rather to espouse my tomb; that if
I be forced, it is the commandment of my Father, whom my honor will not
suffer me to contradict. But is it possible you should not remember the
protestations I have so often made to you, that I would not marry my self? And
you ceased not to love me: whence has it this change? For, if without
marrying me, you have loved me, why can you not now love me, without marrying
me, having an husband who can forbid me to have a brother whom I may always
love with that amity I ought? Good will holds me nearer to you then is
permitted me. Farewell, my Celion: live and love me, who will love you even to
my end, whatsoever becomes of Bellinde.

At this word she kissed him, which was the greatest favor that hitherto she
had done him, leaving him so besides himself, that he was not able to frame a
word to give her answer. When he was come to himself, and that he considered
that Love stooped under du^y, and that there was not a spark of hope
remaining, which might shine among his displeasures, as a person void of
resolution, he went into the Wood, and into the places most covert, where he
did nothing but complain of his cruel disaster, what advice soever his
friends could give him. He lived in this sort many days, during which, he made
the ro^ks to pity him. And that she, who was the cause of his evil might have
some, feeling, he sent her these verses:

STANZA'S Of Celion, on the marriage of Bellinde and Ergaste.
Do then the heavens agree, after such love,
After such services, that you should be
Another man's sweet heart, and so must pr^^^e.
His dear delight, and dearer moity,
And that I have at last for love most true,
But memory, my sorrows to renew?
You once did love me well, what' vaileth me?
This amity now it is gone and past.
If you in others arms embraced I see,
And if for her I be constrained at last,
You now turned his, to keep in silence still,
Displeasures cruel that my patience spill.
If he had more of Love, or of desert
Then I, I know not what to say but cry
Alas! Oh, is not this a cruel smart,
That he should gain in one days space well-ny.
Without desert, what heavens will not beh^^u^
To infinite desires of endless love?
But (oh weak reason) duty you will say,
By her sad laws compels me to do thus.
What duty strong, or law more holy may
Be found then this, that clearly speaks for us,
The faith so often sworn, when hand in hand,
We promised a love for aye to stand?
May hand (you said) forthwith grow dead and dry,
My hand, as of a person most for sworn,
If I be failing in the thing that I
Assure, or if I any thing have borne
Nearer my heart, or else hold ought more dear,
Then this affection which your faith did swear.
Ob cruel memory of passed good,
Be gone, and ever banished from my minds,
Since happiness that in such glory stood.
Alas, I now so much defaced find,
Deface it then, it is not reasonable,
Thou be in me that am so miserable.
Though he made it not appear in any one of his actions, that there remained
any hope in him, yet he always had some little, because the contract of
marriage was not yet passed; and for that he knew well, that oftentimes those
meetings were often broke off, sometimes they that were thought most certain.
But when he knew the articles were signed on both sides, fair Nymph, how can I
tell you the least of his despaires? He wrung his hands, he tore his hair,
hebeat his breast with thumpes: to be short he was a man transported, and so
without reason, that he oftentimes went out with a purpose to kill Ergaste. But
when he was ready for it, some spark of consideration, which in the midst of
so great fury withheld him, made him fear to offend Bellinde, to whom,
notwithstanding, transported with passion, he wrote oftentimes letters so full
of love and reproaches, that she could hardly read them without tears. Among
others he, sent her such an one:

Celions letter to Bellinde in his transport.
MVst then, inconstant shepherdess, my pain survive my affection? Must it
be, that without loving you, I have such pain, when I know you are in another
man's hands? Is it not that the gods will punish me for loving you more then I
ought? Or rather is it not, that when I imagine not to love you yet I have more
love for you then I had before? Yet why should I love you, since you are, and
cannot be any other man's, then one I love not? But on the contrary: why should
not I love you, since I have so much loved you? It is true, that I ought not to
love you? For you are an ungrateful soul, altogether forgetful, and that
has no sense of Love: yet whatsoever you are, you are Bellinde: and can
Bellinde be, without Celion love her? Then do I love you, or if I love you
not, judge in your self, shepherdess; for, for my part, I have a spirit so
disquieted, that I can discern nothing else, but that I am the man in the
world most afflicted.


At the end of the letter were these verses.

STANZA'S.
Excuse I cannot this inconstancy,
Which wrought this bad change of affection,
Change to the better, I call prudency,
But to the worse, shows small discretion.
When Bellinde received these letters and verses, she was in pain to send him
any of hers, because that hearing talk of the strange life he led, and the
words which he uttered against her, she could not suffer it without great
displeasure, considering what great cause of speech this gave to them, who have
their ears but to listen afternewes of others, and tongues to be telling them.
Her letter was thus:

Bellindes letter to Celion.
IT is impossible for me longer to endure the wrong, which your strange fashion
of living brings to us both. I deny not but you have occasion to complain of
our fortune: But I say withal, that a wise man knows how to enjoy what is
permitted him, without the imputation of becoming a fool. What a frenzy is
this, that keeps you from seeing, that, while you publish to the rest of the
world, that you dye for love of me, you constrain me to think, that truly
you never loved me? For, if you loved me, would you displease me? And, do you
not know, that death cannot be more grievous to me, then the knowledge you have
gi^uen to every man of our amity? Forbear then, brother, I beseech you, and by
that name which ties you to have ^are of that which touches me, I conjure you,
that if at this present you cannot bear this disaster, without discovering
your sorrow, you would at least take are solution to go so far off, that those
who hear your complaint may not know my name, but condole with you your own
grief, not being able to suspect any thing to my disadvantage. If you give me
content in this resolution, you shall make me believe that it was superfluity,
and not want of affection, which has made you commit this error against me.
And this consideration shall bind Bellinde, besides the amity which she bears
you, to conserve always dearly the memory of that brother that loves her, and
whom she loves among all these cruel insupportable displeasures.


Though Celion were so transported, that his spirit was almost incapable of
reasons, which his friends could present him, yet so it was, that affection
opened his eyes at that blow, and made him see that Bellinde had counseled
him to some purpose, so that resolving to be gone, he secretly gave order for
his voyage, and the day before he would depart, he writ to his shepherdess,
having a purpose to obey her, and he besought her to give him the commodity
that he might take leave of her, to the end he might depart with some sort of
consolation. The shepherdess that truly loved him, though she foresawe that
this farewell would but increase his displeasure, would not deny him this
request, and appointed the next day in the morning at the fountain of
Sicomores.

The day had scant begun to dawne, when the desolate shepherd leaving his
cabin with his flock, drove the right way to the Fountain, where casting
himself at length, and his eyes on the waters course, he began, while he
attended his shepherdess, to entertain himself about his approaching
misfortune; and after he had been somewhile silent, he breathed out these
verses:

A comparison of a Fountain to his displeasure.
THis Spring, that ever flowing,
Does never make an end,
But aye it self renewing,
By wa^es that far extend,
Resembles mine annoyes, whose sorrows me oppress:
For even like to it, that never means to cease,
As from a fruitful spring the griefs that I complain,
Are still renewed, and always borne again.
Then with a winding course,
All as the flowing wa^e,
Runs wandering from it source,
And no repose will have:
So me with troubles great, with main and many pains,
As through the somwhile spared sandy plains,
The ouer-flowing waters cover quite,
While I with tears bewail my heavy plight.
And as a vagabond,
It with a murmr flies,
Where waves the waves beyond,
Floting along it cries.
In like sort I complain of my most sad mischance,
And against Love my murmuring voice advance.
But what avails me, since in the end
I follow that that Destiny does send?
While this shepherd talked thus with himself, and that he uttered loud
enough many words at randon, he was so troubled with this disafter; Bellinde,
that had not lost the remembrance of the appointment which she had given him,
as soon as she could free her self from them about her, went to seek him, so
much traveled with sorrow to lose him, that she could not hide it, but that it
appeared in her countenance. Ergaste, who that morning was risen in good time
to see her, by chance perceived her afar off, and seeing her go alone, and (as
he thought) sought out the thickest bushes, had a mind to know whither she
went. That was the cause, that following her far off, he saw she took the
way to the fountain of Sicomors; and casting his eye a little further off,
though it were very early, he observed, that already there was a flock
feeding. He that was very advised, and was not ignorant of the affairs of
this shepherdess, but that he had heard speech of the love which Colion bare
her, suddenly entered into conceit, that this flock was his, and that Bellinde
went to seek him.

Now though he made no doubt of the chastity of his mistress, yet did he easily
believe, that she hated him not, thinking that so long a suite could not have
been continued if she had misliked it. And, to satisfy his curiosity, as
soon as he saw her under the trees, and that she could not spy him, fetching
a compass somevvhat about, he hid himself among some bushes; where he
perceived the shepherdess set on the turffes, which were raised about the
Fountain in the fashion of seats, and Celion on his knees by her. What an
assault received he at this sight? Yet, for that he could not heat what they
said, he went softly, and he came so near them, that there was nothing but an
hedge (which compassing about the fountain like a pale) shaddowed him. From
that place then casting his eyes betvveene the opening of the leaves, and being
very attentive withal to their discourse, he heard the shepherdess answer
him, And how, Celion, is it power or will to please me, that makes you wanting
in this occasion? Shall this accident have more force over you, than the power
you have given me? Where is your courage, Celion, or rather, where is your
amity? Have you not heretofore overcome for the love you bear me, greater
misfortunes than these? If it be so, where is the affection, or where is the
resolution that made you do it? Would you have me believe that you have less
now, than you had then? Ah shepherd! consent thou rather to the shortening of
my life, than to the lessening of that goodwill which you have promised me: and
as hitherto I have had that power over you that I listed, so for the time to
come, let nothing be able to diminish the same.

Ergaste heard that Celion answered her: Is it possible, Bellinde, that you can
enter into doubt of mine affection, and of the power you have of me Can you
have so great a want of understanding? and can the heavens be so unjust, that
you can forget those testimonies which I have given you? and that they have
suffered that I should survive the good opinion which you are to have of me?
You, Bellinde, you may call into question that which never any one of my
actions, nor of your commandments left doubtful: At least, before you take
so disaduantagious opinion against me, demand of Amaranthe, what she believes;
demand the respect which makes me silent; demand of Bellinde her self, if
ever she imagined any thing difficult, that my affection did not surmount.

But now that I see you entirely another, and after the end of my disappoynted
love, leaving you in the arms of a more happy man than my self, I must be
gone, and banish my self for ever from you. Alas, can you say it is want of
affection, or of will to obey you, if I feel a pain more cruel than that of
death? How shepherdess! can you think I do love you, if without dying I know
you another man's? Will you say, it should be love and courage that make me
insensible of this disaster? rather, in truth, shall it not be neither love nor
courage to suffer this without despair? O shepherdess! oh that you and I
shall be a Fable a long while! for if this weakness, which makes me unable to
live, and support this misfortune, makes you doubt of my affection; on the
contrary, that great constancy, and that extreme resolution, which I see in
you, is to me an ouer-certaine assurance of your small amity. But withal, why
must I hope more of you, when another (O the cruelty of my destiny!) is to
enjoy you? At this word the poor shepherd fell on the knees of Bellinde
without strength, or sense.

If the shepherdess were touched to the quick, as well at the words, as at
the swowning of Celion, you may judge (fair Nymph) since she loved him as much
as was possible; and she must dissemble, that she had no feeling of this
dolorous separation. When she saw him in a swownd, and that she thought she was
not heard, but of the Sicomors, and the water of the fountain, unwilling to
hide from them the displeasure which she had kept so secret from her
companions, and those whom she ordinarily saw; Alas (said she) wringing her
hands! Alas, O sovereign goodness! take me out of this misery, or out of this
life; for pity, either break off my cruel disaster, or let my cruel
disaster break me! And there casting down her eyes on Celion, And thou (said
she) ouer-faithfull shepherd, which art not miserable, but in that thou love
miserable me, let the heavens be pleased, either to give thee the contentments
thou deseruedst, or to take me from the world, since I am the only cause that
thou suffer the displeasures which thou meritest not. And then holding her
peace a while, she began again, O how hard a thing it is to love well, and
to be wise withal? For I see well, my father has reason to give me to the
wise Ergaste, whether for his merits, or for his substance. But alas! what does
this knowledge avail me, if Love forbid mine affection to delight in him?

I know that Ergaste merits more, and I can hope for nothing more to my benefit
than to be his. But how can I give my self to him, if Love have already given
me to another? Reason is on my fathers side, but Love is for me; and not a
love lately borne, or that has no power, but a Love which I have conceived, or
rather, which the heavens have caused to be borne with me, which grew up with
me from my cradle, and which by so long tract of time is so insinuated into my
soul, that it is more my soul than my soul. O God! can I hope to put it off
without loss of life? And if I cannot undo it, tell me, Bellinde, what will
become of thee? In bringing out these words, the great tears fell from her
eyes, and running down along her face, wet both the hand and cheek of the
shepherd, who by little and little coming to himself, caused the
shepherdess to break off her complaints, and wiping her eyes for fear lest
he should mark it, changing both her countenance, and voice, she spoke to him
in this sort, Shepherd, I will confess that I have a feeling of your pain,
(it may be) as much as your self, and that I cannot doubt of your goodwill,
unless I were the most misunderstanding person in the world.

But, to what end serve this acknowledgement, and those feelings? since the
heavens have subjected me to him, that has given me being, would you have me
so to be, that I disobey him? But be it, that affection more strong prevail
above duty, shall we therefore, Celion, be at rest? Is it possible, if you love
me, that you can have any contentment to see me all the rest of my life long
full of displeasures and griefs? And can you think that the blame which I
shall incur, whether for disobeying my father, or for the opinion that every
one shall have of our life passed, to my disadvantage, can leave me one moment
of quie^nesse? It may be, this will be more credible of another than of me,
that have always so blamed them that have carried themselves thus, that the
shame to see my self fallen into their fault, will be more insupportable to me,
than the most cruel death which the heavens may ordain. Arm your self
therefore with this resolution, O shepherd, that as for the time passed, our
affection never made us commit any thing that was against our duty, though our
love were extreme; so for the time to come, we must not suffer that it compel
us to do it. Besides that, to things which have no remedy, complaints seem
unprofitable.

Now it is certain, that my father has given me to Ergaste, and that gift can
never be revoked, but by Ergaste himself. Judge you what hope we can have
ever that will be. It is true, that having disposed of my affection before my
father did of me, I promised and swore to you, before all the gods, and
particularly, before the deities which dwell in this place, that for affection
I would be yours, until I were in my tomb: and that there was neither father
nor husband, nor tyranny of duty should ever make me do against the oath which
I have made you. The heavens have given me to a father, that father has given
my body to an husband. As I may not contradict heau^^, so my duty forbids me to
refuse the appointment of my father. But, neither the heavens, nor my father,
nor my husband shall ever keep me from having a brother, whom I will love, as I
have promised him, whatsoever may come of it. At these last words, foreseeing
that Celion would fall again to plaints and tears; to put it off, she rose,
and taking him by the head, kissed his brow, and bidding him farewell, and
going away: Shepherd, God grant thee as much contentment (said she) in thy
journey, as thou leauest me little in the case I am in.

Celion had neither the strength to answer her, nor the courage to follow her;
but being risen, and holding his arms acrosse, he went, accompanying her with
his eyes, as far as he could see her; and when the trees took away his view,
lifting up his eyes to heaven, all laden with tears, after many great sighs,
he ran away on the other side, without care, either of his flock, or of any
thing he left in his cabin. Ergaste, who lay hid behind the bush, and had
heard their discourse, was more satisfied with the virtue of Bellinde, than he
could express, admiring both the force of her courage, and the greatness of her
honesty. And after he had long stayed, ravished with this thought, considering
the extreme affection that was between these two lovers, he believed that it
would be an act unworthy himself, to be cause of their separation, and that
the heavens had ordained him to meet with that farewell so fitly, but to let
him see the great error which he went about to commit unawares. Being then
resolved to work for their contentment, all he could possibly, he set
himself to follow Celion, but he was by this time so far gone, that he knew
not how to overtake him and thinking to find him in his cabin, he took a
narrow path that led directly to it. But Celion was gone a contrary way: for
without speaking to any of his kindred or friends, he went wandering many days,
without any other purpose than to fly from men, and fed on the wild fruits
which extreme hunger enforced him to gather in the woods. Ergaste, that saw
his purpose was broken on that side, after a day or two's search, went to find
out Bellinde, hoping to know of her, what way he had taken: and by chance, he
found her at the same place, where she had bid Celion adieu, all alone on the
side of the Fountain, at that time meditating on the last accident that befell
her in that place; the remembrance whereof brought tears from the depth of her
heart. Ergaste, that saw her long before, came purposely to take her in the
most private sort he could possibly: and seeing her tears like two Springs,
run down into the Fountain, he had so much pity, that he swore, not to
take a good nights slee^^, until he had remedied her displeasure. And to lose
no time, aduauncing himself at once toward her, he saluted her.

She that saw her self overtaken with tears in her eyes, that she might
hide them, making show to wash her self, and nimbly casting her hands into the
water, wet her face all over, so that if Ergaste had not seen her tears
before, he could hardly have known she wept: which yet made him more to wonder
at her virtue. At that time she painted in her face a smiling countenance, and
turning to the shepherd, said to him, with a fashion of courtesy, I thought
to have been a lone (gentle shepherd) but for that I see you are come for the
same cause (as I think) that brought me hither, I would say, to refresh you,
and without fayning, see the best Spring, and the most fresh that is in this
Plain. Wise and fair shepherdess (answered Ergaste smiling) you have reason
to say, that the same cause; which made you come hither, has likewise brought
me. For it is true; but where you say, that you and I come to refresh our
selves, I must contradict it, for that neither of us had it for our purpose.
For my part, said the shepherdess, I confess I may be deceived for you: but
for mine own particular, you must permit me to say, that there is none that
knows more than my self. I grant (said Ergaste) that you know more than all
others. But you shall not therefore make me confess, that the cause that
brought you hither, is the very same you have spoken of.

And what think you then (said she) it was? At this word she laid her hand on
her face, seeming to rub her eyebrows, but, indeed, to hide (in some sort)
the redness which was risen. Which Ergaste marking, and willing to free her of
the pain wherein he saw her, answered thus: Fair and discreet
shepherdess, you must use no more dissimulation with me, that know as well
as you, that which you do think you have most secret in your soul: and to
manifest unto you that I lie not, I tell you, that at this present, you are
here at this waters side, thinking with great displeasure on the last adieu,
which you gave unto Celion in this place where you are. I (said she) presently
all overtaken? Yes, you (said Ergaste:) but be not grieved that I know it. For
I do so esteem of your virtue and worth, that it shall be so far from
hurting you, that I desire it should be the cause of your contentment. I know
the long service which this shepherd has done you: I know with how much
honor he has wooed you. I know with what affection he has continued these
many years: and moreover, with what sincere and virtuous amity you have
affected him.

The knowledge of all these things makes me desire death, rather than to be the
cause of your separation. Think not that it is Jealousy that causes me to
speak in this manner: I shall never enter into any doubt of your virtue, since
I have heard with mine ears the wise discourse which you have had with him. No
more think you, but that I believe, that losing you, I shall likewise lose the
best fortune that I could wish for: but the only cause that drives me to
give you to him, whose you ought to be, is this (O wise Bellinde) that I will
not buy my contentment with your everlasting displeasure: and truly, I should
think my self to be culpable both before God and men, if by my occasion, so
good and virtuous an amity should be broken off betvveene you.

I therefore come to tell you, that I choose rather to deprive my self of the
best alliance that ever I shall have, to set you in your former liberty, and
to give you back again the contentment which mine would have taken from you.
And besides that, I think to do and perform that which I believe my duty
commands me; it shall be no small satisfaction to me, to think, that if
Bellinde be contented, Ergaste was an instrument of her contentment. Only I
do require, that if herein I bind you being the cause of the reunion of
your amity, you will be pleased to receive me as a third to you two, and that
you will yield me the same part of goodwill, which you promised to Celion,
when you did think to marry Ergaste: I mean, that I may be a friend to you
two, and be received as a brother.

Can I (fair Nymph) show you the contentment unhoped for of this
shepherdess? I think it is impossible: for she was so surprised, that she
knew not with what words to thank him: but taking him by the hand, she went to
sit down on the turfes of the fountain; where, after she had paused a while,
and seeing the good will wherewith Ergaste bound her, she declared all along,
what had passed between Celion and her, and after a thousand kinds of thanks,
which I omit, for sear of troubling you, she besought him to go seek him,
for that the transport of Celion was such, that he would not come back with
any man in the world that should seek him, for that he would never believe
that good will of his, whom he had never given such cause to, if it were
assured him by any other: But on the contrary, he would imagine it were a trick
to bring him back. Ergaste, that desired in any case to end the good work he
had begun, resolved to be gone the nextday, with Diamis the brother of
Celion, promising her not to come back without bringing him with him.

Being then departed with this purpose, after he had sacrificed to Thautates,
to desire him to direct them to the place where they might find Celion, they
took the way that first offered it self to them. But they had sought long in
vain, before they had any news, if himself, transported with fury, had not
resolved to return into Forests, to kill Ergaste, and then with the same
weapon to pierce his own heart, before Bellinde, not being able to live and
know that another enjoyed his good. In this rage he set himself on his way:
and because he nourished himself but with herbs and fruits, which he found
along the way, he was so feeble, that he could scarce go: and had not his
rage carried him, he could not have done that; yet must he diverse times of the
day rest him, especially when sleep pressed him.

It fell out, that wearied in this sort, he lay down under some trees which
gave a pleasing shadow to a Fountain, and there, after he had some while
thought of his displeasures, he fell asleep. Here Fortune, who delighted her
self with the griefs she had wrought him, disposes to make him entirely
happy. Ergaste and Diamis passed by this way, and by chance Diamis went first:
on the sudden when he saw him, he knew him, and turning softly, came, to
advertise Ergaste, who very joyful, would have gone to embrace him, but Diamis
held him back, saying, I beseech you, Ergaste, do nothing herein that may
turn to evil: my brother, if at once we should tell him this good news,
would dye with joy; and if you knew the extreme affliction that this accident
has brought him, you would be of the same mind. Therefore, me thinks, it
will be better that I tell it him by little and little, and because he will
not believe me, you may come after to confirm it.

Ergaste finding this advice good, got behind some trees where he might see
them, and Dianis went to him. And it must needs be, that he was inspired by
some good Angel: for if at the first Celion had spyed Ergaste, it may be, that
following his resolution, he had done him some displeasure. Now, at the time
that Dianis came toward him, his brother awaked, and beginning again his
ordinary entertainements, he set himself to complain in this manner:

A PLAINT.
BEsides the wees of humane state,
Lighting on naught to comfort me,
Unless it be to wayle my Fate,
I sigh for death, which will not be.
My shield is hope that cannot fall:
But that same sword that entting is,
Which mischief angers me withal,
Is evils too assured to miss.
I hope in my long misery,
To see my dole some end to have:
But how? I must not hope to see
Unless it be within my grane.
Count you him not most miserable,
And all the gods his enemies,
Whose hope that is most favorable,
In death, and in his last Fate lies.
Where are the thoughts of courage high,
Resolved for evil heretofore?
But where am I? or who am I?
I understand my self no more.
My soul through grief is so confused,
That what as now it seems to crane,
It on a sudden leaves refar'd,
Then whom with ease she might it have.
Brought to this state it cannot see
Nor what it has, nor what it is.
O wherefore then must we needs be,
When every thing tastes ^s amiss?
D^amis would not come suddenly on him: but after he had harkened somewhile,
he made a noise purposely, that he might turn his head toward him; and
seeing that he beheld him astonished, he went softly to him, and after he had
saluted him; he said, I thank God, brother, that I have found you so fitly, to
do you the message that Bellinde sendes you.

Bellinde, said he presently? It is possible she should have any remembrance of
me, between the arms of Ergaste? Ergaste, said Diamis, has not Bellinde
between his arms: and I hope, if you have any resolution, she shall never be
his. And doubt you, answered Celion, that resolution shall be wanting to me in
such an affair? I would say, replied Diamis, wisdom. I think, answered
Celion, there as no wisdom that can cross the order that Destiny has
resolved. Destiny, said Diamis, is not so contrary to you, as you think: and
your affairs are not in so evil terms as you believe: Ergasts refuses
Bellinde. Ergaste, said Celion, refuse her? It is certain, continued Diamis,
and that you may be better assured, Ergaste himself seeks you out to tell you
so much. Celion hearing these news, stood without answer, almost besides
himself; and then speaking again, You deceive your self, brother, said he,
or say you this to abuse me? I swear, answered Diamis, by the great Thautates,
Hesus, and Tharamus, and all that which we account most sacred, that I tell
you true, and you may soon know it of the shepherd Ergaste. Then Celion
lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven: O God, said ne, to what more happy end
do you reserve me? His brother, to interrupt him, said; You must talk no more
of misfortune and death, but only of joy and contentment: and above all,
prepare to thank Ergaste for the good which he has done you, for I see him
come toward us. At this word Celion rises up, and seeing him so near, ran
to embrace him with as much good will, as a little before he had borne him
malice. But when he knew the truth of this affair, he cast himself on his
knees before Ergaste, and would have kissed his feet. I cut off all their
discourse (fair Nymph) and will only tell you, that being returned, Ergaste
(...) him Bellinde; and with the consent of his father, he caused her to be
espoused to him, and only desired, as he had before requested Bellinde, that
Celion would accept him for a third, in their honest and sincere affection; and
giving himself entirely to them, would never marry.

See, (fair and wise Nymph) that that it pleased you to know of their fortune,
which was pleasing to all three, so long as it pleased God they should live
together: for some while after, there was borne them a son, whom they called
Ergaste, for the amity they bare to the gentle Ergaste, and long to preserve
his memory. But it fell out, that in the cruel pillage which some strangers
made in the provinces of the Sequans, Viennois and Segusians, this little
Insant was lost, and dyed, without doubt, for want: for they never heard news
of him. And some years after, they had a daughter, named Diane: but Celion nor
Ergaste had not long the pleasure of this child, because they dyed shortly
after, and both on one day: and this is Diane, of whom you asked me news, and
who is accounted in our Hamlet, for one of the fairest and wisest
shepheardesses in all Forestes.

The end of the tenth Book.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF ASTREA AND CELADON.
CELADON went on in this sort, telling to the Nymph the history of Colion and
Belinde, while Leonide and Galathee talked of the news which Flurial brought
them: for as soon as the Nymph perceived Leonide, she took her aside, and bid
her take heed, that Flurial saw not Celadon; for (said she) he is so entirely
for Lindamor, that the beast will tell him all he sees: entertain him then, and
when I have looked over my Letters, I will tell you what news I have. At this
word, the Nymph went out of the chamber, and led Flurial with her, and after
some other speeches, she said to him: Well Flurial, what news bring you to my
Lady? Very good, answered he, and such as she and you would wish; for Clidaman
is well, and Lindamor has done such wonders in the battle, that it is found,
that Meroue and Childerick esteem of him as his virtue deserves: but there is
a young man with me, that would speak with Siluy, whom they at the Gate would
not suffer to enter, who will tell you much better all the particulars, for
that he came from thence; and I received these Letters at my Aunts, whither one
of Lindamors followers brought them, and expects an answer. And know thou
not, replied the Nymph, what he would say to Siluy? No, answered he, for he
would never tell it: He must (said the Nymph) come in. At this word going
toward the Gate, she knew the Youth presently, for she had seen him often with
Ligdamon; which made her judge, he brought some news to Siluy: And because she
knew well, that her sister desired these affairs might be secret, she would
ask him nothing, fayning not to know him; only she told him, she would
advertise Siluy of it. Then drawing Flurial aside: Thou know well Flurial,
said she (my friend) the misfortune that is befalne Lindamor. How, answered
Flurial? we should rather think him happy: for he has got such glory where he
is, that at his return, Amasis dares not deny him Galathee. O Flurial, what
say thou? If thou knewst how things have passed here, thou would protest,
that the voyage of our friend is for his part the way of death. O God (said he)
what say you? for I doubt not, but at his return he will dye of sorrow.
Flurial (said she) it is as I tell thee, and believe not, that there is any
remedy, unless it come from thee. From me, said he? if it may come from me,
hold it for most certain, for there is nothing in the world that I will not
do. Now, said the Nymph, you must then be secret, and this evening I will tell
you more: but now I must know what the poor absent man writes. He sent, said
he, these Letters by a young man, who had charge to carry them to mine Aunt,
she has presently sent me with them, and see one that he w^it to you: she
opened it, and saw it was thus.

The Letter of Lindamor to Leonide.
AS absence has small power over mine own soul, so fear I it has much over
her whom I adore; my faith tells me no, but my fortune threatens the contrary:
yet the assurance which I have in the wisdom of my Confident, makes me live
with less fear, then if my memory were alone. Have care then not to frustrate
the hope which I have (...) you, nor belie the assurances of our amity.


Well, said the Nymph, go to the next place where thou may lodge this
night, and come hither betimes in the morning, and then thou shall know a story
which will make thee wonder at it. Then she called up the Youth which would
speak with Siluy, and led him into the withdrawing chamber of Galathee,
where willing him to attend, she went in, and gave the Nymph to know what she
had done with Fleuriat. You must, said the Nymph, read this Letter which
Lindamor has written to me.

The Letter of Lindamor to Galathee.
NEither the delay of my Voyage, nor the horrors of War, nor the beauties of
these new Hostesses of Gaul can so possess the memory of your faithful
servant from you, but that it continually flies back to the most happy abode,
where, while I am so far distant from you, I leave all my glory: so that not
being able to deny my affection the curiosity, to know how my Lady does, after
I have a thousand times kissed your Robe, I present you with all the good
fortunes wherewith Arms are pleased to favor me, and offer them at your feet,
as to the Diuiniti^ to which I acknowledge them. If you receive them for yours,
Renown will give them you in my behalf, which promises me as well as your
self the honor of your good graces to your most humble servant.


I care not then, said Galathee, neither for him nor his victories; he shall
bind me, more to forget me. For Gods sake (said Leonide) Madame say not so: if
you knew how well he is esteemed both by Meroue and Childerick, I cannot
believe (being borne as you are) but you will make more of him then of a
Shepherd, I say a Shepherd that loves you not, and whom you see sighing
before you for the affection of a Shepherdess. You may think, that all that
I speak, is out of cunning. It is true, presently answered Galathee. Well
Madame, answered Leonide, you may believe what pleases you, but I swear unto
you by all that may be most fearful to the perjured, That in this journey by
great chance I saw that Impostor Clemanthe, and that cunning Polymas, talking
of what happened to you, and discovering between them all the tricks they had
used. Leonide (added Galathee) you lose time, I am resolved what I will do,
talk no more to me of it. I will do Madame what you command, said she; but
suffer me to say one word: What do you mean to do with this Shepherd? I
will have him love me, said she. Wherein, replied Leonide, purpose you that
this amity shall be concluded. You are ouer-busie, said Galathee, to wish me
to know the things to come; only let him love me, and then we will see what we
have to do. Yet (continued Leonide) though one know not what will happen, yet
in all our designs, we must have some Butt whereto we may aim. I think in
all, said Galathee, except those of love: and for my part, I will have no other
design, but that he love me. Then replied Leonide, it must be so, for there is
no likelihood that you will marry him; and not marrying him, what will become
of that honor which you have preserved to your self? for it cannot be, that
this new love can blind you so, but that you will find the wrong you do to
your self, to wish for your lover the man whom you would not marry. And you
(said she) Leonide, that are so scrupulous, tell me true, are you envious that
I should marry him? I, Madame, answered she, I hold him to be too mean a
thing, and I humbly beseech you, not to think me of so small courage, that I
will dayne to cast mine eye on him. And if ever there were any man that had the
power to give me feeling of love, I freely protest to you, the respect which I
have borne you, has made me withdraw. When was that, added Galathee? Then,
said she, when you commanded me (Madame) to make no more of Polemas. O what
grace you have (cried Galathee?) by your faith did you never love Celadon? I
will swear unto you by the faith I owe to you, Madame, answered she, that I
never loved Celadon otherwise, then as if he had been my brother. And in that
she lied not: for after the shepherd spoke so plainly to her at the last
time, she found out the wrong she did to her self, and so resolved to change
the love into amity, Well Leonide, said the Nymph, let us leave this
discourse, and that likewise of Lindamor, for the Dye is cast. And what answer,
said she, will you make to Lindamor? I will make him, said she, no other, but
by silence. And what think you, said she, will become of him, when the man he
sent, returns without Letters? Let what may, said Galathee, become of him;
for, for my part; neither his resolution nor any others, shall ever be cause
for me to make my self miserable. Is it not then necessary, answered Leonide,
that Flurial go back? No, said she.

Leonide then told her coldly, that there was a young man that would speak
with Siluy, and that she believed he was come from Ligdamon, and he would not
tell his message but only to Siluy her self. We must, answered the Nymph,
send him where. she is: we must not think much to draw the Curtaynes of the
Bed where Celadon lies, for I assure my self, he will be glad to hear what
Ligdamon has written; for me thinks you have already told him all their
loves. It is true, answered Leonide: but Siluy is so disdainefull, and so
lofty, that without doubt she would be offended, that the messenger should
speak to her, especially before Celadon. We must, said she, take her on the
sudden: Only go before, and will the shepherd not to speak a word, and
draw the Curtaynes, and I will bring him in. So parted these Nymphs.

And Galathee knowing the young man, as having often seen him with Ligdamon,
demanded whence he came, and what news he brought from his Master. I come
Madame, said he, from the Army of M^roue, and as for news from my Master, I
must not tell them, but to Siluy. Truly (said the Nymph) you are very secret:
and think you I will suffer you to say any thing unto my Nymphs, which I shall
not know? Madame, said he, it shall be before you, if it please you, for I
have that commandment, and principally, before Leonide. Come then (said the
Nymph) and so she brought him into the Chamber of Celadon: where already
Leonide had given the order as she had appointed, without saying any thing to
Siluy; who at the first was astonished, but afterward seeing Galathee enter with
this young man, she judged, that it was to keep the shepherd from being
seen, The amazement she found was great, when she saw Egide (that was the
young man's Name) whom she knew presently: for though she had no love for
Ligdamon, yet she could not exempt her self from all kind of good will; she
judged rightly, that he would tell her some news, but she would not ask him.

But Galathee turning to the young man, said: See where Siluy is; you have no
more to do, but to go through with your Message, since you desire that
Leonide and I should be by. Madame (said Egide, turning to Siluy) my Master,
the most faithful servant that your merits ever won you, has commanded me
to let you know what his fortune has been; wishing no other thing from
Heaven, as a recompense of his fidelity, but that one spark of pity may
touch you, since none of love could come near the ye of your heart. How now
(said Galathee, interrupting his speech) it seems he has made his Testament:
how does he? Madame (said he, turning to Galathee) I will tell you, if it
please you to give me the leisure: and then turning to Siluy, he went on in
this sort.

The History of Ligdamon.
AFter Ligdamon had taken leave of you, he went with Lindamor, accompanied
with so many goodly designs, that he promised himself no less then to win
by this voyage that which his services could not by his presence, resolving to
do so many famous acts, that whether the name of valiant, which his victories
gave him, might be pleasing unto you, or well dying, he might leave you to
sorrow. With this design he came into the Army of Meroue, a Prince filled with
all perfections which are necessary to a Conqueror, and arrived so luckily,
that the battle was assigned the seventh day after; so that all the young
Knights had no other greater care, then to visit their Arms, and to put their
Horses into good plight. But it is not of them that I am to speak: Therefore
letting pass all under silence which touches not Ligdamon, I will tell you,
that the day assigned for this great fight being come, the two Armies came out
of their Camp, and had sight the one of the other, setting themselves in
battle array; here a squadron of Horsemen, there a battalion of Footmen; here
the Drums, there the Trumpets: on the one side, the neighing of Horses, on the
other, the voice of Soldiers raised such a noise, that one might well say,
that Bellona the dreadful was towling in this Plain, and that she had brought
forth whatsoever was most horrible in her Gorgon. For my part, I (who was never
in the like occasion) was so deaffed with that I heard, and so dazzled with the
brightness of the armor, that indeed I knew not where I was; yet my
resolution was not to leave my Master: for the bringing me up from my
childhood, me thought bound me to it, and not to go far from him in this
occasion, where nothing was presented to our eyes, but with the ensigns of
death. But this was nothing to the strange confusion, when all these squadrons
and all these battailons met together, when the sign of battle was given:
for the Horsemen set on the enemy, and the Infanterie likewise, with so great a
noise which the Men, Armor, and Horses made, that one could not hear it
thunder.

After there had passed many clouds of arrows, I cannot tell you true how I
found my self with my Master in the midst of the enemies, that I could not
but admire the great gashes of Ligdamons Sword: and without fayning, fair
Nymph, I saw him do such meruailes, that one made me forget the other. So it
was, that his valor was such, that Meroue would know his name, as having noted
him that day among all the other Knights.

By this time the former Squadron grew victorious, and our men began to order
themselves to set on the second; when the enemy, to make up one entire push,
caused all his forces that remained, to march forward, that he might with that
speed infest them, before Meroue should be able to succor them in time. And
indeed, if he had had to do with a Captain less experienced then him, I
think his purpose had taken effect. But this great Soldier judging the
despair of the Adversary, at the same time divided three new Squadrons, two to
the two Wings, and the third in the tail of the former, so fitly, that they
sustained a great part of the first shocke; yet we who were advanced
forwardest, found our selves much over* laid with great numbers. But I will not
now trouble you with a particular description of this days work, and I know
not how to bring it about. So it was, that then the two bodies of the footmen
being encountered, that of Meroue had the better, and as much as we gained of
ground of them on horseback, so much lost the Infanterie of the enemy. At the
shock which we received, there were many of ours borne to the ground, besides
those whom the arrows of the Infanterie, from the beginning of the battle,
had unhorsed: for at the meeting, the enemy causing some Archers to shoot off,
made us draw through the Wings so many Arrows, that our horsemen not daring to
leave their ranks, had much ado to bear them, before Meroue had sent some of
his to skirmish with them. And among those that at the second brunt were put to
the worse, Clidaman was one, for his horse fell down dead, by three wounds of
three arrows. Ligdamon, that had always his eyes on him, suddenly, seeing him
on the earth, spurred his horse in extreme fury, and did such deeds of arms,
that he made a Round of dead bodies about Clidaman, who in the mean time had
leisure to free himself from his horse. The fury of the enemy, which by this
fall of Clidaman was renewed in that place, had at last trod him under the
horses feet, but for the help and valor of my Master, who allighting, set him
on his own horse, staying on foot so wounded and so charged with the enemy,
that he could not mount on the horse that I brought him. At this instant, our
men were forced to give back, as feeling their weakness, as I think by the
invincible arm of my Master; and the mischief was so great for us, that we
found our selves in the midst of so many enemies, that there was no more hope
of safety: Yet would never Ligdamon yield himself, though he were so wounded
and so wearied as may be imagined; yet was there none so hardy, seeing what
gashes he gave with his arm, that durst lay hold on him. At last, with all
the fury of their horse five or six came to strike him, and so suddenly, that
having bestowed his Sword in the belly of the first horse, it brake near the
hilt, and the horse stricken to the heart, fell down upon him. I ran to
help him up; but ten or twelve that cast themselves on him, hindered me: and
so both of us half dead, were raised up.

And this accident was yet more unfortunate, in that, that almost at the same
time our men recovered the ground they had lost, by the succors which
Childerick brought from the rereward, and after went on gayning the field,
until it was wholly gotten at evening, and the lodgings of the enemy burnt,
and themselves for the most part taken or slain. As for us, we were carried to
their principal Town, called Roan: whither my Master was no sooner come, but
many came to visit him; some of them calling themselves his kinsmen, and
others, his friends, though he knew them not. For my part, I knew not what to
say, not he to think, when he saw those strangers make so much of him: but we
were more astonished, when an honorable Lady, well followed, came to visit him,
saying, that he was her son, with such demonstration of amity, that Ligdamon
was like one besides himself; and much more, when she said to him: O Lidias,
my child, with what contentment and fear do I see thee here? for I thank
God, that at the end of my days I see thee so much esteemed of by the report
of them that have taken thee: but alas, what is my fear, to see thee in this
cruel Town, since thy enemy Aronte is dead of the wounds which he had of
thee, and that thou have been condemned to death by the Lords, of Justice? for
my part, I know no other remedy, but to ransom thee presently, and lie close
till thou be healed, that being able to mount on horseback, thou may be
gone with the Franks. If Ligdamon were astonished at this discourse, you may
judge, and then knew well she took him for another. But he could not answer
her, because at the same instant he which had taken him, entered into the
Chamber with two Officers of the Town, to take the names and quality of the
prisoners, for there were many of their men taken, and they would exchange
them. The poor Lady was surprised, fearing they came to carry him to prison,
and hearing they asked him his Name, she was about to tell it her self, but
my Master thrust her back, and called himself Ligdoman the Segusian. She then
had an opinion, he meant to dissemble; and to put out all suspicion, she
withdrew her self, with a resolution to ransom him with all speed, that he
might not be known. And it was true, that my Master resembled Lidias so much,
that all that saw him, took him for him. Now this Lidias was a young man of
that Country, that being in love with a fair Lady, had fought with Aronte his
Rival, whose jealousy was such, that it let him go beyond his duty,
speaking evil both of her and him. Whereat Lidias offended, after he had
spoken twice or thrice to make him change his discourse, and thinking, that he
took it as out of fear, which indeed proceeded from the wisdom of the young
man, he was at last enforced both out of duty and love to come to Arms, and
with that happiness, that having left his enemy as dead on the earth, he had
the leisure to save himself from the hands of Justice; which, after that
Aronte was dead pursued him so, that though he were absent, yet they condemned
him to death. Ligdamon was so wounded, that he dreamt not of these things: I,
that foresaw the evil that might befall him, always pressed his mother to
redeem him; which she did, but not so secretly, but that the enemies of Lidias
were advertised of it: so that at their request, the same day the good Lady
having paid the ransom, and carrying him to her house, those Officers of
Justice came upon them, and made him take the way to prison, whatsoever
Ligdamon could say; deceived like others, by the resemblance of Lidias. So
behold him in as great danger as a man might be, that had not offended. But
this was nothing to the next days work; when he was questioned of points
whereof he was so ignorant, that he knew not what to say: Notwithstanding, they
forbore not to ratify the former Judgment, and gave him no further term,
then to the healing of his wounds.

The bruit presently ran throughout all the Town, that Lidias was prisoner,
and that he was condemned to dye, not as a Murderer only, but as a Rebel,
having been taken with Arms in his hand for the Franks, that for this cause
he was to be put into the Cage of the Lions; and it was true, that their
custom was such: but they would not pronounce this award to him, that he might
not make himself away. Yet they talked of no other thing within the Town: and
the voice was so spread, that it came to my ears. Wherewith being feared, I
disguised my self so, with the help of this good Lady which had redeemed him,
that I came to Paris, to find out Meroue and Clidaman, whom I gave to
understand of this accident: whereat they were much astonished, thinking it
almost impossible, that two men should be so alike, that there might be no
difference. And to remedy it, they sent speedily two Heralds of Arms, to let
the enemies know the error wherein they were: but this served but to persuade
them the more, and to make them hasten the execution of their Judgment.

The wounds of Ligdamon were almost healed; so that to give him no longer time,
they pronounced the Sentence, That attainted of Murder and Rebellion, Justice
had ordained that he should dye by the Lions, appointed to such an execution:
yet because he was nobly borne, and their countreyman, they did him the grace,
to suffer him to carry his Sword and Dagger, as being the Arms of a Knight,
wherewith if he had the courage, he might defend himself, or at least assay
generously to revenge his death. And at this time in their Council they made
an answer to M^roue, That so they would chastife all their countrymen that
were traitors to their Country. Behold the poor Ligdamon in extreme danger:
yet that courage which yet never bended but under love, seeing there was no
other remedy, resolved to look to his own safety the best he could. And
because Lidias was one of the better Families among the Normans, almost all the
people assembled to see this Spectacle. And when he saw they were ready to put
him into this horrible close field, all that he requested, was, that he might
fight with the Lions one by one. The people hearing so just a demand, agreed
to it by their acclamations and clapping of hands, what difficulties soever the
contrary part propounded. So that behold him thrust alone into the Cage: and
the Lions on the other side the bars seeing this new prey, roared so
fearfully, that there was none of the standers by that trembled not. Without
more, Ligdamon seemed confident among so many dangers, and having an eye on the
first Gate that was to open, lest he might be surprised, he saw a furious
Lion come forth with staring look, and having three or four times stricken
the earth with his tail, began to thrust forth his great fore-feet, and to
open his paws, as if he would show him what death he was to die. But
Ligdamon seeing well there was no safety but in his valor, as soon as he
saw him rise up, he cast his poniard so fitly at him, that he planted it in his
stomach even to the haft, wherewith the Beast being touched at the heart, fell
down dead presently. The cry of the people was great; for every one being
moved with his confidence, with his valor, and with his courage, favored him
in his soul: but he that knew well that the rigor of his Judges would not
stay there, ran readily to take again his poniard; and almost at the same
time, see another Lion, no less fearful then the former, that as soon as
the Gate was opened, came with open throat in such fury, that Ligdamon was
almost surprised: yet as he passed, he turned himself a little aside, and with
his Sword gave him such a blow upon one of his paws, that he cut it off,
whereat the Beast in fury so suddenly came on him, that he cast him to the
ground, but his fortune was such, that in falling, and the Lion ramping over
him, he could but hold out his Sword, which fell out so luckily to be under his
belly, that he fell down dead almost as soon as the former.

In the mean while that Ligdamon was disputing for his life, behold a Lady
fair among the Normans, that cast her self on her knees before the Judges,
beseeching them to cause the execution to cease until she had spoken. They
that knew her to be of the principal of the Country, willingly yielded her
that favor; and indeed it was she for whom Lidias had slain Aronte: her name
was Ameryne, and then she spoke to them in this sort, with a modest voice.

My Lords, Ingratitude is to be punished as Treason, because it is a kind of
it: Therefore seeing Lidias condemned for being on the contrary side, I fear I
should be counted so, if not of you, yet of the Gods, if I thought not my self
bound to save his life that hazarded his to save my honor. This is it for
which I present my self before you, relying on our privileges, which ordain,
That a man condemned to death, shall be delivered, when a maid demands him for
her husband. As soon as I knew of your Judgment, I came with all diligence to
require it, and I could not be here so soon, but he has run the fortune that
all men have seen; yet since God has preserved him so happily for me, you are
not justly to deny me.

All the people that heard this demand, cried with a joyful voice, Grace,
Grace. And though the enemies of Lidias labored the contrary, yet was it
concluded, that the privileges of the Country should take place. But alas,
Ligdamon came out of this danger, but to enter into a greater: for being
brought before the Judges, they let him know the customs of the Country were
such, That any man attainted and convicted of any Crime whatsoever, might be
delivered from the rigours of Justice, if a maid demanded him for husband; so
that if he would marry Ameryne, he should be restored to his liberty, and might
live with her.

He that knew her not, found it hard to answer: notwithstanding, seeing no
other remedy to escape the danger wherein he was, he promised it, hoping that
time would bring out some commodity to free him out of the Labyrinth.

Ameryne, that had always found Lidias so amorous of her, was not a little
astonished at this coldness, yet judging, that the affrightment of the danger
wherein he was, had made him thus besides himself, she had the more pity on
him, and carried him to Lidias mothers house, who was she that procured the
marriage, knowing, there was no other remedy to save her sons life: besides
that, she was not ignorant of the love between them, which made her press
the conclusion of the marriage the most that possibly she could, thinking to
please her son. But on the contrary, this was to hasten the death of him that
could do no more then he had done. Ah my dear Master, when I call to mind the
last words you spoke to me, I know not how it is possible for me to live?

All things were ready for the marriage, and it must be dispatched the next
day, when the night before he took me aside, and said Egide my friend, did
thou ever see such a fortune as this, that they will make me believe that I am
not my self? Sir, said I, me thinks it is not evil: Ameryne is fair and
rich, all that call themselves her kinsmen, are the principal of this Country;
what would you desire more? Ah Egide, said he, thou speak for thine own
ease. If thou knew the case wherein I am, thou would have pity on me. But
have care of what I say, and above all the Obligation that thou owe me, and
the love which I have always found in thee, fail not as soon as to morrow I
shall have done that I am resolved of, to bear this Letter to the fair Siluy,
and relate to her all that thou have seen; and moreover assure her, that I
never loved any but her, and never shall. At this word he gave me this Letter,
which I kept very carefully until the next morning; when at the hour that he
was to go to the Temple, he called me, and commanded me to be about him, and
made me swear again to seek you out with diligence. At the same time one
came to him, to place him in the wedding Chariot, where already the fair
Ameryne was set with one of her uncles, whom she loved and honored as her
father. She was in the midst between Ligdamon and Caristes, so her uncle was
named, all covered with a yellow veil, and having on her head as well as
Ligdamon the Garland. It is true, my Masters was of Sifymber, and Amerynes of
picked and sweet Aspharagon. Before the Chariot went all the family; and
after, only the kinsmen and nearest allies and friends. In this Triumph they
came to the Temple, and were brought to Hymen's Altar, before which, five
Torches were lighted: On the right side of Hymen they had placed Jupiter and
Iu^o; on the left, Venus and Diana. As for Hymen, he was crowned with flowers
and sweet Marioram, holding in his right hand a Torch, and in his left a Veil,
of that color that Amerynes was, as also the buskins which he had on his
feet. When they entered into the Temple, the mother of Lidias and Ameryne
lighted their Torches; and then the great Druide coming near, directed his
speech to my Master, and demanded: Lidias, will you have Ameryne for the
mother of your Family? he stayed somewhile without answer, at last he was
constrained to say yes. Then the Druide turning to her: And you Ameryne, will
you have Lidias for father of your Family? and she answering yes, then taking
their hands, and joining them together, he said: And I, in tho behalf of the
great Gods, give you each to other, and for earnest, you must eat the Condition
together: and then taking the Wheaten Cake, Lidias cut it into pieces, and she
laying them together, of which, according to the custom, they both eat. There
remained no more of all the Ceremonies, but to take the Wine, when turning to
me, he said: Now friend. for the most pleasing service that ever thou did
me, reach me the Cup. I did so alas, with a mischief over diligent. As soon
as he had it in his hand, with a voice loud enough he said: O powerful Gods,
said he, that know who I am, venge not my death upon this fair Lady, who
taking me for another man, more happy then I, has brought me to my death: and
at this word, drunk all that was in the Cup, which was contrary to the
custom, because the husband was to drink but half, and the Wife the rest.
She smiling, said unto him: And how friend Lidias? it seems you have forgotten
the custom, you should have left me my part. God forbid, said he, wife
Ameryne, for it is of poison, which I have chosen to end my life, rather then
to be wanting in my promise to you, and in the affection which I owe to the
fair Siluy. O God, said she, is it possible? as yet thinking it was her true
Lidias, but that he had changed his good will, during his absence, and
unwilling to live without him, ran with the Cup in her hand, where he was that
had given the Wine mixed; for the day before he had caused it to be made at the
Apothecaries, and before it was known what my Master said, notwithstanding any
forbidding of his, because it was the custom they gave her the full cup, which
she presently drunk of. And then returning to him, she said, O cruel and
ungrateful, thou have loved death more then me, and I also love it rather then
thy refusal. But if that God which has hitherto conducted our affections, do
not venge me on a soul so perjured in another life, I shall think he has
neither care to hear false oaths, nor power to punish them.

Then every one drew near her to hear her reproaches, and it was then that
Ligdamon answered her. Discreet Amerine, I confess I have offended you if I
were he whom you think I am, but believe me that am now at the end of my
days, I am not Lidias, I am Ligdamon, and whatsoever error may be of me at
this hour, I assure my self that time will discover my justice. And in the
mean time, I rather choose death, then to be wanting to the affection which I
have promised to the fair Siluy, to whom I have consecrated my life, not being
otherwise able to satisfy both.

And then he continued, O fair Siluy, receive this will which I offer you,
and let this last of all my actions be best received, because it is imprinted
with the best character of my faithfulness. By little and little the poison
gained on the spirits of these two newly married, so that they could hardly
draw their breath, when turning his eyes on me, he said: Go my friend, finish
that thou have to do, and above all, truly recount what thou have seen, and
that death is welcome to me, that keeps me from offending the fidelity which
I have vowed to the fair Siluy. Siluy was the last word he spoke, for with
that word the fair soul parted from the body: and for my part, I believe that
if ever lover were happy in the Elisian fields, my master is, attending until
he may see you again there.

And how said Siluy, is it true that Ligdamon is dead? without doubt answered
he. O God cried out Siluy. At this word all that she could do was but to cast
her self on a bed, for her heart failed her, and after she had lain somewhile
with her face toward the beds head, she prayed Leonide who was with her, to
take Ligdamons letter, and to tell Egide that he should go to her lodging,
because she would have him serve her. So Egide withdrew, but so affected that
he was covered with tears. Then would love show one of his puissances, for
that Nymph that never loved Ligdamon while he lived, at this time when she
heard of his death, showed so great a feeling, that the most passionate in love
could not do more.

It was upon this speech that Galathee talking to Celadon, fayde, that
hereafter she would believe it is impossible, but a woman once in her life
must love some thing: for this young Nymph has used such cruelties toward all
them that loved her, that some are dead for grief, others even of despair
have banished themselves from her sight; and especially this whom she be wailes
dead, she has heretofore brought to that extremity, that without Leonide the
same had befallen him then, so that I would rather have sworn, love might
rather have found place in the Ice of the coldest of the Alps, then in her
heart; and yet you see now whereto she is reduced.

Madame, answered the shepherd, believe not that it is love, it is rather
pity. In truth she must be harder then ever was stone, if the report which
this young man has made, have not touched her to the quick, for I know not who
would not in hearing him relate it, though one had no other knowledge of him
but this only action: and for my part, I must say true, I hold Ligdamon
happyer then if he were alive, since he loved this Nymph with such affection,
and she used him with as great rigor as I have known, for what greater
happiness can befall him, then to end his miseries, and to enter into those
felicities which do accompany them. What think you was his contentment to see
that Siluy laments him, sorrows for him, and esteems of his affection: but I
mean that Siluy that has dealt so roughly with him. And then what is that
which the lover desires more then to be able to give assurance to the party
beloved of his faithfulness and affection; and to come to this point, what
punishments, what deaths will he refuse? At this time, when he sees from the
place where he is, the tears of his Siluy, when he hears her sight, what is
his happiness, and what his glory? not only for that he has assured her of
his love, but for him to be certain that she loves him.

O no Madame, believe me Ligdamon has no cause to complain, but Siluy, for
(and in time you shall see it) all that she will represent to her self shall
be the ordinary actions of Ligdamon, the discourse of Ligdamon, his fashion,
his amity, his valor: briefly, this I dole will be ordinarily houering about
her, almost like an auenger of the cruelties with which she has tormented
that poor lover, and repentance which galling her thoughts, will be the
executioner of the Justice of Love.

THese speeches were so loud, and so near Siluy that she heard them all, and
that made her burst for anger, for she thought them probable. At last, after
she had endured them some while, and finding her self too feeble to resist so
strange enemies, she went out of that chamber into her own, where there were
none to let her from tears. For having shut the door after her, and prayde
Leonide to leave her alone, she cast her self on her bed, her arms acrosse
her stomach, and her eyes toward heaven, in her memory she passed through all
their life, what affection he had always showed to her, how patiently he bore
her rigours, with what discretion he had served her, how long time this
affection had lasted, and in the end, said she, all this is now enclosed in a
little earth. And in this sorrow remembering her own discourses, her adues, her
impatiencies, and a thousand small particularities, she was constrained to say:
Hold thy peace memory, let the ashes of my Ligdamon be at rest, since if thou
thus torment me, I know he will disauow thee for his, and if thou be not his, I
care not for thee. At last, having stayed some while silent, she said, well the
die is cast, let it shorten or lengthen my life as please the gods, and my
destiny, but I will not cease to love the memory of Ligdamon, to cherish his
love, and to honor his virtues. Galathee in the mean time opened the letter,
which yet remained in Leonides hands, she found it was thus.

Ligdamons Letter to Siluy.
IF you have ^e^e offended at the presumption which has forced me to love, my
death which follows it shall revenge it for you. But if it be indifferent to
you, I assure myself, that this last act of my affection shall gain me
somewhat more in your soul. If it fall out so, I shall cherish there semblance
of Lidias more then my birth, since by it I came into the world to be too
troublesome to you, and by the other I go out of it to your good liking.


These are without faining said Celadon, the great reuenges of love. It is
very true answered Galathee, that love leaves not an offense against himself
unpunished, and thereof it comes that we see herein more strange accidents then
in all other of men's actions. But if this be so Celadon, how, quak^ not you for
fear? and how from moment to moment expect not you the revenging arrows of
this god? And why said the shepherd, should I fear, since I am the party
offended? Ah Celadon, said the Nymph, if all things were justly balanced, how
much heavier should you find your self in the offenses you do, then in those
you receive? This is (said the shepherd) this is the heap of misfortune, when
the afflicted man is thought happy, and they can see him languish, without
taking pity on him.

But answered the Nymph, tell me shepherd, among all the greatest offenses,
do not those of Ingratitude take the chief place? It does without doubt,
answered the shepherd. Now since it is so, continued Galathee, how can you
wash your self, since for the great love I show to you, I receive from you but
coldness and disdain? I must at last tell you thus: You see shepherd, being
the woman I am, and seeing who you are, I cannot think but in some thing or
other I have offended Love, since he punishes me with so many rigors. Celadon
was extremely sorry that he had begun this discourse, for he labored to avoid
it as much as possibly he could; notwithstanding, since it was done, he
resolved to clear it entirely, and said thus to her: Madame, I know not what
to answer to your words, except by blushing, and yet Love which makes you
speak, constraynes me to answer you. That which you call Ingratitude in me, my
affection calls duty, and when it pleases you to know the reason, I will tell
you it. And what reason (interrupted Galathee) can you allege, but that you
love elsewhere, and that your love ties you to it? But the Law of Nature
proceeds quite otherwise: th^^ commands us to seek after our own good; and
can you desire a greater then my amity? Who is there in all this Country that
is as I, that can do that for you that I can? These be mockeries Celadon, to
rely on these follies of fidelity and constancy, words which old folk and
they that are become deformed have invented, to hold in their lines the souls
which their faces set at liberty. They say, that all virtues are chayned
together, then Constancy cannot be without Prudence: but should this be
Prudence, to disdain a certain good to avoid the title of inconstant? Madame,
answered Celadon, Prudence never teaches us to make our profit by unjust
means, and Nature by her Laws never command^ us to build, before we have
laid a good foundation. But is there any thing more shameful, then not to
keep promise? Is there any thing more nimble then the Spirit, that flies about
like a Be from flower to flower, drawn with every new sweet savor? Madame,
if faithfulness be lost, what foundation can I lay in your amity? since if
you follow the Law you speak of, how long shall I remain in this happiness,
^o long as you remain in that place where there is no other man then my self.

The Nymph and the shepherd discoursed thus, while Leonide withdrew to her
chamber^, to make a dispatch to Lindamor, who in the end was to come back with
all diligence, that nothing should stay him, otherwise he was to despair of
all things. And the morning that Flurial came back, after she had given him
the Letter, she said to him: See Flurial, it is now that I shall by your
diligence know the love which you bear to Lindamor, for delay can bring him no
less then death. Be gone then, or rather fly, and bid him come with all
speed, and as he returns, let him go the direct way to Adamas his house, for
that I have won him entirely for him; and when he is here, he shall know
the most notorious Treason of Love which was ever yet invented: but he must
come unknown to any, if it be possible.

Thus parted Flurial, so desirous to serve Lindamor, that he would not return
to his Aunts house, that he might not lose the least time, and would have no
occasion to send him whom Lindamor had dispatched, defirous to do the service
himself.

So passed over three or four days; during which time, Celadon found himself
so amended, that he almost felt no more of his dis^ase, and already began to
think the return of the Druide to be long, for the hope he had to be
go^^^rom that place. And to shorten the ouer-long days, he went oftentimes to
walk in the Garden, and sometimes into the great Wood of the high grown
Trees, but never without being accompanied by one of the Nymphs, and often by
all three.

The humor of Siluy was it that pleased him best, as more sympathizing with
his own: therefore he sought her out as often as he could.

It fell out one day, all four being abroad to walk, they passed by the great
Den of Damon and of Fortune: and because the entrance seemed fair, and made
with great Art, the shepherd demanded what it was; to whom Galathee answered:
Would you see (shepherd) one of the greatest proofs that Love has made of
his power of long time? And what is it, answered the shepherd? That is, said
the Nymph, the lo^es of Mandrake and of Damon; for, for the shepherdess
Fortune, it is a thing ordinary.

And who is, replied the shepherd, this Mandrake? If by the Work, said
Galathee, one may know the Workman, to make good that I say, you will judge
she is one of the greatest Magicians of Gaul, for it is she that by her
enchantment has made this Den, and diverse other rarities which are hereabout.

And entering in, the shepherd stood ravished with consideration of the
workmanship. The entry was very high and spacious. On the two sides, in stead
of pillars, were two Terms, which on their heads sustained the boughts of the
vault of the portall. The one figured Pan, the other Syrinx, which were very
curiously adorned with stones of diverse colors: the hair, the eyebrows,
the mouthchatos, the beard, and the two horns of Pan were of Cockles from the
sea, and so workemanly set in, that the ciment appeared not.

Syrinx, that was on the other side, had her hair of Roses, and somewhat under
the nauill one might see them swell by little and little: the tower of the gate
on the outside was of rusticke fashion, and ropes of coquils fastened in four
corners hung down, finished near the heads of the Terms. Within the Vault
there was a rock which seemed in many places to drop with Salt* peter, and
over the midst it opened with an ouall form, through which the light came in.
This, place, both without and within, was enriched with a great number of
Statues, which falling into their cesternes made diverse fountains, and all
represented some effect of the power of love.

In the middle of the cave one might see the tomb raised the height of ten or
twelve foot, which at the top ended like a crown, and all about garnished
with tables, whereof the painting was so well done, that the sight deceived the
judgment, the distance of every table was filled by half pillars of black
wrought marble, the coins of the tomb, the bases and the capital of half
colors, and the cornishes, which round about in fashion of a girdle, held up
the tables, and though of diverse pieces, yet made but one well composed frame
which was of the same marble.

The curiosity of Celadon was great: after he had considered altogether, to
desire to know the particularities, and that he might give the Nymph occasion
to tell him something, he commended the invention and cunning of the workman.

These are, said the Nymph, the Spirits of Mandrake, which after some time have
been left here for witness, that Love will no more pardon the gray head then
the yellow hair, and always to relate to them that come hither the
unfortunate and faithful loves of Damon, of her self, and of the
shepherdess Fortune.

And how, replied Celadon, is this the fountain of the truth of Love? No,
answered the Nymph, but that is not far hence, and I would I had spirit
enough to make you understand these Tables, for the History is worthy to be
known.

As she drew near to expound them to him, she saw Adamas enter in: who being
returned, and not finding the Nymphs at their Lodgings, judged they were gone
forth to walk; where after he had ^id the Habits which he brought, he came to
seek them so fitly, that it seemed Fortune conducted him thither, to make him
handle the loves of this Fortune. Galathee no sooner spyed him, but she cried
out: O my Father, you come in good time to free me from the pain wherein I am;
and then turning to Celadon: See him (shepherd) that will satisfy the desire
which you have to know this History. And after he had asked him how he did,
and that the salutations were made on both sides; Adamas, to obey the Nymphs
commandment, and to content the curiosity of the shepherd, going with them
to the Tomb, began in this fort.

The History of Damon and Fortune.
As the Workman plays with his work, and does as pleases him, so the great
Gods, by whose hand we were formed, take pleasure to make us play upon the
Theater of the World the part that they have chosen for us. But among all,
there is none that has imaginations so various as Love, for he makes the old
young, and the young old in as short a time as the light lasts of a good eye.
And this History, which is truer then I would it were, will give proof, that
hardly it can be withstood, as by the process of my discourse you will
confess.

The first Table.
SEe you in the first place this Shepherd set on the ground, his back leaning
to an Oak, his leg acrosse, that plays on his pipe? This is the fair
shepherd Damon, who has name of fair for the perfection of his face. This
young shepherd fed his sheep along your sweet Lignon being borne of one of
the best families of mount Verdun, and no far removed kinsman of the old
Cleontine, and of Leonides mother, and by consequent in some sort my kinsman.
Mark how this visage, besides that it is fair, represents very lively a
person that had no care, but of his own contentment: for you may see I know
not what open and clear countenance without trouble or cloud of busy
imaginations. And on the contrary, turn your eyes upon the shepheardesses
which are about him, you may judge by the fashion of their visages, that they
are not without pain, for as Damon had a free spirit, and restfull; so had the
shepheardesses their hearts passionated for him. Yet as you see, he vouchsafes
not to look toward them, and therefore it is that they have painted on the
right side in the air that little naked child with his bow and torch in his
hand, his eyes b'inded, his back winged, his shoulders charged with a quiver,
that threatens him on the other hand. This is Love, who begin offended at the
contempt which this shepherd showed toward these shepheardesses, swore that
he would be revenged on him.

But for the better setting forth of the Table, note how well the Art of the
painting is observed. You may see, me thinks, the arm of the shepherd sinking
a little under the swelling of the instrument, and how the cane where he blows
has lost his color, that is, because his moist mouth had put it out. Mark on
the left hand how the sheep feed, see some of them lying in the shade, some
licking their feet, others that astonished look on the two Rams, that run to
push at one another with all their might. Observe the turning that this makes
of his neck, for he ho^deth down his head, so that the other encounters only
his horns. But the winding of the other back, is also very artificial for
nature that teaches him that virtue united is more strong, makes him so lock
himself in an heap, that he seems almost round. The duty even of the dogs
is not forgotten, which to oppose against the courses of the Wolf comes under
the wings of the wood side. And it seems they are set ^ike three (...) on the
higher places, to the end they may see the farther off, or as I think, that
they might see one another, and succor them in their necessity.

But consider the careful industry of the Painter, whereas dogs that sleep
without care, use to put themselves into a round, and oftentimes hide their
head under their paws, to keep from them the light: these that their are
painted here, are lying in another fort, to show that they sleep not, but
only rest: for they are couched on the four feet, and have their nose along
their forefeet, holding always their eyes open, as curiously as a man can. But
let us see the other Table.

The second Table.
BEhold the second Table, which is clean contrary to the former, for if that
were full of Neglect, this is full of Love, if that show nothing but Pride, in
this appears nothing but sweetness and submission; and lo here the cause.
Mark this Shepherdess set against a bush, how fair she is and neatly
attired, her hair raised up before, sporting at liberty over her shoulders,
and it seems the wind enuies nature, by his blowing makes them frizle in a
round, but being jealous of the small loves which they find hid, and which go
bewraying their weariness, it will disperse them. And indeed see some of them
carried by force, others which foulding into knots which they have made, and
others which assay to return but cannot, so much is their yet enfeebled wing
contraried by the importunity of Zephirus. This is the fair shepherdess
Fortune, of whom Love would serve himself to do the vengeance promised against
Damon, who is the shepherd that you see by her leaning on his shephooke.

Consider these little loves which are all busied about them, and how attentive
every one is about that he does. Behold one that takes the measure of the
brows of the shepherdess, and gives it to another, that with his knife
marks his bow that he may compass the like at his return. And see another
that having stolen some hairs of this fair, of so fair theft would make a
string for his companions bow. See how he is set on the ground, how he has
tied one end of his string to his great toe, which gives back a little as
being too hard drawn. Mark how to twist it the better, another brings him a
handful of a lovers tears for him to wet his fingers. Consider how he holds
the raines, I know not how twisted, that under the right arm you may see the
half appear before, though he show all behind the right shoulder.

Behold another, that having put a string to one of the nockes of his bow, that
he might do the like in the other bows down on that side to the earth, and
with his left knee bends the bow against his stomach, and gives upward with his
left hand, and with his right endeauours to make the string slide to the
bottom.

Cupid is a little higher, whose left hand holds his bow, holding the right as
yet behind his ear, as if he newly had let his arrow slip: for see him with
rest up, his arm drawn back, the three former fingers wide open and
stretched out, and the other two drawn into his hand, and indeed his shot was
not in vain, for the shepherd was so wounded, that death ouely could heal it.

But behold a little on the other side, and you shall see this A^teros which
with chains of roses and flowers, ties the arms and neck of this fair
shepherdess Fortune, and then puts them into the hands of the shepherd: this
is to make us know, that desert, love, and services of that lovely shepherd,
which are figured by these flowers, binds Fortune to a reciprocal love
toward him.

But if you think it strange that Auteros is represented here greater then
Cupid, know that this is to show you, that love that grows from love, is
always greater then that whence it proceeds. But let us pasie to the third.

The third Table.
THen Adamas went on. See your fair river of Lignon, see where it takes a
double head, the one coming from the mountains of Coruieres, the other from
them of Chalmasel, which come to join a little above the merchant town of
B^ing. How well are these passages made, and the winding shores of this river,
with these little Elder trees that grow there ordinarily.

Know you not this wood which confines on this great pasture; where most
usually the lasie shepherds use to feed their flocks? Me thinks that great
tust of trees on the left hand this little byas which creepes on the left side,
and this half moon which makes the river on this corner, may well set it
before your eyes, that if it be not at this present altogether alike, it is
not for that the table is false, but for that some trees since that time are
dead, others grown up, that the river in some places has gotten, and in other
is beaten back, and yet no great change.

Now mark a little lower along Lignon, see a flock of sheep in the shadow,
how some of them chaw the cud, and others hold their nose to the ground to draw
out the freshness.

This is Damons flock that you may see if you turn your eyes hitherward in
the water to the middle. Consider how these young lopped trees, do hide it from
the beams of the sun, and yet seem to to rejoice that other besides
themselves may see it. And yet the sun is so curious that he finds passage
between some of their leaves, for some of his beams. Note how well this
shadow and this brightness is represented. But certainly it must be confessed,
that this shepherd cannot be surpassed in beauty. Consider the draughts and
proportions of his face, his stature strait and tall, his flank round, his
breast hie, and see if he have any imperfection; yet some what stooping to serve
himself of the water, and with his right hand he rubs his left arm: so it is,
he does does not that action that may hinder the knowledge of his perfect
beauty. Now cast your eye on the other side the river, if you be not afraid to
look on the deformed in her perfection, as in his own you have seen the
fair, for among these fearful briars you may see the magician Mandrake be
holding the shepherd in his bath. Behold her clothed almost in despite of
them, that look on her hair spread, one arm naked, her gown on one side
trussed up above her knee, I think she comes to some in chantment. But judge
here the effect of a beauty. This old Crone that you see so wrinkled, that
every moment of her life has set a furrow in her face, lean, little, al gray,
her hair half cut, all crooked, and for age fitter for the coffin then to
live, is not ashamed to doat on this young shepherd. If love come by simpathy,
as they say, I know not how it may be found between Damon and her. See what
countenance she makes in her ecstasy. She thrusts out her head with her long
neck, shrugs up her shoulders, holds down her arms at length, and her hands
clasped in her lap, and the sport is, when she thought to smile she made a
mouth. So it is, that such as she is, yet forbeares she not to seek the love
of this fair shepherd. Now raise up your eyes a little, and see within that
cloud Venus and Cupid, who beholding this new lover, seem to laugh outright:
without doubt this little god, happily for some wager which he has made with
his mother, has not forborne one trick, which always ought to be used for
old age, to make so fair a wound. Or if it be not for a wager, it is to make
us see in this old thing, that the dry wood burns better and more easily then
the green, or to show his power on this old hostess of tombs, it pleases
him to make proof of the burning of his torch with which it seems he has
given a new soul, and to speak in a word, whom he has made to rise again,
and come out of the coffin.

The fourth Table.
But let us pass to the other. See a night well represented, see how under the
darkness, of these shadows these mountains appear, so as they show but a
little and so that in effect, one cannot judge what it is. Mark how the
stars seems to twinckle; see the others so well disposed that one may know
them. See the great Bear, look how the judicious workman, though she have
twenty seven stars, yet he represents clearly but twelve; and of these
twelve, yet he makes but seven clearly shining.

See the little Bear, and consider that, for that these seven stars are
never hidden, though it has none of the third magnitude, and loure of the
fourth; yet he makes us see them all, observing their proportion. See the
Dragon, in which he has well set the thirty one stars, but he has not
showed them so well as the thirteen, five whereof as you see are of the fourth
magnitude, and the eight of the third.

Behold the crown of Ariadne who has her eight stars, but there are but
six of them that are well seene^, yet see on of them shining brighter then
them all. You may see on the other side the Milky way by the which the Romans
hold, that the gods come down into earth, and mount back into heaven.

But these clouds are well represented, which in some places run through the
Sky with great largeness, and in others only, like a light smoke, and some
allouer, and as they be more or less raised, are more or less bright.

Now let us consider the history of this Table: see Mandrak in the midst of a
circle, a white rod in her right hand, a book all greasy in the other, with
candle of virgins wax, and thick spectacles on her nose. Look how she seems
to mumble, and how she holds her eyes turned after a strange fashion, her mouth
half open, and making a countenance so strange, with brows that show she
travels with affection. But have regard how the foot, arm, and left shoulder
are naked: that is, for that it is the side of the heart: these fancies that
you see about, are devils, which by the force of her charms she has
constrained to come to her, to know how she may be beloved of Damon. They tell
her of the affection which he bears to Fortune, that there is no better mean
then to persuade him that this shepherdess loves elsewhere; and to do it more
easily, she must for this time change the virtue of the fountain of the truth
of Love. Before you pass farther, consider alittle the workmanship of the
picture, see the effects of the Candle of M^ndrake among the darkness of the
night. She has all the left side of her face bright, and the rest so dark,
that it seems to be of a different visage; the mouth half open, seems within
to be bright, so far as the opening will suffer the light to enter. And the
arm which holds the Candle, you may see near the hand very dark, because the
book which she holds shadows it, and the rest is so bright above that it
makes the blackness show the more beneath. And with the like consideration may
be observed the effects which the Candle gives among the devils; for they all
according as they are turned to it, are brighter or darker. And see another
great piece of art in this picture, which is distance, for the perspectiue is
so well observed, that you would think that this other accident which he would
represent on the other side, is out of this table and far distant from it;
and yet this is Mandrake that is in the fountain of the truth of Love. But to
make you understand all; know that sometimes before a fair shepherdess
daughter, to a learned Magitian, fell secretly in love with a shepherd, which
her father perceived not: were it for that the charms of Magic can do
nothing over the charms of love: or were it that altogether atten^iue to his
study, he cast not his eye on h^^. So it was that after an hot burning amity,
for that in love there is nothing more insupportable then disdain, and this
shepherd neglecting her for that he had long time been vowed elsewhere, she
was brought to that pass, that by little and little the fire increasing, and
her strength diminishing, she came to die, her fathers knowledge not being able
to succor her. Whereat the Magitian being very sorry when he knew the
occasion, for a mark of her memory ever after changed her tomb into a
fountain which he named the truth of love, because that he that loves, if he
look into it shall see his Lady, and if he be beloved he shall see himself by
her, or him whom she loves: or if she love none, she appears alone. And this
is that truth which Mandrake would change, that Damon coming to see, and
finding his mistress loved another, he should loose like wise the affection he
bare her, and so she might have the place free. And see how she enchants it,
what caractars she makes round about, what triangles, what squares interlaid
with rounds, believe she forgets nothing which was necessary, for this affairs
touches her too near. Beforetime she had by her charms assembled all her
devils to find remedy to her evil, but for that love is more strong then all
this, they durst not undertake it against him, but only counseled her to
work this treason to these two faithful lovers. And for as much as the virtue
of the fountain came by the enchantment of a Magitian Mandrake, which
surmounted in this science all her predecessors may put it out for a while. But
let us pass to the Table that follows.

The fifth Table.
THe fifth Table (continued Adamas) has two actions. The first when Damon came
to this fountain to free him from the pain which a trouble some dream had
brought him, the other when deceived by the craft of Mandrake, having seen in
the fountain that the shepherdess Fortune loved another, in despair he
killed himself.

Now let us see how well they are represented. See Damon with his spear, for
he is in the same sort set out as he was wont to go on hunting. Behold the way
he follows, mark with what care his faithful beast attends his master, for
while he looks into the fountain, it seems the eyes are so bent toward him,
to be desirous to know what makes him so abashed; that if you consider the
astonishment which is painted in his face, you would judge he had some great
cause.

Mandrake had made him see in a dream, Maradon a young shepherd that taking
an arrow from Cupid, opend the bosom of Fortune, and took out her heart.

He that following the ordinary course of lovers was yet in doubt, and as soon
as it was day ran to this fountain to see if his mistress loved him. I
beseech you consider his abashment, for if you compare the visages of the other
Tables to this, you shall see the same draughts, though the trouble wherein he
is, paint the change much.

Of those two Figures which you do see in the Fountain, the one as you may
plainly know, is of the Shepherdess Fortune, and the other you may see is of
the Shepherd Moradon, whom the Magician made to be represented rather then
another, because he knew he had a long time bin a servant of the shepherdess,
and though she vouchsafed not to regard him, yet love which easily believes the
thing it fears, presently persuaded the contrary to Damon: belief that made
him resolve to die. Mark I pray you how this water seems to tremble, this is
for that the Painter would represent the effect of the tears of the shepherd
which fell into it. But let us pass to the second action. See how the
continuation of this Cave is made, and how truly this seems to be more
declining.

This dead man that you see on the ground, is the poor Damon, who in despair
thrust his spear through his body. The action which he does is very natural.
You may see one leg stretched out, the other drawn up as with pain: one arm
laid under the body, as having bin surprised by the suddenness of the fall,
and not having force to come again to himself, and the other languishing
along the body, yet he holds gently the spear in his hand, his head hanging
toward his right shoulder, his eyes half shut, and half turned up and he
that sees him in such a case, may well judge him to be a man in the trances of
death; his mouth somewhat opened, the teeth in some places discovered a little,
and the passages of his nose shrunk up, all signs of a late dead man.

Also he has not figured him as wholly dead, but between death and life, if
there be any separation between them. See here the spear well represented,
you may see the breadth of the Iron half hidden in the wound, the staff on
the one side bloody, on the other, of the color it was before. But how great
has the Painters diligence been, he has not forgot the nails which go as
weeping toward the end, for the nearer the shaft as well the as wood, the more
they were staynd with blood. It is true, that through the blood you might know
them.

Now let us consider the spurting out of the blood, issuing out of the wound.
Me thinks it is like a fountain, which being led by long channels from some
higher place, when it has been restrained, as they open it skips in fury this
way and that way: for see these streams of blood, how well they are
represented, consider the boiling which seems to raise it self to bubbles. I
think nature cannot represent any thing more truly.

The sixth Table.
NOw for the sixth and last Table, which contaynes four actions of the
Shepherdess Fortune. The first, is a Dream which Mandrake made her have: The
other, how she went to the Fountain, to clear her doubt: The third, how she
complaynes of the inconstancy of her Shepherd: and the last, how she dies;
which is the conclusion of this Tragedy. Now let us see all things
particularly.

See the rising of the Sun, note the length of the shadows, and how on the
one side the Heaven is yet less clear. See these clouds, which are half air
as it seems, which by little and little fly, lifting up these little birds,
which seem to sing as they mount, and are of those kind of Larkes that rise
from the deaw in the new Sun. These ill-formed birds, which with uncertain
flight go to hide themselves, are of those Owls that avoid the Sun: whereof
the Mountain couers a good part, and the other shines to clear, that one
cannot judge that it was other thing then a great and confused brightness.

Let us go forward. Behold the shepherdess Fortune asleep, she is in bed,
where the Sun that enters by the window open by negligence, discouers half
her breast. She has one arm carelessly stretched along the side of the
bedstead, her hand a little hanging from the boulster, the other hand stretched
along her thigh, without the bed, and for that her smock sleeves is by chance
thrust up, you may see it above the Elbowe, there being nothing that hides any
of the arms beauty.

See about her the devils of Morpheus, wherewith Mandrake serves herself, to
give her a will to go to the fountains of the truth of Love. See on this side
what she casts up: for having dreamed that her shepherd was dead, and taking
his death for the loss of his amity, she came to know the truth. Behold how
the sorrowful visage by the sweetness of it mooues pity, and makes us take
part in her displeasure; because she no sooner casts her veiwe into the water
but she perceiues Damon. But alas, hard by him the shepherdess Melide, a
fair shepherdess indeed, and which was not without suspicion of loving
Damen, yet vnbeloued of him.

Deceived with this falsehood, see how she is retired into the inwarrd parts
of the Den, and comes unawares to lament her displeasure, in the same place
where Damon was almost dead.

Behold her set against the rock, her arms acrosse her breast, which choler
and grief made her discover, in tearing that which was upon it. It seems
that she sighs, and her breast pants, her face and eyes lifting up, and asking
vengeance from heaven for the perfidiousnesse which she thought was in Damon.
And because the transport of her evil, made her lift up her voice in her
complaynt. Damon whom you see by her, though he were even at the last of all
his life, hearing the laments of his fair Shepherdess, and knowing the
voice, he then enforced himself to call her. She which heard these dying
words, suddenly turning her head went to him.

But O God what a sight was this? She quite forgot, seeing him in this case,
and the occasion she had to complain of him, she demanded who had dealt so
foully with him? It is said he, the change of my fortune, it is the
inconstancy of your soul which has deceived me with such demonstrations of
goodwill. Briefly, it is the happiness of Macadon, whom the Fountain from
whence you came showed me to be by you. And do you think it reasonable that
he should live having lost your love; that lived not but to be beloved of
you? Fortune hearing these words. Ah Damon, how lying is this Spring to our
undoing, since it made me see Melide near unto you, whom I now see die for so
dearly loving me.

So these faithful lovers knew well the falsehood of this Fountain, and more
assured then ever of their affection, they dyed embracing: Damon of the wound,
and she for grief of his death.

Behold the shepherdess set against the rock covered with moss, and see
Damon leaning his head in her lap, and who to give her the last farewell,
reached forth his arm and neck to her, seeming to strain and raise himself
a little to kiss her: in the mean time, she all covered with blood held his
head, and bowing her self to come near his face, laid her hand under him for
to heave him up a little.

This old gray headed which is by them, is Mandrake the magitian, who finding
them dead, curses her Art, detesteth her devils, tears her hair, and batters
her breast with blows. The gestures of lifting her hands above her head,
holding her hands joined; and contrarily casting down her head, almost hiding
her chinne in her bosom, folding and tossing the body in her lap, are signs
of her violent displeasure, and of the sorrow which she had for the loss of
two so faithful and pe^^^^t lovers, besides the loss of all her contentment.

The face of this old woman is hidden, but consider the manner of her hair,
how it hangs down low, and to the nape of the neck, and those that are more
short, seem to stick up. Behold a little farther off Cupid weeping, see his
bow and arrows broken, his torch put out, and his scarffe all wet with
tears, for the less of two so faithful lovers.

Celadon was all the while very attentive to the discourse of the wise Adamas,
and often repented himself for his want of courage, that could not find a
like remedy to that of Damon, and because the consideration of this held him
some while mute, Galathee as she went out of the cave, and taking Celadon by
the hand: what think you said she of these loves, and of these effects?

That these are (answered the shepherd) the effects of imprudence and not of
love, and it is a popular error to cover our own ignorance, or to excuse our
faults, to attribute always to some divinity the effects, whereof the causes
are hidden from us.

And how, said she, think you there is no love? If there be, said the
shepherd, it should be nothing but sweetness. But howsoever it be, you
speak Madame, to one so ignorant as any that lives, for besides that; my
condition will not permit ^mee to know much, my grosser spirit has made me
much more incapable. Then the sad Siluy replied. It is some while since I saw
you in a place where one might hardly believe this of you; for there were so
many beauties for you to take, and you are too honest a man to suffer your
self to be taken.

Fair Nymph, answered the shepherd, in what place soever this was since you
were there, it is without question, there was much beauty there: but as too
much fire burns rather then warmes* so your beauties are too great for our
rusticke hearts, and make themselves rather admired then beloved, and rather
adored then served. With such talk this fair company went to their lodging,
whither the hour of repast called them.

The end of the eleventh book.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF ASTREA AND CELADON.
BY that time the day began to appear, Leo^ide following the resolution which
in the evening Adamas her companion, and Celadon had taken together, came into
the shepherds chamber, to put on him the habit which her uncle had brought.
But the little Merill that by the commandment of Galathee, ordinarily tarried
with Celadon to spy Leo^ides actions, as well as to wait on the shepherd,
hindered them long time from doing it. At last, some noise they made in the
court, caused Merill to go forth, that he might bring them some news. Then
presently Celadon rose, and the Nymph (behold to what Love abases her) helped
him to cloth himself, for he could not do it without her. Within a while
after, see the little Merill that came running back so fast, that he must
needs take them in the manner, but Celadon that had an eye to him, got into a
wardrobe, expecting when he should return. He was no sooner entered, but he
asked where Celadon was. He is within the wardrobe said the Nymph, he will come
presently: but what would you with him? I would tell him answered the boy, that
Amasis is coming hither. Leonide was a little surprised, fearing she should
not be able to finish what she had begun, yet to take some counsel with
Celadon,she said to Merill, little Merill I pray thee run to inform my Lady
of it, for it may be she will be overtaken. The child ran out, and Celadon
comes laughing forth at these news. And why, said the Nymph, do you laugh
Celadon at her coming, you may well be taken? No such thing (said he) only
hold you on in dressing me for I may easily steal away in the confusion of so
many Nymphs. But while they wereabout their business, see Galathee comes in
so suddenly, that Celadon could not get into the Cabinet: you may well judge
that the Nymph and Celadon were surprised, but the subtilty of Leonide was
greater and quicker then it was credible: for seeing Galathee enter, she took
hold on Celadon, who would have run to hide himself, and turning toward the
Nymph, did what she could to stay him. Madame, said she, if it please you not
to do somewhat, that my Lady your mother come not hither, we are all undone:
for my part, I have done what I could to disguise Celadon, but I fear I cannot
bring it about. Galathee, who at the first knew not what to judge of this
Metamorphosis, commended the spirit of Leonide for inuenting this shift, and
coming nearer to consider Celadon so well disguised under this habit, that she
could not hold from laughter: answered the Nymph, Friend, we had bin undone but
for you, for there was no mean to hide the shepherd from so many persons as
come with Amasis, where being clad in this habit, we are not only more
assured, but withal I would have you let your other companions see her, that
they may take her for a maid. And then she went on the other side, and was
ravished in beholding him; for his beauty by these ornaments made the greater
show. In the mean time, Leonide the better to play her part, told her that she
might be gone, for fear lest Amasis came suddenly on her. So the Nymph, after
she had resolved that Celadon should call himself the kinswoman of Adamas,
named Lucinde, went out to entertain her mother, after she had commanded
Leonide to bring her where they were as soon as she could be dressed. I must
confess the truth, said Celadon, after she was gone, in my life was I never
more astonished then at these three accidents; at the coming of Amasis, at the
surprisall of Galathee, and at your quick invention.

Shepherd said she, that which I do proceeds of the good will I have to rid
you of your pain, and would to God all the rest of your contentment would sort
as luckily as this does, then you should know how much good I wish you. For
requital of so great an obligation, answered the shepherd, I can but offer
you the life which you have preserved: with such discourses they entertained
themselves, till Merill came into the chamber, and seeing Celadon almost ready,
he was ravished, and said: There is no body that can know him, and I that am
all day with him, would not believe it is he, unless I saw him dressing.
Celadon answered him, who told you I was disguised. Thus it was, answered he:
My Lady who commanded me to call you Lucinde, and that I should say you are the
kinswoman of Adamas, and sent me presently to the Druide to let him know it,
who could not forbear laughter when he heard it, and he promised me to do as
my Lady had appointed. See that all things go well, said the shepherd, and
take heed you forget not your self. In the mean time, Amasis being come out
of her chariot, met Galathee at the stayres foot, with Siluy and Adamas.
Daughter, said she, you have been over long in your solitariness, I must
recreate you a little, specially, for that news which I have seen from
Clidaman and Lindamor, do rejoice me, that I can enjoy it no longer alone:
therefore came I unto you to give you a part, and desire to have you go with
me to Marcellis, where I will have bonefires made for so good news. I thank
God, answered Galathee, for so great happiness, and I beseech God to keep you
yet an age longer: but indeed Madame, the place is so pleasing to me, that it
makes me sorry to leave it. It shall not be long, replied Amasis, but because
I will not go back till toward night, let us go walk, and I will tell you all that I have learned. Then Adamas kissed her robe and said; your news madame
must be good, since to tell them to my Lady your daughter, you came abroad so
early. It is two or three days, said Amasis, since I received them, and
suddenly resolved to come hither, for me thinks I cannot joy at such
contentment alone, and indeed the thing deserves to be known. With such
discourse she descended into the garden, where beginning to walk, having
Galathee on the one side, and Adamas on the other, she went on in this sort.

The history of Lidias and Melander.
COnsidering the strange accidents which happen by Love, me ^hinks we are
almost constrained to confess, that if Fortune have many wheels to advance
and cast down, to turn and change humane things, the wheel of love is that
with which she often serves her turn, for there is nothing that yields so many
changes as this passion of Love. The examples are always so common before our
eyes, that it should be superfluous to tell them. Yet must you confess when
you have heard what I will I say, that this accident is one of the most
remarkable that yet you have ever heard told. You know how Clidaman by lot
became servant to Siluy, and how Guima^^es by the letter which he brought from
his brother became likewise amorous.

I assure my self, since that time, you cannot be ignorant of the design that
made them both depart so secretly, to seek out Meroue, nor that I might not
leave Clidaman alone in a place so far off, I sent after him under the charge
of Lindamor, a company of young knights of this country, but you can hardly know
what befell them since their departure, and that is it which I will now tell
you, for there is nothing more worthy to be known.

As soon as Clidaman came to thearmy, Guimantes who was well known there,
brought him to kiss the hands of Meroue and Childericke, and without showing
who he was only gave them to understand that he was a young knight, of a good
house, that desired to serve them. They were received with open arms, and
especially for coming in a time when their enemies had renewed their forces,
and taking good courage had threatened to give battle. But when Lindamor was
come, and that they knew what Clidaman was, the honor and welcome which they
did him cannot be told, for within two or three fights he was so famous, that
both his friends and enemies knew him and esteemed of him.

Among other prisoners which he and Guimantes took, for commonly they went
together in all enterprises, they found a youth of great Britain, so fair,
but so sad, that it wrought pity in Clidaman, and because the longer he
remained in captivity, the more appeared his sorrow: one day he caused him to
be called before him, and after he had enquired of his estate and condition, he
asked the occasion of his sadness, saving, that if it proceeded of his
imprisonment, he must like a man of courage bear such accidents, and he was to
thank the heavens that had provided he should fall into their hands, since
he was in a place where he should receive nothing but courtesy, and the delay
of his liberty proceeded but from the command of Merou^, who had forbidden
that the prisoners should as yet be ransomed, and when he would give them
leave, he should see what their courtesy was.

This young man thanked him, yet was not able to forbear fighing, whereat
Clidaman somewhat more moved, demanded the cause, to whom he answered: Sir
knight, this sadness which you see painted in my face, and these sighs which
steal so often from my breast proceed not of this prison you speak of, but of
another which binds me more st^aightly: for time and ransom may free me from
this, but from the other, there is nothing but death that can ^^deeme me. And
I am resolved to bear it with patience, if I did not foresee an ouer-speedie
end, not by my death only, but the loss of that parti^ that keeps me in so
strait hold.

Clidaman knew well by his words, that it was Love whereof he labored, and by
the experience which he had found in himself, considering the disease of his
prisoner, he took such pity on him, that he assured him his liberty the
soonest he could possibly, knowing well by proof, that they be the passions
and disquietnesses that accompany the person that truly loves. Since, faid he,
you know that it is Love, and that your courtesy binds me to believe, that the
knowledge you may have of me, shall not make you change your good will, to the
end you may judge of the cause which I have to complain of, or rather to
despair of, seeing the evil so near, and the remedy so far, so you will
promise me not to discover it, I will tell you things which without doubt will
astonish you: and when he had promised him, he began in this sort.

Sir Knight, this habit wherein you see me, is not mine own, but Love, who
sometimes has clothed men like women plays with me in this fort, and making
me forget in part what I am, has put me into an habit contrary to mine own,
for I am not a man, but a daughter of one of the best Houses of Brutayne, and
called Mellandra, fallen into your hands by the greatest fortune that ever was
conducted by Love. It is some while since a young man named Lidias, came to
London, flying out of his own Country (as I have heard since) for having
killed his enemy in field. They were both of that part of Gaul, which they
call Normandy: but because the dead man was of kindred to the greatest among
them, he was enforced to fly hi^ Country, to avoid the rigor of Justice.

Thus being then come to London, is the custom of our Nation, he found such
courtesy that there was no good House wherein he was not right soon familiar:
among others, he lived with that priuacie at my fathers, as if he had been
of his household. And because he had a purpose to stay there as long as his
return into his Country should be forbidden him, he determined to make show
of loving some, that he might the better frame himself to the humor of them
of great Brittany, that have every one some particular Lady. On this resolution
he turned (I know not whether I may say for good or evil ^ortune) his eyes on
me, were it that he found me more for his delight or more for his commodity,
he began to profess himself to be my servant. What dissimulations, what
wooings, what oaths were those which he used to me? I will not trouble you
with an ouerlong discourse. So it was, that after sufficient long wooing (for
he continued two years) I loved him without dissimulation, for that his
beauty, his courtesy, his discretion, and valor, were ouer-great allurements
to overcome with long suit any soul, how barbarous soever. I blush not then to
confess it to one that has had trial of Love, nor to say, that this
beginning then was the end of my quiet.

Now these things resting in this state, and living with all the contentment
that the party that loves and is assured of the person beloved, may have; it
fell out, that the Franks, after they had won so many battles against the
Roman Emperors against the Goths and Gauls, turned their Arms against the
Normans, and reduced them to those terms, that because they are their ancient
Allies, they were constrained to send to London, to demand succors; which,
according to the alliance made between them and those of great Britain, was
granted them both by the King and by the Estates. This news was suddenly
divulged throughout the Realm; and we that were of the principal Town,
understood it with the first: And from that time, Lidias began to think of his
return; assuring himself, that they of his side having need of his like,
would easily absolve him of the death of Aronte. Notwithstanding, because he
had always promised me, not to go, but he would carry me with him, which
the malicious man did to deceive me, and for fear lest I might impeach his
departure, he concealed his purpose from me. But as there is no fire so
closely covered, from which there comes not some smoke, so there is nothing so
secret, but some thing or other will discover it; and so many, before I was
aware, told me of it.

As soon as I knew it, the first time I saw him, I drew him aside: Well (said
I) Lidias, have you resolved that I shall not know that you will leave me?
Think you my amity so weak, that it cannot bear out the strokes of your
fortune? If your affairs will have you return into your Country, why will
not your love permit me to go with you? Demand me of my father, I am assured
he will be pleased with our alliance, for I know he loves you: but to leave
me here alone with your faith forsworn, no Lidias, believe me, do not
commit so great a fault, for the Gods will punish you. He answered me coldly,
that he had no thought of return, and that all his affairs were nothing worth
to the good of my presence, that I committed an offense in doubting, and that
his actions should constrayne me to confess as much. And yet this perjured
person within two days after went away with the first Troops that came from
great Britain, and took his time so fitly, that he came to the Sea shore
the same day that they were to go, and so took ship with them. We were
presently advertised of his departure: Yet had I so strong a fancy that he
loved me, that I was the last that believed it; so that there were more then
eight days after his departure, before I could persuade my self, that one so
well borne could be so deceitful and unthankful. At last, one day following
after another without any news, I found I was deceived, and Lidias was gone.

If then my sorrow were great, judge you Sir Knight, since falling sick, I was
brought to those terms, that my Physicians not knowing my disease, despayred
of me, and forsaking me, held me for dead. But Love, who would show his power,
and is a better Physician then Esculapius, healed me with a strange Antidote.
And see how he delights in effects which are contrary to our resolution. When
I first knew of the flight of Lidias, for in truth it may be so called, I found
my self in such sort displeased, that after I had a thousand times called
Heaven to witness of his perfidiousnesse, I swear I would never love him, as
often as he had sworn to me, that he would ever love me, and I may tell
you we were both forsworn. For while my hatred was in his greatest fury,
behold a Vessel that came from Callays, to report, that the Succors were
happily arrived, that told us, that Lidias went over with an intent to war
among them of great Britain: but as soon as the Governor of the place, who
was a kinsman to Aronte, understood of it, he caused him to be put in prison,
as having been already condemned; that they accounted him for lost, because
the Governor was of great credit among the Normans, that indeed there was one
mean to save him, but so hard, that there was no man that would hazard it,
being such an one.

As soon as Lidias saw himself arrested, he demanded, how a Knight of such
reputation as he was, would revenge his quarrels by Justice, and not by Arms?
for it is a custom among the Gauls, never to run to Justice in what offends
their Honor, but to the Combat, and they that do otherwise, are held
dishonorable.

Lipandas, which was the name of the Governor, answered, That he slew not
Aronte like a man, and if he were not condemned by lustice, he would maintain
it by Arms: but being ashamed to fight with one attainted, if he had any of
his friends that would offer himself for him, he proffered to fight in that
quarrel, that if he were overcome, he would set him at liberty, that otherwise
lustice should be done. And to give time to his kinsfolks and friends, he
would keep him a month in his custody, that if none come within that time,
he would give him over into the rigorous hands of the Ancients of Roa^, to be
handled as he deserves: and that there might be no advantage to any, he would
this Combat should be fought with Sword and Dagger, in their shirts. But
Lipandas being accounted one of the valintest men in all Normandy, there was
not one that had the hardiness to undertake this combat, besides that the
friends of Lidias not understanding of it could not perform that good office.
Sir knight, when I remember the contraries, which shake me when I heard this
news, I must confess I was never more confounded in my life, no not when this
perfidious man forlooke me. Then would Love have me know, that the propositions
made against him are more weak when he will, then the waves that beat in vain
against the rock to make it shake: for to pay the tribute of Love, you must run
to the ordinary moneys with which his imposts are paid, which are tears. But
after long and vain bewailing the persidious Lidias, I must in the end resolve
of his safety, though it cost me both my restan^d honor. And transported with
this new fury, or rather with this renewing of Love I resolved to go to
Callais, with an intent to find the means there to advertise the kinsmen and
friends of Lidias, and giving order with as great secrecy as I could for my
voyage. one night I stole away in the habit you see me; but my fortune was so
hard, that I stayed above fifteen days before I could find a ship that went
that way. I know not what became of my parents when they saw I was gone, for I
heard no news of them since, only I know the old age of my poor father can
hardly bear out this grief, for he loved me more tenderly then I did my
self, and has ever so carefully bred me, that I am oftentimes astonished how I
could endure the discommodities which since my departure I have borne, and I
must say, it is Love, and not my self.

But to hold on our course, after I had stayed fifteen or sixteen days at the
Sea side, at last there came a ship in which I went to Callais, when I had no
more then five or six days of the Term that Lipandas had given. The tossing
of the ship had so distempered me, that I was constrained to keep my bed two
days, so that I had no time to advertise kinsmen of Lidias, especially not
knowing who they were, nor where they dwelt. If this troubled me you may judge,
especially because me thought I was come at the time to see him die, and to be
present at his funerals. O Gods how do you dispose us! I was so ouerlayd with
this disaster, that day and night the tears were in mine eyes. At last, the
day before the Term, transported with a desire to dye before Lidias, I
resolved to enter into the combat against Lipandas: What resolution, or rather
what despair was this? for all my life long I never took sword in my hand,
and knew not well with which hand to hold the dagger or the sword, and yet
behold me resolved to enter into combat with a knight, who all his life had
been used to that mystery, and who had always won the title of brave and
valiant. But all these considerations were nothing against me, that chose to
die before he whom I loved, lost his life. And though I knew well I could not
save him, yet was it no little satisfaction to me, that he should have that
proof of my love.

One thing tormented me infinitely, which I endeavored to remedy, which was
the fear lest Lidias might know me, and left that might hinder my design,
because we were to fight unarmed. To remedy which, I sent a scroule to
Lipandas, whereby after I had desyed him, I desired, that being both knights,
we might serve our selves of the armor which knights use, and not like
desperate persons. He answered, that the next morning he would be in the
field, and that I might come armed, and so would he, though he would have it at
his own choice: after he had begun the combat in that sort, for my
satisfaction, to finish it for his own, as he had propounded at the beginning.
I that doubted not, but in what sortsoeuer I was to die, accepted what he
would. And with this purpose in the morning, I presented my self in the field
armed at all points; but I must confess the truth, I was so combred with my
armor, that I knew not how to stir. They that saw me go staggering, thought
it was for fear of the combat, and it was out of weakness. Soon after,
behold Lipandas came armed, and mounted to his advantage, who at his first
setting out made them afraid, whom the danger no way touched: and believe you
not that I was amazed. But when the poor Lidias was brought on a scaffold, to
be present at the combat; for the pity which I had to see him in such case,
touched me so that I stayed long without being able to stir. At last the
Judges led me to him, to know if he accepted me for his champion. He asked me
who I was, then counterfeiting my voice: content your self Lidias, said I, I
that am the only man that will undertake this fight for you. Since it is so,
replied he, you must be a person of valor, and therefore said he, turning to
the Judges, I accept him, and as I was going, he said, Valiant knight fear not
but our quarrel is just. Lidias, answered I, I would you had no other
injustice, and then I withdrew my self so resolved to dye, that I hardly
tarryed for the trumpets giving signal of battle. Indeed at the first sound
I set forward, but my horse shook me so sore, that in stead of bearing my
lance as I should, I let it go as Fortune would, so that in place of striking
him, I thrust it into the neck of the horse, leaving the spear in his body,
whereupon the horse ran at the first about the field in despite of his
master, at last fell down dead. Lipandas was coming against me with such an
eagerness to do well, that his over great desire made him miss his blow: for
my part, my horse went whither he would, for all that I could do was to keep
my self from falling, and stopping of himself, and hearing Lipandas crying to
me to turn him, with many reuilings, for that I had killed his horse, I came
back, when I had laid my hand on my sword the best I could, and not without
pain; but my horse which happily I had spurred more then his courage would
bear, as soon as I had turned him, of himself took his course, and to so
good purpose, that he smote Lipandas with such fury, that he cast him down
with his heels upward, but as he passed by, he gave him with his sword such a
thrust into the body, that within a while after I perceived him to sink under
me, and it was no smali thing that I could remember to take my feet out of the
stirrops, for to get out of the saddle, and alight from my horse.

Then came I toward him, who was at hand with his sword alost to strike me, and
I must tell you, that if Love had not sustained the burden of arms, I had not
had the force to do it.

At last, behold Lipandas, who with all his force came to charge me with a
blow on the head: nature taught me to thrust forward my left arm, for
otherwise I had forgotten the shield that hung on that arm, the blow lighted
so full on it, that wanting strength to bear it, my shield gave me back such
a blow upon my helmet, that the sparks flew out of mine eyes. He that saw how
I staggered, meant to charge me afresh, with another more weighty, but my
fortune was such, that lifting up my sword, I met his to so good a purpose that
it brake into two pieces; and mine half broken, did like his at the first blow
which I would have giuenhim: For he shrunk back, and I not having strength to
stay it, let it fall to the ground, where toward to point it lighted on a
stone that broke it.

Lipandas then seeing us both have the like advantage, said to me* Knight,
thesearmes have been alike favorable to us: I mean to try whether the other
will be so to, and therefore disarme your self, for it is with that that I
will end the fight. Knight, answered I, by that which is passed you may well
know that you have done wrong, and delivering Lidias you ought to leave this
combat.

No no, said Lipandas in choler, Lidias and you shall die. I shall assay,
replied I, to turn that sentence upon your own head, and then removing in the
field the farthest I could from Lidias, for fear of being known: By the help
of those that attended, I disarmed my self; and for that we had made provision
before of a Sword and Dagger, after we had put off our doublets, we came each
against other. I must tell you, it was not without pain that I covered my
breast, because the shirt, for all that I could do, showed the swelling of my
pappes; but ery one rather thought of any thing else then of that, and as for
Lidias he could not know it, as well for that he saw me in an habit
disguised, as for that I was enflamed with the heat of the armor, and this
high color much changed my visage. At last, behold us, Lipandas and me, about
ten or twelve paces a sunder they parted the sun betwixt us, and the Judges
were gone back. It was then that I thought verily to die, assuring my self,
that at the first blow he would run his Sword into my body.

But fortune was so good for Lidias, (for it was only of his life that I stood
in fear) that this, arrogant Lipandas coming with all his fury to me,
stumbled so, to purpose for me, that he laid his head almost at my feet so
violently, that he gave himself two wounds, the one with his Dagger, with
which he pierced his left shoulder, and the other with his Sword, cutting his
brow.

For my part, I was so afraid of his fall, that I thought him already dead,
and without doing him more hurt, I gave back two or three paces. It is true,
that imagining I might better overcome him with courtesy then valor, I said
unto him: Rise up Lipandas, it is not on the earth that I will offend you. He
that had stood some time amazed with the blow, all in rage rises to cast
himself on me, but the two wounds which he had made himself, the one blinded
him, and the other took all strength from his arm, so that he saw nothing,
and was scarce able to hold up his sword; which I perceiving, took courage,
and came toward him with my sword aloft: Yield thy self Lipandas, other wise
thou art dead. Why, said he, should I yield my self, since the conditions of
our combat was not so? Content thy self that I set Lidias at I bertie.

And then the ludges being come, and Lipandas having ratified his promise, they
accompanied me out of the camp like a conqueror. But fearing they might do
me some wrong in that place, where Lipandas had such power, after I had armed
my self, I went with my visard down to Lidias, and said: Sir Lidias thank
God for my victory, and if you desire to confer longer with me, I go to the
town of Regiaque, where I will expect some news from you in fifteen days,
for after that time, I am constrained to go about some other occasions, which
carry me far from hence; and you may ask for the fadde knight, for that is
the name I bear, for the reason which you shall know hereafter.

Shall I not otherwise know him (said he) to whom I am so much obliged? Neither
for your good (fayde I) nor for mine may it be; and at that word I left him:
and after I had provided another horse, I came to Regiaque, where I stayed.

Now this traitor Lipandas, as soon as I was gone, made Lidias be put again
into prison more straightly then before, and when he complained and reproched
him for breach of promise which he had made me; he answered, he promised to set
him at liberty, but he told him not when, and that it should be within 20.
years, unless it were with a condition which he propounded; which was to work
so, that I would commit my self prisoner in his place, and so I should pay the
ransom of his liberty with loss of mineowne. Lidias answered him, so he
should be as ungrateful to me, as Lipandas perfidious to him. Whereat he was
so offended, that he swore that within 15. days if I were not in his hands, he
would give him up into the hands of Justice.

And when Lidias set before his eyes his faith forsworn: I have done penance,
said he, by the Wounds which I brought from the Combat, but having long time
promised the Lords of Normandy to maintain Justice, am I not more bound to the
former, then to the latter promise?

The former days passed over without any heed taking: but seeing I heard no
news of him, I sent a man to enquire for him. By him I knew the malice of
Lipandas, and the term that he had given: and though I well foresaw all the
cruelties and all the indignities which one might receive, yet did I resolve to
free Lidias out of such hands, having nothing so dear to me as his
conservation; and by fortune, the day that you took me, I was going thither.
And at this time, the heaviness which you see in me, and the sighs which give
me no rest, proceed not from the prison wherein I am (for this is pleasant, in
respect of that which was propounded) but to think, how this perfidious and
cruel Lipandas will without doubt commit him into the hands of his enemies,
who expect no other thing, but to see a deplorable and shameful end: for of
the fifteen days which he gave, ten are passed; so that I almost despair
to be able to do this last office to Lidias.

At this word the tears hindered her voice, that she was constrained to hold
her peace, but with such demonstration of displeasure, that Clidaman was
moved, and to comfort her, said: You are not (said he) courageous: Melandre so
to lose your courage, that you may not maintain that generousnesse in this
accident, which you have showed in all the rest; that God which has preserved
you in so great perils, will not forsake you in the lesser: You are to
believe, that what may depend on me, shall be always disposed of to your
contentment. But for that I am under a Prince whom I may not displease, your
liberty must come from him, yet do I promise you for my part whatsoever you
may hope from a good friend.

And so leaving her with these good words, he went to seek out Childericke,
and besought him to procure of King Meroue the liberty of this young prisoner.
The young Prince who loved my son, and who knew well how willing the King his
father would be to oblige Clidaman, without longer stay went to demand it of
Meroue, who granted what his son asked. And because the time was so short,
that the least part of it lost, would hurt Melandre, he went to seek her at
her Lodging; where having led her aside, he said:

Sad Knight (quoth he) you must change that name, for if your misfortunes have
heretofore given you cause to bear it, it seems you shall shortly loose it.
The Heavens begin to look on you with a more pleasing eye then of wont. And as
one evil comes not alone, so good fortunes march always in companies: and for
proof of that I say, know Knight (for so your will is I should call you, since
your generousnesse has of good right won you that Title) that henceforth you
are at liberty, and may dispose of your actions as you please. The Prince of
the Franks has given me leave to dispose of you, and the duty of a Knight
binds me not only to set you at liberty, but to offer you all the assistance
that you think I may afford you.

Melandre hearing a word so unhoped for, leaped with joy, and casting her self
at his feet, kissed his hand by way of thanks for so great a grace: for the
good which she imagined to receive from him, was to be put to a ransom; and
the inconveniences of paying it, made her despair of being able to do it so
soon as the term of fifteen days were run out. But when she heard so great
courtesy: Truly said she to him, Sir Knight, you make it appear, that you
know what it is to love, since you have pity on them that are taynted with
it. I pray God, until my self be able to requite it, that he would make you
as happy as he has made you courteous and worthy of all good fortune: and at
that very hour she would have been gone; which Clidaman would not suffer,
because it was night.

The next morning then very early she set on her way, and stayed not till she
came to Callais, where by chance she arrived the day before the term. That
evening she would have made her coming known to Lipandas, had she not been
of the mind, considering the perfidiousnesse of him with whom she had to do,
to attend for the day, that the more persons might see the wrong he did her,
if happily he should be failing of his word.

The day being come, and the hour of Midday having struck, that the chief
men of the place, to honor the Governor, were then in his house; behold the
sad Knight presenting himself, at the first he was not known, for they had
not seen him but in Combat, where it may be fear had altered his
countenance: and then every man drew near to hear what he would say.

Lipandas, said he, I come hither in the behalf of the kinsmen and friends of
Lidias, to hear some news of him, and to charge you with your word, or to
refer him to some other new condition: otherwise they send you word by me,
that they will proclay me you for an dishonest man.

Stranger, answered Lipandas, you may tell them that Lidias fares better then
he shall do within few days, because that this day being past, I will deliver
him into the hands of them that will avenge me: that for my word I think I am
quit, in giving him over into the hands of lustice; for this Justice, what
other thing is it, but true Liberty? As for the new conditions, I will have no
other but that which I have already propounded, which is, that they put into my
hands him that fought against me, that I may do my will of him, and I will
deliver Lidias. And what is that, said he, that you will do? When I am to give
account of my actions to you, answered he, you shall know. And how, said he,
are you yet of the same mind? Altogether of the same mind, replied Lipandas. If
it be so, added the sad Knight, send for Lidias, and I will deliver you him
whom you demand. Lipandas, that above all things desired to be revenged of his
enemy, for he had turned all his hatred on Melandre, sent for him immediately.
Lidias, that knew well, that that day was the last of the term which he had
set, believed it was to lead him to the Lords of Justice: notwithstanding he
foresaw his assured death, yet did he choose it, rather then to see him that
had fought for him, in that danger for his sake. When he was come before
Lipandas, he said; Lidias, see the last day that I have given thee to present
thy Champion into my hands; this young Knight is come hither for that cause, if
he do it, thou art at liberty. Melandre, while those few words were speaking,
found the means to turn her face aside, that she might not be known; and
when she would answer, she turned wholly toward Lipandas, and said: Yes
Lipandas, I have promised, and I will do it. Do you keep your word as well,
for I am he whom you demand; behold me that fear neither rigor nor cruelty
whatsoever, provided that my friend be freed from pain. Then every one cast
his eyes on her, and calling to memory the fashion of him that combated, knew
she said true. Her beauty, her youth, and her affection moved all them that
were present, except Lipandas, who thought himself infinitely offended with
her, commanded she should presently be put in prison, and suffered Lidias to
go at liberty.

He that desired rather his own destruction, then to see himself so much
obliged, made some difficulty. But Melandre came toward him, and told him in
his care: Lidias be gone, trouble not your self for me, I have a mean to get
out of prison very easily when I will: and if you will do any thing for me, I
pray you go serve Meroue, and particularly Clidaman, who is the cause that you
are at liberty, and tell him, that it is for my sake that you came to him.

And is it possible, said Lidias, that I should go, before I know who you are?
I am, answered she, the sad Knight: and this shall suffice, till you have
better opportunity to know more. So went Lidias away, with a resolution to
serve the King of the Franks, since he to whom he twice ought his life, would
have it so.

But in the mean time Lipandas expressly commanded, that Melandre should be
well guarded, and put her into a Den, with yrons on her hands and feet,
resolving to let her lie there, till she dyed through misery. Judge in what
case this young maid was, and what complaints she might make against Love: Her
food was vile, and her lodging fearful, and all other discommodities great,
that if her affection had not supported these things, it is impossible but she
must have dyed.

But in the mean time the rumor spread throughout all Normandy, that Lidias by
the means of his friend was delivered from the prison at Callais, and that he
was gone to serve the King Meroue, this was the cause that his banishment was
renewed, and he declared Traitor to his Country. Yet he forbear not to come
to the Camp of the Franks: where searching for the Tent of Clidaman, it was
showed him. As soon as he saw it, and that Lindamor and Guymantes spyed him,
they ran to embrace him, but with such affection and such courtesy, that he
was astonished; for they all took him for Ligdamon, that a little before was
lost in the battle which they had against the Normans, whom he so much
resembled, that all they that knew Ligdamon, were deceived.

In the end being known to be Lidias, the friend of Melandre, he led him to
Meroue: where, in the presence of them all, Lidias discoursed to the King the
story of his prison as you have heard, and the courtesy which he had twice
received of that unknown Knight, and at last, the commandment which he gave
him to come and serve him, and particularly Clidaman. Then Clidaman, after the
King had entertained him, and thanked him for his love, said: Is it possible
Lidias, you know not him that fought, and is in prison for you? No truly said
he. Behold said he, the strangest mistaking that I ever heard spoken of, have
you ever seen one resemble him? Not as I remember* said Lidias, all
astonished. Then will I tell the king (said Clidaman) an history the most
worthy of compassion that ever love wrought: And thereupon he began the
discourse which Lidias had told, that he went into great Britain, of the
contents he found there, whereto he adjoined very discreetly the love of
Melandre, of the promises he made, of the carrying her into Normandy with him
if he were constrained to go; of his flight: and lastly, of his imprisonment
at Callais.

The poor Lidias was so astonished, to hear such particularities of his life,
that he knew not what to think. But when Clidaman repeated to him the
resolution of Melandre to set on her voyage, and her attiring her self like a
man, to give his friends knowledge of it, and after to arm and enter in close
field against Lipandas, and the fortunes of the two combats; there was not one
of the hearers that was not ravished, and much more when he ended all that
which I have told you. O Gods, cried out Lidias, is it possible that mine eyes
have been so blinded? what is there for me to do, to free my self of this
obligation? There is nothing more, said Clydaman, then to hazard for her that
which she has preserved in you. That added Lidias with a deep sigh, me thinks
it is but a small thing, if the entire affection which she bears me, be
accompanied with mine own. In the mean time that they had this discourse,
they which heard Clidaman, said, that this maid alone deserved to have this
great Army to assail Callais. In truth, said Meroue, I will neglect all other
things rather then not get the liberty to a Lady so virtuous, and we know not
how our arms may be better employed then in such service.

The evening being come, Lidias goes to Clidaman, and discouers to him that
he had an infallible enterprise on Callais, which he had noted during the
time he was prisoner, that if they would give him soldiers, without doubt he
would put them into the town. This advice being reported to Meroue, it was
found so good, that he resolved to send him So there were given him five
hundred archers conducted by two hundred men at arms, to execute this
enterprise. The conclusion was (for I cannot tell you all the business)
Callais was taken, Lipandas prisoner, and Melandre freed out of captivity. But
I know not how nor why; hardly was the tumult of the taken town ceased, but it
was noted, that Lidias and Melandre were gone, so that since is unknown what
is become of them.

Now during all these things, the poor Ligdamon has been more tormented for
Lidias, then may well be told: for being prisoner in the hands of the Normans,
he was taken for Lidias, and as soon condemned to death. Clidaman so wrought,
that Meroue sent them two Heralds at Arms, to let them know how they deceived
themselves: but the assurance which Lipandas had newly given them, made them
pass it over, without giving credit to Meroue. So behold Ligdamon put into the
Cage of the Lions, where it is said he did more then a man might do: but
without doubt he had dyed, had it not been that a very fair Lady had demanded
him for Husband. The custom which permits it to be so, saved him for that
time, but shortly after he dyed: for loving Siluy with such an affection, that
it would not suffer him to marry any other then her, he rather made choice of
a Tomb, then that fair Dame: so that when they would marry him, he poisoned
himself; and she that believed it was indeed Lidias, who heretofore had loved
her so dearly, poisoned her self also with the same potion. So is the poor
Ligdamon dead, with such lamentation of every one, that there is none among his
enemies, but bewayles him. But that is a gracious revenge wherewith Love has
punished the cruel Lipandas: for calling to his remembrance the virtue, the
beauty, and the affection of Melandre, he is become so far in love with her,
that poor as he is, he takes no consolation but in speaking of her. My son
sends me word, that he does what he can to get him out of prison, and that he
hopes to obtain it.

So (continued Amasis) now they live with such honor and commendations, that
every man esteems more of them then any other in the Army. I pray God, said
Adamas, to continue them still in such good fortune.

And while they discoursed thus, they saw coming along Leonide and Lucinde,
with the little Merill: I say Lucinde, because Celadon, as I told you, bare
that name, following the resolution which Galathee had made. Amasis that knew
her not, asked who she was. It is, answered Galathee, a kinswoman of Adamas, so
fair, and so furnished with virtue, that I have desired him to leave her with
me a while; she is called Lucinda. It seems (said Amasis) she is as demure as
fair. I assure my self, added Galathee, that her humor will please you, and
if you think it good, she shall come (Madame) with unto M^rcelles. At this
word, Leonide came so near, that Lucinde to kiss the hand of Amasis, advanced
forward, and setting one knee on the ground, kissed her hand with a fashion so
well counterfeited, that there was none but took her for a maid. Amasis raised
her up, and after she had embraced her, she kissed her, telling her, that she
loved Adamas so well, that whatsoever touched him, was dear to her as her own
children. Then Adamas took the word by the end, for fear, that if the fained
Lucinde should answer, they might find out somewhat by her voice. But he
needed not have feared: for she knew so well to counterfeit, that her voice as
well as the rest would have helped the better to make up the deceit. Yet for
this blow, she contented her self to allow of the answer of Adamas only with
a low courtesy; and after drew back among the other Nymphs, attending for
nothing but some opportunity to steal away.

At last, the hour of dinner being come, Amasis returned to her Lodging: where
finding the Tables ready spread, every one full of contentment for the good
news they had, dined cheerfully, except Siluy, who had always before her
eyes the image of her dear Ligdamon, and in her soul the remembrance that he
dyed for her. This was the subject wherewith they spent one part of the dinner:
for the Nymph was willing enough they should know that she loved the memory of
a man both virtuous and so dedicated to her; but withal, that being dead, she
should be no more importuned by him, nor he benefit himself with this good
will.

After dinner, all the Nymphs disposed themselves, some to play, other to see
the House, some the Garden, others to entertain the time with diverse
discourses in the chamber of Amasis. Leonide, without the heeding of any,
making show to prepare her self for the journey, got out of the chamber, and
shortly after Lucinde, and meeting at the Rendeuous that was given them,
fayning to go walk, went out of the Castle, having hid under their sleeves
either of them a part of the shepherds garments: and when they were at the
Woods end, the shepherd unclothed himself, and taking his accustomed habit,
thanked the Nymph for the great help she had given him* and offered in
exchange his life, and all that depended on it Then the Nymph with a great sigh
s^^d: Well (quoth she) Celadon, have I not kept the promise I made you? Do you
not think you are bound to perform that which you promised me? I should
think my self, answered he, the most unworthy that ever lived, if I should
fail. Now Celadon (said she) then remember what you have sworn to me: for I
am resolved now to bring it into proof. Fair Nymph, answered Celadon, dispose
of all that I may, as of that which your self may, for you shall be no better
obeyed of your self then of me. Have you not promised, replied the Nymph, that
I should inquire into your life passed; and that which I could find you might
do for me, you would do it? and he answering it was true. Well Celadon,
continued she, I have done that which you willed me; and though they paint Love
blind, yet has it left me light enough to know, that truly you are to
continue the love which you have so often promised to be eternal to your
Astrea; for the preciseness of Love will not permit a man to be either for
sworn or unfaithful. And so though one have used you hardly, yet must not you
fail in your duty; for another man's error will never wash away our fault.
Then love the fair and happy Astrea with as much affection and sincerity as
you ever loved her, serve her, adore her, and more, if more may be, for Love
will have extremity in his sacrifice: but withal I well know, that the good
offices which I have done you, deserve some remembrance of you: and without
doubt, because Love cannot pay it self but by Love, you shall be obliged to
satisfy me in the same money, if the impossibility contradicted it not. But
since it is true, that one heart is capable but of one true love, I must pay my
self of that which remaynes. Then having no more Loves to give me as to a
Mistress, I demand your amity as your sister, and from henceforth you love me,
you cherish me, and hold me for such. The contentment of Celadon, hearing these
words, cannot be expressed; for he protested, that that was one of the things
which in his misery he found some kind of contentment in. Therefore, after he
had thanked the Nymph for the amity she bare him, he swore unto her to take
her for his sister, and never to use her but as that name commanded him. Then
lest they should be found out, they separated themselves, both well contented
and satisfied each with other.

Leonide returned to the palace, and the shepherd held on his voyage,
shunning the places where he thought he might meet with shepherds whom he
knew; and leaving Mountverdun on the left hand, he passed through the midst
of a great Plain, that in the end led him to a Coast somewhat raised, and from
whence he might know and mark with his eye the most part of the places where
he had used to drive his flock to feed on the other side of Lignon, where
Astrea came to seek him, where sometimes they avoided the ouer-scorching heat
of the Sun. Briefly, this view set before his eyes the most part of the
contentments which he paid so dearly for at that hour: and in that
consideration being set at the foot of a Tree, he sighed out these Verses.

Remembrances.
THen did my fair Sun take her rest,
While the other lazy sleeping lay:
But when he comes at break of day
With Gilly flowers and ^oses dressed,
To chase away th'affrights of night;
Then chiefly shines with beams most bright
The Sun that my soul does adore,
Carrying the day light as she moves,
Unto the Playnes she honors more,
And whom she going, fills with loves.
Upon that running Rivers side
He shows himself in sundry wise:
Sometimes with scorching heat he fryes,
Another while his light he hides,
And seems as touched with jealousy,
He meant to steal quite from our eye:
So though as in a cloud it were,
The Sun his face hide from us all,
Yet cannot such a shadow small
Cover a light that is so clear.
But who will say but that it burns,
When he beholds the other Sun
Makes with his looks herbs dry and dunne?
While burning Dog-starre keeps his turn,
Why may not likewise then (say I)
My Sun she herbe^ about her dry?
I mean it is my Ladies part,
(O Love) to cast no conquering rays
On bodies that no soul bewrayes,
And will burn nothing but the heart.
Thou fountain that borrows the name
Of Sycamores growing by thee,
Thou late did me contented see:
Why meet I now not with the same?
What fault have I committed late,
That of the gods I win the hate?
Are they subjected as are we,
To be envious now and then?
Or can the change proper to men
Reach up unto the Deity?
Late on thy banks my shepherdess
Said, while her hand held my hand close?
Well may uncertain chance dispose
Of our lives full of brittlenesse:
But Celadon, never in troth
There shall be failing of the oath,
Which in this hand I swear to thee.
Alive and dead I love thee still,
Or if I die, my grave stone will
Lock up for aye our amity.
You thick leaves that this arbor dight,
And cover it with shade each way:
Remember you not well that day,
When mixing red with lilly white,
She fell a blushing all for shame,
For that a shepherd by her came,
Talking with me, and called her fair,
A bliss and honor where she stays,
To no eyes but to mine (she says)
To seem so lovely does she care.
Thou rock, where often for priuacie
We met together in thy room:
Tell if thou can what is become
Of all these loves for which I cry?
The gods that often have been inuokt,
Will they brook that they be so mocked?
Will they those prayers, which ^o did bind
Both her and me, receive in vain,
Since she by this her change of mind,
Pays all those lo^es with one disdain?
The heavens graun^, Astrea said,
That I may die before I see
My fathers power more strongly made,
Out of a mere obstinacy,
In such a long continued hate,
Us and our loves to separate.
Then can our loves holy and sure,
Join us together linked fast:
So I, that all the loss endure,
Shall die to see it not to last.
Thou aged willow tree, whose bark
Defends thee from the weathers force:
Tell me, have I not reasons mark,
To make complaint of this divorce,
And raise on thee my cries most fit?
How often have we to other writ,
Relying on thy surest guard,
In hollow of thy trunk halfe-eate?
But oh, as I thee now reguard,
Willow how comes thy change so great?
These thoughts had held Celadon longer in that place, had he not been
overtaken by the desolate shepherd, who continually bewayling his loss, came
sighing out these verses.

On too hasty a death.
YOu that behold my mournful tear,
If you knew what the mischiefs were,
With which my soul is taint:
In stead of blaming of mine eye,
You would join with me in your cry
To make up my complaint.
Under the horror of black stone,
That which the earth held fair alone,
Does into cinders tend.
O fates that play this rigorus part,
Why not my body as my heart
May to the deep descend?
She was not yet become so low,
As that the gods at one quick blow,
Should ravish her from me.
So that alone for this intent
To enter to her monument:
Her life seems given to be.
Why should so great a world of love,
Resemblance of a flower prove,
That but for one day springs.
The heavens have showed her but for show,
And that our tears might ouerflow,
For los^e which her fate brings.
As Yuy clasping fast the tree,
From trunk well cannot served be
Though it be dead and dry,
At least I would it might be tide,
That I alive hard by her side,
Under her stone might lie.
With her I should contented live,
And if they would me license give,
To speak and tell my mind*
For such a lodging I would bless
The death, of love that left no less
Then such a pawn behind.
Celadon that would not be seen of any that might know him, when he saw this
shepherd began by little, and little to withdraw himself under the covert of
some thick trees, but seeing that without staying at him, he went to sit down
in the same place from whence he came, he followed after pace by pace, and so
fitly, that he could hear a part of his complaint. The humor of this unknown
shepherd, simpathising with his own, made him curious to know of him some
news of his mistress, thinking he could not learn it more easily by another,
without being known. Then approaching to him, he said. Shepherd God give thee
the contentment which thou wishes for, as I desire with a good heart, and not
being able to do more, thou art to take it in good part: and if it may bind
thee to any touch of courtesy, tell me I beseech thee if thou know Astrea,
Phillis and Licides, and if so, declare to me what thou know, Gentle
shepherd, answered he, thy courteous words bind me to pray heaven, in
exchange of that thou wishes me, that it never give thee occasion to bewail
that I mourn for: and moreover, to tell all I know of the persons whom thou
speak of, though the sadness wherein I live, forbid me to meddle in other
affairs then mine own. It may be abouts month and an half since, I came into
the country of Forests, not as did many, to try the fountain of the verity
of Love. For I am but too well assured of my evil, but following the
commandment of a God, which from the flowery banks of that glorious Seyne,
has sent me hither with assurance that I shall find remedy for my
displeasure. And since, my abode in these villages seemed so pleasing and
agreeing to my humor, that I resolved to tarry as long as the heavens would
permit me. That purpose made me desirous to know the being, and the quality of
the most part of the shepherds and shepheardesses of that country; and
because they, of whom you demanded news, are the principallest of that hamlet,
which is beyond the water where I made choice to abide, I can tell you as much
as you desire. I would know, said Celadon, nothing but how they doc? All, said
he, are in good health. It is true, that as virtue always is that which is
most ^ossed, they have had a blow of blind and changing Fortune, which they
feel even at their soul, which is the loss of Celadon, a shepherd whom I
know not, the brother of Li^idas, so bel^ued an^ esteemed of all that river,
that his loss has been felt generally of them all but much more by those
three persons whom you nam^d: for they hold, that is to say, (they that know
somewhat of the worlds ^^cr^ts) t^^s shepherd was servant to Astrea, and that
which hindered them from marriage, was the hatred of their parents. And how,
said they, repl^ed Celadon, was this shepherd lost. They tell it (said he) in
diverse so^ts some in speaking after their opinion, others according to
apparances, and others after the report of some, and so it is told diversely:
for my part, I came into that coast the same day that he was lost, and I
remembered I saw every one so disquieted with that accident, that there was no
man that could give me a good account. At last and that is the more common
opinion, because Phillis, Astrea, and Licidas themselves told it so, being laid
to sleep on the rivers bank, he must needs fall in, and indeed the fair
Astrea did the like, but her clothes saved her. Celadon then judged that they
three had wisely found this invention, lest they might give occasion to many to
speak some evil of it, and was well pleased: for he had always fear that
they would suspect somewhat to the disgrace of Astrea, and therefore holding on
his demands: But said he, what think they is become of him? That he is dead,
answered the desolate shepherd, and assure your self that Astrea carries,
howsoever she dissemble, such a load of grief, that it is incredible how much
they say she is changed. Yet as it is, if Diana be not a let, she is the
fairest of all those that ever I saw, my dear Cleon excepted, but those three
may go jointly. Every other man (added Celadon) will say as much of his
mistress, for Love has this property, not to shut up the eyes as some
believe, but to change the eyes of them that love, into the love it self, and
for that there were never soul loves, never shall a lover find his mistress
foul.

That, answered the shepherd, would have served well, if I had loved Astrea
and Diana, but being not capable of it, I am a judge without exception. And you
that doubt of the beauty of these two shepheardesses, are you a stranger, or
does hatred make you commit an error so contrary to that which you say proceeds
from love?

I am neither of them, said Celadon, but indeed the most miserable and most
afflicted shepherd in the world. That will I never yield to, unless you put me
out of the number: for if your evil come from any other thing then love, your
stripes are not so grievous as mine, for that the heart being the most sensible
part we have, we feel more to the quick the offenses of it. But if your evil
proceed of love, yet must it give place to mine, since of all the evils of
love, there is none like to that which has no hope, having heard say long
ago, where hope may only lick the sore, it is not over grievous. Now this
hope may mingle it self in all those accidents of love, be it disdain, be it
anger, be it jealousy, be it absence; except where death takes place (For
that pale gods with her fatal hand cuts off hope at one blow, when the thread
of life is broken.) But I more miserable then all others, most miserable I go
bewayling an evil without remedy and without hope. Celadon then answered him
with a great sigh, Shepherd how are you deceived in your opinion? I will
confess that the greatest evils are those of love, thereof I am too faithful
a witness: but to say, that they that are without hope are the most grievous,
so far is it that they meri^e not to be felt at all: for it is an act of
folly to be wail a thing that cannot be remedied. And love, what is it
(answered he) but a purefolly. I will not, replied Celadon, enter now into
that discourse, because I would finish the former. But tell me, bewail you
this death for love or no? It is (answered he) for love. Now what is this love,
fayd Celadon, but as I have heard it said of Siluander, and the most
understanding of our shepherds, but a desire of the beauty, which we find to
be such. It is true, said the stranger. But replied Celadon, is this a thing in
a man reasonable, to desire a thing he cannot have? No certainly (said he.)
Now you may see, said Celadon, how the death of Cleon ought to be the remedy
of your evils, for since you confess, that desire ought not to be where hope
cannot reach, and that love is nothing but desire, death which by that which
you say, depriues you of all hope, should by consequent put from you all
desire; and desire dying, it should draw away love into same coffin, and having
no more of love, since the evil you complained of is fallen, I know not how
you can feel it.

The desolate shepherd answered; Be it love or hatred, so it is, that it is
truer then I can tell you, that my evil is most extreme. And for that Celadon
would have replied, he that could not abide to be contradicted in that
opinion, thinking that if he endured to hear the contrary reasons, he should
offend the ashes of Cleon, said shepherd; that which is under ^ence is more
certain then that which is in opinion, therefore all the reasons which you
allege, are to give place to that I feel. And thereupon commends him to Pan
and takes another way, and Celadon likewise passes over the river: and because
solitude has this property, to represent most lively either joy or sadness:
being alone, he began to be so handled for the time by his fortune and love,
that he had no cause of torment in him, which was not before his eyes. He was
exempted only of jealousy, yet with such sorrows, that if that monster had
taken hold on him, I know not what armie^ had been able to have faued him. In
these sad thoughts holding on his pace, he found the bridge, over which being
passed, he went against the river, not knowing which way to take, for in any
case he would obey the commandment of Astrea, who had forbid him to come in
her sight until she bad him. At last being come near Boulieu inhabited by the
vestals, he was as surprised with shame for coming so near unawares, from
whence his resolution commanded him to go, and minding to turn, he thrust into
a wood so large, and in some part so fennie, that h^ could hardly get out: this
constrained him to draw nearer the river, for the gravel was less trouble
some to him then the mudde. By fortune, being weary of the long way, he went
about seeking a place wherein he might rest, attending till the night might
give him leave to withdraw himself without meeting of any body, purposing to
go so far where they might never hear news of him: he cast his eye on a cave,
which on the side of the entry was washed by the river, and on the other side
was half covered with some trees and bushes, which by their thickness took
the sight of him from them that passed along that way, and he himself had not
heeded it, had it not been that being constrained to pass along the River, he
found himself before the entry; whither by fortune being got up, and thinking
he might there be well hidden till night, the place pleased him so well, that
he resolved to pass the rest of his sorrowful and disasterous days there,
having a purpose all the day long not to go from the hollow of that Cave. In
this de liberation he began to trim it the best he could, sweeping out all
the rubbish which the river, being great, had brought in. It was nothing but a
little rock, which the water being strong had made hollow by little and
little, and that with great ^ase, because that having at the beginning found it
grauily and tender, it was easily undermined, so that the diue^s hollowes which
the enforced water had made, rounded it as if it had purposely been done.
Afterward being to lie down, it served for a bed, which was not above three or
four paces off. The room might be some six or seven paces long, and because
it was round, it had the greater breadth. It was a little higher then a man; yet
in some places there hung down some points of the Rock, which the shepherd,
by throwing gravel stones at it, by little and little broke off: and because
by chance it was found hardest at the bottom, the water had not made it ^^llow
in many corners; which gave Celadon cause, breaking with little pain the
coins that were highest, to make a place for a Bed, made out in the hardest of
the Rock, which afterward he covered with moss, which was a great commodity
to him, for that when it rayned foundly upon his Cave, which was of a tender
Rock, it was pierced through by the water, so that he had no other place dry
but that delicious Bed.

Being in short time fitted in this manner, he put off his Coat and his Wallet,
and other Weeds which troubled him most, and tying them together, laid them on
the bed with his Pipe, which always he bare in fashion of a Scarf: but
stripping himself, by chance there fell a paper on the ground, which he knew
full well to come from the fair Astrea. This remembrance being hindered by
nothing which might draw him other where (for nothing was presented to his eyes
but the course of the River) had such power over him, that there was no trouble
befallen him since his banishment, that came not into his memory. At last
raising himself from these thoughts as from a sound sleep, he came to the
door of the Cave, where unfolding the dear Paper which he had in his hand,
after a thousand ardent and amorous kisses, he said: Ah dear Paper, heretofore
the cause of my contentment, and now the occasion of renewing my sorrows, how
is it possible, that you should keep in you the conceit of her that writ you,
without changing it, since the good will, which then was there, is so changed,
that she and I are no more that we were wont to be? Oh what fault is this? A
thing without spirit is constant, and the most fair of spirits is not so. At
this word having opened it, the first thing that presented it self, was the
cipher of Astrea joined with his own. This put him in mind of his happiness
passed so lively in his spirit, that the grief to see himself so fallen,
almost brought him to the term of despair. Ah ciphers, said he, witnesses too
certain of the misfortune, wherein for having been ouer-happy, I now find my
self; how are not you separated, to follow the mind of my fair
shepherdess? for if heretofore she has united you, it was in a time when our
spirits were much more; but now, when our disaster has so cruelly separated
us, how ciphers most happy, remain you so together? It is (as I think) to
show, that the Heavens may rain down on me all their disasterous influences,
but never can make my will differing from Astreas. Hold on then, O faithful
ciphers, that symbol of my intentions, to the end, that after my last hour,
which I wish may be as ready as the first moment that I shall breath, you may
manifest to all those that shall see you, of what quality was the love of the
most unfortunate shepherd that ever loved. And it may be it will happen, if at
the least the Gods have not lost all remembrance of me, that after my death,
for my satisfaction, that fair may find you, and beholding you, she shall
acknowledge, that she did as great wrong to thrust me from her, as she had
reason to tie you together. At this word he sat down on a great stone which
he had drawn from the River to the entry of his Den, and after he had wiped
away his tears, he red the Letter, which was thus.

The Letter of Astrea to Celadon.
GOd permit Celadon, that the assurance which you give me of your love, may
continue as long with me, as I yield supply of affection to you, and to
believe, that I hold you more dear then if you were my brother, and that even
to my Tomb I shall be yours.


These few words of Astrea were cause of much evil to Celadon; for after he
had often red them, he was so far from finding any asswagement, that on the
contrary it did but more enuenome his soar: so that it called to his memory by
one and by one all the favors this shepherdess had done him; which made him
lament so dolefully, that had not the night come upon him, he could hardly
have given truce to his eyes, which rayned down that which the tongue bewailed
and the heart fuffered. But the darkness causing him to go into his Cave,
interrupted for some while his sad thoughts, and permitted his body, wearied
with his sorrows, and with the length of the way, to take some rest at least
by sleep.

Now twice had the day given place to the night, before this shepherd
remembered to eat, for his sad thoughts busied him so, and the melancholy so
filld his stomach, that he had no appetite to other victuals then that which
the remembrance of his sorrows could prepare, softened with so many tears,
that his eyes seemed two heads of Fountains: and had it not been for fear of
offending the Gods in suffering his own death, and much rather, that of
loosing by his death that fair Idea which he had of Astrea in his heart,
without doubt he would have been glad so to end the sad course of his life.
But seeing himself so restrained, he goes to the Wallet, which Leonide had
well furnished, the provision whereof lasted him many days, for he did eat as
little as he could. At last, he was forced to run to herbs, and to the
roots that were most tender. He found not far off a Fountain, which
abounded with Watercresses, which was his most certain and delicious food:
for knowing where to find that with which he might live, he employed his time
but on his sad thoughts, and they gave him so faithful company, that as they
could not be without him, so no more could he be without them.

So long as the day lasted, if he saw no body about his little Lodging, he
would walk along on the gravel, and there he often engraued on the tender
barks of young Trees the subject of his sorrows, sometimes his cipher and
Astreas, and when he alighted on them interlaced together, suddenly he would
deface them, and say, Thou deceiuest thy self Celadon, this is no more the
season that these ciphers were allowed thee: The more constant thou art, the
more to thy disadvantage are all things changed. Deface, deface miserable man,
that ouer-happie testimony of thy good time passed: and if thou will set down
with thy cipher that which pleases her most, set down thy mark of tears, of
pains, and of death.

With such speeches Celadon reprehended himself, if at any time he forget^
himself in his thoughts. But when the night comes, it is then that all his
displeasures touch him to the quick in his memory: for darkness has this
property, that it makes the imagination more strong. Moreover, he never
returned home but when it was far night: if the Moon shone, he passed the
night under some Trees; where often overcome with sleep before he was aware,
he found himself the next morning.

So went this sad Shepherd drawing on his life, which in few days made him so
pale and lean, that one might hardly know him: and himself sometimes going to
drink at the next Fountain, was astonished, when he saw his Figure in the
Water, as being brought to that pass, that he could not long live. His beard
could not make him look grimme, for he had none as yet: but his hair, which
was much grown; the leanenesse, which had changed the roundenesse of his face,
and made his nose long; and sadness, which had driven out of his eyes that
lively brightness, which at other times had made him so gracious; now made him
become quite other then he was wont to be. Ah, if Astrea had seen him in that
case, what joy and contentment would the pain of that faithful Shepherd have
given her, knowing by so assured a testimony, how truly she was beloved of the
most faithful and most perfect Shepherd of Lignon*

FINIS.

