THE SVBSTANCE OF THAT WHICH WAS DELIVERED IN A SERmon before the Commons House
of Parliament, in St. MARGARETS Church at Westminster, the 18, of February,
1620.

By JAMES VSSHER, PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE University of DVELIN, in Ireland.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, for John Bartlet: and are to be sold at
the sign of the gilded Cup, in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside. 1621.

TO THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY of the Commons House of Parliament.
IT pleased this Honorable Assembly to require my service, in preaching at
that late religious meeting of yours, for the receiving of the holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. I was afterward also sent unto by the like authority, to
publish that which (according to my poor ability) I then delivered. And
although in respect of my self, and of my want of time to prosecute such a
subject, I could wish I had been spared from such a task: yet rather then the
expectation, and express signification of the desire of the representative
body of the whole Comminalty of the Kingdom should rest unsatisfied; I have
yielded to commit this unto the disposing and direction of them, for whose
sakes it was at first undertaken. Opprimi enim me onere officij malui, quam id,
Cic.
quod mihi cum fide semel impositum fuit, propter infirmitatem animi deponere.
The very words which then I uttered, I am not able to present unto you: the
substance of the matter I have truly laid down, though in some places (as it
fell out) somewhat contracted, in others a little more enlarged. Whatsoever it
is, I wholly submit it unto your grave censures: and so beseeching the Lord to
give you prosperous success in all your worthy endeavors for the service of
God, his Majesty and your Country, I rest

Yours in all Christian duty to be commanded, JAMES VSSHER.

1. COR. 10. Verse. 17. We being many, are one bread, and one body: for we are
all partakers of that one bread.


OTher entrance I need not make unto my speech at this time, then that which
the Apostle himself presents unto me in the verse next but one going before
my Text: I speak to wise men. The more unwise might I deem my self to be,
who being so conscious unto my self of my great weakness, durst adventure to
discover the same before so grave and judicious an Auditory; but that this
consideration does somewhat support me, that no great blame can light herein
upon me, but some aspersion thereof must reflect upon your selves, who
happened to make so evil a choice; the more facile I expect you to be in a
cause, wherein you your selves are some ways interested.

The special cause of your assembling at this time, is, first, that you who
profess the same truth, may join in one body, and partake together of the
same blessed Communion: and then, that such as adhere unto false worship, may
be discovered and avoided: You in your wisdom discerning this holy Sacrament
to be, as it were, ignis probationis, which would both congregare homogenea,
and segregare heterogenea, (as in Philosophy we use to speak) both conioyne
those that be of the same, and dis-ioyne such as be of a differing kind and
disposition. And to this purpose have I made choice of this present Text:
wherein the Apostle makes our partaking of the Lords Table to be a testimony,
not only of the union and communion which we have betwixt our selves, and
with our Head, (which he does in the express words, which I have read) but
also of our disunion and separation from all idolatrous worship: as appears
by the application hereof unto his maine drift and intendment, laid down in
the 14. and 21. verses.

The effect therefore of that which Saint Paul in express terms here
delivers, is the Communion of Saints: which consists of two parts; the
fellowship which they have with the Body, laid down in the beginning; and the
fellowship which they have with the Head, laid down in the end of the verse:
both which are thus explained by Saint John: That which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh.
1.3. Let them therefore that walk in darkness, brag as much as they list of
their good-fellowship: this blessed Apostle assures us, that such only as do
walk in the light, 1. Ioh. 1.6, 7.
have fellowship one with another; even as they have fellowship with God, and
Jesus Christ his Son, whose blood shall cleanse them from all sin. And to
what better company can a man come, Heb. 12.23, 24.
than to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are
enrolled in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood
of sprinkling, which speaks better things then that of Abel? No fellowship
(doubtless) is comparable to this Communion of Saints.

To begin therefore with the first part thereof; as the Apostle in the third to
the Galatians makes our being baptized into Christ, Gal. 3.27, 28.
to be a testimony that we are all one in Christ: so does he here make our
partaking of that one bread, to be an evidence that we also are all one bread,
and one body in him. And to the same purpose, in the twelfth Chapter following,
he propounds both our Baptism and our drinking of the Lords Cup, as seals
of the spiritual conjunction of us all into one mystical body. 1. Cor. 12.12,
13.
For as the body is one, (says he) and has many members, and all the members
of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. For by one
Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be bond or free: and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
Afterward he adds, that we are the body of Christ, and members in
particular: and in another place also, Ibid. verse. 27.
that We being many, are one body in Christ, Romans 12.5.
and every one members one of another.

Now the use which he teaches us to make of this wonderful conjunction
(whereby we are made members of Christ, and members one of another) is
twofold: 1. That there should be no schism in the body. 2. That the members
should have the same care one for another, 1. Cor. 12.25. For preventing of
Schism, he exhorts us in the fourth to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.3-6.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: and to make this bond
the firmer, he puts us in mind of one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in us all: by this multiplication of unities declaring unto
us, that the knots whereby we are tied together, are both in number more, and
of far greater moment, then that matters of smaller consequence should
disseuer us: and therefore that we should stand fast in one spirit, with one
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified
by our adversaries, Philip. chap. 1. verse. 27, 28.

But howsoever God has thus marshalled his Church in a goodly order, Cant. 6.4.
terrible as an army with banners: yet, such is the disorder of our nature,
that many for all this break rank, and the enemy labors to breed division
in Gods House, that so his Kingdom might not stand. Nay, often times it
comes to pass, Cant. 5.7.
that the Watchmen themselves, who were appointed for the safegarding of the
Church, prove in this kind to be the smiters and wounders of her: and from
among them who were purposely ordained in the Church, for the bringing of men
Veteres scripturas scrutans, inuenire non possum, scidisse Ecclesiam and de
domo Dei populos seduxisse, praeter illos qui Sacerdotes a Deo positi fuerant
and Prophetae. Hieron.
into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, oven from
among those, some do arise, that speak perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them.

Thus we find in the Ecclesiastical History, Ephesians. 4 13. Act. 20.30.
that after the death of Julian the Apostata, (...). Sozo. men. lib. 6. hist.
Ecclesiast. cap. 4.
questions and disputes concerning matters of doctrine were freshly set afoot
by those who were set over the Churches. Whereupon Sozomen makes this grave
observation: that (...). Ibid.
the disposition of men is such, that when they are wronged by others, they are
at agreement among themselves; but when they are freed of evils from abroad,
then they make insurrections one against another. Which as we find to be too
true by the late experience of our neighbor Churches in the Low Countries: so
are we to consider with the Wise man, Eccles. 3.15.
that What has been, is now, and that which is to be, has already been: and
be not so inquisitiue, Eccles. 6.10.
why the former days were better then these? for we do not enquire wisely
concerning this. When like troubles were in the Church heretofore, Isidorus
Pelusiota, an ancient Father, moves the question, (...). Jsidor. Pelus lib. 4.
epist. 133.
What a man should do in this case? and makes answer, that If it be
possible, we should mend it, but if that may not be, we should hold our
peace.

The Apostles resolution, I think, may give sufficient satisfaction in this
point, to all that have moderate and peaceable minds. Phil. 3.15, 16.
If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you: nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same thing. It is not to be looked for, that all good
men should agree in all things: neither is it fit that we should (as our
Adversaries do) put the truth unto compromise, and to the saying of an
Achitophel, whose counsel must be accepted, as if a man had inquired at the
Oracle of God. We all agree that the Scriptures of God are the perfect rule of
our faith: we all consent in the maine grounds of Religion drawn from thence:
we all subscribe to the articles of doctrine agreed upon in the Synod of the
year 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and the establishing
of consent touching true Religion. Hitherto, by Gods mercy, have we already
attained; thus far therefore let us mind the same thing: let not every
wanton wit be permitted to bring what fancies he list, into the Pulpit, and to
disturb things that have been well ordered. Romans 16.17.
I beseech you, brethren (says the Apostle) mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

If in some other things we be otherwise minded, than others of our brethren
are; let us bear one with another, until God shall reveal the same thing
unto us: and howsoever we may see cause why we should dissent from others in
matter of opinion; yet let us remember, that that is no cause why we should
break the Kings peace, and make a rent in the Church of God. A thing deeply
to be thought of by the Ismaels of our time, whose hand is against every man,
Genesis 16.12.
and every man's hand against them; Gal. 5.15.
who bite and devour one another, until they be consumed one of another; who
forsake the fellowship of the Saints, and Vos ergo quare separatione sacrilega
pacis vinculum dirupistis? August. lib. 2. de Baptismo contra Donat. (...). I
say and protest, that to make schism in the Church, is no less evil, than to
fall into heresy. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 11.
by a sacrilegious separation break this bond of peace. Little do these men
consider, how precious the peace of the Church ought to be in our eyes (to be
redeemed with a thousand of our lives) and of what dangerous consequence the
matter of schism is unto their own souls. For howsoever the schismaticke
secundum affectum (as the Schoolmen speak) in his intention and wicked
purpose, takes away unity from the Church; even as he that hates God, does
take away goodness from him, as much as in him lies: yet secundum effectum,
in truth and in very deed, he takes away the unity of the Church only from
himself: that is, he cutteth himself off from being united with the rest of
the body; and being disseuered from the body, how is it possible that he should
retain communion with the Head?

To conclude therefore this first use which we are to make of our communion
with the Body: let us call to mind the exhortation of the Apostle: Above all
things put on love, Col. 3.14, 15.
which is the bond of perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to the which also ye are called in one Body. Behold how good and
pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity: Psalm. 133.1.
what a goodly thing it is to behold such an honorable Assembly as this is,
Psalm. 122 3.
to be as a house that is compact together in it self; holding fit
correspondence with the other part of this great body, and due subordination
unto their and our Head! Such as wish not well to the public good, and would
rejoice at the ruin of our State, long for nothing more, then that dissensions
should arise here, betwixt the members mutually, and betwixt them and the Head.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. They know full well, Math.
12.25.
that every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation; and
every house divided against it self, shall not stand: nor do they forget the
Politicians old rule, Divide and impera, Make a division, and get the dominion.
The more need have we to look herein unto our selves; who cannot be
ignorant how dolorous Solutio continui, and how dangerous Ruptures prove to be
unto our bodies. If therefore there be any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.
fulfill our joy: that ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind; and doing nothing through strife or vaineglory. Remember
that as often as we come unto the Lords Table, so often do we enter into new bonds
of peace, and tie our selves with firmer knots of love together: this blessed
Communion being a sacred seal not only of the union which we have with our
Head by faith, but also of our conjunction with the other members of the body
by love.

Whereby as we are admonished to maintain unity among ourselves, that there be
no schism or division in the body: so are we also further put in mind, that
the members should have the same care one for another. For that is the second
use which Saint Paul teaches us to make hereof, in 1. Cor. 12.26. which he
further amplifieth in the verse next following, by the mutual sympathy and
fellow-feeling which the members of the same body have one with another. For
whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it: and then he adds: Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular. Showing unto us thereby, that as we
are all Ephesians. 3.6.
(...), concorporated (as it were) and made copartners of the promise in
Christ: so we should have one another in our hearts, 2. Cor. 7.3.
(...), to die and live together. And hereupon is that exhortation in the 13.
to the Hebrews grounded: Heb. 13.3.
Remember them that are in in bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the Body. It being a perilous sign
that we be no lively members of that body, if we be not sensible of the
calamities that lie upon our afflicted brethren. We know the Woe that is
pronounced against such as are at ease in Sion, Amos 6.1, 6, 7.
and are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph: with the judgment
following. Therefore now shall they go captive, with the first that go
captive. We know the Angels bitter curse against the inhabitants of Meroz.
Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof: because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the
mighty. Not as if the Lord did stand in need of our help, or were not able,
without our assistance, to maintain his own cause; but that hereby he would
make trial of our readiness to do him service, and prove the sincerity of
our love. If we hold our peace and sit still at this time, Ester 4 14.
deliverance shall arise to Gods Church from another place: but let us look
that the destruction do not light upon us and ours.

I need not make any application of that which I have spoken: the face of
Christendom, so miserably rent and torn, as it is at this day, cannot but
present it self as a rufull spectacle unto all our eyes, and (if there be any
bowels in us) stir up compassion in our hearts. Neither need I to be earnest
in exciting you to put your helping hands to the making up of these breaches:
your forwardness herein has prevented me, and in stead of petitioning (for
which I had prepared my self) has ministered unto me matter of thanksgiving.
A good work is at all times commendable: but the doing of it in fit time,
adds much to the luster thereof, and makes it yet more goodly. The season of
the year is approaching, wherein Kings go forth to battle: 2. Sam. 11.1.
the present supply and offer of your Subsidy was done in a time most
seasonable: being so much also the more acceptable, as it was granted not
grudgingly, or of necessity, but freely, and with a willing mind. God loves a
cheerful giver: 2. Cor. 9.7, 8.
and he is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work.

And thus being by your goodness so happily abridged of that which I intended
further to have urged from the conjunction which we have with the Body: I pass
now unto the second part of the Communion of Saints, which consists in the
union which we all have with one Head. For Christ our Head is the maine
foundation of this heavenly union. Out of him there is nothing but confusion;
without him we are nothing but disordered heaps of rubbish: but in him all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord; and in
him are we builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians.
2.21, 22. Of our selves we are but lost sheep, scattered and wandering upon
every Mountain. From him it is, that there is one fold, and one shepherd,
Ioh. 10.16. God having purposed in himself to gather together in one all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in
him, Ephesians. 1.10. This is the effect of our Saviors prayer, Ioh. 17.21. That
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us, etc. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one. And this is it which we find so often repeated by Saint Paul: We being
many, are one body in Christ, Romans 12.5. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.28. And in the Text we have in hand: We being many, are one bread, and one
body. Why? because we are all partakers of that one bread: namely, of that
bread, whereof he had said in the words immediately going before: The bread
which we break, 1. Cer. 10.16.
is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Under the name of Bread therefore here is comprehended both Panis Domini, and
Panis Dominus; not only the bread of the Lord, but also the Lord himself, who
is that living Bread which came down from heaven, Ioh. 6.51. For as Saint
Peter, 1. Pet 3.21.
saying that Baptism does save us, understands thereby both the outward part
of that Sacrament, (for he expressly calls it a figure) and more then that
too (as appears by the explication presently adjoined: not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh) even the inward purging of our consciences by virtue
of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ: so Saint Paul here making the
reason of our union to be our partaking all of this one bread, has not so
much respect unto the external bread in the Sacrament (though he exclude not
that neither) as unto the true and heavenly Bread figured thereby; whereof the
Lord himself pronounces in the sixth of John: Ioh. 8.32, 51.
The bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. And (to show that by partaking of this bread, that wonderful union we
speak of, is effected:) He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Ioh.
6.56.
dwells in me, and I in him.

It is a lamentable thing to behold, how this holy Sacrament, which was
ordained by Christ to be a bond whereby we should be knit together in unity,
is by Satan's malice, and the corruption of man's disposition, so strangely
perverted the contrary way; that it is made the principal occasion of that
woeful distraction which we see amongst Christians at this day, and the very
fuel of endless strifes, and implacable contentions. And for as much as these
mischiefs have proceeded from the inconsiderate confounding of those things
which in their own nature are as different as may be: for the cleerer
distinguishing of matters, we are in the first place to consider, that a
Sacrament taken in his full extent, comprehends two things in it: that which
is outward and visible, which the Schools call properly Sacramentum, (in a
more strict acception of the word:) and that which is inward and invisible,
which they term rem Sacramenti, the principal thing exhibited in the
Sacrament. Thus in the Lords Supper, the outward thing which we see with our
eyes, is bread and wine, the inward thing which we apprehend by faith is, the
body and blood of Christ: in the outward part of this mystical action, which
reaches to that which is Sacramentum only, we receive this body and blood but
sacramentally; in the inward, which contains rem, the thing it self in it,
we receive them really: and consequently the presence of these in the one is
relative and symbolicall; in the other, real and substantial.

To begin then with that which is symbolicall and relative: we may observe out
of the Scripture, which says, that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision,
Romans (...).
a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had being uncircumcised;
that Sacraments have a twofold relation to the things whereof they be
Sacraments: the one of a sign, the other of a seal. Signs, we know, are
relatiuely united unto the things which they do signify; and in this respect
are so nearly conjoined together, that the name of the one is usually
communicated unto the other. This cup is the new Testament, or, the new
Covenant, says our Savior in the institution of the holy Supper, Luke 22.20.
This is my Covenant, says God in the institution of Circumcision in the old
Testament, Genesis 17.10. but how it was his Covenant, he explaneth in the verse
immediately following: Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskinne; and it
shall be a SIGN of the Covenant betwixt me and you. So words being the signs
of things, no sooner is the sound of the word conveyed to our ears, but the
notion of the thing signified thereby is presented unto our mind: and
thereupon in the speech of the Scripture nothing is more ordinary, then by the
term of So the ten. Commandments are (...) Exodus 24.28. (...), no thing. Luke
1.37. etc.
Word to note a thing. We read in the fourth of the first of Samuel, that the
Philistims were afraid and said, God is come into the Camp, verse. 7. when the
Israelites brought thither the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord of hosts, which
dwells between the Cherubims, verse. 4. and yet was that no other but this
relative kind of presence whereof now we speak: in respect whereof also the
shewbread is in the Hebrew named (...) the bread of faces, or, the presence
bread. We see with us, the room wherein the Kings chair, and other ensigns
of State are placed, is called the Chamber of presence, although the King
himself be not there personally present: and as the rude and undutiful
behavior of any in that place, or the offering of any dis-respect to the Kings
pourtraicture, or to the Arms Royal, or to any other thing that has relation
to his Majesty, is taken as a dishonor done unto the King himself: so here,
he that eats the bread, and drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily, is
accounted guilty of offering indignity to the body and blood of the Lord. 1.
Cor. 11.27.


In this sort we acknowledge Sacraments to be signs; but bare signs we deny
them to be: seals they are, as well as signs of the Covenant of grace. As
it was therefore said of John the Baptist, that he was a Prophet, Math. 11.9.
and more then a Prophet: so must we say of Sacraments, that they be signs,
and more then signs; even pledges and assurances of the interest which we
have in the heavenly things that are represented by them. He that has in his
chamber ye picture of the French King, has but a bare sign; which possibly
may make him think of that King when he looks on it, but shows not that
he has any manner of interest in him. It is otherwise with him that has
the Kings great Seal for the confirmation of the title that he has unto all
the lands and liuelihood which he does enjoy. And as here, the wax that is
affixed to those letters Patents, howsoever for substance it be the very same
with that which is to be found every where, yet being applied to this use, is
of more worth to the Patentee, then all the wax in the country beside: so
stands it with the outward elements in the matter of the Sacrament. The bread
and wine are not changed in substance from being the same with that which is
served at ordinary tables: but in respect of the sacred use whereunto they are
consecrated, such a change is made, that now they differ as much from common
bread and wine, as heaven from earth. Neither are they to be accounted barely
significatiue, but truly exhibitiue also of those heavenly things whereto they
have relation: as being appointed by God to be a means of conueying the same
unto us, and putting us in actual possession thereof. So that in the use of
this holy ordinance, as verily as a man with his bodily hand and mouth
receives the earthly creatures; so verily does he with his spiritual hand and
mouth (if any such he have) receive the body and blood of Christ.

And this is that real and substantial presence, which we affirmed to be in
the inward part of this sacred action. For the better conceiving of which
mystery, we are to inquire, first, what the thing is which we do here
receive; secondly, how and in what manner we are made partakers of it. Touching
the first, the truth which must be held, is this: that we do not here receive
only the benefits that flow from Christ; but the very body and blood of
Christ, that is, Christ himself crucified. For as none can be made partaker
of the virtue of the bread and wine to his bodily sustenance, unless he first
do receive the substance of those creatures: so neither can any participate in
the benefits arising from Christ to his spiritual relief, except he first
have communion with Christ himself. We must 1. Ioh. 5.12.
have the Son, before we have life: and therefore Ioh. 6.57.
eat him we must, (as himself speaks) that is, as truly be made partakers
of him, as we are of our ordinary food, if we will live by him. As there is a
giving of him on Gods part (for Esa. 9.6.
unto us a Son is given;) so there must be a receiving of him on our part:
for Ioh. 1.12.
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God.
And as we are 1. Cor. 1.9.
called by God unto the communion of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: so if we
do hear his voice, and not harden our hearts by unbelief, we are indeed
made Heb. 3.14.
partakers of Christ. This is that great mystery (for so the Apostle terms
it) of our union with Christ, Ephesians. 5.30, 32.
whereby we are made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: and
this is that eating of the flesh of the Son of man, and drinking of his
blood, which our Savior insisteth so much upon, in the sixth of John.

Where if any man shall demand, (that I may now come unto the second point of
our inquiry) How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Ioh. 6.52.
he must beware that he come not pre-occupied with such dull conceits as they
were possessed withal, who moved that question there; he must not think that
we cannot truly feed on Christ, unless we receive him within our jaws: (for
that is as gross an imagination as that of Nicodemus, who could not conceive
how a man could be borne again, Ioh. 2.4.
unless he should enter the second time into his mothers womb:) but must
consider that the eating and drinking which our Savior speaks of, must be
answerable to the hungring and thirsting, for the quenching whereof this
heavenly Banquet is provided. Mark well the words which he uses, toward the
beginning of his discourse concerning this argument. Ioh. 6.35, 36.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst. But I said unto you, that ye also
have seen me, and believe not. And compare them with those in the end: Ioh.
6.63, 64.
It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. But there are some of
you that believe not. Now observe, that such as our hungring is, such is our
eating. But every one will confess, that the hunger here spoken of, is not
corporal, but spiritual: Why then should any man dream here of a corporal
eating? Again, the corporal eating, if a man might have it, would not avail
any thing to ye slaking of this hunger; nay, we are expressly told, that the
flesh thus taken (for so we must understand it) profits nothing, a man should
never be the better, nor one jot the holier, nor any whit further from the
second death, if he had filled his belly with it. But that manner of feeding on
this flesh, which Christ himself commends unto us, is of such profit, that
it preserves the eater from death, Ioh. 6.50, 51, 54, 58.
and makes him to live for ever. It is not therefore such an eating, that
every man who brings a bodily mouth with him may attain unto: but it is of a
far higher nature; namely, a spiritual uniting of us unto Christ, whereby he
dwells in us, and we live by him.

If any do further inquire, how it is possible that any such union should be,
seeing the body of Christ is in heaven, and we are upon earth? I answer, that
if the manner of this conjunction were carnal and corporal, it would be
indeed necessary that the things conjoined should be admitted to be in the
same place: but it being altogether spiritual and supernatural, no local
presence, no physical nor mathematical continuity or contiguity is any way
requisite thereunto. It is sufficient for the making of a real union in this
kind, that Christ and we (though never so far distant in place each from
other) be knit together by those spiritual ligatures, which are intimated
unto us in the words alleged out of the sixth of John: to wit, the quickening
Spirit descending downward from the Head, to be in us a fountain of
supernatural life; and a lively faith (wrought by the same Spirit) ascending
from us upward, to lay fast hold upon him, who having by himself purged our
sins, sits on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 1.3.


First therefore, for the communion of the Spirit, which is the ground and
foundation of this spiritual union; let us call to mind what we have read in
Gods Book: that Christ, the second Adam, was made 1. Cor. 15.45.
a quickening spirit: and that he Ioh. 5.21.
quickens whom he will: that unto him Ioh. 3.34.
God has given the Spirit without measure: and Ioh. 1.16.
of his fullness have all we received: that 1. Cor. 6.17.
he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit: and that 1. Ioh. 3.24.4.13.
hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
his Spirit. By all which it does appear, that the mystery of our union with
Christ consists mainly in this: that the selfsame Spirit which is in him,
as in the Head, is so derived from him into every one of his true members, that
thereby they are animated and quickened to a spiritual life. We read in the
first of Ezekiel, of four living creatures, and of four wheels standing by
them. When those went, (says the Text) these went; and when those stood, these
stood: and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up
over against them. He that should behold such a vision as this, would easily
conclude by yt which he saw, that some invisible bands there were by which
these wheels and living creatures were joined together, howsoever none did
outwardly appear unto the eye: and the holy Ghost, to give us satisfaction
herein, discovers the secret, by yielding this for the reason of this
strange connection; that the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels,
Ezekiel. 1.21. From whence we may infer, that things may truly be conjoined
together, though the manner of the conjunction be not corporal: and that
things distant in place may be united together, by having the spirit of the one
communicated unto the other.

Nay, if we mark it well, we shall find it to be thus in every of our own
bodies: that the formal reason of the union of the members consists not in
the continuity of the parts (though that also be requisite to the unity of a
natural body:) but in the animation thereof by one and the same spirit. If we
should suppose a body to be as high as the heavens, that the head thereof
should be where Christ our Head is, and the feet where we his members are: no
sooner could that head think of moving one of the toes, but instantly the
thing would be done, without any impediment given by that huge distance of the
one from the other. And why? because the same soul that is in the head, as in
the fountain of sense and motion, is present likewise in the lowest member of
the body. But if it should so fall out, that this, or any other member proved
to be mortified, it presently would cease to be a member of that body; the
corporal conjunction and continuity with the other parts notwithstanding. And
even thus is it in Christ; although in regard of his corporal presence, the
heaven must receive him, until the times of the restitution of all things:
Act. 3.21.
yet is he here with us always, even unto the end of the world, in respect of
the presence of his Spirit; Math. 28.20.
by the vital influence whereof from him, as from the Head, the whole body is
fitly joined together, Ephesians. 4.16.
and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part. Which quickening Spirit if it be wanting
in any, no external communion with Christ or his Church, can make him a true
member of this mystical body: this being a most sure principle, that He which
has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his, Romans 8.9.

Now among all the graces that are wrought in us by the Spirit of Christ, the
soul (as it were) of all the rest, and that whereby Habak. 2.4. Romans 1.17.
Gal. 3.11. Heb. 10.38.
the just does live, is Faith. Gal. 5.5.
For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith, says
S. Paul to the Galatians. And again: Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. By faith it is, that we do Ioh. 1.12.
receive Christ: and so likewise Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. Faith therefore is that spiritual
mouth in us, whereby we eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, that is, (as the Apostle expresses it without the trope) Heb. 3.14.
are made partakers of Christ: he being by this means as truly, and every
ways as effectually made ours, as the meat and drink which we receive into
our natural bodies.

But you will say, If this be all the matter, what do we get by coming to the
Sacrament? seeing we have faith, and the quickening Spirit of Christ before we
come thither. To this I answer: that the Spirit is received in diverse
measures, and faith bestowed upon us in different degrees; by reason whereof
our conjunction with Christ may every day be made straiter, and the hold which
we take of him firmer. To receive the Spirit Ioh. 3.34.
not by measure, is the privilege of our Head: we that Ioh. 1.16.
receive out of his fullness, have not our portion of grace delivered unto us
all at once, but must daily look for Phil. 1.19.
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. So also, while we are in this world,
Romans 1.17.
the righteousness of God is revealed unto us from faith to faith, that is,
from one degree and measure of it to another: and consequently, we must still
labor to 1. These. 3.10.
perfect that which is lacking in our faith, and evermore pray with the
Apostles, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith. Colos. 2.6, 7.
As we have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so must we walk in
him; rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith: that we Ephesians.
4.15.
may grow up into him in all things, which is the Head. And to this end God
has ordained public officers in his Church, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ: and has accordingly 2. Cor. 3.6.
made them able Ministers of the Spirit that quickens, and 1. Cor. 3.5.
Ministers by whom we should believe, even as the Lord shall give to every man.
When we have therefore received Gal. 3.2.
the Spirit and Ioh. 17.20.
Faith (and so spiritual life) by their ministry, we are not there to rest;
but 1. Pet. 2.2.
as newborn babes we must desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may
grow thereby: and as grown men too, we must desire to be fed at the Lords
Table, that by the strength of that spiritual re^^^^ we may be enabled to do
the Lords work, (...) may continually be nourished up thereby in the life of
grace, unto the life of glory.

Neither must we here with a fleshly eye look upon the meandness of the
outward elements, and have this faithless thought in our hearts, that there is
no likelihood, a bit of bread, and a draught of wine should be able to produce
such heavenly effects as these. For so we should prove our selves to be no
wiser than Naaman the Syrian was, 2 King. 5.12, 13.
who having received direction from the man of God, that he should wash in
Jordan seven times, to be cleansed of his Leprosy; replied with indignation,
Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of
Israel? May I not wash in them, and be clean? But as his servants did soberly
advise him then, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would
thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and
be clean? So give me leave to say unto you now: If the Lord had commanded us
to do some great thing, for the attaining of so high a good; should not we
willingly have done it? How much rather then, when he bids us to eat the
bread, and drink the wine that he has provided for us at his own Table, that
by his blessing thereupon we may grow in grace, and be preserved both in body
and soul unto everlasting life?

True it is indeed, these outward creatures have no natural power in them to
effect so great a work as this is, no more then the water of Jordan had to
recover the Leper: but the work wrought by these means, is supernatural; and
God has been pleased in the dispensation both of the Word and of the
Sacraments so to ordain it, that these heavenly treasures should be presented
unto us in earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 4.7.
that the excellency of the power might be of God. As therefore in the
preaching of the Gospel, the Minister does not dare verba, and beat the air
with a fruitless sound, but the words that he speaks unto us are Spirit and
life; 1. Cor. 1.21.
God being pleased by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe:
so likewise in the administration of the Lords Supper, he does not feed us with
bare bread and wine, but if we have the life of faith in us, (for still we must
remember that this Table is provided not for the dead, but for the living) and
come worthily, 1. Cor. 10.16.
the Cup of blessing which he blesses, will be unto us the communion of the
blood of Christ, and the bread which he breaks, the communion of the body of
Christ: of which precious body and blood we being really made partakers, (that
is, in truth and indeed, and not in imagination only) although in a spiritual
and not a corporal manner; the Lord does grant us, Ephesians. 3.16, 19.
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man, that we may be filled with all the fullness of God.
For the Sacraments (as well as the Word) be a part of that ministration of the
Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.6, 8.
which is committed to the Ministers of the New Testament: for as much as by
one Spirit, (as before we have heard from the Apostle) we have been all
baptized into one body, 1. Cor. 12.13.
and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.

And thus have I finished the first part of my task, my Congregatio
homogeneorum, (as I call it) the knitting together of those that appertain to
the same body, both with their fellovv-members, and with their Head: which is
the thing laid down in the express words of my Text. It remains now that
I proceed to the Apostles application hereof unto the argument he has in
hand, which is Segregatio heterogeneorum, a disseuering of those that be not
of the same communion; that the faithful may not partake with Idolaters, by
countenancing, or any way joining with them in their ungodly courses. For
that this is the maine scope at which S. Paul aims in his treating here of
the Sacrament, is evident both by that which goes before in the 19. verse.
Wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry: and that which follovveth in
the 21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils; ye cannot
be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of devils.

Whereby we may collect thus much, that as the Lords Supper is a seal of our
conjunction one with another, and with Christ our Head; so is it an evidence
of our dis-iunction from Idolaters, binding us to dis-auovv all communion with
them in their false worship. And indeed, the one must necessarily follovv upon
the other: considering the nature of this heinous sin of Idolatry is such,
that it can no ways stand with the fellowship which a Christian man ought to
have, both with the Head, and with the body of the Church. To this purpose, in
the sixth of the second to the Corinthians we read thus: What agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? 2. Cor. 6.16, 17
for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Wherefore come out from among the^, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you. And in the 2. Chap. of
the Epistle to the Colossians: Let no man beguile you of your reward, Col.
2.1^, 19.
in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those
things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind: and not
holding the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
In which words the Apostle shows unto us, that such as under pretense of
humility were drawn to the worshipping of Angels, did not hold the Head, and
consequently could not retain communion with the body, which receives his
whole growth from thence. Answerably whereunto the Fathers assembled out of
diverse provinces of Asia in the Synod held at Laodicea, (not far from the
Colossians) did solemnly conclude, that Council. Laodicen. Can. 35. (...), that
is, (...): as Theodoret expounds these words of the Canon, in 2. and 3. cap.
epist. ad Coloss.
Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and go and invoke
Angels, and pronounced an anathema against any that should be found to do so,
(...).
because (say they) he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
and given himself to Idolatry: declaring plainly, that by this idolatrous
invocation of Angels, a discession was made both from the Church of God, as
they note in the beginning, and from Christ the Head of the Church, as they
observe in the end of their Canon.

For the further understanding of this particular, it will not be amiss to
consider what Theodoret, a famous Bishop of the ancient Church, has written of
this matter in his Commentary upon the second to the Colossians, They that
defended the Law (says he) induced the^ also to worship the Angels, saying
that the Law was given by them. And this vice continued in Phrygia, and Pisidia
for a long time: for which cause also the Synod assembled in Laodicea the
chief City of Phrygia, forbad them by a Law, to pray unto Angels. And even to
this day among them and their borderers, there are Oratories of Saint Michael
to be seen. This therefore did they counsel should be done, using humility,
and saying, that the God of all was invisible, and inaccessible, and
incomprehensible; and that it was fit men should get Gods favor by the means
of Angels. And this is it which the Apostle says, In humility, and worshipping
of Angels. Thus far Theodoret, whom Cardinal Baronius discerning to come
somewhat close unto him, and to touch the Idolatry of the Popish crew a little
to the quick, leaves the poor shifts wherewith his companions labor to
obscure the light of this testimony, and tells us plainly, that Ex his
videas (quod necessario dicendum est) Theodoretum haud satis seliciter (eius
pace sit dictum) assecutum esse Pauli verborum sensum. Baron. Annal. tom. 1.
ann. 60. sect. 20.
Theodoret, by his leave, did not well understand the meaning of Paul's words:
and Incaute nimis, quae a Catholicis essent antiquitus instituta, haereticis,
quorum nulla esset memoria, tribuens. Id. ibid.
that those Oratories of Saint Michael were erected anciently by Catholics,
and not by those Heretics which were condemned in the Council of Laodicea, as
he mistook the matter. As if any wise man would be persuaded upon his bare
word, that the memory of things done in Asia so long since, should be more
fresh in Rome at this day, then in the time of Theodoret, who lived twelve
hundred years ago.

Yet must I needs confess, that he shows a little more modesty herein then
Bellarmine his fellow-Cardinall does; who would make us believe, that the place
in the nineteenth of the Revelation, where the Angel says to Saint John that
would have worshipped him, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow-seruant,
Worship God; makes for them; and demands very soberly, Cur nos
reprehendimur, qui facimus quod Ioannes fecit? number melius Joanne norunt
Caluinistae, sintne Angeli adorandi? Bellar. de Sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 1. cap.
14.
why they should be reprehended, who do the same thing that John did? and,
whether the Caluinists knew better then John, whether Angels were to be adored
or no? And as for invocation of them, he tells us, that Hic aperte S. Jacob
Angelum inuocauit. Id. ibid. cap. 19.
Saint Jacob plainly prayed unto an Angel, in the 48. of Genesis, when in
blessing the sons of Joseph, he said, The Angel which delivered me from all
evil, bless those children. Whom for answer we remit to Saint Cyril, (in the
first Chapter of the third book of his Thesaurus) and entreat him to tell us,
how near of kin he is here to those Heretics of whom S. Cyril there
speaks. His words be these: That he does not mean (in that place, Genes.
48.16.) an Angel, as the HERETICS understand it, but the Son of God is
manifest by this: that when he had said, [The Angel,] he presently adds,
[who delivered me from all evils.] Which Saint Cyril presupposes, no good
Christian will ascribe to any but to God alone.

But to come more near yet unto that which is Idolatry most properly: An Idol
(we must understand) in the exact propriety of the term, does signify any
Image; but according to the Ecclesiastical use of the word, it notes such an
Image as is set up for religious adoration. And in this later sense we charge
the adherents of the Church of Rome with gross Idolatry: See for this, the
excellent Homily of the Peril of Idolatry.
because that contrary to Gods express Commandment they are found to be
worshippers of Images. Neither will it avail them here to say, that the
Idolatry forbidden in the Scripture, is that only which was used by Jews and
Pagans. The Apostle indeed in this place dehorting Christians from Idolatry,
propounds the fall of the Jews in this kind before their eyes: 1. Cor.
10.7, 8.
Neither be ye Idolaters, says he, as some of them were. And so does he also
add concerning another sin, in the verse following: Neither let us commit
fornication, as some of them committed. As well then might one plead, that
Jewish or Heathenish fornication were here only reprehended, as Jewish or
Heathenish Idolatry. But as the one is a foul sin, whether it be committed
by Jew, Pagan, or Christian: so if such as profess the Name of Christ, shall
practice that which the Word of God condemns in Jews and Pagans, for
Idolatry, their profession is so far from diminishing, that it augmenteth
rather the heinousness of the crime. Psalm. 135.15.
The Idols of the Heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands, says
the Psalmist: and so the Idols (of Christians, in all likelihood) mentioned in
the Revelation, Revel. 9.20.
are said to be of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood; which
neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. The description of these Idols (we see)
agrees in all points with Popish Images: where is any difference?

The Heathen, say they, held the Images themselves to be gods, which is far
from our thought. Admit, some of the simpler sort of the Heathen did so: what
shall we say of the Jewish Idolaters, (of whom the Apostle here speaks) who
erected the golden Calfe in the Wilderness? Can we think yt they were all so
senseless, as to imagine that the Calfe, which they knew was not at all in
rerum natura, and had no being at that time when they came out of Egypt, should
yet be that God which brought them up out of the land of Egypt? Exodus 32.4.
And for the Heathen: did the Romans and Grecians, when they dedicated in
several places an hundred Images (for example) to the honor of Jupiter, the
king of all their gods, think that thereby they had made an hundred Jupiters?
or when their blocks were so old, that they had need to have new placed in
their stead; did they think by this change of their Images, yt they made change
also of their gods? without question they must so have thought, if they did
take the very Images themselves to be their gods: and yet the Prophet bids us
consider diligently; and we shall find that the Heathen nations did not
change their gods, (Ierem. 2.10, 11.) Nay, what do we meet with, more usually
in the writings of the Fathers, then these answers of the Heathens for
themselves? Deos per simulacra veneramur. Arnob. lib. 6. aduers. Getes.
We worship the gods by the Images. Non ipsa, inquiu^t, timemus; sed eos, ad
quorum imaginem ficta, et quorum nominibus co^secrata sunt. Lact. lib. 2.
divine. institut. ca. 2.
We fear not them, but those to whose image they are made, and to whose names
they are consecrated. Non ego illum lapidem colo. nec illud simulacrum quod est
sine sensu. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
I do not worship that stone, nor that Image which is without sense. Nec
simulacru^ nec daemonium colo; sed per essigiem corporalem eius rei signum
intueor, qua^ colere debeo. Aug. in Psa. 113. c. 2.
I neither worship the Image nor a spirit in it: but by the bodily pourtrature
I do behold the sign of that thing which I ought to worship.

But admit they did not account the Image it self to be God, (will the Papist
further say;) yet were those images set up to represent either things that had
no being, or devils, or false gods; and in that respect were Idols: whereas we
erect Images only to the honor of the true God, and of his servants the
Saints and Angels. To this I might oppose that answer of the Heathen to the
Christians: Non colimus niala daemonia: Angelos quos dicitis, ipsos et nos
colimus, virtutes Dei magni, et ministeria Dei magni. Aug. in Psa. 96.
We do not worship evil spirits: such as you call Angels, those do we also
worship, the powers of the great God, and the Ministers of the great God. and
put them in mind of S. Augustines reply: Vtinam ipsos colere velletis; facile
ab ipsis disceretis non illos colere. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
I would you did worship them; you should easily learn of them not to worship
them. But I will grant unto them, that many of the Idolatrous Jews and
Heathens Images were such as they say they were: yet I deny that all of them
were such, and confidently do avouch, that Idolatry is committed by yielding
adoration to an Image of the true God himself. For proof whereof (omitting
the Idols of Judge. 17.3, 13
Micah, and 2. Kin. 10.16, 29, 31.
Jeroboam, which were erected to the memory of Jehovah the God of Israel; as
also the Athenians superstitious worship of the Trehellius Pollio, in the life
of Claudius, calls the God of Moses, incertum nume^. so does Lucan the god of
the Jews, Incerti Iudaea Dei. As therefore the Jews (by the relation of
Tacitus, li. 2. Hi.) worshipped their God in mount Carmel, non simulacro aut
templo, sed ara tantum: so it might be that the Athenians also did the like,
especially if we consider that their Ara misericordia (which possibly might be
the same with this) is thus described by Statius. lib. 12. Thebaidos: Nulla
aute^ effigies, nulli co^missa metallo Forma Dei; me^tes habitare et pectora
gaudet.
Unknown God, Act. 17.23. if, as the common use of Idolaters was, they added
an Image to their Altar:) I will content my self with these two places of
Scripture; the one whereof concerns the Jews, the other the Heathen. That
which touches the Heathen, is in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans: where the Apostle having said, that God had showed unto the^ that which
might be known of him; and that the invisible things of him, that is, his
eternal power and Godhead, was manifested unto them by the creation of the
world, and the contemplation of the creatures: he adds presently, that God
was sorely displeased with them, and therefore gave them up unto vile
affections, because they changed the glory of that incorruptible God, into an
Image made like to corruptible men, and to birds, and foure-footed beasts, and
creeping things. Whereby it is evident, that the Idolatry condemned in the
wisest of the Heathen, was the adoring of the invisible God, whom they
acknowledged to be the Creator of all things, in visible Images fashioned to
the similitude of men and beasts.

The other place of Scripture, is the 4. of Deuteronomy: where Moses uses this
speech unto the children of Israel.

The Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the first: ye heard the voice of
the Words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice, verse 12. And what
does he infer upon this? Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves,
(says he in the 5. verse,) for he saw no manner of similitude on the day that
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: Lest ye
corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure,
the likeness of male or female, the likeness of any beast that is on the earth,
the likeness of any winged foul that flies in the air, the likeness of any
thing that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the
waters beneath the earth. Where we may observe: first, that God in the delivery
of the Law did purposely use a voice only; because that such a creature as
that, was not to be expressed by visible lineaments: as if that voice should
have said unto the Painter, as Echo is feigned to do in the Ausonius, Epigram.
xi.
Poet.

Vane, quid affectas faciem mihi ponere, pictor?
Si mihi vis similem pingere, pinge sonum.
Secondly, that when he uttered the word of the second Commandment in mount
Sinai, and forbad the making of the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the Earth; he did at
that time forbear to show himself in any visible shape, either of man or
woman, either of beast in the earth, foul in the air, or fish in the waters
beneath the earth: to the end it might be the better made known, that it was
his pleasure not to be adored at all in any such forms; and that the
worshipping of Images, not only as they have reference to the creatures whom
they do immediately represent, or to false gods, but also as they have
relation to himself (the true God, who was then speaking unto them in the
Mount) did come within the compass of the Idolatry which was condemned in that
Commandment.

In vain therefore do the Romanists go a bout to persuade us, that their
Images be no Idols: and as vainly also do they spend time in curiously
distinguishing the several degrees of worship; the highest point whereof,
which they call Latreia, and acknowledge to be due only unto God, they would
be loath we should think that they did communicate to any of their Images. But
here we are to understand, first of all, that Idolatry may be committed by
giving not the highest only, but also the lowest degree of religious adoration
unto Images: and therefore in the words of the Commandment, the very bowing
down unto them, which is one of ye meanest degrees of worship, is expressly
forbidden. Secondly, that it is Constans est Theologoru^ sententia, Imagine^
eodem honor et cultu honorari et coli, quo colitur id cuius est Imago. Azor.
institut. moral. part. 1. lib. 9. c. 6.
the received doctrine of Popish divines, that the Image should be honored with
the same worship, wherewith that thing is worshipped whose Image it is: and
therefore what adoration is due to Christ and the Trinity, the same by this
ground they are to give unto their Images. Thirdly, that in the Roman
Pontifical published by the authority of Clement the VIII. (to omit other
testimonies in this kind) it is concluded, Crux legati, quia debetur ei
latria, erit a dextris. Pontifical. edit. Romans page 672.
that the Cross of the Popes Legate shall have the right hand, upon this very
reason, quia debetur ei latria, because the worship proper to God is due to it.
Now whether they commit Idolatry, who communicate unto a senseless thing, that
worship which they themselves confess to be due unto God alone: let all the
world judge.

They were best therefore from henceforth confess themselves to be Idolaters:
and stand to it, that every kind of Idolatry is not unlawful. Their Jesuit
Gregorius de Valentia will tell them for their comfort, Grego. Valent. li. 2.
Apol. de Idololatr. ca. 7.1. Pe. 4.3.
that it is no absurdity to think that Saint Peter, when he deterreth the
faithful by name ab illicitis Idolorum cultibus ((...) Saint Peter calls
them, that is, abominable Idolatries) does insinuate thereby, that Some Jdolatry
he should say: for that is S. Peter's word.
some worship of Images is lawful. John Monceye the Frenchman in his Aaron
Purgatus (dedicated to the late Pope Paul the fifth) and in his twenty
questions propounded to Visorius, stretches yet a strain higher. For
howsoever he cannot away with the name of Idols and Idolatry; yet he likes
the thing it self so well, that he undertakes to clear Aaron from committing
any error in setting up the golden Calfe, and labors to purge Laban, and
Micha, and Jeroboam too from the imputation of Idolatry: having found indeed,
that nothing had been done by them in this kind, which is not agreeable to
the practice of the Roman Church at this day.

And lest the poor people, whom they have so miserably abused, should find
how far they have been misled; we see that the masters of that Church do
in the Service books and Catechismes, which come unto the hands of the vulgar,
generally leave out the words of the second Commandment that make against the
adoration of Images: fearing lest by the light thereof, the mystery of their
iniquity should be discovered. They pretend indeed that this Commandment is
not excluded by them, but included only in the first: whereas in truth they
do but craftily conceal it from the peoples eyes, because they would not have
them to be ruled by it. Nay, Gab. Vasquez. lib. 2. do Ador. disput. 4. c. 3..
74.75.
Vasquez the Jesuit does boldly acknowledge, that it plainly appears by
comparing the words of this Commandment, with the place which has been
alleged out of the 4. of Deuteronomy; that the Scripture did not only forbid
the worshipping of an Image for God, but also the adoration of the true God
himself in an Image. He confesses further, that he and his fellow Catholics
do otherwise. What says he then to the Commandment, think you? Because it
will not be obeyed, it must be repealed, and not admitted to have any place
among the moral precepts of God. Cum suerit iuris positiui et Caeremonialis
illa leges Mosaicae prohibitio, tempore legis Euangelicae debuit cessare; atque
id, quod alias iure natu rali licitum, et honestum est, vt imagines depingere,
et illis etia^ vti ad adoratio nem, in lege Euangelie a locum habere debet.
Vasques ibid. c. 4. 84.
It was (says he) a positive and ceremonial Law: and therefore ought to cease
in the time of the Gospel. And as if it had not been enough for him to match
the Scribes and Pharisees in impiety, who made the Commandment of God of none
effect, that they might keep their own tradition: that he might fulfill the
measure of his fathers, and show himself to be a true child of her who
bears the name of being the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth;
Reu. 17.5.
he is yet more mad, Vasquez de Adorat. lib. 3. disput. 1. Cap. 2 5.8.10.
and sticks not to maintain, that not only a painted Image, but any other
thing of the world, whether it be without life and reason, or whether it be a
reasonable creature, may (in the nature of the thing, and if the matter be
discreetly handled) be adored with God, as his Image; yea and counts it no
absurdity at all, that a very vvispe of straw should be thus worshipped.

But let us turn yet again, E^^^ 8.15.
and we shall see greater abominations then these. We heard how this blessed
Sacrament, which is here propounded by the Apostle, as a bond to unite
Christians together in one body, has been made the apple of strife, and the
occasion of most bitter breaches in the Church: we may now observe again, that
the same holy Sacrament, which by the same Apostle is here brought in as a
principal inducement to make men stee from Idolatry, is by our Adversaries
made the object of the grossest Idolatry that ever has been practiced by any.
For their constant doctrine is, that in worshipping the Sacrament they should
give unto it, latriae cultum qui vero Deo debetur, Co^^il. Trident. ^ess. 13.
(...) 1.5.
(as the Council of Trent has determined,) that kind of service which is due
to the true God; determining their worship in that very thing which the Priest
does hold betwixt his hands. Their practice also runs accordingly: for an
instance whereof we need go no further then to Sanders book of the Lords
Supper; before which he has perfixed an Epistle Dedicatory, superscribed in
this manner: To the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, under the
forms of Bread and Wine, all honor, praise, and thanks, be given for ever.
Adding further in the process of that blockish Epistle. Howsoever it be with
other men, I adore thee my God and Lord really present under the forms of
Bread and Wine, after consecration denly made: Beseeching thee of pardon for my
sins, etc.

Now if the conceit which these men have concerning the Sacrament should prove
to be false (as indeed we know it to be most absurd and monstrous) their own
Jesuit Coster does freely confess, that they should be in such an error and
Idolatry, qualis in orb terrarum nunquam vel visus vel auditus fuit, as never
was seen or heard of in this world. Tolerabilior est enim error eorum, qui pro
Deo colunt Statua^ auream aut argenteam, aut alterius materiae imaginem, quo
modo Gentiles deos suos venerabantur; vel pannum rubrum in hastam eleuatum,
quod narratur de Lappis; vel viua animalia, vt quondam Egyptij: quam eoru^, qui
frustu^ panis. Coster. Enchirid. ca. 12.
For the error of them is more tolerable, (says he) who worship for God a
Statue of gold or silver, or an Image of any other matter, as the Gentiles
adored their gods; or a red cloth lifted up upon a spear, as it is reported of
the Lappians; or living creatures, as did sometime the Egyptians; then of those
that worship a piece of bread. We therefore who are verily persuaded that the
Papists do thus, must of force (if we follow their Jesuits direction) judge
them to be the most intolerable Idolaters that ever were.

Nay, according to their own principles, how is it possible that any of
themselves should certainly know, that the host which they worship should be
any other thing but bread? seeing the change does wholly depend upon
consecration duly made, (as Sanders speaks) and that depends upon the
intention of the Priest, which no man but himself can have notice of.
Bellarmine, disputing against Ambrosius Catharinus, one of his own brethren,
that a man has no certain knowledge of his own justification, can take
advantage of this, and allege for himself, that one Neque potest certus esse
certitudine sidei, se percipere verum Sacramentum; cum Sacramen tum sine inten
tione ministri non conficiatur, and intentionem alterius nemo ^idere possit.
Bellarmin de Iustificat. lib. 3. cap. 8.
cannot be certain by the certainty of faith, that he does receive a true
Sacrament; forasmuch as the Sacrament cannot be made without the intention of
the Minister, and none can see another man's intention. Apply this now to the
matter we have in hand; and see into what intricate Labyrinths these men have
brought themselves. Admit the Priests intention stood right at the time of
consecration, yet if he that baptized him failed in his intention when he
administered that Sacrament, he remains still unbaptized, and so becomes
incapable of Priesthood; and consequently, whatsoever he consecrateth is but
bread still. Yea, admit he were rightly baptized too: if either the Bishop
that conferred upon him the Sacrament of Orders, (for so they hold it to be) or
those that baptized or ordained that Bishop, missed their right intention;
neither will the one prove Bishop, nor the other Priest; and so with what
intention soever either the one or the other does consecrate, there remains
but bread still. Neither does the inconvenience stay here, but ascends
upward to all their predecessors: in any one of whom if there fall out to be a
nullity of Priesthood (for want of intention, either in the baptizer, or in the
ordainer) all the generation following, according to their principles, go
without their Priesthood too; and so deliver but bread to the people, in stead
of the body of Christ. The Papists themselves therefore, if they stand unto
their own grounds, must needs confess, that they are in no better case here,
then the Samaritans were in, of whom our Savior says, Ioh. 4.22.
Ye worship ye know not what: but we know, that what they worship (be the
condition or intention of their Priest what it will be) is bread indeed; which
while they take to be their God, we must still account them guilty of
spiritual fornication, and such fornication, as is not so much as named
amongst the Gentiles.

These then being the Idolaters with whom we have to deal, let us learn first
how dangerous a thing it is to communicate with them in their false worship.
For if we will be partakers of Babylons sins, Revel. 18.4.
we must look to receive of her plagues. Secondly, we are to be admonished,
that it is not sufficient that in our own persons we refrain worshipping of
Idols, but it is further required, that we restrain (as much as in us lies)
the practice thereof in others; lest by suffering God to be dishonored in so
high a manner, when we may by our calling hinder it, we make our selves
partakers of other men's sins. Eli the high Priest was a good man, and gave
excellent counsel unto his lewd sons: yet we know what judgment fell upon
him, 1. Sam. 3.13.
because his sons made themselves vile, and he frowned not upon them, (that
is, restrained them not;) which God does interpret to be a kind of Idolatry,
1. Sam. 2.29.
in honoring of his sons above him. The Church of Pergamus did for her own
part hold fast Christ's name, and denied not his faith: yet had the Lord
something against her; Revel. 2.14.
because she had there, them that held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac
to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. So we see what special
notice our Savior takes of the works, and charity, and service, and faith,
and patience of the Church of Thyatira: Revel. 2.20.
and yet for all this he adds, Notwithstanding, I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, which calls herself a
Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to
eat things sacrisiced unto Idols.

In the second of Judges God tells the children of Israel, what mischief
should come unto them by tolerating the Canaanitish Idolaters in their Land.
Judge. 2.3.
They shall be thorns in your sides, (says he) and their gods shall be a
snare unto you. Which words contain in them the intimation of a double danger:
the one respecting the soul, the other the body. That which concerns the
soul, is: that their Idols should be a snare unto them. For God well knew that
man's nature is as prone to spiritual fornication, as it is to corporal. As
therefore for the preventing of the one, he would not have a common harlot
tolerated in Israel, Lest the Land should fall to whoredom and become full of
wickedness: Leuit. 19.29.
so for the keeping out of the other, he would have prouocations taken away,
and all occasions whereby a man might be tempted to commit so vile a sin. The
bodily danger that follows upon the toleration of Idolaters, is: that they
should be in their sides, that is, (as in another place it is more fully
expressed) they should be pricks in their eyes, Numb. 33.55.
and thorns in their sides, and should vex them in the Land wherein they
dwelled. Now in both these respects it is certain, that the toleration of the
Idolaters with whom we have to do, is far more perilous than of any other.
In regard of the spiritual danger, wherewith simple souls are more like to
be ensnared: because this kind of Idolatry is not brought in with an open
show of impiety, (as that of the Pagans) but is a mystery of iniquity, a
wickedness covered with the veil of piety; and the harlot, which makes the
inhabitants of the earth drunk with the wine of this fornication, is both
gilded her self, and presents also her abominations unto her followers in a
cup of gold. Revel. 17.2.4.
If we look to outward peril, we are like to find these men, not thorns in
our sides to vex us, but daggers in our hearts to destroy us. Not that I take
all of them to be of this furious disposition, (mistake me not: I know a number
my self of a far different temper:) but because there are never wanting
among them some turbulent humors, so inflamed with the spirit of fornication,
that they run mad with it; and are transported so far, that no tolerable
terms can content them, until they have attained to the utmost pitch of their
unbridled desires. For compassing whereof, there is no treachery, nor rebellion,
nor murder, nor desperate course whatsoever, that (without all remorse of
conscience) they dare not adventure upon.

Neither do they thus only, but they teach men also so to do: arming both
Pope, and Bishops, and People, and private persons, with power to cast down
even Kings themselves from their Thrones, if they stand in their way, and give
any impediment to their designs. Touching the Popes power herein, there is no
disputing: one of them tells us, that Dubium non est, quin Papa possit omnes
Reges, cum subest causa rationabilis, deponere. Augustine. Triumphus, de Potest.
Ecclesiast. quaest. 46. artic. 2.
there is no doubt, but the Pope may depose all Kings, when there is a
reasonable cause so to do. For Bishops, Cardinal Baronius informs us by the
example of Dacius the Bishop of Millayne, his dealing against the Arrians; Quo
exemplo satis intelligas, non moereri calumaiam, neque inuidiam Episcopos illos
pati debere, qui ne sub haeretico principe degant, omnem lapidem voluunt.
Baron. an. 538.. 89.
that those Bishops deserve no blame, and ought to suffer no envy, who roll
every sione, (yea and rather then fail, would blow up stones too) that they
may not live under an heretical Prince. For the People, Dominieus Bannes, a
Dominican Friar, resolves, that they need not, in this case, expect any
sentencing of the matter by Pope, or other; but Quando adest euidens notitia
criminis, licite possunt subditi (si modo eis vires suppetant) eximere se a
potestate suorum Principum ante Judicis sententiam deciaratoriam. Bannes in
Thom. 2.2. quaest. 12. artic. 2.
when the knowledge of the fault is evident, subjects may lawfully (if so be
they have sufficient strength) exempt themselves from subjection to their
Princes, before any declaratory sentence of a Judge. And that we may understand
that the Prouiso which he inserteth of having strength sufficient, is very
material; he puts us in mind, that Ex hac conclusione sequitur esse
excusandos Anglicanos and Saxonios fideles, qui non se eximunt a potestate
superiorum, nec bellum contra illos gerunt. Quoniam communiter non habent
facultatem ad haec bella gerenda contra Principes, and imminent illis grauia
pericula. Id. Ibid.
the faithful (the Papists he means) of England are to be excused hereby,
who do not exempt themselves from the power of their superiors, nor make
war against them. Because that generally they have not power sufficient to
make such wars against Princes, and great dangers are imminent over them.

Lastly, for private persons, we may read in Suarez, that an heretical King,
Post sententiam latam omnino priuatur regno, ita vt non possit iusto titulo
illud possidere: ergo extunc poterit tanquam omnino tyrannus tractari; and
consequenter a quocunque priuato poterit inter fici. Fr. Suarez Defens. fid.
Cathol. lib. 6. cap. 4.. 14.
after sentence given against him, is absolutely deprived of his Kingdom, so
that he cannot possess it by any just title: and therefore from thenceforth may
be handled altogether as a Tyrant; and consequently, he may be killed by any
private person. Only the Jesuit adds this limitation: that Si Papa Regem
deponat, ab illis tantum poterit expelli, vel interfi^i, qui bus ipse id
commiserit. Quod sinulli executionem imperet, pertinebit ad legitimum in regno
successorem; vel si nullus inuentus fuerit, ad regnum ipsum spectabit. Id.
ibid.. 18.
If the Pope do depose the King, he may be expelled or killed by them only to
whom he shall commit that business. But if he inioyne the execution thereof
to no body; then it shall appertain to the lawful successor in the Kingdom:
or if none such be to be found, it shall belong to the Kingdom it self. But
let him once be declared to be a Tyrant; Mariana ( Suarez his Countryman and
fellow Jesuit) will tell you better how he should be handled. Jtaque aperta
vi and armis posse occidi tyrannum, sieve impetu in regiam facto, sieve commissa
pugna, in confesso est Sed and dolo atque insidijs exceptum: quod fecit Aiod,
etc. Est quidem maioris virtutis and animi simultatem aperte exercere, palam in
hostem reipublicae irruere: sed non minoris or udentiae, fraudi and insidijs
locum captare, quod sine motu contingat, minori certe periculo publico atque
priuato. Io. Mariana, de Reg. instit. lib. 1. cap. 7.
That a Tyrant (says he) may be killed by open force and arms, whether by
violent breaking in into the Court, or by joining of battle, is a matter
confessed: yea, and by deceit and ambushes too, as Ehud did in killing Eglon
the King of the Moabites. Indeed it would argue a brauer mind to profess open
enmity, and publicly to rush in upon the enemy of the Commonwealth: but it is
no less prudence, to take advantage by fraud and ambushes, because it is done
without stir, and with less danger surely, both public and private. His
conclusion is, that Jn ents vitam grassari quacunque art concessum; ne cogatur
cantum scions aut imprudens sibi conscire mor tem. Id. ibid. in fine.
it is lawful to take away his life, by any art whatsoever: with this prouiso
only, that he be not constrained either wittingly or unwittingly to be the
cause of his own death. Where the tenderness of a Jesuits conscience is well
worth the observing. He makes no scruple at all to take away the man's life:
only he would advise that he be not made away, by having poison conveyed
into his meat or drink, lest in taking hereof (forsooth) he which is to be
killed, should by this means have some hand in procuring his own death. Hoc
tamen temperamento vti in hac quidem disputatio ne licebst, si non ipse qui
perimi tur venenum haurire cogitur quo intimis me dullis concepto pereat: sed
ex terius ab alio adhibeatur nibil adiunante co qui perimendus est: nimirum cum
tanta vis est veneni, vt sella eo aut vest delibuta vim interficiendi habeat.
Id. ibid.
Yet poison him you may, if you list, so that the venom be externally applied
by some other, he that is to be killed helping nothing thereunto: namely, when
the force of the poison is so great, that a seat or garment being infected
therewith, it may have strength to kill. And that such means of poisoning has
been used, he proves by diverse practices of the Moors: which we leave to be
considered of by Fitzherbert, who (to prove that Squires intention of poisoning
Queen Elizabeth in this manner, was but a mere fiction) would persuade us
that it is not agreeable to the grounds of nature and reason, that any such
thing should be.

Thus we see what pestilent doctrine is daily broched by these incendiaries of
the world: which, what pernicious effects it has produced, I need not go
far to exemplify; this assembly and this place cannot but call to mind the
memory of that barbarous plot of the Powder Treason. Which being most justly
charged to have At inquies, omnem modum crudelitatis excessit ea coniuratio;
cum and prolem, and Regni ordines simul implicuisset. Id velim ne mireris. Nam
malae and pernitiosae herbae and semina conterenda, and radices omnes
euellendae sunt, ne recrescant. Alias etiam, propter paucos sceleratos, multi
saepe naufragio pereunt. B. P. (...). epistolae I. R. impress. anno 1609.
exceeded all measure of cruelty; as inuoluing not the King alone, but also his
children, and the States of the Kingdom, and many thousands of innocent people
in the same ruin: a wicked varlet (with whose name I will not defile this
place) steppeth forth some four years after, and with a brazen forehead
bids us not to wonder at the matter. For of an evil and pernicious herb,
both the seeds are to be crushed, and all the roots to be pulled up, that they
grow not again. And otherwise also, for a few wicked persons it falls out
oftentimes that many perish in shipwreck. In the later of which reasons we may
note these men's insolent impiety toward God: in arrogating unto themselves such
an absolute power for the murdering of innocents, as he that is Lord of all,
has over his own creatures; the best of whom, if he do enter into judgment
with them, will not be found righteous in his sight. In the former, we may
observe their deadly malice toward Gods Anointed, which they sufficiently
declare will not be satisfied but by the utter extirpation of him, and all his
Royal progeny.

And whereas for the discovery of such wicked spirits, his Majesty in his
Princely wisdom did cause an Oath of Allegiance to be framed; by the
tendering whereof he might be the better able to distinguish betwixt his loyal
and disloyal subjects, and to put a difference betwixt a seditious and a
quiet-minded Romanist: this companion derideth his simplicity, in imagining,
that that will serve the turn, and supposing that a Papist will think
himself any whit bound by taking such an oath. Sed vide in tanta astutia,
quanta sit simplicitas. Cum omnem securitatem in eo iuramento sibi statuisset;
talem se modum iuramenti, tot circumstantijs connexu^isse existimabat, qui,
salua conscientia, nulla ratione a quoquam dissolui posset. Sed videre non
potuit, si pontifex iuramentum dissoluerit, omnes illius nexus, sieve de
fidelitate Regi praestanda, sieve de dispensatione non admittenda, pariter
dissolutos fore. Immo aliud dicam admirabilius. Nosti, credo, iuramentum
iniustum, si tale esse euidenter sciatur, vil aperte declaretur, neminem
obligare; sed ipso facto nullum esse. Regis iuramentum iniustum esse, ab ipso
Ecclesiae Pastore sufficienter declaratum est. Vides igitur iam, in sumum
abijsse illius obligationem; vt vinculum, quod a tot sapientibus ferreum
putabatur, minus sit, quam strammeum. Id. ibid.
See (says he) in so great craft, how great simplicity does bewray it self.
When he had placed all his security in that oath; he thought he had found such
a manner of oath, knit with so many circumstances, that it could not, with
safety of conscience, by any means be dissolved by any man. But he could not
see, that if the Pope did dissolve that oath; all the tyings of it, (whether of
performing fidelity to the King, or of admitting no dispensation) would be
dissolved together. Yea, I will say another thing that is more admirable. You
know (I believe) that an unjust oath, if it be evidently known, or openly
declared to be such, binds no man; but is void ipso facto. That the Kings
oath is unjust, has been sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church
himself. You see therefore, that the obligation of it is vanished into smoke:
so that the bond, which by so many wise men was thought to be of iron, is
become less then of straw.

If matters now be come unto this pass, that such as are addicted to the Pope,
will account the Oath of Allegiance to have less force to bind them then a
rope of straw; judge ye whether yt be not true which has been said, that in
respect not of spiritual infection only, but of outward danger also to our
State, any Idolaters may be more safely permitted then Papists. Which I do not
speak, to exasperate you against their persons, or to stir you up to make
new Laws for shedding of their blood. Their blindness I do much pity: and
my hearts desire and prayer to God for them is, that they might be saved.
Only this I must say, that (things standing as they do) I cannot preach peace
unto them. 2. King. 9.22.
For as John said to Ioram, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother
Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many? so must I say unto them: What peace
can there be, so long as you suffer your selves to be led by the mother of
harlots and abominations of the earth, Reu. 17.2, 5. and 18.23.
who by her sorceries has deceived all Nations, and made them drunk with the
wine of her fornication? Hos. 2.2.
Let her put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from
between her breasts; let her repent of her murders, and her sorceries, and
her idolatries: or rather, because she is past all hope, let those that are
seduced by her, cease to communicate with her in these abominable iniquities;
and we shall be all ready to meet them, and rejoice with the Angels in heaven
for their conversion. In the mean time, they who sit at the Helm, and have
the charge of our Church and Common wealth committed to them, must provide by
all good means, that God be not dishonored by their open Idolatries, nor our
King and State endangered by their secret trecheries. Good Laws there are
already enacted to this purpose; which of they were duly put in execution, we
should bane less need to think of making new. But it is nor my part to press
this poyne. I will therefore conclude as I did begin: I speak as to wise men;
Judge ye what I say.

2. Tim. 2.7. (...) what I say, and the Lord give you understanding (...) all
thing.

FINIS.

