The Sergeant Mayor.

A DIALOGVE of the Office of a Sergeant Mayor.

Written in Spanishe by the Master of the Camp Francisco de Valdes. And
translated into English, by John Thorius.

LONDON. Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

To the Right Honorable Knight, Sir John Norris, Lord President of Munster.
etc.
John Thorius wishes increase of all Heroical versues.

RIght Honorable: Plutarch has written a tretise entitled (...). In which he
shows how men may reap profit by their enemies. And forasmuch as this book
was written to instruct those that are professed enemies to our estate, I
thought that we might reap some profit by them, if this their Sergeant Mayor
were as well known unto our men as unto them selves: and that, notsomuch for
any points of policy which might be in their soldiers more then in ours, or
for that I think them to have more knowledge in matters concerning warfare
then our English warriers, who are no whit inferior to any of them; as for
that their orders being known unto us, we may the better and more easily
hurt them and benefit our selves by reason of this advantage. I have therefore
bestowed some pains in vnarming this Spanysh Sergeant and doffing his Castilian
and hostile armor, and have clothed him in English apparel, to the end that
our men may use him to their pleasure, and he finding him self metamorphosed,
learn how to serve English men. Beseeching and desiring your Honor, that as in
the field you wish to be the first to encounter, not with the stoutest
Sergeant only, but also with the brauest Duke, Prince, or King, that
professes enmity against yourselfe, your Prince, or your Country. So you will
at home vouchsafe to protect this SERGEANT MAYOR, who having now forsaken his
own Country, matcheth not in the field in Spanishe colors, but walks in
London streets in English attire. And I for my part shall think my self
much bounden unto your Honor, if you shall accept this my labor as a sign of
my good mind. Thus I leave your Honor to your martial meditations, beseeching
God, that as our enemies have felt your valor, the low Countries inioyed it,
and England with an universal voice generally commended it, so it may please
his divine Majesty to increase it, to the glory of his own Honor, to the
terror of your enemies, and to the benefit of our Prince and Country.

A Military Dialogue of the Office of the Seargeant Mayor. INTER LOCVTORS.
Londonno. Vargas. I Have had better luck then my self could wish (Master
Londonno) seeing that at this time you cannot justly be excused from telling
me that which I have so often requested you, and which besides (if I be well
remembered) you have promised. But your many affairs (as I take it) have
hitherto hindered, that I have not obtained my desire, and your self as yet
not satisfied my request. But now seeing my good fortune was such, that we
should meet together by our selves only, separated from all other
conversation, among the rivers of this most pleasant Rhene, I heartely beseeth
you, that it be not troublesome to you, to declare that unto me, which I so
greedily wish to know: seeing that not only the law of friendship does
bind you thereto, but also Christian charity inioyneth, that the talent
received from heaven shall not be buried, but rather multiplied, that all such
may be taught and instructed, as by reason of their ignorance, want the light
of knowledge.

Londonno. Certes, good Sir, I conceived great pleasure in finding you in so
pleasant a place by your self, accompanied only with your manifold virtues,
which never suffer you to be alone: and I take not this your most virtuous
curiosity to be the least of them, in that (now that your fortune has
brought you to this Military profession) you be so diligent in learning all
such things as a good and valiant soldier ought to know. And I would to God
that I were so sufficient, that I might be able to satisfy this your most
honest desire. But as much as I can, and as far as my small wit can reach
unto, I will not refuse to stand you in sted: And if until this time I have
not yet done in this particular, as you so greatly have requested me, persuade
your self, that (as you have very well said) my over many businesses, and
certain perturbations of the mind withal, (which never forsake us that
travail as strangers in this way of humane misery) have caused the same. But
now forasmuch as we have some leisure, and the pleasantnes, jointly with the
solitarines of this place, and especially your company (which were enough to
amend any vicous man) inticeth and allureth us to all virtuous conversation.
Ask what you will, for I am ready to obey.


Vargas. I looked for no less courteous answer to proceed from your discretion
and virtues. And I am fully persuaded, that if any one in this our age can
fully satisfy my mind concerning this point, you are the man, for the
excellent judgment, continual reading, and great experience of many years,
which I know to be in you, do assure me of it. You already know that many
days since, I have greatly desired to hear you discourse of the offices of
Captains, Ensigns, Seargeants, and Corporals, what preheminences they have,
and what and how manifold their duty is, unto which every one is bound
according to the Office which he does hear. And I do think that you in like
manner remember, that I have requested you at sometimes of leisure to talk
with me concerning the Office of the Seargeant Mayor, of which if it would
please you now to entreat, I should think my self beholding unto you, and we
will leave the first particulars to some other time, seeing that (as I have
heard men of great judgment, and such as could discourse of matters
concerning this profession, say) they which are perfectly acquainted with this
charge and office, can easily learn all such things as are required in the
foresaid offices and other besides, whereof I have not made mention. Insomuch
that I cannot enough marvel what the cause should be, why many Captains
general do often times make choice of persons, that not only want discretion,
but are also welnigh without wit and experience to bear this office, it being
of so great moment, and which requires so much ability.


Londonno. You have great reason surely. For in such like elections many abuses
have been and are daily seen, and (I mean not here to prejudice any
particular man, but to tell in truth what what I have seen) I say the number
of them is but small which I have known to be fit and sufficeint Sergeants
Mayor. And hence does it come that many errors have and daily are committed by
those that exercise this office, seeing that it has been and ordinarily is
seen, that in time and place of necessity, the squadron cannot be fourmed, by
reason of the fault and inhabilitie of the Sergeants Mayor. And the same which
I speak of the inconvenience (which is the chiefest) might I also say of some
others of unportance, and which are daily committed in armies, as well in
appointing and disposing the watch and Sentinels in the camp, as in many other
particulars, which you shall more manifestly perceive heareafter in the
discourse following. Which least the time escape us in preambles, I
inco^tinently begin, and say, that where as this name of Sergeant has it
original beginning from the French tongue (in which it betokens and signyfieth
as much as in the Latin tongue, minister, one that has the charge or office to
do a thing, a minister or sergeant that miuistreth etc. The Frenchmen first
applyee it to the use and customs of their chaunceries, courts, and judgment
seals, using certain ministers or under officers, caling them sergeants,
which stood them in steed to proclaim, declare and execute their statutes,
will and ordinances, appertayning to law: and afterward taking it hence, I
mean, out of these gouned and civil exercises, they also applied it to the
military use of arms, and in each company of men, they placed and appointed an
officer, calling him a sergeant, imitating the custom used in Courts, and
Tribunal seats, to the end that the Captains by means of such a minister or
officer, might keep due order in placing of their men, both marching, lodging
and fighting. And thus much as touching the imposing of the name which in
England, France and Spayn is received in all our warfarre as a natural word.
And the Sergeant Mayor is so called, because in every regiment (which is as
much as a Roman legion) there is a sergeant who is superintendent and head
over all the other Sergeants that are in his regiment: and as every Sergeant in
each company takes the manner of government or order of his Captain or his
lieftenant, so the Sergeant Mayor receaueth it of the Captain General, or
Coronell, or master of the camp, and afterward from him it passes to the
other Sergeants of the same regiment, from hand to hand according to the
custom. In so much that the Sergeant Mayor is an officer or general minister
of one whole regiment superintendent, and chief of all the Sergeants of the
same regiment, by the means of whose industry and help, the Captayn, General,
or Coronell may give convenient order for due government in ordering his men
both in marching, lodging and fighting, and other more things also unto this
appertayning, these three things in which the Sergeant Mayor is employed, are
such, that if ^hey be well executed. Wished victory and glory is with great
reason hoped for. Whereas if contrarily they be not well executed, much harm
ensues thereby, and the field is lost and there with goods, life, honor and
al. Therefore no insufficient persons, but such as are able to discharge so
great an office, and of so much weight, ought to be elected and chosen to be
Sergeants Mayor, and not unfit men: as some thing before we complained of the
carelesnes of some Generals of our times in such like elections.


Vargas. What qualityes be those by which those may be known, that are apt
and fit, and those also that are unapt and not sufficient?


Londonno. Yt is manifest and known unto all men that martial election
comprehends two sorts of men, some to command and govern, and others to
obey and to be ruled: and of this latter sort are the common soldiers, called
Gregarii, in which both the Greeks and the Romans required four qualityes.
Viz. that they should be strong and hardy, that they should be trained up in
arms and warlike exercises: that they should be obedient and that they should
be good swimmers. And in those soldiers that bear rule and govern as
General, Coronell, Master of the camp, the Sergeant Mayor, and the captayns
they also required four qualyties, and these be they. That they should be
very. skillful in the art of war and military science, that they should be
virtuous, that they should be men of authority, and that they should be very
fortunate. These four qualityes were used by the Greeks and Romans as an
infallible rule, (as in truth it is) to know the sufficiency or insufficiency
of officers in warfare. In so much that he is sufficient that it is endowed
with the foresaid four qualities, and he in whom they be not, is not
sufficyent. The Sergeant Mayor being one of the pryncipall officers in war,
ought to have the foresaid qualityes.


Vargas, To tell you the truth I do not well understand what you mean by
those four qualityes.


Loudonno. I will declare them unto you in few words. Warfare being so noble a
matter as it is, ought to have it rule and precepts: whence comes the art of
war. And as no man is allowed or suffered publicly to practice physic, or
to profess divinity or any other science, unless he have studied the said
facultyes and be well seen in them, so were it not good that any one should
govern and bear office in warfarre, that were not well seen in the art of
war. Which art stands a man in steed of a loyal counsayler, of light, in
the myddest of darkness, and of a guide in a difficult and doubtful way,
especyally if he have the general grounds of prudence and chief principles
of the libeall sciences.


Vargas. For as much as the greater part of souldyers lose their time in
games, love idleness, and have not from their youth either will or power to
apply themselves to any virtuous exercise, wanting the due grounds of
speculation, they dispayr that ever they shall be able to study any such art,
and so to cover their exceeding fault, they scoff at the art of war, which
men attain unto by study.


Londonno. There is no reason why we should answer them that are void of all
reason, and of the infinite reasons that may be alleged to confound their dull
ignorance, this only shall suffyce at this time that all arts have both
speculation and action or practice, and so has warfarre also: And they that
with a valiant courage follow arms and prudently use them in war, in time
attain to practice: but he that jointly with this mingleth speculatyon, shall
attayn both to speculation and practice, which are two, and therefore is the
speculatiue art the better and nobler of the two.


Vargas. I now understand the first quality, but know not yet what you mean
by the second, of being virtuous.


Londonno. This virtue which is required in Military officers is (as Tullie
declares it) toylsome labor in affairs, industry in doing them, speediness
in dispatching them, constance and fortitude of the mind in dangers, not
suffering their unruly affections to bear rule over them and overcome them.
The other two qualities, which are Authority and Fortune, do necessarily
follow the two former, as the shadow follows the body: for, the virtue
whereof I spoke, does put the Military precepts in practice, and brings them
to effect, making a disposition or quality of them in the Soldier, whence
necessarily proceeds the fame and glory of his valor and deeds, which
increases his credit, and brings him in authority. As for felicity and
good success that springs from all three, skill, virtue and authority, for
he that by knowledge and experience knows what he ought to do, and is endued
with virtue to attempt any thing, and put it in execution with advice and
authority, to the end his Soldiers may believe him and follow him, this man
shall obtain good success, which is to be fortunate and happy. Therefore the
Greeks and Romans did with good cause require, that these foresaid qualities
should be in all and every Officer and chief Captain of war, and I for
this cause will also have them to be in the Seargeant Mayor, and yet one more
besides, with which there will be five in all.


Vargas. Yet another say you, which I pray you?


Londonno. That he be some thing cunning in Arithmetike: for that science is
very necessary for the forming and making of the Squadrons, which cannot be
made without the science of numbering.


Vargas. You demand and require so many things in a Seargeant Mayor, that I
doubt none such are to be found answerable to your description.


Londonno. Yes marie Sir be there, though they be but few, and there would be
many more to be found, if it were not for the favors, suits, and bribes, which
as in other things, so in the choosing of a Seargeant Mayor, disturb and
impeach the right course of election. Furthermore, whereas I am to form a
Seargeant Mayor, it is not for our purpose to seek out and inquire what kind
of men our Scargeantes Mayor be, but rather to show and declare what men they
and all others should be, and how they ought to be qualified We must follow
that which is perfest, for that which is not perfect may be found at every
place.


Vargas. You have showed me the spring, beginning and signification of the
name of Seargeant Mayor and Seargeant, and what the Seargeant Mayor is, and the
qualities in him required: Now I desire to know of you what Office the same of
the Seargeant Mayor is, and in what manner he ought to execute it. But first I
beseech you to resolve me of one doubt, which is, that I know not whether they
that lived in ancient times past, had this Office of the Seargeant Mayor.


Londonno. I have not read that the Lacedaemonians, Greeks and Romans (among
which Nations did warfare flourish most) have had it: but we may read that
they had and used diverse manners of Battles and Squadrons, and I believe this
to be the cause (if I be not deceived) that they had no Seargeant Mayor,
because this Office was discharged by certain other Officers, as we may gather
out of those that have written De ^e Militari, viz. that the Captain General
and chief head of the Armies, understanding and perceiving of how great
moment and importance the good order and perfection of the Squadron or Battle
is, in which consists all the force of the whole Army, they would trust no
particular man with this Office, but themselves disposed their Armies, and made
the Squadrons, of which they used sundry and different kinds and manners,
according to the diversity of weapons with which in those times they
accustomed to encounter with their enemies, and also their soldiers were so
well instructed and so skillful, that in a very great and huge Army there was
not one soldier but knew his place in the Squadron: for the easier obtaining
of which knowledge, there were many Schools in Rome, as Titus Liuie writes,
where those young soldiers which they called Tyrones, among us, fresh water
soldiers, were not only taught and showed how to be apt and quick in using
any kind of weapon, but they were also instructed how they should keep
their place, that every man might have and know his own several place, in
which thing they were so well instructed, that it was a very easy matter, and
little or no labor, trouble or difficulty at all, to frame and make the
Squadrons, and they became daily the more fit and apt as long as they were not
without an hnge and perpetual Army. And the same Liuie says, that the young
soldiers exercised themselves twice a day, and the old beaten soldiers but
once a day. And this most excellent order which the Romans observed above all
other Nations, caused them so to enlarge their Empire, and to become almost
invincible throughout the world: whereas notwithstanding (as Vegetius very
well says) they were neither so great as the Germans, nor more in number then
the French men, nor so subtle as the Affricans, nor so many or of such force
as the Spaniards, nor so wise as Greeks, but the Soldiers exercised and
instructed in Warfare, did conquer and overcome all these difficulties. It were
a very easy matter in proof of this truth, here to allege many examples
both old and new of many excellent Captains, who with little Armies well
instructed and set in good order, have obtained victory of innumerable armies
and bands of men naughtily ranked and confused. But I will only rehearse some
of them, seeing it is not strange to the matter of which we now entreat,
neither will it be out of the purpose to make a short digression to prove this
verity. And let the first example be taken from the great King Alexander, when
he set upon all Asia, and the innumerable bands of Darius, yet with a very
small army, but wonderful well instructed. Lucullus a famous Captain did get
a most happy victory over all the great powers of Tigranes with so small a
number of good Soldiers well trained and set in good araie, that Tygranes
seeing them coming toward his forces, making little account of them, and to
mock with them said, that if they come as Ambassadors, they were inowe of
them, but if to fight, they were very few. Julius Caesar being Proconsull,
subdued unto the Empire of Rome many and rude barbarous Nations, even from the
river Rhene and sea Ocean, until the sea Mediterranean. And I pray what made
him so victorious, but the good order and discipline he used? And in our days
Hernando Cortes, (most worthy to be placed among the nine celebrated Captains,)
with less then a thousand and four score horse, took the great king
Montecuma within his own City. And at the length only by the good order he
used, he did subdue the whole kingdom of Mexico. And Hernando Aluarez Duke of
Alua, only with one thousand of small shot, and five hundredth Muskets in
Frisland, overthrew an army of twelve thousand men, with which Lodowicke of
Nassau had entered in that Province. To conclude, as touching this point, I
say, that seeing a Squadron is a company of soldiers placed in order, in
which every man has his place appointed him, in such order that-he may fight
without hindering others, or being hindered of his fellows, and in which all
their forces may be so united and joined together, that they may obtain
theyr-principall intent and end (which is, to become invincible, and for which
end the first warriers that were, did invent so many kinds and manners of
Squadrons) we must needs believe that that Army which is best ordered, though
it be least in number of men, shall always (according to reason) become
victorious.


Vargas. You have resolved me of the thing whereof I doubted, and now I expect
what you will say of that which even now I asked of you touching the office
of the Sergeat Mayor.


Londonno. Out of the definition which I before set down, may be gathered,
that the Office of the Seargeant Mayor consists in three things, viz. in the
safe order of marching, in the good manner of lodging, and in pitching the
field to buckle with the enemy. All other matters that the Sergeants Mayor
has to do withal, must of necessity be reduced unto these three things
only. For Warfare (as they say who have written of this subject) has three
parts: the one being the preparation for War, unto which part appertains
the leuying and pressing, or taking up of Soldiers, the arming of them, the
paying of them, and victualling of them: for all which there are particular
Officers appointed, the Seargeant Mayor having nothing to do therewith. The
second part of Warfare concerns the Host: unto which part appertains the
marching of the camp, and the lodging of the same, and so out of this second
part of warfare, two of the three points in which the Office of the Sergeant
Mayor consists do proceed. The third part of Warfare is, concerning the
fighting and joining in battle with the enemy, whether it be by sea or by
land, whether in plain ground or hilly, whether besieging or being besieged:
out of which part of Warfare proceeds the third part of the Office of the
Seargeant Mayor, which consists principally in ranking his soldiers orderly
and strongly, when he forms and makes his Squadrons: from which Squadrons
as from the chief part, I will begin to show you how the Seargeant Mayor
exercises his Office: and afterward I will in order proceed successively to
show the same in the other two parts of his Office.


Vargas. It is not long since you told me what a Squadron is, and therefore
now I pray you begin to make the Squadron, and set the Battle: for this is
it we intend.


Londonno. The Squadrons are made of a great number of Soldiers, more or
less, according to the bigness of the Army or Host. And it is necessary
that he who takes his charge in hand, know what people every company that
is in Regiment has, how many pike men, and how many harquebusiers, and that
before the time of need, he continually have in his head and memory a plat and
form, thereby to set a Battle when occasion is offered, in conceit always
forming such Squadrons, as for the present time are most used. As those that
are square of ground, square of number of people, broad in the front, and
those that are drawn out in length Hearse-wise. This ought he not only to do
of the number of those men that are in the Bands or Companies of his Regiment,
but of all numbers. For oftentimes it comes to pass that the Seargeants
Mayor are willed by the Captains general to set a Battle of three or four
Regiments together, and then if they be not exercised, they shall be so
unready, and fall into so many absurdities, and shame themselves in presence of
their Princes, and in the general judgment of the whole Host, and for this
cause did a friend of ours say very well, that a Seargeant Mayor could not
commit a small fault, seeing that the Judges and arbiters thereof were so many.


Vargas. Before you advantage your discourse, I pray you sir dayn to tell, me
whether there be any more kinds of battayles or squadrons then those four
which you have before named.


Londonno. Yes mary be there many others, whereof some be in use among the
Italians and Switzers, as those that are horned like a half moon, and those
also that are made like a cross, which are approved and thought to be good by
many excellent wits, there be also other manner of battayls, as those that are
made wedgewise in form of a wedge, and those that are made in form of an
egg, and those also that are made tryangular wise, with many others besides
which are now quite out of use, yet I think it not amiss, nay rather I would
judge it very necessary, that the Sergeant Mayor should be acquainted with them
all, and be exercised in setting all kinds of battails: seeing that occasson
and place might be offered, where they might be needful, and it is not good
that a man should be ignorant of any thing concerning his office, which might
chance to be necessary to advantage himself thereby. But of all battayls
those four which I set down first, are most in use now a days, in those
places where warfarre flourishes most, and they be taken to be the strongest
battayls, and most necessary, considering the weapons that are used in this our
age.


Vargas. And which think you to be the strongest of these four.


Londonno. They be all of like force and strong enough according as occasion
and place requires, for in some places the square battayls of ground, or of
number of people is best, for we should not do well to make a square
battle, drawn out in length herswise in some places, as in Barbery or some
other place where the enemy has a great troop of horsemen to set upon us, and
we none, but in such a case we ought to use the square battle of ground or of
number of people, that it being set upon by the enemies, they may find equal
resistance at all the four sides of the battle: in other places it were
most convenient to use those battles that have a large front, which I would
ordinarily use among our countrymen, if we were to fight with our enemy,
considering that in these squadrons, by how much the more great the front is,
by so much the more men fight in the vantgard, and besides this, this kind of
battle above all other squadrons cannot without great difficulty be environed
about by the enemy. The Germans and Switzers do greatly use square battails
drawn out in length, taking that squadro^ to be of wonderful strength that
has a great courtain: but I would commonly use the square battayl of ground,
unless the situation of the place compelled me to do otherwise, judging this
battayl to be most proportionable, and of equal force in the vantguard and
rereward, and it takes up less room.


Vargas. Tell me I pray you, what order might be observed to form these
squadrons with facillity and quickness?


Londonno. To make a square battayl of number of people it will be sufficient
to take the square root of that number whereof 1600
the squadron is to be made, and every one of the our sides of 40
the squadron or battayl, shall contain as many soldiers as the 2500
number of the root is of, as for example, if you will make a square 50
battle of one thousand and six hundredth pikes, the square root of this
number is forty, and of so many is every rank, and if you make it of two
thousand five hundredth pikes, the square root is fifty, that is fifty to every
rank, which number being multiplied in it self, fifty times fifty, it makes
the foresaid number. We will call the square root (according to the
Arithmeticians) the greatest number which being multiplied in it self, ends
in the quantity or number which you will make the squadron of, as you may
perceive in the two foresaid examples, for in a thousand and six hundredth
there can be no greater number taken out, then that which is multiplied in it
self, which is forty, and in two thousand five hundredth, there can be no
greater then fifty, as by multiplication you may learn, multipliyng each one
of these two numbers in it self, and presupposing (as I mentioned before) that
the Sergeant Mayor ought to be ready in counting, and skilful in cyphering, I
shall not need to stand upon it any longer, teaching how a man may count. As
for the square battayl of ground, the famous Mathemacitian Tartalla, sets
down a rule, how it may be perfectly made and framed. And this is it, if you
take this number 2401
forty nine, and multiply it in it self, it makes two thousand four hundredth
and one, this number must be multiplied by the number of those soldiers, of
which you will make the squadron or battayl, and that which remains of this
multiplcation you must divide 1000
it by a thousand, and out of the product you must take the square root, and
that shall be the number of the soldiers that ought to be in every rank, and
dividing the said quantity of which the squadron is to be made, by this square
root, that which remains shall be the number of the ranks. Example, if we
would make a square battle of the same number of soldiers as we did 1600
before, viz. one thousand and six hundredth, we must multiply this number by
the two thousand four hundredth and one, which remained of the multiplication,
of the number forty nine, and it will 1600
make three millions eight hundredth one and forty thousand and six 241
hundredth, which being divided by one thousand, there remain 49
three thousand eight hundredth forty and one, and the square root 3841600
of this number is three score and one, and if the said quantity of 1000
which the squadron is to be made, which is one thousand and six 3841
hundredth be divided, by this square root of three score and one, 61
there remain twenty and six, and of so many ranks shall the 1000
squadron be, and then fourteen remain over plus, which may be 61
placed according as the Sergeant Mayor thinks best. There is another 26
way shorter then this, to make this kind of squadron, but 14
the squadron falls out nothing so perfectly, by reason of the multitude of
people that remain over plus, and this is it: you must divide the number of
soldiers of which you will make your battle, by one and twenty, and taking
the square root out of the product, set that which remains over plus a side,
and multiplying the square root by seven, you shall have the number of the
soldiers that must be in every rank, and multiplying the said square root
by three, that which remains of the multiplication shall be the number of the
rancks, and this being done, multiplying 21
those that remain over plus by twenty and one, the product 1600
makes the number of the soldiers that remain over plus, as 21
may be seen by the foresaid example of one thousand and six 76
hundredth men, which being divided by one and twenty, the product 4
is threescore and sixteen, and four remain over plus, and 8
the square root of this number is eight, which being multiplied 7
by seven, makes six and fifty, and of so many soldiers shall 56
every rank be, and if the said root which is eight be multiplied by 8
three, it makes twenty four, and so many ranks shall there be in 3
the squadron, then multiplying the twelve that remain by one and 24
twenty, they make two hundredth fifty and two, which are they 12
that were left, and four which remained over plus in the division: 2
so that all the overplus makes six and fifty, of which (the 252
Sergeant Mayor adding three rancks) the squadron is made of 256
seven and twenty ranks, nine and fifty soldiers to a rank, and 27
seven only remain over plus, but I like the first manner better then this (as
I told you before) yet it is good to know the one as well as the other The
other two manners of squadrons, viz. that which is drawn out in length
hersewise; and that which has a large front, are framed and made very easily,
especially if one know how to make the two former kinds of squadrons, and
therefore I will only tell you that either of the^ is both, for if of the fla^ke
of a square battayl made hersewise, you make the front, then will it be a broad
squadro^ with a large front, even so contrarily if of the front of a broad
squadron you make the flancke, then is the same squadron made a long squadron
drawn out in length hersewise. Example, if you make a large square of one
thousand two hundredth soldiers, each ranks will be of three score pikes, and
the courtin will be of twenty pikes, but if of this courtin of twentye pikes
you make the front, the flank will be of three score pikes, and so it will be a
perfect long battle hersewise, observing due proportion, which is, that the
front of the one be never more then three times as much as the courtin of the
other, as may be understood by the example above said, for the front being of
three score soldiers, the flank is no more then twenty, all these manners and
fashions of squadrons before specified, may easily be made by the Sergeant
Mayor, if he be skillful in the science of Arithmeticke, as I said above: for
otherwise it will be very hard and troublesome for him to do it.


Vargas. I have noted in the examples which you have set down of squadrons and
battayls, that the most of them were in number even, whereas notwithstanding I
have hard many say, yea and stand upon it, that squadrons and ranks ought to be
in number odd, and that in ancient times past, it was always used, but
especially in those nations where warfarre did florishe most. Wherefore I pray
you to satisfy me concerning this point before we go any further.


Londonno. Opinions there be many that battayls and squadrons ought to be odd
in number of soldiers, and I going about diverse times to inquire and search
out of what importance it is that the squadron should be in number odd or
even, and whither this can make it more or less strong, and having read very
curiously the authors both ancient and modern, that entreat of this art or
science martial, and having also noted the manner and number which they
observed in making their battles and spuadrons, I find as well by that which
I have said as by the reasons which I will here show, that it concerns not
the strentgh or weakness of the battle, whither it be made in number even
or odd, for I will show unto you that observing the true and perfect rule to
make a squadron or battle, there are certain numbers of which if you will
make squadrons odd in number, you should find a wonderful great imperfection
therein, and so contrarily there be other numbers, of which a man cannot
conveniently make squadrons of even number. Example, If you would make a
square battle of number of people of two thousand and five hundredth pikes,
the square root of this number is just fifty, and it would be a great fault to
make it of more or less, seeing that (as I have said) a square battle of
number of people can have no greater perfection, then to be made of the number
that the square root of it is of, and if you will make one, of three thousand
and six hundredth pikes, the square root of this number is three score, and of
so many soldiers will the front of the Squadron be, and this is the perfection
of it. And as I have set down two examples hereof, so could I set down
many more, and I say the same of the Squadron, that is made of an odd number.
For if you will form a Squadron or Battle square in number of people, of two
thousand six hundredth soldiers and one, the number of it will be one and
fifty pikes, for that is the square root of it: and to make it of a greater
or lesser number, it would be amiss. And if you will make such a Squadron of
one thousand four score and nine, the fronts of it will be of three and
thirty pikes, for this is the square root of the Squadron. And if you add
any thing unto this number, or diminish it, the Squadron will remain
imperfect. Insomuch that by that which I find used, and by mine own opinion,
I gather, that Squadrons or Battles ought to be made according to the number
of people of which they be made, and manner how they be made, and as the place
where they be made permits. As for the reasons which some allege, that in
the odd number there is a middle, and in the even number there is none, as is
seen by example, that in three, five, seven and nine there is a middle, whereas
in two, four, six and eight, there is none, and so they say, that the same
middle which is the unity (which unity is the beginning of all numbers)
should be the foundation and basis of the Squadron, and therefore they hold
opinion that it is the stronger. They allege furthermore, that Martial men
in ancient times past, did not without mystery use the odd number in their
Squadrons and Battayles, more then the even number, all which cannot suffice to
prove that their Battles were therefore the stronger, for as you might have
marked, I have sufficiently argued and proved wherein the strength and force of
a square battle does principally consist. For if this only that the Squadron
is made of the odd number makes it the stronger, it is consequent, that any
Squadron whatsoever in number odd, though it be but of a small number of men,
yet it shall be of more force and strength then any other Squadron made of a
far greater number of soldiers, which is in number even, which is most
unlikely and falls. For who knows not that a Squadron in the front, whereof
there be fifty, sixty, or eighty, or one hundredth soldiers, is stronger,
then one yt has but fifty or twenty, seven or three and thirty in every
rank, and so likewise does it follow that those Squadrons shall be strong
that have seven and twenty, three and thirty, one and fifty or three and
sixty, then those that have but twelve, sixteen, four and twenty, or six and
thirty: in so much that the number odd or even, makes not the squadron
strong, but due proportion according to the quantity of the people of which it
is made, together with the place, and above all things the valor of the
soldiers is the right and true strength of battayls, and for as much as they
say, that the auncientes did more use the odd number then even (which they
cannot easily prove) but though it were so; yet it is most manifest, that they
did not so because they believed that the squadron was the stronger by reason
that it was odd in number, but they did it being moved with a certain
devotion and religion, taking this number odd to be consecrated to their Gods,
as Virgill some where mentions. Numero Deusimpari gaudet, and so they being
so religious in all their actions (but specially the Romans) they gave them
selves more to the observation of this number odd, in framing and making their
squadrons and battails, then of the number even. As, for the same reason and
with greater cause we ought to reverence this number, for that which was
uncertain and unknown to the heathens and gentiles in this particular, being
ignorant of the excellency and diety of this number odd, the light of our
faith makes manifest and known unto us, believing as we do, that God is
trinus and vn^s. But what makes this devotion or religious conceipte, for the
strength of the squadron? and as for the seconds reason, yt ought less to be
admitted, for where they say that the od number has a middle, and the even
number has none, how can this make the squadron strong? for it is manifest
that in this number fifty, there is no middle, and yet if the battle be
square in number of people, and so the squadron be made of two thousand and
five hundredth pikes (as before was said) it cannot be more stronger or
perfect: for it is square every way having fifty ranks, fifty to a rank,
which is the square root, and if of the same number two thousand and five
hundredth pikes, you would make a battle of the odd number as of five and
forty, seven and forty, or nine and forty pikes to a rank, which are all three
odd, and have a middle, the squadron would be nothing so perfect, for that is
not the square root of it. And if chance we would make at the squadron of one
and fifty or three and fifty, it would not fall out in the foresaid number of
two thousand and five hundredth, and so we should find an imperfection, because
the square root exceeds. But if it were not for this inconvenience of
imperfection, that Sergeant Mayor that were curious in making his ranks and
squadrons of the number oddde, though it be for nothing else but only to
satisfy the general opinion of the most that make profession of warfarre, who
seem continually to look that the squadrons should be made of the number
odd, I am persuaded should not do amiss, especially when the companies enter
or go from the watch hill, for then the ranks are but small, and it seems
better that they should then be three, five, or seven to a rank, then four,
six, or eight, and I think the reason be, because the middle is discerned in
such small numbers, which cannot so easily be seen in greater numbers, and it
ought especially to be done by reason of the custom which is ordinarily used
in making rancks odd: and all that which is by custom and use received,
seems to be best and most allowed. Nevertheless this ought not to be so
greatly respected, that (as I mentioned before) when the number of the people,
and form or fashion of the Squadron be such, that it requires to be made of
the number even, it should in any case be made of the number odd, for they
that should so do, should commit a foul error. For so in these wars of
Flanders, when the Prince of Orange passed the Mose with his army, and entered
into Braband, the two armies marching so near the one by the other, that they
every day looked that they should buckle together, the Duke of Alua ordained
that the masters of the Camp and Seargeant Mayor of their three Regiments of
Spanish foot-bands, with the other personages that were of his counsel in
war should make an assembly: and that the number of the pikes they had in
their Ensigns being known, they should each of them give their voices
concerning the fashion and form of which the Squadron should be made. Which
was so done, and they found that there were no more pikes in all the three
Regiments then one thousand and two hundredth, and they all agreed that they
should make a broad Battle with a large front. Which Squadron conformable
to the number of the piks, and observing proportion, could have no more then
three score soldiers in the front of it, and twenty in the courtin, which
justly make up the full number of one thousand and two hundredth: and so it was
done. and because they marching through some straight and narowe grounds, the
Squadron could not march with so many in the front, it was divided into three
parts, in such manner, that the Regiment of Naples, which had six hundred
pikes should march with thirty pikes in the front, and the Regiment of
Lombardie which had three hundredth and twenty pikes, should march with
sixteen pikes in each rank, and the Regiment of Sicil which had two hundredth
and four score pikes should have fourteen in the front. And now you may see,
that all these three Battles were of the number even, and being joined all
three in one, they made a large fronted Squadron of the number even. For the
quantity of pikes which were in each regiment and the form of the Battle
did so require it. And it is to be believed, that if there had been any
imperfection in these Squadrons and Battayles, so great a Captain of War,
and so worthy a, soldier as the Duke was, would not have permitted it to be
done in such order.


Vargas. I remain satisfied as touching this particular, and in truth before
your discourse, I was fully persuaded that all squadrens should necessarily be
made of the number odd. But now I doubt not of it: and therefore I pray you
continue on your discourse, and tell me what you think of certain rules set
down by one Cataneus Nouares, and of some others, which (if I be well
remembered) I have seen, thereby to form all kinds and manners of Battles,
do you account them necessary?


Londonno. They help much, but those men chiefly that can not cipher, but I
would not have any one bound unto them only. For so, if a man should take
them out of their A B C book (as men say) they would incontinently be vnoone.
I say, if occasion were offered them to make a squadron or battle of a
number, differing from the number which they find set down, they should
very quickly spy their unreadiness, and acknowledge their ignorance. And
hereupon I rehearse the same which I have spoken before, that nothing is
better for the Seargeant Mayor to shun wearisomnesse and difficulty in
making and framing all kinds of Battles and Squadrons, then dexterity and
readiness in counting, jointly with a continual habit or disposition of
forming and framing diverse kinds of squadrens in his head, by the help of his
memory. And this ought he likewise to put in practice before necessity
constrains him to do it. And so he may when his Regiment marches either to
the lodging or from the lodging, exercise his people, and by experience and
practice see that which he is taught by theorie and contemplation. And
forasmuch as in that which you asked of me first, of the manner how to make
Squadrons with facility and speed, is not only contained and comprehended to
give rules how to form them speedily and readily, but also to show how that
confusion may be shunned which often is caused (but especially among the
Spaniards) by those that contend and strive to be placed in the first rank of
the vauntgard, insomuch that it falls out very often, that much time passes
before the Seargeant Mayor with all the Captains together, can make up the
Squadron. I say, that seeing the chief care and charge to avoid this
inconvenience, concerns the Seargeant Mayor. He ought to take such order
with the Ensigns and companies before they come to this point, that the said
confusion and disobedience may be excused. And it shall be avoided if such
order be taken, that all the Ensigns know before, that the first ranks shall
be made of the Company or Companies that be of the watch that day, and they
shall be seconded by them that were of the watch before, and next to them shall
they follow that first come to the squadron, continually aduertising the
Officers, not to suffer any Soldiers of their Ensigns or Companies come,
any piece of their armor wanting. For in this case, though it be their turn
to fight in the vauntgarde, yet they shall be turned to the rereward, and loose
their precheminence because they come not well and orderly armed, and others
may be justly placed in their rooms: and because sometimes arm being called,
and the companies running altogether to the place of arms, this order cannot
be observed, seeing that in time of necessity, above al things this must be
attended, that the Squadron may be formed with all celeritie and quickness. It
is convenient that the Seargeant Mayor, (if so be the foresaid inconvenience
happen) dispose the confused and disorded multitude of people, setting the
Captains before, and then take the Squadron out of the flank or rereward, if
he think it most commodious. Which he may do with great facility: for so he
leaves them which were the cause of that confusion deceyed of their intent,
and so he shall perform two things, the one is, that he speedily does make
up his squadron, the other that he corrects and punishes the disobedient
with this disgrace, leaving them all in the rereward, and thence forward seeing
that the Sergeant Mayor uses riddance and dispatch. Leaving them with the
mock, they will be glad to obey, and presently get in order. I have my self
used this remedy, and every time that I so did, I had done, and almost wholly
made the Squadron of my Regiment, before the Sergeant Mayor could in other
Regiments frame the foremost ranks.


Vargas. I was very glad to understand how this confusion may be expelled,
which is so usual in the making and framing of squadrons, and most of all
among the Spaniardes, for I cannot believe that in any other nation men be so
disobedient, and make such a do to be placed in the first rank, but that
every one does obey and content himself with the place which is appointed
him, or by lot falls unto him.


Londonno. So they ought to do all of them, for unto him that will fight
valiantly and do his duty, occasion will never be failing to show his good
mind in War, and know surely that many that make so much a do to provide a
place for themselves in the first rank of the Squadron, the desire they have
to fight, does not draw them unto it, but they be only vain shows, by
which they pretend to recover credit, and gain the name and title of
valiantness, though we cannot deny nevertheless but that some are moved to
procure them that place by their valor and good zeal, Yet cannot a good and
valyant Soldier in any thing so near hit the mark, as in obeying: and this
is the principal virtue which a soldier ought to have set before his eyes as
an obiecte at the day that he takes the Pike in Wars. If this be wanting
in him, he has none of any value or estimation: for obedience is the
ground, basis, and foundation of all good discipline.


Vargas. Let us pass on if you please, for I fear me the time will be scant
for the number of doubts which I pretend to ask of you. And tell me now seeing
you have made up the squadron with pikes, how they ought to be lined, how many
and how big the sleeves ought to be, and how far distant from the squadron,
for in good sooth, I have heard diverse opinions concerning this particular.


Londonno. Truly no man that is a soldier is ignorant that the battle of
pikes ought ot be guarded about with Gunnes, putting a row of Harquebuziers
close to the other row of Pikes, so that there be as many rows of
Harquebuziers at each side as there be of Pikes, and to observe the true
manner of living of the squadron, there ought to be no more rows of
hargubuzers, then could be guarded by the pikes, especially where the enemy has
gretest store of horsemen, and so, seeing that there cannot be above five
hargubuzers under the favor of the pikes, with so many rows (to my mind) ought
the squadron to be ordered, but in case that this inconvenience be not, that
the battayl is not like to be set upon with troops of horses, then may the
Sergeant Mayor line the battle with a greater number of hargubuzers, as he
thinks best according to the quantity of gunne-men he has in his ensigns,
having a regard and consideration that he want no hargubuzers to make the
sleeves, which ought not to be above four, and less, according as necessity
requires and the place permits. These ought to have their due proportion,
and I would not have them to be made of more then three hundredth shot, nor
of less then two hundredth, and in case that many hargubuzers remain after the
battle is furnished and closed up, I would rather make four sleeves of the
foresaid number then two of a greater quantity. For ordinarily, when the
sleeves be very great and improportionable, it is a hard matter to rule and
govern them in good order without confusion, and two sleeves of three hundredth
soldiers a piece, can be ordered and governed far better, and easier then one
sleeue of six hundredth soldiers. And he that will try this, shall find it so
manifest and dear by experience, that I will not here labor to prove it to be
so with more reasons or arguments. The place of these sleeves ought to be at
the corners of the squadrons, after such order that they be not very far
aparted from the squadron. For even as the horsemen make a cross defense to
the courtins of a castle, so the sleeves unto the battayl, and they be the
stronger being under the favor of the pikes: and as a castle has it whole
perfection joined togegether in one. The courtins, horsemen, and ditches. After
the same manner is a squadron perfect, when the pikes being placed in convenient
order, are lined with gnus, and fortified with the sleeves of hargubuzers.


Vargas. I pray you sir, let it not grieve you to stay here a while, for I
desire greedily that you should resolve me of a certain doubt, which I have
seen some make upon this which I now shall say. You well know that
ordinarily in the Spanish footbands, there be many more hargubuzers then pykes,
for we shall see nine thousand footmen together, among which there be scar^e one
thousand and five hundredth pikemen, all the rest being gunmen in so much that
the squadron being lined, and four sleeves being made unto it (and that is the
most that you say it ought to have) yet there remains a great quantity over
plus, but I pray you where think you that these hargubuzers may be set to be
safe from the troops of the enemies horsemen, for it falls out diverse times
that we wage wars in Barbery, where the enemy have so many horse, and we but
few or none, and as in Barbery, so might this inconvenience chance in other
places.


Londonno. Very well have you asked, and I have diverse times hard this matter
disputed upon, and I have more times the^ once thought of this, nether is it
long since I spoke of it before the Captayn general, and that which I said
there will I here repeat. Viz. that I am of opinion, that those hargubuzers
cannot be any where placed in safety, but in the midst of the squadron or
battails of pikes, where though we could have no other fruit or service of
them, then to have them sure and kept safe there until such time that we should
have need of them, I think that this were very much, and yet do I not know
why, but that they may greatly favor the squadron and do it much good, with
great damage to the enemies, if they did but regard when the pikes are couched
on that side of the squadron which is set upon by the enemies, that then the
pikemen should some thing bend their bodies ^nclining downwards: for so might
the hargubuzers that are in the center of the squadron have commodity freely to
discharge their pieces on their ennemy without any hurt or prejudice to the
pikemen, and though this seem to be something hard and troublesome unto them
that have not used it, and put it in practice, yet so they would exercise
themselves in trying and doing it sometimes, they would find it to be most
easy. For far more difficult and troublesome was that which the Romans did,
who making three squadrons of their foot bands, when the first was defeated, at
the last driven to great extremity, and grievously oppressed by the ennemy, it
was received within the second, without disordering either of them, and even so
was both the first and second recelued within the third, without confusion of
any of them all, necessity urging them thereto, which no doubt by reason of
continual use was easy unto them to do: for what thing is there so hard and
difficult, which cannot be made easy by use and exercise.


Vargas. Why, but how do you understand that the shot should be within the
pikes? you by hap, mean that one hargubuzer should be set between two pikes.


Londonno. No, not so, for it is likely tha so the order would be broken and
marred, but I intend that withint the midst of the squadron and center of it
there should be a place, where the hargubuzers should be placed in their order,
and may be without any offense or hinderance to the pikes: and so the Sergeant
Mayor should not do amiss to cast what shot he has, and having considered
how many argubuzers are necessary to line the squadron and to make the sleeves,
above al thing to set them that remain overplus in order squarewise, and
compass them about with the pikeme^. This is to be done (as you very well noted
above) where the enemy has great company of horsemen and we lack them: For it
is most manifest that shot only cannot resist the strength of horesemen:
though nevertheless it has more then once or twice bin seen that hargubuzers
have bin charged by a troup of horse, and yet have not bin defeated: but for all
this no man can deny that the valor of the hargubuzers was not so much the
cause of it, as the pusillanimity and cowardice of the horsemen: for the
uttermost of their powers is to discharge their pieces upon the squadron and
battayl of the horsemen which set upon them, and being compassed and environed
about by them, having no defense by their swords, are not able to withstand the
vehement charge of the horsemen, which is only granted unto the pike, and so
of force, if they want this favor, they must always be overthrown, if the
horsemen quit them selves accordingly. But in other places where the said
inconvenience is not offered, but the battle is to be fought only against foot
bands, there shot does great service, and victory has very often been
obtained by hargubuzers only. But for all this, I am not of opinion that among
our Spanish nation nor the Italians, there should be a greater number of
hargubuzers then pikemen in the companies: as for the Switzers and Germans,
their pikes are much worth, but their gunnes are very lightly esteemed.


Vargas. I have taken great pleasure in the discourse which you have made upon
the doubt I moved, and now seeing you have made the Squadron and Battle. Tell
me I pray you how the Sergeant Mayor ought to behave himself when he
marches with it.


Londonno. This which you now ask, is not the least care which the Sergeant
Mayor ought to have in his office, seeing it is a matter of so great moment and
importance, to lead the people marching in good order, which is so much the
more hard and troublesome to be done, by how much the more you see all men
generally abhor to be tied to order, and especially our Spanish foot men,
who being (by reason of the climate more cholerike then of any other
complexion) take it something impatiently to go in order. For you cannot so
soon set them in order, but straight upon the least occasion in the world,
they will be disordered again. As when they meet with some place by the way
that is something narrow, or when they become weary and hot, going to seek
water, and so separate themselves from the companies to go and drink, yea,
and for other causes, nothing so reasonable as this: but all this proceeds
partly of the ill discipline that is now a days used in Wars: and partly of
the fault and carelessness of the Officers. For there is no doubt but that if
the Soldier did know that if he did go out of order, he should be punished
so severely as they were punished in ancient times past that served among the
Romans, none of them durst go a whit out of the way, or do otherwise then
he is commanded to do: but because men see how slacklie such offenses are
punished, they do not regard whether they go in order or not: but now seeing
that in this age the disobedience of Soldiers is not so rigorously punished,
as it was in that ancient Martial discipline. If the Officers both upper and
under were so diligent and careful as is required, and as they are bound to
be, these inconveniences might easily be remedied. For to bring which thing
to pass, I will show you what order I think may be taken. But above all other
things, I will not pass those things with silence which the Seargeant Mayor
ought to do before he marches with his people, being in the field. I say
then that the Seargeant Mayor ought first of all to go to the Captain
General to to take directions, and know whether his Regiment be to march in
the vauntgarde, battle, or rerewarde, which is ordinarily done the night
before the Army marches (though notwithstanding sometimes the General will
not give the orders for worthy respects, til the very hour that they are to
march and he ought to be very well informed of the way, especially when it
is his Regimentes turn to march in the vauntgarde, though it be very
necessary at all times to know the ways of the Country very well and
perfectly, through which he may most fitly march with his people out of the
Camp: and by fault hereof it does not very seldom come to pass, that
many Seargeant Majors have been confounded and shamed in presence of their
Generalles, guiding their Regimentes by ways that are stopte and cumbered with
Carts, and other baggages of the Camp, sometimes bringing their soldiers
through such narrow ways and straightes, that they cannot pass, unless they
break their order: for at the raising and departing of the Camp (as you have
seen) the horsemen do so cross up and down in all parts, and the
Trumpettes and Drums make such a noise, that unless he be very well
foreseen, and know perfectly the way which he is to take, and through
which way he is to bring forth his Companies, commonly he shall fall into
these inconveniences, principally when the Camp departs by night, or in such
days as are cloudie. Wherefore it is necessary that the Seargeant Mayor, if
it be possible, should be singularly well informed of ths situation of the
Country, through which he is to pass, and of the distaunce between cuerie
place, the quantity of the ways, with their abridgementes, hills, valleys,
fountaynes, rivers. And to be the more sure, he ought to have skillful
Warfarers and faithful guides. Then the order being known and the way also,
and the hour come of departure, he ought to give order that the Drum Mayor
gather the Companyes together, and that the Captain of the field cause the
baggage to be laden, and then he ought speedily to bring his Ensigns from
their quarters to the place of Arms, and there to form his Squadron, and
separate the Captains, each one in their orders, they ought to march in that
day, and to dispose the Seargeantes in such manner, that every one of them
do know what people they must govern and keep in order: and because it is
very seldom seen that the ways are large inoughe for the Squadron to march
with the whole front, he shall make his rank no greater, then that the people
may march commodyously, always having consideration that the rank be never
lesser (if the way suffer it) then the third part of the front of this
Squadron or Battle. As for example. If the front of this Battle be of one
and twenty men, seven men shall march in a rank: and so likewise of other
Battles. For he ought always to be very careful in procuring his
footebandes to be lead in such order, that occasion of necessity being
offered, he may with all speed and celeritie make up his Squadron. Now the
Captains and Officers being severed, as I have said, and the Regiment
marching, the Seargeant Mayor his right place is in the vauntgarde of the
Regiment, where it most commonly concerns the master of the Camp or
Colonnell to go. And I say most commonly, because if chance we should leave
the enemy behind us. The rereward is a more convenient place for the
Colonnell to march in. And forasmuch as the Sergeant Mayor is his instrument,
by means of whom he sends the order unto the Captains and Companies. He
ought to stand near to his person, but he ought in such manner to be there, ye
he neglect not sometimes to make a stand and stay himself, and see the whole
Regiment pass: and if he find any retchlesnesse or negligence in the
Sergeants, not discharging their duty, in causing the people committed to
their government, to go in good order: he ought to blame and rebuke them
severely, insomuch that none of the Sergeantes ought to forbear any fault or
negligence whereby the order may be marred: but diligently to take heed, that
ye order never be broken, if it be possible. And if it chance to be broken (as
it happens sometimes by reason of the streightnes of the ways) they ought to
be very careful in making it up again. For which if it be needful that the
vantgard make a stand, one of y^ Officers shall incontinently go to inform
the Sergeant Mayor of it. And I am of opinion, that no Sergeant, Ensign or
Captain should pass the word through the Squadron, saying, Stand, or March
from hand to hand (as it is many times done very unadvisedly) unless the
necessity be such, that they cannot have time to signify it unto the
Colonnell or Seargeant Mayor. For by reason of this abuse, that every Officer,
and upon every occasion that is offered, does pass the word, many
inconveniences may do spring, and the Officers will take upon them to do
those things that appertain unto the superiors, usurping that pre-eminence
which is only granted unto the Colonnel as head of the Regiment, and unto the
Seargeant Mayor, as the general guide of the Squadron. And now this is become
so common, that not only the Officers, but also the common soldiers, without
respect or discretion, for the least cause in the world, do use to pass the
word. Whence it comes to pass, that sometimes when for matters of
importance, the superior pass the word, it does not pass so speedily as it
should, by reason that it is neglected and naught set by, and so for the most
part it remains in the middle of the squadron sans passing to the vantgard,
the soldiers thinking and persuading themselves, that it comes not by
commandment of the superiors. But if they were sure that none had authority
to command it to be passed but the superiors, they would incontinently obey,
and do as they are commanded. And therefore to shun and anoide this
inconvenience in a matter so important, as to keep the squadron in good order,
it is very necessary that this pre-eminence should be only rescrued for the
two upper officers. And it is most just that such Officers or soldiers that
dares first pass the word should not remain unpunished. I will advertise you
how that it is necessary that the people should sometimes make a stand, as
well that the soldiers may rest themselves a while, and eat of that which they
use to carry in their scrippes or bags, as also that they may the better
keep themselves in good order, having breathed a little after their
weariness. And the Seargeant Mayor ought to procure such stands to be made
near some water, where the Soldiers may drink and refreshe themselves, and
the Officers ought to be very diligent in looking to the Souldyers, that none
of them at such stands get out of the Squadron, and make any misrule in the
neighbor places, and much less that any of them enter into Orchardes to
endomage the Husbandmen. For all those things are alienate and estraunged from
good discipline. And if the Soldier should be permitted to be licentious in
these trifles and small things, they would not afterward be able to
refrain from the same in greater matters. Howbeit I cannot count it a small
thing that the Soldier should leave his place and disranke himself, ranging
in the possessions and grounds of the poor people, and so I cannot patiently
think upon the great negligence and in consideration of certain Officers,
that do not only not repress such disorders among the soldiers, but
themselves also oftentimes are the first that show them the way and help to
do it. Who ought not only to be deprived of their Offices, as unworthy to
have them, but also to be punished with greater and more grievous punishment,
as transgressors of Martial discipline.


Vargas. By that which you have very well spoken, we may easily gather that
the retchlesnesse and negligence of Officers is the chief cause of disorder:
and no doubt, if that care were both in the soldiers and officers which is
required in them, they should always march in good order. And I take it to be
a matter very important, that the word should not be passed in the squadro^,
but with great regard and consideration, and I suppose it very necessary that
such stands should be made, that the soldiers may rest a little. In deed the
Gunners can better abide the troublesomnes of the way without resting, as men
that go loose, and not passed with the heaviness and weight of armors: but
corsiets cannot any way hold out, but must needs make stays, especially in
days that are extremely hot. And I have often seen some neglect their
offices, and stay when they have bin commanded to march: and many soldiers
being heavy armed have bin choked, striving to do more then they could do,
marching in their armor. And certes it is a shame for some Seargeants Mayor to
see how untowardly they lead their squadrons, and how unadvisedly they march,
observing no order, only for not considering when it is necessary for them to
make stands: whence it comes to pass, that they lead a squadron orderly,
but draw as it were a long rope after them three or four miles, oftentimes
being between the vantgard and the rereward: in such manner, that the enemy
with a far lesser number then those Seargeants Mayor have in their Regiments,
might very easily do them much harm, and so they march in great danger in
one hour through their negligence, to loose all the credit, honor and
reputation, which they have gotten in many years. And although the Master of
the Camp or Colonnel be the chief of the Regiment, and therefore (as unto such
a one) the honor or shame of the good or ill success of the companies,
appertains principally unto him, yet nevertheless the Seargant Mayor has a
good share therein: for as much as I can gather by your discourse, and (if my
memory deceive me not) ever since I have given my self to this profession, I
have always seen that not only the common judgment of all men, but also the
Captains and Generals do use to praise or blame the Seargeantes Mayor, because
they lead their Regiments in good or ill order, before any other whatsoever,
as such officers whom the ordering of the squadron chiefly concerns.


Land. So it is in truth, for all this care and charge does properly and wholly
appertayn unto the Sergeant Mayor, and he ought not to excuse himself of his
negligence or inability, blaming the sergeants or officers of his regiment, for
they do all of them obey his orders and do according to his directions, and
also they he more or less, diligent or slow, according to the watchfulnes or
slownesse of the Sergeant Mayor who commands them.


Vargas. Now I pray you tell me how the people of the regiment ought to be
divided when it marches, who ought to go in the vantguard, who in battayl, and
who in rereward, and what place the standards or ensigns ought to have.


Londonno. I have already told you above (if my remembrance keep touch with
me) that the Sergeant Mayor ought to procure his people to march in such manner
and so well ordered, that occasion of necessity enforcing him, he may always
with great easiness and facillity form and make his squadron. And to attayn
unto this, I think this to be the order he ought to observe. First in the
vantguard marches the sleeue of hargubuzers of the right hand of the squadron
(which sleeue as we have before said, ought to be made before the company be
brought forth of the camp) which ordinarily is one company of gun-men, of the
two that are in one regiment, next after follows the lining of the same right
hand, being of hargubuzers, and after that follow the pikes according to the
manner before showed. And because among other things that happen to be done
unadvisedly in a squadron, it is a very unseemly thing to se the ensigns born
so out of order and ouerthwartly, sometimes at one side and sometimes at
another. The Sergeant Mayor ought to cause them to be placed so, that the
squadron being made, they be always in their proper places, which is in ye
midst and center of the battayl, next ensues the lining of hargubuzers, of
the left hand, and last of al in the rereward marches the sleeue of
hargubuzers, being one of the two companies of gun-men that are always in one
regiment. And thus you see that after this manner the people marches being
parted and divided, and yet the squadron is incontinently formed.


Vargas. I pray you why say you that the sleeue and lining of the right hand
should go before the sleeue and lining of the left^ hand? it may be there is
some mystery in it.


Londonno. I know not of any other mystery, but this that in all our actions,
we ought to apply our selves to perfection as near as we possibly can, and
for as much as the right hand is the noblest and most perfect, it is better we
should begin thence, then from the left hand to form the squadron, and also
to undo it or break it.


Vargas. Now seeing that you have told me how the people ought to march, I
desire you to know where the baggage of these companies may be carried, that it
may both be safe, and yet not hinder the people of the regiment.


Londonno. When an army marches, this consideration ought to be had, that if
the enemy be before in the vant guard of the way, the baggage ought to be in
the rereward, and contrarily, if the enemy be behind the army our baggage shall
be carried in the vantguard, and if the enemies camp be at the right hand of the
way, our baggage shall be put at the left hand of our camp, and if the enemy be
on the other side we ought to follow the same order, carrying our baggage at
the right hand of our army. And so shall the battle continually be a wall and
defense to our baggage, and if occasion be offered that the two armies should
join in fight, as they march, it cannot hinder them, and besides this certain
troops of horse do ordinarily go to guard the baggage from the suddayn
incursions and assaults of horsemen sent out by the enemy, and this very same
order ought also to be observed, marching with one regiment by it self only.
But in case we were far from the enemy, I would have the baggage for a good
consideration march in the vantguard with a troop of hargubuzers to guide it,
for it is a great commodity for the soldiers, when they come to their quarters
weary with going, to find their tents planted, and their forage ready without
staiyng for it, after they be come to the place where they are to be lodged,
coming many times wette and almost dead for hunger. And besides this if any
thing should chance to fall by the way, the owner may save it, seeing it in
danger to fall, or be lost, and so every one may look unto his things that
nothing be lost, which they could not do, if their baggage were carried in the
rereward behind the battle.


Vargas. Certes it is most true, that all these commodityes be had by carriyng
the baggage in the vantguard, whereas nothing is gotten by carriyng of it in
the rereward, but loss and discommodity, for daily we see that some one or
other playneth that he has lost one thing or other, and it chances every day
that many things are lost or taken through the negligence of naughty servants
and boys, their masters not being there to see their baggage, or to look unto
it, which if it were carried in the vantguard undoubtedly should not be lost.


Londonno. I will have you to understand, (before we leave this particular,
which we now speak off, that occasion might be offered, where the baggage
could be safely carried in neither of the foresaid places, and then it would be
necessary that it should be carried in the midst of the squadron after the
same manner as I said above of the shot that remained over plus, for if we
should march with our army in Barbery or any other place, where the enemy has
great store of horse, and we none, it were necessary that our baggage should
be in the midst and center of our sqnadro^, if we would not lose it, for seeing
that that little which the soldiers have, is there, it is great reason it
should be carefully looked unto, and safely guarded, and this ought the rather
be procured, for that the reputation is great which we lose, if the enemy
spoil us of it, gloriosly bragging and vanting that they took some prise from
us against our wills in despighte of us. Whereof among other valiant
Captains, Julius Caesar, left us a worthy example, when he (according to
Suetonius) being forced by the vehemence and civil sury of them of Alexandria,
to retire, did cast him self unto the River Nilus, and carried in one hand
his book of commentaries holding it on hie, that it might take no wette, and
swimmed with the other, holding his vesture in his mouth, that his enemy should
not glory of any spoil of his. But in case that without manifest danger that
the people be defeated and spoiled this cannot be done, the goods ought to be
abandoned, and forsaken to conserve the principal, which has not only ben
done by many noble and excellent Captains, but also some have of purpose left
their carriage in the enemies power, offering the occasion in robbing of it,
and gathering the spoil to disorder themselves, to the end that by means of
this policy they might with less trouble and great facillity obtain the
victory of them.


Vargas. I had forgotten to ask you where you think that the horses of the
footmen as well corslets as Hargubuzers should go, and like wise where the
servants and lackeis shall carry their masters pikes when they ride? for I have
seen this used diversely.


Londonno. You know that by all good discipline it is forbidden that any
footeman shall go forth of the lodging, or much less enter in it on horse
back: but always in going forth he ought to accompany his band or ensign, at
the least a mile, or an half, and even so in coming to the lodging within a
mile or half a mile of it he ought to light, seeing that their horses that
use to ride may easily go at the flank of the battle if the ways be broad
enough, and if not, at the tail, till they may ride. And it ought not to be
suffered in any case, that the soldiers should get upon their horses, before
their Captains that march on foot, take horse: and then riding and setting
them selves in order by the Captain and officer that leads them (who ought
before by the Seargeant Mayor to be named and appointed) they shall place them
selves if they be hargubuzers of the vantguard, straight behind the same: and
if they be pykemen, they shall ride behind their pikes, the same shall the
hargubuzers do that march in the rerewarde, placing them selves in the tail
of the squadron, and the servant of such pikemen as ride, shall go with
their pikes in the same place where their master use to march in the
squadron, that occasion being offered, that the people should alight and march
on foot. Each soldier that is on horse back may speedily return to his
place, and the squadron need not to be broken or confused. The very same
ought to be observed by those soldiers, who though they march on foot, yet
have their men to carry their pikes: who ought to bear them hard by their
Masters in the same rank or in the other rank behind them: where when
necessity is offered, the soldiers may take there pikes, and their men or
boys ought incontinently get themselves out of the squadron or battayl. And to
tell you the truth, I like not the manner and order which I have herein don and
observed by diverse Sergeants Mayor, who placed all the servants, lackeis, and
boys, together in order nere the bands either before them or behynd them. For
it is most manifest that in so doing the squadron cannot escape confusion and
disorder, and none of them that ride know their place certainly. Whereas it is
most necessary that the Sergeant Mayor should in nothing so much trouble and
wast himself as in procuring his people to be so lead, that all and each of
them know his own place. For herein consists the conservation of all good
order: when they come near the place where they are to lodge, the Captains
(as I have already told you) ought to light with in one half a mile at the
least of it, and so following them, the other soldiers that ride, ought
likewise to light on foot, and it is convenient that the Sergeant Mayor,
either himself, or by his assistant, should be acquainted with the situation
of the place a while before the companyes reach thither. And coming unto the
place of arms or watch-hill of the said lodging, he ought to form a
Squadron, and make his Battle, not permitting any Soldiers to go to his
quarter, or to disranke himself until such time that the whole regiment being
arrived the Sergeant Mayor himself, or his assistaunte, comes to the
Ensigns and license them to go to their lodgings. Who (as you have seen) are
lodged in the front of the quarters of each companyes, all of them in one
rank, and beneath them are the soldiers lodged. The Sergeant Mayor ought not
to suffer in any case, that any cart or other baggage be put before the
standards or Ensigns, and much less ought he to permit any fire to be made
there, nor any let or hinderaunce: for all a long from that place is the
watch-hill, or place of arms, which ought to be kept vncombred and free for
the Squadron only. When the regiment is lodged, the Sergeant Mayor ought
incontinently to cause a Courte-gard of five and twenty men to be set about
seventy or eighty paces from the front of the lodging. And these soldiers
ought to be taken out of one of those companyes that watched the night before:
seeing that it appertains unto them to be of the watch until the new watch
enters, and four and twenty hours be expyred: save only when one whole
company is appointed to watch by day, and in this case he ought to appoint
some of the companyes of Arcabuzers to watch, and this Courte-garde which I
said to be set in the day time, ought to be in the same place, where at
night the company that do enter to watch shall be placed. After this the
first thing that he ought to do, is to make himself well acquainted with his
quarter, and to see whether it be necessary there should be any paths or
ways made, that the soldiers may commodiously get out to fight: and if need
be they should be made with all speed, (for it oftentimes chances that the
companyes be lodged in Orchards, woods, and vines, where a man cannot without
much a do get out, unless there be ways made) it appertains unto the
Sergeant Mayor in all have to cause ways to be made, and passage to be made
easy, and all things to be taken away that may any ways hinder or let, that
the squadron can not be made with all speed and facility. And as well for
this, as for the fortifying of the lodgings, and making passages and ways for
the artillery to pass: there be in all armies certain companies of pianors,
over which the General of the artilery or his Liefetenant has jurisdiction.
And the Sergeant Mayor making recourse unto any of these, ought to provide all
things necessary to the purpose. After this, if there be an whole army, he
is to go to the Master of the Camp general, and learn how many of the
companies of his regiments he shall bring to watch, and in what quarter they
shall be appointed. But if he be there alone with his regiment only, he ought
to epsy and view the place diligently, and to dispose the Sentonels in such
manner that no man may possibly enter or go forth of the lodging or quarter,
unless he be seen by them: and if so be that his regiment be with other
regiments whether they be of ye same nation or of an other, he ought to join
with the Sergeant Mayor of the said regimentes and agree with them of the
manner and order to be used by them in appointing the watch, and sending out
the Sentonels, in so much that there be nothing neglected or left imperfect: for
all this office consists in wariness and diligence: and it is very
watchfulnes it self. Then it appertains unto the Sergeant M. to go for the
watch word unto the general, and to take directions for the next day, and
incontinently to bear it unto the Colonel, and to make him acquainted with
the directions which he brings: notwithstanding that sometimes the Colonel
himself takes the watchword and directions of the general, and gives it to
the S. Mayor, but properly it concerns the S. Mayor to do this. Furthermore
the hour being come to set the watch (which ought not to be before the night
approaches, especially if the enemy be not far off for the Sergeant Mayor
ought as far as possible they can, to use the matter so, that the enemy do not
spy, whence they pick out those that are to watch and to stand Sentonels) he
ought to gather together the company or companies that be of the watch (which
ordinarily should be caused in the morning by the head drommer of the regiment,
to be ready) and place the^ in those parts and quarters which (as I said
above) he ought to have espied before: and he ought straight to inform the
Sergeants of those companies where they shall send out the Sentonels, and what
order they shall use in making the rownds: and he ought to have an especial
regard, afterward to visit all things and to ouer-see them, noting and
marking whether they be so done and executed as he prescribed and ordained:
and if he find any thing neglected, as well in this as all other orders and
directions which he gives the officers, he ought not to let it pass unrebuked
more or less severally, according as the case requires. For because the
Sergeants Mayor are slow in rebuking and punishing the faults and negligences
which the officers and soldiers oftentimes do commit, thence it comes to
pass that they are themselves not set by, and their directions and orders
nothing regarded.


Vargas. You have told me more then I asked of you, and I am very glad that
your discretion forgets not to teach me that which by reason of my
ignorance I know not to ask. But now I desire you to tell me what distance you
think there ought to be between the watch, and the quarters or lodgings: and
how far the Sentonels ought to be separated from the Courte-gardes, and how far
distance they ought to stand the one from the other: and lastly whether they
ought to stand double or single. For of all these things, I have heard diverse
opinions, and I have seen those things diuersely used.


Londonno. In incamping, they use oftentimes to entrench the army, and rear a
ramper round about the quarters, for the greater safety and strength of the
lodgings: and then, the companyes that are of the watch ought always to go out
to ward, and keep the trench, which is the wall of the lodging or camp. But
in case there be no trench, as I told you above, I would not have, that the
Courte-guard should be at the most, no further from the front of the lodgings
then seventy or eyghtye paces, in the place of arms or watch hill: how be it
sometimes they shall find certain motes, ditches, or gappes so strong, that
it would not be amiss for them to set the watch there, though it be something
sarther from the lodging then the said distaunce. For such like defenses serve
in steed of trenches: but in case there be none such, then the watch ought to
be set according to the manner above said. Seeing that as well for the
safety of the quarters, as to aid and succor them if necessity should so
require, it is better that the watch should be some thing near the companyes
then far from them. The in-most Sentonelles ought to stand no farther from
the court gards then thirty paces, and there ought not to be more distance
from the one to the other, then that they may be suffered by the darkness of
the night to see one another. For the sentonels being as it were the wall of
the Camp, and standing there to the end that no body may pass in or out
unless he be seen, if they did stand farther one from the other, they should
be deceived of that which they entende, and fall into great inconveniences,
and faults in their watch. These Sentonels as the principal and chiefest
ought to be double. Seeing that, as it is commonly said, more see four eyes
then two: and also if there be a fresh and cold air, one of them may walk
up and down, whilst the other watches: and if they see any thing whereof
they ought to advise their Corporals, one of them may go and the other stand
still, in so much that for all these causes it is necessary and more safe for
the whole Camp, that these Sentonels should stand double. But thirty paces
beyond these Sentonels, other Sentonels stand single, which are by some called
(though not properly) forlorn Sentonels, which ought to stand no farther one
from another then the other first and in-most Sentonels: and if so be they see
any thing they ought to retire to the nearer sentonels and aduising them of
that which they saw. They ought to return to their places again without
calling arm at all: but if case they see any notorious quantity of people,
either on horse or on foot, then ought they to retire to the double
Sentonelles, and if they all three do affirm that they are sure they see such
troops of people coming: then ought they to call arm, but not otherwise, for
oftentimes either fear or a man's own imagination makes a small number to
seem a great many unto one man alone: and in a Camy, no man ought to call
arm, but upon great occasion. And to this intent the carfulness and
watchfulness of the Officers of the companies that watch is very important,
for they ought to visit and ouersee the watch very ordinarily and diligently,
which likewise ought to be done by the Sergeant Mayor every night at sundry
hours, as well to visit and see whether every thing be done according as it
was ordained, as also because this may be a chief cause to move the Officers
and Soldiers to look to their charge, knowing that they shall be visited and
ouerseene by the Sergeant Mayor at diverse times, and rebuked and punished for
their negligence and faults if so be they commit any. Silence in Court-gards
especially in the nightime is very necessary, I mean, that all noise,
stir, cries, and hollowings, ought to be quite expelled from the watch, and
if they talk one with the other, they ought to speak low and softly, with
modesty. but the Sentonels ought not to speak at any time, but always to be
not only very watchful in seeing and looking, but also very attentive in
harkening: for very many times they may chance to hear that which by reason
of the darkness of night, they cannot by sight perceive.


Vargas. Tell me, why you said that some men improperly call the outtermost
Sentinelles that stand single, forlorn Sentinels.


Londonno. Because (properly he is called a forlorn Sentinel, that necessity
so requiring) is set either on foot or horseback near to the enemies Camp,
to give aduisement whether any people gone forth of the Camp, or whether the
Camp depart secretly, and this Sentinel ought to be so near the Camp of the
enemy, that if he be cfpied, he may harlie escape, and return with great
difficulty: and ought not to be sent, but when they have great necessity of
such aduisements, and so this Sentinel ought not to have the watchword of our
Camp, for the inconvenience which might come, if he should be taken by the
enemy, and being bribed, should let them know our watchword: but he ought to
have a different and particular counter-token for himself only, by which he
may be known and received at his return. As for the utmost Sentinels, that
stand single by themselves before the double Sentinels, I know not upon what
reason some call them forlorn Sentinels: seeing that they standing but thirty
paces from the double Sentinels, may (sufficient cause why they should do it
being offered) commodiously retire back to the double Sentinels, and so as
well the one as the other (if they be forced by necessity) may speedely
repair to the Courte-gard.


Vargas. Think you that the Sentinels when there is an alarm in the Camp,
ought all of them to return to their Courtegard.


Londonno. In no case, if their Corporal cause them not to retire: seeing that
they may not stir from the place appointed them, without the leave of their
Corporal: those Sentinels excepted that call arm, and spy the sury of their
enemy rushing upon them, and be not able to resist it: these may and ought to
retire to their Courte-gard, but all the rest ought to stand firmly, and keep
their places. And seeing that I have resolved you of the doubt you were in, and
what I think the Sentinels ought to do, I will also tell you what I remember
of those companies that watch. For oftentimes (as you have seen) three or
four companies of one regiment are appointed to watch in one night. Now, if it
should chance that there should be an alarm in the Camp, it were not
convenient that each company should make a squadron apart, but that they should
meet Whereas he speaks that all the companies ought to make one squadron, I
understand him, all of them that are appointed to the ^aim^ Courtegard, for if
he mean that all the petty Courts de guard shall reuert and make one maine
stand, then must he needs leave much of the Cople to spoil, besides cut
himself for intelligence, and so not know where to answer his enemy to the
best advantage.
altogether by the maine Courtegard, which place being the place of Arms is
more commodious, and they ought to be appointed before, by the sergeant Mayor
there to make their Squadron: whether also all the rest that are in their
quarters shall assemble and gather together: but mark, that those companies
which watch either by the Captain General, or by the Municion house, or out
of the place of Arms, or out of their quarters, ought It is impossible to
allow that any watch may be without sentinel.
not to send out their Sentinels: and when it happens so that there be an
alarm in the Camp, the Sergeant Mayor, (whose Squadron being made before all
things, all the time the alarm continues, does keep his ward) ought to know
and understand the cause of the alarm very well and surely: and it being
known unto him, he ought to advise his neighbor regiments of it, and
especially his Captain General, and the Master of the field, without whose
commandment (I mean the Captain General) the companies that are set in
Battle, ought not to return to their wards or quarters: but after the
Sergeant Mayor is sure that they may safely do it, and have license of the
Captain General, he may send out the Sentinels again, and appoint them
their places as before: and if so be that he think it necessary, to increase
the force of the watch, he may do it with more Soldiers or less, according as
the necessity of the time requires. Furthermore, seeing that we now speak of
the watch and Sentinels, or shield watch, I will advertise you of an ordinary
and great negligence, which is committed as well by the vnshilfull and unapt
Officers, as common Soldiers in the manner of asking and demanding the
watchword one of the other, and also in giving it one to the other: which being
one of the chiefest things in warfare that ought to be done, with due regard
and consideration, is now least regarded, and therefore I could wish, that
every one should be careful of this, being a matter of such weight and
moment: and that the Round, when he visits the Sentinel, if he find him
watchful according to his duty, he needs not at If he may come so near the
Sentinel as to see whether he do his duty or not without any trial, so
may he likewise come being an enemy, and spy how the Court of gards be
placed, or for some other intelligence, and so go his way again without saying
any thing.
every time to come near him, but pass to the other Sentinels: and if he
find them all awake and doing their duty, he ought to return to the
courtegard. And in such a case I think it not necessary, that the watchword
should be given from one side to the other, seeing that the Round comes not
near the Sentinels. And when upon some necessary occasion, the Round comes
near to the Sentinels, then ought the Sentinel or shield-watch (if he be an
Hargabuzer putting his match into the cock of his piece, and if he be a
pikeman trailing his Pike) demand the watchword: and that no further of, that
it may be heard with a low voice, and after the same manner ought the Round to
give the watch word unto the Sentinel, who in no case ought to suffer any man
to come near him, unless he give him the watchword, although he know him to
be his captain or Sergeant Mayor, or master of the camp: for the Soldier
being appointed Sentinel, is not In this matter is there a question, for as well
may the Sentinel forget the watchword, whereof may ensue many desperate casual
ties, as also be negligent in other duties. I think it therefore necessary, that
the Captain of the watch, or the Sergeant Mayor, either by an ordinary time of
Round, or else by some certain token ray be known to the sentinel, that thereby
he may prove the sentence in doing his duty, otherwise the Sentinel having
forgotten the watchword, shall have it brought him by the next Round, or
otherwise may let a false round, or kill a true round, etc.
bound to know any man, or to let him come near him, except he give him the
watchword. For we see daily, that men be easily deceived in these two senses
of hearing and seeing. And for this cause is it now used in warfare, that all
the wards receive a countertoken or sign of the Captain general (which the
Italians called Moto, and the Spaniards Nombre, but in England it is called the
watchword) to exclude all suspicion and deceit, and that we may know
assuredly, that he who gives us such a token or sign, is one of our Camp,
and that we may safely let him come near us as our friend.


Vargas. Yet I doubt of one thing by reason of that which you said but a while
since. For I have ever heard that the Sentinel ought not to let any man pass
unless he give the watchword: how say you then that the Round, if he find the
Sentinel watching according to their duty, after he has seen them, may
return to the Courtegard without giving the watchword.


Londonno. Know that the Sentinel ought not to let any of the Camp to go in or
out unless he give the watchword, much less ought he to let him come near
the place where he himself stands: but if the Round or Captain of the
watch pass eight or ten paces from him, it is sufficient that they speak,
neither is it necessary that they should be bound to give the watchword, and
this is to be understood, if the Round or Captain of the watch pass within
the watch hill: for if he pass two or fro without the Camp, then ought not
the Sentinel, to suffer him come near for to know him, though he be no
farther of then the said distance, unless he give the watchword, and if chance
he give it not, he may slay him as an enemy, besides, note that though he that
comes from abroad out of the Camp give the watchword, yet ought not the
Sentinel freely to let him enter in the Lodge, but he ought to accompany him
unto the double Sentinels, and charge them with him, that one of them in like
manner, may go with him to the main Courte-gard, and deliver him to the
Sergeant, Ensign, or Captain of the company, who are bound incontinently to
advise the Sergeant Mayor of it, and it appertains unto him to bring him to
the master of the Camp, or Captain General if need be.


Vargas. What say you of the little Courte-gards, which I have seen some
Sergeants Majors take out of the maine Courteguards, where those Sentinels and
companies be in, that watch in the outward parts of the Camp: what think you
of them? are you of opinion that they be necessary?


Londonno. Certes, I think that who so does, cannot do amiss, and I have
seen it used very much, and the true cause why this is used, is this, such
courtegards are taken only of those Soldiers, that are appointed for
Sentinels and Roundes that night: to the end that the Officer or Corporal at
the time when he is to change them, may find them more readily: these
courtegards serve also, that the Sentinels, (occasion being offered) might have
help and aid with more speed, and they furthermore, cause the watch to be
more vigilant and watchful. And all whatsoever serves to make a Soldier,
more viligent and ready for the service of their companies and to discharge
their duty ought to be allowed and approved as good and profitable.


Vargas. I pray you sir, ought the watch to retire from their ward in the
morning, without expecting or looking for any other order.


Londonno. No: but even as they were appointed to watch by the Sergeant Mayor,
so may they not return without his command, for he is bound him self or his
assistant to come and release them, and set the others whose turn it is to
watch by day. And seeing it comes to the purpose, you shall understand, that
the companies being set in the watch or in battle, or lodged in their
quarters, or embarked in ships, when they are in service, then may none of them
stir or pass out of the place appointed them (observing such discipline as
ought to be used in warfare) unless the Sergeant Mayor give order for it.
Neither ought the Master or chief heads of the Camp, give any such order
unto the companies, or command them any thing, but by the means of the
Sergeant Mayor, who is the guide, key and instrument of all such commands,
injunctions, and proclamations, which the Captains General and masters of the
Camp cause to be made unto their companies, and so likewise without his license
ought no General or particular Edict, command, or proclamation, to be made in
his Regiment. And if there be any Municion of Powder, Match, Lead, Victuals ^r
weapons, provided for the Regiment, (all which ought to be ca^sed to be brought
by the chief Furrire or Commissary, if there be one) it apperteineth unto the
Sergeant to part and divide it among the companies. And also the Sergeant Mayor
is the General and only procurer of the welfare of all the Soldiers, for it
apperteineth unto him to solicitate that they be provided of all things
necessary, as when they are without weapons, or want Municion, or victuals, to
make suit unto the General and chief of the camp, that they may have it: and
if they be not well paid and want money having great need of it, he is to
speak unto the master of the Camp and to the General, to provide their pay,
and if there be any sick or hurt, or sorely wounded in the Camp, he ought to
cause them to be carried very carefully to the Hospitals and places appointed
for that intent, providing them of Carts, baggages and Wagons (if it be
necessary) and to do all this, he is to have the help of all the Officers
in his Regiment, who ought to aid and obey him. For he uses the Captain of
the field to see the Carts and baggages that are necessary for the
Regiments, and also guides for the ways. When they are to march some journey,
the chief Furrire stands the Sergeant Mayor in stead, to bring Municion and
victuals: and the Sergeants to lead the soldiers in good order, and in those
things that apperteine to the watch, he uses the Ensign: and shows him what
order he will have observed for the service of the companies: and the Drum
Mayor serves to proclaim the general commandes and Edicts, and aduises the
Captains that are to watch. But above all things it is necessary that the
Sergeant Mayor should have an assistant to help him, with whom he should (with
the will of the counsel and chief of the camp) communiate his power and
authority: of whom the Captains and Officers of the Regiment ought to receive
the order to be observed, and obey him as the Sergeant Mayor himself. And
therefore it is requisite, that he should be a very sufficient man, well-beloved
and well known, left he lose the credit and countenance, which he ought to
have in respect of the Office which he bears, for want of those parts and
qualities that are required in such like persons.


Vargas. You have satisfied me of many things that I had in my mind ready to
ask of you: but besides the rest, I would now request you to tell me, of whom
the Sergeant Mayor, is to take the watchword.


Londonno. Of the Captain General, Coronell, or Master of the camp only.


Vargas. And put the case, that some Captain remain Governor over the
companies of his Regiments, as it daily falls out, ought the Sergeant Mayor
to take the watchword of him?


Londonno. I think not.


Vargas. Ought then the Sergeant Mayor to give it himself?


London. No: for it apperteineth to the governor to give it.


Vargas. Why then unto whom does it appertain to ask it?


Londonno. The Serg. Mayor his assistant ought to go to the governor to fetch
it, and incontinently to bring it to the Ser. Mayor.


Vargas. And if it chance he has not any assistant (as most times they have
none,) who shall take it?


Londonno. Then it apperteineth unto the Sergeant of the company that is to
watch, to go and take it, and bring it to the S. Mayor himself only for to
observe. The honor and pre-eminence due to an Office of so great authority, as
the Office which the Sergeant Mayor bears, of who^ (as in our former
discourse) you have been certified the Captains receive the orders by them to
be observed, it is not decent, much less convenient, that the sergeant Mayor
should go to take the watchword of any one but his superior.


Vargas. But I pray you sir, is it not more esteemed and of more credit, for
one to be Captain, then a Serg Mayor: seeing that to reward him, they use to
give him a band company of men.


Londonno. Of this the Emperor Charles the fifth, of happy memory, marueiled,
and not without great reason: for one Villandrando a Serg. Mayor, in the
service done at Dura, coming unto him to ask a certain company of him, that
had been vacant: making more account to be captain of the same, then of the
Office he did bear, the Emperor answered, y^ the office of a S. Mayor was far
more preeminent, then ye order prescribed unto them by the S. Mayor, and takes
directions by the General, or of the King or Emperor himself: and in war the
S. Mayor is barred from no place, but he may freely enter into the Pauilion, or
chamber of the king, or General. Villandrando, answered his Majesty, yt he
had reason, but that it was of old used among y^ Spanish footmen, that the S.
Mayor should in reward, be made captain of some company, by reason yt the
wages or stipend given to the S. Mayor was so small and miserable. And for this
cause, very well do the Germans, Italians, and Frenchmen, always choose one
of the best and most sufficient Captains, to bear this Office: and so they are
both Captains and Sergeant Mayor together: and in the absence of their
Coronell or Master of the Camp (by the law of war) it apperteineth unto them
in their stead to govern the bands or companies of their regiments: and surely
they do very wisely: and the Spaniards only cannot yet consider it, whence
grow many inconveniences, for we see that very many are chosen to exercise the
Office of a Sergeant Mayor, that are very unapt, insufficient, and unskillful
(as we have noted in the beginning of this discourse:) and because they have
not that authority and power which is required in such a charge, it falls
out oftentimes that the Captains set naught by them, whereas if they were
Captains of a company besides as well as they, they would not contemn them:
and also, Captains do more willingly obey and receive the order prescribed by
another Captain as they be, then of him that is but Sergeant Mayor, and who
(as they know) aspireth to be made Captain of a band of men, in reward of
his service. And because I think it be something late, and I believe we have
run through all the chiefest points concerning this Office, that are
necessary well to discharge it, let us turn over the land, that seeing we have
walked something far by reason of this delectable and pleasant River, before
we return I may tell you, what I think the Sergeant Mayor ought to do, when
he with his Regiment enters into some place or Fortress to lie in Garrison,
and herewith we will close up our discourse to day, But first I will tell you,
that seeing the Sergeant Mayor is to take order and dispose of so many and
weighty matters, and that he is to make provision of so many things: and
seeing that he ought to be so vigilant and quick in ouerseeing and
discharging the one, and in providing for the other: he ought when he goes
to the field to be well provided of good Nagges. And know, that he only is
allowed at all times and in all parts, and upon what occasion soever, to
cross up and down the Squadrons and Battles of the Army on Horse back: yea
although he go to the Captain General to fetch the watchword: and if it
chance he be seen on Horseback, it ought not to be imputed to ill or
untowardly bringing up, neither is he bound to go on foot, as some unfit and
sottishe Seargeant Mayor do, for the carfulness and speediness, necessary
in his charge requires such pre-eminence. And in the day, that is appointed
for the battle, ought he much less to be on foot, and place himself in the
rank among the other Captains, as some be persuaded he ought to do: seeing
that he fighting there can stand in stead but of one: whereas if he be on
horseback he may serve for many, ouerseeing and providing for many things that
at such times chance to be necessary and which often are cause of the victory:
and because no particular thing appertayning unto this office that I remember,
shall escape unspoken of, I will not pass with silence (because I have seen
many ignorant fellows take it in digeon) how that the Sergeants Mayor
ordinarily bear a short stick something thick in their hand, which serves
them for very many uses: as well to separate horses one from an other, and
cause other baggages to be removed and set a side, which oftentimes do much
harm to the ranks and squadrons, causing confusion, as to show and point
certain things which they command, using it as we use our foorefinger Index,
when we show or point at any thing: and they use also at the instant and
present time to correct and punish the disobedience of some soldiers with this
cudgel: which no man ought to be ashamed of, or think himself injured or
abused, and he is a very ignorant fellow that will take it in dugeon, for even
so both the Master of the camp, the Captains and the Sergeants Mayor with
such a stick or leading staff use to correct the soldiers, and oftentimes
break it on his head that is stubborn and will not obey, going out of order
contrary to the captain or Sergeant Mayor his direction, and it is very well
done, seeing it is done to punish them for their unruliness. Furthermore this
leading staff is ordinarily the Sergeant Mayor his wepon, wherewith he justly
punishes the faults of his soldiers, and would to God all those unreasonable
and brutish corrections were banished out of the wars, which many Officers
do with their swords and holberds, wounding their men and breaking their
limbs, yea and also killing many of them for very small faults, and upon
little occasion, which ought not to be done, but in cases of notorious
disobedience, and unless it were necessarily required for diverse worthy
respects that they should be punished in fraganti. We have made an end of all
things that seem unto me to be necessary for a Sergeant Mayor to exercise his
office in the field, now will we pass on forwards and entreat of those things
which he ought to do, when he enters into some fortress or camp with his
companies to lodge there, and to appoint the watch for the safe defense of the
same, and therefore I say, that when a regiment lies in garrison in some place,
and is to remain there some days for to keep the same, the first thing that
the Sergeant Mayor ought to do, is to make himself acquainted with the place
both within and without, vewing each part and parcel thereof, and considering
which parts are most necessary and commodious for to place the Courte-gardes
and Sentonelles or shield-watch, and also wherethe rowndes may be appointed to
go in the night time to ouersee the Sentonelles: he ought likewise to mark
what place may be most fit for the place of arms or watch-hill, where if
chance there should be an allarum, the soldiers might assemble and gather
together: and this being done, he ought to divide and quarter out his companies
according as he shall think it needful or requisite for the safe defense of
that place and of this partition which he makes (first of all communicating it
unto the Master of the Camp) he shall give his ensign an instruction, signed
with his name in writing, to the end that none of the Officers may with reason
excuse himself, if any negligence or carelessness be committed by them
touching the watch, otherwise then was ordained or appointed them, seeing they
had it set down in writing. The Seargeant Mayor must be advised that he ought
to be very circumspect and wary in parting his companyes, and setting the
watch in a Fortress or Camp, especially if it happen so that the enemy have
his Camp not far off (how so ever wariness, watchfulness, and diligence is
very necessary at all times in this profession) and so he must take heed that
he commit not that error and oversight that many Seargeantes Mayor do in
dividing the watch of the place by quarters, appointing each company their
quarter, my meaning is that he should not appoint each company a part of the
wall or rampire, ordinarily to keep and defend the same: seeing that for the
most part that any Fortress, City, Town, Castle or Camp, has been taken
or assaulted by charge, the cause thereof has been, that the Corporal or
Sentonell being bribed, did know the place or quarter in which it appertayned
unto him ordinarily to watch. And I could make a true rehearsal in testimony
hereof, of those things which I have my self seen passed in the war of
Sena, I being my self in proper person called as a witness to the self same
matter which I mean here to declare, which was thus: Don Garcia de Toledo, who
(was General of the army by reason of the death of his father Don Pedio de
Toledo Uiceroy) beseiging Montalehin, a certain Sergeant of the Duke of Soma,
and a Corporal a very friend of his, both of them banished out of the
kindgome of Naples, being appointed and charged always to watch one self same
place and quarter of the wall, occasion serving them, they offered Don Garcia
de Toledo, that they would let him with all the forces that he would bring
thither, enter into the place, by that quarter and part of the wall which was
committed unto their ward: and as this treason was even concluded, it fell out
that at the same instant one Iordanus Vrfenus, (who was at the defense of
Montalehin) ordained as a vigilant and careful man (how be it the rumor
runned that it was done by the counsel of Captain Moretus, who was also at
the same time within that place with his company) that the watch should no
more be set by appointing each company their quarter in which they
ordinarily should watch, during the time of their being there, as they had
done thither to, but that all the companyes that were appointed to watch
gathering together in the place of arms, should cast lots for the places and
quarters in which each one should watch, so that afterward the foresaid
Seargeant and Corporal being unsure of the place where they should watch,
could not bring their treason to effect, which in a very few days after
chanced to be discovered by fault of one of their servants, so that they
were therefore executed, and hanged by the feet on the tappe of the wall, as
all they that were in that service and place salve, and as I believe will
remember it. Therefore the Seargeant Mayor ought not only to ordain that the
companyes that are appointed to watch should cast lottes every night, to see
whose lot it chances to be to watch in this or that quarter or part of the
wall, but following the right order, it is convenient and necessary that the
Squadron and Sentonelles should do the same, so that neither the Squadrons
know their quarter, nor the companyes what part of the wall they shall keep,
nor the Sentonelles much less what place they shall stand in before the very
hour that the watch is set. Neither is there any cause why any Officer or
soldier should take this in dugeon, imagining that they be but little
trusted, and that their fidelity and faithfulness is had in question: for we
know that in all congregations and companyes that were most faithful and true
to their Princes and commonweals, there have never been base minds wanting,
who being either enduced by luker, or overcome with some human passion, have
made sale of countries, Provinces, and Kingdoms. Besides this, no Nation that
maintains war ought in this age to be more careful and wary then the
Spanish, seeing we know how odious it is generally unto all other countries,
because they have ever since fourscore years hitherward, maintained wars
ordinarily for the service of their king in most parts of Europe: and seeing
that it is most certain, that among the bands and companyes of Spanish
soldiers, there be many strangers that serve among them, as Italians,
Germans, Frenchmen, Fleminges, Englishmen, and Burgunnians, who serving and
being brought up among the Spaniards from their youth, learn to speak the
spanish tongue so perfectly, that it is impossible to discern many of them
from natural Spaniards: and of these, many (as by experience we have been
taught) have often attempted foul and filthy practices, in so much that all
the care which in this case is taken, is most iustlye taken and with great
reason, and we ought to be very scrupulous and curious herein, which our
curiosity and wariness ought to be allowed, and approved of us all to be
most profitable, good, and necessary, for no man's credit is thereby
diminished or any whitt empayred, but the opportunity and occasion of treason
is taken from them that bear disloyal and traiterous minds, and herewithall,
all they that lie in garrison, are most safe from danger, and sure of their
lives, and the kings service is accordingly looked unto. But to return to our
purpose: the Sergeant Mayor having divided his men according to the manner
aforesaid, he is to regard, whether the Courte-gardes into which the
company or companyes are to enter, or they that watch at the gates, or the
horsemen: whether the said Courte-gardes be commodious or fit for the turn,
or lack reparation, and likewise, whether the Sentinel house where the
Sentinels must stand, be well placed and can resist against the storms of
rain and wind, and if chance they be ruinous and weather beaten, the
Sergeant Mayor ought to cause them to be repaired with all speed at the cost
of the country as by custom is used, he ought also to consider whether the
rounds may easily pass round about the walls, and if there be any difficulty,
he ought incontinently to cause the passage to be made easey. Furthermore
provision is to be made of lamps and lanternes as well for the courtgarde, as
for the rownds and country roundes. As for the companies that are of the watch,
the Sergeants Mayor use to set them at different hours, the one party in the
morning, the other at night, and sometims later then at other times, as they
think good, but according to my mind (if necessity constrained me not to do
otherwise) I would always set the watch an hour before Sunsette: that the
soldier may come to the watch after supper, and so shall he have no occasion to
go from the watch, after he is come thither, and before the gates be shut up,
no man ought to be unarmed, for leaving aside how necessary carefulnes and
watchfulnes is in such cases, it it likewise needful that the soldiers
should be taught and made to understand how filthy and alienate it is from
their profession to do as they do. Viz. that as soon as they are entered in
to the court guarde, incontinently they hang up their weapons on the walls,
vnarming themselves presently, and this licentiousnes is so far come, that
not only in places where they lie in garrison, but in the field also, and when
they have an opposite army just over against them, they do the very same,
which ought in no case to be permitted. For no soldier ought to be suffered to
unarm himself before he sees his ansigne to dosse his armor, on whom they
ought to cast their eyes to imitate him, as they do on the standard which he
bears to follow him, in so much that the ansignes ought to be very
circumspect in their service, that the soldier may not take example by them of
negligence and carelessenes, but rather may by imitating them become painful
and diligent. For this profession is chiefly maintained by continual
exercise. To conclude, great care ought to be had at the opening and shutting
up of the gates, seeing that at such times great occasion of danger may
easily be offered. For which the Sergeant Mayor ought to appoint the sergeant
or sergeants that watch to be present, at the opening and shutting of the
gates, with their men well armed, and none of them ought to be suffered to have
his cloak about him, or any other thing that may hinder him, or be troublesome
unto him. And first let four or six soldiers of the company go forth
through the wickets of the gates of the cities, and look whether al be well,
walking three or fourscore paces from the gates, and if all be free from
danger and in safety, then let the gates be opened, and first let them of the
city pass out, not in clusters, but by little and little, one by one, but
especially if there be carts or baggage to go forth, and til all they be
past, that go out of the city, none ought to be suffered to pass in, no,
not so much as to come near the gates, when they be all forth that are to go
out of the gates, then after the same manner may they enter, that will go into
the cittye, and it is very necessary that at every gate there be one with a
long pike of iron, that if any carte pass by with hay or straw he may pass
it through with his iron pike, to know whether there be no fraud or treachery,
seeing that Caesar of Naples in those carts which he would have to go to
Turin, advised us that a fortress, castle, or city, might easily be gotten by
such ^^^ights. In all court guards the Sergeant Mayor ought to command two
Sentinels to be appointed both day and night, one for the weapones, the other
for the field. Furthermore provision of wood ought to be made at at times,
for though in summer time it be not necessary against cold, yet there ought to
be fire to kindle the matches, great care ought to be had that there be some
commodious place in the courtguards to hang up the corslets, and where all
the gunnes may lie in good order, for this is not only necessary that if
chance there be an alarm on the suddayne, each soldier may with more sneede
find his weapon, but also to shun confusion, and to observe due order in the
courte-guard, which is an ornament unto it. The Sergeant Mayor should not
suffer any one in the courtgard^ to play at tables or dice, when the companies
of the watch enter in, for that seems to be very uncomely and indecent, and
it is a token of contempt and disdain, as little respecting those that come
in, and setting naught by them, for seeing the companies represent the
authority of the King, the soldiers are bound to receive them in all places,
all armor and noise ought to be enstranged, yea quite banished out of the
courte-guard, round and counter round, if any one of them that watch pick a
quarrel or make any braulle in the court-guard, either in word or deed, he
ought to be severely punished, because such a company being together, there
might that soon be set on fire, which would not in have be extinguished. The
round and country rounds may be of more or less people, and continue more long
or shortly, according as necessity requires, but they may never return to the
company after they be gone forth, til their turn be ended, which they ought to
spend in going up and down about the wall, visiting and ouerseeing the
watchfulness of those that stand Sentinel. The very same ought they to do
that are rounds in the field, and because sometimes it is thought to be
doubtful, in case the round meet with the upper round, either in the field
or where they lie in garrison, whither of the two ought first to give the
watchword, and upon this point there be diverse opinions, and many move this
doubt, making an Elephant of a Fly, framing a question De Lanacaprina, (as
Horace says) I say that the upper rounds most commonly be of officers, and so
according to reason, and due obedience, it is more just that the round should
give place, and give the name first unto the upper round, but because
Captains do also use to round in the ordinary turns, to the end that no man
may justly take any thing in dugeon or be grieved, and to take al occasion of
doubt, and inconvenience, the Sergeant Mayor (unto whose charge it is committed
to dispose and appointe the watch rounds, and upper rounds) ought to leave
order with the companies how they ought to do as concerning this point, which
ought to be such, that the round shall always give place unto the upper round,
and give the watchword first, and for this cause the officers of the companies
should be always appointed to be of the upper round as by custom it is used.
And if chance that there be officers in both the rounds, or none in either of
them, but they be all soldiers, yet howsoever, it is great reason that the
round should give place and give the watchword first. Seeing that the upper
rounds are of more pre-eminence, for they are not only appointed to do the
same which the rounds do, to wit, to regard whether the court-gard and they
that stand Sentinel do their duty or not, but also to see whether the rounds
them selves fail not of their duty. But you must know that this which we have
said is to be understood, in case that the upper rounds be ordinary, as ye
rou^ds are, for when the Master of the ca^p or governor of the place where they
lie in garrison, or the Sergeant Mayor round extraordinarily (as they sometimes
do) then it appertains unto them to give the watchword. First: for the round
not knowing that there is any upper round, is not bound to give the watchword
unto any one, but to the Sentonel, and he is to know and ask the watchword
of all them that he meets, and examine them what they are, and what they do
there, taking them that he finds guilty, or going about any harm, and all
other suspicious persons that he chances to meet withal. Furthermore before
we pass from this point, I would you should be advertised of an error (which
is not very small) and it is committed ordinarily, by reasonof the negligence
and carelessnes of the officers, and I lay this fault of this abuse only upon
the officers, for it is most manifest that the soldiers do as they are taught
to do by the officers, and the abuse is, that when one stands Sentonell, if
another soldier come to him to have him away, he does not only leave his
place, but also if chance that the other soldier have not the watchword the
Sentonell him self gives it unto him, and so doing, he commits all these
faults following. First he does il because as we have said, that no soldier
standing Sentonel, ought to suffer any one to com near him without giving the
watchword. Secondly he is too blame, in that he himself gives the watchword
unto him that comes, whereas the Sentonell ought not to give the watchworde
unto any one whatsoever. Thirdly he does contrary to his duty in leaving his
place and ceasing to stand Sentonell, before the officer unto whom it
appertains to take him thence, comes in proper person to renew him. But the
negligence and small regard of the officers, who loath to take the pains to
rise them selves to remove the Sentinels (as they are bound to do it) are cause
of these abuses, and have brought in this naughty custom, that the Sergeant or
Corporal toward night, name four soldiers to stand Sentinel in one place,
leaving order that when one has stood out his turn, should call the other, and
that they should communicate ye watchword, and give it one to another among
themselves, which ought not in any case to be don, for it is most just that the
officers should perform that which apertaineth unto them to do according as
they are bound by their offices, and he that does not so, is unworthy of his
office which he bears, and ought to be put besides his office, and besides
this, the watchword being the safety and trust of the watch of the camp of
garrison, it ought with great regard and discretion be given by the Seargeant
Mayor to the Seargeant, and of them to the Corporal and Sentinels, and so (due
order observed) the Seargeant Mayor ought not to give the watchword in the
field, before the Sentinels be sent out: and when he lies in garrison in any
place, he ought not to give it before the gate be shut up. Neither ought the
Sergeants nor Corporals give it to the Sentinels before the very instant that
they be sent out. And note that if chance any one be sent forth by night (as
ordinarily it happens to be necessary) the Seargeant Mayor ought to cause
the watchword which was appointed for the watch to be changed for diverse
inconveniences that might fall out by not so doing. Now after all these things
are orderly appointed, the Sergeant Mayor ought at sundry times and diverse
hours to visit them, and see how they be looked unto, finding falt with them
that are blame worthy, and punishing them that deserve correction. The
Sergeant Mayor ought always to be personally present in the watch, having
great regard what number of men serve in every Company, according to the
mustre which they make. Whereof the Muster master or Tresurer ought to make
faith unto the Seargeant Mayor. Who (if so be that he can find or perceive that
the Companies receive pay for more men then they watch with) ought to make the
Officers of the companies to give him account of it: for oftentimes many
soldiers by reason of their Officers negligence become careless, and so they
regard not their duty. They ought not to permit at the entering or departing
of the watch, that the Corslets should want any piece of their armor, or the
Harguebuzer come without his head piece, and much less, that they should serve
with rustie weapons, or notoriously ill graven, nor the pikes without arminges,
seeing that it is not only a great ornament unto a Squadron to have all the
pikes with armings, but it makes the squadron to seem greater, which is a
very important circumstance. For all shows that are likely to cause a terror
or fear to the enemies, ought to be esteemed and greatly accounted of. When
the Companies of the watch enter into the place of Arms, it is ordinarily
used, that the Gunne-men being come to the place (who use to march in the
vantgard toward the Court-gard) should part and open, making a lane for the
Pikemen to enter, vauncing their Pikes as soon as they come near the
Harguebuzerie. But I do not like this manner, for the watch to enter, for to
march vauncing their pikes, is no time necessary in wars, and in so doing the
soldiers exercise themselves in things not necessary. Therefore they ought to
shun the absurdities which you see the Corslets ordinarily commit in stepping
back, when they vaunce their Pikes, and so they march without any firmness,
which is a very ill thing. And to shun it, it is better that the Corslets
should enter by the harguebuzerie marching the pikes, and when they come to the
end of the lane where the Captain stands, without parting or opening, they
should vaunce them, staying in their araie, and so from hand to hand make the
ranks following, and that the harguebuziers, as soon as the rank of Pikes
being vaunced come near them, should close to it, and fill up the said rank,
following this order till the end, so that the squadron may be framed: and as
well the Harguebuzes as Corslettes ought to be so used in doing this, that it
be not necessary that the Officer put them in order: and if two Companies
enter to watch at one time, as it often chances, then they should join
together into one squadron, taking the harguebuzerie at each flank, and the
Corslets without marring the rays should enter in the midst, noting by the
way that the Standarde remain always in the center of the people. And I have
proved this manner of ioining two Companies (being in hearses) into one
squadron, and diverse times caused it to be done at the entering of the watch,
and it has been very well thought of, and approved by Captains of great
prudence and experience. And though there were no other reason for it then
this, that they which follow Wars, in all places and at all times, when and
where they be together with their weapons in their hands, ought to frame
themselves in a squadron, without which they cannot have such perfection and
strength as is requsred, yet is it a most sufficient cause. And besides this,
the profit which ensues, by reason that the soldiers by these means and
continual practice, become ready and well instructed in matters of so great
importance, is exceeding great. The Companies that watch when others enter, may
not depart from the watch hill or place of Arms, until such time as they
that enter to watch, have framed their squadron. But having their weapons in
their hands and standing at the sides of the Court-gard, they must stay til
they are all entered, and then they may depart orderly each one to his
lodging. The Seargeant Mayor ought to be very careful in the day time to
visit the Court-gardes, and so doing he shall force both the officers and
soldiers to look to their wards, which they ought not in any case to leave,
save only when they go to dinner, and that by order, each one in his turn
with his tabling mate, or Tamarda. And when some forcible necessity is
offered, no soldier ought to depart from his ward without leave from his
Officers, seeing that the soldiers are no less bound from that day that they
entered into this profession of warfare, to be obedient unto the Captains and
Officers, doing nothing without their leave: then those Friars that are tied to
many strait orders, are to their Priors or Wardens. For when they be entered
into the Books of his Majesty's pay at the first day of their souldiership,
to serve rather in this Company then in that, betokens and signifies no
other thing but this only, that they promise and swear secretly and inwardly
in heart, to serve their King or Prince, obeying all and every thing that the
Officers of their Companies shall or do command them touching his Majesty's
service. But I mean not that they shall not be bound to obey the Officers of
other companies. For they owe due obeisance unto all Officers, as well to the
Officers of other companies, as to the Officers of their companies in all
things concerning the orders by them given and prescribed, especially when they
are ranked in a squadron, or march in order, or standing at the watch, briefly,
in all things appertaining unto their Princes service. Yet this ought to be
noted, that no soldier ought to be punished for his disobedience, unless it
be in such things as concern their prince his service. As when they contemn
or despise any Officer in matters touching the order. For in other particular
and private matters, that touch not the service of the King, the Officers are
no less bound to be humble, mecke, and use good behavior toward the
soldiers. Seruatis, seruandis, then the soldiers are to be toward them, and
those Officers that amidst their games and private conversation, for their own
commodity pass the limits of civility, often abusing certain souldyers
both in words many times and also in deeds, should be severely punished. For
thence it proceeds that the soldiers afterward set naught by them in
matters of order and government, being provoked and stirred up against them by
their hard usage, whereas nevertheless all Officers ought contrarily to love
and use all soldiers that are under their protection and government, as their
own natural sons. And above all other the Seargeant Mayor ought so to do,
seeing that it may very truly be said, that he is the general Father of all
the soldiers that serve in his Regiment. Now Sir, seeing that the people are
lodged, and I (to confess the truth) weary of this our long discourse, I will
conclude with telling you that it does not only appertain unto the Seargeant
Mayor to be the general master of all good discipline in Wars, and to be
the only and universal procurer of all bodily and corporal necessities for
the soldiers, but he ought also to have no less regard and care of their
souls: persecuting and banishing all public sin out of the Army, as leude
livers, thieves, and all such as live dissolutely and shamefully, and above all
things he ought to be very watchful and diligent, in not permitting any one
in the camp to blaspheme the name of God, no not so much, if possible be, as
to swear by his name, seeing that his divine Majesty is so greatly offended
with both of those horrible sins. For in the Army where there is no fear of
God, and the foundation and principal intent be not to seek his glory and
honor, there can nothing be sure, nothing good or certain. Certes it is a
grief to behold, that among a people which ought to be most zealous in the
service of their Creator (seeing that the obtaining of the victory does not
consist in the virtue of the multitude of arms, nor in the force of wepons,
but in the intercession of his grace, without whose providence not so much as
the leaf of a tree can be moved) are so many vices and abominations. And
verily we should most justly weep and deplore the weak remembrance of men,
when we sce that those men are so forgetful of Gods just indgements, who
above all other kinds of people have death every moment more nighest and
surest before their eyes, and by all our ill kind of living, it seems that
when any one takes the Pike in hand to become a soldier, even that day he
renounceth to be a Christian any longer, and makes profession ever after to
be a Gentil, and (which is worst of all) that our ignorance is so great, that
many unskillful fellows, and men without conscience, think and hold opinion,
that it is contrary to a good and valiant soldier, to be a good Christian
and to fear God, but let all such know, that contrarily it is impossible for
any man to be a right good and valyant soldier, if he lack the foundation of
the fear of God, for though we see many dissolute and ill living soldiers
very resolute to die, and being so determined fight courageously, daring both
to buckle with their enemies, and to die, if occasion be offered, yet we may
most truly turn this their boltnes to a beastly brutish mind, seeing that it
does not proceed from true fortitude, which ever is accompanied with the fear
of God, and it is rather a right temeritie of brute beasts, and not of men
endued with reason, for they consider not, nor understand not how great a thing
that is which they put in adventure, and so for the most part we see that such
men, upon the least occasion in the world, though it be most vile and of no
value, as some small commodity or vanity: hazard their lives, which they ought
to make so great account of, which they ought then to put in danger with all
their hearts, and making no account of it, when justice and counsel
requires. God grant it may please his mercy to take away the darkness of
this most clear and apparent ignorance from our understanding, that we may so
know and serve him in this our temporal warfare, under the standard and faith
of our sovereign Lord and invincible Captain Jesus Christ, that we may
deserve by him to be made partaker of that celestial and glorious warrefare in
triumphant Jerusalem. Master Vargas. we have made an end at one time both of
our discourse and our journey also. And I beseech you to pardon me if I have
not bin able to satisfy your request according to your desire, for my simple
talent is no farther extended: and be fully persuaded that I have not taken
this pains so much for my pleasure, as to accomplish your desire, which pains
I shall think ill bestowed if you take it in part of my service toward you:
and now good Sir, let us fall to such meat as we have here, for it may be your
chamber-fellow has already dined.


Vargas. I am beholding unto you for your courtesy, and you well know that it
is not new or strange to me to take part with you at dinner, but as for this
day I mean not any more to weary you, for if I went to dine with you, I am
certain that seeing you have now so fully satisfied me, in that I desired so
greedily to know concerning the Office of the Seargeant Mayor, (which amongst
many other good turns and deeds of true friendship which I have received of
you I account not the least) I should not leave to speak of the other points
which I mentioned yesterdaie unto you: but I am contented for this time, so you
will some other day (if occasion be offered) with some short discourse daine
to satisfy my desire.


Londonno. I will refuse no pains to do you service, and so God be your guide.


Vargas. He be with you also and all others.


FINIS.

