THE TRANSlation of a letter written by a French Gentilwoman to an other
Gentilwoman stranger, her frind, upon the death of the most excellent and
virtuous Lady, Elenor of Roye, Princes of Conde, contaynyng her last will and
Testament.

Done by Henry Myddelmore Gentylman at the request of the Lady Anne
Throkmorton.

Imprinted at London by John Day, for Humfrye Toye, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, 1564.

The last will and Testament of the Princes of Conde.
SO soon as reason and gods word might command mine eyes, and that this
paper, watered over with my tears, might dry it self: I did take my pen
in hand to answer the request that so instantlye you made unto me, to write
you a brief discourse of the manner and course of my Lady the Princes of Condes
sickness: For the great desire you have (as you say) that the shadow of her
death, may serve you for a light to lighten your doings, against the thicknes
of the darkness of our life in this perilous pilgrimage. But I pray you (if I
do not satisfice your expectation according to the sufficiencye of the
subject) accuse the baseness of my wit rather then the good will I have to
content you, and to give by this private letter (since better I cannot do it) a
faithful testimonye of her virtue, which well deserves a public setting
forth. The profane auncientes were wont to say when they did lose such
patterns and examples of virtue, that God, being angrye with men, did beareft
them of so great a good before the time. And you shall give me leave to say to
you, that in very conscience I believe he judged us unworthy of a thing of so
great valor.

And now, leaving to speak of the rest of her life, and of the first and
furthest causes of her evil, that is to say the extreme sorrows which she
was driven to devour, in that first peryllous time of the imprisonment of my
Lord the Prince her husband, and likewise of Madame de Roye her mother (the
same being a right worthy argument of a great historye, whereby might be
eternised, and made perpetual, the singular graces which God had endued this
noble Princes with, and the unspeakable force and constancye of her mind in
all her adversities) I will begin with the most euidentes and freshest.

I doubt not, but you have hard how that after she had letfe my Lord her
husband at Meaux (at the same time that he resolved to goo to Orlea^s) as she
was traualynge toward her house, called Muret, and passing by a vyllage
named Vanderay, nere unto Lizy and upon the river of Ours, a company of
paisants (which then were goinge in procession) did set upon her and the
Marquis of Conty her eldest son, with staves, stones, crosses and banners,
and that without any occasion given, but that there was a malicious and naughty
priest amongst them, who for the hatred that he bare to the religion, incited
and set on the said troop of paisants so to outrage her and her company, at
this very time the fire of the troubles for religion did begin to kyndle, and
in the most parts of all France the sparkelles thereof did already appear.

This furor and populous rage, did so move and unquiet this good Lady, that
having gonne to the end of cyghte months, she was the same day, by fear,
and before her time, delivered of two boys, at a village called Gandalu,
before she could recover any of her own houses. And within few days after
(as she was naturallye of great courage and heart) she took her way toward
Orleans, to mete with my Lord her husband: Whether she came in the end by
long and dangerous iourneis. For you must imagine, that all the ways and
passages were already taken and kept. And that therefore she was driven to use
great circumspection, and to expose her person to very great danger to make
that hasardous voyage.

Note you that, of this same inconueniencye: Of the second time of the
imprisonment of my Lord her husband, after the cruel conflict of a battle: Of
the besiegyng of the town of Orleans, and so of the pains and continual
travails, which she did suffer and abide during the whole time of the troubles
(beside that she did not diligently enough look to her self, when she had the
last year the small pokes at Galleo^) has grown and proceaded, by course of
time, all her sickness and indisposition: But chyefly an Issue of blood, caused
by a Carcinome, or eating canker, in the Matrice: which her shamefastnes and
chastity, would never suffer to be dressed as it was requisite and necessary.

This flux of blood, which was faier, read, and of good substance, began
the.xxvj. day of April last past, but took her more aboundauntlye the
thursdaye and Sunday next followynge, and so continued and left of, at
certain times until the.xxiij. day of this present month of July: At what
time her forces were so abated and weakened, that she lost utterly the power
retentiue: so as the same then runnyng out unto the drop of that little
that remained of the former great voydynges, she yielded happelye up her sprite
to God, through lack of natural heat, at Conde about xj. of the cloak in the
morning.

This euacuation was very much hastened by a diet which a little before she
had taken in hand, and would needs continue the same after her return from
Troy: where settinge aside all other things, she had been in great have to
see my Lord her husband, then newly, fallen into a sickness: which diet was
clean contrary to her, and the drink that she took did greatly heat and
chafe her blood, which of it self was over subtle. Herein I can assure you
that after the Physicians and Chirurgiens were ons made acquainted with all,
they did omite nothing of that, that order and knowledge might command: And
it had been very easy at the beginnynge to have remedyed and healed it, if the
matter had been so soon declared as it was requisite.

In the time of this sickness many accidents happened, as the laske, the fever
Hetique, which was with some access, pain of the raynes, with great
unquietness, faintinges and soundings through the venomous vapors carried from
the diseased part to the stomach, to the liver, to the heart, and to the
brain. You must think that I ca^ne hardlye express unto you all her griefs,
for they were by the judgment of them that be most expert in that art, so
diverse and violent, that they had been vndurable to any other.

Wherein, I pray you mark well, how greatly God did assist and strengthen her,
for she never opened her mouth to murmur, nor made any show or countenance
of impacience. I did always see her in her greatest pains with dry eyes,
without cryinge, without tears, and without complaints: which be ordinary to
all sick folckes, yea to the most strongest and constants.

And because I know, it wylbe great pleasure unto you, to hear me
particularise somewhat of her behauiours, I will show you, that the most egre
and lamentable voice, that in all the time of her sickness I ever hard her
pronounce (and yet as you know I was very litell from her) was that one time
about an eight days before her death, being pressed with extreme pain, she
addressed her self to God, in raising her voice a little more then she was
accustomed (when she could not find in two beds with all her often
chaungyngs, any one place where she might rest one minute of an hour) and
said.

Oh Lord God almightye, forasmuch as in all the places of this terrestrial
abiding (how great and spacious soever it be, and whereof thou art only
creator) I cannot find by all my diligence one littell corner of quietness nor
void of grief (whereby I might lyberally pronounce, as I was wont, thy great
goodness and mercy) I leave and give over wyllingly my longer dwelling and
abode here, to return, if it please thee, at this time to that heavenly rest
which thou have prepared for me, by the death and passion of thy well-beloved
Son. Make my God my Father by his means, that my soul and body be both
content and at rest: The one, to be free and at liberty going straight to
thee, who I see does already stretche out his arms for me: The other abiding
insensible here below, until thou do waken it at the sound of thy coming.

I cannot tell whether this her talk will seame to you out of order or no,
but I can assure you I never hard her speak worse words in the mids of
her greatest extremities.

This chaste Lady, for so I may right well call her, as accomplished in every
degree and in all circumstaunces in that excellent gift and matronall modesty,
which did follow her even unto her grave, as you see Justice does Kings to
their buryals (whereof I require no better prouffe then the very confession of
her enemies (and I do nothing marvel if in your country so many wise and
grave Ladies do determine to set her before their eyes, for an image and
mirror of chastity in the bringyng up and nurturynge of their daughters, even
as we here emo^gst our selves desire to do the like. For to speak truly, she
does excel all those that ever have been celebrated by any history: And at
one word there was never nothing that found place in her heart but virtue
only: And thereof I may be a sufficient wittnes, having had the honor, even
from her cradell and most tender years, to be always about her person.

She, I say, did well forsee, so soon as this Issue of blood began to take
her, that the disease was mortal: And besides her own judgment (having
hard the opinion of them that had the charge of her health) she resolved
incontinently to give order in her householde affairs, to the intent she might
the more lyberallye think of God.

And to this effect she sent for my Lord the Prince her husband, desiryng him
most humbly to come to her: which he did forthwith and in great have, after he
had received the news thereof at Vitry: from whence on the morrow the court
removed to Bar.

And after he had been a two or three days at home with her, and that she had
made many chereful shows and countinau^ces of the Joy she had to see him (for
you know there was never woman that loved, cheryshed, honored, or respected
more her husband then she did him) she prayed two personages, toward the
law, which she knew did love and honor their house, to go and declare unto
him the great danger of death wherein she thought her self to be (fearing it
should grieve him much more if she her self did tell him it): To thyntent it
might please him to give her leave to ordeyne and dispose of certain things
which she desired to have executed after her decesse.

And I do very well remember that when she sent these two counselors to him,
she desired them to say unto him amongst all the rest) these words which I
did well note.

Since, the good pleasure of God was that the separation of him, and her should
be made as touching the body, yet she desired him that their souls might
continue together inseparable, in that charity which they did owe alike to
their father Jesus Christ: who had so miraculouslye delivered them in the sight
of all the world, from so many troubles and dangers as they had passed and
escaped by his grace: That he had left unto them children the sure gage of
their amity: And that to begin her testament, she did make him universal
inheritor of that Mass of love that she had hitherto bo^^e them: To ye end
that after her death he should love them both for him self and for her to:
recomme^dynge them unto him principally for their bringing up and instruction
in the fear of God: which she assured to be the most certain good and
patrimony that she could leave them.

They have, said she, good beginnings, and that at the hands of a sufficient
master (meaning the minister de l'Espine) who in deed has of late taken great
pains with them, interpretynge unto them every morning (with great
dexterity) the proverbs of Solomon: And in the afternone the Commentaries of
Julius Caesar, whereby my Lord Marquis their eldest son has so well
profited, that he is one of the best learned that is to be found of his age.

She added unto these (as she was always a well spoken woman) many other
godly sayenges and exhortations: which the force of the stream that issued
out of mine eyes did let me to bear away. And do you not marueil at all, if
I did then weep so abounda^tly, for the two persons before spoken of, did no
less, before they departed to goo thither as she had desired them.

Soon after I saw them return again to make report of the honest and wise
talk, that my Lord the Prince had used unto them upon this sorrowful subject:
Whereof the good Lady received a most great contentation and comfort: And they
both told me apart: that it was impossible for any man to speak more
eloquentlye then the Prince had done to them (as every man knows how well
spoken he is, of how good judgment he is, and how gentil a Prince he is) True
it is, said they, that we have very well perceived, that the amity and love
which he bears to this his dear spouse and compagnion, did oftentimes break
the thryd of his Oration, by the many and deep sighs he gave, which do
sufficientlye wytnes his just and profound sorrow.

God, said he, who has conjoined us together, separate and sonder us since it
does so please him: it is reason that we do wholly conform our selves to his
holy will: It is certain that he is more happy that goes to him, then he that
caryeth here and abides an other passage: Oh happy hour that God shall
ordain us to be reunited in heaven, in the place of everlasting felicity.

In the mean time, I will study to keep well the gages which she has left
me, and will continue them in the same manner of teachinge that so christianlye
they have begone, to the intent, that the use and the property of the mother,
of the father, and of the children, be all to God: who by his puissau^t hand
has so oftentimes delivered and conserved this house of ours.

If I do consider and way the rarenes of my good fortune herin (which does
present it self incessauntly before mine eyes: and whereof I see my self
utterly spoiled by this separation) It can not be, that I cane find here
sufficient or egall consolation: when no man is able to number by all the
millio^s that may be assembled, the infinitnes of so notable a loss. I will
therefore have my recourse to him (if I dare say so) that has given me the
wound, who shall, and please him, fournishe me of aswaging plaster of his
word to heal the same: as it is said of them that be bytten by the Scorpion,
must seal the remedy of the Scorpion.

And as to that she prays me, by you, to double my good will toward our
children: I did feale in my heart at the very same instant that you spoke these
words to me, I can not tell what manner of hydden infusio^, that has increased
in me the fire of fatherlye love: which I did before believe, could not have
received any increase, persuadyng always my self, that it was not possible
to augment it in me.

You shall now return, and say to her, I pray you, that this oration, which
she has made me, by your mouths, has so resolved me, that I feale in me the
effects of the force of her noble courage: and that I do praise God greatly
for the inestimable constancye, that he has given her: but I pray her that in
any wise she do not omit nor forsake any of those means, which God has
departed to men by art and industry, for the recoueringe of her health: to
the intent she do not leave behind her an increase of my sorrows, when I should
understand hereafter the fault of her remedy.

This discourse was much more great and grave as you may well think: but
excuse (I pray you) the memory of a woman so greuouslye troubled and
attainted.

This done, she caused two Notaries to come unto her, unto whom she spoke from
word to word her last will and Testament commaundynge them to write in this
sort followinge.

Considering the fragilitie and uncertainty of this life, and that God, by
this grievous sickness (where with it has pleased him to visit me) has warned
me as it were by a calling upon, to prepare my self, and to take order in my
worldly affairs, that I might be ready with speed to follow his will, when
it shall please him to call me: I have made, said, and ordained, this which
follows, for the declaration of my last will and testament, reuokynge all
others in any sort made heretofore.

First, I beseech thee my good God, that when it shall please thee to deliver me
of the miseries and peynes of this life, and to take my soul out of the prison
of this body (wherein it is closed, but for a time) that of thy goodness and
mercy, thou will vouchsafe to receive it into thy hands, and to place it in
the possession and enioyinge of that felicitye, which thy dear Sone has
bought us by his death and passion: And by this means to assure, the steadfast
faith, which thou have given us by thy promises, and sealed, as well by the
sacrament of Baptysme, as by the same of thy holy Supper, of the general
remission of our sins: all which we believe to be so defaced by the blood
and obedience of thy Son, that they shall never come in account before thee.

Secondly, I recommende unto thee our children, praying the, that (according to
thy promise) thou will be their God, their Father, and protector: and that
extendyng thy blessyng upon them, it may please thee to illuminat, and instruct
them in the knowledge and fear of thy holy name: and to serve thy self of
them, as thou have done of their father, to exalte thy glory, to procure and
co^serue the reapose and quietness of thy church, and to pluck up by the root
all that which thou have not planted therein: Make them by thy special goodness,
instruments and vessels of thy glory, and replenishe them with thy heavenly
graces, comma^dyng them by the authority which thou have given me over them,
that they do aduowe and dedicate all their life to thy service and to the same
of thy church.

I refer the buryinge of my body to the good will and pleasure of my Lord my
husband, knowing well that where so ever it does lie, it will rest there in a
very certain hope of his resurrection.

Then she disposed her goods to my Lords her children, and gave many
charitable Legacies: And amongst others one for the entertaynynge of the
College of la Ferte au Col, which a littel before my Lord her husband, and
she had instituted and erected.

She did also ordeyne that upon her lands, a certain pencion should be yearly
leauyed toward the finding of the Ministers of gods word: and did her self
hear the accomptes of al her servant, to the end she might help them to
that, yt in any sort might be due unto them: so great was her care to do right
to every body, and to understand her household affairs: whereunto she would be
made preuye eue^ unto the last extremity: giving as good order in them, and
with as sound a judgment, as at any time she was accoustumed to do in her
most perfect health.

That being done she caused the minister Perrucel to be called, and declared
unto him how glad she was to understand yt she should very shortly go to her
God, by the end of this sickness: And that therefore she would consider of the
state of her conscience: Not said she, thanks be to God, that I do feel my
self otherwise the^ well disposed toward my creator, and ready to go to
him when it shall please him: but to the end that you father, whom god has
ordained shepherd in my Lord my husbands house and mine, may know the face
of this sheep of your flock: and that I dye contented, that I have given
before the Minister of the church of the Lord, a true testimonye of my faith
and hope of health, which by his grace and goodness I receive of him.

Then with joined hands, and eyes lyfted up on high, she made humble
confession of her faith: declarynge that she did believe and confess God to be,
and in being to be God only, distinct, notwithstanding in three persons, which
are the Father, the Sone, and ye holy Ghost: that he is creator, conseruer and
governor of heaven, the earth, the Sea, and all that is in them: without
whose will and pleasure no creatures (be they Angels, Dyuels, or any other)
can make or move any thing: and yet nevertheless he can not be said, nor
ought to be said, the procurer to evil, or the cause or author of sin,
which does proceade of the corruption and malice, that man has purchassed to
him self.

After this, she protested that she did not think, that there was any other
mean or way, by the which men might have remission of their sins, health,
and everlasting life, but by Jesus Christ only: and that there is no other
name given to man for his salvation, but that only: and that as he is very God,
he is also only savior and redemer, mediator and aduocat of man toward God,
and sole sacrificatour and sacrifice: who has ones for all satisfysed and
appaised the wrath and strayte judgment of God the father, by his death for
us, and has fully justified us in his resurrection.

Wherefore I take him, said she, for my only and notwithstanding sufficient
ransom, for my peace, for my wisdom, for my justice and for my santcfication:
assuryng my self that he did prepare a place for me in heaven, when he
ascended thither, and that he does there tarry me with his father and mine by
him, with the holy Ghost, the Angels and the saints: where I desire to be with
all my heart, and whether I am sure I shall go or it be long,

Thyrdly she gave to understand that we ought not to serve God, otherwise or in
other sort then as he has appointed us by his word: And therefore that she
did acknowledge two parts in the true service of God: Whereof the first and
principal is to trust and believe steadfastly in him: to obey his holy
commandments: to call upon him in all our necessities: and to give thanks to
him only as the only author of all goodness.

The Other is to exercise in the church those things which he has
established: as the ministry of his word and of his Sacraments, the
ecclesiastical Discipline in her pureness, followynge his order therein,
without mynglynge either of the wit or invention of man: and therefore
addressynge her speech a new to God she said further on this sort.

How aboundauntly, oh Lord, have thou vouchsaft to show thy mercies upon me,
that by thy holy sprite have made me understand and see, that thy holy word,
the holy Baptism and the holy Supper (which be the two Sacraments, that thy
Son Jesus Christ has left to thy church his spouse and body) the
discipline and correction of sinners, ordained by him in his Gospel, be purelye
and sincerely administered in the reformed churches of France: and also that in
the same churches, the true doctrine of obedience, of repentance, of faith,
and justification by the same, through the merit of Jesus Christ (without
that there may be any thing at all allowed of ours for payment) is there
preached and constantly declared: that Gods name is truly called upon there,
that is to say, in the only name of Jesus Christ: and that to him alone
begyuen al thanks for all his goodness received:

For these causes I say, Oh my Lord, and delyuerer, I do acknowledge that these
reformed churches, with all other like unto the^ (where soever they be) do make
togethers the spouse and the body of thy Son Jesus Christ, thy chosen vine,
thy flock, thy holy Jerusalem, and thy lawful assemblye: thanking thee with
al my heart, that thou haste called me to this most happy knowledge: yea and I
thank thee more, that thou haste made me one of the stones of this thy
building and humble City, one of the sheep of this thy flock, one of the
branches of this thy vine, and one of the members of this body and and of this
spouse of thy Son Jesus Christ.

Make me so to persevere (oh dyuine goodness) and continue in me these graces
even unto the last sighe of my life: to the end that according to thy
promise, I may be received of the into the kingdom and heritage of thy most
happy children.

The end of the will.

Within an hour after she sent for, and caused to come into her chamber, the
Minister de l' Espine, of whom I have already spoken to you: and continuynge
(in one manner of feruencye and affection) the talk which before she had
entamed, she began to recite the favors which God had showed her, having as
unto the world made her greatly honorable, and imparted largely inoughe unto
her of the goods of the same: assisted her in all her affairs, defended and
sustained my Lord her husband, my Lady her mother, her self, her children,
her kynsfolks and frindes, against all the enterprises and conspiracies of
their enemies: and yet that al these his graces, did seame lyttel unto her, in
respect of the knowledge which he had given her of him and of his Sone by his
holy word: for in that only co^sisted al her felicity, and it was the
certain and true foundation of all her hope.

And being by all these reasons infinitely bound to serve God, that
notwithstanding she had not done her duty to acknowledge and confess the
author from whom so many and sondrye blessyngs came unto her, to give unto him
for the^ all thanks, praises and glory.

Nevertheless for all these great ingratitudes which she had used toward
God, she did verily hope that by his mercy and the merit of his Son the same
and all other his fautes should be entyerely pardoned, assuring her self to
be in the number of his sheep, by the grace she had received to hear ye voice
of her sheppeard, and pastor, and that by his calling of her, she was assured
of her Justice and glory.

For these causes she said, she desired nothing more earnestly the^ to be
quicklye out of this world, that she might go into the arms of her Savior:
and that notwithstanding, she did leave behynd her my Lord the Prince her
husband, my Lady her mother, and my Lords her children (which she did love
as much and as well as nature and duty might bear) yet she preferred God to
all them: And yt there was nothing so dear unto her, as to follow redilye and
chearefullye his good will and pleasure.

The Dyuel she said did set before her eyes many sundry imaginations, touching
the kingdom of heaven: and went about to persuade her, that it was not the
same that she took it to be, that by that means he might bring her to be
loathe to leave the vain pleasures and delights of this world: But for all yt,
she did remain ancred in that faith, that eye never saw, care never hard,
nor heart of man could ever conceive, which god has prepared for his elect.

As she had thus made an end, came into the chamber my Lord the Prince (as he
was very diligent in visitinge of her) and after that he had spent a few
words, in the coumfortyng of her, she said unto him, there were four things
which did greatly satisfice and content her. The first was the assurance, she
had of her salvation, for by the hope and hand of faith, she did already
enjoy eternal life. Her second contentation was, in the reputation of an
honest woman, which she had always had, by the grace of God. Thyrdly, she did
assure her self, that even, as she had as faithfully served him, loved him,
and honored him, as any woman in the world could do her husband: so she
did as verily believe that on his part, he did hold him self very well
content, and satisfised of her: And for the last point, she did greatly
rejoice, that God did leave such a father to her children, and such a
Grandmother, as would bring them up in the fear of the Lord, which was the
chefest of her desiers.

My Lord the Prince could no longer abide to hear this manner of talk, and
therefore after having felt her poulse, he retired him self upon this word
which she said to him: Sir, thus I must end my course, to win the price,
which I see prepared for me at the end of the lysts of this painful carire.

After the Prince was thus returned into his chamber, he sent unto her my Lord
Marquis their son to make her merye, understanding that she had sent for him,
and that she took great pleasure to see him (as he is very amiable and does
promise many good things, which ought to be desired in a good Prince: When
she had asked him how he did, and the Seigneur of Garannes, his governor, how
he used him self: she demanded of him, if he would not be content, that,
according to the order of nature, she did first go to God, since it was so his
pleasure to call her, that being our Father, he did nothing but for our
advancement and profit.

I pray you my son, said she, fear him above all things, and honor him as
author of all goodness: at whose hands you ought to look for all favor, since
it has pleased him to leave in our house so great an earnest of his
beneficence, which you shall much better judge with more years. Grow in
virtue, my lyttel frynde, which is the true ornament of the great: to the end
you may be capable to do the King agreeable service: In whose face every man may
see the printe and mark of a well borne Prince and of a litell Josias, of
whom you have hard me so often speak. Honor my lord Cardinal of Bourbon, my
Lord your father, my Lady your grandmother, your uncles my Lords of
Chastillion and Rochefoucault, which be men that fear God, and have made good
prouffe of their virtues in fondry sorts: Love well the common wealth, and
procure it by all just means, without offendynge your conscience: Love your
two brethern and your sister, not as a brother, but as a father, for so you
must be to them, since you are the eldest and be no more a child: Talk the
ofteneste, that you may with the Ministers Perrucel and de l'Espine, for your
souls health, and believe ye counsel of three me^ of Law, which you know to
be beloved and esteemed of my Lord your father and me: Beware that you never
do any thing under color or procurement, that any man shall say to you,
that your governor (be he never so watchful) shall not here nor know of it:
For your Father who is in heaven does see, understand, and know all thing, and
therefore you should be ashamed to do evil, as if he were always present and
by you, according to the godly instructions of your book of Salomo^, which
you should never leave out of your hands, to the end that in all your life and
conversation, you may speak and recite to every body, that which is
contained therein: Be gentle and tractable to such as be so: abatinge the
pride of them, whose audacitie should make them forget the^ selfs: Let your
mouth be the house of truth, your hand open to the poor, and your gates
closed to flatterers.

If you do this, my Iuell, you shall have as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had gods
blessinge and mine: which I do give you with this ringe of Diama^t, that you
shall keep for my sake, and in remembrance of that which I have said to you:
Whereof your governor is witness, and can well put you in mind of it, in
time and place convenient, as he is most careful of your well doing.

She did then turn her talk to my Lady her daughter, and wylled her to mark
diligently that which she had said to her brother: and that she should believe
the council and advise of the Lady of saint Cir her gouernesse, no less the^
as if she were her natural mother.

These little children, which sometimes kyssed her mouth and somtymes her
hands, were by her commandment taken out of her sight, least they should
have been made more sorrowful, and because, with all that she could do she
could note stay them by any means from most bitter weepynge.

After she had thus said to her children, she began with a new admonition to
her maids and Gentilwomen: but you shall hold me excused if I do not tell you
the hoole: for I did then go forth to prepare a thing which the physicians had
appointed for her: And I came again, as she was praying the^ to remember ye
good bringing up and nourriture which they had had in her house, and the
example which she had given them: Have always (my daughters, said she) the
reverence of God before your eyes: and let your honor be more dear unto you
then your lyfes: Love my Lady my mother and my daughter, for they love that,
that touches me, and you shall continue with them until you be married.
Farewell my maidens: think me happy and contented, and learn you to dye well.

At night, feelyng her self troubled with a great laske, with a short breath,
and with a pain in her throat, she caused the Minister Perrucel to come to
her, and to talk to her of God, as oftentimes he did: and as he was in
comfortynge of her, she lifted up her hands to heaven, and with a soft sighe,
said in this sort.

Ha my God my Father, it is now that I shall come to thee: I have foughte^ a
good combat: I have kept my faith: I have ended my course, and all by thy
grace and favor: for the which, I assure my self that I shall have, or it be
long, the crown of Justice, and shall live of the life, that thou kepest for
me, and have hidden for me in Jesus Christ.

Then stretchynge out her hand to master Perrucell she said: Father, pray
to God, to give me perseverance and increase in all his graces: that he will
strengthen me against all assaults and temptations: that he will always hold
his hand over me, as I do see he does in his son Jesus Christ: that he do
make me continuallye feel his love toward me, that he do deliver me from all
grief and sorrow, which might trouble me for the leaving of any corruptible
thing of this world, and that the violence of my sickness, do not hinder me
from the magnifyinge of his name and hyghnes.

In this sort she spoke to the Minister, for that she thought her speech
should soon after be taken from her, judging the same so, by that she felt
inwardlye.

So, as immediatlye after they had prayed, she sent for my Lord her husband,
who was then a bed (for it was nere unto one of the clock after mydnight) and
for all the request that Madame de Roye did make unto her, to defer the
matter until the morning, she continued still in the contrary, assuryng her
self, as she said, that he would not be sorry to be wakened for so great an
occasion: and that it was not good to tarry until she could speak no more,
least she could not declare unto him those things which God had put into her
heart.

Thus was my Lord the Prince called, at whose coming all the company gave
place, and suffered them to speak together. I cannot declare unto you the
talk that then passed betwexte them: for albeit I was very nere, yet I could
understand nothing, her voice was so much decayed, and to tell you true, I
did sometimes slomber, as you may imagine, we had no great rest, neither night
nor day. I remember very well that this discourse betwexte them dured almost
an hour, for it was nere the break of day before they left of, and about
that time she was wont to fall to a little rest, as she then did.

In the afternoon her pain did take her again (which all the morning before
was slaked) whereupon she began to say to master Perrucel. It is, now,
father, that God will have me, whereof I do most rejoice: but alas I am sorry,
that my short breath, and the rume which falls from my brain, do let me to
praise him: pray him, as you did this night past, that it may please him to
give me a little respite to call upon him, not that I do desire to live any
longer, for he knows my thoughts, and reads in the tables of my heart.

So soon as the prayer was made, she felt her self much eased, and at the
same instaunt she gave God thanks in this sort. Is it not thou (Oh immortal
Lord, mighty God, wise and good) that without the help of man appaisest in
one moment of time my travail and peines? Oh inestimable goodness, which do
make thy self to be so openly seen, touched and feelte of me, fortify my
soul, since thou do abate my body.

In this sort she continued a good time in praising and thankyng of God:
Afterward she framed and made her prayers for my Lord her husband, my Lords
her children, my Lady her mother, for all the Church, and finally, for all
them of whom God had most specially bound her to have care: as her
kynsfolks, her frindes, her allies, her servants and subjects: which prayer
was at the lest an hour long, togethers with the same, she made for the
King, and for the tranquillity of the Realm.

So great were then the sorrows, wepynges, and lamentable voices of all those
that were present, that I could bear away neither the substance, nor the
form of it: but this I can assure you, that it is impossible to hear more
humble, pure and fervent prayers, then she made at that time: and I know very
well, that all the hole company had their hearts no less heavy then I, which
may be a sufficient testimonye to you of the same.

In the end she asked pardon of all the world, namely of my Lady her mother,
and of her good sister, Madame de Rochefoulcault, who was there with her as
continuallye, as if she had been tied to her.

While these things were in doing, there came upon her again great
difficulty for the taking of her breath, with a sore grief in her side,
which put her suddenly to silence: but this euel did immediately cease by the
remedy of prayer: A thing worthy of great marueil: and as she her self did
well acknowledge, at whose hands she received that ease and favor. And I
remember how curiouslye, at the same time, she caused l'Espine to recite unto
her the passages of the Scripture, which be proper and mete for the
consolation of them, which dye in Jesus Christ: Of all which I well bare away
the same of the Apocalipse, and that of Esaye in the last chapters: which you
shall for my sake, and please you, read over at your leisure.

I will not write you here the divine dialogues, that passed betwexte her and my
Lady her mother, during ye course of this sickness: as of the greatness of God,
of his wisdom, goodness and mercy, of hell, of the consciences of such as
have not his fear before their faces, of the difference of true and false
service, of the assurance of the faithful soul at the article of death: And
of such other high matters, which well deserve hole and long letters: but I
will keep the^ in store for you against an other time: and believe I pray you,
that I should find my self greatly troubled, if I should come to give my
judgment whether of them said better, For you know what swetnes there is in
the mouth of Madame de Roye, and how grave her discourses be.

The night before the death of our religiouse Princes, about two of the clock
after midnight, ye Minister Perrucel (perceiving it should be very hard for
her to pass ye day followyng) declared unto her (as she had always desired
him) that the hour in his opinion did draw nere of her departing: that she
should be or it were long at her desired rest: that in any wise she took a good
heart to her, without having fear of the law, of sin, of hell, or of any
other ennemie of her salvation: that all such thieves and robbers had been put
to flight, by the Lamb of God Jesus Christ, together with the emperor of
death, the Dyuell and his empire, who was made cursednes and condemnation, for
all them that put their trust and confidence in him.

And when the Minister asked her, if she felt not her self by the virtue and
grace of the holy Ghost, armed of the pieces which saint Paul writteth of,
to the Ephesians: and above all of the buckler of faith, and the sharp sword
of the word of God: She answered, yea truly father, I have in my heart that
which God, since my youth, has put in it, the assurance of my salvation: and
so she said these four verses of David.

My Lord my God by virtue thine
Is made to fly this foe of mine
Discomfited of force and might,
At thine aspect and only sight.
That done she continued her talk to master Perrucel, and said therefore,
father, ask of god for me, and I will in heart pray with you, that he will
always lend me the burninge lamp, to thinte^t, that when the spouse
shalco^me, I may enter in with him to the wedding: that he will give me the
grace to watch continually, to the end, I be not taken suddenly, when my Lord
shall come: that he will give me the whight garment, that I may follow the lamb
with ye lyuerey, whersoeuer he goes: that he will make me to be borne of his
Angels, that I do not fall, and that he will take me from hence below,
puttyng his left hand under my head, and embrasinge me with his right.

Then they prayed, and answer being made, so be it, she said. Oh my god my
Savior, now is my winter past, and my spring time is come: Open therefore the
gate unto me of thy celestial garden, that I may taste of the fruit of thy
everlasting swetnes: repetynge these words three times.

At this same time master Perrucell took his leave to goo, to prepare himself
to preach, which he should do that morninge, and in his place came l'Espine,
according as they disposed of the hours, to be about her, turn by turn,
togethers: with the minister la Bossiere. It was then about.vij. of the clock
in the morning, being Sunday.xxiii. day of this month. L'espine continued in
prayers and exhortations, and as you know he is ritche and copious in
similitudes and co^parisons, so he spoke things more celestial then human:
which lasted for the space of an hour, and until they gave to this
courageous pacient some little sustenaunce: who was accoustumed to says.vj.
or.vij. days before, that notwithstanding, she knew welinough, that that she
did eat and take, was unprofitable, and a lost thing, that nevertheless she
would still entertain her body with nourishment, until it should please God
to dispose of the issue of her soul: and that it was not in us to leave this
garrison without the leave of our Captain.

Soon after this repast, her flux of blood took her again, which by no
means could be stopped, for that her forces were ouermuche abated: she her
self did then also judge, that the former remedies, vinaiger nor boxinges
could any longer prevail.

Master Perrucel (being in his Sermon) was sent for, because, before, she had
desired that in any wise he might be by her in that extremity,
notwithstanding, that de l'Espine was then there with her. Her difficultye of
breathinge came upon her again: and saying first her right hand dye, and then
her left, she put them one upon the other, and said to me, it is now, my good
frynde, that I do go to god.

Master Perrucell came in great haste, and so soon as she had perceived him,
she said, my good father, speak for me, do your office, you have had the
charge of my soul, my hearing is hardened, my tongue fails me, but I will make
you signs with my head, if I can not answer. These two Ministers used unto
her many godly and convenient exhortations, as they be both notoriouslye
learned, and full of zeal: after which they asked her, if she had well
understood al yt they had said, and whether her heart did so believe it, and
feel it: Yea I thank god, said she, liftyng up her eyes to heaven: make your
prayers for me, according as you both know my soul desiereth.

Which prayers ended, she called unto her one of her maidens of her chamber,
that she loved very dearly, and said unto her (to the end she might receive
with all the contentations that she could, the ease and benefit of death)
that she should take her legs, and stretche them forth, which the rigor of
mortal cold had already drawn up. And suddenly she pronounced these words.

Into thy hands, oh Lord, I commend my soul: And so began to enter into
the pangs of death: wherein she continued not so long as half a quarter of an
hour, during which time, these two good men, togethers with la Boissiere,
did declare unto her sundry good and godly sayings, of the assurance of her
salvation, and to answer them, and to let the^ know that she understood them
well, she enforced her self to speak, but could not: so as she gave them in
stead of words the sign of the head, which she had before promised.

Within a minute of an hour after, she departed, by a sweet sighe up into
heaven, into the heritage which God has prepared for his elect: Leauyng to us
all, a desire to end as she had done.

I can not but tell you that, because whylst I live here, I can see her no
more, I must remain for ever in an extreme sorrow and heaviness, and yet in a
joy most greatest, that I have appertayned in service to so virtuous a
Princes.

Now comes to my remembrance the talk which master Perrucel had to this
Lady, at the article of her death, which I esteame worthy to be written.

Madame, said he, you must and please you acknowledge the goodness of this great
god toward you: not only for all the goodness and graces which he has done
for you in all your life hitherto: but also for the special favor which he
does presently show you: for having put you into his vyneyarde, there to
labor and travail all the hole day, he will take you from thence, at the
midds of the day, to bring you to rest and quietness. You have scantly yet
attained to the mids of your age, which you have by the grace of god, well
and faithfullye employed in the labor of his vyneyarde: Ought not you to
thank him, and think well of him, if he will excuse you of the sweat and
traueaile of the rest of the day, and give you like wages, and payment as if
you had labored all the day long.

I had also forgotten to tell you, that about a moves before her death: she
said to a personage of great quality, her kynsma^, and a very just man,
that she had hard a voice in the night, which said to her in very plain
words, that she should dye, or it were long, and that therefore she should
prepare her self: and so much it lacked, that those news did make her any
thing sad or sorrowful, as that ever after she did most desire the end of
this holy separation. I must tell you truly, that without flattering of those
of our sex and sort, her magnanimitye herein, has shamed, and put to foil
the great courage whereof men so ordinarily do vaunt them selves: for her
members dyinge one after an other before her eyes, she did less care for the
fear of death, then the brauest of them ever did. She spoke as francklye and
boldly of this great terror of death, as if it had been of any thing, that
every day is most comen to us, and that does appartaine to our most familier
and domestical matters. And two days before her death, notwithstanding, that
the dangerous beatynge of her poulce did make her perfect of that, which soon
after should come to her, nevertheless she caused to be brought to her the
plote of the castle of Amsi: which she had commanded to be made a little
before her sickness: wherein she did deuyse with my Lord her husband, as
curiouslye, and as particularly, of all the desseins, devises, and orders, as
that you would have thought, to have seen her speak with her ordinary
laughyngs and smilyngs, that she would have accommodated her self to have
dwelt there, some long time: And yet did she not this, but that she knew
welinough, that her true and most assured buyldyng was in heaven: But she said
it was not to be marueled at, if she did so speak and devise of all matters,
as though she had not set at al before her eyes, the danger wherein she saw
her self: For that god had given her the grace ever since she had the
knowledge of him, and his word, that she did think, she was as well subject
to death at one time, as at an other: and that the true christian will also
believe, that thereof does depend the greatness of of his blessedness and
contentation.

She was borne at Chastillion, upon the river of Loing the, xxiiij. day of
Februarye. 1535. And was married to my Lord the Prince, the.xxij. day of June.
1551. Of ths marriage be issued seven children in six times of greatness: that
is to say, three daughters, Catherine, Marguerit and Magdalene, and four
sons, Henry, Fraunces, and at her last deliuerye, Charles and Jews, twynnes.
Henry, Fraunces, Charles and Marguerit be living: God has taken the others.
She lived.xxviij. years.iiij. months.xxvij. days and.xj. hours.

In the time of her sickness, she was visited of many great personages and good
folks: namely of my lords her three uncles of Chastillion, who did to her all the good, godly and charitable offices, that were possible to have been
desiered.

I will not here discover unto you the noblenes of her race, as well French, as
strange, for every one understands it sufficiently, and you know as well as I
that of her fathers side, she is descended of the right line, by the woman of
Jews the sixth, King of France.

Yet I will write unto you thus much more, which has seamed unto me to
appartaine to yt, that goes before, and which you shall receive as vsurye of
my good will. This death was declared to my L. the Prince, who had retired
himself alone i^to his chamber, and was gone to bed after his return from
the preaching. At ye coming up of the Minister la Bossiere, (who was made
messenger for ye purpose) he suspected, yt which was in deed happened,
nevertheless he continued sometime in reading in a book of prayers, which he
had in his hands: soon after, tourni^g his face toward ye minister, he asked
him how his wife did, she is my L. said he, with god, whether you shall go
also one day: At this word he could not keep himself from sighing and
sorowing, In so much ye two or three ge^tilmen, and ye minister Perrucel, who
then came in, were greatly troubled to see him in that heavy case: and yet
nevertheless durst not approach to break of his bitter co^plaits, and
lamentatio^s, until such time as a certain man toward ye law, came unto him,
and prayed him to resolve and cou^forte himself, as he had done in all his
other great adversities, and hereupon ye two ministers took occasion to
continue this manner of talk, according to ye largenes of the scope, yt was
offered the^: notwithstanding, he remained for a good time sylent, and after
puttyng his handkerchyef to his face, he said. He trusted ye god would not
impute unto him, ye infirmity, and that good men would support him, in those
his grievous passions: saying that his sorrows proceaded not, but of ye love of
virtue. That in very dedede he had great reason to content him self, for the
assurance he had of ye good rest of his dear wife and moitye, who had dyed the
death of a saint: but also yt he was excusable for his heaviness, to lose ye
company of so wise and virtuous a Lady, that had always honored him above al
things-and loved him so derely, as she would have sacrificed her own life for
him: yt had governed his house in all holiness, and brought up his children in all wisdom, in rendering to him all due obedience.

He added to this (turning his face to heaven) a lyttel prayer to God: the
sentence whereof, as I was writynge this unto you, is fallen into my mind in
these four verses, without, as it were thinking of it.

It is I good Lord, not she has done the fault
And reason would, that I should therefore gryeue
Yet I do wrong unto thy prudence hault,
For to say truth, I dye and she does live.
Here upon, after having deuotly vowed the rest of his life in the service of
God, he sent for my lords his children, but being desired to eat somewhat (for
it was then past noone) he defferred to see them till after his dinner, which
was, God knows, a small thing, and full of sighs and heaviness.

After grace being said, his children my Lords Marquis and Frau^ces, with their
sister were brought i^ to hi^: his daughter was set upon his bed, and my
Lords, his two sons stood by him, whether ye litel souls were no sooner
come, but they fell so into weepyng, that al those that were present could not
withholde them selfs from it, no more could my L. the Prince their father, and
as for me, I can not now tell it you, but I melte away in tears.

You should have seen this little Lady (who is a lively picture of beautye)
take my L. her father about ye neck, and wash his face and berde with ye
abundance of her tears, without having power to speak to hi^, but in half
and broke; words.

My L. her father used such ways to her, as ye in the end he appaised her
weeping, and did dry her face with some pretty admonitio^s, mete for her age,
which I will tell you, if I have carried them well away. My daughter, we must
weep no more, our good God wylbe angrye with us: do not you remember yt you
say to him every day, Thy will be done, he has taken your mother out of
prison, to set her by him in liberty, because he loved her well, and will you be
angry with it? he is so wise, yt we should never ask why he does any thing: he
has left you here for the image of her: and as I have loved her, above all
the women of ye world, so I will love you: but you must not be only the image of
her face, but also of her spirit and virtue: for although she were fair of
personage, it was nothing in comparison of her gentil and well disposed mi^de,
which never did office, but of chastity, no more then her heart, her tongue, her
hands, and her ears. As you shall wax great and grow, enquire dilige^tlie,
what manner of woman this good mother was: And when you shall here, yt she never
loved man but her husband, yt she did always live without any blote of
dishonestie, yea without suspicion, that all her doings and countinaunces, have
been holy, chaste, modest, plain and virtuous: Then enforce your self, my
minnio^, to resemble her, to the intent god may assist you, as he has done her,
that every body may esteame you, and that I may love you more and more, as I
will not fail to do, if you be such a one.

Then he called to him the Lady of saint Cir, her gouernes, and embracinge
her, and her daughter de Fosses, he prayed them to continue their care in the
education and bringyng up of her, as one of the things, which were most
precious unto him.

After this, putting his hand upon my Lord Marquis head, my son, said he to
him, you are the first testimonye which God gave of his blessing, and favor,
of the marriage of your mother and me, and the great increase of our love.
Seek always to give me joy and consolation, as you shall do, if you will
follow the stepps, which your mother has trodden before you, in the way of
virtue: Mark well the path and tracke thereof, lest you lose your self, and
fall into the ways of the dangerous dedal of this world. The sons co^menlye
conform them selves to the doings of the father: but you shall principallye
study to resemble in manners and virtue your mother. For one may tell you, and
you may sometimes here of your father, and of his life, things which you ought
not to follow (as in others again you ought to imitate him) but in your mother
(of the life and death of whom God has vouchsafed to serve himself) you shall
find nothing, that is not worthy to be followed and straightly kept, as she was
most worthy to be placed in the first rank of the most virtuous women. My
son, virtue has made Princes, and the Heroical deeds of their auncesters,
and those that were before the^. For the rest, we be all the children of Adam,
of sin and of death, to keep well then this principalititye, it behooves us
to live virtuously, and to flee from vice, as a thing most horrible and
abominable to all noble hearts.

Therefore, it is, that a Prince should always think, that he is in this
world, as upon a scaffolde, to be beholden of al folks: So as his fautes be
more seen and marked, then theirs be that be under him: And as a blote that in
an other part might be hydden, is easelye perceived in the face, and does make
one diformed (be it never so lyttel) so is it in the actions and doings of
Princes, which be (how smallye reprehensible soever they be) seen and
perceived of every one, by the high place in degree, that they hold amongst
the commen and vulgar people.

Lo, my Iuel, how you may prosper, and so you shall be to me an agreeable child.

Then in the absence of his governor, he committed him to the charge of ye
Seigneur de Buisson, whom he gave him for his stuarde, praying him, that above
all things, there were good eye given, that there came nere him, no conte^pnor
of God, nor of the reverence, which we owe to his holy commandments.

On Sunday after, which was yesterdaye her body was put into the Sepulcher of
her predecessors at Muret, without other pomp or ceremony, but that master
Perrucel did make an excelent Sermon upon the fifty seventh chapter of Esaye,
whereat there was a good number of nobility, and people of the churches, nere
there abouts.

The sermon ended, which was about nine of the clock in the morning some part
of the Gentilmen went, and fetched the body (which lay, leaded in a hawle nere
unto that, where the preaching was) and so brought it to the place chosen and
made for the reapos, and rest thereof unto the consummation of the world.

The rest of the nobility and people followed the body in order to the grave,
and so after returned in like sort into the court of the Castle, where
master Perrucel declared unto the^ how worthy a work of Christians they had
done, by this their accompanying of the body to his buryal, of the great
edification, the same was to the^ of the church: How pleasant a thing it was
to god, and how agreeable to my Lord the Prince: thankyng them all in his name,
and in the name of all the kynsfolkes of the decessed Lady.

I could send you in this packet sundry consolatio^s, which were sent as well
to my late decessed Lady, as to my lord her husband, since her death, by ye
most wise, learned and apparaunt personages of Christendom: but I understand
by your good kynsman, that you have had the copyes of them from other places.

This is then as much as you shall have of me at this time, prayinge you to
excuse my wit, my eyes, my memory, my hand, and my pen, all which in their
natures and offices, do feel the sorrow and pain of me, their passionnate
mystres: who it may please you, may remain in your favor and good grace.

God grant you to live well, and to dye well in his Son Jesus Christ.

From Conde, in the country of Brye the last day of July.

1564. Your entyer and good frind to obey you. I. D. V.


