THE CHVRCH MILITANT, HISTORICALLY Continued from the Year of Our SAVIOVRS
Incarnation 33. until this present, 1640.

BY WILLIAM VAUGHAN, Knight.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Pain for Humfrey Blunden, at the Castle in Cornhill.
1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD, EARL OF CARBERY.
The Argument.
The Author here my Noble Lord acquaints
What Paths they tread who lead the lives of Saints,
What Comforts he shall find, what good success,
While he walks in the New-mans Diocese.
I Sound not forth Old Souldours turned to Swine
By Harlots Charms, by fulsome Cheer or Wine;
But the Newborn (a Theme to Worldlings strange)
^ sing the Minds more then the Bodies Change;
I sing the Churches Change, Eclipse, Decrease,
Her East, and West, with her Full Moons Increase.
Such News I blaze, which no good Protestant
Shall justly tax for Sparks exorbitant,
Like to those Brats exposed to Brambles Flame
By Midwives Doom to hide the Parents shame,
Or those, for which of late our Paul's Churchyard
And Smith-field in the Spoils with Vulcan shared.
Truth smites the Chaste: while Wantons long to hear
False Tales, at which they Nod, or fondly Ieere,
Fooling away the Time, their precious Time,
Lent them for better use in Prose or Rhyme,
To win some Strayes by means of Virtuous Books,
Not Souls to tempt with Fornications Hooks.
There, with much Gall Gulls one another flout:
Hoere for Mistakes, the Lie, or Toys they pout,
Forgetting Satan's Ambush for Good Wits,
Tongues trip, Pens blur, None free from Passions Fits,
And yet for Words and Names, External things,
They persecute their Christian Mates with stings,
^ill tired at last with Conscience-griping Cares,
Both Parties howl within the Devils Snares.
Others by Lines and Cubes aspire to know
The Higher Orbs, or in the Globe below
They level Spires, the Climates, or the Laws,
unto whose Depth they pry no more then Dawes;
And yet to gain applause, or Golden Fees,
They hope for Swans to chop their gaggling Geese.
Some Court Fair Dames with Fancies Madrigalls,
Chaulking the way to Paphian Lupercalls,
Which they frequent with uncontrouled Lust
Till Honor, Wealth, and Health lie in the Dust.
Sometimes Pelagian-wise they ruminate
On Man's Free Will, and the Predestinate,
Till they from Grace quite excommunicate
Do pitch on Hell, and on the Reprobate.
Now, of long-handed Kings the mounted state,
Anon, their slips or Fall they personate
With Satyrs sting, until themselves are stung;
Or else they sooth Great men with glozing Tongue,
Until they feel worse Racks with Conscience seared,
Then Poets faign'd for stroaking of Joves Beard.
Some other whiles they dare more Curious peep
Into the Concaves of the Infernal Deep,
Of Limboes Vault, or Purgatories Pain
Redeemed for Gold the long-white Robe to stain.
With such Bald Stuff most Writers do oppress,
In hope to purchase Fame, the Printers Press.
Which shows, that Souls, like Seas tossed with unrest,
Wave, till they set into Gods Port of Rest;
Or else that they, like Swine, fall to worse Seas
Then Gaderens for their prodigious Pleas,
Remonstrances, and Problems, which they pend,
Of Rampant Zeal the Churches Peace to rend*
SO busy is Man's Brain: It always works
And seeks to know what from the Senses lurkes,
Abstruse and hid, like Planets moving still;
But in default of Objects good or ill,
Because it finds no business from without,
Turns Monk within, an Idiot, or a Lout;
Or on it self with Atoms and Chymeres
Plays Whirligig, until it ends in Fears,
Distractions, Lies, and Schisms, just Penalties
Due for the Search of Knotty Novelties.
For want of Grace, and of Celestial Arms,
Sighs, Tears, and Vows, thus by the Serpents charms
Are Men seduced Old Adams Tree to taste,
And with vain Fruit to break their needless Fast.
Because Gods Word, whereby they might be saved,
They slighted, it is no marvel though they raved.
But our New man weaned from the Carnal Teat
By Truths calm Breath, the Flaming Paraclete,
With Drier Brain holds a Clear Intellect,
So solid, that he others can direct
A safer Course of knowledge to affect
Then what the Windmill grinds of Satan's Sect.
Though Natures sting in our Original
Has made us prone into the Snare to fall:
Yet we Newborn fight with the Spirits Sword,
And triumph by the Second Adams Word
Over the Dragons false enchanting Arts,
With constant Faith repelling all his Darts,
Those sober Cates contenting our repast,
Which lawful are for tender Souls to taste.
We would seem Inward more then Outward wise,
Yet Both address with Saints to sympathize.
For carnal Samians transubstantiate Change,
(The Old Man's Quirk) the New man we exchange.
Instead of Lethes Lake, or Phlegeton,
^e Tophets Pain sing due to Babylon.
For Limbus Patrum, or the Elizian Camp.
Gods Paradise for Saints renewes our Lamp.
A Dolphin bore Arion from the Seas;
^mphions Harp, they say, did Thebes appease:
But Jesus Christ the Third day to have rose
From Joseph's Tomb, we really disclose,
Or by a Whale we Jonas bring to Land,
Who Niniveh converted out of hand.
For Cerberus, we blaze proud Satan's Loss;
For Hercules his Club, our Saviors Cross.
For Trivial Tales, and sence-alluring Toys,
We read on Books Soule-ravishing to joys.
For Thalmuds we the Scriptures native sense;
And for Nice Schoole-mens Gloss, in our Defense,
We can produce by Truths Prerogative
The Chiefest Stars of the Church Primitive,
Or those, who in the Last and Present Age
With Volumes rare repaired our New man's Stage.
To banish Humane Lies, and Brainsick Dreams,
What Tree more full? what Field yields riper Theames
Then Christ his Life, and the New Testament?
Or in her Swathes the Churches fragrant scent?
This Lady here my New man warbles forth,
Though fully not according to her worth,
Yet so, My Lord, that you may clearly see:
Though she was long obscured, she now reigns free,
Clothed with the Sun, Crowned with a dozen Stars,
And no Eclipse you from her Influence bars.
But out alas! how many boast of Faith?
Who never marked what Christian Scripture says:
For what is Faith without Good works, or Fruit,
But a dead Stock? not worth a Moors pursuit?
Unless he dreams of Mechaes fond Delights?
Or Millenairs to snare Voluptuous Wights?
Or of vain works of Supererogation,
Souls to bewitch with Babels Fornication?
Our Saint is not with such Conceits defiled,
Nor turns with such Extravagances wild,
For he well knows, that as good Trees will bud,
And bear good Fruit, so Saints do always Good,
And never scorn to greet the Simplest Man;
To call home Strayes they labor what they c^^.
Such is our Saint the Naked he actires,
And helps to warm their Souls with zealous Fires.
According to his Power great or small,
He saves distressed Saints from Tyrants Thr^^.
He sues for Peaoe, and grieves to see debate.
And daily prays Laws Rigor to abate.
If he be forced to Law in his defense.
He does it without spl^^n, or Saints offense.
And if his Clapper hap to clatter wild,
Before Sunset he grows more Calm and mild;
Or if that Filmy Piece in others blabbs
His shame, he counts it like the Noise of Drabbs.
He sets not out his Lips to Farm, nor slander,
Nor lets his Tongue before his Wits to wander.
He holds his Word as precious as his Seal,
And scorns False Cards unto the Least to deal.
He dares not plot Revenge, nor scoff, nor rail,
But bears with Knaves and Fools for Saints avail.
He covets no man's Goods, but if at Play
He winnes, He gives it to the Poor away.
He spends his vacant Hours in thrifty Course,
Lest Idleness corrupt him worse and worse.
He prizeth Coin but excrementall Dross,
And toiles for Others Good, though with his Loss.
He does his Best to curb Promooting Scribes,
Lest God require of him their winkt-at Bribes.
At Night he scores the Deeds he did that Day,
And the next Morning scowres their rust away.
The Sabbath, like the Puritan, he waighes,
And, like the Papist, keeps the Fasting days:
The Former minds him of the Spirits Mart,
The Latter helps to stint the Sensual Part.
He daily strives so to compose his Mind,
That seldom him do Idoll-passions blind,
Nor cause him long to dote on Pleasures shape,
Be it a Horse, or Hawke, a Dog, or Ape,
He kindly speaks, means well, does good to all,
But most to Saints, and helps up them that fall.
God root these Works in me, lest whilst his Way
I others teach, my self a Cast-a-way
Become, like him, another Floor that sweepes,
And yet his own New house most nasty keeps.
THe Heart still moves: It Loves and spreads with Joy
Or wrung with Gall and Grief it feels Annoy.
The Former flow, because Gods Flames inspire it,
The Latter chance in absence of his Spirit.
Of these Affects our Inward Man partakes,
Amidst his Joys sometimes his Spirit aches:
Yet his Griefs smart spring not for worldly Cause,
But for men's Breach of the Creators Laws,
For the Increase of Idols, Avarice,
Of Drunken Healths, or the like Heathenish vice,
For Concords Breach, for Christian Bloods effusion,
For loss of Time, our Talents vain profusion;
Or else because he sees the Church of Christ
Oppressed by Fiends, and Saints by Antichrist.
Sometimes he feels strange Qualmes, near destitute
Of zeale-bred heat, till entering to dispute
With his Proud Foe, he like One cheered with Wine,
Threats him with Thumps, to make his Pride decline:
He calls him Monster, Belly god, and Slave,
And vows his Fare to shorten, if be ra^e:
With David's Sling he knocks Gollahs down^,
For standing out against his Masters Crown.
Though he enjoyes an outward fair Estate,
And seems to some to be most fortunate;
^et in his Mind he waighes the Cause, The Event,
Men's Frailty, and his own coincident,
Whereat he Lion-like for braver Prey
His Courage lifts at full, not giving way
To poor Conceits, but to the Noblest End*
His Cares, his Thoughts, and his designements bonds;
Which he Effects by a New Sacrifice
To God, who gave those undeserved Supplies
With knowledge of his Mysteries Divine,
And Prudent Rules Old Passions to confine,
When Thousands of his Brethren want that store,
Who would perhaps have glorified him more,
And never ceased, like Angels here on Earth,
To praise those helps, since Others dye of Dearth.
His Spirit scorns that which the Body joys;
And checks that Lump, because it did rejoice
In Aerie Toys, in things mere transitory,
Which draw the Sense from the bright Sun of Glory,
And like to Golden Clouds may pass away
By Humane Plots, or by Death in a day.
HE reapes Content to see his Neighbors thrive,
And their Amendment does his Soul revive,
For he the Poorest Saint in Christ preferre^
Before the Greatest Potentate that erres.
He Joys, that he breathes of the Common Air;
Which is allotted for the Saints repair,
With whom he sings, grieves, and Communicates,
Swell for Sacred Rites, as Needful Rates.
(...) Joys, that he had learned from his Youth,
^^ke Timothy, the Word of Sacred Truth,
^^at taught to serve One God, One Advocate,
(...) could not brook of Balaams Snares to prate.
Joys, that he no raking Money owes,
^^en what to pay he on short warning knows,
Without grim Sergeants Threats, or Suerties Thrall,
(...) without Robbing Peter to pay Paul.
(...) glories more of Souls and Bodies Health,
^^en in the Blaze of Honor, Fame, or Wealth.
(...) cheer his Noblest Part he soars aloft,
And viewes the Stars of Holy Stories often;
He Courts the Offspring of fair Memory,
As Well Divine as Humane History;
By which true Glass he finds how short and vain
Those Pleasures are, which Worldlings hold for Gain,
Though Cause of Pain eternal after Deuth;
If not before of Dolour-racking Breath.
Another while Wraths Cornet to prevent,
Which he observes with burning Arrows ^^^t
To aim at change, by Learned Art he strives
To blunt their Shafts, and into Physic dives
As Well by Prayer as by Galens Quill,
With Zealous Heart, as by Arabian Skill,
Like Good Saint Luke, for the Four Humors foul
He studies Cure, as Solace for the Soul.
For which I^^^^t, and the Complexions Good
He for (...) F^^d, which might insta^^ the Blood:
For what exceedes the Temper Oily warm,
Or Mayes mild Heat he knows breeds after-harme.
Lest Nature dro^p^, he breathes his Park-horse often,
Not on the Rheumy Vale, or Marish soft,
But on dry Hills to suck most wholesome Air,
There, with Pure Gales the Spirits to repair.
While Gulls fly out with Golden Wings excess,
(...) lives at home content with Fortunes less,
^^t daring by Another Idoll-store
(...) mete his wants, where Saints do languish more:
^^d if he should lash out in Pomp like those,
(...) Pomp and Store would cause him after-woes,
^^en the Great Judge requires his Talents use,
^^th strict Account of Stocks and Times abuse.
Drinks no more then does a Saint befit,
^^d ever rises with an Appetite,
^^r, as a Type of Blessed Abstimence,
Joys to sing of Diets Excellence*
^^d to relate, when Girald lived, that they
^f Cambriaes Soil did feed but once a day;
^s how the Greeks thought Platoes Tale a Lie,
That twice a day they meal'd in Sicily.
No Beauty, Wine, nor Musicks Harmony
^ontents our Saint more then Good Company,
Knowing their Vows, and mutual Hearts Consent
Avail him more then Worldlings Blandishment.
To end his Joys, on this he sets his Rest:
That a Good Conscience is his daily Feast.
THese harmless steps a Christian ought to tread
And the same Life I strive and hope to lead.
And if these Rules My hopeful Nephew scan,
He then shall pass for a Right Noble Man,
Excelling vulgar Wits as Porcellan,
Course vessels, as the New the Outward Man,
By Virtue rankt within True Honors File
Among the brave Heroes of this I Will,
Crowned with a fair and brighter Coronet,
Then One with Gold and Precious Stones beset,
And be so skilled in Both the Fortunes Cures,
That Poor men's Cries tend not to You nor Yours.
While Vengeance strikes a Nembrodizing Lord.
And his Proud Race with Fates two-edged Sword,
^ke Mordecai, unwearied in your ways,
^^u shall we are out on Earth most happy Days;
And after Death when they feel endless Pain,
^^u shall with Christ in Peace for ever Reign.
^^ch bliss pursues a Pious-minded Peer,
And such I hope attends you there and here,
Which to seal up, and to set forth Your Train,
^eere take your Choice of Posies various Strain:
Without the New-mans Robes none are indeed
True Noblemen, but borne of Mongrell Seed.
To be borne Great, great Honor some esteem it:
But to do Good I greater Honor deem it.
Virtue so far excells Sires Heraldry,
As does Daylight the Dark, the Sap the Dry.
A Noble Mind surmounts a Noble Birth;
But who has Both-shines like Sun on Earth.
Magnus honor nasci praelustri stemmate, Major Stemma Piis Factis nobilitare
suum.
"Quanto Lux Tenebras, Siccum vel Succidus Hum^ Tanto depictos Men's Pia vincit
Avos.
"Virtus Naturam superat, sed amictus utrisque Dotibus ut Lumen Solis in orb
nitet.
THE CHVRCH MILITANT HERE ON EARTH FOVNDED AND RENEWED BY OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST.
Who is this that comes from Edom, with red Garments from Bozrah? Esaias. 63.
The Argument.
The Church is built on Christ, who under-went
The Curse, Rose up, and then to Heaven went.
This wonder-rapt some Angels of that Sphere,
That they with Joys speak of his coming there.
IN Paradise the Church of Christ began,
When after Breach God opened unto Man
The hopeful means, whereby he might deface
The Sting of Sin, and be restored to Grace;
If on the promise of the Woman's Seed
Man would rely, he might redeem his Deed.
But Bloody Cain with his accursed Race
Went Whoring after Satan, sleighting Grace.
And then the Church in Seth, Methusalem,
In Noe and his Arc, in Godly Sem
And Iaphet fixed: from whence no liking Cham
She downward past to Job, and Abraham,
And settled in the Circumcized Ligne,
Until the Promised Seed with Light Divine
And Gospels Sound arrived, graft things anew,
And by his Cross our Charter did renew.
The Gentiles then by his Apostles blessed
From Heaven gained the Holy Ghost for Guest,
To cheer their Church, within her to reside,
And evermore her Christian Brood to guide,
As long as they Him for their Rock protest,
Whom Peter thrice for all his Mates Confessed.
So Thousands did with Angels Gifts increase
From Age to Age, and found in Conscience Ease,
As testify the Pulpet and the Press,
Which holp our Church to bloome with good success.
Others, since the Word late came in use,
^pir'd have wrote and Preached of Faiths Abuse.
(...) so likewise we see, that in our Days
(...) feel the Heat of that bright Spirits Rays.
(...) them our New man reapes the Fruits of Truth,
^^^nsformes Old wily Age to Saintlike Youth,
^^y for Eve, for Adam Christ he sings,
^^ose Blood then Abels speaks forth better things,
^^rancing Souls with Gifts Prophetical,
^^d otherwhiles with Numbers Sphericall,
^^at by those Means and sweet enchanting Lays
^^ey might confirm themselves, as call home strayes.
first like Babes with Bells, smiles mixed with threats,
^weanes the weak before their Sense he bea^es
^^th Zealous Charms from worldly vanities,
^^apting them for purer Qualities,
which our Good Sire with Metaplastick Mould
^^nds ready to infuse more fine then Gold.
THis Prudent course Some take in Verse as Prose
For stilling Swarming Bees, or Stubborn Foes,
To win Applause to their more weighty work,
Which in their Brain, like ember'd Fire, did Lork.
They tickle first with smooth Conceptions Youth,
Laurel their Name* and then gain Room for Tru^^
To spread without Repulse, or sour Distaste,
Before they dress rare Manna for their Taste,
Clozing their Feast with Healths from Sions Fount
Like Petrarch, Beza, and M^randols Count,
Who with ripe Fruit by good men's Suffrages
Ransomed their Froth, and greener passages.
Such Wits I wish with Lines of Sacred Truth
From Carnal Dreams to scare our Straggling Youth
And such I hope by Grace here to produce,
As Types of Virtue drawn for Holy use.
^N the Lords Day, though not with full content,
^ate sung Christ's from Olives Mount ascnt
(...) to that Orb, whose height no Earthly Scribe
(...) by the Book, or Astrolabe describe.
Though Galilees new Glass a World espies
Within the Moon, yet Moone-sick are the Spies,
While clogged with flesh, not Spirit-rapt, they pry
^o Gods Thrones Transcendent Mystery.
(...) Heaven I glaunc'd, wherein his Manhood rests,
^^eparing Room for his Believing Guests,
Who su'd to Christ, Men's Advocate alone,
^ot parcelling his Worship into halves,
(...) Jews for Moloch, Baal, and Golden Calves;
that so the Sabaoths change at Pentecost
^ucceede with Gifts signed by the Holy Ghost,
The Comforter, which should the Church renew,
And grace thenceforth the Gentile and the Jew,
Till the Returns, as Man-Emanuell
Within the Clouds to Judge the World and Hell*
HEre now again with Fiery Flights I horer,
And his Ascent more spaciously run over
Then I did late, because our Church has dressed
And cookt upon another Day this Feast.
The way of Christ's up to Gods Orb Ascension
Transcends above frail Natures Apprehention.
I dare not wrest, Christ's Body, nor confine
His Godhead. There, He Reigns a Man-Divine,
As Man He s^es for Men. As God he sends
The Holy Ghost to gratify his Friends,
And by Infusion here his Church to grace,
If we Believe, and Love and Pray for Grace.
Although as God his Presence never ^ayles us,
His Bodies Absence here yet more availes us,
As he is Man, or else his Bodi^s Sight
Had made us Careless of the Spirits Light.
His Manhood by his own Experience saw
Our Natures weakness, and how Fiends would draw
Us from Gods will, and from true Innocence,
Whereby none could avoid Hells Pestilence.
Unless himself did stand within the Gap
^etwixt our Sins and Wraths fierce Thunderclap;
and that made him remove his Person hence
^o Heaven, there to ease our Punishments,
^y suing to Gods Grace, as Advocate,
that for his sake he would repair our State.
GReat were the Angels Joys, when Jesus came
^n humane shape with such Imperial Fame
Up to the Empyrean Sphere, where none before
Of that New Form could like a Phaenix soar.
^s by his Cross lay hushed Hells damned Crowd,
So wondering here Some Angels sung alowd:
What Is He that mounts, and sits on Gods right hand,
With Bozraes Robes, come from red Edoms Land?
Clad like to One, who has the Winepresse trod,
Yet looking like unto the Son of God,
Who did ride on the Cherubins and fly,
Yea, fly upon the wings of winds most High?
Perhaps He is a New Melchisedeck,
Gods Spouse to grace, or her with Gemmes to deck?
Or else the Cause of this New Man's Ascent
Might be her Vows and Offerings to presert;
Or for her Strayes to sue as Advocate,
Those whom the Gospels Light reclaimes of late.
His coming here with such Triumphant Port
Doubtless to Men Salvation does import.
This Mystery and Joyful Spectacle
Above all Wonders prove a Miracle
Vnparalell'd, that by Divinity
Infused in Flesh, men gain Eternity;
And that the Gentiles, as the Jewish Tribes,
In Truths rare Secrets grow most learned Scribes,
Pertaking Grace without disparity,
Made only Just by Faiths dependency,
Not by their Own, but by Another Deeds,
It Is strange how they are cleared of their misdeedes.
What sparkling Eyes more beautiful then Wine?
^^ose Teeth like Milk? whose Body looks Divine?
^ mild Aspect, yet of S. Michaels strength
^^epard, to Plague and foil our Foes at length?
those Hairs more white the^ Wool, or the full moon
^^d whose bright Face outshines the Sun at Noone?
those voices Tunes like silver Brooks resounds?
^^d whose fair Feet like finest Brass do sound?
that is He? a Prophet? Prince? or Peer?
^ho in man's shape climbed up our Highest Sphere?
^^d there instal'd with the Divinest Light
^^eares now a Crown more bright then Chrysolite?
WHat can he be then said Others, the Lord,
^ho to save men became the Incarnate word?
and having led on Earth an Humble life?
^e has trod on the Dragons Crown of strife?
Who Preached to Souls with hideous Mists perplexed,
^et for his Love by his own Nation vexed,
Who slain at last by Romes Authority,
Yet spite of Hell Rose up with Majesty?
This New man God the Third day raised from Dead
To be our King, and Comforts more to breath;
Who made Light things, or Spirits, to descend,
Now upwards holp Christ's Body to ascend;
Whose Body now we see Incorruptible,
Most Glorious, New, of strength Invincible,
Divine as well as Humane, not with hands
Of Mortals wrest, as Error understands.
Yet his long Hands, I mean, his Spirits Arms,
Extend to shield his Church from deadly Harms.
His clearest Eyes all Penitents behold,
And his white Teeth do Temperance infold.
His Silver Hairs his knowledge Ripe declare,
And his bright Face foretells his Favors rare.
Out of his Mouth flows Truths melodious Word,
But his just Wrath darts forth a Lightning Sword.
From Heaven He survayes each Holy Place,
And raps with mystic Trance Men changed by Grace
At their great Feast He is the Souls Colleague,
Spirit matched with Hypostaticke League
(...) really, as in One Horoscope
^wo Souls that plight with hands their mutual Hope,
^hilst up to Him with Thanks she lifts and heaves
(...) Ravished Thoughts, like Wheates ripe eared sheaves,
(...) Captive He has led Captivity,
(...) Gifts to Men, and does their Chains unty,
^^solving quite lewd Passions Linkes a sunder,
(...) knots of Eeles, or Swarms of Waspes by thunder
^preme there He all Creatures overswayes,
^^d there in his high Manhoods Person stays,
^ill All the Elect, the Gentile as the Jew,
^al'd up for Grace come in, and till they rue
^th shameful Guilt their Rancour, Guile, and Pri^^^*
^ho his pure Word and Deity still deride.
^is Garments red show, that He trod alone
^he Winepresse, how in Need him succored None.
^is Robes likewise resembling Bozraes Grain
(...) Crimsondipt, imply, that Men again
Will in his Members him oppress and gore,
As they their Head and Master did before,
With Aspicke Tongues hired to empoyson Fame
With strife and Loss, or Plots surmizing Blame
Whereby weak Natures Brood torn by Dissension
Might lose the hopeful use of Christ's Ascension;
Or with Cross Flames more fiercely violent,
Them in their lives last Period to torment,
Because false Christ's they would not every where
Kiss, and adore Christ's Body here, and there.
But leaving them for Antichristians Limbs,
Let us applaud, and greet with Joyful Hymns
The Real Form and Body of the Lord
From mangling now to Lasting Life restored;
This Crowned Lamb, the first Fruits of the Dead,
Whom God ordained to be our Prince and Head:
Great Jesus Christ borne on Sins neck to tread,
And to divide the Right from the Misse-led:
The Son of our Jehovah Elohim,
^^om Saints their Savior call, and None but Him;
(...) unto Him our Maker has resigned
(...) Creatures sway with Power unconfined,
(...) whose dread Name all Angels, Saints, and Men
^ust bow, and at his Praise vent forth Amen,
^ot only with loud sounding Tunes expression,
^t likewise with Loves Inward Flames impression.
The New man's Cloze of Thankesgiving for our Saviors Ascending up into Heaven.
^ll Glory be to God for evermore,
^ho with New Lays has multiplied our store,
and taught us by the Holy Gholy to find
Where Christ remaynes raised in his Human kind.
That the New man put down our Carnal Sense,
'Twas well therefore that he departed hence,
^is Body rapt till Doomesday from our fight,
^et by his great Victory infusing Light
With Wondrous Gifts on the Apostolic,
And ever since on the Church Catholic,
Or more or less, as She with Zealous Hope
Days Turret climbed, or in Nights vale did grope.
For these high Flames more bright then Sunny Rays
We sing to Three in One, New Songs of Praise.
THE MOST MEMORABLE OCCVRRENCES, WHICH ^apned in Our Christian Church, from The
Thirtieth Three year of Our Saviors ^^carnation; and from the Eighteenth
year ^f Tiberius Caesar's Reign the Roman Emperor, until the year of Our
Lord 100. at which time Trajan the Emperor began his Reign.
The Argument.
Behold what Thanks from Worldlings worse then Mad
For Preaching Truth, the chief Apostles had.
^ot One escapes a sad Tormenting Fate,
Which help to build at first the Churches state.
What better Fruit can a New Sparkling Muse
Produce then Holy Odes for Christians use?
^hen by the Apostles Glass of Peace to chime?
(...) from late Iarres to scare the World with Rhyme?
O would I could, like Roman Arato,
In English Tune such Labors undergo,
As might display the Apostles Acts and Lives,
Gladding our Age with their Pure Honey-Hives!
Which spite of Drones, False Brethren, stormy Blast
And tortures stood through watchings, vows and Fa^^
Forear'd against the Foemen of the Cross,
As to prevent from Hell ensuing Loss.
Although our Latter be not built as well,
Nor may that Church in Glory parallel,
Yet our Good Will availes in stead of Spice,
And our New man helps us to Sacrifice;
For we have had our Martys, like the First,
Yea, and the Living Rock to quench our Thirst;
We have beheld the Spirits Lightning Sword;
Only, I fear, we want the Flames of Love,
Which Primer Saints with mutual Heat did move.
This want Some may with their Ambrosian Food
Supply, sound forth, and publish for our good,
If, as they have begun, they warble out
that I to bring about do stand in doubt.
^his Task Paul's Faithful Mate in Physic sk^ll'd,
Though more for Souls then Bodies Cure, fulfilled
^cring two Works to Greek Theophilus,
(...) Monuments, and by his Lamps to us;
(...) left them us to show what Legacies
^^e Heavens lent for Christian Sacrifice.
^ence, as his Ape, by Imitations strain
^ope some Light for Britains Church to gain,
^ least to serve as Sparks, Babes to revive,
^ho fail for want of Torches store to thrive.
^Hen that our New-mans Sire, the Holy Ghost*
^^h Cloven Tongues, like Fire, at Pentecost
(...) lighted on the Apostles visible,
^he some times inspired invisible
^^s Prophets: then Faith, Love, and Christian Ioye^
^^ighd Delphick Dreams, and Babels^arring Noise;
Then, Men that learnd no language save their own
Amid' strange Folks rung fo^th the Lords Renown
And blazed his deeds in every Foreign Tongue,
Like Angels Quire, with sweet harmonious song
As perfectly, as they their Natives were,
So that those Aliens stood entranced with Fear,
For how could they but be aghast to hear
Jews speak with Tongs peculiar to their Ear.
Some Others deemed them Mad, or Drunk with Win^
Till Peter proved them rapt with Joys Divine.
He proved them rapt by Gods immediate Rays,
With Ectasies above all Humane ways.
And not alone the gifts of Tongues, but Zeal
To Preach they had, and without Drugs to heal.
Some Prophesi^d, some Sung, whilst others told
What wondrous Acts the Lord performd of Old.
Those Mystic sparks, which by Degrees we learn
God then infused, as of more Blessings Earne,
To parallel Job, Abraham, Solomon,
For Patience, Faith, and Wisdom thereupon.
(...) who can blaze the Wonders of that Day?
^e more I muse on them, the more Dismay
(...) spend my Sense, Lord, raise up my desires,
^ sing the. Event of that Days Glorious Fires,
which comforted the Gentile as the Jew,
^rich'd the Barren Will, made Old things New.
(...) such rare Signs came first the Mystery
Three in One, the sacred Trinity
(...) be more known unto the Church on Earth,
^^d since Old Rites were past at our New Birth,
^at she might name at her solemnities
^e Holy Ghost Colleaged to Baptize.
^ working we agnize, feel, and admire,
(...) who but He could stony Hearts inspire?
Done as with Gifts this Holy Flame appeared,
^uls Chaos melt, and their dull wits had cleared,
^ds Word then from Melchisedechs choice Town,
^ from the Earths fixed Meditullium blown,
Pierst Egypt, Greece, Damascus, Babylon,
The Temperate, yea, and the Torrid Zone,
Where Negroes, though of Circumcised Race,
Converted by an Eunuch look for Grace.
The Gospel pierced each Country and each Town,
Truths Sound went forth to all the world then know
Whereby no Nation might excuses plead,
But that they might be linkt with Christ their Head.
WIth like success the Christian Faith did bloome,
And flourish there where brave Triumphant Rome
Prepared the way by Moral Arts and Aw,
That Grace Men's Hearts might so the sooner draw.
While tatling News fond Athens itch'd to tell,
The Romans dried her Aristotle's Well.
These Second Means for Planting Christian Rites,
In those days much avayld Romes Proselites.
Arts usher Faith. Faith quick by Hearing grows,
But most of all when the Good Spirit blows.
There wanted none of these in Ancient Rome,
Where vows and tears for Grace had purcha^'d room.
Rome was the Empires Head, Great Caesar's Seat,
The Westernes Mother Church, where then complete
From Salem s^one the Crosses radiant Star,
Which in Paul's time enlightening near and far
Transferred on Linus, Clemens, Anaclete,
The Martyrs Crown with Flaming stones beset,
And thence bespred Truths universal Course,
^or then all Men to Tiber had recourse.
^ut though I much commend Old Christian Rome,
(...) should forget my self and Christendom,
(...) that fair Town of memorized Fame
Which first professed to bear the Christian Name,
(...) chance to pass by unsaluted now,
Not doing Homage which all Christians ow.
Had I rich Tassoes vein to set her forth,
Or Godfreyes strength to vindicate he^worth,
(...) would possess all Christians Catholic,
That Antioch was S, Peter's Bishopric.
And that it well becomes a Christian Knight,
Who first bore Christian Badge to do her Right.
I would redeem her from proud Ottoman
From Muffties sway, and Mechaes Alcoran.
In Iowry Land arose the Gentiles Light,
From Antioch came the Name, which Fiends does frig^^
And shall out last all Names, until our Head,
As God and Man shall judge both Quick and Dead,
Till Christ resignes to the Supremest Mace,
To All in All, his Intercessors Place.
THis Light and Name the Sire of Antichrist,
In Envy unto Man, and spite to Christ:
With his Blacke-Guard that were deprived of Light,
And for their Pride enwrapt in Errors Night:
They all conspired, and strove to prejudice
With all their Might, the New-mans Sacrifice.
For this design, their Malice to effect,
They seized the wits of Annas and his sect.
They first played on the souls of Saducees,
and gulled such Brains as idolld Golden Fees:
christ in his Limbs to Crucify again;
And all for Pomps support and worldly Gain.
THe Creeple raised in Jesus Christ his Name,
^y Fishermen, that wonder put to shame
The Jewish Scribes, so that they burned for Ire,
And feared least Christ might di^^ their Levites Fire,
Or quite abate their Old Traditions Gain,
Which help their present Glory to maintain.
At first they silenced them, and then with Gall
They thundered out big words ses^uipedall:
That if thenceforth they acted Miracles
In Jesus Name, they would as Spectacles
Of Infamy their Bodies publickely
Afflict, or make them in Iaile-Shackles ly.
But since the Apostles them regarded not,
Nor cared for Threats, nor scourging, then they shot
Their Church-Darts out of Excommunications,
Till a Law Doctor calmed their Combinations.
By this Advice, that no Devise of Man
Might stop the Will of God, do what they can.
ON this the Levites rested for a while,
And ceased their hand with Murder to defile.
The which Advise if Romes late Catholics,
Had ^aigh'd for them whom they called Here tickes,
Rome might have held a Reverend Mothers Sway,
She had ere this turned Eastern Nights to Day:
Where ministering now scandal to the Turks,
Both they and we detest their Bloody works.
For Ten Years space, till Claudius Casar raignd,
The Scribes lay still, their spleen a while restrained,
And seemed to wink at the Apostles Fame,
Whilst in that breathing Truce the Christian Name,
The Church increased, had all her wants relieved,
Antioch received, S^maritans Believed,
Ioppa ^rejoyc'd, Caesare a gained Grace,
^^d many Jews joyd of the Christian Race;
^well the Gentiles, as the Circumtiz'd;
^n'd in One League for Christ to be Baptized.
that Good Time Saints gaped not for Gold,
^liv'd in Common, their Possessions sold,
^^d without Guile the Price did distribute,
^hereby they barred the Cause of wrangling suite,
^ Mine and Thine. Their Care was Bread and Wine
(...) sacred use, and for the Heavenly Vine;
(...) build Christ's Church upon the New-Mans Rock,
(...) on the Sand, False Keys, or stumbling Block.
^^at Wonders wrought they of stupendous sort
^^ove frail Sense? Or Carnal wits Report?
(...) Words they made the Cripled wight to walk,
^he Dead to Rise, Blind see, the Dumb to talk.
(...) Words they struck a Lying Couple Dead,
and Blinded One, who men by Charms misseled.
Through Jesus Name they wrought such Miracles,
And freed themselves from Tyrants Manacles.
The Fame of such fair deeds in Salem rung,
As Nettle pricks the Envious Clergy stung.
That Gentiles should partake with Isreal's Tribes
Of Gods good Grace, they brookt not without ^i^es
They flouted that the New-mans Troops as well,
As their Old Scribes should ^ame the Fiends of Hell
And the most part, like unto snarling Curres
In Manger laid, found fault with Others Cures.
Repining thus at Progress of the Word,
Since that no Tricks could stop it, by the Sword.
^ebedees son they caused to lose his breath,
As they by stoning wrought the Deacons death;
By Caesar's Minion King they weaved their Plot,
Who would have cast on Peter the like Lot,
But that an Angel came to free his Chains,
To Plague with worms the Tyrant for his Pains.
^His puts my Muse in mind of Phillips Queen,
^ho wreakd on Saints her Gall with swelling spleen,
^ill with her Gods, her States, and Calleis Loss,
^e felt the weight of a more heavy Cross;
and of the Royal Brothers styled Valois,
^ho di'd in Blood for Blood, and Bloody Joys,
^riaes Rings can testify likewise,
that they have got by Belgiaes bloody Cries.
MOre mild yet dealt Agrippa with Saint Paul,
^ot barring him from Romes Appeal at all,
^t would have joined with Feftus to enlarge,
and save for his Appeal him to discharge.
Much less would once that sage Praetorian Peer
^or Words and Names the Jews mad Clamours hear.
HOw many Snares with Tumultes, spite, and Rage
Did they spread forth for Christians in that Age?
By all the means, which Satan could devise,
Men sought to stop the New Man's Sacrifice.
But all in vain, like trod on Cammomell
It grew the more, and with a fragrant smell.
Not Elimas, nor Magus with Hell Charms,
Nor could Dianaes Smith knock down their Arms,
Or quench in them the Holy Spirits Flame,
Which they conferred in Jesus Christ his Name,
That like themselves at first Enthusians rapt,
For Holy Trances they made others apt.
Unwearied they in their Vocation went,
And acted Deeds to Arts astonishment.
No by-respects to Glory, Wealth, or Ease,
No Emulations Sting could make them cease
From the Pursuit of the Immortal Prize;
No servile Fears, Detraction, nor surmize,
Could let their maine intent, and Ghostly Race,
From setting forth Gods Charter of free Grace.
No Chollers Heat, Debate, nor Casual Brawle.
As fell betwixt Saint Peter and Saint Paul
For Jewish Rites, as likewise came to pass
For Choosing Mark twixt Paul and Barnabas;
Or as it chanced to Abraham and Lot:
Their Passions swayed not so, that they forgot
The Progress of the Word, the work in hand,
But that they ran, and toiled by Sea and Land.
In Accidentalles, though as Men they erred;
Yet, as Divines, the substance they preferred.
Their Elder Man they stoupt in spite of vice,
And their New-Man went on to Sacrifice.
Here Paul and Silas Preach, Apollos there,
While Barnabas and Mark, do teach else where.
Mathias, Jude, and Simon burned alike
To execute their Charge Apostolic.
With the like zeal all the Apostles rapt
Transformed souls for Mysticke Trances apt.
THey Catechized, and sought their Saviors Praise,
Their Sovereign Joys were to reclaim some Strayt
With Constant Faith the Gospel they did blaze,
And daily wrought great wonders of amaze;
Till by Romes Mace the Type of Antichrist,
Which slew their Master Christ, they di'd for Christ.
In all their Deeds they were so far from Pride,
That when some Gentiles would have Deified
Good Barnabas and Paul with glorious shout
In stead of yielding thanks they ran about
With clothes all rent among the wondering throng,
And begged of them the Deity not to wrong,
Nor by detracting from their Makers Grace
With Sacrifice his servants to disgrace.
They vilified themselves, took up the Cross,
Contemning Pomp and Gold, like seumme or dross.
They varnished not Gods Word with Gloss of schools
But sought the wholesome spring, not Muddy Pooles,
And spared their New built Church to interrupt,
With knotty doubts of Fantasies Corrupt.
Now for a Type of their essential Gare,
^ will produce this One Example rare,
When Proselites of Pharisaicall sort,
Would Gentiles to strict Moses Laws exhort:
^^ Salems Council the Apostles sat,
And in few lines resolved their Questions state:
Whereas by some ye were perplexed with Fear
about Old Rites, we warn you to forbear
From Meats Profane at Idolles Sacrifice.
From beastly Lust, or Wives Pluralities,
From strangled Flesh, and shedding Humane Blood,
^f as your own, ye Carke another Good:
And do abstain from the said sins withal,
Ye shall do well. By Barnabas and Paul.
And two of the Chief Brethren more they sent
These Pithy Acts the Gentiles to Content.
Whereby I note on Weaklings they impose
No heavier Yoke then what the New-man chose.
They combred not the Church with Needless Laws,
Nor with Traditions Superstitious Flawes.
They could not brook Food dressed with Satan's (...)
Nor at Christ's Feasts to glut their hungry Mawes.
Thus we observe how easy is Christ's Yoke,
That to clear doubts Faith bears the Sovereign (...)
Faith linkt with Love requires us to forbear,
And not for Toys Christ's seamelesse Coat to tear.
HOw wondrously did the Good Spirit breathe
The New-Mans Gifts, from darkness and from death
To raise up souls? and Heathen Clouds to clear?
Dispersing Christ's Disciples here and there?
By visions He Immediate lighted on
Cornelius and Saint Peter, both for One
^^fect, to let the wavering Gentiles know,
^^at God took care within their Hearts to sow
^s seed of Grace, which stubborn Jews abused,
^^d Christ their Head, Gods husbandman refused:
^^d that without respect of high or low,
(...) loves all them, who to his Service bow*
That Travels did good Peter undergo?
Sea and Land he did undaunted go,
^^ough wanting means, unfurnished of Money,
^t for himself to gain a Patrimony
(...) corruptible mould, or brittle Mass*
^^ich like fond dreams in time away do pass?
(...) for his Master Christ souls wrapped with mists,
(...) Ignorance he made good Catechists,
^od Catholics Apostolickes he made,
^^^tructing them in his Soule-fishing Trade.
^^d as some write, when Simon with his Whore.
^^ene bragged, he like a God would soar
Above the Clouds, by Peter's vows he fell,
And brake his Neck, left by his Guard of Hell.
TO Jews and Gentiles He the Gospel taught,
But chiefly he the Jews conversion sought;
Deputed for the Circumcisions Charge,
Unto the Elect, dispenst he showed at large
The Patent of his ^eald Apostleship;
Yea, and, if Fame belies him not, his Ship
And Fishing-nets he left at Tibers stream,
Where some then so journ'd of Jerusalem,
As in the Acts we read; there he baptized,
(If there he was) till Nero tyrannized.
Now whether Rome has cause of him to boast,
As for his seat more then the Holy Ghost,
Which living Peter gave to men of Faith,
Some since have strove, not following Peter's path^
It Is certaint, that he were no Triple Crown:
None kissed his Foot, nor ^rod he Princes down.
It Is known, that Gold and silver he have none:
A Tanners house was of his Lodg^ngs One.
It Is credited, that to the Cross he bowed,
A kind of Death which only Rome allowed,
Till: Constantine in love to Christ for bad
This cruel pain and spectacle most sad;
That being Old against frail Natures will,
Others did Peter lead his Blood to spill,
As Christ foretold; but his Crosse-fixed place
(Romes Empire lay so large) I dare not trace.
BUt sure I am Saint Paul in bloody Rome,
When Nero reigned, endured Martyrdom.
There, having twice before that Tyrant stood,
His Faiths Defense he sealed with his Blood
About the time when that mad Bouteseu,
Had fired the City with his wanton Crew,
Because he ^ong'd to sing the sack of Troy,
And by such Types would execute his Toy,
To cloak the Fact, and stop the Mutiny,
Yet not repenting of his villainy,
He authour'd Christians of those dismal cries,
And butchered them to bleare the Peoples eyes.
Among that guiltless Troop then suffered Paul,
Who had fore-wrote what should him there befall.
This chosen Saint has left brave Monuments
Unto the Church, which Satan's Ambushments
Can never trap, nor Canker-fretting Age
Consume, but they stand firm in spite of Rage.
IN Albions Orb an arched stately Room,
The chiefest Pile, I think, in Christendom,
Of Paul's sole Name, revives his memory,
Till Doomes-dayes blast the River Thames shall dry;
In the mean time grave Saint-like Ministers,
Accompanied with Asaphs Quiristers,
Sing praise to God for gracing of Saint Paul,
Who once had been a bloody-minded Saul.
Of late repaired it shines with zealous Fire,
^s erst with flames raged the stupendous spite.
Blessed be their Zeal, their Cares, and good Intent,
Which have rebuilt this famous Monument,
Resembling that of Salems Second one,
Renewed by Jews, first built by Solomon.
LIke these, so did all Christ's Apostles Fish,
And on some Coast or other never miste
To catch for Christ some choice and dainty Prey,
Bartholomew and Thomas knew the way
unto the East, and there engraved their Names.
^aint Mathewes Pains sev'n flouded Nilus fames,
And precious John the Bel^ll Abissine,
From him and Philip claims Christ a Faith Divine.
Achaia vaunts of good Saint Andrews Cares,
With whom he pawned his Bones, till those rich wares,
Some Scottish Saints by a Greek Monk redeemed,
Them and their worth, like precious Gems, esteemed.
While Mark from Peter's mouth Gods Word compil^,
To leave it her, Niles Alexandria smiles,
Sea-spousing Venice too did sacrifice
Unto Saint Mark a goodly Edifice.
The latter James, Christ's kinsm^n by the flesh,
In Salem lived, disorders to redress,
Where he, though styled just, as spectacle
Of shame, was thrown down from the P^^^a^le,
Which Satan moved to Christ. There he expired,
And Roman Force the place soon after fired,
Yet has his Fame to after-Ages spread,
His Bishops Seat with Christians flourished,
By Princes graced, and for Antiquity
Puts Antioch down, and Romes Priority.
At the First Council Iame^ ^a^ President.
There, S^in^t cloz'd up the Circumcised Ren^.
In Salem ^ate the High Commission Court,
Where they decided doubts of most import.
Galicians since built up a sacred (...)
At Compostell, which later Wits profane,
Adoring ^^mes, as if Humanity
Should offer Vows due to the Trinity.
ABout the Time of James his death, to (...)
The Fatal Web for sinful Salem spunn^,
Upon the Siege the Christian Jews fore-warned
By Oracle from Christ, fled thence una^^'d
With Humane helps, but guarded by Divine
Supplica, themselves to ^ella they confine,
Where they on I^rdans B^^ks securely lay,
While Rebell-Iewes were slain, and fold away.
SO stood the Church with them, who flourished first,
Next Christ's Ascent most pure, until accursed,
The Jewish Nation for their Crying sin,
And hardened Hearts deep woes were plu^ged in,
And then God pleased for Iewries unbelief,
The Gentiles to adopt to Iewries grief,
And our Church seems to them a stumbling sin,
Till all the Elected Gentiles be come in:
As unto them of Antichristian Race
She seems, till Babel feels her last disgrace.
But why were Saints, like Christ, so foulely slaint:
Because the more they suff^red here, more Gain
They reap, the Nobler Crown in Heaven they gai^^;
And shall judge those, who put them hereto pain.
IF you would know by Times Gradation m^c,
Domitius and Domitian yields you store;
Read Tacitus, when Rome lay wast with fire,
How Christians felt the Formers Frantic Ire:
Some crucified* some burnt, and some were ^as'd
In wild beasts skins, by Mastives torn and chasd
So cruelly, that who did them contemn,
In hate to N^^^^s spleen then pitied them.
Though Christians were to manifolded pain,
Throughout the twelfe year put of Neroes Reign,
^et like to Palm suppressed, the more they grew;
The Church the more by Martyrs did renew.
Athmos with Romes whole Empire tells what pain,
The Church endurd in the last Flavians Reign,
^ith greater Numbers Martyrs Calendar
^anonizing then in mad Neroes year:
^uring which Rage some Brethren false did rove,
The Deacons Sect, lewd Family of Love;
and he that durst before Christ's Darling bath,
^ut felt the Doom of his incensed wrath;
The Bath-walls fell, crushd Cerinthe underneath,
As soon as John had menaced him with death.
THE OCCVRRANCES OF THE SECOND AGE From the year of our Lord 100. until the
year 200. At which time Severus reigned Emperor of Rome.
The Argument.
Saint John deceased, Fiends Seeds of Error sow,
Yet does the Church, though persecuted, grow,
And from her Womb spring up a Learned Crew
Of Saints, who with their blood do Truth renew.
HE that desires a Saint-like Life to lead,
Let him the steps of ancient fathers tread,
Who nearest lived unto The Apostles times;
Thence I collect the Course in Raptured Rimes,
Which Christ his Church then for her members held
What Paths they traced, and wherein she excelld,
If we mislike her Plainness, or their Marts,
Love bids us chastely gaze, and wink at Warts;
For like the Moon at full, sometimes the Church,
Reigns known from her, who lives upon the lurch,
Dispersed through the World, Apostolic,
Yet, like our God in Three, one Catholic,
In sundry shapes repleat with sacred Fire;
With many Tongues, in Spirit yet entire
And Essence one; who, though diversifi'd
For Rites or Form, (...) yet ^ustifi'd
By Faith with Him, who tryes men's Consciences,
Bears with their ^^ips, and hears her Grievances.
Return, quoth he, Ye^ people full of strife,
Who Me have wronged, like a rebellious Wife.
Alluding to which challenge in his Word:
Before the Lord and Ange^^s I record,
That I believe no Church on Earth this day,
Then Britains Church goes a more knowing (...)*
In substance pure, and in her good intents,
Sealed rightly with the Newmans Sacraments.
And with the Best her Elders I confer,
Yet dare not say her Troops do never err,
Nor brag that she has neither Mole nor Wen,
While she cohabits here with mortal men:
But pray, that she in Fruit more pregnant thrive,
As she in shape is like the Primitive;
And that with flames of mutual Love we glow,
As forward as in height we seem to grow.
One thing I add against her Foes in brief,
And therewithal to ease our Weaklings grief;
Although I honor with my heart and Pen,
The Couneclls, Fathers, and the Ancient men,
Who wrote before the seventh Century
Became bewitched with Babels Mystery,
Yet we no more give credit to their Lore,
Their Matter, Tropes, and Topic Maxims store
Derived from Old Adams double Tree,
Nor further then we find them to agree
With Gods own Word, or Oracles Divine,
Dare we consent with them in every Line,
For men may err, yea, Learned Countells err
By Faction^ swayed, as other whiles they were;
And, as Eusebius marked, the Church began
To be unchaste, soon as the Apostles ran
The Hower-glasse out of their lives Pilgrim age,
By Cerinths Toils, and Nicholaites Rage;
Or by those Fogges, which Epiphanius brands
For Heresies of Antichristian Bands;
Or Sects, whose Augustine expells the mists,
Be they Pelagians, or the Donatists.
AT the New Rising of the Second Age,
In the First year came Trajan on the Stage,
Adopted Caesar by good Nerv^es choice,
Broiles to prevent, and Cares to counterpoise.
In his precedent Reign Domitians Act
Against the Church in Rome was somewhat slackt;
But otherwhere the Praetours for their Gain
By Christians goods escbeat, renewed again
The Old Decree, and in their Liberties
Practiced on Saints their former Cruelties.
But leaving them a while to rack and rage,
I now glance on the Wonder of that Age.
OF Him I sing, who would have kneeled down,
But was forbod, unto an Angel, known
Of all the Apostles longest to have seen
The Churches course eclipsed by Tyranis spleen.
One while assailed, anon strong Militant
John saw her curb Conetits exorbitant.
Thou haft, O glorious Saint, beheld her Pure,
Like to the ^unne dispelling Clouds obscure.
When Shepherd Pan deceased, then Oracles
From that time ceased through Christian Miracles;
For when Tiberi^t swayd, Fiends waild their loss,
While they shipped Tam^^ forced to brute ^he Cross,
And to proclaim in Midland Seas with dread:
That Pan, the great God Pan, was newly dead.
Thou have survivd thy Brethren, and thy Mates,
Thou have beheld strange Turns of worldly States,
The Temple sacked, Jerusalem destroyed,
Thy Native soil all harried and annoyd,
Thou liv'st to see weeds of black Heresies,
Amidst the Church spring up, Apostafies
Grownerife, the Saints with Persecutions flame
Scorcht every where, and put to open shame,
Thou have out-dar'd a dozen Emperors,
Since thy good Lord triumphed over powrs,
When thou beganst to shine, Tiberius raignd,
They saw thy Life's sunset, whom Trajan paind.
What dangers, wrackes, and buffetings of Fiends,
Have thou often felt? What snares of glozing Friends?
Portents to make the Patient^^ Job dismayed;
Thou have outlived thy Charge, the Widow-Maid,
Thy Mother dear adopted on the Cross,
To thee his Minion left, to ease thy loss,
When therehence out thou tookst her to thy house,
As a true Nun, to help thy Christian vows.
HOw long she lived with thee, to calculate,
An Angel must the certain Time relate,
Or name the Place where her Blessed Body lies,
Whether she was in Body Enoch-wise,
Immediately to Heaven assumed up?
Or dwelt with John till Age made her to stoup?
And paid her debt as other Mortals do
To Nature, much it skills not us to know?
Since now with Christ her Soul Triumphant rests,
And as her Life deserved with him she feasts:
Admitting no such Mediatrix style,
Or Goddesses, as some themselves beguile,
That she does oftentimes command her Son
To hear a Sinners suite, or Orison?
SAve that I might be into Whirle-pooles brought,
Or for my Guess be too Sagacious thought,
I would Conjecture at the Time when John,
Before the Siege of Salem undergone,
Departed into Corinth, Ephesus,
Or other Coasts, where Titus and Timotheus,
Were by Saint Paul ordained to Over-see,
There, to confirm each Saint in his Degree,
As they by Him, who all those Churches bare
Upon his shoulders first, were bred with Care.
There, he consumed the Remnant of his Age,
Until to Pathmos by Domitians Rage
Confined, he saw in spirit Christ again,
Who then and there by Revelations plain
To his Rapt Sense, though hid from Carnal Brain,
Did prophecy the future Churches stain.
For Comfort of the Elect the Lord appeared
Unto this Saint, and his Wits Senses cleared,
To understand what plagues he will effect
In the last days for his true Words Neglect.
THese Mysteries Christ opened unto John,
Whom he reserved so long. And thereupon
I humbly glance by leave of Holy Wits,
To whom my Muse her Raptures here submits:
That when One asked Christ, what John should do?
Whether he should remain behind or go?
His Answer was unto this bold Assay.
If my will be to have him here to stay
Until I come, what matters that to thee?
And long he staid, as all may clearly see.
Before his Death he did so settle things,
That Greece his Praise as well as Asia rings.
In Norvaes Reign he came with his Release
To Ephesus, where he deceased in Peace,
While Trajan swayed, as Grecian Clearks relate,
Having escaped an Oily scalding Fate,
Imposed on him by fierce Domitians Rage,
Who then exiled him to Pathmos Cage,
Where, though cub'd up a while from Christians sight,
He saw what cheered his Soul, His Masters Light.
BOth in his time, and after, soon began
The Devils Plots to scare the Christian man,
Which Valentinian and Menander spread,
And many more, which Weaklings then misled:
For whose Mistakes Saint Irenaeus grieved,
Two hundred years ere Epiphanius lived,
To blazon them and other Heresies,
Which then obscured the New Man's Sacrifice,
After Saint John's decease, till Adrian reigned,
The Roman Praetours still the Christians Pained,
Who so confirmed were for the Fiery Cross,
They feared not Death, nor Pain, nor Fortunes Loss.
The Truth when rackt by Inquisition strict,
That Christians much were wronged by Romes Edict,
Great Trajan then did unto Pliny write,
To mitigate the Fiery Trialls Spite;
Yet not to spare them, if they were brought in.
(Damned policy so cloaking Bloody Sin)
In which implicit Snare Ignatius bound,
Like Christ's fine Corn, by Lions Teeth was ground.
NExt after this, the Second Century
Points at some Saints of Glorious Memory,
As Pillars of that Age, with whom as Chief,
Succeeding those fore-nam'd I rank in Brief
A Martyred Sire of Naples Palestine,
One that foretold his death to Antonine,
When shortly after did a Cynickes Hate
Conclude with Flames the Swans Prognosticate,
Having first wrote, to calm the Emperors
Spleen his Defense, and to Romes Senators.
In Iustines time, which by the years account,
Since Christ's Ascension up from Olives Mount,
One Hundred shone, good Christians lived content
With simple Means, and scorned the Blandishment
Of Gain or Pomp, with all false worldly Wares:
But fixed on Christ, and Cure of Souls their Cares.
Platoes and Moors Eutopiaes Commonwealth,
Compared to them seems but Promethean stealth,
Phant asticke Dreams, or Speculations Flame,
Which being unpractiz'd breed the Authors shame,
They taught and wrought with Real Charity,
As if that day they were arraigned to dye;
Not like to Stoics dissembling Looks austere;
But against Sin with Discipline severe,
With Vows and Fasts the Outward man to tame;
Not for Repute, or Superficial Fame,
But with intent to keep their Vessels pure,
And to seal up their Christian Calling sure,
They promised not but what they did perform,
And squared their Deeds to the Apostles Form,
Such Pious Deeds with Zealous Sparks beset,
As I for Saints have in my Preface set.
From Justines Works likewise I apprehend
The Eucharists Religious Use and End:
We take no Common Bread nor Common Wine,
(Says he) but like as Christ by the Divine
Bright Word became true Flesh, and for our Good,
Took on him our Attire of Flesh and Blood,
So we by Virtue of his Word, Record
That Food to be the Body of the Lord;
Yet Sacramental Wine and Sacred Bread,
Which have our Souls by the Remembrance fed.
With this short Course the Presect of the Feast,
Insinuates Vows into each Sacred Breast;
They fed with zeal: the Throng Thanksgiving sing,
And Deacons did unto the Absent bring
The Consecrated Food, that they likewise
Might have a Taste of the Soule-sacrifice:
Such was the Ancients Form, to distribute
The Holy Food without Quirkes or Dispute.
IN those Days Cross to Food blessed by the Word,
Was Sacrifice of Flesh at Heathens Board
To Idoll-Gods, which Christians did refuse,
By reason of the Cursed End and Use,
(As we likewise that Carnal Food despise,
Which some Create a God at Sacrifice)
And yet the Food, ere it was so disgraced,
Could not pollute the honest Takers taste.
So when Gods Word has blessed Ours to record
Our Saviors Cross, it quickens by that Word,
Which full of Life breathes Spirit, Life, Relief,
If it be taken by Souls firm of Belief;
For otherwise the present Ectasy
Does uanish, and away those Blessings fly:
They at their Feast Emanuels Presence lose,
His Presence, whose rare Form some Clearks appose.
Though they believe, that Christ is God and Man,
And styled God with us, his Form they scan,
And question, how could Paul and Stephen see
Emanuel, while on Earth Men living be?
As to the Pure this Mysti^ke Trance turns Pure,
So it is Damnations Bait to the Impure.
And when Faiths Feast becomes a Sacrifice
To Idol Gods, it tends to prejudice;
For this grave Cause good Christians do refuse
False Altars Meat, where Satan Poison scrues.
WHat shall I write of Mark Aurelius Reign?
When all his Camp distressed for want of Rain,
Were at the point to perish, Christians then,
By Miracle gained showers to save his Men?
While hopeless Pagans dig'd, by Prayers they
Gained in One Night what they had toiled by Day.
Such wondrous Deeds of the Church Primitive,
Like those Blessed Showrs, will cause our M^se to thrive,
If therewithal we moisten Thirsty Souls,
Which long to taste of our Nectarean Bowls,
In hope from Bruites to be trasnform'd anew
To better shapes, then Ovid could renew,
Or Samian Forge. Our New-Man sings more strange,
Of Manners, not of Bodies, the Exchange.
WIthin this Age lived Irenaeus known
A Bishop, where France built her Lions Town.
He stoutly did the Marriage-state defend,
Whose Foes, he writes, blame God and Natures End.
He taxed Romish Victors Lightnings Flash,
And qualified his Squibs denounced rash,
Which he presumed against the East to throw,
For Easters Date with Supercilious Brow:
(Or did perhaps not excommunicate,
But bar with them Rome to communicate.)
So likewise did Grave Policrates blame
His Censure-causing Schism, and Christians shame.
This Reverend Man, to win the more Applause
For his Defense of that propounded Cause,
Demonstrated, that his seven Ancestors,
And he the Eighth from those Progenitors,
Were Bishops all of Ephesus, and held
Their yearly Course of Easter unrepeal'd,
Implying, that his Lineall Holy Race,
Confirmed the Truth to clear that wrangling Case.
NExt unto those shone Athenagor as,
Tatian, and He, who with his Sire would pass
To Martyrdom, and but for Mothers Tears
Partake, like Adamant, not shrunk with Fears.
He gloss'd Gods Word, and would have bin more prized,
If he had not too much allegoriz'd.
Severus sent for him (such was his Fame)
To Antioch, where he stuck to Christ his Name,
And blazed his Word with such rare Eloquence,
That he returned by Caesar graced from thence,
Dismissed with Gifts, and Courtiers good report,
He came again to the sev'n Flouded Port,
Where he much Oil in Alexanders Town,
Consumed, until his Error put him down.
Where well he wrote, no better Writer known:
Where ill, none worse then Origin is shown.
Famous for this: he terms Christ's Flesh and Bl^^^^
The Spirits Type, his Word Soule-quickning Food;
Most infamous for this: that first he Gelt
Himself, and then for fear he should have felt
A Buggering Rape by a Black-hired Moore,
He Sacrificed to Idols (a far more
Scurfe-spreading sin) for which with Bolts accursed,
By Alexandriaes Church, to Tears he burst,
Whenlighting on a Text in Salmes Town,
And there desired to Preach, he found his own
Unhappy Act by Lot, nay by Divine
Appointment: How the Precepts which are mine,
Dare thou presume within thy Mouth profane
To teach or read, O thou ungodly Man?
Upon which Text poor Origin abasht,
With Tears his Crime and his Presumption washed.
THE STATE OF THE BISHOPS OF ROME DURING THE TIME OF PERSECVTION, and while
they were subject to the Emperors.
IT may be here some Curious Wits expect,
That I their Lives and Deeds should recollect,
Whom Priestly Votes h^ve voyc'd for Roman Popes
In Peter's Chair, on whom they sixth their Hope^
To bind and loose their manifolded Cri^e^
Both then and now, and in ensuing Times.
But such a Task I dare not undergo,
Nor will I have with Fraudfull Styles to do:
The Servant when of Servants One proclaims
Himself, and yet a Monarques Power claims.
Let them who build on Flesh and Bloods Desires,
Entangling their Belief with needless Fires
Of High Ambitious Thrones, not warranted
By Gods dear Lamb, who for our sakes here led
An Humble Life: Let them I say bow down
Before the Gold-cross'd Shoe and Triple Grown.
But I am sure they no Record shall find,
Nor Chronicle, that mentions in that kind
The least Reflexe of Royal Majesty
Due to Romes Popes with Both Swords Sovereignty,
Until the French the Lumbards overcame,
Till Charlemaine did Desiderius tame
Since Phocas Time they Nine score years before,
Above all Priests the Chiefest Mi^er wore:
Since Constantines, who Phocas did precede
Three Hundred years, a Patriarchs sway I read
They had here in our West. But till that Time
They scarce found space to breath, much less to climb,
Or claim a Mace, and to be called Lord,
A Style, which Christ forbad, and Saints abhorred;
For till the Reign of Constantine the Great,
Thirty they were, which graced Romes Pastors Seat,
And of those Thirty Bishops there were None,
But they were slain, or did through Troubles groan.
As English Saints were in Queen Mary's days
By Tyrants spleen distressed sundry ways,
Imprisoned, rackt, and put to Open shame,
Deprived of all their Goods, and burnt in Flame:
So Christ's New Church, tho with rare Dowries blessed,
Near for Three Hundred years was sore oppressed.
Caefars without, and Herteickes within,
Did persecute, and plunge her Members in
So many Toiles, that hardly they could meet
In Private Place, nor one another greet
With Common shows of Neighbors Amity;
How then could they think on Priority?
And stand on Points of Prelates Primacie,
Without distrust of some Conspiracy?
THe Truth is this: who were styled Bishops then,
They fished not for frail Wealth, but Souls of Men,
Not to enrich themselves with Private store,
But like Saint Paul, the Cross they thought on m^^^
From Christian Caesar's they got Liberties,
But not so great to claim Regalities,
About the Year Six Hundred sixty six,
We find that Rome began to play more Tricks
Then she durst act within the Ages past,
As Paul and John foretold her Breach at last)
And never left to lift her Lofty Crest,
Till she Gods Word had darkened in the West,
And dared upon the Caesar's State to prey,
The maine great Let to her Prodigious Sway.
She never ceased to stir up raging Fires,
Till she at Trent concluded her Desires,
Repugnant to the Vow, which she professed
At her First Rise, Six Hundred years at least,
At such wild Fits I only glance, not carpe;
This Task I leave for an iambicks Warpe.
THE OCCVRRANCES OF THE THIRD AGE, From the year of our Lord 200. until the
year 300. At which time Dioclesian and Maximinus reigned Emperors of Rome.
The Argument
Next to the Greeks the Latin Scribes begin,
Idolaters unto Christ's Church to win*
Romes Tyrants fret, and Saints they martirize.
Saint Anthony into a Desert flies.
WIthin this Age the Church most Militant
And Cautious, strove to shun exorbitant
Attempts of Foes; one while to secret Caves
Constrained to retire; sometimes to tame the Braves
Of her own Tribe, Domesticke Mutineers,
She used the Spirits Sword; (...) the Jeeres
And Flou^ing Stuffes of F^rrainers to daunt,
Which did at her Poor Robes and Altars taunt,
She fought against Caetilius and his Train,
And proved their Vaunt for Outward Glories vain.
Her State was then unsettled* New, and Poor,
But Time to come might make her flourish more.
A thousand of such Taunts and Fiery Darts,
A Thousand of great Dangers, Envious Arts,
By Satan's Plots she daily underwent,
While Caesar's sought their Pagan-Gods Content.
The nearer that the Church drew to her Time
Of Liberty, least that too high she climb,
Satan suborned his Agents in this Age,
Against her Race to show their utmost Rage.
He knew her Thraldomes Date to John foretold,
Would shortly end. And that made him so bold.
AS otherwhiles a Woman Chaste and Fair.
Disheveled seems, or with loose dangling Hair:
So without Art, and in her Native Dress
The Church at first for want of Time to dress,
And to compose her Outward Ornament,
Came forth to spread her Saviors Testament,
Not carking much for Superficial Wea^e,
But in the Heart the New Man's Gifts to bear;
And yet both Chaste and Fair She comely shone,
With Constant Faith built on the Cornerstone.
And though she lived and reigned of Men unseen
With Carnal Eyes, yet of Good Angels seen,
Heard in the Quire, which to the Lamb belongs,
Answered by Saints with Sympathizing Songs,
Nay, seen and known of Men Reborne anew
Both then and now, who never kneeled to Baal,
But to One Christ, the Savior of us all,
Who by his Word, and bright Di^rnall Light,
Has late dispersed the Tempests of the Night,
Saved us, like Peter, out of Her^ds Iayle,
From Babels Powder-traine, for Saints avail.
For which sweet Grace, redintegracious Love,
The Saints on Earth with Those of Heaven above,
United in One League shall ever sing
Melodious Songs to our Triumphant King.
OUr Latin West unto the Church of Greece,
Acknowledge must her self in some degrees
Inferior and obliged, From her she had the Form
Of Christian Rites false Altars to reform,
As she the Substance from Jerusalem,
More near to Greece then Rome, the Church Supreme,
From her she borrowed her prime Words of Art,
Those Second coined Intentions, to impart
From Man to Man by Terms, Discourse, and Tongue,
What otherwise would dormant lie unstrung.
Her Noblest Name of Christian Catholic,
The Eucharist, the Faith Apostolic,
Types, Symboles, and Ecclesiasticke Laws,
What be they but Greek words for Christian Cause
Disguised in Latin Robes Faith to express?
And to work on Mild Hearers more or less?
The Sev'nty Soribes translated Iewries Joys
To the Greek Tongue by Philadephus Choice.
Saint Paul and Luke divulged in Grecian Tone
Christ's Mysteries, yea, and Saint John wrought on
His Auditors in Grecian Vestiment,
Fit in that Age to further his Intent.
Greece more to praise, ere Rome saw Christ his Light,
Some Greeks of Philip cray'd his Masters sight.
NO marvel then, that Greeks, ere Latinists
Did publish Works, fought in our Christian Lists
With Infidells against their Rites obsceane.
Toward the Period of the Second Scene,
To celebrate this Age, Tertullian rose,
With Tullian Phrase to daunt the Churches Foes,
False Heretics and Jews, whom he refells;
And but for Dreaming Fasts his Part excells,
Whilst he, against Marcion makes Christ's Body good,
Truths Figure, not Imaginary Food,
Since Figures show not false, but things indeed.
And in another Place, quoth he, We feed
By Hearing on the Word In^arnate blessed,
With Understanding chew, through Faith digest.
SAint Cyprian him succeeds, who famous made
By Monuments, which cannot fail nor fade,
The Churches Union; and the Martyrs Crown,
Which since himself received in Carthage Town.
This Saint bids us the Holy Bread to part,
And break by Faith, not with sharp Teeth nor Art,
While we confess: That, which is broke to Parts,
Divine-Humane both God and Man imparts.
Out of his Books we cull, at Carthage Town
How he did fr^t, and all the Council frown
To hear, that any should Romes Pope install,
The Bishop of all Bishops General.
NExt after him Minucius Foelix came
In Roman Robes, Caecilius overcame
With Dialogues, and foiled his Heathenish Dreams.
So did Arnobius by the Spirits Beams,
In the like Garb the Gentiles Rage abate;
And shows the Cause, why Christians Idols hate.
By Fabian Bathed He graced this Centers Age,
Who first of Caesar's wore the Christian Badge.
LOng had the Church been rackt with bitter woes,
In travel, like a Woman tired with Throes,
To bring that fair Light forth, and Blessed Birth,
Which in the Elect shines with Harmonious Mirth,
The Inward Man, I mean, whose Praise we sing,
Graced to that end with Will by Heavens King.
Through all the Roman Empire tortured,
And by fierce Tyrants hands sore Martyred
In every Age during her Pilgrimage
Here in this World, until Maxentius Rage,
Became suppressed by zealous Constantine,
She felt what Dioclesian, Maximine,
And what their Praetours could impose of Force
Upon her Limbs without their least remorce
She felt, Christ in his Members felt again,
What Hangmen could inflict of Hellish Pain,
And what their Predecessors could inflict
Upon her Lambs by Proclamations strict,
(Prefiguring our late New Christian Fry,
Whom men professing Christ in Flames did fry)
And yet they failed by their Decrees severe,
Or Wolvish Decius them to daunt with fear,
But that in midst of Pain, by Satan stung,
They to the Lamb Allelujaes sung.
Slighting the Gridiron through the Holy Ghost:
Now choose thy Flesh, quoth Lawrence, Raw or Roast.
Fair Theodora to the Stews confined,
^er Friend holp her to escape in Masked kind,
^ay'd in her place, He thrall'd, she came again;
^et did the Judge for Martyrs both arraigne,
MAuger all Rackes and Flames Saint Alba^ here
^n Britain first, and Noble George appear,
Who armed on Horseback with a Sangaine Cross
Leagued Salems Knights, and often feared Englands Foes,
As Ancient Wits conceived their Aerie Sign,
Like that, which meteour'd once to Constantine.
Which Sign they might more fitly to their Head
Impute then with his Members quartered.
Their Crimson Gore transformed to Robes of White,
By virtue of their Faith Beames-darting-bright.
With Amphibale they live yet in our West
And with those Twain, whom of her Martyrs Best,
With sacred Bays at Vsk Carleons Town
Saint Aaron, and Saint Julius still does Crown.
WIthin this Age, like to the Essences Sect,
Good Men of Life austene did Cells erect
Of Christian Hermites or Anachorites,
In Aegypts Deserts, there, that Convertites
Might solitaty dwell, from Passions free,
And from those Baits, wherewith we daily see
The greatest Part, even of the Churches Brood,
Ensnared (a Mystic Point not understood
By Libertines in these our Carnal Days)
There, cloystred up from soul Temptations stays
Alone and far from Mortals Company
The Holy Saint, the long-lived Anthony,
His life sustaining only by the Fruit
Of one Palmitoe Tree, whose Rind did suit
And cloth his Limbs, as did the Fruit him feed.
His Pattern then good Saint Macarius traced,
Whose Presence since the Nicen Council graced,
O happy Types* If Superstition since
For Hypocrites Some came not to convince;
As Savoyes Hermit through Confessions shrowed,
Since Cuckolded the Best of all the Crowd.
ABout the end of this Third Century,
When Dioclesians Rage and Butchery
Did persecute the Saints, God raised up
Lactantius to confirm them not to droup,
For now their Time of Liberty drew near,
Which by Gods Grace did after soon appear:
For saving Philip, whom Pope Fabian blessed,
All Caesar's hitherto Christ's Flock oppressed.
The Church as yet fixed on no Constant Forms
Of Government. So grievous were the Storms
Of Persecution raised by Tytants Rage,
The First three Ages of her Pilgrimage,
That she could not Correct, but now and then,
Judge, nor with Tithes reward Industrious men.
As Lollards were by our Lancastrians curbed,
And Huguenots in France by Kings disturbed,
So her awed St^rres durst scarce a Synod call
By stealth, much less a Council General,
Where her Chief Watchmen of the Christian Race,
Might Congregate in one convenient Place.
Popes stood not then on high Prerogatives,
Glad often to fly, to lurk, and save their lives:
But Christians now began to be more bold,
The Time in the Apocalipse foretold,
The two and Forty Months being full expired
(Months counted for Years Sabbaths) they aspired*
By the Imperial Leave to settle things
In Order without Gall, or Envious stings,
As shall appear after Licinius Death.
Mean while I Will rest, so to resume more breath.
THE OCCVRRANCES OF THE FOURTH AGE, From the Year of our Lord 300. until the
Year 400. being the Second Year of the Reign of Arcadius and Honorius the
Sons of Theodosius the Roman Emperor.
The Argument.
The Glorious Church, which Constantine ^uil^ up.
At his Decease, by Arrians vexed does droupe.
For Schools Restraint of Julian she complains*
Which Rise again through Theodosius Pains.
THough I be slow the Strumpet to (...),
Yet I contend to blaze the New-man^ Task,
And to perform enough to satisfy
My Noble Friends, where the True Church did lie.
Since Christ his Time until our present Age,
Mauger Hells spite during her Pilgrimage:
Because she did on no Foundation stand
But Christ, none shall her Name with Error brand;
Because she built upon the Living Rock,
Which Peter voucht, she shunned the Fatal shocke
Of the fierce Dragons Flood, in Darkness shined,
Though to a Desert rude she seemed confined.
Because she squared her Doctrine and her Rites
According to Gods Word, her Opposites
Can never black her Fame and Memory,
Nor need she fear Proud Babels Mystery,
That Errors spirit can obliterate
The Gospels Text, which she enjoyes of late.
I Will make good, that though some Curse and (...),
Yet by Gods Rays, or his Saint Michaels Banner;
She spreads Christ's Name, in Saints and Martyrs blessed,
In Dangers often, and seldom times at Rest;
One while in Tents, in Wars against her Foes:
Another time beleaguered, feeling woes,
When seeking Christ in time of superstition,
The Watchmen smote her in the Inquisition,
As Solomon sung in his Canticles;
As Christ himself by Scribes Conven^ic^^s,
And Roman Doom in person felt what Grace
His Limbs with Men find in their Holy Race.
By Martyrs Blood and spoils of the Old Man,
Our New man first his Sacrifice began,
Continues still his Feast, though some conspire
To mar the same, and Our Good Church to fire.
ANd yet for all Men's Hate, our Mother lives,
Yea, from her Flames the New Man buds and thrives,
Not much unlike the Phoenix, whom they say,
That being burnt her Like revives always,
Though always not so Vigourous or Fair,
By reason of the Climate, Food, or Air,
Too high Conceit of her splendidious Worth,
Or of the Keys to shut the stubborn forth;
Or other Accidental Lets she seem
But vile, or lacking Tithes, in poor esteem,
Nipt with hard Winters Frost, or scorcht with Hear,
Course Diet, or with changing Soil or Seat.
Yet at the last the Bridegroom in extremes
Shows her the way to his spiritual Streams,
To pray with Zeal, more cautiously to watch,
Least Fiend-like Pride her or her Brood attache,
To feed his Flock, though they ungrateful be,
Combining to keep back his Tithes, her Fee.
For whether Poor or Sick by dankish Air,
She sleeps not, till she does to Christ repair
With contrite thoughts, and Lusts Mortification,
With the New-mans and Souls Resussitation,
Of whom she begs, and humbly sues for Grace,
Which on her Tears she gains, then sees his Face,
The splendor of his Spirit working wonders;
With mildest Gales restraining Sinaies Thunders;
And thereupon is throned on a Hill,
With large Command, according to his Will.
To Bind or Loose her Childrens Sins to keep,
To watch, and Feed, but not to Flay his Sheep,
Like her with Triple Crown on seven Hills,
Who with false Fires now sits as God, and fills
Men's Consciences with Smoaky Pardons, Wares
Of the Beasts Mark, with Lies and Bug^e are Cares,
A Bout three hundred Years the Gospels Light,
Had through our Saviors Blood acquired Might
And rooting, when restrained it faster spread,
Enlightening Souls whom Forged Tales missed.
When die had foiled Maxentius, Maximine,
And to a Nooke Licinius did confine,
The Christian Church was reared by Constantine,
Most Glorious on a Hill, with Rires Divine,
And decent States, as well from Foes Contempt,
As from home-scandalls to become exempt.
Soon as that Sign had meteour'd in the Air,
Which Conqueror him styled, he did repair
The Ruins of the Church, recalled home
Those whom late Tyrants had proscribed from Rome.
SUch Grace she found: But soon her Sons forgot
To thanks our God the Author of their Lot,
Who had inspired the Imperial Majesty
With Zeal to serve One God in Trinity,
And at the Nic^ne Council to restore
By Public Acts what prostrate lay before,
To build up Temples with large Liberties,
There, to serve God with Vows and Sacrifice,
To choose Grave Mitred Sires to over-see,
Least Christ his Flock by Wolves should scared ^e,
And by Decree to quashall Idols down
At Synod held in Eliberi^ Town.
This Course he took by his Good Mothers Lore,
Whose Birth much Fame to Britains did restore;
And Helens Name deserves to be engilt,
For finding Christ his Cross, for Temples built.
Five Bishoprics he raised to mighty Height,
Whereof each One possessed a Several Right;
And None of these in one another Charge
To meddle, but their own Task to discharge,
O're-seeing their Proper Flocks. The Chiefest Room
He gave the Popes of New and Ancient Rome:
The Third he granted to Jerusalem:
Then Antiochs fell and Alexandriaes stem.
This stinted Course they long observed, and None
Swarv'd from the Stem at Nice agreed upon,
But Brethren-like lived in true Amity,
Not striving for more Seats Priority,
Then Constantine out of his bounteous Grace
Allotted them in their distinguished Place.
The First, that sithence kicked, was He of Rome,
Who at Bizantiums Council would become
The Chiefest Priest as of Old Rome the Pope,
Sometime the Empires Head of spacious scope;
The which the Pope of New-built Rome gaine-sayd,
And there to hold the Prime Place he assayd;
At which Vigilius did so powte and frown,
He would not meet with them, though then in Town.
Thus they, who should a Lowly Mind possess,
Began to climb to Lordly Loftiness,
Perverting to wrong Sense the Living Rock,
Gods Word, the Keys, and Feeding of Christ's Flock.
That they might reign here in this World a while,
For a few years pufft with a Princely Style:
When they know in their Consciences they Err,
That after Death they fall, like Lucifer.
But they for Faith leaned unto Humane worth,
And scatt'red Doubts against Gods Spirit forth.
They mutined against the Holy Ghost;
Apostate Arrians raung'd through every Coast.
They soon forgot the Mysticke Crosses sense,
The New-mans Vewes, and the Words Excellence.
Their Plenty pufft them up, and the Suns Light
Bedazzeled them, like Gazing Birds of Night.
For the True Substante, Shadows they adored,
For the Creator, Creatures they implored*
The late Baptized enured to Pagan Rites,
To Saturnalian Feasts, and Idol sights,
Could not away with that Religions Form,
Which typing Christ's their Lives ought to reform,
Their Flamiues grudged, that the New-^lergy held
The Conquest over Souls, themselves expelld.
The Laymen waved betwixt the Old and New,
Like Aethiops loath to change their pristine Hew.
To punish these, when Constantine was urged,
Not so, said he, Mad men should rather purgd
By Physic be. We must, though Curres do bark,
With Gentle Gales to Port bring Christ his Ark.
This Prince, when he Paphnutius saw at Ni^e,
His Hollowes kissed, whom Focs deprived of Eyes.
The Roman Empire was most fortunate
Under his Sway. He raised Romes falling state
To such a Height, that never Kingdom since
His Parallel enjoyed, nor any Prince
Succeeded like to him in Pieties
True Practice, far exempt from Avarice
And Crying sins. His Palace with the Poor
Then with Praetorian Bands abounded more.
He was not served in Gold or Silver Plate,
Though he might set on all the World a rate,
But Earthen Vessels or of Wood he chose.
He curbd himself, because he would not lose
His wavering Subjects hearts. And what he spared
Above the Pensions of his Soldiers, Guard,
The Public Troup, and his own Private Charge,
He yearly did confer the same at large
To Pious use, and Temples up to build,
But more Christ's Living Temple to rebuild.
Blessed was the Church while* his good Monarch raign^
Having Peace, Freedom, Wealth, and Honor gained*
But after his decease by Arrians vexed,
She like a Widow stood long time perplexed,
But not with Open Force, for Satan then
Was for a Thousand Years from Murdering Men,
For the Faiths sake begun to be restrained,
Yet so, that Saints for Trial might be Pained.
SInce I my Task for Constantine have spun,
I must not leave Constantiaes Web unspun.
This zealous Princess, whether Fancies Flame,
Or to become Cortivall of her Fame*
Who late had found the Cross in Calvary,
Or Satan's Plot into her Creed to pry,
Whether these Tempting Baits wrought on her Will,
To shake her Faith, and her Best Part to spill:
She sought the Picture of our Savior Christ,
As if her Creed did on the same consist
To bring to pass her Project frivolous,
She wrote unto Euscbius Pamphilus,
Requiring him to send it her to Greece,
To make her happy in that Graven Piece.
The Holy Father with disdainefull Eye
Perused her Lines; he feared Idolatry,
Lest the Connivence at such Passages,
Might blurre the New-mans Ghostly Images.
He therefore answered her with Piety,
In Zealous Lines, not without Majesty:
Your Grace desires, Christ's Portraiture to have,
But which of his Two Persons would you crave?
Which do you mean (quoth he) His Shape Divine,
That bears the ^^kenesse of the First in Trine?
Or else the Image of a Servants Form,
To which for us he did himself transform?
If you aspire his God-heads Shape to see,
Take heed you touch not on Old Adams Tree;
None knows the Father but the Son alone,
And none but by the Father knows the Son.
But if that Persons-Picture you demand,
Borne of our Flesh, you must then understand,
That none by Art and Oily Colors di'd,
Can limne His Bodies Frame now Glorified;
For since that his Disciples could not see
His shining Face at Tabor, how shall we
View his bright Face and Persons Lineaments,
Which till Doomes-day he has removed hence?
On this Monition the Good Empress staid,
And of such Carnal Types became afraid.
WHile Lukewarm Thoughts contended much with Zeal,
False Arrius crept into Christ's Commonweal,
Where Six score years his Sect Good Men so grieved,
That in those days the Most part mis-believ'd.
Two Councels then the Arrian side preferred,
The Millaine strayed, the Ariminian erred:
Yea, Bishops both of New and Ancient Rome,
Subscribed, and to Heretics gave room.
Against them all did Athanafius war,
And therefore may be styled That Ages Star.
By his true Zeal and Pen the Arrians quail'd,
And Truth at last with Victory prevailed.
During Souls Time of Blindness, Satan's War
Began again both near at hand and far.
Against false Hearts, not by Bloods violence,
But by fly Arts to try Saints Innocence.
To dim the Churches Splendor, he sent out
His slyest Fiends to compass them about*
Mad Julian he stirred up, till he perforce
Did yield unto the Galileans Force:
Where Magic Spells, nor his Dear ^orphiry,
Could stop Gods Doom due for his Treachery,
Which unto Christians interdicting Schools,
Made Wits more ho^, his Counselors but Fools.
As bad proved Valens, since to Arrians sold,
But Goths by Fire purged his Presumption bold.
WHat Julian spoild, did Valentinian raise,
And Gra^ian grace. But Theodosius Praise
Deserves much more. He by Pope Damasus,
And Millains star did Arrian Tumults crush.
Blessed be his Name, who barred for his Amiss
From Church refrained, till he gained Ambrose bliss,
And though a King of Kings, yet not withstood
Checks for rash Doom of Thessalonians Blood.
O Godly Prince! who when he might command
A Pardon, yet most humbly demand.
Of him One sung: Each thing with him prevails:
So Winds Conjurd descended to his Sails:
For him the Heavens fought, the Waves went back,
And Natures course for all his Foes ran slack.
This Claudian blazd with Panegyric strain,
And Ambrose of his Death did much complain:
I loved this Prince, quoth he, because he cared,
More for the Church then his own Weal regard.
MUch owes the Church unto his Memory,
For after he had chasd Idolatry,
And calmed the Arrians Rage to Catholics
Content, he settled Christian Bishoprics*
And least the Church for want of Means should ^ade,
Confirmed the Act which Good Iovinian made
For Tithes to Pastors, which has ever since
Revived the Fame of this Religious Prince.
What Good this Act has done in Ages past,
Till Mungrell Monks the Churches Hire defaced,
Encroaching on the Clergy Seculare,
For their Support of Sloth and Private Care,
Let Godly States observe, and weigh what Loss
Ensues of Souls by such as do ingrosse
Impropriate Tithes, while many Thousands pine
For want of Means to spread the Seed Divine.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE FIFTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 400. until the
year 500. At which Time Anastasius Reigned Emperor of Rome.
The Argument.
Priests Marriages Confirmed. Foul Heresies
Burst out. False Christians plagued by Enemies.
What wondrous Wits that Age brought forth Divine.
Now bloomed the Irish Church and Abissine.
THat Parcel of false Babels Mystery,
Broacht at the End of the last Century
Inhibiting Priests Marriage, in the Rise
Of this New Age returns to Hell, and dies.
For while the Arrians Heat began to slake,
Siricius made Romes Clergies hearts to ache,
When he would them in the last Age constrain,
To live without their Wives in Tantales Pain,
Without their Plightd Mates, whom Christ had joy'nd
As Type of his Church-Mystery, enjoined
From Strangers sheets, as well with Holy Seed
To store his Church, as to partake some Meed
For Solace of their Lives anxiety,
While they soiled not Chaste Society,
Like Heathen Men, with Wives Pluralities,
Or haunted Whores in surreptitious wise.
But quickly was this Cloud dispersed and gone,
As not by Mortals to be undergone,
When Wiser Men condemned his Decree,
And proved the Marriage State for all men free,
As Well by Lessons out of Sacred Story,
As Nicens Warrant to Paphnutius Glory,
Who though himself had never married been,
Yet he to bar Priests Marriage deemed it Sin.
And so the Council held at Gangren past,
The like Decree for evermore to last,
That Married Priests might safely Minister,
And who enacted otherwise did err,
With thundering Doom accursing every Wight,
That dares maintain that Tenets Opposite.
Saint Nazianzen sung that he was borne,
The third Year since his Si^e a Priest was sworn.
THough this and other Fire-drakes choke in snuff,
Yet did not Other Clouds leave off to puff
And poison Souls. Each One must have his Guard
Of Angels two both Good and Bad, to ward
Or tempt his Soul, that the Sect Manicbee
Might conjure them, but not without a Fee.
To aid them with Free Will and Merits Charms,
Pelagius offers now to lend them Arms.
For these two Sects together with the Mists
Breathed forth by Arrians and the Donatists,
The World then suff'red condign Punishments,
In Lives and Fortunes with distracted Rents.
THat Ages Church was so with Heresies
Beset, and from the Truth seduced with Lies,
That though she fled into a Wilderness,
To sojourne there safe from their Wickedness,
And damned Plots, yet did the Dragon spew
A Flood of (...) in hope to (...) he^hew.
But missing her he persecutes her Seed,
And seeks by Open Force to slay her Breed.
Which though he failed because of his restraint,
Yet he prevai'ld her Lukewarm Race to taint.
For this great War he raised up Bloody Foes,
Goths, Vandalls, Hunnes, all pressed at his dispose,
By Rhadagase, Alaricke, Totilas,
By Him, whom, Aetius foiled, proud A^tilas,
Who had proclaimed himself the Scourge of God,
To chastise Mortals with an Iron Rod;
Besides the Vandall Arrian Gensericke,
Who sacked at Austines Death his Bishopric.
By these whom Rome had sometimes kept in Thrall,
God suff'red Fiends for Sin to work Romes Fall,
To let lewd Worldlings know, that when they fail
In Zeal and Love, then Satan will prevail.
Before these Storms, when as the Church was like
To perish quite, God graced her Catholic
Again by Means of Athanasius Creed,
By Ambrose, Jerome, and good Austines Deed.
BEsides those Four, how many radiant Lamps
Did the Good Spirit raise against the Damps
Of Hellish Fiends in that famed Century?
From Gratians Time, till Zenoes Empery?
No Age before nor since has ever seen
Such Lights to Crown Theology a Queen,
No Age more wise, more Learned Wits brought forth,
Since the Apostles Time of better Worth
Then those fore-nam'd, then famous Hi^^ary,
Theodoret, Eusebius, Gregory,
And Basil his dear Mate, then Chrysostom omes
Rare Ho^^ties, whose fluent Golden Tomes
Ravish the dullest sense, Or who can share
With Epiphanius? Or for skill compare
With both the Cyrills, or with Emissene?
And Others, who renowned that Ages Scene?
Extirping Arrians, and the M^^ichees?
Daunting Donatus, and his Accomplices?
And striving to keep down Pelagians Pride?
Orfor a time to stint their swelling Tide,
Which but for them had sooner made the way
For sale of Souls, and Antichristian Sway?
These shone as Stars within the Fir^ament,
And did then Satan in that Age prevent
From his deep Reach. And we might do as much,
If next Gods Word upon their Stone we touch
Discreetly without Passion, or self-love,
Since Men are pro^e the worst things to approve.
Tempted by Fiends, which wheel about the Brain,
To misconceive the Right for Worldly Gain.
Such bred in Error from their Infancy,
Will hardly see the Truths resplendencie.
BUt soon relapsed that Ages Proselytes,
They whoor'd again as did the Israelites.
On which Relapse He that for Abrams Seed
Could raise up Stones, a Stony-hearted breed,
Stirred from the North his Blessings to partake,
Which Christians soiled. These did in time forsake
Their Pagan Gods, and the True Faith embraced
In milder Climes, which Hypocrites disgraced.
At last they fell likewise through pamp'^ing Ease,
And with gross Sins their Savior did displease.
SO stood where Caesar's reigned the Churches state:
But now I must look back where Belul sat,
The Southern Queens Successor, Sabaes Heir,
Who was Baptized in the Fourth Hundred Year.
LOng had the Church of the Equinoctial Line,
Candaces Clime, since styled the Abissine,
Been tossed on Nilus Lakes by Mungrell Winds,
Composed of Jewish Rites and Heathenish Minds.
But now those Storms allayed, att^nements made,
That Christians might through Circumcision wade,
And each partake of Others Laws and Love,
Both leagued, both vowed Baptized to approve
The Christian Eunuchs Faith by Philip taught,
And long before to Ethiopia brought.
Above Three Hundred Years the Gospels Spring
Had cheered their parched Zone, and every thing
Began to grow with various fair Increase
Of Ghostly Gifts and Homilies of Peace
By their Abunaes Care, and Clergies Toil,
Only the Great Ones still did them embroyle
With Carnal Snares to cross their good Attempts.
Like as the Roman Caesar's Saints intents
By Tyranny had interrupted long,
Till Constantine redrest the Churches wrong.
So likewise Saints among the Abissines
Were trod upon, or by sore Mulcts and Fines,
Oppressed, that some kept close, some fled away,
Some as it were in hugger mugger lay:
Others for fear recanted from the Light,
Dissembling what they knew to be the Right,
As many here gloz'd in Queen Mary's days,
And some in France with our Reformed ways;
Until their Foes were calmed, and Liberty
Of Conscience signed to the New Christian Fry;
About which time Hells Rage became allayed,
Which for Three Hundred Years the Saints oreswayd.
BUt now on the Approach of this Fifth Age,
By his Grave Counsel and Abunaes sage.
The Emperor of Ethiopiaes Land
The Gospel more began to understand,
And raised the Christian Faith with Public vows,
Yet mixed with Jewish Rites and Levites shows,
And though their Forms appear extravagant,
In Substance yet their Faith is Protestant,
And little differing from the Primitive
Which we profess. Like Ours their Clergy Wive;
They Minister the Cup unto the Lay;
They honor Saints with a Memorial way,
But worship not Shrines, nor Imagery,
Lest they might fall to flat Idolatry.
Sound Christians, were it not that the^y too much
On Moses Laws the Observation touch:
Or else that they for their Dispense do plead,
That to eat Bacon, Hares-flesh, or the like,
Might make them Leprons, and their Bodies sick,
Their Climates Sun diseasing Blood and Brain:
That what agrees with us procures them Pain.
Perhaps they rank their Circumcisions use,
And shroud it with Indifferent things excuse.
DEvout they are, when in the Church they meet,
They spit not there, nor come with durty feet.
Their Lent is long, which by their Foes observed,
They often surprise the^ through their Feasts half starved.
Some Ancient Books among us lost they hold,
Which they esteem as Gemmes, more dear then Gold,
The Oracles of Enoch, and the Book
Of the Apostles Canons they o're-looke,
And the lost Acts of one of Calcedons
Old Counsels they retain like Precious Stones.
The Patriarch still of Alexandriaes Bay
Claymes from Saint Mark their Sacerdotall Sway.
These Negroes here for Christians I assign,
To show that Christ his Church does elsewhere shine,
And that she might grow strong within the South,
When in our West she seemed a Dwarf in growth.
Out of the Christian Church exiled by Romes
Fierce Caesar's for the Faith some left their Homes,
And fled for shelter to Remoter Climes,
In hope to shun the malice of the Times;
To shun the ten great Persecutions Rage,
Many were forced their Fortunes to ^ngage,
Some past the Bosphors Straights, some Gibraltars,
Others reti^'d themselves where Sunne-burnt Carres,
Twice yearly touch on both the Hemispere^,
That they might live secured from worldly Fears.
The like, whilst that mad Dioclesian raved,
Our Britains did, and Neighbors succor craved,
Who giving them Corporeal Nourishments,
Were by their Guests with Soule-Food recompensed.
A Saint-like Bounty, where both Parties Blessed
Partake of Love, the Greatest with the Least.)
Among these Nations, now my Muse invites
The Reader to review some Neighbor Lights.
THat Humid Western I Will, whose Soil resists twists,
Snakes, Toads, and Moules, whose Wood no Cob-web
Stored with true Saints a Saint-like Style now gains,
Trampling Pelagians down by Patricks Pains.
For while they skream'd in Britain, France, and Rome,
He Preached free Grace to reeling Christendom;
He Preached sweet Peace, dehorting men from Jarres,
From Crying Sins, from Murder, Spoils and Wars;
Though some of late in Printed Legends tell,
That by his Word he Thousands packt to Hell.
(A strange Narration, that a Saint should act
So opposite to Christ a Bloody Fact.)
But after his Decease, Hybernia lost
Within few Years the Style which graced her most:
And then mad Broils her Members pricked like Goads,
Worse than the Stings or Bane of Snakes and Toads.
Yea, God with Wolves plagued her Backsliding Fry,
Because they like Samarians went awry:
In mingling with Gods Worship, Idol sights,
Traditions Flawes, and Superstitious Rites.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE SIXTH AGE, Chiefly what happened in the I Will of Britain
after the Arrival of the Saxons from the Year of our Lord 500. until the
Year 600. being the Sixteenth Year of the Reign of Maurice the Roman
Emperor.
The Argument.
The Christian Church, which Greeks and Latins reared,
In Britain lies with Pagan Rites besmeared,
Trod on by Saxons Troops, and Wodens Brood,
But worse by her Own Natives sheading Blood.
FIve Hundred Years from Christ not fully told,
When Arrians stopped, then stepped Pelagians bold
With more sly Tricks of Humans Worth to boast
Then tha^ Dull Sect, which wronged the Holy Ghost.
Wherefore New Broiles infested Christ endome,
To chastife men for Schism, as to make Room
For Antichrist the Head of Heretics,
Which Mystic wise from Mungrell Catholics
Derived his Birth, and will a Tyrant grow.
Because Men loved Lies, such Plagues did flow.
Great Plagues indeed; which since defiled the East
With Carnal Baits by an Arabian dressed,
And with Soule-tainting Charms by Popes professed,
Cookt by Pelagians first within the West,
Confounding Faith by Whimseyes of the Brain
With Flesh and Bloods Desires, and Merits stain,
So that Our I Will her Former Glory lost;
There was no Room left for the Holy Ghost,
Pelagi^s had her Motions so engrost
And then her North to Hu^ler all was lost
By Scots and Ficts usurpt with dismal woes.
Because she Grace blasphemed, God sent her Foes,
Which like a Del^ge broke through Adrians Wall,
Till Strangers came with Arms to end the Brawle.
Yet ended not her stink of Ghostly sin,
Nor Carnal Snares, where she involved had been.
THe Sun had run One Hundrid Years at full,
Ere Heathnish hands could all her Feathers pull,
Or part asunder her Old Seamelesse Wear,
Which Christ his Font had dipped with Reverend Fear,
In Dies sent her from Eleuthere in grain,
And by Great Helens Son Confirmed again;
Plain without stain, I mean, and free from Pride,
Or that foul Schism, which did her since betide
By her Abortive Brood, Pelagian Crew,
The Sect that made Millions of Souls to rue.
Plain Robes she wore without Embroidery,
Or Worldlings Garb, when Ancient Hillary
Greeted his Brethren here in Brittany*
Those whom Faith linkt to Saints sweet Company.
So well had Damian and Fugatius bore
Christ's Ensign here two hundred years before,
That at the Council Grave Theodoret
Rejoiced to see our British Elders met.
WIth Purest Flowers Our Britain Church did bloom,
Till in Honorius Reign, Goths ra^sackt Rome.
She flourished under Roman Legions long,
But those being gone, she faded and went wrong;
And then Fiends watched the Time while Heresy
Possessed weak Albions Brain with Lunacie.
They saw how she cosseted her Child
Pelagius, how she was by him beguil^d,
They loath to lose advantage, nursed the Hate
Betwixt her and her Aids. Although of late
The Remnant which the Roman Caesar's left
Of Soldiers here to guard this I Will from Theft,
Were with the ablest British Youth to France,
Transported there to lead a Warre-like Dance
Against Romes Foes, where by Warres-casualties
Few lived to see their Home-Calamities:
Yet Britains rather here for Empire fought
Then to gain Souls for their Redeemer sought,
Or rather Roman Fry in Britain borne,
Their Factions made Our British Church a scorn:
Their Church, which late with Twenty eight did tower
Since counted sev'n, and ebbed to Bishops four.
Their Temples and Romes Legionary Towns,
Were quartered out for Teutons Garrisons;
Before the Sun had Forty years his Race
Run through, since Hengist raised Old Wodens Mace,
Those Germains then did them, like Wolves, devour,
Since Home and Foreign Saints did fail to scour
Their Vessels clean from Filth, since both did fail
Saint German and Saint Lupus to prevail.
AFter these Stars declined to Natures Course,
For Thirty Years the Church often fared worse,
Some times aloft she mounted; other times
She stood amazed at Change of Worldly Climes;
Peace settled her in a Calm Air again,
When Dubrice did Pelagian Blasts restrain,
About the time of Great Justinians Reign,
And then a while Our Church renewed again,
When after home bred Jarres and Civil strife,
Our Petty Kings chose Val^ant Arthur Chief
Over their Troops in Britains Western Lands
Against fierce Wodens Race, and Saxon Bands,
But soon relapsed the Britains, proud of spoils,
Not caring for Devotion, all for Broiles.
They one another strove more to supplant
For Elbow-roome, then Christian Faith to plant.
SUch impious Blurres observed by Hellish Fiends,
They sowed Debate betwixt them and their Friends,
Made them so slight their Patriarchs grave advise,
That in despair he from Carleon flies;
Whence cause he brookt not the Silures Crimes,
Demetia begged his Crozier, Hapre, and Chimes.
But why did thou, Saint David, fly from Usk,
To smell of Herrings, when thou might have Musk
And Frankincense to offer unto God,
Nearer then where thou fixest thy Abode?
Amidst the Craggy Hills and Foaming Flood,
So far remote to do the Saxons good?
Why might not thou beat down Idolatries,
As thou did daunt Pelagian Mysteries?
Which by Free Will had strove Gods Grace to rend,
And on Man's own Poor Merits to depend?
Fear caused thy Flight, or else thy Clergies Hate
Brookt not the Glory of a Rising State;
Or Discontent to find the want of Love,
Among thy Flock procured thy Remove.
Mean while behold thy Countrymen at ods,
Struggling for brittle Sway, like Demy-Gods.
AT the Decease of that brave Martial Prince,
Whose Tomb was found in Glastenbury since,
All went to wrack, like Alexanders State,
They parted that which he had gained of late,
And by their Strife with fell intestine Rage
The Victours lost the Saxons Vassalage.
While they obeyed One Sovereign General,
Nor Scots nor Picts could work their final Fall.
Their Foe-men paid them Tribute, and the East
Of Wodens Brood cring'd to the Britains West.
But Sussex now out-braves proud Constantine,
While Vortipore South Cambria makes to whine,
Look how the Nymphs of Dee and Severne groan
To bear the yoke of Conan and Malgon;
How Moan and Man with the Lancastrian Less
Cry out: Alas, that they serve Cunoglasse,
Who, though the Greatest of the Britain Kings,
Shames Christians more then Humbers Pagan stings.
THese leagued with Arthur late for States Defense
Against their Foes, now for Pre-eminence
Contend, and kill their Kin, like Sheep or Beeves,
And, which to blaze as yet my Nation grieves,
More prone to smother Truth with glozing Cards
Then hear their Twnysogs Fall by honest Bardh's:
Two harmless Youths of Arthurs Princely Ligne
Were slain in Wintons Church by Constantine,
That Cornish Wolf, who had usurpt their Right,
He slew them there in their own Mothers sight,
Without regard unto that Sacred Place,
To Christ his Altar, or their Noble Race.
And as their Kings, so did their Judges rave.
Sheading Inferiors Blood, whom Christ forgave.
They sit on Thieves, themselves the greatest Thieves,
Defloure the Daughter, whilst the Father grieves.
Their Plighted Mates they murder or divorce,
And spare not Altars to profane with Force.
THe Bruit of these Misdeeds inhumane strikes
Such Odiousness, such Horror, and Dislikes,
That their own Blood, whom Brinish Seas divide,
Gauls Britonants, disdain with them to side;
And their Old Friends of Patricks Island scorn
To aid a wicked State through Discord torn;
Nay worse, instead of aid Gurmundus came
From thence for Spoils, and soon them overcame,
The Britains thus forlorn, Nort humbria gains,
Mercia starts up, and the West Saxon Reigns,
Which Last will last, and shall chalk out the way
In times to come for a Monarchique Sway.
NO wonder that rude Strangers gained room,
And banishd them from their best Native Home,
Since neither Dubrice, David, nor such Stars
Could them reform, God sent them bloody Jarres;
Not all at once, but by Degrees he sent
His whips of Wrath whereby some might repent;
But all in vain. No Threats could Britains tame,
They did those Sins which Paini^s blush to name.
Hengist at first did but East Britain (...),
And Thirty Lustres past ere Angles Prease
Durst Severne pass, and longer Years then tho^^,
Ere Offa could his Marches Meeres enclose
During which Term had Britains tr^^ ^he Path
Of Penitence, they might have calmed Gods Wrath,
Exchanged with Foes the Chain of Thraldomes yoke,
And escaped what since they felt, Bellon^es stroke.
SO sung a Swan of Claud us Caesar's Town,
Whose Birth fell out that Year, when Britains won
The Day with Trophies at the (...),
And did their Trench with Saxon Coarses fill.
He not a Rush did for lewd Tyrants pass,
But against Five stood like a Wall of Brass.
He showed what heavy Plagues would them befall,
How they and none but they caused Britains Fall;
Their Incests, Thefis, and their loud Crying Sins,
Which to commit they cared no more then Pinnes,
With Tragic Buskin and Proph^ticke strain,
He feared not of their Treasons to complain,
Who though but weak against the Common Foe,
Divided Kings, at home yet raged so
With Bloody spoils, that through their Tyranny,
They lost the most Part of West Brittany,
For all, which they possessed from Winchester
To Cornwall, Pagans got with Gloucester.
Now Sussex, and the Mercian Kings arise
On Seve^^es shore to plant Dutch Colonies.
Such Threnes of thine, Good Gildas, proved true,
As Christians felt ^q that which did ensue.
THeir Champions then to Woods and Mountains fled,
Where Savage bent, and with such Rancour led
For the long Knives Complot, which like a Torch
From time to time did their galled Entrails scorch,
Their Clergy at no hand would join to Preach
The Gospel, not the Saxon Rout to teach,
Unless they would to them again restore
Their Country back, which they had snatched before:
Until at length Romes blessed Gregery
Dispatched a Monk of Famous Memory
To Englands Kent, where soon he did convert
Prepared by his Fair Queen King Et^el^ert.
Whence thousands more with all their Kings became
By Austines pains Baptized, to Britains shame.
For which neglect of theirs, and Neighbors scorn,
Their State all rent, and through Dissension torn,
Northumbers since did to West-Chester rush,
Slay Bangors Monks, and B^o^maels Forces crush
So deadly, that thenceforth they seldom dared
To try the Fields Event with Foes prepared.
And this sore Blow in Judgment them befell,
As Gildas first, and Austine did foretell.
THus stood the case with Britains Commonwealth,
Because they gave themselves to Rapines, Stealth,
To Fraud, Revenge, and chiefly to contemn
Those, who^ they might have made good Christian men
Without the help of more Competitours,
Brought from proud Rome to build up Babels Tow^es,
For Austine, when he came, began to strive
With them for Rule, and Romes Prerogative,
Which compli'd not with Saints of Christian sort,
As an old Hermit guessed by Austines Port,
Who Pope-like set disdained to rise and greet
Sev'n Christian Bishops with Love-congies meet.
Such harsh Salutes, or Inhumanity,
So far remote from sage Urbanity,
What could they but distracted Rents produce?
Ending in Schism, and Holy things abuse?
Our Savior Christ was meek, all made of Love:
The Devil proud, and so his servants prove.
O what ado they kept? what Coile? what sturres?
With Synods Pleas, with Quillets, and Demurres?
Like Turks for Turbants, Monks for ^rizes Hew,
So Christians then did one another sue.
The Easters Time procured this Factious Brawle,
The Romish Claimed from Peter and from Paul,
The British by Prescription from Saint John,
And their Feasts Date the Greek Church grounded on.
But nothing could appease the Adverse side,
Till Force at last the Quarrel did decide,
Until Saint Colman and the Scottish Clerks
For Unions sake were feign to yield to Quirkes,
POpe Foelix now signed the Last Unctions use,
Which did in time a Sacra^ent produce,
That by more Fees Priests might enrich themselves
For sacring Oiled Feet from aerie Elves.
One thing of Note must not forgotten be,
How in the Year Five Hundred Fifty Three.
Then at a Council in Bizantium held
The Roman Pope Vigilius was refell'd
For Heresy, Judged Excommunicate,
And doomed to be deprived of his State.
For which and murders proved the Emperor,
With slender diet starved him in a Tower,
A just reward for claiming all that Scope
Of Liberties due to the Western Pope,
Which Nicens Council under Constantine,
Did long before betwixt Five Popes assign,
Betwixt them of both Romes, of Salems Flock,
Of Antioch, and of Alexandriaes stock,
So that our Popes in the West Franchise watched
The Souls, which Peter's Net for Christ then caught,
Not with Hells Husks, Traditions, Dreams, and Lie^
But them to feed with Scriptures Homilies.
So wily was the Serpent to begin
With our Prime men and Stars, to plunge them in
The Gulf of Worldly Pride and Avarice,
That by their means they Others might entice,
For when the Head feels Pestilentiall Flame;
How soon puts it the Members out of frame?
If, like Saint Peter, He that claims his Place,
Had lived, Romes Church had stood in better Case.
But how should then the Prophesies of Paul,
And of Saint John been verified at all?
^n vain the Man of sin, Perditions Son,
Long time by Caesar's Pomp barred in that Throne
To sit as God, and in Gods Temple too,
The use of Meats and Marriage to undo;
To wrong the Church by Carnal Sacrifice,
Of Souls and Bodies making Merchandise;
In vain Great Babels Whore the Scripture has
Described, if Rome had kept her Former Faith:
By thrall'd Vigilius mark, that Popes were then,
Even for Six Hundred Years to Mighty Men,
Eaths Lords, enthralled as well for Life as State;
Yea, Christ our Head to Caesar paid a Rate
Both for himself and Peter from a Fish
Without excuse, Grudge, or repining Pish,
As they did since, which challenge Peter's Chair,
Under pretext Romes ruins to repair.
And herewithall let all true Christians know:
"As long as men are kept in aw and Low,
"At some High Powers beck, whom they do fear,
"So long they virtuous are, or so appear.
This of the Popes may well be verified,
"While they were by the Caesar's terrified,
"And subject to the Laws, so long they thrived
"In Goodness, Preached the Cross, in order lived.
But when they once obtained the Primacie
Above their Peers, and the Supremacy
Above the Caesar's, then they wantoniz'd,
Grew Avaricious, Proud, and ill adviz'd.
But this great Flame will not break thoroughly out,
Until the Eleventh Age shall wheel about,
When with False Christ's, like Capernaites Chymeres,
The Dragon more will charm Great Babels ears.
Think on these Sparks, ye States and People all,
From the Kings Bench to the poort Cobblers Awle.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE SEVENTH AGE, From the Year of our Lord 600. until the
Year 700. in which Tract of Time the Roman Pope got the Style of the
Universal Bishop, and Mahomets Sect began.
The Argument.
What Heresies sprang up ere Antichrist
Broke from his Swathes into the Church of Christ.
He grows. but not to full maturity,
Till he has got the Twofold Sovereignty.
NExt to Gods Word, or Oracles Divine,
Contemplating on Matyriz'd Iustine,
Tertullian, Irene, Tatian, Clementine,
Lactantius, Euphreme, Jerome, Origin,
Eusebius, Leo, Cyrill, Nazianzen,
On Epiphanius, Basil, Hillary,
Theodoret, Ruffinus, Gregory,
And their more Ancients Cyprian, Chrysostom,
With those of Af^rick, Asia, Greece or Rome,
Whither they in the Abissines Libraries,
Or Vaticans immured for Antiquaries;
Whether in Pri^^, or Manuscripts they be,
Musing, I say, on them with insight free,
Who wro^e within the First Six Hundred Year,
Besides the Synods of the Sacred Peers,
Chiefly at Nice (to sort New things with Old)
I wish this Post serit set in stamps of Gold:
Those Wits, who can Grave Epiphanius scan,
May help to fan Romes Church from the Old Man,
Like Wheat from Chafe, or Gold from dust and dross.
I wish this done, but dare not it ingrosse,
Or undertake my wishing to fulfill
Or want of time, of Strength, of Levites skill.
THough while proud Caesar's raved, some Christians pained,
Yet Pliny shows their state when Trajan reigned;
Nor could their Rage, nor Victors thundering schism,
For Easters Rites impeach Faiths Catechism.
Cursed were those Weeds sprung of Idolatries,
Which by Truths Flame Good Epiphanius tries:
And Blessed the Flowers, or Herballs of the Fields,
For Quintessence which Epiphanius yields.
There, Millenaires, and gross Monothelites,
With other Clouds dim the First Churches Lights.
There, see wise men then ^ire Drakes more unsure,
Yet others there more sure then Cynosure,
Though Origin and Cyprian in some things
Have erred, yet Saints by Union Calmed their stings.
While Arrians Rage Chief Rulers of the Roast,
The Orthodox proclaim the Holy Ghost.
While Capernaites Christ's Flesh most grossly take,
True Saints by Faith that Mystic Food partake.
Where Ebionites and Manichees tax Marriage,
There, Gods Elect dissolves so strict a Carriage.
Where Montanists for Merit Fasts erect
At Times prefixed, there, Saints a snake suspect.
Priscillians teach men to Equivocate,
But Christian Saints all Double-dealing hate.
Caianes Sect did Angels Help implore,
And with fond Vows their mystic Shapes adore:
As likewise did those doting Heretics,
Whom some in Austines Time termed Angellicks.
But Saints Christ's Father serve, that Mighty One
In Persons Three, and three in One alone,
Not Creatures, nor the Members, but the Head
Of Creatures Life, the Judge of Quick and Dead.
All others Help they utterly disclaim,
Save that, which they through Christ his Merits claim.
Some to Our Lady offered Sacrifice,
But Epiphane blames them of Heathenish vice,
Suites Women's Cakes for her Idolatriz'd
With Trash, which to Heavens Queen were sacrifie'd,
Equals their Deed to that which snared Eve,
Yea, to the Serpents which did Eve deceave,
And likewise tears the Veil where Christ was painted
Forbidding Dead Men's Pictures to be Sainted;
Wherewith by Letter he upon this Theme,
Acquaints the Bishop of Jerusalem,
Advising him not to endure the like
Scandal, or Crime within his Bishopric.
This of the Veil at Anablata hung
Was then from Greek turned to the Latin Tongue.
Novatus damned men after Baptismes Breach,
But no Despairing Fate Mild Christians teach;
They rather will raise up the Br^ized Reed,
Then Thunder out what is not in their Creed.
SUch Lamps this Holy Work of Ancient Date
Exemplifies for us to imitate
Such Damps likewise expressed in that Work
May warn the Elect, where does the Dragon lurk.
There, Heretics in sundry Forms appear,
There, Christ his Church you may discern most clear,
And how good Christians lived in Days of Yore,
With what they taught before that Rome turned whore,
Or which of Either Church are grown of late
In Faith, or Manners more Adulterate,
There, with some Pains we might gain knowledge more,
Which Work I wish, but want the Lydian Lore
To touch, to try the Spirits, and apply
The Extracts to the Modern Policy.
Let some Grave Elder with Seraphick Love,
Indifferent, Just, and Mild, the Spirits prove.
Let Usher, Hall, or Learned Montague,
My Mate sometimes in Eaton those renew,
Which, if my Minds presaging Augury
Fail not, will yet to us more News discry;
Or if Affairs afford them not the leisure,
To levy, rate, and draw the hidden Treasure,
Some Good Professor of Judicious Brain,
Which wants a Flock, may undergo the strain;
Orsome brave Spirit of our Academes,
Start up blaze those sacred Theoremes,
Which adding wings to our Reformed Flights,
Would serve to guard our Newborn Lambs from Kites
And show them Gentle Bathes, when to the Brim,
Old Tiber filled cause Elephants to swim;
While Honest Swains them greet: God bless the weak,
And grant they not their Christian vows do break,
While Saints do Saints salute: God speed the Plow,
And make us all content with what we sow.
So that their Seed be pure, full well we know,
They with Increase and Peace shall reap and Mow.
The Harvest great, no doubt but Christ enough
Of Workmen will provide, though I be slow.
I now review another Century:
About the Sev'nth of Christ, the Mystery
Of Ghostly Sin began to domineere,
And here-hence-out a Pilot false will steer
The Churches Ship exalted by his Mace,
Who durst usurp his Lords Imperial Place,
Bereaving Him, his Wife, and Babes of Life,
(An Omen sure portending future Strife)
From Phocas first received Pope Boniface
Investiture of his Supremest Place,
And to be styled, The Churches Sovereign Lord,
Which some have wrested since to Peter's Sword,
Which smote off Malchus Ear. In the mean while
Hypocrisy did all the World beguile,
For from the Year since Boniface began,
The Dragon wrought upon the Brain of Man,
With more sly Tricks then in the Times before
On Heretics, or Wits of weaker Lore.
Pope Gregory foresaw this Mystic Cloud,
And New Romes Patriarch therefore warned aloud:
That who aspired to be the Sovereign Priest,
He was forerunner of False Antichrist.
THis Gregory foretold, although himself
Had left his Ship on a suspected Shelfe;
When here in England he gave Austine leave
To wink at Heathen Feasts, to interweave
Their Stuff with Faith, which some resemblance had
With Christian Forms, to weane them form their Bad
And damned Garbes, that so by Easy steps
They might ascend, and not by sudden Leapes.
These Pagan Rites by Saints connived at first,
Like tainted Vessels savored of the Worst,
And long retained their mixed Religions Taint,
Till the Last Age, on the New man's Complaint,
Had purified what the Good Spirit knew
Expedient in the Church Christ to renew.
THat Monster, which since the Apostles Age
Crept Mysticke-wise, grew big, began to rage,
And Reign soon after Gregory's Decease,
Under the Keys pretense disturbing Peace,
And shall for Gold assume Iehovahes Might,
To Thunder, Bless, or Curse each Mortal wight;
For now henceforth a Mixed Religion flows,
To mar Good Seed the Tempter Darnell sowes.
With Dreggish Dreams, which here Pelagians first,
And Monkish Brains had brewed, they quench their Thirst.
With Relics, Shrines, and Lies, Monastic Cells
Abound, and Darkness now the Light expells.
Foul Sodomy instead of Lawful Flames,
And now our West Black Superstition shames.
As Mungrells of Samaria Sacrificed
Some unto God, some Creatures Idolized:
Some this besaint, that Image they observe,
But really the Most Part Mauzzim serve.
On Creatures they the God-heads Right confer,
And while they kneel to Shrines most grossly err;
The Sunne's Eclipsed, The Gospel they misprise,
And slight the Cross, the New-mans Sacrifice:
The Fiery Cross they slight, and hope by Deeds
And Humane Craft to blot out all Mis-deedes.
BOth East and West, since Mahome^ began,
Since Mecha roared the Moorish Alcoran,
Find much ado their Credit to excuse,
But must confess the New-man they abuse,
While the Old Man with his Voluptuous store,
Traditions, and his Trident they adore;
While Dust and Ashes they extol too much,
Gods Word concealing, where they inly grutch
At Him, who did Poor Fishermen inspire
With sundry Tongues appearing then, like Fire,
Unless they will mad Iulians cause support,
Restraining Light from all the Vulgar Sort,
Who burnt the Scriptures, interdicted Zeal,
And forbad Schools to Christians Commonweal:
As from the Year Six Hundred Sixty Six,
Rome did obscure Gods Word to raise her Pixe*
And what more Sign of a Tyrannick Sway
Could be, then with One Tongue to oversway
The Christian Church composed of many Sounds?
The Catholic of unrestrained Bounds?
Within this Age likewise the Agarens,
By changing of their Names to Saracens,
Intruded on the Right of Abrams Heir,
On Christ's as Moses Laws, and on the Fair
Possessions of the Church in Siriaes Land,
With Egypt, which to his Arabian strand
Now Mahomet does add, that by those Three
The Horns in Daniel might accomplish be,
With Hodgepodge-Dreames Cookt for a Fairy Feast.
And so himself of those Three Realms possessed
Dared to spue out the most Presumptuous thing,
The Alcoran, I mean, against our Christ,
Whereby he grew One of Great Antichrist
His Chiefest Limbs to Lord it in the East,
As Popes already crept into the West;
And save for Christian Name, which they do bear,
Shall over-match him in our Worldly sphere,
For as the One himself styles Lord of Lords:
So Ours shall go beyond him by loud Words,
And Thundering Bulls accursing men to Hell,
Dethroning Kings, and seating Souls as well
In Heaven, as in Purgatory-Cells:
In which Attempts the Pope the Turk excells.
BUt whether for Pelagian Heresy,
Or for her Fraud Romes great Apostasy
Fell out? (For though Pelagius she may blame,
Yet his Conceptions with implicit Flame
She hugges) Or when she turned Courtezan?
Or when was Satan curbed? I leave to scan,
Loath to resolve such Questions Scrupulous,
Till Fresher Gales, for their more clear discuss,
Shall quicken up my gravelled Intellect
From Ancient Scribes the Truth to recollect.
I Had almost forgot here down to quote
Among these Broiles one memorable Note;
About the Year Six Hundred Sixty Four,
When Sarasens and Popes began to rore,
A Female-Saint of York did Prophetize,
And speak against Romes New Enormities:
She stood against the Shaving of the Crown,
Which then the Romish Church, to know her own
False Prophets by, as Public Mark or Seal,
Had forced on Priests with a loud thundering Peale.
Against the same, and Easters Roman Date
Good Hilda spoke, but Popes said she did prate:
For since they durst the New-mans Course exchange,
Why might not they all Ancient Orders change?
Add to the Church New Sacraments, as Lights?
And alter Times as well as Outward Rites?
He, that presumes above all Counsels, Kings,
And States, will do far more prodigious things.
Thus Popes have done. Therefore I strongly fix
Upon the Year Six Hundred Sixty Six.
When Gog with Force advanced the Alcoran,
When Magogs wiles set up the Outward Man:
Then did those Foes, though diff^ring in their ways,
Begin with Filth to soil the Churches Rays.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE EIGHTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 700. until the
year 800. At which Time Irene reigned Empress of Constantinople, being the
Mother of Constantine and Nicephorus. About which Time Ecbert began his
Monarchy in England.
The Argument.
The Churches Brood seduced with Monkish Lies
And Mechaes Dreams, the Gospel they misprize;
Mungrells themselves, then Mixed Religions flow,
Yet some reclaimed, their Mothers Voice did know.
ABout the Year Six Hundred Sixty Six,
Strife dimmed the use of the true Crucifixe.
For Pictured Saints the Greek Imperiallists
Began to tax our Western Latinists,
Whose Right or Wrong Serenus, Gregory,
And Epiphane did long before descry.
Some prized those Types, like Books, to edify:
Some them defied, least Gulls them Deifie.
Some thought their sight did quicken much the sense,
Whilst others held they dulled the Conscience.
But to sum this: we must our Bodies yield
As Minds to serve the Lord, or lose the Field.
We outwardly must to Gods Rites attend,
As inwardly on his Good Gifts intend,
For what the Heart adores, the Tongue sounds out,
The Knee bows to, the Sight puts out of doubt.
Then, Agars seed prevailed to Tyrannize,
Popes to usurp, and both to Sympathize
With Satan's Genius, by false masked zeal
To over-sway Christ's Church and Commonweal,
Fraud taught them first to crouch and to dissemble,
Then Fiends trained the^ to make their Foes to tremble.
Thus darkened stood our Western Hemisphere,
Till She that is with the Sun clothed did appear.
By Trumpets sound, and Printings Mystery,
Recalling home her Strayes from P^pery.
Among which Lutes harmoniously Divine,
Would I could thrust this Oaten Pipe of Mine.
BUt was Our Church on Earth invisible
Till Luthers Time? No sure. Most visible
She lay to Saints, though to some Romish hid,
Like Diamonds in Mines, yet clearly did
She breath in Christ, although not eminent
To Carnal Eyes, or on a Hill transparent,
Yet Catholic, and through the World diffused,
She sojourned with Holy Rays infused,
Like a Poor Pilgrim, one while in the East
She lived retired. Another while the West,
She put in mind of Jeremiaes Threnes:
Anon the Northerne-Iles, and Isters Fennes
She visited, and oftentimes the South,
Or all at once she wakened from their Sloth,
Which ^ruitfull Greece, and rich Arsaces Land
Could testify with Ethiopiaes Strand:
Which C^^ms Tartaria and the Moguls Ground
Could blaze how she Nestorians did confound.
Which Snow^ Mos^ho^s Clime could justify;
Yea, many in our West could verify,
That she, Good Soul, with Tears and Doctrine soun^
Sought to red^^me them in Hells Fetters bound,
And on Christ's Merits only to rely
Without Distrust or Ambiguity,
Tendering her Gloss Christ's Gospel to expound,
But most were deaf, or would not hear her Sound,
For either in a Tongue unknown, by roat,
Or ^arnally they would her D^ctates note.
Nay, when she would indifferent things to use
P^rmit her B^bes, her Love they would abuse;
And for her Care, her Champions they would raze
Out of their Files with Cursed Anathemaes.
Yet some of better Mould attentively
Ga^e ^are; and these I praise deservedly*
SOme Godly Monks, and the Old Saxon Bid
Show us what Life a Christian ought to lead.
He d^ing wished, a^ Cutber^ wrote, that Men
Would read Gods Word, and humane dreams contemn
To which Good End himself in English To^e
Christ's Gospel left according to Saint John.
Those Holy Monks lived not on others sweat,
Nor idly did by Strangers Tithes get Meat,
But earned repast in Gardens by the Spade,
Or in foul weather by some Household Trade.
To keep their thoughts from sensual Plots they wrought,
And on High Days or Fest^^als they taught
Their Auditors what sense Christ's Mystery
Bears to imprint his Passions M^mory;
Or Catechis'd the weak and tender Brain
With Scriptures Text, and intelligible strain*
But when the Lumbards were by Cha^lemaine
Represt, then Popes raised up their Pe^cocks Train*
With Carnal Sense and Carnal means support,
Transforming Rites ingrosse stupendio^s sor^,
And by Degrees transferred to Catholics
Traditions hatched by Former Heretics.
What Wheel is this? what strange Extravagance?
Religious Rome, like Dina, gads to Dance.
Nay more, she paints her Face, like Jezabel,
Darkning those Gifts, wherein she did excel,
She that most Honored was next Salems Church,
Spreads Lying Dreams, and now lives by the lurch.
She, that was once the Westernes sacred Dame,
Converting Heathen Souls unto the Lamb,
Usurps Saint Peter's Place with Lofty Style,
Depraves Gods Gifts, and reares up Babels Pile.
She, that was Chaste, delights to play the Queen,
And more then Good to practice Deeds obsceane,
But these are Tri^les in respect of those
Great Sins, to which she will henceforth dispose
Her Wh^^rish will, for wicked Sodo^y
She will commit, cheat men with Alchimy;
She will proud Nembr^d from Damnation free,
And will besamt false Magus for a Fee.
She will Create New Christ's, burn Saints, force Hell,
Mew up Gods Word, and Virtue quite expel.
She Christendom will topsie-turvie turn,
Dethrone her Kings, and make their Subjects mourn,
But here the Comfort lies: though Rome plays false,
And Nero-like, debauched, yet all her Brawles,
Plots, Menaces, and Tortures cannot stop
The Pens of Some the Truth to underprop
With Learned Works, to blaze in every Age
Her Breach of Faith, and tyrannizing Rage.
THe strong Conceit of the States Holiness,
Saint Peter's Keys, and Shrines did so possess
Remoter Brains, that Rome they did prefer
Before all Climes. Thither Cadwallader
Our British King for Refuge in Distress,
And sundry Others went for Happiness,
As they then dreamed: Some for Monastic Rest:
Some to become there by such Merits Blessed.
And if Ravennaes Fear, and Lumbards Sway
Had not then blockt them in their Pilgrims way,
With dangers by Banditi in some Straight
About the Alps, where Thieves for Preyes awaite,
(Such was the Blindness of that Ages Zeal)
Romes Mart had greater been; more loud her Peale,
As sithence for her Merchandise encreafe
Fell out, though to their Loss of Inward Peace.
WHile Rome thus vaunted of Imagery,
Greece seconded her Sinful Mystery.
And though New Rome long struggled with the Old,
Yet now her Keys then Ice become Cold:
And so prevailed damned Error at the last,
That Nicens second Council made aghast
Our Christian Church, when that Romes glorious Head
She saw Accursed, and yet themselves misled
Would set forth Acts for Images Adore,
Which their Greek Church condemned had before.
Honorius was most justly Censured,
But Idols use they ill determined.
For Heresy the Roman Pope they quail'd,
Yet Heresy within themselves prevailed;
And what the Former Age brookt as a Book,
An Image now like to a God they took,
And held an Idol in no l^sse esteem
Then Pagans did to honor Dagon seem,
This Ages Grief I point at, that the East
We may conclude as faulty as the West.
None can excuse themselves. As Well New Rome,
As did the Old, for Antichrist made room.
Because, like Rome, a Mungrell Faith they those;
The Greeks their Fame of Iconomaches lose.
Yet this stole in but like an Ague Fit,
They soon recovered, and confounded it.
THey did not since so Superstitious grow,
To vow that Service which to Christ they owe,
They kneeled not down, nor orav'd d^a^^ Idoll^ ayd^,
As if their Church to Baal they had betrayed.
They minister the Cup unto the Lay;
Their Clergymen do Marry to this day;
And in the Mother Tongue the Gospel read,
Not like the Westernes Rome so much misled.
ANd yet no doubt their Church went much astray
In many points, though not so gross away,
As Rome. They held, and made apparent Boast
Of idle Quirkes about the Holy Ghost,
That they might share, and be in tangled in
The Mystery of the Lewd Man of Sin.
For which Foul Crime, and D^pravation, Christ
Did then withdraw his Grace, and in that Mist,
The Dragon did work on their Enemies,
As on their Wi^^, their Empire to surprise,
And to prey on their Chief Metropolis,
As Turks still do. And all for their amiss.
ERe I conclude this Ages Century,
I must not over-slip, how Zachary
The Roman Pope against Gods Word gave way
From Childerick the Crown to put away,
And to Depose the French Men's Lawful King
On Pipins Plea, and for no other thing
Then for a slothful Life, and that a Be
Was fitter then a Drone to Over-see
And Rule a Realm, that he took all the Care,
While Childerick lay still in Pleasures Snare,
Or lulled a sleep, not caring but for Ease,
Whereby he did the Commonwealth displease.
On this surmize; the Pope gave his Assent,
That the Poor King be to a Cloister sent
And shorn a Monk, that Pipine wear the Crown,
The lawful Heirs from Native Right quite thrown.
For this good Turn the Pope to gratify,
The Franks New King combined to fortify
Saint Peter's Seat against the Lumbards strength,
That he Ravenna forced to yield at length.
The Year of Christ Seven Hundred Fifty Six,
When men did much on Outward Objects fix,
Then Constantine to Pipine in the West
Sent first the use use of Organs from the East,
In imitation of King David's Harp,
A Godly Use, though Some thereat do carpe,
Which though Pope Paul the First did not abhor,
Yet afterward he dared that Emperor
With Curses for opposing Images:
On these Popes doated so with Passages
Of Glorious Shows, that Adrian Peter all
In Silver clothed, and Paul with Golden Pall.
THus by Degrees Rome that was famed for Chaste,
Began to paint her Face, and prove unchaste.
But though Popes daubed, and were more proud become,
Others went Plain like Old Religious Rome;
And in Our West will so continue still,
Till to adore False Christ's, Fiends bane their Will.
All were not Bad; although the Head was crazed,
The Lord yet some of Romes poor Members graced.
No doubt, He blessed some of the Romain Brood;
Caiphas was Bad, but Nichodemus Good.
When that Elias thought the Church down reeled,
Sev'n Thousand were to Baal that never kneeled.
As in the East, so in the West there were
Thousands which then from Idols did forbear,
Fixing their only Faith on Mary's Seed,
The Churches Head, which ransomed Evaes Deed.
Now the first use to Christen Bells began,
Whereby (I think) they Baptism did profane,
When they depraved the Rites of Sacred Font,
Wherewith to type the New-man we are wont.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE NINTH AGE, From the Year of our Lord 800. (About which
Time Charles the Great of France after his Conquest of the Lumbards, was
Crowned by Pope Leo the Third Emperor of the West) until the Year 900. About
which time the Danes sore afflicted England.
The Argument.
Charles builds New Schools, subjects the Western Broiles,
And with the Pope shares Fair Ravennaes Spoils.
Though some rare Wits renowned then that Age,
Two Monstrous Deeds yet shame the Roman Stage.
BRave Charlemaine, like Romes bifronted Sire,
Whom Pagans at the Former Years expire,
And at the News Approach renewed with Bays:
So merited this Prince redoubted Praise,
For clozing up in the Last falling Age
Our Western wounds made by Barbarian Rage.
No Fate of Worldly Wheels, nor length of Years
Shall cancel Martells Deeds, nor the Twelve Peers
Dim, nor expunge from Honors Calendar,
For their Exploits and Memorable War
Against the Moors, with whom they did so cope,
That they quite lost their proud Ambitious Hope
Of Conquering France, as they subjected Spain,
But left behind Two hundred Thousand slain
Of Moorish Coarses for a Pawn or Sign,
That none shall France but Christians make to whine.
CHarles after Broiles in this Ninth Age began
Three Academes to found for the New-man,
To propagate in France and Italy,
By whose fair Pattern More did fructify
In other Christian Lands, from whence Some rose,
Some Rome to aid, and some her to oppose:
For though the Head of the Vertigo wheeled,
Some Members yet there were, which never reeled.
ANd surely Charles the Name of Great deserves
As Well as Constantine, but that he serves
Too lavishly in my Conceit to prop
Rome with more States, when she had need of stop.
He Desiderius for her sake immured,
And her with him to share the Spoils endured.
He did to her that Patrimony sign,
Which since she falsely forged from Constantine;
For which henceforth we must expect but Force,
Spiritual Rapes, and the New-mans Divorce,
Truth crying out, that they the Lumbards wronged,
And that the Fee to Irens Son belonged,
Great Constantines Successor, New Romes Lord.
But how should then proud Babel be adored?
Alas, that such Effects from Kings did stream,
To taint the Springs of New Jerusalem,
Since what they gave out of their Love and Zeal,
Redounded to corrupt Christ's Commonweal*
The more Rome had, the more she coveted,
(Ambition perkes with reins unlimited)
And never will the Pope in quiet rest,
Till he rides on a Scarlet colored Beast,
Till he Crowned with a Triple Diadem
Shall both his Mates and Emperors contemn.
But the Red Dragon yet works covertly,
He spues not all his Dr^gges but lees them ly
At random, whilst this Age amazed does pass
Like to a Dream; and that the Next an Ass
Shall turn, extinct of Light, and Learnings Fruit,
Which Charles had left for Honors fair pursuit:
Whereby more Room shall for ambitious Rome
Enlarged be for Souls abroad to roame.
About the Year Eight Hundred Sixty Six,
Romes Church being grown of late a Meretrix,
Chaste Marriage more to bring into Decay,
And to promote the Antichristian Sway
By Sodomes Snares and Brothelries accursed,
Consented that Pope Nicholas the First,
With Lucifers and all the Monks applause
Should then enact these gross Tyrannicque Laws:
That no Laymen receive the Sacrament
By Married Priests, though with devout intent;
As if Gods Mysticks from John Baptists Sire,
Or Peter savored of Profaner Fire;
And that thenceforth no Priest should celebrate
Within Precincts of all the Christian state
Gods Service in the Vulgar Mother Tongue,
But in the Latin, which did all belong,
As he surmiz'd, to Peter's Government,
And so to him by reason consequent,
Excepting only the Sclavonian Rout
And Polanders, whom he of Grace left out*
Thus has Romes Lord the Devils Doctrine broacht,
And falsely on the New-mans Right encroacht.
Where was Christ's Church the while? gone from that
Elsewhere (perhaps a Thousand Years) to chime,
That so Rome being for her unthankfulness
Cut off, the Gospels Sound might Others bless.
But while this Eighth Centurian Age did last,
Some Wits barred Sin from spreading too too fast.
OF these I praise good Bertrams Unity
And Haymons Cares, because the verity
Of our late Doubts about the Sacrament
Of the Lords Feast they quote, and what is meant
By that Divine and Mystic Ordinance,
Which Carnal Clerks by Transubstantiate Trance
Broacht to confound our Weaklings Apprehension
For his true Bodies Form, Site, and Dimension:
Ae^^gera then gloss'd the Sacrament
(...) them, from which our Modern Popes dissent.
So learned Raban did, and Isidore,
Who held those Points, which Bertram held before.
NO Clarks then cloyed Christ's Flock with heavy Mast
But dressed his Feast fit for the New-mans taste:
They Christ Received by Intellectual Trance,
And upwards taught by Faith Souls to advance.
They taught their Flock the Old Man to deface,
And to embrace the Holy Spirits Grace:
The Chain 'twixt Christ and us incorporate,
Christ's Flesh and Blood with Ours Regenerate:
The Sacrament not taken in One kind.
(Who would bar Wine from Guests but men unkind)
The Real Form whereof unspeakable
If I describe, the Saints will say I babble,
For Carnal Reason knows not to define,
How Christ descends at our Great Feast Divine.
Upon our Faith the Holy Ghost alights,
And He with Christ our rapt-up Souls unites,
Makes us in Mind and Body Sympathize
With Christ his Humane Nature Mystick-wise,
BUt then before this Century expired,
The Romish Church two Monstrous Meteours fn'd,
And by their Dampe gave warning to those Times,
That Vengeance was at hand, unless betimes
They would New Babel shun with her false charms,
And damned Plots po^tencing after-harmes.
The One fell out when the Whore Moguntine
In a Man's habit played the false Divine,
So blear'd the Romans Eyes, that they for Pope
Elected her, to show how they did grope,
And stumble in re-building Babels Walls,
Which they should let, lest they become her Thralls.
A real Sign, that Rome then turned Whore
With Carnal soiled, with Ghostly Traffic more.
THe Other Prodigy Pope Sergius spread,
When he the Corpse of Pope Formosus dead
Dig'd from his Grave, beheaded him with shame,
And into Tybers Stream then flung the same.
How well Romes Head deserves the Name by John
Foretold of Old: The Whore of Babylon?
BY these two Flaming Brands and Papal Jarres,
Good Watchmen may dissever Fiends from Stars,
And by the Fruit proud Antichrist discern,
If foggy Mists impeacht them not to learn.
His Empires wound which long since Goths had made
By Constantines Remove, had for his Trade
Of Souls been soon recur'd, yea, Antichrist
Been sooner known: But God that Cloudy Mist
Permitted by degrees the West to blind,
Which grew of wild degenerated kind,
Until Romes Cup of Fornications full
Were mounted to the height the World to gull,
That so his Word fulfilled, her fearful Fall
Amaze them more, who her a Queen install.
While she deferres her Coron^tion Day,
The Next far duller Age prepares her way,
To climb above all Christian States and Kings,
And to invert for Gold Gods sacred things.
Mark, Reader, but with Fear; and Glory not
In that Old Churches Fall, lest that thy Lot
For thy proud Peacocks vaunt of thine Own Worth,
May hap, like her, from Grace to be cast forth.
While thus the Popes their Monarchy contrive,
Within the Year Eight Hundred Ninety Five:
In imitation of brave Charlemaine,
Who founded Schools poor Students to maintain,
And likewise of the Saxon Sigebert,
Who reared the like in Cambridge to convert
Two Ages past rude Wits from Ignorance:
King Alfred built for Scholars Maintenance
An Academe, or Universitie
At Oxford, which with Men of Piety,
Men skillful in the Tongues and Arts he stored,
Such as could well expound Gods Sacred Word,
Whereof himself a present Pattern was,
And might be styled true Virtues Looking-glass^;
Even as our James was Learnings Oracle,
Styled Faiths Defender, Britains Miracle;
For as the One clad Part of David's H^mnes
In Saxon Garb, wrote Books, and Carechismes:
So did Our King of Famous Memory
New-clothe those Psalms in Verse, and Popery
Convince with sundry Books, and Babylon,
For which Our Age inscribes him Solomon.
IN Turn of Time, as Faith did ebb and flow,
Or as the Moon eclipsed, or Winds did blow,
Religion waved, sprung up another Fry,
Which grounding Faith on vain Imagery,
And their own Merits puff, for Penance sake,
Or with Great Rome to part Vaine-glories stake,
Took up Good Alfreds Task, to build more Rooms
In the Oxonian Town, upon whose Tombs
Fair Violets and Roses sithence grew,
Because they living strove Arts to renew.
This moved Wainflet, Wickam, Chiches^ey,
And Others with more Fabrickes to supply
That Nursery; Some brought in Wood, some Clay,
Some Stone, as well the Clergy as the Lay.
Hence as from Sinons Horse Minervaes Knights
Came forth, well skilled in Fences and in Fights.
Hence as from Saplings shot up Goodly Trees,
Hence as from Hives came up Industrious Bees,
Whereof some did the Conscience edify,
The Commonwealth some Others beautify.
Hence Wickli^se rose, Bale, and laborious Fox,
Who holp to build Our Temple Orthodoxe,
Though not in Zeal to match the Primitive, thrive,
Yet by such Good Men's Cares through Grace we
By Martyrs Acts fetched from Old Registers
To stop the Mouths of false Interpreters,
As by those Wits nursed up with Food Divine
On Oxfords Paps, which now in London shine,
And likewise by a Thousand Other Stars,
Whose Radiant Rays excel the Sunny Carres,
At whose rare Gifts and Voice our Britains wonder,
When they strike Sin, like to the Sons of Thunder.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE TENTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 900. until the
year 1000. At which Time reigned Emperor Otho the Third, whom the Almaines
call the Worlds Wonder. About which Time King Et heldred Reigned in England.
The Argument.
The Dullness of this Age. The Pope Supreme

In Rule unto the Latin Tongue binds them

Who are his Th^alles. Yet to the Truth some stand

Most firm. The Electours now grace Teutons Land.

O Who can count the Churches doleful Teare^,
Her Woes, Her Fits, and Manifolded Feare^
By Sarace^s, the Popes, and Heat^nish Bands,
Who forraged, and rackt all Christian Lands?
No sooner had Victorious Charlemaine
Parted with Popes the Scepter Sovereign,
Adding unto the Keys a Diadem,
But Rome grew proud of that brave State Supreme,
Although as then it was a single Crownc,
And not, as since, like Gerions, Triple grown;
So seemed to have her former wound healed up,
Which Caesar's gave by their Remove; her Cup
O're-flow'd, her Mac^ renewe'd, which Gorhes had rent.
She frolicks now, forgets her Banishment;
She hopes, that the like Blow shall never light
Upon her Limbs, nor work her more despite.
She stands secure, and builds up Babels Walls,
And by New Kings, her Tributary Thralls,
Whom she has trained with Fetches into serve
Her Turn, and as their God, her to observe,
She stores her Palace with the price of Blood,
With Sinful Spoils veiled with an Angels Hood.
While thus she vaunts of Carnal Dignities,
And slights the Serpent, which concealed lies,
Religion goes to wrack: and few there be,
Which will, or dare the Gospels Splendor see.
Dumb are her Priests, and mu^fled are the Flock;
Both Honor Stocks more then the Living Rock.
Instead of Scriptures now, Traditions strange,
The Devils Husks, dispersed. Lord! how those range!
Which th^ugh but light at first in Wise men's Eyes,
None fannes them, lest they might disgrace the Keys
Usurping Lord, who, whilst he graced those Toys,
Stopped Strangers murmr at the Latin Noise.
O Tyranny, worse than Our Norman Kings!
Such was Great Henry's Spleen, and such his stings
Toward the Welsh or British Nation bent,
Because they had by their Troops Ambushment
Near Snowdon Hills defeated in their Woods
And Straights his Forces, in his angry Moods
He meant, if hesped in a Victours way
Old Cambers Tone quite to exile away,
And force the Vanquished from their Native Tongue
To learn the English Tone. But of this wrong
Consulting with an Hermit, when he heard
How hard that Plot would prove, he seemed afear'd:
That though their Persons he might subjugate,
Yet he could not that Tongue obliterate,
Which was so Ancient, but it should endure
Till Doomesday came, the Pure from the Impure
To separate, and that this Sound among
The Chief should vent Allelujaes Song.
MUch then has Rome to answer for this wrong,
And they have Cause to wail, who were so long
Barred from Soules-Comfort in the Mother Tongue
By Rapsodies unknown, or Parrats Song.
Before this Ninth Centurian Age began,
Although the Head turned giddy, the New-man
Forsook not to reclaim the Chiefest Parts
Of the Church-Body from the Serpents Arts.
In all the Course of the Church-Pilgrimage,
From the Apostles Time until this Age,
I apprehend no Pleas in that long Tract
Of Time, nor real Motives to substract,
(Some Schismaticques excepted, and some Few,
Who seized on Rights to their Creator due)
From her Essential Worth, and Purity^
But that Romes Church leagued in Integrity
With Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine,
For the Resolve of Mysteries Divine;
And that with those, whom I have named last,
We hold True Faith in spite of Babels Blast,
The Faith, which they did Catholic profess;
Yea, and the very same untowardnesse
Of Factious Spirits, which they scorned, we scorn,
Hating to see our Masters Raiment torn.
DId any Farnous Writers from Christ's Age?
Or in Eight Hundred Years since Christ engage
Their Auditors to credit those lewd Points,
Which with lewd threats Trents Council late appoints
Did either Popes, or Councels then ordain
From Wedlock Bonds the Clergy to refrain?
Did they compel their Flocks Gods Word to hear
In a strange Tongue, as if they senseless were?
Did they without their Troop Communicate?
Or let them without Wine participate
The Holy Bread alone? with cursed intent
So maiming half our Christian Sacrament?
Did they kneel down to Images or Shrines?
Or offer Bribing Gifts? Or pay them Fines?
Did they believe the Pope dispensed with Oaths?
Or could dispose of Realms to Franks or Goths?
Did Popes within sev'n Hundred Years exempt
States from their Kings, or Kings hold in contempt?
Did they believe that Popes could Pardons sell?
And ransom Souls from Purgings Flames of Hell?
Or do the Greeks, the East, or Abissine
Hold to this day, like Rome, their Rites Divine?
But rather join with us in most of these*
Holding her Sick of Schismaticques Disease?
Did they before the Council Popes prefer?
As though, like Other Men, they could not err?
No Romainist, although he loves the Pope,
Unless he rackes too much, will prove I hope,
That any Doctors broacht that Dostrine out
Until the Sun the Ninth Age brought about;
Or till indeed long after by degrees
Popes thundering Spells forced Monarques on their knees
Against Christ's Rule, who never grud^'d to pay
Caesarean Toll, nor Pilate did gainsay.
And if they should by Romes Type patronize
Those Errors, which the True Church does despise,
Let them look back upon the Word Divine,
And see if there they can such Points define;
Or if before, or after Constantine,
Till this Tenth Age from Pureness did decline,
They apprehend that Saints did Sympathize
With those gross dreams, which now they dearly prize.
Only some Shrines in Austins Time began
To be in some request, by their Old Man
Devised to soil the New, but not, as since,
That they might from Gods Adoration flinch,
With an All Hail to the Triumphall Wood,
To Martyrs Ashes, or Saint Benets Hood.
Though in our West Some used thus to comply,
The East remembered yet Saint Anthony,
Who at his Lives last gasp, Sin to prevent,
Required his Friends, that not with Monument
They would enclose his Corpse, but secretly
Conceal the same, lest men might foolishly
It Idolize in Zeal to do him grace,
Which would redound at last to their disgrace.
To John the Twelfe now Caesar Homage swore,
And that the Mid-time of this Age did gore.
OF all the Ages since the Word made Flesh
First rose on Earth none for the Church had less
Of Learnings Light then this Tenth Century,
Dulled through the Damps of Hells great Mystery.
Full Fourscore years os Ignorance prevailed,
That Knowledge seemed extinct, the Gospel failed.
Who could repeat the Paternoster, Creed,
And Ave Mary's often, though with small heed,
Or gloss'd on Shrines, or mumbled Latin Mass,
In Schools he did for a good Graduate pass.
But if he made Monastic Legends known,
A Doctors Cap became his shaven Crown.
Whether this chanced by Romes deep Policy,
That none might dive to her Supremacy,
Which she had newly Crowned, or that the Wars,
Anxiety embroyling Souls with Cares
Prevented Learnings Growth, we find small Signs
In that tempestuous Time of Virtuous Lines,
Or Monuments to move Posterity
Not to accuse them of Impiety.
Such was the Blindness of this darkened Age,
That none scarce acted on the Muses Stage
Parts to be seen of Gotams Auditors;
So busy were Old Fools in building Towers
And strong Monastic Cells, where they found Peace,
Or to defend their Relics from the Prease
Of Soldiers storms, which from the North did fall,
Norwegians, Danes, and Pirates robbing all.
Only some Foppish Tales they left behind,
Thereby to cheat, not edify the Mind:
What Miracles were wrought in such a Place,
Which they conceived their Monkish Haunt to grace,
How Dunstan hookt, caught Satan by the Nose,
With many more absurder Lies then those;
Like Oberons imagined Fairy Dance,
Or Arthurs Knights, or the Twelve Peers of France;
How Patrick kill^d Five Hundred Years before
Thousands of Irish Kernes by Charmed Lore;
How David did a mighty Mountain move,
And by his Word the Massy Earth remove.
With such Fond Tales they gulled the Multitude,
That it is no marvel we account them rude.
YEt over his Church the Spirit vigilant
Neglected not their Dreams extravagant
To interrupt, by raising up the Wit
Of Aelfrick to reform their raving Fit,
Which work perhaps not useful for that Age,
But for our Doubts we do conceive them sage,
I mean for Christ his Body in suspense
With Some, which till this Age in Ghostly Sense,
I dare be bold to say, Saints ever took,
Not Carnall-wise, but by the New-mans Book.
This Reverend Clerk in ancient Saxon Style
Describes what Blots the Sacrament defile,
And proves the Sense and Manner of the Feast
To suit with None, but with the Spirits Guest.
From the tenth Chapter of the Corinths First
He thus compares: The Israelites a thirst
Drank of Christ's Rock with a Spiritual Taste,
And on his Flesh, though Clouded, brake their Fast.
As our New-man, or zealous Catechist
Admires Christ's Body in the Eucharist:
So they praised God for Manna and Rock-water,
Types of the Churches Twins, how he begat her.
OUt of the Forest of this Century,
Excepting, Rudeness, Broiles, and Butchery,
I apprehend no memorable Course
To beautify my Lines; But worse and worse
All things decline. This only I conclude
Imperial Otho to extinguish Fiend,
And mortal Jarres for Choosing Emperors
On Sev'n conferred the first Elective Pow'res,
Eternizing the Period of this Scene,
Whose Former Acts we count Rude and obsceane.
This Otho by Pope Gregory's Assent
Did to assure the Almaines Government,
And to content the Rhines Count Palatine,
Because he next of Charlemaine his Ligne
Deserved that Honor, which his Race has held,
Till Force of late the Golden Bull expelled.
For this brave Act the Author got the Praise,
To be enstil'd the Wonder of those Days,
As they, who do that Order violate,
Shall be proclaimed Usurpers of the State.
FOr an Appendix to my Register,
I must not over-passe Pope Sylvester,
Who by Hell-Charmes, Spells, Negromantick Lies,
And Magic Arts defamed the Papal Keys,
Preparing room by that Catastrophe
To the Next Age tossed with a Sinful Sea.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE ELEVENTH AGE, From the Year of our Lord 1000. until
the Year 1100. About which time Godfrey of Lorraine became King of Jerusalem,
and Henry the First Reigned King of England.
The Argument.
Hells Highest sleights a Thousand Years restrained,
Break out, when Priests the Searlet Hat had gained.
The Clergy barred of Wives. The Masses Cake
Turns Flesh. The Holy Land now Christians take.
NOw to glance on the Churches Darkened wane,
Who can deny but Rome became profane?
When Satan was let loose a Thousand Years
After St. John's Prediction, as appears
Even till these Times with Curses, Fire, and Sword,
And secret Slights to martyrize Gods Word?
Both Sun and Moon stood then eclipsed of Light,
And Starre-like Men from Grace declined quite.
The Heavens were moved, Strange Meteors scared the East,
But Earthquakes most appalled the troubled West.
Men's Consciences o're-clouded were with Mists,
When Satan ranged from his Confined Lists,
With leave to prey upon those Romanists,
Who had forsook Christ's Word for Antichrists,
In giving heed unto Erroneous Spirits,
Cashiering Marriage, and their Saviors Merits:
Yoaking their Flocks, not of Necessity,
But to subvert true Christian Liberty,
(I mean the Spirits Freedom, and Gods Word,
Not that which Fools do to the Flesh afford)
By Pilgrimage to Saints, Idolatry,
With wonders wrought by Fiends their Faith to try,
By Lies and Dreams bred in Scholastic Brain
For Belly-work, Ambitious Ends, or Gain:
With Carnal Sense advancing Superstitions,
And spotting Faith with needless Men's Traditions.
With such Flim-Flams, since Satan was let loose,
And since Romes Clergy Christ his Rival chose,
Were there False Church possessed; and to this day
Some go in those strange Labyrinths astray,
Not willing to be won; nor to decide
By Scriptures Light the Quarrels of their Side.
ABout this Time the Cardinals arose
Unto their Sway, till then a Secret Close,
For though the Name were known of Cardinals,
Yet were they rankt but Deacons, Principalls,
Or Parsons of Romes Parishes to serve
The several Cures, not Prelates to conserve
The Papacies Resplendent Majesty,
As since they grew by Satan's Subtilty.
On each of these his Holiness conferres
A Scarlet Hat, to Higher Place preferres,
And amplifies with Bishoprics their State,
Whereby they might live eminent, from Hate
And Envy safe, the better to support
Their Princely Pomp, and his Magnifique Port.
At their Install he so much scarlet shares
To cloth their Mules, that by those Scarlet Wares
Saints may divine where Babels Whore abides,
Which on a Beast of scarlet Color rides.
THese Men shut up within the Conclave close,
And having by most Suff^ages him chose,
Who stands for Pope, they then his usual wear
Pluck off, and in their stead bring glorious Gear:
A Scarlet suit, Red stockings, and Red shoes,
On which, because he claims that he can loose
Or bind men's Sins, a Golden Cross they place,
That some might kiss the same whom he would grace
A Girdle red then they about him clap
With Buckles all of Gold, and a Red Cap
Present to him with Band of Gold and Pearl,
Wrought and engirt fit for a King or Earl.
Thus trimmed, they put him on a Scarlet Cloak;
And to puff up him more with Glories Smoke,
Upon his Head the Triple Crown they set
With Carbuncles and Diamonds beset.
At last they mount him, though a mortal Clod,
And on an Altar Throne him, like a God,
The Holy Place, where their Masse-God remains:
There none of them to kiss his Foot disdaines.
His Chaplains now turn Politic Divines,
More prone to spoil then prop up Sions Vines.
THus every Age has added Royalties,
Since first the Pope affected Soveraignties
In Ghostly things above his Ghostly Mates,
To scandalize the Church. This animates
The Turks and Moors to counterpoize his Crown
With the like Tares by their Arabian sown.
For when they saw Religion mixed with Theames
Of Humane stamp, they forged idler Dreams,
That by such Carnal Baits their Sect like those
Of Christian Name, might with such Wordlings glo^e
As loved Pomp, and by their Muffry hope
The like Soule-blisse as Christians from the Pope,
Whereby both Sects make up the Antichrist,
Turks openly, Popes sl^ly crossing Christ.
The Former raved, and quickly were revealed,
The Latter grew by stealth, so lay concealed
In Mystic sort from Carnal Drowzie Brains,
Because Gods Word was hid, none took the Pains,
Or durst indeed proclaim with open Lips
The Pope Christ's Foe, or by the Apocalipse
Depaint him out in Colors, least that Hire,
Which Saints reapt since, they should have felt by Fire.
BUt who would once suspect within the Church
A Grave Divine to live so by the lurch,
As to deprave the Holy Spirits Gifts?
And in a Saint-like shape with Satan's shifts,
Wherewith he tempted in the Desert Christ,
To take the place of a Monarchique Priest?
And by the Keys pretense for Gold to sell
Men's Souls? and to dispose of Realms, as well
As to encroach upon the Churches Ark,
That None should preach of Christ without his Mark?
Not only in the Western Enpery,
But over the World he claimed Soveraignety;
And not alone he claimed this Massy Round,
But Other Worlds, and the Abisse profound,
To order there, like Heathens Rhadamant,
Souls Torment due for Deeds extravagant.
How on the Psalmists Clause have Schoolmen gloss^d?
Thou have all things under his Feet disposed?
As Cattle Living men, as Fish pained Souls,
As Aerie Foul High Saints the Pope controules.
AMong the rest of Antichristian Blots,
I may not overpasse Romes damned Plots
About th'inhibiting of Nuptial Rites
Unto the Clergies Rank by Romish Kites;
That Divellish Doctrine of the Latter Days
By Paul fore-warned now Babels Strumpet waighes
In a false Balance by Hells Oracle,
Slighting the Type of Cana^s Miracle;
And, as from Christ by Revelations New
Authentic firm'd, she does the same renew,
Although that Plea Three Hundred Years before,
Had ordered been against the Remain Whore
By the Sixth Council in Bizantium held,
And by the Apostles Canons there upheld:
That Deacons, Priests, or Clergymen might marry,
And if they should from this Position vary,
The Priest not with his Wife cohabiting,
They censured him with Deprivations sting;
And if he should his Wife repudiate,
They then judged him for Excommunicate.
But notwithstanding all the Counsels Three
At Gangren, Nice, and This, they would decree
Suborned by peevish Monks to lay that Yoke,
Which they in Younger Years could hardly brook.
For quenching of this Sodomiticque Flame,
We find two Works under Volusians Name,
To prove the Weakness of that Canons worth,
By Ausburgs Bishop Huld erick set forth.
Pope Nicholas the Second of that Name
By this and other Acts quite out of frame
Set Romes weak Church. Even he by Hildebrands
Lewd Counsel scorcht the Church with burning Bra^ds
And coram nobis brought good Berengare,
That Babels Mass might prove as Market Ware.
ABout that Time Rome framed a God of Bread
Turned into Flesh, like Him, whom she had read
In Genesis Created of Red Earth,
Unto which Wight she Motion gave and Birth.
To this New God with supercilious Brow
She strictly charged her Subjects all to bow.
Her Courtiers, and the Multitude confused
Obeyed the Charge, but Gods Elect refused.
Good Men refused, and Berengarius sought
With Monks support and Prelates underwrought,
To contradict the Transubstantiate Mass,
Or not to leave it unreformed pass.
But Factious Wits with Worldly Policy,
Took that to clinch and pinch Romes Primacie.
Yet this Good Soul, though since for fear of death
Enforced to recant, consumed his Breath
With Reasons sound, and Arguments profound,
Till Tyranny his Patience did confound,
In opposition to their Sacrament,
Which derogates from the Man Christ's Ascent;
And left behind what Hell can never blot,
The Sense of that, which seems to Some a knot.
Nor wanted he Applauses in that Age
Of Abbots, Monks, and Prelates wise and sage;
And Hildebert a Norman Bishop wrote
His praise at large, which Time shall never rot.
It Is strange to me how Faction then prevailed,
That they had not in Disputations quail'd,
Ashamed of their Ghostly Man's relapse,
Having been nursed upon the Churches Paps,
As they supposed, and of the Spirit borne,
Yet they the Sense did Intellectual scorn
Of that Blessed Food, which Christ himself fed on
Before his Death, and gave thereof Construction
Spiritual plain, as all the Fathers did,
That Saints might find with ease the Treasure hid.
But what they spoke by Oratories Trope
Rome wrested since her Mass to underprop.
Sometimes the Fathers by Syne^doche,
By Metonymy, or Hyperbole
Spoke to advance the Sacred Mystery,
Thereby to print in ravished Memory
Souls healthful Cure against Passions Insurrection
Typ'd by Our Saviors Cross and Resurrection.
Toward this Ages End Pope Hildebrand
Attempted by maine Force and armed Hand,
To wrest from Caesar's Gift the Papacies
Elections Grant, and Paramounting Sway,
Which Popes received from them until that Day.
At least they took their Confirmations Weal
Not sure without the High Imperial Seal,
And so did other Bishops in his Land,
Assume their Worldly States from Caesar's Hand.
But now the Pope by Romes New Cardinals
More pow'refull grown into his Party calls
As Well the Lay, as Clergymen to aid
Him in his Wars, which Caesar sore dismayed;
For by his Bulls he gave his Realms away,
And blockt from him and his the Heavens way.
Thus he that took himself to be the Head
Of Christ his Flock claimed Rule unlimited
Above all Kings, and Earthly Potentates,
And by the Keys would alter worldly States.
The Emperor accursed, he sends a Crown
To Rodolfe with this Posie written down:
The Rock to Peter gave the Rule Supreme,
And he to Rodolfe gives the Diadem.
Upon this Warrant of his Ghostly Sire
Against his Lord proud Rodolfe did conspire.
The Members raved, and turned irregulare,
As if they felt the Cramp or Riding Mare.
Then, Thousands raged with Frenzies Calentures,
Till Thousands let them Blood, or took their Cures.
This Quarrel made all Germany to quake;
With Rodolfe Some, with Henry more partake.
The Cross and Eagle reared for Bloody Signs,
Yet Caesar foiled Saint Peter's false Assigns;
And Rodolfe in the last great Battle fought,
Lost his Right Hand, which to him dying brought
He showed it to the Bishops standing by,
Lo, here the Guerdon of disloyalty,
That Hand, quoth he, which did to Caesar vow,
I lost by your Advise. Behold it now.
But notwithstanding all these cruel Broiles,
Proud Hildebrand, late Gregoriz'd, embroiles
Himself again, will hazard Soul and Body,
But he will prove the Emperor a Noddy,
His Sovereign Self comparing to the Sun,
And Caesar's Person to his Vassal Moon.
So long he played, till Caesar sacked Rome,
Doomed him, and set another in his room:
As Others his Successors Herod's Sword
Drew out so often cross to their Masters Word,
That now of late Popes odious in their place,
Twice Burbon did and Alva Rome deface.
ABout this time our Rufus to enlarge
New Forest, there to have a Chase more large,
Pulled many Churches down. But while he plies
The Game, into his Heart an Arrow slies.
ER^ I proceed to the Next Ages Stem,
I must reflect upon Jerusalem.
Our Westernes now by Romes Croisadoes spurred
Made a brave League; and like good Brethren stirrd
With Christian Zeal, they having Antioch won
To Salem went, and took that Famous Town,
Mauger the Forces of the Saracens,
Erected there the Cross for Christian Men's
Encouragement then living in those days,
Wherewith the sight they might, as Star-like Rays,
Behold a glimpse of some Pathetick Love
Home-frozen there renewed, of force to move
Compunction in their hearts on Calvaries
And Olivets survey, a Sacrifice
Well pleasing unto Christ, while they with Tears
Mused on his Griefs, his Bloody sweat, and Fears,
His Passion undergone for their Amiss,
His Fathers Wrath for Sin appeased, and Bliss
Restored to them, and to the Penitent
By his Deserts alone and Punishment,
Who without help the Bloody Wine Press trod,
And sealed for us a New Contract with God.
THis City by victorious Godfrey gained,
When all his Host would have him there constrained
As King to wear a Golden Crown: Shall I
Most Sinful Man, quoth he, unworthily
Yield to be Crowned with Gold in that same Town,
Where Christ was forced to wear a Thorny Crown?
Far be that Thought from me, weak Mortal Clod,
To slight his Cross, my Duty unto God.
Such Carnal Pomp I utterly contemn:
Pitch we our Thoughts on New Jerusalem,
Where every Saint the Vassal as the King,
Shall Crowned with Bliss Alleluiaes fing.
The New-mans Complaint in the Name of Our Savior Christ for the Roman
Churches Apostasy and Adulterate Religion.
WHilst in thy Name I vent this just Complaint,
Bear with my Song, O Christ, my Sovereign Saint.
But thou, Romes Cause of Sin, thou Dotards Clod,
Pack hence, or humbly weigh the Word of God;
I am Truths Light, yet None from r^aming cease:
I am the Prince of Peace, yet None loves Peace:
I am the Hill, yet None climbes Sions Mount:
I am the Spring, yet None drinks of my Font:
I am the Shepherd, yet None hears my Call:
I am Gods Priest, yet None heedes me at all.
I am Sins Death, yet None from Sin will rise:
I am Souls Health, yet None me gratifies.
I am the Way, yet none will tract my Pace:
I am Life's Vine, yet none aff^ords me Place:
I am Faiths Quintessence, yet none partakes me:
I am Souls Manna, yet aright none takes me.
I am Most true to Man, None true to me:
I am Raised up, yet None my Form will see:
I am Man's Bail, yet None does con me Thanks:
I am Hells scourge, yet None hates Satan's Prankes:
I am the Golden Mean, None waighes my Center:
I am Heaven's Door, yet None the door dares enter.
I am Gods Word, yet None will hear his Word:
I am their Judge, yet None regards the sword:
I am Heavens strength, yet None sticks to my Fame:
I am Zeales-Mover, yet None heedes the Flame.
I am the Star of the New-Eastern Morn:
I am the New-mans Head, yet None's newborn.
I am the Thundrer, yet None fears my stroke:
I am Free-hearted, yet None bears my yoke.
I am the Lamb, None will my Nature take:
I am the Sun, yet None Sins Clouds forsake.
I am Truths Rock, yet None will now believe me:
I am Men's Hope, yet None will cease to grieve me;
But in these Times with color of my Rock,
The Dragons seed does persecute my Flock,
And all Romes Clergy now do listen more
Unto the Popes Decrees then to my Lore.
No wonder with Hells Plague that Souls are stung,
When such foul Mists rise from the Monsters Dung.
O wretched Man! whom neither Christ his Path,
Nor Gospel moves, nor yet his Threatening Wrath!
[Nemo]
Yet if the Roman None thou backward spell,
[Omen]
I may to thee a Converts LUCK foretell,
Thou soon shall chase our Aerie Foes to Hell,
If thou by Faith seekst in the Heavens to dwell,
And by the Cross the Old Man to expel.
Here lies our Task: think on it, and Farewell.
The same Complaint reiterated in Latin Measures.
DUm novus erumpo vates sub nomine Christi,
Da veniam justae, Rex Sacrosancte, Querelae.
Sed, Romae Terrene Senex, tu causa malorum,
I procul, aut humili pende haec Oracula mente;
Sum Lux, sed Nemo Tenebras Latebrasque relinquit:
Sum Rex Pacificus, sed nemo est Pacis amicus.
Sum Mons, sed Montem conscendit Nemo Sionis:
Sum Fons, sed potat Nemo de Font Pere^^i.
Sum Pastor, sed Ovilis adest mihi Nemo vocanti:
Sum Mystes, sed Nemo tenet mea Mystica mente.
Sum Mors Peccati, Nemo expergiscitur insons:
Sum Rediviva Salus, sed Nemo rependit amorem.
Sum Via, sed Nemo sequitur vestigia nostra:
Sum Vitis vitae, sed Nemo hanc Cord reponit.
Sum Liquor, at Nemo me spiritualiter haurit:
Sum Panis Coelestis, edit sed Pectore Nemo.
Sum Fidus, sed Nemo fidem mihi praestat ad-^^^^
Sum Sursum positus, sed me vult Nemo videre.
Sum Datus Obses, agit mihi Grates Nemo libe^ter:
Sum Satanae Domitor, sed vitat Nemo Gehennam.
Sum Modus and Centru^, tamen hac duo Nemo revolvit,
Sum Pia Porta Poli, sed Nemo precatur, ut int^et.
Sum Praeco, sed Nemo sacris accommodat aures:
Sum Judex, sed Nemo fugit modo vindicis Ensem.
Sum Coeli virtus, sed adhaeret Nemo vigori:
Sum Zeli Motor, sed flammis Nemo movetur.
Sum Matutinum Sidus, vates que Diei:
Sum Restaurator Populi, sed Nemo renat^^.
Sum, Deus Altitonans, melior sed Nemo fit^ictu.
Sum Mitis, sed molle jugum fert Nemo modernus.
Sum Patiens Agnus, sed me vult Nemo Patronum.
Sum Sol exoriens, sed nubila Nemo retractat:
Sum Rupes Fidei, sed Nemo sideliter orat.
Sum Spes sola hominum, sed Nemo lacessere probris
Meque meumque Gregem Petrae sub imagine cessat.
Sic hodie Semen solet insanire Draconis,
Ut Papae Decreta magis quam Dogmata nostra,
Iura Hominum non Iussa Dei bibit aure Sacerdes.
Nec mirum; Nubes ortae de stercore Monstri
Inficiunt animas: Ecclesia pestc laborat;
O vetule infoelix! qui Christi Call, nec Aris,
Nec sacris Monitis, nec moveare Minis!
Sin nomen NEMO supplex inverteris, OMEN
Destinat, and Christo sic Anagramma placet.
Aereos Hosts cit^ profligabis in Orcum,
Si modo rimaris Caelica Claustra Fide,
Proditor ille Senex tunc evanescet in Auras,
Succumbit Christi cum tu^ Massa Cruci.
Hoc Opus, hic labor est; Perlege, pende, Vale.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE TWELFTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 1100. until
the year 1200. At which Time King John reigned here in England, who to be
absolved of the Popes Excommunications made himself Tributary to His Holiness.
The Argument.
The Council Lateran confirms the Mass.
The Canon Laws for Romes maine Profit pass.
The Pope mounts up on Caesar's humbled Back.
Schoolmen new use. And Salem goes to wrack.
THose whom Rome styled the Berengarian Sect,
Because her Mass they ventured to correct,
Were censured at the Council Lateran,
As at l'ercelli the like Act profane
Against them past that Politician Wh^re,
For her Trades sake, in the last Age before.
And here likewise such Labors went to Pot,
As Joachim a Latian Abbot wrote,
To prove: the Man of Sin, the Antichrist,
And Babels Whore jumpt with the Roman Priest,
O Valiant man! who for this Mystic Point
On Truths behalf adventured his best Joint!
NO better sorts the Churches Pilgrimage
In this obscure Eclipse, and Carnal Age:
Popes struggling still for Worldly Dignity
With Emperors, and for Priority.
Amidst these Broils, although Eugenius storm,
Yet Bernard dared his Popedom to inform,
How he in striving Both the Swords to hold,
Might lose them Both for his encroachment bold.
ANd sure if Popes had not on Princes played,
Nor warred with Worldly States, but only Prayed,
And sought the Health of Souls by Lenity,
They might have reigned in long Prosperity,
And by their Doctrine linkt with Holy Life
Drawn wrangling States from Faction, Blood and strife.
Whereas for Peace they rather Quarrels spun,
Not caring by what sleights they Places won.
So that some call him Pope a Year or two,
And that great Kings or Dukes do kiss his shoe,
Old Adrian wreakes not how he came to mount,
Nor by what Means, so he his Peers surmount.
And yet this Fate with a repenting Breath
This Pope perplexed lamented at his Death,
And said, that he, who got the Papacy
By Murder, traced the Steps and Policy
Of Romulus, who slew his Brother Rheme,
Alone to wear Romes Newfound Diadem.
When that Eleven Hundred Years and Ten
Had wheeled from Christ his Birth, a Bishop then
Of Florence preached, that the Proud Man of Sin,
The Antichrist, who long concealed had been,
Was surely come, and in Gods Temple sat,
Pretending Right to sway the Christian State.
The Mystic Let of Caesar's Glorious Train,
Which made him hide his head, and did restrain
His haughty Thoughts and Plots unlimited,
Was thrust away, and near extinguished
By the Popes Tumults, Threats, and Stratagemes,
Subjecting Bodies, Souls, and Diademes.
Priests Ghostly Charge into an Earthly changed:
The Spirits Gifts Simoniously exchanged:
The Words Eclipse: Idolatries increase
And Sodomies: with want of Christian Peace:
These Hellish Crimes, or Deeds irregulare,
Demonstrate, who the Churches Foe-men are.
When Pope Paschalis Second of that Name
Had heard diuulg'd his Hierarchies shame,
Most Politic to stop the Bruit at first
Of such New Sparks, by his Old ways accursed,
He sent his Briefes at Florence to appoint
A Council there to right things out of joint,
As he surmiz'd, where Coram nobis brought
The Bishop there was fore'd to be new taught,
With Babels Gloss to palliate what he knew,
The Cole-black for Snow white, the False for True,
And so to leave the Pope in Peter's Chair
Chaffring for Souls, till Saints disturb the Fair.
BUt in the midst of all these brandling Cares,
Which rackt the Church, succeeded other Snares,
Souls to subject unto the Vultures Claws,
Renewd with Gloss Voluminous of Laws
By Azoes, Gratians, and Accursius Pains,
That so Men's Wits by such divertive Trains,
In hope of Worldly Fees to^ld might not pry
Into Sins deep concealed Mystery,
But nimbly help to execute the Bulls
And Briefes, wherewith his Thralls the Tyrant gulls,
Emptying their store, sacking their Substance dry,
That he might joy at Clients Misery.
And though the One the Elder Sister were,
The Younger yet and Canon Law did bear
The primest Sway, and Kings durst not gainesay
But must appear at Rome on a set day.
For when the Pope enthralled the Emperor,
Romes Keys then Caesar's Laws did over-towre.
TO fortify the Canons glozing Gloss,
About that Time Our Schoolmen then arose,
Quaint Wits, who spun Divinity anew,
And by Distinctions would the Gospel mew.
Such Knots and Wiles did Curious Wits compose,
That they to Rome might all the World transpose,
And so heal up, and cloze the grievous Scarres,
Which she sustained deservedly for Jarres.
And for her Breach of Faith at Christ his Spring
Vowed, that to him she against the World would cling.
But in the next Ensuing Age shall rise
Bald Friars Sects to help Baals Sacrifice.
To temper, or to stint these Busy Brains,
There shall start up Men of unwearied Pains,
Who seem to raise Devotion at a pinch:
Among which I rank Poor Francis Sainted since,
Who innocent in Life, by Poverty
Would feign restore the Old Integrity,
To imitate, as much as in him lay,
The Ancient Monks, or the Essences way,
Or rather Benets Rules; but afterward
The Dragon bribed his Mates to be his Guard;
His Sect soon strayed, and his Fraternity
With Merits boast corrupted Purity,
Pestring the Church and Christian Commonweal,
With Dreams adverse unto the Founders Zeal.
OUt of their Dung did other Orders grow,
Austere in Life, of Sanctimonious show,
Pretending Holiness in Outward Sight,
But inwardly in Melancholic plight,
Now spending Days and Nights near in despair,
Anon blown up, like Bladders in the Air,
With Meritorious Wind, Pelagian Worth,
And Humane Works they set their Doctrine forth,
They lashed their Flesh to keep the Old man down,
And, like that Sect from crazed Montanus flowne,
They stupifi'd through Fasts their Brawny Sides
In hope of Grace, and Worldly Fame besides.
Mean while the Blood of Christ they frustrate made,
And by such blasted Buds Faiths Tree did fade.
Yet by their Deeds, and seeming Sacrifice
The Scarlet Whore thought to redeem her vice;
And that their Works of Supererogation
Suffis'd at least to win a Prorogation
Of Vengeance due for her high Pamperd Pride,
If not to purge what Christ had left untri'd:
Like those who bought, to ransom Judas Sin,
Bloods Hire, a Field to bury Strangers in.
O What a Rabble does my Muse descry
Of Croakers from the Dragons mouth to slye
Within the space of the Next Ages Roll!
All bent the Praise of Babel to enrowle!
The Domini^ks, Cartbusians, Augustines,
The Carmelites, Capouchins, Iacobines,
Besides the Order of the Jerome Crowd,
To whom of late Castiles great Monarch vowed
His Marbled Palace of the Escuriall Mount,
Whose Structure cost him many Millions Count.
These Orders, though of despicable Form,
In Beggars Rags, yet holp they to reform
Some things amiss at their first shooting up,
Or else the Wh^res Abominations Cup
Had quickly been by Kings descri'd and spilt;
Her Flock had flinch'd, and soon espied her Guilt.
But the Conceit of these Men's Sanctity,
And manner of their Lives Austerity
Gained them Repute of Wiss Prophetical,
Whose Vows would shroud Sins never so Capital.
Yea, though a man had both his Parents slain,
Romes Pardons and their Vows salv'd all again.
THis blindness lasted long, till Christ his Spouse
Returned from the Desert Souls to rowze
From Superstitious sleep, and Ignorance,
To brighter Light, and a more Lively Trance.
Like Ravens, Frogs, Scritchowles, and Dismal Foul,
Whose Auguries type Weather Fair or Foul,
So did those Flying Spirits of that Age
Seal up Dark Minds a Prey for Satan's rage,
And on the Elect betoken Calmer Gales
To blow, when tired with Old fanatique Tales,
They should in Time to come Gods Spirit see,
The Martyrs slain revived, from Sodom free.
WHile Canonists, the Schoolmen, and those Swarms
Of Lawyers rose, the Roman Popes with Arms
And Curses still, leaving the Laws dispute
To spur their League, did Caesar's persecute.
No Treaties, Wars, nor Spoils the Popes could tame'
Till One of them of Alexanders Name
On Caesar's humbled back got on his Mule,
As Footstool to a a Lord of mad Mis-rule,
Detracting from Christ's Power: Thou shall tread
On Basiliskes, and bruize the Serpents Head.
I do to Peter this, and not to thee,
Said Caesar: Both to Peter and to me,
Replied the Mounted Priest; for Peter's Throne
On Earth I hold, and he and I are One.
O where was then Romes Boast of Innocence?
Of Catholic Consent, and Penitence?
Their Actions show what Spirit reigns in them,
Who durst assume the Triple Diadem,
And manage both the Swords with more disdain
Then Bajazeth complained of Tamberlaine.
But had not Caesar's Son in Navall Fight
By the Venetians been Captived, such spite
He could not have endured so patiently,
Nor let such wrongs long unrevenged lie.
NOw for this Age to wind up Babels height,
One Thousand, and one Hundred Eighty Eight,
About that Year the Machiavellian Pope,
To settle surer his Imperious Hope,
And to confirm his proud Investiture,
Found out a Plot his Rapines to assure,
And to employ his Neighbors far from Rome,
Lest they more pry into his Arts at home.
By his Croisadoes Charms Cried Sanctified
In Christ his Name, but by his Word untri'd,
He packt from hence many a Valiant Band,
Under pretense to Conquer Iewries Land,
And there to build Jerusalem again,
Like Jericho sometime not Cursed in vain,
And to regaine it back from Saladine,
Who late had won the Land of Palestine.
But as no Good flows from a Tainted Spring.
So hence then Loss ensued no other thing.
CAESAR Romes Curses thinking to compound,
Took up the Cross, and by the way was drowned.
Yet could not so the Fathers Death appease;
The Popes his Sons by Curses bar from Peace.
And to redeem their Bloody Spoils with Deeds
Of Merit, they spread Meritorious Seeds,
As that Fond Age then dreamed, they prostitute
To Meloch first, and then they institute
The Orders of the Begging Friars, so
To calm Gods Wrath, which kept such loud ado
At Rich men's Doors, that Superstition more
And more confirmed Baals Power then before.
About this Time my Learned Countryman
Archdeacon Girald wrote, by whom I can
Disprove out of his Books of Pilgrimage
Which he set forth of Cambria in that Age,
The Wonders of the Well of Winifride;
Which Friars Brains in Aftertimes discri'd,
When the Fourth Henry reigned, that then, even then
They coined those Tales to gull poor Simple men,
To haunt their Cells, and impious Sacrifice
Graced from the Pope with Novell Liberties,
And Leave to build a Chapel or a Fane,
As Men were wont for the like use profane;
And as they did in this Fond Age erect
Most Stately Shrines to Becket and his Sect.
BEcause some Monks Night Apparitious saw,
Which K^aves or Fiends invented there to draw
Concourse of Pilgrims, and Oblations store,
They built such Shrines, and noised their Dreams the more.
But Our New-man slights all such Miracles,
As derogate from Scriptures Oracles,
Not ignorant of the Old Serpents slight,
That he may seem an Angel of the Light.
Because Men loved Lies more then Gods Word,
And tried them not by the Spiritual Sword,
He suffered Satan to pervert their Will,
That they believed what did the Spirit kill.
To let our Blinded Strayes to know their Crimes,
Derived from the Course of faultring Times,
I warn them to look back into this Age,
And there to weigh what Cunning mixed with Rage
Popes practiced then by more of Councels store
To raise their Crest then in the Times before,
How many Councels did the Romish Clerks
Assemble in our West for their vain Quirkes
Support? what Age before has ever seen
Of Councels held One Hundred and Fifteen?
(For just so many did this Century
Produce) Some to confirm Sins Mystery
With Attributes of the Divinest Style:
That as the Head conspired to enstyle
A Wafer Cake a God, so they likewise,
As Members would a God him solemnize
With Power raised above the Caesar's far,
Since he could Souls from Purgatory bar.
Some Counsels leagued to send Croisadoes out
To Palestine against the Persian Rout.
Others were called the Married Priests to curb;
And some were held the Caesar's to disturb,
Exempting from their Laws the Clergies Crew,
Though nere so faulty, whence great scandalls grew.
Some Counsels did against all Kings contest
Of Bishops their Investiture to wrest
Unto the Popes. And some Pluralities,
Of Popes restrained and their Enormities.
And which seems most uncharitable, foul,
And Schismatic, some Counsels did control,
Nay, put to silence the Reformed Flock,
Who built their Faith upon the New-mans Rock,
I mean, that Flock, which Lions Waldus won
From Darkness to look on the Gospels Sun.
Such Acts above One Hundred Counsels Tomes
Contained to please the Popes, like Hecatombs,
Within the space of the Twelfe Century;
And all to prop Great Babels Empery.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE THIRTEENTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 1200. until
the year 1300 At which Time King Edward the First reigned here in England.
The Argument.
The Waldois and Albigians Rome oppose,
Caesar's with Popes for R^le contesting lose.
The Gransire, Sire, and Nephews feel the Smart.
Pope Celestine is gulled by Waly Art.
IN woeful Case remained the Church of Christ,
Through Bloody Broiles, that how she could subsist
On Earth, while this Age lasted, it might dull
A Sparkling Muse, but that I learned at full
The Cause of her Retire, the Difference
Betwixt her Wane, and her Lights excellence,
Her Catholic, and her Subordinate
Commanion, which false Rome would feign persuade
That she alone does own without respect
Unto her Mat^s, or Betters grown by Grace,
Where none can see her Universal Face
Save God himself. The World is large, our skill
At stint: How then know we her Spacious Hill?
The Waldo is and the Albigians in our West,
The A^issines, and Others do suggest,
That they partake her Influence, and her Head,
Even Him that shall dispose of Quick and Dead.
Peter and Paul we know. But who are ye,
Who Mere the Church of Nembrods proud degree?
POpe Innocent in the last puddled Age
By Canons strict, but neither wise nor sage,
Our English Clergy now did here so gore,
As Hildebrand and Lanfrank did before.
That they without more Shifts, Delays, Dispense,
Or hopes to calm Romes Spleen through bribing pe^ce
Must turn away their Plighted Mates to grass,
Or be Accursed, and to refrain from Mass;
A heavy Doom, and not to be recalled.
This made our Clergy winch, when they were galled,
And causelessly thus curbed without remorce
Of that, which Christ condemned the Divorce.
Against this Flash Walter de Mapes wrote
Oxfords Archdeacon stout; he taxed the Blot
And Scandal which the Roman Church encurr'd.
He showed the Flames, which her poor Guard endured
By such unlawful Acts, those very Flames,
Which Popes themselves not without branded Names
Could well avoid in their more youthful Years,
Nor Cardinals, nor any of their Peers,
They did enjoyne for tolerable Pain.
This moved Mapes in Old Roman Strain
To gird and nip the Popes usurped Decree,
And to prove Marriage for the Clergy free.
But now my Muse more Bloody Deeds must tell,
Which then the Church endured from Fiends of Hell.
About the Year Twelve Hundred Thirty One,
The Greek and Latin Church could not atone
Their Difference new sprung up for Christian Rites,
But a sore Schism then chanced, for Romish Kites
Would rake even to the bone all Churches else.
They would yoke to Romes Sovereignty excelse
The Eastern Church, and force investiture
Of all their Bishops, and their Ghostly Cure
Under the Keys pretense to Romes proud Mace.
But they would not subject, nor so abase
Their Pastors Staff, alleging Old Decrees
Of Synods made for ordring of their Fleece
And Liberties in their prefixed Sphere,
At Chalcedon, at Nice, and other where:
That every Patriarch in their proper Charge,
Should only deal, and their own Place discharge,
Not meddling with Another stinted Cure,
But watching still their own Flocks to secure,
Not striving for high Seats of Prelacie,
As Gregory then did for Primacie.
To this Effect Bizantiums Patriarch wrote
To Gregory the Ninth, that he could not
Consent to thrall his Church unto his Will,
Which, as a Tyrants Law, might spill or kill.
At which Resolve Romes Lofty Prelate frowned
And by his lowing Bulls accursed Sound
Anathemated him and all the East,
Because they would not bow to his behest,
And there withal proclaimed the Cross to fight,
And to deprive them of Gods Blessings quite.
According to his Will false Christians went,
And Martyrs did with Cypriots Blood augment.
Before this Rupture both the East and West
Till then agreed, on Union fixed their Rest,
And though for Clericks Wives, and Masses Rites
They varied, yet Romes Popes played not the Kites
Till then on them, as in our Western Sphere,
From whence they raked much Treasure every year;
They Both agreed, acknowledging One Head,
One Christ, One Faith, One Judge of Quick and Dead,
One Universal Church, One Bond of Love,
And that One Spirit ought them all to move:
All Patriarchs linkt in mutual Amity,
Coequalls graced with Honors Parity.
But through this Rent by Babels Whore begun,
A Bloody Flag was for Both Churches spun.
THis Schism 'twixt East and West obscured the Cross
And to them both fore-doom'd a twofold Loss,
Of Worldly States to Greece in time to come;
But Loss of Ghostly Gifts to haughty Rome,
Together with the Loss of Both the Swords,
As Bernard to Eugenius well records;
When she shall see how many Potentates
Will flinch from her, and free themselves and States;
When she shall hear One with a Dreadful Tone
Proclaim the Fall of Whor^sh Babylon.
WHen Babel saw, that her Croisadoes mist
Jerusalem to win again for Christ,
As she, but in Disguise, suggested then,
Now she proclaims them against Christian Men;
The Waldois and Alb gians feel her Spite,
For against them she is resolved to fight.
Some yield unto the Fiery Cross. Some stay,
Some stray, recant, and Others fly away
With all their Kin into Calabriaes Soil,
Where till of late they lived safe from Romes Broile.
Nor could that Age, nor yet the Ages since
Extirpe their Seed, nor cause their Faith to fl^nch.
Ye Darkened Ghosts of those inveagled Times,
Who merit well Damnation for your Crimes,
Do what ye can, these New-sprung Waldois shall
With their good Mates Albigians you appall,
And shall out-last your Cursing Thunder-blasts
Till Luther comes and gives you more distasts,
At which appointed Time with louder Crack
Your Camerades shall tremble, or fall back
From Ralaams League unto a Nobler Head,
Whose Spirit them will into Sion lead.
WEll near 300. Years the Popes have fought
With Emperors and Kings, their downfall sought,
Deposed the Sire, and raised a Rebel Son
Unnatural the Father to dethrone.
They poisoned some, and Others by degrees
They forced to cry Peccavi on their knees;
And all for worldly Rule. Nay, Kings durst not
Curb Homi^ides (such was the Clergies Lo^)
In those Days, that if they to Rome appealed,
They were exempt, and had their Pardons sealed.
While Rebel Be^ket for poor things withstood
His King, the Pope his Shield most firmly stood;
And Others of his Rank haled to their Nets,
Two English Kings of our Plantagenets.
WHen Milan rose against the Emperor,
With other Towns, though not to Babels Tower
Subject at all, yet did Pope Gregory,
Because the Rebels sought his Amity,
Accurse the Third Time Caesar's Majesty:
And though some pleaded then a Nullity,
Yet no submission served Frederick,
But he stands barred from the Church Catholic.
About the Year Two Hundred Thirty Eight
With the one Thousand past, for his own Right
The Emperor was then compelled to Fight,
The while the Pope all Caesar's League did smite
With Thundering Darts pretended from Saint Paul
And from Saint Peter to affright them all.
But seeing that such Blasts small terror struck,
He then proclaimed the Cross, and thereby shook
The Imperial League, yet not so fatally,
But that his Gibellines stood really,
As with the Pope remained the Guelphian Side,
Which Two did long all Italy divide.
Here ends not all this Centuries Complaint:
With far more dismal Stirs the Pope did taint
Those Cloudy Times. The Father dead, he shootes
Upon the Son his Bolts. It little boots
Him to submit. The Son alike must bear
His Fathers Curse, and so to Sway forbear.
Conradus dead, he does for Conradine
As much and more, for him he does confine
Not only from the Empire; But his Own
Of Naples Realm with the Sicilian Crown
He gives away for Prey to Charles of France,
Whose Banners there Pope Clement did advance,
And never left (such was his Chollers Flame
To Conradine for his dead Grandsires Fame)
Till he and Austriaes Prince by a sly way
Were taken and beheaded in One day*
Judge, Readers, now, if Popes lived like to Christ,
Or whether they resembled Antichrist.
SO Sly and Cautious were this Ages States,
That None for fear to have with Popes Debates
For Seventeene Years durst hazard on the Mace
Imperial, but the same lay for that Space
Still vacant. For Alphonsus King of Spain
Had flat refused the Cumbers to sustain,
Least of an ancient Friend, his Ghostly Sire
Become his Foe, and so his Love expire;
He would not leave, he said, Astronomy
Which he then studied, for all Germany.
The Electours then chose Richard Cornewalls Duke,
The Romans King, but he with some rebuke
Was since put off, because his Holidome
Expected more of Others for that Room;
And thereupon he Hasburgs Earl enthrones,
Since Austriaes Head, with him the Pope attones
In Old Lausannaes Town; but could not get
Him once to Rome, lest that his footing set
In that unlucky Place, some Jealous Fit
Might nip the Popes rash Brain and crazed Wit,
That he from thence should never more return,
But perish there, except he served his turn,
As Caesar's were before his time to do
Constrained, or else his Wrath to undergo.
And to that end the prudent Emperor
Rehearsed the Tale, how to the Lions Bower
Who feigned him sick, the Fox saw many Beasts
To enter in as Complementall Guests,
But not the steps of any coming back.
And that made him to Rome his Visit slack.
NOw at this Ages Period Celestine
The Romish Pope was cheated by a fine
And Cunning Slight, the Popedom to resign
To Boniface, himself and to confine
Into an Hermites Cell, to end his Days
With Prayers, Fasts, and such Religious ways.
This by a whispring Cane or hollow Reed
He acted, and his wish did so succeed.
Thus Boniface began. But as such Plots
Thrive seldom, so entangled in those knots,
Which he for others warped, he waged Wars
In Italy. In France he moved Jarres
Against the King, with Fulminating Darts
Against his Realm, till spite of all his Arts
His Holiness Captived, in Prison fast,
For very Grief then he deceased at last,
With this Memorial fixed on his Clog:
He came a Fox, Reigned a Wolf, di'd a Dog.
But to increase Romes Superstitious store,
Before his Death he coined one Custom more,
The Jubilees great Tear, wherein all such,
Who came to Rome, were ^as'd of Sin and Pouch:
Eased of Sins Pain from Purgatories Flame,
Eased of their Gold as Ransom for the same.
This Pope decreed it first with Balaams Fire,
When that One Hundred Years did full expire;
But since to Fifty Years Popes changed the Course,
That they might reap more Gain by Gulls recourse,
And Pilgrim-Visits of the Lateran,
And other Sainted-Fanes late made profane,
Since Freedom was proclaimed by Romish Sires
For many Thousand Years from Purging Fires.
So does the Mystic Whore entangle Souls
To credit Dreams, which raise her Market Tolles.
And now likewise for her Gods Adoration
Popes first Decreed the Messes Elevation.
Thus I wind up this Popish Age, the while
I warn thy Wits to greet, O Patricks I Will,
Thy Prelate Fitz-Raphe, Primate Armachan,
Who against the Upstart Friars played the Man,
And proud their Begging Orders Vain and False
Before the Pope and all his Cardinals.
So shone that time this Learned Man's Renown,
That when his Death was through Avinion known,
A Cardinal was heard of Him to say:
The Church has lost a Pillar strong this day.
ANd yet for all such Good men's Prophes^es,
Rome would not quit her Pedlers Merchandise,
Which to her use those Croaking Frie^s truckt,
But by their Li^s she all our Horey sucked.
(Their Legends wrought such Superstitious Fear.)
They saw Our Lady here, Our Lady there,
At Mountserrat, Lorrette, Walsingham,
Whereby they got, as to the Ephesian Dame,
To Isis, Baal, and Moloch Temples built,
And Images with Gold and Azure gilt,
By which false specious Shows, old Satan's Mists,
Rich Offerings they procured to Romish Priests.
Then, Miracles were rife, of Wise men known
For Ghostly Wiles, now to a Proverb grown;
That to conclude Some for Notorious Liers,
It is enough to say, that they are Friars.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE FOURTEENTH AGE, From the Year of our Lord 1300. until
the Year 1400. At which time Henry the Fourth Ra^gned King of England.
The Argument.
The Fratricells soon up, and quasht. At Mass
By Papal Plot then Caesar pois^ed was.
Pope John maintains, he can all Kings depose.
Our Wickliffe now Romes Doctrine does oppose.
ABout the Dawne of this New Century,
The Fratricells of Anabaptists Fry
In Germany dispersed their Arguments,
That Christians should not perk to Governments;
But that all things lay Common to the Poor
As to the Rich. No Creature less or more
Then Others must possess. Equallity
They taught of States and Lives Conformity,
Much like to that, which Plato Chymeriz'd,
Or the Utopian Weal, which Moore devised.
But their Opinions vanished into Smoke,
And they themselves endured the Churches stroke,
Censured for Bedlems of Corrupted Zeal,
Offensive to the Church and Commonweal,
Which without hope of Gain would slothful grow:
Yet by the Fruit a Christians Faith we know.
I wish in Wealth a Mean, from Mizers store
A Miracle extended to the Poor.
O how my Heart does grieve to see their Cures
Neglected, whilst our Dr^nish Epicures
Most idly waste what Godly Families
Would save from Dearth, and serve as Sacrifice
To cover Sins. We car^y hence no Gold
Nor Land* Eight Foot alone a Coarse will hold.
A Friars Act yet happened to his Liege,
Great Luxemb^roughs Caesar, at the Siege
Of Florence more prodigious by the Popes
Procurement, which quasht suddenly the Hopes
And Life of the Imperial Majesty,
(Deciphring Babels black Iniquity)
By a Black Friar with a Masses Cake
Envenomed, and taen his Heart Strings brake.
And so whom Force, nor Flashes could out-brave,
One hallowed Bit dispatched him to his Grave.
NOr did the Next succeeding Emperor
Much better speed, for he likewise the sour
And crabb'd aspect felt of proud Anti br^st.
He Lewis dared out of the Church of Christ
By Thund^ing Bulls to shut, and made his Boast,
That he had Power through the Holy Ghost
Both Emperors and Princes to dispose,
And at his Will their Kingdoms to transpose.
Thus John the Two and Twentieth of that Name
On Caesar played, and Scriptures did defame,
Until some Grave and Learned Men arose
In that Tempestuous Age him to oppose.
AMong which Occam started up with Quill
Of Cherubs Wing, and proved that Doctrine ill.
He proved the Rule of all this Earthly Ball
To appertain unto States Temporal,
And by the Light transferred from Holy Scrowles,
How Truth exempts no privileged Souls,
No not the Pope himself from Caesar's Doom,
Since Peter felt by Nero Martyrdom.
SO to the Glory of the English Race,
Who with the First withstood the Papal Mace,
He, whom the Godly for his Learned Works
Then styled, The Hammer of the Romish Church,
On Grosted I reflect, Grave Lincolnes Sire:
He stoutly wrote against his Forged Fire,
Which netled him so much, that out of hand
He would have cited him before his Band
Of Pharisees at Tiber to appear,
But that admonished by his Council there,
Sage Cardinals, he was content to pass
Him over, lest the Bishop might surpass
Them by his rare incomparable Lore,
And wind them in more Mazes then before.
Two Ages past had Abbot Ioachim
Against Romes Gain a Prophet been to grim.
O Glorious I Will, most happy is thy Fate,
Which had the Luck first to descry thy State,
Thy Churches doleful state by Babel torn,
And with the First to be in Christ Newborn,
To shake her Yoke quite off, and to fly out
From her Dark Jaile, mauger her Guardians stour.
FRom time to time we read in Antiquartes,
God raised up some to sound forth Romes Vagaries.
Before that Wickliffe stretched his Lions Paw,
One Robert Gall Soule-rapt in Paris saw
The Romish Church by Name with Head like Death,
And with a Body lean, and scant of Breath:
An Angel then, while this sight did appear,
Bad him the Romish Church mark standing there.
SHe in our West was then of small extent,
Perhaps retired elsewhere, like Abrams Tent;
Or She fared in that Antichristian Age,
Like Babels Jews, or Saints through Neroes Rage.
Heavens Path is Narrow, Stiep. Hells Broad, down hill,
Good men but Few, the Greatest part are Ill:
Yet of those Few it is hard to know their Scope:
Some sick, some weak, or of Potentiall Hope,
Yet of those Few the True Church is composed,
And of those Few some were, like Stars, disposed
By our Good God of Dangers to foretell,
Whereby the Rest might save themselves from Hell.
So Petrarch sung in twofold Latian Style,
And others did in Learned Works compile
Glauncing, nay Striking at Romes Antichrist,
And drawing Souls from dark Cimmerian Mist.
So Boccace had, although with Tales disguised,
The Friars wanton Thefts Epitomized.
As likewise those Three Nuns Canonized Saints,
Like Babels Jews, or Sybills made Complaints:
Good Katharine, Bridget, and Hildegard
Foretold our New-mans Arms of safest ward,
And that a New Reformed Presbytery
Their Liturgy should quash and Popery.
THus by Records the Churches Race I try,
And by Faiths Light her Orient Face descry,
Like the New Moon approaching from the Wane,
And shine more bright in Consciences Humane.
By which and by Romes own Historian Platine,
I find how lived the Head of the Church Latin,
By Simony, and lewd Magicians Spells,
By Murders, Fraud, and Coining of New Hells,
By setting all our Christ endome at ods,
Because they kneeled not to his Maumet Gods.
With Factious Guelphes, his hurliburles Assigns,
He warred against the Imperial Gibellines.
Amidst these Broiles and Crimes exorbitant,
Christ whistled home his Flock extravagant.
Some knew his Sound, and to his Fold returned,
Some staid behind, and Refractaries turned.
The First he linkt with his Church Catholic,
But left the Latter of the Staggers Sick,
And for a Prey to Fiends, because his Call
They flighted, and his Cures Angelical.
Such to be gulled he left by Aerie Elves,
But his True Ark he steered free from Shelves.
Now with fair Light from famous Oxford rose
Our Wicklisse, Romes Foundations to oppose,
By certain Lords and Londoners Support,
Which though some crossed, yet gave a loud Report,
So loud, that Husse and Icrome heard from Prague
The Noise, and learned to fly from Babels Plague,
And left to Aftertimes such Fruitful Seed,
That the True Church now glories in the Breed.
THen Chaucer by the Freedom of his Rimes
Unsilenc'd scanned the Darkness of those Times:
(Of such strange Force are Tunes of Raptured Wits,
That they have charmed and stilled wild Tyrants Fits)
He plainly pointed at Romes Antichrist,
Admiring at the Clergies stormy Mist,
Which did so long our West exagitate.
Like them in Zeal, though with unequal Fate,
Did the Lord Cobham since, the Bohemes Husse,
And those Good Souls in Britains I Will discuss
Religions state, those whom the Papists then
Nicknamed for their Faith Just and Fast Men.
Whose Manner near was such as Pliny writ
To Trajan erst. They, as did Saints befit,
Assembled in the Night, sung Psalms, Received
The Holy Food, and with sweet Trance conceived
Christ's Mystic Gifts, the New-mans Sacrifice,
The Spirits Flame, which Carnallists despise.
They lived as Brethren, leagued in Unity
With mutual Love, and Goods Community,
Relieving One another Need always,
Their own Just Fast Men's Need without delays.
For Paul's Epistles, or the Apocalipse
In English penned, because there Babels slips
Were prophesied, they grudged not to defray
Five Sterling Marks, a Scriveners Royal Pay,
If we regard the scarceness then of Coin,
Before Castile did Perues Oar purloine.
And which is strange, they seldom mixed their Seed,
But with their Mates, lest they might taint their Breed.
Fools styled them then, as they now Lutherans,
The Known Men, or Wicklevian Puritans,
The Just and Fast, or with a Brow more sour,
Them Lollards marked, from whence came Lollaras Tower.
IN Wales, About this Ages latter end,
Did Blasts from Hell to Friars Brain ascend;
False Miracles these Merit-^onging Crew
Pretended done by Winifride did brew
Near to a Well derived from Rocky Lime,
Which Holy they enstyld in that Dark Time,
Because the Blood of that good Virgin there,
As they surmizd, was shed, and not elsewhere:
Lord, how they roamd, like wild Geese, on the Fame!
And unto Baal with fat Oblations came!
All to enrich the Forgers of the Bruit
With what they never toyld for, Strangers Fruit!
Before which Feat for their Monastic Weal,
Their Beggars Wants they knew not how to heal.
It Is strange to see how soon the World turned Whore,
When Girald past Two Hundred Years before
That very Place with an exact Survay,
Yet could not learn what men did since display.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE FIFTEENTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 1400. until
the year 1500 At which Time Henry the Seventh reigned King in England.
The Argument.
Our Churches slighted state. Bizantium lost.
The Papacy in strife. The Hussites crossed
For Husse raise War, with Ziscaes Conquests crowned.
Strange Lands by Gama and Columbus found.
AS I of late Old Rubbage diggd, I felt
(With Flaming Force my Perturbations melt,
My Passions curbd, my Outward Man of Might
Deprivd. And then I had a Ghostly Sight
Of Robert Galls Parisian Iack-a-Lent,
Whereof the Pope by Carnal Minds Consent
Is Supreme Head on Earth. But soon I saw
Both Head and Body burn away like straw;
For Both indeed wore brittle Ornaments,
And so dissolvd to the First Elements,
His Soul descending into Lower Spheres
Then those of Purging, which he farmed for Years.
Anon I saw with Intellectual Eyes,
From a Dark Iaile a comely Dame arise,
When seeing me She stopped her Modest Pace,
And like my Saviors Mother, full of Grace,
Thou Mortal Man, quoth She, do wonder now,
Why on Poor Thralls my Favors I bestow,
And not on Scarlet Robes in midst of Plenty?
I dwell not with the Proud; Not one of Twenty,
That spends the time in Carnal Jollity,
Enjoyes my Love, Heat, or Society;
Which Caiphas-like, Pope Adrian true confessed,
He saw not how Romes Scepter could be blessed,
Since He, to whom Christ left the Churches Care,
Shunned worldly Rule, Pomp, and Simonious Ware.
The Consciences, where I frequent me most;
Are styled The Temple of the Holy Ghost.
And there, no Swine, no Beasts of prey, nor Curres
Dare enter once, nor any thing that blurres.
Notorious sins with Penance I commute,
But Common slips to Nature I impute.
I never sold the Holy Spirits Gifts,
But I receive Strayes gratis without shifts.
Though I enjoy the Keys to bind or loose,
I seldom Curse, nor Yealding Reeds do bruize.
Against Heretics I war, but not with Sword,
My Fence is Vows and Tears, my Sword Gods Word.
For my Chaste Faith to Christ I am beloved,
And by his Fiery Cross I am approved.
If thou desire then to find me out,
Look, VAUGHAN, not for me among the Rout,
But with my Babes, which bear a loving Mind,
Wise, Constant, sad. And there thou me shall find.
With such I lived in Superstitious Times,
And so proclaim me in thy New-mans Rimes.
With such I dwelt by Worldlings scorned, the while
My Beldame Foe Christ's Altars did defile,
With Carnal Sense and Sacrilegious Rape
Moulding the Immortal in frail Mortal shape.
THus stood Our Church, though not so fair of Face
As she seems now, yet by Elections Grace,
Christ's Merits, and his Bloods Prerogative
She breathed free from Sins imputative,
And though her Seed were not so pure as Our,
Nor Ours, as Saints, yet may the Man-Gods Power
For their Faiths sake Old Passions purify,
When Doomedayes Flames shall Bodies change or try
Or rather at Deaths Gasp to Paradise
Convaigh them like the Thief, with Saints to rise,
The Judge will cloth them with his Robes of Grace,
And them enroule with his True Churches Race.
Thus stood Our Church most visible to Saints,
Ere Luther broke into his Just Complaints.
Here in Our West she persecuted lay,
While Rome made sale of Souls and open Prey.
She in the House of Mourning at the Stake
Lay Patient, while Rome forged the Masses Cake.
How did they her with Racks and Tortures touze
Within their Jail^^ and Inquisition House?
How in Old Times did Berengariu^ fare,
For daring to control cotrupted Ware?
Nay, how in Spain^ do they speed at this day,
Who Christ alone for Advoca^e display?
A Thousand Years the Dragon with Restraint
Of Bloody Force ^y Close. Till then a Saint
Possessed his Conscience free from Tortures Fi^e,
Or Hells Const^aint. No Synod f^ll of Ire,
Till the Fourth Henry reigned, did sign a Law
By Massacres poor England to withdraw
From preaching Christ. No Council General
Doomed Saints to Flames to end Religions Bra^le,
Till Sigismond at Constance suffered Husse
And Jerome to be burnt without discuss
Of their true Cause. Yet Sautre first
Of Martyrs did appease the Bloody thirst
Of Antichristian Priests in the First Year
Of the said Henry's Reign. Next Badby here
Thorpe, Purvey, Taylour, White, and Hoveden,
With the Lord Cobham, Flower of Noblemen,
Who did before the Bishops of this Land,
With burning Zeal the Romish Church withstand,
For the Faiths sake, and the Wicklevian Sect
Did by their Blood, and Martyrs Seals erect
An Altar up in honor of our Christ
As Members of their Head against Antichrist,
How many Souls were forced to abjure
And to recant* No Saint then liy'd secure
In the Three Henry's Sway of Lancaster,
Who preached Gods Word, as He of Chichester
Grave Peacock felt, and many more, that fared
As bad because they Babels Whore out-dar'd*
Kent, Herefords, and Norwich Diocese
Saw men styled Lollards then with like success
Take up the Cross, and yield for Christ their Breath.
(So Prelates Saints pursued with spite, and Death)
And not content the Living to torment,
They one Degree beyond the Pagans went,
For Wickliffs Bones from out the Grave they tore,
And burnt, which lay there Forty Years before.
With solemn Pomp and Degradations Mask,
Those Gotam-Scribes performed that Gothish Task.
O Would the Lines of this Epitome
Could move our Strayes, which haunt the Romish Sea,
To meditate on Times Old Monuments,
And there to mark what Savage Punishments
One Hundred Years, ere Luther rose, were then
Inflicted by mad Priests on Christian Men,
For seeking to reform Old things amiss,
And by Gods Word to win blind strayes to Bliss:
I might then hope some would relent and turn
To our New-man, and with New Zeal would burn,
Not heeding Dreams and Superstitious Mists,
Which spread abroad by false Masse-monging Priests,
And Idolized by haughty Hildebrand,
Lay yet on Rome an Ignominious Brand;
But noting what the New-man put in ure
The first Six Hundred Years, they hold most pure.
For such our Martyrs did, and such I know
Great Britain now extolls, at least in show.
BUt to review the Churches History,
The Looking-glass of Sacred Memory:
Whilst half this Age with doubtful chance embroils,
Which France shall feel, or England Bloudier Broules?
The Center of this Age melts into Tears,
And cries out shame upon (...) Westorne P^^res,
For suffering Turks Bizantium to possess,
And by that means quite to subvert the Peace
Of all the Eastern Church, and there for Christ
To fiixe a mighty Limb of Antichrist.
Had they in time bu^ seconded the Duke
Of Burg^ndy when he Thralls a rebuke
With a Check-mate received in Hungary,
The Ottomans had not fair Bulgary
Subjected, nor the Grecian Isles fince won
To Christians Loss, and Mahome^s renown.
But as with Cunning Plots the Dragon rac'd
Our Westernes Faith, so then he there defaced
With Open Force the Easternes Primest Seat,
The City of New Rome; in which Defeat
He glories, that the same with Salems Town,
And Antioch he from Servile Christians won.
Their Sins them servile made, that so before
The Judgment Day their Fall might Others more
Rowze up from Sloth and Dull Security
To Watch, least they feel more Indignity.
ANd then near Thirty Years were past, since Popes
Branding each Other for false Antipopes
Copartners, at a Council General
By Sigismonds good Cares they stint the Brawle.
At which I cannot in my Zealous Trance
Unnamed leave a Chancellor of France,
Grave Gerson, whom our Chronicles record,
That for Truths Rights to be again restored
He motion'd to bring back the Light Divine,
As in the Days of Paul or Constantine.
This he craved in the Council General
Most Zealous, but the State Pontisicall
Would not assent to hear of Reformation,
Lest they might clinch their Court of Augmentation,
Like Politics, who wink at Thieves or Stews,
At Spoils or Bribes, at Barrettours or Jews,
Increasing Sin, and what to Vengeance tends
For Private Gain, and their own Idoll-ends.
This Motion made that Clerk Magnanimous
About the Time, when there they burned Husse,
That Husse, who sung, that tho they broiled the Goose,
Within One Hundred Years should be let loose
A Swan out of those Flames, as white as Snow,
Whose powerful Tune wuld make more Ear^^ to glow.
Which Prophecy fell true, for the Events
Gamaliels-like since answered the Contents*
Yet did that Council do one piece of Worth,
For they deposed Three Popes, and chose a Fourth.
BUt afterward the Caesar Sigismond
For Breach of Faith by dear Experience conn'd,
That though, as Toys, wrongs Mortals over-passe,
Yet God will them not unrevenged pass,
For of the Breach soon as Bohemia heard,
The Safe Conduct infringed, the Cause unheard,
And that the Council had condemned Husse
And Jerome to be burnt without discuss
Of the maine Points of Faith, for which they (...)
By Safe Conduct signed in the Imperial Name:
And now affronted with this fond Reply,
Or rather jeered with a Priseillian Lie:
That Promise, Faith, and Vows to Heretics
Were void in Law, if made by Catholics;
The Taborites repined, fair Prague laments,
And all Bohemia moves with sudden Rent^,
For their late Prophets Death, and Guil^l^ (...) Blo^d
Shed for no cause, but that they Rome withstood.
Then Valiant Zisca, like the Son of Nun,
Heads against Caeser, many Battles won,
And with small Numbers to all the Papists Wonder
Great Armies daunts, as st^ook with claps of Thunder.
The Bohemes so against their Foes prevailed,
That they their Loss, and Breach of Faith bewailed;
And to this day those Rites in Boheme last,
Which first to Husse from English Wickli^^e past.
NOr was that Doctrine in Bohemia close,
And England kept alone, but to oppose
The Romish Sid^ by Virtue of the Light
Derived from thence there daily came more Might.
The Bishop of Cr^atia then did rise
By Wickliffes Lamp, and did Romes Fall comprise
In Measured Lines, which with Prophetic Gloss
(...) did for that Dark Age disclose.
Cameracums Good Cardinal then wrote,
And laid on Rome an everlasting Blot,
As others in those Days the like revealed
What from Old muddy Pates stood long concealed.
So M^ntuan did and Savonarola,
Clemangis, and the Count Mirandola
Boldly declaime against Great Babels Pride,
Ere Luther rose to write against her Side.
For now had God in his appointed Time
Refined more Wits the Gospel out to chime.
THough for their Sins he Pius took away
The Best of Popes, who whilst he lived, gave way
Some Errors to reform, and meant that Wives
Should licensed be to Priests, yet still he lives
For his Good Will enrowl'd in Lines of Fame,
That Silvius thought to cover Babels shame.
FOr like Effect God sent the Printers Press,
That with Good Books we might his Truth confess,
For till this Age fair Printing lay unknown,
And so for want of Works Truth was pressed down.
Gunnes likewise came within this Ages List,
Invented by by a Friar Alchymist*
Now Beads came up, where Sixtus was not wary
For Penance sake to link the Ave-Mary.
And after him, by the next raving Pope,
Who for his Fact was worthy of a Rope,
Romes Stews came up, for whom he builded Rooms,
And got the Whores to pay him Yearly Sums,
Under pretense to keep some Women Chaste,
But more for Gain, and for his Priests unchaste,
As though the Brothels could Knaves temptings let,
By suffering Ill, Sin Hidraes to beget.
WHat now has Rome to plead? what Color? Shift?
Or false Demurre to cloak her wanton drift?
That she be not indicted hereupon
A Baud? and styled the Whore of Babylon,
Not only Ghostly, but a Carnal Whore
She stands arraigned; for, as ye heard before,
A Whore indeed, a Woman Moguntine
Sat Pope in Rome, and acted Rites Divine.
If this be not sufficient Evidence,
Examine well their Lives and Fr^^dulence,
What Paramours Popes keptd what Bloody Da^ce
They led? what Plut^ their Bastards to advance?
That very Pope, which shall cloze up this Age,
Can restifie with what tumul^uous Rage
He raised his Son and Daughter to great States
Caesar made Duke, a Duke Lucreti^ mates.
About the Year Six Hundred Sixty Six,
The Antichristian Fiend began his Tricks
And Lullabies to act through Carnal Ease,
That men might fall to Scorbuts Foul^ disease,
Or to some Prantick Fits. Nor was it long
But at the Time foretold, who did belong
To the Great Cities D^^^, by Sea and Land
Played the fond Bed^ems at their Heads command.
Her huge Impostume broke out at the last,
That is Five Hundred Years she made ^uch wast
Of Rags for Tenes to keep her Issuer running,
To serve her still it past our Westernes cunning.
The Prince of Fiends such Humors, Spleen, and Gall
Envenomed had this Mystery withal,
That for Gu^iat^m she must India riste,
For Europes Drugges seemed to her Lims a Trifle.
Who durst oppose her what she went about?
She had the Keys of Heaven and Hell to boot:
Of all the World she was Chief Governesse,
And of what Christ scorned in the Wilderness.
Only there wanted to supply her State
The Gen^^es Map, and Isabellaes Fate.
BEfore her Wane Gods Glory to extend,
It chanced about this Ages Latter End,
That Gama first from Lisbon tried the Course,
To pass by Sea to the East-Indian Shores,
Where having found the Lodestone since in use,
He Pilots did from the Pole-starre reduce;
By which and Printing was the Gospels sound
Dispersed, and Both within this Age Newfound.
West India then was was by Columbus seen,
At the Expense of that Castilian Queen;
Who pawned her Jewels for the finding out
Of those New Lands, whose Gold made Spain so stout,
That aiming at the Western Monarchy.
She Musters, Fights, holds Kings in Jealousies
And Babels Whore hopes in that Newfound Soilo
By Mart of Souls to keep more revell Coile,
And what She here has by the Gospel lost,
That to repair in Indiaes Sunburned Coast.
Our Seventh Henry might have made his Boast,
Had he but been as prone as Ferdinand
To take the tendered Map of that New Land.
But though the Tract was large, yet Portingall
And Castiles King contended, till the Brawle
By the High Priests Imaginary Lines
Umpir'd, they claimed more then their Right confin^^.
And so Romes Rites erected in that Coast.
Satan repaires what he in Europe lost,
Unless our I Will, to countepoise his Craft,
Had lately aimed into that North a Shaft,
Which may perhaps some Consciences so wound,
That Savages may hear the Gospels Sound,
Which others Damps with Superstitious Fire
Have there concealed, and hindered to inspire.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE SIXTEENTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 1500. until
the year 1600.
The Argument.
Where lay Our Church ^re Wickliffe first arose:
By Prodigies Rome warned ere Luther rose.
No Tyrants Plots could let Our Churches Sound,
But Englands Queens did all her Foes confound.
FRom Age to Age I showed the Churches race,
Her Wane, her Wens, and her refulgent Fa^e;
And some I named for Prophetizing Wits
Times against our Beli^ls Fit^,
^
^
^
Who labored to suppress what Christ prescribes?
Besides the Abissines under Pret^ous John,
The Armenians, Greeks, and Some in Babylon,
Or otherwhere (For who dares bound our Guest?
Since we are ti'd likewise to Judge the Best?)
And not to bind Gods free unbounded Grace
To any certain Climate, Time, or Place?)
Christ had his Church, a Remnant saved by Grace
Always inspired in some or Other Place;
Whether our Scribes pretend them Coloieros,
Nesto^^n^, M^nkes, or Saint John's Cavoll^res;
Whether they hold of Persian Iacobites,
The Hi^^ies Form, or of Georgiaes Rites;
Of Maronites, or Coftics of the East,
Or Catbelicks so craking in the West,
Or Hermites, Nuns, and l'olyntaries (...),
Whose humbled hearts then Pomp Saints honor more
Because they side with Christ, bear Christian Name,
Though much in Blame, yet I will spare their Fame;
And let our Weaklings know, that some were Wise,
And did of Old in Babel Sybillize;
By special Signs and Symptoms general,
But most by Sacred Stars Authentical,
Denouncing for her Slips Gods Wrath, her Fall,
Unless she would Repent her at their Call.
And so things came to pass, as they Divined,
Her Spires for Rookes we now demolisht find,
Some by the Force of furious Ottoman,
Some forfeited for what the Laws did scan:
Her Chapels turned to Barnes, or Nests for Owls,
Her Nunneries first built for harmless Souls
Lie wast with her Rich Temporalls and Rents;
Yea, and Gods Tithes, Our Church-emoluments,
By what just Warrant let the Laws dispute,
Some keep away as yet; and I am Mute,
Because I see sometimes that Innocence,
As Well as Vice, dies of the Pestilence,
An Order laid Pope Alexander down
For the New World. But shortly of his Own
Most wretched States and Life shall be bereft,
And for Usurpers an Example left.
For after this usurpt Partition made,
His Bastard Son to try his Former Trade
Of Pois^ning Those, whom he supposed would bar
The Proud Designs of his complotted war,
His Motto blazed, the Hazards Die is cast,
Caesar, or Nothing, now by Poisons Taste
He meant to rid Suspected Cardinals
Out of the way, but hereby both their Falls,
His Fathers and his Own, he sudden wrought,
For he soon as the Fat all Wine was brought,
Charged his Page, that he the Bottle watch,
And when he called for Wine that he should reach
It for his Guests; the Pope came in the while,
And thirsty called for Wine: the Page the Will
Not knowing, thought the Wine reserved was Choice,
And without more ado, or Answers Noise,
Filled him a Cup of the Empoisned Wine,
And by just Doom, as writes Gui^ciardine,
Came in the Author, his accursed Son
All thirsty too, and tasted thereupon
The Cup which he for Others brewed, and lost
His Father out of hand, himself almost
Ran the same Fate, but that by Nature strong,
He for that time escaped to do more wrong,
Still quarrelling, till he was thrall'd and slain.
So Caesar Borgias lived and di'd a Caine.
Pope Julius now to Tiber slung his Koyes,
Then fought, and lost by French his Enemies.
A Token that Romes Church to wrack began
To fall, as you may by the sequel scan.
THe Ourward Cross in Teutons Soil appeared
Of Martyrs Form, and with that Sign besmeared
Their Palaces, and Household Ornaments,
Their Windows, Doors, and Bodies Vestiments;
A sign to show the Fiery Trialls Doom
By Factious Gogs and Magogs Force to come,
Veiled with the Cross, the Keys, with Peter's Net,
With Jesus, with the Laws, or Mahomet.
This Miracle in Maximilians Time
Fell out, not long before the Gospels Chime
At Wittemberge with Motions life began
By Luthers Zeal, that good Samaritan,
Who, when most shunned to help the wounded Man,
Cheered up, and Bathed Christ's Members pale and wan.
ANd after this another Prodigy
Befell to Rome, which no Apology
Of Idolists can cover the mis-hap;
When little Jesus from his Mothers Lap
Was in the Church removed, and Peter's Keys
Thrown from his Pictures hand, Both in a trice
Without respect of Persons by the stroke
Of Thunders Crack and sacred Sulphures Smoke
Just in that Church, where One and Thirty Priests
With the Red Hat that Day, like Minstre^^ists,
Installed were by Leo there with state
In the same Year, when Lutber to abate
His Loftiness began with greater Fame
Then Cardinals support, in Christ his Name.
OUr Kings and States of Western Christendom
Complained and sought for some Redress to come
Of Faiths abuse, and Romes Impiety,
But still the Head was deaf to Piety,
He would no Member be, but the Church whole,
Himself sole Judge, and Church, without one Mole,
Or Sinful Spot, by which Prerogative
He tyrannized so, that none could thrive;
He watched with Vultures Claws all Stakes to sweep:
He watched to flay, but not to feed the Sheep,
Like Maltaes Jew, or those of La^lesse kind,
Who under Mask of Law cease not to grind
Christ's Members, till they feel Hells measures heapt,
Or till they reap what Old Masse-mongers reap^.
So blinded were the Popes by Doom Divine,
Till a Poor Man, a Friar Augustine,
Since started up to do that Glorious Deed,
Which Gregory's, and Austines does exceed,
Which Kings af^ay'd, but failed to perform:
Nay, Kings durst not what Luther did reform.
Would God that some like Prophet took the Pains
To bring back Love for which our Church complains.
This Wonder God wrought in our Latter Days,
That before Doom he might recall some Strayes,
That Satan's Pride he might by Sucklings tame,
And by the Weak the Worldly Wizz and shame.
WEll near upon our Luthers Sacrifice,
Grave Reuclin did and Valla break the Ice,
As London was prepared by Golets Flame,
And Dutch-land by the Clerk of Rotter da^^;
As Swizzer Land, when Luther first began,
By Zuinglius was stirred up Romes zeal to scan.
But none then our Just Fast Men triumphed more,
Whose Race had held full Sixscore Years before
With Faggots Fire, and Lollards branded Pain
Pursued till now, and now rejoiced again,
To see that Faith, which with the Hussites they
Had long maintained, found out an open way
By Luthers Zeal, Stigelius ravish^ Mus^,
And by Melancthons Flowers with blooming News.
BAbel her Fall in Henry's Time foresaw,
When Praemunire Englands ancient Law
Her Clergy rackt. But most the quakt for Dread
To hear him styled the Churches Supreme Head:
For by that Style what Rome usurped here
Of Aunates, Far^^s, and Duties every Year,
Our Parliament had on the King conferred
To aid him in his Wars. These Spoils transferred
From Foreign use to help the Natives want:
It Is strange to mark how soon men did recant
Their Carnal Dreams; and blind Idolatries,
To celebrate the New-mans Sacrifice.
Blessed be Young Edward, Our Iosiaes Name,
Who next commenced this Work of Pio^^ Fame.
But as the Former Brood, when Constantine
Deceased, then proved ungrateful, the Next Lig^e
Of Caesar's fell to Arrian Heresy,
And their Old Vomits with Apostasy:
So wavering England in the Marian Reign
Quickly returned to Babels yoke again,
Until some Martyrs Blood, the Churches Seed,
True Members of their Head in time of Need
Had through Gods Grace behind them left a Fire,
As Latimer foretold, which would inspire,
And never be extinct in Albions I Will,
Whilst that Our Kings bear Faiths Defenders Style.
This by our Virgin Queen of Tydirs Race,
Great Debora, was since made good to raze,
And quite demollish here Romes strongest Fort,
And chiefest Nerves, which did her Pride support.
And surely, if Romes Tributary Thralls
Would take that Course, she on a sudden falls.
Her Lofty Towers would yield so loud a Crack
That they, which Court her now, would soon go ba^k,
When slartled up at the New wondrous Sight,
They see a Church more Catholic of Light:
They would ^vouch no Advocate but One,
And build their Faith upon the Corner Stone,
That was hewne from the Mountain without hand,
Male-borne without Male-Sire in Iewry Land.
They would exalt Our Church Apostolic
Above their Own, the Car^all Catholic,
And by Gods Word, Truths ground, the Churches no^e,
They would conclude what now they ^on by roat.
ABout the midst of this strange Century,
Iniquities prodigious Mystery
Began at Trent, or City Tridentine,
Again to play upon the Word Divine
By Canons propt with Iulians Tyranny,
More fit for Moors then Counsels harmony.
Least that the Gospel should Romes Captives free
From their Old doting Dreams, they did decree,
That all such Books, which Protestants had penned
To blaze Gods Word, they should in pieces rend;
Or if they touched her Carnal Copyhold,
To Martyr them, since Babel aims at Gold;
And that who did gainsay in Word or Deed,
Or took it not as Parcel of their Creed,
That the whole Mass both for the Dead and Quick
Sufficed, those Men they doomed no Catholic;
That, who believed not all the Romish Crewes
Traditions, they were worse then Turks or Jews.
Such Acts at Trent were last determined
By the Fourth Pi^s, Romes most impious Head,
With Thundering Threats. From whence arose those Jars,
Combustions, Powder-plots, and Bloody Wars,
Which ever since embroiled Christendom,
And will (I fear) until the Day of Doom
Endure, unless our headstrong Strayes afford,
While Time remains, more Passage to Gods Word.
NOne can deny, but that this Council gave
More Liberty for Papists to out-brave
The Church Reformed by Inquisitions strict
To rack poor Souls, and by severe Edict
On Forfeiture of Life and Goods Escheat,
If they would not adore the Papal Seat.
From hence began the Civil Wars in France,
Which ended not but by most Bloody Dance.
And various sort of Massacres and Spoils.
They ended not for all their Leaguers Broiles,
Until their Kings, the Guisians, and their Chiefes,
Who sided in the Quarrel, di'd in Griefs,
In Anguishes and Blood. And this the Star
In Seventy Two, which past all Comets (...)
For strange Portent and Blazing-hearded Rays,
Did then denounce with woes to stubborn Strayes,
For Belgiaes injured States did thereupon
Incenc'd by Alv^es Duke, and Austria^^ John,
Who would have forced to Mass men's Consciences,
Break into wars against Spaines Out-r^^es;
Which last as yet. So likewise Portingall,
With her Sebastian did in Afric fall.
Enduc'd to fight with Moors by Jesuits Train,
That Philip by his Death might ceaze all Spain,
Excluding Don Antonio and his Race
Quite from the Sway of Lis^ons Royal Mace.
But to retire to our French Leaguers back,
How Fatal proved their Plots? They thought to sack
And ransack all the Towns, which Protestants,
For their Defense then held. But in their wants
God aided these, and on their Foes returned
The Tragic Flames, wherewith they would have burned
Their Neighbors Roofes. Guise armed against his King,
The King against him, till Both felt Judgments sting,
Both di'd in Blood, yea, which appeared most rare,
The King was caught in the same Bloody Snare,
Where he in time fore-past had leagued the Death
Of Saints, whereby Catillion off his ^tea^h,
For in that very Room the King was slain
By Friars hands, where first was laid that Train.
LOng lived Our Queen to build things out of square
A Virgin v^w'd to Christ, of Dowries rare,
Excelling in the Gifts of Tongues and Arts;
But more then all ^^one her Diviner Parts.
Church-Elders She propt up, when Some their Fall,
As if their State touched not the Temporal,
For Lucre sake had plotted to deface
Our Churches Form, her Frame, and Outward Face,
Whereby her Sway had proved an An^rchy,
Of scorned stem, the House of God a Sty,
And Learning held in vile Contempt for lack
Of Wages due; yea, all had gone to wrack,
If this Good Queen had not supported them,
Who holp to build our New Jerusalem.
IN her Buddes-time, to counterpoize, or let
Our Churches Growth, or in her Te^ts beset
To ruin^ some of our good Souldi^rs, sp^^^g
The Jesuits Sect with the False Serpents Tongue
Disguised with Zeal, and promising to Youth
Mountains of Rules, New Documents for Truth.
Upon which News, and Newne^^^ of their Name,
Degrading Antioch, and the Christi^^ Fame,
They wan Repute in Babel. But of ^are
Discreeter States their Bloody Doctrine hate.
Among these Frogs croakt Mariana first
Against all Kings, who were by Popes Accursed,
And by Black Rules derived from Hells Abyss,
Dethroned them of their States for their Amiss.
Yea, and their Lives subjected unto Slaves.
With such lewd Points, wherein this Jesuit raves,
He Campians Brain so stuffed, that Irelands Realm
And Desmonds Crew he poisned with the stream;
For which his Plots and false Conspiracies,
Himself became a Damned Sacrifice;
As well deserved the Author for his Books
Entangling Christians with such Hellish Hooks*
But all their Plots of Pi^^olls, Poison, Swords,
Nor Romish Bulls, nor Briefes loud thundering words,
Could shorten or impeach Elizaes Reign,
But that she thrived in spite of Rome and Spain,
While they prevailed with Fatal wound to sting
One whom they took for the most Christian King;
Which Deed so pleased Pope Six^^^, that he durst
With Judith rank the Malefactor C^rst.
THis Sixtus dared to Excommunicate
Our Famous Queen, her Empire to translate,
As much as in him lay, and Leave to gore
Her Person gave, as Pius did before.
But all their roaring Bulls and Thunderclaps
With Interest returned, with heavy Raps
Upon themselves, their Faction, and on those,
To whom they dreamed her Kingdoms to transpose
Under his shroud, who from a Fishes Craw
Did Toll for Christ and his own Person draw.
IN the mean time fair Englands Zealo^s Queen,
Like Char-coale sparks, contemned their flashing spleen.
And for her Zeal God blessed her brave Attempts,
That she cried Quittance for his slight Contempts
Of Neighbors Love with the Great King of Spain,
Who suff^ed still his Inquisitions Train,
Under pretext of their Religions Laws,
To prey upon her Merchants without Cause,
And on their Goods: or sheading of their Blood;
Or Galley-slav'd; or to wear Benets Hood.
These wrongs by Drake and Candish she redrest,
And feared not to encounter him at Best
With all his Navall Force in Eighty Eight,
And afterward at Cales she showed her Might.
Nor went his Indies free from her Revenge,
Nor Belgiaes Soil, but that she did avenge
Her Quarrel full, by Force of Arms transverse
The Belgian State, and free the Hollanders
From the Inquisitions Yoke by Alva laid,
And sithence trained their Milk-sops by her Aid
To turn brave Soldiers both on Sea and Land,
To weary Spain, and on their Guard to stand.
AFter that Bloody Feast in Seventy Two,
When Sions Church French Herod's would undo,
Besieged Rochell with Munitions store
By Sea she furnish^, and Relieved her Poor.
Again, France tasted of her Lenity,
As Burbon tried and his Posterity,
Which but for her good Cares, and Troops Supply,
Had stoupt unto Iberiaes Tyranny;
And Lorra^nes League then mammo^kt into Parts
Had thrall'd all France to Spaines Superior Darts.
SHe planted Ireland, civilliz'd the Rude,
Rebellious, Wild, and Kernish Multitude;
And near her Set by Valiant Mountjoyes Cares,
With Triumph there over Spain she cloz'd her Wars.
So stood out State of Church and Common-weal^,
In spite of Romish Bulls, Spain, and Oneale,
Secured from Schisms, Home-broyles, and Hostile Train,
As long as Great Elizabeth did Reign.
HEreby Our Strayes, who tax the Gospels Sound,
May fear how they Gods Church do meore and bound
Within Romes Fold by Popes Prerogative,
As if our Faith were pinned unto his Sleeve.
Here they may see what ignominious Spoils
Romes Champions reapt for all their Bloody Broiles;
Whilst that Our Princes in set Peace have stretched
Their Limbs, in Blood their latest Gasp they fetched.
Not Austria, France, nor Rome with steely dint,
Nor Marian Fire could Christ his Gospel stint,
Nor could they raze the Name of Hugueno^s,
Or Protestants for all their Bloody Plots.
Much less could their School-Doctors plead her Cause
Against the Brightness of the Spirits Clause,
Which by Saint John had prophesied her Fall,
And likewise her forewarned by Saint Paul,
That she, whom for her Faith Renowned Fame
Then blazed, should be at last cut off with shame,
If she continued not, as she begun,
Chaste to her Spouse the Great Iehovahs Son.
Gods Charter still goes with a whilst, or If
Thou honor me, I will remove thy Grief.
Not her Decline could all her Clergy stop,
Nor Canonists her Doctrine underprop;
Not Gratian, nor her Best, Panormitan,
Nor all her Routes of Thalmudists profane;
Not Wolsey, Poole, nor learned Cajetan,
Kings-mating Cardinals in Pomp Humane,
The Mystic Remnant of the Dragons Band,
Could vengeance stay, nor Judgments Lees withstand.
Their Martyrs Urnes can no way parallel
Our Holy Ones, nor can their Legends tell
Five Bishops burnt for their Religions sake,
Where we can name consumed at the Stake
Great Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer,
And Ferrar Sainted in our Register,
With many more, whom the Force Secular,
Hells Magogs, hois'd to Martyrs Calendar,
Though them they knew to be the Churches Seed,
By hearing at their Death their Christian Creed:
Which Creed, lest it might move a Conscience soft,
Their Torturers have interrupted often
In midst of Flames, by hurling Staves or Stones,
To wound the more their Heads and broiling Bones.
O Valiant Men, true Members of our Head!
Who like to Him for Him to Death have bled!
O Glorious Saints, who left such Monuments
Surpassing far the Sevenfold Wonderments!
Who to prevent Souls Dearth built Granaries,
Like Joseph's store, enough for Sacrifice!
Whose Martyrdomes refulgent Memory
Puts down Romes Palles, and Shrines Imagery!
Who have, like Stars derived from Heavens Light,
Left Spectacles and Torches for our Sight!
God grant they may increase Devotions Flame,
And dull those Schisms, which the next Age will shame.
In Brief, no Age since Christ saw greater Change
Of Manners, Knowledge, States, and which is strange,
Great Rome twice sacked. The Common Foe more bold,
Whilst our Chief West waved with the Spanish Gold.
THE OCCVRRENCES OF THE SEVENTEENTH AGE, From the year of our Lord 1600.
until this present year 1640. Being the 16. of King Charles his Reign over
Great Britain.
The Argument.
Our Church escapes the Dragons Powder-traine;
And is confirmed in James, and Charles his Reign.
Abroad the Bloody Cross her Members s^ites;
In Britain some blame Types, and Outward Rites.
THe third Year past of this our present Age,
Our Sunset Queen expired her Pilgrimag^
A Virgin on our Virgin Ladi^s Eve*
To see her Star Death did her hence b^^^av^.
Elizabeth then folding up her Reign
Of Forty Four, Triumphant over Spain,
The Popish Side, Tirone, and Irish Kernes;
Fair Englands Crown to Him whom it concerns
By Right of Blood descends, to Solomon,
Our Phoenix James, who like the radiant Sun
Shot forth his Rays, of Kings the Paragon;
A Writer most acute, for Natives Tone
Unparalleled by any Regal Scribe,
Next to that Star, the Honor of his Tribe.
Whether in Prose or Measured Lines he steeres,
The Loadstone of his Labors still appears
Directly aimed unto the New man's White.
His David's Psalms our Belials so appall,
None dare them now Geneva-jigges mis-call.
This Posthume Fruit has Learned Sterline late
Set forth, the Fainting Soul to recreate.
His Works endure the Light, his Lamp the Night
Of Ignorance repells, and None our James,
His Bockes, his Life, or Reign, save Envy blames.
He Vorstius foiled, restrained Superfluous Doubts,
And by his Pen convinced Scholastic Routs.
While here he lived, O how did Knowledge shine!
The Church renew her Hopes, the Grave Divine
Afford us daily Manna for Soule-Food,
And by his Royal Rays all things did Bud,
Yea, his Rays made the Wildest Red-shanks tame,
Dried Irish Bogges, and spread Virginiaes Fame.
NOr lackt this King the Gift of Prophecy,
To pry into the Jesuits Secrecy,
Whereby they thought to blow up Albions State
With Powder-Traine Hells next obnoxious Fate.
For though that Tressams Lines seemed intricate,
Flowing from Sphynx, or Coedipus his Pate,
A Riddle, dark, and scorned by Other Men,
Yet this Wise Prince the same did not contemn,
But pointed at the Mine, and their Intent,
Which they kept close sworn on the Sacrament.
THis Peaceful King upon the least disgust
Among his Neighbor States, or Wars mistrust,
Spared for no Pains nor Charge to mediate
A Christian End, their Passions to abate.
How many Treaties has Vienna seen?
What Embassies to calm fierce Austriaes Spleen?
That without Blood the Palatine might gain
His Own, he sent his only Son to Spain.
In hope to shun th'Events, which happened since,
To Dangers he exposed our Darling Prince,
That by that gentle Course or Sacrifice,
He might prevent ensuing Prejudice.
No Age paints out, nor points at the like Type
Of Princely Love, Offense away to wipe.
LIke James in Zeal came Young Iehosaphat,
Our Royal Charles, whose sweet and moderate
Condition yield us Hopes, that, like his Sire,
He will retain unquencht the Sacred Fire,
Which in his Soul burns calmely by the Heat
Of Heavens Flame, the Holy Paraclete.
Now in his Reign we plant Virgini^es North
With Colontes, and hope by setting forth
The Gospel there the Savages to win
In Christ his Name from Lust and Bloody Sin:
Our Dr^nes turn Bees in his Auspicious Reign,
Removed to Foreign Isles in hope of Gain,
And by his Famous Glass, who built of Old,
For Tharsus Ships to fetch thence Ophirs Gold,
This Prudent Prince preparts a Warre-like Flees
To scowre the Seas, and Force with Force to mees,
As testify of late his Admiralls,
Which forced Moors to yield home English Thralls.
But more then all, the New man he does grace,
And the Divine holds in his Counsel Place.
While M^^s went on the Electours wings to pull,
Against the Charter of the Golden Bull,
Distressed Teutons Limbs found both relief
And Succor of our Charles, to ease their Grief.
And while their Church with Tortures lay oppressed,
Her Babes exiled: our Britain Mother blessed
Thrives by the Cares of our Religious Charles,
Secured from Schism, and Superstitious Snarles.
O Happy Britain, could thou know thy Good
Where Neighbor-states ore-flow with Spoils and Blood!
To calculate who were by Wars extinct
In Belgia, France, and Germanies Precinct,
Or the late Troubles of the Valroline,
The Grisons Griefs, or Rochels to define,
A Buskin craves more then Poetical,
Or Algebraes Points Mathematical.
Nay, he that counts the Scarres in Christian Lands,
On Christian Folks late made by Tyrants hands,
Shall sooner tell the Names of Magogs Bands,
Which John compares unto the Ocean Sands.
All which the Saints, though in their Tents beset
By Fiends, yet them from Vows no Crosses let.
All which Gods Church, though oftentimes she fears,
And vents forth Angels Mones, with Patience bears.
Our King bewailes their Case, stands on Defense;
He Arms, and yet not ministers Offense.
We feel their Griefs, with them we sympathize,
And pray for Cure, which Passion mollifies.
WHen Austriaes Caesar had with Eagles Wings
Aspired, and lift against the King of Kings
His lofty Head, and mustered all his Force
To trample on Christ's Flock without remorce,
Having begun the Electours Plumes to pull
Against the Germane Laws and Golden Bull:
Even then (O Wonder!) unexpected Aid
Was by the Lord from Swethens Land convai'd,
From the far North brave King Gustav^s came,
Who came like Thunder, fought, and overcame.
And though this Heroes perished for our Sins
In Battle late, yet to the Philistines,
Like Sampson, he full dearly sold his Breath,
Confounded them, and Triumphed by his Death;
Yea, from his Cinders since sprung up a Flame,
Which Tyrants Threats, and Turncoats puts to shame.
Long may thy Trophies last, Great Macchabee,
All Terror to our Foes, until they see,
That they who wittingly shead Christians Blood,
Like Roman Pilate, and the Jewish Crowd,
Stand guilty all of Christ his Death again,
And cannot Purge, or wash away the stain
With Bribes, or Ransom of Sophistick kind,
Besides the Scandal which they leave behind,
That Tearing Bonds of Christian Unity
Confirms the Turk by their Hostility
To flout, and them with feigned Leagues to wind,
As shortly his Confederates may find.
Mean while they wast a Christian Monarchy,
And Teutons Land becomes an Anarchy.
BUt leaving them with Fire and Sword to skuffle,
I saw Our Churches F^es begin to shu^^^e
Strange Cards, in hope by Arts Legier-de-maine
To win. The Stake is Soul prodigi^^ Gain^,
Which God avert, and grant that we take heed
Of Sheep-skin'd Wolves, who sacrifice their Seed
To Moloch, and expect for Ioviall Nuns
To be Confessed by Romes unmarried So^^^s.
This Women styld the Iesuitrices,
Did lately press, that they by their Access
To Ladies might for their Conversion speed,
And work upon their Own frail Sexes Creed
With greater slight, and with more fervency
Then Priests often blurr^d for Carnell Privacie.
This Femall Sect, before it grew to height,
Was by the present Pope, Urben^ the Eight,
Dashed in the Spring. A prudent Actinde^d,
To stine the Growth of Antichristian S^^^.
God grant him more such Sparks, that as his Book.
Of Poems bruites his skill, so he the Hook
And Fishers Ner convert to better use
Then Other Popes have done to Faiths abuse,
The which he may, like Peter or Saint Paul,
Soon bring to pass by Counsel General;
Yea, and perhaps he may there Reconcile
Those Worldly Jarres, which blur Old Antiochs style.
FOr what poor things wuld some disguised with zeal
Disturb the Peace of Christ his Commonweal?
Some startle at the Altars Ancient Name;
Others our settled Form of Vows defame.
Because they want some business from without,
To make their Badies sweat, or smart, they pour,
And peevish grow, not knowing what they aile
Within their Sickly Brain, till Eits prevail;
Like idle Maias with the Greene-sicknesse vexed,
They loath what is good, and in ward are perplexed
With bra^kish Fleame, with Moodes extravagant,
And Longings often from Reason discrepant.
Because they cannot have their own Chymeres
And whimseyes of their Will, they wast with Fears,
Repining at their Neighbors store of Grace,
And yet their Crazed selves will not embrace
The tendered Form, nor join in the Soule-Cure,
As Others do, and with sweet Sauce procure,
Whereby they may with Understanding Pray,
And not by roat, nor rashly Vows rep^^.
Glutted with Quails, and Ma^maes precious Fare,
Their stomachs long for Onions, homely ware,
And Simple Trash, which may the Blood iuflame
More then that wholesome Food, which they defame.
Have we not seen more Pride in Course Attire
Then in Rich Robes? Yea, some, who did aspire
Under the Mask of plain Sincerity,
Yet afterward strove for Priority?
LEt him, that blames the Surplice comely wear,
Look how the Saints in long-white Robes appear
Before the Highest Throne, and then no doubt
At such a Sight he will no longer pout.
And who is he so frowardly severe,
That rayles at Graduates Hood of Minnivere?
The Scarlet Robe? or at the Cornered Cap
In Academes Matriculated Lap,
Like Laureate Wreathes, borne and produced to grace
Industrious Wits, the Churches hopeful Race?
That with such Types and Tokens garnished
The Bees from Drones might be distinguished?
And that by Virtues Hire, fair Honors Crown,
Some might, as Stars, from Lesser Lights be known!
Much more distinct the Sacred Rank had need
From Vulgar Garbes of Grave and Reverend Weed,
As Well to move regard by Outward Hew
Of Surplices and Miters, as to show
To hardened Roman Strayes, that without stings
We join with them in all Indifferent Things,
And that to shun Offense, Faiths Essence said,
We can for bear, and yield to them that raved
In clozing Rents, for some Traditions, Rites,
And Outward Forms, so to renew their Lights.
The Jews lost not by Aaro^^ Bells their Hopes:
And what lose we by Miters Sight, or Copes?
THus stands our Church be^et with Schismatics,
And Romish Routes pretended Catholics:
The Former raising Jarres for Triuiall things,
The Latter seems to taint the New man's Springs.
And yet she shines most bright, while like a Storm,
The Formers Faction quails, and may reform
Their slips with Ease, at least, when mellow Age
Shall by Degrees compose their Passions Rage.
And there is Hope the Other will renounce
Dependencies on Saints, and so pronounce:
(As did those Saints themselves) Faith Justifies,
And Christ his Blood alone does us suffice
Without our Own, or other Merits Boast,
To gain Salvation through the Holy Ghost.
For want of Tithes the One a Sect contrives:
And Discontent tempts Babels Fugitives.
THus has our Christ^an Church by Grace Divine,
Past through the Seventeenth Age till Thirty Nine,
And Sixteen Hundred Years from Christ his Birth
Are fif^ly told by Mortals here on Earth;
In spite of Tyrants, Schisms, Idolatry,
The Dragons Flood, and Babels Butchery.
O would my Muse knew ways to ^^oncil^
The stubborn Straye^ and Hot-spurs of this (...)
That, as We all ex^oll One Christian Creed,
And what were in Six Hundred Years decreed
By the First Synods of the East and West,
So we might meet at our Communion Feast
In mutual Love, without distrust or st^ngs,
To pay our Vows unto^ the King of Kings,
Like Brethren with Harmonious Ravishment
In Spirit, with One Will, and One Consent.
Accounting Copes, Bells, Organs, Surplices,
Or shaven Grownes, a^ Rites, not ^^^^ances
To bar the Faith or Conscience of a Saint,
As Some with such Conceits the Church would ^aint.
"A Christian should be mild in Temporal Things,
"Which breeds not Sin, nor Soul-^ick Scandal brings.
"So that Gods Word be preached and Faith increase,
"I will accept what Outward G^rbes they please.
"Il^^kneele, sit, stand, or else in Sackcloth Fast;
"So that I may win Souls, no Flesh I Will taste,
"I Will wear the Sa^t^ Robe, Saint Be^^^s Hood,
"Or Friars Cow^e, to do our Weaklings good.
"Such shapes I take for harmless Policy,
"As Adi^p^ors with (...)
"Expedient for some Persons more then Other,
"So to shake hands, and wrangling Quillets smother;
Not like Old (...) of corrupted Zeal,
Who rackt sometime the Romish Commonweal,
And wanting Wit to choose Frige Black, or Gray,
Or White, at last they made a Bloody Fray.
ABout such Outward Forms the Fiend of late
With Bloody Broiles thought to enwrap our State.
But He, that left at his Departure hence
Against M^ll. ^l^t ^ Gods Spirit for Defense,
Inspired our King with Mercy, to forgiv^
Them for whose Faul^s he more th^n they did griev^.
When Some for Fam^, and Others for their Hir^,
When some for Spoils glad of Cambustions Fir^^
And some for Doubts with swelling Spleen did hope
In Savage Fight with Martial (...) and to cop^^
Our Charles, though strongly (...) extended the^^
In Christian Love Grace unto ^^^ing Men.
Like Him, who (...) chose O^e Citizen
Tus^^e then S^^y ^ Thousand H^stise Men.
By this rare Act of sacred Clemency
He paralells, nay, gets Precedencie
Above all Kings that sway this Worldly Sphere,
Whose Subjects more their Frowns and Rigor fe^^
Then honor them for Balanced Equity,
Or Real Deeds surmounting Quality.
Had Theodosim so his Passions squared,
He surely had the The ssalonians spared,
And not been warned by Ambrose to refrain
Ero^ ^illains Church, til conscience wrought some Pain
O Happy Prince, that knew'st thy S^viours Will
O Happy Land where sover (...) (...) to Kill
Now, ye that vaunt of Al^ious Al^^nact,
Or of Fergusim Sway, appla^d' this Act
With thankful Lays set forth in Charles his pr^ise,
Who when he might destroy forgave your S^^^yes.
But O what doleful News (...) in my B^^es
That Discords Flame, late quenched, again appears?
We shall, they say, Have War^s, and bl^^dy (...),
New M^sters, Taxes, Toil. Ou^ Wizzards stars,
And Malt-Worme Brains inculcate like B^g-beares,
In Lukewarm Breasts effeminated Fears.
My Censure now of our late Vulgars Bruit,
Who blinded in their Own would seem acute
In Heavens Affairs, is this: that if Our God
Smite them or us, who can resist his Rod*
Some Rank of Ease-require Pblebotomy:
Some Crazed: Some Lean, like an Anoatmy:
Their Sins are great, and we excuse not Our.
Our Feasts, Rich Rob^s, Law-suites, and Humors flore
Bloodletting need, and purge of Hellebore.
But, if as often as Me^ offend, God power
The Vialls of his Wrath and Vengeance down,
Who now had lived to have his Mercies known?
Whether we dye at Sea, or on the Land
By (...), Pl^gues, or Blows from Butchers hand,
That (...)-string'd Whip, which does us here attend
For Temporal Revenge, or Trialls End,
Gods Will be done. Yet whilst his Church on Earth
Stands ^^me, I fear ^o Wars, no Pl^g^e nor D^^rt^;
For Worldly things (so Fates have weaved the Plot)
Roll, reele, and squierme like Eeles within a Pot.
HOw shall we then wear out these Worldly Broiles?
So voluble of Course, so full of Toiles?
Just as some deal^ with a cumultuous Crew
Of Leaguer'd God^s. When first the Quatre^^ grew,
And Shepherds met with mind to trounce them all,
A Swains did thus their so daine Doom recall:
What shall we do^ with these bold Animalls:
Which pill our Ple^ts, and spile our Vegetalls?
Which gathering into W^^ords ca^e not for words?
Nor with their ^aliant Tappe^ do fear our Swords.
As if they would out-bear'd, they threaten us,
That Cats enraged may turn as perilous
As greater Beasts. Some thi^de them to immure,
Lest other Beasts to Follies they i^ure.
They Custo^^ claim, and Native Li^erties,
To pill our B^^k, and brouze on Grafts of price,
But what bald Custom can their Bucks infer
(Not in their R^tring time, for then to err
Was Frenzies Fit) the Peace to violate?
With Skreames to sear our Melt^^^^ State,
When Prudent P^^ with Councehance severe
Assayed by Law the Mutineers to fear*
What shall we do with this long bearded Kind
Of Castle, which presume to read the Ri^^
And Beauty of our Woods without to^^roule?
Slighting our W^^s like a vain Blank or Serowle?
These Out-^ages are great. Yet (...)
With Pity mixed warnes our Pi^^gerency
Over Gods Crea^nes to provid^some Course,
That Beasts of Gain may thrive, no^ fare the worse.
Fire and Blood-latting are the last of Cures:
So, to be Mild hurts not, but u^secures;
And though it seems ^ while, like to a Block
Contemned of Frogs, yet lasts it like the Rock.
The Ox must not he muzzled, no^ these Goats
Deprived of Food, ^or Horses tob'd of O^tes.
What Forests are reserved for straggling Dear,
Which retribute small Profit in the Year?
We foster greedy Hounds and swilling Swine:
And shall we now less hurtful Beasts confine?
What Cares take we for Drones more then for Bees?
And yet to Kiddes grutch a few Sapling Trees?
If we hemme in their Dammes, Both dye of Dearth,
And so we lose some of the Best on Earth
For Profits Breed. They rough and hardy are
In Aires Extremes, content with simple Fare:
(A Gift which many Beasts, nay men do want,
A Gift which lessens Crimes exorb^tant.)
A little them sustaines. And yet their Does
Yield store of Milk to countervaile some Cowes.
They do bring forth two or three Kiddes a piece
Within the Year; their Milk does cordialize,
Natured like what they eat. Feed them with Spurge
Or Lettice, then their Milk does Humors purge.
The Male-Goats Blood refines the Diamond;
It breaks the Stone, and makes the Gravelled sound.
When it is bakt, or into Powder done,
And strewn on Liquid Food, it Cures the Stone
Sooner then Leeks, or Alisanders Broth,
Which seems with it compared but skummy Froth.
A Hivers Pasty tastes like Venison;
The Buffe defends from Frost as from the Sun.
I skip the Stuff wrought of Goats stately Beard,
Lest not a Goats-haires worth be what I heard;
Nor mention I Borrachoes Spanish Case,
Which Pilgrims vow with Healths to Bacc^us Grace;
Nor yet their Flesh, which Portingalls do dress
And lay with Salt for Indiaes Voyages.
So useful are these Goats that none for want
Of them in wild and Newfound Lands can plant:
Which is the Cause that Britains Colonies
Thrive not there like the Spaniards Progenies.
Now for my Vote or Cloze particulare,
Which I submit to your more Silver Hair:
It is not safe the moody to constrain;
Tread on a Worm, and it will turn again.
The Fits o're-past: we may cull out the Bad,
Divide their Troops, and Cure in time the Mad.
If we permit the Weanelings of their Flocks,
Their tender Kiddes, which cannot shift on Rocks
For stronger Food, to champ on weaker Boughs;
And their Moone-sick on Plants sometimes to brouze:
Both these will, when their Constitution grows
To abler Nerves, eat Hay in time of Snowes,
And be right glad to taste of stronger Food
As Well to our Content, as for their Good.
And let the rest live in their Craggy Soil,
In hope they will no more keep revell Coile;
Lest if we thence provoke their Wilder Whelps,
They may turn mad with Tupping and with Yelpes,
Unless in the Mid-Summers Moon we chain
Those whom we find most Crazed in the Brain.
'Twere well we could their Teeth with safety file,
And not our hands with Streams of Blood defile
If they disband, and of their Crimes repent,
And will with Grief redeem their Punishment,
Let Us suffer them to spend their windy Breath
Upon the Rocky Hills and Barren Heath,
That it may be engrossed in After-Rowles:
We left them there, where bustling Boreas cooles
The hottest Spleen, in hope that they would grow
More useful far then we do find them now.
When Riper Time shall Humors purify,
They will conform themselves, at least their Fry.
Since Foreign Coasts to Bears and Wolves submit,
I think we may less harmefull Goats admit
To their Old Haunts our Dai^es to increase,
So that henceforth their Buckes from Tupping cease.
Let us not then root out these Beasts with Beards,
Weakening our Stock (an Honor to our Herds)
Lest we give Cause of Jeering to our Foes,
Who, if our Stock decays, may work us woes.
They pill our Bark: that is it you now will says
So did our Iron-men and Tanners play:
So Others have by causeless Brawles and Fees,
And H^athnish Spoils, forced men to sell good Trees.
But here one whisperd him: Touch not that Noat,
Lest you be termed a rash-promoting Goat,
Incurring Scorn with hoobubsand outcries,
For glancing at our Modernes Robberies.
The Swain sbash'd, his Face to Crimson di'd;
And the Goats Cause lies in suspense untri^^:
Where though Great Pan an Higher skill relies,
Yet scorns he not a Rusticks poor^ Supplies,
In all Extremes on this I set my Rest.
Of Ills to ^^use the Least, of Good the Best,
And if I miss the Latter to attain,
Yet I will hope the Golden Me^ne to gain.
COncerning other Points of Faiths abuse,
As Purgatories Pain, false Idols use,
Courting of Saints, to Christ's apparent wrong,
Gods Sacred Word kept from the Vulgar Tongue,
Additions to the Mass, the Papal Keys,
And Priests debarred of Wives: Let him that waight^
The Dreams of Balaams Priests, this Passage know:
Pride made the Pope a Simon Magus grow,
And then he changed the Spirits Gifts for Gain.
For after the Decease of Charlemaine,
Who Sceptred Popes, in the ensuing Years,
They to maintain their Pomp, the Christian Meere^
Of Modesty transcended, got elbow room
To spread the Devils Husks in rampant Rome.
Which to reform, as we of late have done
In Britains Orb, by Wickliffs Cares begun
About three Ages past, so let all them,
Who hope to see the New Jerusalem,
Look back upon the first Six Centuries;
Or if that seem too tedious to revise,
Let them the next Six Ages well review,
And they shall find Romes Faith then patcht anew,
That by Degrees the Popes by Phocas first,
And by Great Charles since raised, became accursed;
And that Our Church the very same of Old,
Which was at Nice, and Chalcedon enrolled
For Orthodoxe, is Catholic and True,
Only, because new-scour'd, enstiled New.
LOhere, Dear Contrymen, in Pithy Phraze,
What some have whirled about with winding Maze,
And some, I hope, these short Analyzes,
Will relish more then long Remonstrances,
Since Substances ye like, I simply show
Where lay our Church Pure, Catholic and True,
Before we took the Name of Protestants
At Auspurg late, which Our Extravagants
By Transmarine and false exotic Glo^^e
Would soil, like Pitch, with Appellations gross
Of Hugueno^s, or Luthers Heretics;
While they usurp the Name of Catholics,
Like Hagars Brood, which Moors term Saracen;
Like Hypocrites; who pass for Godly Men.
For why should they alone be in our West
Called Catholics, when Thousands in the East,
The Abissines and Others do contend
For the like Name in Substance, Use, and End?
Why should the Parts above the Whole presume?
One Sister Church the Mothers Style assume?
The Catholic, which spreads in every Coast
With Mutual Gifts powered by the Holy Ghost?
Why should the Beams against the Sun compact?
The Branches from the Oaks Good Name detract?
Our Churches are (weigh the Comparison)
As Boughs or Beams: Christ's Spouse the Oak or Sun.
And for Our Church, more yet I could relate,
To manifest her Wane, Eclipse, and Fate
In Popish Times, but that each Novice knows
What means the Desert, where she powered her vows
During the Reign of that great Mystic Whore,
Which preached False Christ's by the red Dragons Lore.
But mauger Constance, Trent, and Lateran,
The Night is past of Skreeching Ignorance,
And we embrace the Spirits Countenance,
Which at this day shines bright in Britains I Will,
And may do long, if we shun Hate and Guile.
Not Ecchius, Moore, Poole, Fisher, Posstvine,
Not Dowayes Fry, nor Copious Bellarmine
Can match our Calvin, Zanchius, Bullinger,
Frith, Jewel, Fox, Fulkes, Raynolds, Whitaker,
Andrews, Usher, and those whose Melodies
Mount up to Christ, like a New Sacrifice,
With many more in our Great Britains Orb,
Surviving yet, and able them to curb:
Whose Praises Web more Curious if I spun,
I should then light a Candle in the Sun;
Or undertake Saint Michaels War to pen,
A Task more fit for Angels then for Men.
Yet by that Mystic Type Saints may discry
The Battles Issue, and our Victory:
For such a Palm the Fiery Crosses Sign
Has gained, as in the Days of Constantine.
But now in Embers clozing up my Fire,
I silently into my Thoughts retire,
Often looking back to Babels Mystery,
Often musing on Fair Stons Victory,
Where first Six Hundred Sixty Six I fix,
One Thousand then Six Hundred Fifty Six,
Times Pedigree from Man's Creation cast,
Till Fatal Showers for Sin the Earth defaced,
I ruminate in Mind, least suddenly
While I defer my Duty to supply,
The last great Trumpets Sound concludes the Day
To Worldlings woe, and Sinners sore Dismay.
Wars in Faiths House proclaimed, and Babylon
Discovered show great Doomes-dayes signs near gone:
From which Extremes, Lord, save our Church as well
As thou Elias did from Iezabel,
That with the Spirits stream she quench her Thirst
Until that Day, while Babel lies accursed.
As long as Sun and Moon, or Raine-bowes sign
Shall last, preserve our King like Constantine,
Assigning us from Stewarts Regal Ligne
Good Stwards still to over-see what is Thine.
Remove not hence our Churches Candlestick,
While firmly we to Thy Sons Pledges stick,
But for his Sake who paid the Costly Price
In Judgment due for our Enormities,
Whereas some led by Fiends as yet do stray,
If they Repent, reduce them to thy way,
That Ismaels Brood henceforth no Christians flout
For Lutherans, or the Wicklevian Rout,
For Huguenots, Novatians, Schismatics,
For Puritans, or Mungrell Catholics.
When these with Peter vouch Gods Living Son,
With Paul One God, One Advocate alone
Exploding School-mens Dreams, Hypocrisies,
Soules-Marchandize, and winding Fallacies,
We then shall soon for Other Points agree,
Without recourse to Edens curious Tree.
This Fruit the Church reapes by her Childrens Peace:
When they from jarres, then Foes from jeering cease.
THE PICTVRE OF THE TRVE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC CHURCH Represented in English
and Latin Numbers.
The Argument.
The Author last this Corollary knits,
To help Our Church against mad wrangling Wits:
Till the Sixth Age the Spouse of Christ (...) Pure;
So does our Church. And here is her Portraiture.
THe Spouse of Christ shone in her Prime
(...) lived near the Apostles Time.
But afterward Eclipsed of Light,
She lay Obscure from most men's Sight *
For while her Watch hugged Carnal Ease,
And loathed the Cross, she felt Disease.
Because they did Gods Rays contemn,
And Maumets served, Grace fled from them.
Then Stars fell down, Fiends blackt the Air,
And Mungrells held the Churches Chair.
But now dispelling Errors Night,
By Christ his Might, our New-mans Light,
She may compare for Faith alike
With famous Romes first Catholic,
And Paragons for Virtue bright
The Royal Scribes sweet Sulamite,
Who trained to Zeal, yet without Traps,
Her poor Young Sister wanting Paps;
Without Traditions she trained her,
Or Quillets, which make Souls to Err.
SO feeds our Church her Tender Brood
With Milk, the Strong with stronger Food.
She does contend in Grace to thrive,
Reformed, like the Primitive.
She hates the Dark, yet walks the Round,
And joys to hear the Gospels Sound.
She hates their Mind in Judgment blind,
Who swell with Merits out of kind.
In Christ alone lies all her Hope,
Not craving Help of Saint or Pope.
Poor Saints, to show her Faith by Deeds,
She fills their Souls, their Bodies feeds.
She grants no Weapons for Offense;
Save Vows and Fasting for Defense;
And yet she strikes. But with what Sword?
The Spirits Sword, Gods Lightning Word.
Indiff'rent Toys, and Childish Slips
She slights, but checks gross Sins with stripes.
Yet soon the Strayes her Favor win,
When they Repent them of the Sin.
So mild is she, still loathing Ill,
And yet most loath the Soul to kill.
SUch is the Lady, whom I serve;
Her Goodness such, whom I observe,
And for whosee Love I begged these Lays
Borne from the Spheres with Flaming Rays.
But who can paint the Dowries forth
Of this New Mary to the Worth?
O let us for her Gifts restored
Then Sacrifice to Heavens Lord
Our Hearts with Psalms, like Trumpets loud,
For sending her to curb the Proud,
And to bear down Romes Antichrist,
As she types her that brought forth Christ,
The Object of our Second Birth,
And the Prime cause of all our Mirth.
Thus is Our Church in Essence like
The Ancient True Apostolic.
GOD grant this Dame, our Britains long to sway,
Whereby they may to Christ new Vows repay;
And bless thee, Reader, with like Happiness,
To hold his pledges firm with Godliness.
CAndidore Fides lustrabat Lumine Mund^m,
(...) propi^s tetigit Saecula Prima (...)*
Lumen at Ecclipsin (...) labenti^^^ (...)
Reddidit obscuram, quae fuit (...), (...)
Nec mirum Turbans tantas senfisse (...),
Carnem plus Vigiles quam sap^ere (...);
Seria cum nugis miscentes Sacra prof^^^*
Idolis Flame^ post posuere Dei.
Stellarum Laps^s, (...) Fra^^, Nubil^^ (...),
Haec t^ia Corrupti Causa fuers Thro^i.
Sed^^d^ dispers^^ Tene^^ is No^^ De^^uit A^^^,
Spo^sa^^dit Christi, Cr^scit and Altar Home.
Crescit sponsaredux Hominis fulgore Novati,
Dum legitur Christi Pagina Sacra Choro.
Nec minus est sponsa Salomonis Nostra pudica,
Vel Grege Primaevo quem pia Roma tulit.
Uberibus vacuam Parvam Prior illa Sororem
Allexit zeli Lacte; sed absque dolo,
Absque venena^is Prudens allexit Elenchis
Gentes quae tenebris delituere diu.
Quin and Nostra Greges solet enutrire tenellos
Lacte, magis Fortes sed refovere Cibo.
Odit Nostra nigra Mentis Caligine Captos
Coetus, qui Meritis intumuere suis*
Non Carnale sapit, nec Papae Numen adorat,
Horret enim Christi commaculare Thorum.
Pectora Con^i^^is, Sanctorum Corpora victa
Pascit, ne fieret Fabula vana Fides.
Arm^ virago gerit: sed Qualia? Flaminis Arma
Enthea, nempe Dei Mystica, Metra, Preces.
Condonat facili leviuscula Crimina v^ltu,
F^eda sed Orbilii vindicat Acta Minis.
Non animam jugulat (tanta est Clementia Divae)
Sed resipiscentes Laeta reducit Oves.
Talis Imago Dei sponsae, nostraeque Magistrae,
In cujus Lauds Aetheris igne feror.
Tanta Novae fulget virtus Divina Mariae;
Sed sua quis Calamo pingere Dona potest?
Sat ^ihi pro Donis tantum si Psalmata dentur,
Dum placet Aethereo Cor Holocauma Patri,
Qui nuper sponsam naevis maculisque solutam
Transtulit, ut Fidei Roma nitore ruat,
Utque Novi Dotes Hominis Caeloque renati
Liberiore canam Pectore, voce, Tuba.
Sic and Nostra viget similis jam Sponsa Priori,
Quae visit quondam Tempora prisca Patrum.
Det Deus, ut longum regat haec Sulamitha Britannos,
Que possint alacres nova vota rependere Christ,
Concedat que purem ribi, Lector Candide, Sortem,
Ut pi^ Christigene conserves Pignora Sponse.
Another Hymn to the same Effect, as how to discern the True Catholic Church.
THe Cross, on which our Savior di'd,
For many Years lay undiscri'd
With Rubbage soiled in Calvary,
Till, to renew Christ's Memory,
The Mother of Great Constantine
Searched, found, and left it for a Sign,
That Converts then might understand,
Christ di'd for them in Jewries Land.
In the like sort the Church of Christ,
Lay long Eclipsed through Carnal Mist,
Resembling Gold obscured with dross,
As was with Earth that Wooden Cross.
And though some wished to find her out,
They could not bring their wish about,
(So strong of Might, so full of slight
Was Babels Whore to bleare their Sight)
Until Gods Word performed the Deed
With Martyrs Blood, the Churches Seed;
Till Wickl^^^e first, and Luther next
Stepped up, her Babes stood sore perplexed.
NOw (O look up) this Gracious Queen
On Sions Hill is to be seen,
With her New man, Gods hopeful Son,
Rays darting like the Glorious Sun.
But they, who would descry her right,
Must her descry with Inward Sight,
Not like the Old Brasse-Serpent, which
Idolaters did erst bewich,
But like the Cross, which Saints took up
Ere Some to that since found did stoup.
Thus stands the Church seen and unseen,
Unseen of Sots, of Saints well seen.
These by Gods Word her Presence weigh,
Those by false Dreams and Worldly Sway.
Now, Brother, mark, which of these Crew
Of Christ his Church are Children true?
The One kneel to the New man's Rock,
The Other to an Outward Stock,
Like Manichees, which they do paint
For Angellick, or Guardian Saint.
There, they meet men, who live by Lurch,
But never Saints of the True Church.
THE CONCLUSION TO THE READERS.
The Argument.
The Author here from the New-man derives
The Churches Web, condemns the Dronish Hives,
Blames Labans Saints, and false Poetic Dreams,
Which he reformes, and so concludes his Theames.
I Blunder forth no Quirkes, nor Captious Theames,
No trivial Toys, nor fond Lascivious Dreams.
While Carnal Wits were pleased to weave such Tales,
Of late I found the New-mans Worms in Wales,
Whose Entrails spun in my retired Home
For me some Silk, which suits with Englands Loome,
Without engagement to a (...) shore,
For (...), Romes, or the Hesp^rian (...).
And now my Silk-wormes store Domestic spun
I have divulged before the Fates have run
Their Period out for my poor (...) of Life,
Before strong Passions wave my Thoughts with strife,
My Senses with more Grief, or what might ^et
The s^rious Task which Christ on me had set.
Though Hydr^es hissed, and (...) brayed,
Yet could not all their Coile (...) the (...),
Nor daunt my Freeborn Muse from setting forth
To public view some useful w^res of worth;
Nor could Romes Canons Noise ^oa^'d out from Trent
Deter my Zeal, nor sear my fair intent;
Where they have doomed the Books of Protestants,
The New-mans Fruit, for wild Extrav^g^^ts.
Such ^^^ick Goblin Fears I leave to them,
Who slighting Truth the Spirits Rays contemn.
Not tempting Wine, nor Feasts delition; Bait
Could make me sound a Cowards base retrait;
Nor could the Storms of our late Adverse Times
Disturb, or shake my Form of Sacred Rimes,
Where I have limm'd in a two-folded Frame
Our Saviors Life, and his True Churches Flame,
Whereof the Latter here I first produce
To usher that of the Divinest Use.
No pampered Sloth, nor Households netled Care,
Nor Natures Nets could my Resolves ensnare
To hide from you her Tents, and War-fares Ways
From Christ's Ascent until our present Days,
But that I would to yield you some Content,
Strew her good Tents with Leaves of Rosy scent,
And to recure the Saulish Moone-sick Brain,
I would enchant the Sense with Musuks Strain.
I lock not up my Use of Labored Hours,
Nor poast it over unto Executours,
Like Miser-Churles, who worldly Goods conceal,
And wrong thereby the Christian Commonweal,
Who at their death the same most madly leave
To such as may their hoped Trust deceave.
The Author dead: who cares to mend his Books?
No Step-Dame well to Orphans Breeding looks.
No Nurse respects a tender Suckling Wight
Like Her, who claims the Native proper Right,
As Iudaes wisest King long since descri'd,
When he gave Doom on the True Mothers Side.
Unhappy are those Scribes, who catch no Souls
For Christ, if so they may, by Holy Scroules;
And much too blame are those of Carnal Brood,
Who loath to taste of Intellectual Food,
Yet surfeit on Old Tales of Robin Hood,
Of Friars Cowles, or of Saint Benets Hood,
Of Patricks Broiles, or of Saint Georges Lance,
Of Errant Knights, or of the Fairy Dance.
But Ye, who are borne of Immortal Seed,
Scorn your Best Part with Honey'd-Gall to feed.
Fly, Readers, fly, and shun such Baits as these,
Which though they for a time the Senses please,
At last they breed a Soule-sick ravery,
Which will from Truth distaste your Memory.
Fly from such Cates, which shining Sins suggest,
And from their Sauce, though by a Prophet dressed,
Like that, which on the may the Man of God
From Bethel took, although by him for bod.
Read virtuous Books, which Manners rectify,
And may help up the Soul to edify;
For even as the Spirits clear and fresh
Excel in worth the massy Pulpe of Flesh:
Much more essential Joy and true Delight,
We must conceive, spring from the New-mans Light,
Where we by Grace may hap to be like Paul
In Spirit rapt above this Earthly Ball,
To Paradise, or the Third Fleaven, where
He learned more Nemes then he away could bear.
O do not then the Spirits Gifts suppress,
Since they bear up the Soul, beat down the Flesh.
THey mount the Soul those the Chris^dlli^^
And Starry Orbs to view with Sight Div^^^
Those Mysteries, for which the Greatest G^^^k;
Unless (...) imes he stoupts, gropes in the (...),
And never shall attain to that brare Pi^ch,
Because his wings are soiled with clammy Pitch,
Or borrowed of the Peacocks ^ately Train,
Which either lead him to Despai^e and P^^^e,
Or to Presumptuous s^^^e, (...) L^^^^ers,
And then, as Lamps, false Mereours he preferres
Before the Light of Gods Etarnal Word.
And the Souls Bauquet, at his Sa^ed (...).
Then, Humane shrines, and Monks Mythology
He more be^^ints then true Theology.
For as the Greeks Plurality of Gods
Devised, whom they confessed to live at ods
Among themselves: so Superstition since
Cr^pt in ^^^ng the (...), (...) at a (...),
To further Hells (...) like to fall,
When Romes Great Empire won'd, if (...) shall
Had not been (...) with Fait^^ Resterati^^
By Satans-Craft, to (...) the (...)
With Calendars of Canonized Saints,
To whom they framed instead of Christ Complaints,
As in Old time those Poets did approve
The Lesser Gods, as Advocates to Jove.
And by the like Distinctions in the Schools
Would them Create Subordinated Fools,
Or Courtiers of the Olympian Majesty
To intercede, or ay^ Mortality.
To which they kneeled in various Idol-shapes,
Like Babels Head of Gold, Calves, Cats, or Apes.
SO Babels babbling Dawes Saints Help exact:
Saint Margaret Lucin^^^ Part must Act,
Saint Anthony relieves them of the Po^
With Relics Charms fetched from Old ^^la^ms Box.
For the Twin-Brother Gods they consecrate
Saint Nic^^^^s at Sea their Advocate*
Saint Eu^^ace must uphold the Forest Game,
For which Old Pagans used Dian^es Name.
With a huge Club Saint Christopher they please,
As with the like those painted Hercules.
Yea, every Soil possessed Teutelares,
Small Gods, to ease them of their heavy Cares.
Iun o holp Carthage, Mars Rome, Pallas Greece,
Ceres blessed Corn, Pan sheep, Pomona Trees.
So Denis France, George England, Iago Spain,
And the like Saints to guard their Coast they faigne,
The Scottish Folks were of Saint Andrews ward,
Ireland of Patricks, Wales of David's Guard.
Unto Saint Mark the Rich Venetian bends,
And he that Venice wrongs with Mark contends.
But above all Saint Peter bears the Bell:
He Rome protects, and Rome must all excel.
Num^es Aegeria Peter has suppressed,
With Romul^^ Saint Peter does contest.
Nay, Peter's Keys the Eagle bruiz'd, out mist
Ian^^ his Peaceful Do ores to shut for Christ.
BUt we, which are of Gods Spirit borne
Lament to see Christ's seamelesse Raiment torn,
Or parted from the Fashion Primitive,
But join, like Saints, in Sacred Love to thrive.
We fly vai^e Dreams, which often enchant the Sense
From worshipping the God-heads Excellence.
We slight the Tales of Poets rank Vaga^ies,
As Vows to Saints with needless Ave-Maties.
While Others steal to Paths unknown, or ^^ay
To Stranger Coasts, we go the surest way
For fear of Wolves, or what may else ^^tide
A man that loses Christ, his Chiefest Guide.
While some in Tongue unknown, like (...), ^h^^,
And ask of God by ^oat they know nor what:
Our Churches, Ba^^s do pray in Christ his Name
For what they want, (...) He does grant the same
For his dear sake, who pleades for Humane Race,
While they with understanding crave his Grace;
And having gained their Suit they sing his Praise
With cheerful hearts, new Tongues, and thankful Lays:
Not grounding Faith on Saints Pluralities,
On Angels, Pow'res, or Principalities.
AS for the Garbes of Poets Antic Fables,
They are but vain, though Moralized Bables,
Vain like themselves, who pip'd for Hire, or Fame,
While Saints of Zeal set out their (...) Name.
So David rap^ with Bliffe composed his Lays:
But Horace broacht for need M^cen^^s Praise.
So Jeremy Ierusalems Annoy
Bewailed of Zeal; when Homer begged for Tr^y.
Our Strains therefore sprung from Celestial Light
Shall Scur^ile Songs scourge hence, like works of night;
Our Truth shall soil their Dreams; our (...)
Their Ap^s, our Faith their Heat^^ish Consciences.
And in their stead, to help Devotions Heat,
Our New man here cooks various sorts of Mea^,
With Music apt thy Spirits to refresh,
If thou suppress the Motions of the Flesh.
Our Adam first shall hurl Prometheus down;
Then, Noes Flood shall their Deucalions drown,
With Titans Brood, whom they for Giants hatch;
And Babels Tower will Pelions Mount o're-match.
By Hemors Son our gadding Dinaes Rape
Does unto Sires a fair Example shape
What foul Effects by Cock'ring Love ensue,
Since Indulgence both Parties then did rue;
More true then Helens Rape, by Theseus first,
And last by Paris of old Trojans cursed.
Our Moses shall convince their faign'd mistakes,
As did his Rod the Egyptians charmed Snakes.
For Niobe into a Stone estranged,
We sounds Lots Wife to a Salt-Pillar changed.
For Jove's descent to be Philemons Guest,
Our Abram for Three Angels made a Feast;
And for the Formers Gift from Jupiter,
Our Solomon did Wisdoms choice prefer.
Our Sampson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass,
Does Hercules and his Twelve Labors pass.
Our Iepthes vow for his Maid-Child too grim,
Does the Grek Prince his Iphigenia dim.
Our zealous David's Sling does far exceed
Their Persem Shield, and Ariadnes Thread.
If Hylas they and Hercules object:
Or Theseus and Pirithous Loves select;
Our David loved his Jonathan more dear,
As may yet by his Epitaph appear.
If they fetch Rites from Babel, Rome, or Creet:
Gods Laws from Sinai we and Salem greet.
If Midas they with Asses Ears bewray:
We Humane Speech in Balaams Ass display.
If they gaze on the Coach of Phoebus Son,
We Iosuah sing Commander of the Sun;
Ot else we can the Suns Degrees produce,
Backward to go for Hezechi^es use.
But while they lift the Creatures Excellence,
We glory bring to our Creator thence.
Thence we derive a Subject to commend
Gods Friendship shown ^o Man as to his Friend.
If they ^^ne Odes in Aes^^lapius praise,
Because from Death He These^s Son did raise:
From Holy Writ we many can transfer,
Who really to Life restored were.
If they insist on Delphick Ora^les;
True Prophesi^s confirmed with Miracles
We can from Gods choice Servants more rehearse,
Then may be coucht, or s^ng in stinted Verse.
And if they chaunt Loves Rapes by Carnal Jave:
We Canticles sing of Divinest Love:
And with our Vows prevent Asmode^s Craft,
Mauger Loves Golden Wings and Poisned Shaft.
Let Halcion grieve for C^ix her Husbands death,
Till fabled for a Bird Sobs stop her Breath:
We for slain Bethlems Babes count Rachels Tears.
Or the sad Badge we sing, which Salem wears?
Or else our Churches Threnes for her late Loss
Of Christian Blood spilt causeless at the Cross.
Whilst that they bath in Aganippes Spring,
Of Jordan we and of Bethesda sing.
And while they climb Parnassus forked Hill,
On Sions Mount we show our sacred skill.
Instead of Pagan Baits with Calvary,
And Olives Fruit we sauce our Poetry
According to Christ's Gifts infused new,
We leave those Dregs, which the Old man did brew.
As Oracles ceased after Christ his Death
Among the Gentiles by the Apostles Breath:
So fail those Lees, which Satan since did brew,
By our Religion, of some termed New.
So that for their false Metamorphosis
Of men to Earthly Forms, our Purpose is,
Souls to convert into Immortal shapes
By our New man, that foiles their Apes and Rapes.
And for that Dame Ephesian Idolized,
We Christ his Mother-Maid Evangeli^'d
Do bl^sse and praise, but worship not of lat^
As Goddess, least from God we derogate.
For Hermes, Pall^s, or Ap^llo^^ Lore,
We crave the Holy Ghost to bless our store,
For Tantalus in Hell, or lxions Wheel,
We Dives Preach their racking aine to feel.
Souls Judges they served Minos, R^adamant,
And Aeacus: But Christ our Judge we chant,
Christ we look for to Doom both Dead and Quick,
The Dead in Faith and the Church Catholic:
Mean while his Spirit reigns in every Place,
Yet craves as Man for men his Fathers Grace.
With this Prime Saint we satisfy our selves,
And for him scorn all Shrines, and Labans Elves;
Whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
One God in Three, we found through Britains Coast,
As we were bound at our New Second Birth,
Gods Angels all applanding us with Mirth.
NOw, Eyes, pack hence, whether Elizian Greece,
The Hesperides ye faig^e, or Colches Flecce:
Whether ye gull weak Souls, or them control
With Benets Hood, or the Franciscans Cowle;
Whether ye ^low spring Pooles Poeticull,
From Tophets Lake, or Streams Papisticall;
And Farewell Dreams, whether from Ch^llers stea^^,
From Dragons Gull ye ^low, or Blood and Fleame.
And in their stead, come Truth, thy Name we bla^e,
For thy Bright Lamp does Men and Fiends ama^e.
Thou art the Life of a True Prophets Song,
And they who slight thy Sound, Gods Spirit wrong.
Then come, O Blessed Truth, Correct our Ods,
As thou long since have quail'd the Pagans Gods;
And suffer not the Dragons Sorteries
To be commixt with Christian Mysteries,
Nor Legends of vain Men to prejudice
The Gospels Light, or Our New Sacrifice.
On thee I built the Churches History;
By thee I found, that Babels Mystery
Eclipsed the Church from the seventh Century,
Till Wickliffe did into Romes Whoredoms pry,
And by his Pen that Subject more dilate,
Which Thousands now as copiously relate,
Which I among the rest, as they began,
Have warbled forth to daunt the Outward man,
Who by Nicknames does tax Our Church for New,
And to her Spouse outface to be untrue.
Now to wind up my Task, I add this Ode,
In hope no Saint will my intent explode:
Lest I the Doom of Wrath encurre,
Which Slugges does for bad Stewards blurre,
I look about with watchful Cares
To see who wants some Holy Wares.
My Talents use I freely give
To cloth some Souls, whilst yet I live.
Divide the Web, Friends, as ye please;
The Wear is light producing Ease.
The Hew not ga^dy, nor yet base,
But like White Robes, which Temples grace.
From Our New man I fetched the Stuff,
Let none then take the Gift in Snuff,
Or tax the Matter for the Form,
Since what I could I did perform,
They came from Love, the Spirits Dove,
Let that suffice Good Minds to move.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes.
December. 20. 1639.

