AN ANSWER OR ADMONITION to those of the Church of Rome, touching the Iubile,
proclaimed by the Bull, made and set forth by Pope Clement the eight, for the
year of our Lord. 1600.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by E. Allde for John Wolf.

An advertisement, or admonition to those of the Church of Rome, touching the
Iubile, proclaimed by the Bull, made and set forth by Pope Clement the eight,
for the year of our Lord. 1600.
YOu of the Church of Rome, that bear the name of Christians, and vaunt your
selves to be Catholic members, of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, adding
thereunto the name of Roman; Now it is time that you awake from the profound
sleep, wherein long time you have continued, and open your eyes in a manner
blinded with the obscurity of errors, where with you have continually bin
nourished and fed by the traditions of worldly men, under the beautiful tytles
which by usurpation they attribute unto themselves: for if ever you had matter
or occasion to acknowledge, that the son of perdition (of whom Saint Paul
speaks in the 2. to the These. 2.) is revealed, and that he sits in the
Temple of God, making himself God, and usurping the power and authority that
appertains only unto God: yea and lifting up himself above that which is
called God, in that he takes upon him to controwle the ordinances and decrees
of God; certainly it is now or else never. And again if you will look
narrowly into, and examine the contents of the Bull (rightly to be termed a
bubble or bottle of water) touching the Iubile, you shall most manifestly
perceive it. God grant you the grace, that in truth this year may be unto you,
the agreeable and peaceable year of your salvation and remission of your
sins in one only Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1. Act. 4.
our wisdom, Justice, Sanctification, and redemption, who is only given us
by the Father, to this effect.

Pope Clement the eight, following the good and commendable custom of his
Predecessors, as he says, thereby the better to strengthen and increase the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and more and more to bring in subjection, the
consciences of men under his tyranny, has pronounced the Iubile for the year
of our Lord 1600. adorning and enriching the same with most beautiful tytles,
the better to cause his Merchandise to be esteemed. But as being placed in this
seat, he is the eldest Son of Satan, and that he has rather succeeded
Simon Magus; then Simon Peter, in this pretended authority: therefore he
begins his goodly Bull, with a most manifest and open lie. And to speak
truth, he could not otherwise maintain his trumpery, and abominable errors.

He says that the Iubile ought to be celebrated (according to the custom)
within the City of Rome, because it is found to be so by the ancient
traditions, etc. But he cannot show that this custom has bin ordained and
appointed by Jesus Christ, our great Doctor and only Master; Neither yet, that
it was ever practiced, nor put in use by the Apostles. For as the ancient
Doctor S. Tertullian says: Jesus Christ says not I am the custom, Against
Hermogenes.
but I am the truth. And Saint Ciprian, conformable thereunto: custom without
the truth, is the antiquity of error. And if we must only hear Jesus Christ,
we must not stay, nor lay hold upon that which any one before us, shall have
esteemed lawful to be done: but upon that which Christ, who is before all men,
has first done: for we must not follow the customs of men, but the truth of
God.

And althought Clement the eight says, that this institution has not
proceeded from a vain superstition, but of a pure and religious worshipping:
Yet can it not be true, but clean contrary, for that all whatsoever is done
without faith is sin; and faith is not grounded upon the institution and
traditions of men, but only upon the pure word of God. So yt then it
appears, that the superstition grounded upon insatiable avarice, and
immoderate ambition of such as have attained unto this Seat, have forged this
Iubile, after the manner of the secular year of the Romans: That is, of a
certain Feast and plays, which was celebrated every hundred years within the
City of Rome, among the Pagans: as in like manner Candlemas day has been
established by them, in place of the Feast which the Pagans used to celebrate
upon the same day, and with the like ceremonies of Candles and Lights, in the
honor of their Goddess Proserpin. Mark then how these good Prelates and
heads of the Church have transfigured the feasts of the Pagans into their
Papistical Feasts, only changing the names.

But let us see the antiquity of the institution of this Bull: Platine upon
Boniface 8. Naucler.
we find by writing, that in Anno 1300. Pope Boniface the eight caused the
first Iubile to be published, to the same end aforesaid, as he said
according to the institution mentioned in the old Testament: Genesis 44.
and commanded it to be celebrated, every hundred years. Behold the
original of the Iubile, edified upon a good foundation: behold a good
successor of the Apostles, that taught us a full deliverance and discharge from
the yoke of the ceremonies of the Law! and this Pope will enclose, and hold
us in a much more straiter servitude. The Jewish Iubile ordained by the
express commandment of God, was indifferently observed throughout all Judea,
Leuit. 25.
not any man for that cause being bound to go unto Jerusalem. And this Pope
incloseth it within his City of Rome: but of that we will speak more
hereafter. There are then but three hundred years fully accomplished, since
that this invention has been established, and so by consequence, it was not at
any time used within the precedent 1300. years: Behold the great antiquity,
wherewith these Holy Fathers seem to fight against us, and by the means
thereof abuse so many poor people.

But what is this Boniface of happy memory, of whom Clement the eight is
successor? If we may believe certain Historiographers (as in truth his entrye
into the Papacy, all the course of his life, and his death manifestly declare)
he was one that entered like a fox, reigned like a lyo^ and dyed like a dog.
Is he not then a Pope of happy memory? Notwithstanding, it is no marvel
though Clement says so: for that the memory of the most part of the rest of
the Popes is not much better, and diverse of them much more abominable. The
Historians aforesaid, speaking of the wicked act he had played with this Pope
Clement his predecessor (which was, that after he had persuaded him (like a
crafty fox) to leave the Papacy, when this poor Celestine went again unto
his Hermitage: he like a furious lion, caused him to be cast in prison, where
with grief he dyed.) Add further, that this man appeared to be a personage
full of great ingratitude and deceit: in this, that being provoked by ambition,
he so deceived that holy man, having persuaded him to leave this dignity,
having taken and put him into the tower of Fumon, constrained him to dye
therein before his time; And we must not omit by silence, that which Nauclerus
says, which is, that in Anno 1295. the seat being vacant, as the Florentine
historye declares, Cardinal Benet was in great care for the Papacy, not
staying till he was called thereunto, Note.
like Aaron: whereupon it happened that one night he went (not with any great
train) to the Palace of King Charles, promising him all aid that the Church
could give, if by his means he might be made Pope: whereupon, the King
persuaded by this hope, found the means that the Cardinals his friends,
elected him Pope. Behold the holy man, of whom Clement the eight is successor?
so the supposts and vpholders of the Papacy have a most firm argument to
maintain and defend their vocation, which is the succession of such men.

To make an end of this matter, I will add that which Platina sets down of
the government and end of this Boniface (or rather Maliface:) this man says
he, dyed when (that is like a dog) he sought to procure terror and fear
among Emperors, Kings, Princes, nations and people rather then to plant true
Religion: that used all means he could to give and take away kingdoms: to
banish and after that to recall men again, when it pleased him, being without
all measure puffed up with the great treasure, by him gotten from all places.

Let us now return unto our Iubile, which the Pope commands at the end of
100. years, although (says he) some others have restrained it unto a shorter
number of years: as Clement the sixth, that caused it to be celebrated 50.
years after, but he did it the easilyer to fill his Coffers. And it is to be
noted, that this said Pope, the better to make himself to be known to be
Antichrist, in the Bull by him sent forth for the same effect, commanded the
Angels to draw out of Purgatory the souls of all those that dyed in the way to
Rome. But how can Clement the eight prove, that this custom, at the end of
every 100. years, to celebrate this holy Iubile is Divine, and that rather in
the City of Rome, then else where? What virtue has this number of 100. more
then any other? What charity is there so long a time to defer, so great a
benefit as this Iubile brings? Clement the sixth had more reason in
appearance, in abreuiating the time from 50. to 50. years, according to that
of the Jews. The number of 7. multiplied in it self, inclusiuely
comprehending 49 signifiyng, perfection in ye holy Scriptures: But yet
nevertheless the use of that Iubile of the Jews, did wholly cease at the
coming of Jesus Christ: and we find not that any other has been established
for the Christians, in a certain number of years. As we read that Baptism
succeeded Circumeision, and the holy Sacrament, the Paschal Lamb. And as this
holy Father can not prove that, but only because it is his pleasure, and that
his will ought be holden for a decree of the Celestial Court: So can he much
less prove, that such a thing ought to be done in Rome, by him called the
Fortress and house of christian religion. As many words as in that place he
sets down, are so many blasphemies: that the town most given over unto all
the villainies that ever were; which also by S. Ierom in his time, In the pref:
upon Didimus
is called the seat of the whore apparelled in purple vestures: the City
wherein al things are permitted, where virtue is banished: the town wherein all
sacred things, yea God himself (if it were possible) are to be sold. But what
speak I of sacred things? All things profane, defiled, and unclean, are to
be bought by him that offers most money. The City wherein the Cardinals, (by
the Pope termed his reverend brethren,) lead a life more then Sardanapalike,
for that they are not ashamed to walk with their Concubines throughout the
City, in the open view and sight of all the people. Sodomy is therein
tolerable, approved and maintained: that such a town (I say) ought to be
called the Fortress and house of religion? but according to the saying of
Petrarke, the house of dolor, the School of error, and the temple of
herresie. But to what end is this Iubile ordained? to reiterate and renew
(says Clement the eight) the memory of so great a benefit: that is, that Jesus
Christ the Son of Justice, he that brought salvation to all the world, is borne
of the Virgin Mary, etc. Now you shall see how this is done: if we ought to
refer it to any certain place of celebration, it were fitter to be done in
Bethlehem, where Jesus Christ (according to the flesh) was borne, then in Rome:
but we have not any commandment, neither for this place, nor for any other.
But, as express commandment was given unto the Apostles to Preach the Gospel
throughout all the world: so is it, that throughout all the world, we must
celebrate the memory of the Son of God, without distinction of this, or that
place. The Lord is with those that are assembled in his name, and according to
his will. The holy Sacrament was ordained by him, to the end that we should
celebrate it in memory of him; not only because that he was borne, but also,
that he suffered death and passion, for the remission of our sins, and rose
again for our justification. And we must not attend a 100. 50. or 25. years,
but we must do it as often as we may and not at Rome, from whence the Gospel,
yea and Jesus Christ himself is banished: but in all places, where the
Doctrine of the Gospel is purely Preached, and the holy Sacraments
administered, according to the ordinance of our Sovereign Pastor and Master,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Pope calls himself, the successor of the Apostles: where do we find
that the Apostles did establish any certain seat, whereunto they have
enjoined us to resort, as to the stone of faith? But to the contrary, they
themselves went and Preached throughout all the world: they themselves went to
seek the sheep, and stayed not till the sheep came to find them. S. Peter
himself preached unto the Jews, and S. Paul unto the Gentiles. Now that S.
Peter erected his seat in Rome, there is no appearance thereof: the book of
the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles of S. Paul, both that which he
wrote unto the Romans, and that which he sent out of prison in Rome, do
sufficiently overthrow and disprooue all these impostures, that would affirm
the contrary: for in any of them, there is not any mention made of S. Peter.
And as touching that which the Munke Onuphrius says, that S. Peter did first
erect his seat in Rome, for the space of nine years, and that he was driven
away among other Jews, by the Emperor Claudius; whereby it fell out that he
was present in Jerusalem, at the assembly of the Apostles recited by Saint Luke
Act. 15. which is but a mere jest, and a notable lie, Act. 15.16.17.
devised in his Monkish cap: For he can by no means show, nor by any approved
Author verify it: besides that, that Saint Luke alleges touching this
matter, proves him a liar. Where he says, that S. Paul having stayed for a
time in Antiochia, after his return from Jerusalem, went to visit the
Churches, where he and Barnabas had Preached: and having past by Siria and
Cilicia, came to Iconia; and from thence went for Phrigia and Galatia, and then
to Macedonia, where he stayed long time, Preaching in many places thereof; at
the last he came to Athens, and from thence to Corinthus, where he met with
Aquilla and Priscila, who not long before, or lately came thither out of Italy,
because Claudius had commanded the Jews to depart out of Rome. Now this word
(lately) shows that Onuphrius deceives himself, or else would deceive other
men, affirming that S. Peter was driven out of Rome, by Claudius: For S. Paul
having stayed (from the time of the Sinode at Jerusalem) in Antiohia, could not
have made so long a voyage. Preaching the Gospel almost in every place, where
he past, in so short a time. And touching the rest, if it were so that S. Peter
had been at Rome, does it follow that he was the head of the Church? There is
but one only Jesus Christ, who is also the true stone of the Faith, whereupon
the Church of God is erected, and not Saint Peter. Which has been so often
proved by the Authorities and witnesses of the most ancient Doctors, that it
would be but mere labor lost, to reiterate it: only I will allege one
witness taken out of their own Authors, which by consequent they cannot
reprove. Petra dedit Petro: Petrus diadema Rodulpho. The stone (that is
Christ) gave the Diadem to Peter, and Peter gave it to Redulphus. Now although
this is false, as it shall hereafter be proved: so is it notwithstanding that
God by a just judgment, and admirable wisdom, has drawn from this lie (that
the stone gave Peter the Diadem) this true confession, that Christ is the
stone: as also the gloss; Et Super hanc Petram, in the distinction 19. C. ita
Dominus, says: I believe that the Lord by this indiction, has declared no
other thing, then only the words which S. Peter answered unto the Lord, when he
said; thou art the Christ the Son of the living God. For the Church is erected
upon this article of the faith. Then God has built his Church upon himself.
Also behold what is added in the margent. Where he says, upon this stone etc.
That is, the same which thou have confessed: that is to say, my self: for the
stone was Christ: De consecrat: did. 2. C^re vera: Upon which foundation Peter
was edified. It is then by a false title, that the Pope says, that he sits
in S. Peter's chair: that he is the Father of those that call themselves
Catholics, and sovereign Pastor of the sheep. For, without making any long
discourse touching the disloyalties, disorders, covetousness, ambition,
intolerable tyranny, and pride more then diabolical, where with the most part
of those that have mounted up into this abominable seat, have bin adorned and
enriched, or rather spotted and defiled, seeing the hystories of their lives
are filled therewith. What duty of a Father, or Pastor, (I beseech you) do
they show? Is it in setting Jesus Christ, and al his benefits to sale? Is it in
sucking the substance of Kingdoms, by their pardons and indulgences? And
further, by means of the Annates and such like diabolical inventions, and all
to draw money into their purses? Have we any one example of the Apostles, which
in any thing does resemble these things? Sueto in Tiberio.
The Emperor Tiberius although an Infidel and a tyrant, did nevertheless say,
that it is the ducty of a good Pastor, to sheare the sheep, but not to flea
them. If we look into the trafique, and policies of the City of Rome, we
shall find it to be but a right fleaing, how much wors I omit. That which this
holy father adds, is no truer then the rest that went before: for how is it
possible for says to shine, where it is not? Will you say, that there is the
faith, where man's traditions and inventions, are preferred before the express
commandments of God? This only example shall suffice; God often times says,
and that in most plain and cuident words. Thou shall not make any Image, nor
the likeness thereof, neither shall thou worship them: The Pope says, thou
shall erect Images, and the likeness of God and of his Saints and shall
worship them with the same worship, that belongs unto the things which they
represent. Can there be any faith there, where the simple people are taught to
have recourse unto creatures, to inuoke and call upon them, and to make vows
and services to them, that belong to God alone? Likewise, can there be faith
where men teach that we must doubt the promises of God; there where the
sovereign Bishop with his supporters, openly, boldly, and shamelesly
maintain, that the holy Scriptures, although divinely inspired, and profitable
Doctrine, to reprehend, correct, and reprove, that the man of God may be
perfect, and instructed in all good works: are nevertheless imperfect, and
uncertain, and that we must have recourse unto traditions, which they term
the unwritten word?

Where he says that this truth has never bin changed, by any course of times.
That shall be found to be most untrue, by such as will but confer the Doctrine
which the holy Prophets and Apostles have left us in writing, with their
inventions and traditions; for that the one resembles the other, as much as
light and darkness, and truth and untruth. But behold a most sufficient
witness of the union, that the celebration of this Iubile, where the name of God
is outragiously blasphemed, the blood of the Son of God, villanously abused
and trodden under foot, and his death and passion, exposed for a mockery and
pastime. This notwithstanding, this holy Father, the better to cover his
subtilty and malice, full of deceit, will ground his Iubile, upon that which
is Prophesied of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Esaias 61. As our Lord himself
expounds it in Luke 4. But behold, unadvisedly not thinking thereof, he
discovers his deceipts, and impostures, being clean contrary to that he
says he will do, following our Savior Christ. It is said in Luke 4. that
Jesus Christ according to his manner, being entered into the Sinagogue of
Nazareth, upon a Saboath day, stood up to read, and that the book of the
Prophet Esaias was laid before him, and having opened it, he turned to the
parcel of Scripture, where it is witten, the Spirit of God is upon me, because
he has anointed me. He has sent me to the end, that I might Preach unto the
poor, that I might heal those that are contrite of heart: that I should
annownce deliverance unto captives, and sight unto the blind, and set at
liberty those that are bruised and broken in pieces, etc. But how did Jesus
Christ do this? did he command the Jews to whom he Preached, to come and
find him in a certain place, there to cause them to visit certain Temples,
and Churches, and for the space of thus many or so many days, with other such
like follies as they must do at Rome? Was it not rather in Preaching
repentance, and amendment of life, and free remission of sins, unto all that
are true repentant, by the faith which they ought to have in Jesus Christ,
without sending them hither and thither, with Tapers, gold and silver? And did
it not only in Nazareth, Mar. 1.
but throughout all Judea, and in Jerusalem it self, as you may read in the
Evangelists, especially in Saint John. Math. 25. Act. 1.
The like he commands his Apostles, when he says: go and Preach the Gospel
throughout all the world. Also you shall be witnesses unto me, in Jerusalem,
and through all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the world. In doing this,
did he ordain the celebration of the true spiritual Iubile, to be in one
certain place, and to be celebrated at the end of every 100. of 50. years?
This solemn Feast ought it not to be celebrated every day: as Saint Paul also
exhorts us, touching the spiritual celebration of the true Paschall Lamb,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? 1. Cor. 5. The Apostles and among others,
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, did they use by their Bulls, to proclaim this year
of Iubile? Did they not Preach it openly themselves, going personally from
town to town, and vilage to vilage, to announce and declare remission of
sins, by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, to all believers? as also
conversion and amendment of life? They also sent Epistles to the Churches, but
not to cause the faithful to come to the places where they were resident,
there to kiss their Pantables, and to receive a sign of the Cross, as they
call it: Neither yet attribute unto them selves, such a tyrannical power over
the Kings, Princes and people of the earth, as the Popes do. The Son of God,
neither yet his Apostles, did not appoint a certain time, place nor days, to
persuade the faithful to repentance. Every day and every year, ought to be
the year of Iubile, to all the faithful.

It is therefore a plain mockery to publish this goodly Iubile. The Pope says
that he Preaches, as being the Ambassador of Jesus Christ, unto all the world:
But who gave him that charge? a certain number of Cardinals. And from whom have
they this authority? Act. 1. and 6. and 14.
Is it from Christ? No, for it was not so from the beginning, when S. Mathias
should be chosen, and others likewise that were called to any Ecclesiastical
charge. But it is the Pope himself that has advanced them to this high
dignity, to establish and fortify his realm of Abbadon. Had the Apostles this
proud manner, when they went into any country, to send for Kings, Princes, and
people, to come to kiss their Pantable? Did they cause themselves to be borne
upon men's shoulders, as this goodly Ambassador does? Cornelius the Centinier
did he go to S. Peter? But according to the instruction of the Angel, did not
he send to fetch him? and did he not say unto him that he had well done that he
came? It is true, he would have worshipped him, but he was sharply admonished
to the contrary. So much there wanted, that S. Peter would have made him to
kiss his pantable. It is therefore necessary for the Pope, for the well
exercising of his office of Ambassador, to go as the Apostles did, preaching ye
gospel through out all the world: and not to content himself with sending a
piece of paper, to cause so many people to come to Rome, to obtain pardons. In
truth it is a good exhortation that he gieth unto al men, to convert and turn
unto God. For so the doctrine of the gospel teaches us. But to speak with the
authority of sovereign Pastor; it is the part of Antichrist, as also to
assign a certain place, and certain days to do penance, and obtain pardon.

These are things that may not be prolonged, neither yet posted over til the
next day, as David says, Psalm. 95. Psa. 95.
To day, when you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. The grace of God is
not at this day tied to a certain place, but is spread thorowout all the
world, to all the faithful, which give certain testimony of their faith, by a
true repentance and amendment of life. As touching that which this holy Father
says, that if it were need he would shed his blood, for those that are strayed
out of the way: I leave that to the secret judgment of God, seeing that there
is not any likelihood or appearance, that those who so long and many years,
have bathed themselves in the blood of so great numbers of peoples and nations,
especially such as have sought their salvation in the blood of Jesus Christ,
would shed their own blood. But the Son of God, at the day of his judgment,
so much desired by his elect, and so fearful to the wicked, will judge them.
But if Pope Clement had never so little fear of this judgment, which he
calls fearful: if he would believe that there is a God judge of all the
world, would he not tremble in his heart? Would not his hayres stare and stand
upright upon his head, and all his body become pale and wan, when he dares in
such sort power out so many blasphemies, all at one time? First when he
speaks of the Iubile, that was celebrated in Rome a hundredth years past,
under Pope Alexander the sixth: will you know who that Pope was; read the
Histories of such as have written his life. Guichardine says, his Pontificats,
being gotten by villainous means, was peradventure maintained by more villainous
means, then ever were heard off. And some there were that believed (for there
is nothing so wicked and unjust, which was not thought to be in him) that
Baiazeth having intelligence that the King of France, came into Italy,
corrupted the Pope with money, by means of George Bucciard, to cause him to
procure the death of Iemy his brother. All the rest that write, speak of him
as of a monster in nature.

And it appears by all the discourse of his life, yt the reason why he caused
the Iubile to be celebrated, was more to have money, whereof he was extreme
covetous, to enrich his Son Caesar Borgia, then for any devotion he had to the
holy Church. And to prove it, at the beginning of the same year, and as it
were at the very instant time, when this goodly Iubile should begin, the
aforesaid Caesar battered the Town of Forly, holding the Lady thereof enclosed
therein. Was not this a fair celebrating the Iubile, and getting of pardons,
to oppress poor Widows, and fatherless children? Guichardin says also,
Guicciar. Lib. 5.
in his fifth book. And to the end, says he, that he might not omit any kind
of gain, he sent pardons into Italy, and all other nations, which are called
Iubile, celebrated in Rome, with a great assembly of people inhabiting beyond
the mountains: and gave to those that could not come, means to obtain the
said pardons, so they paid for them: which money so gotten, with all the
treasure that he could by any means draw from the Treasors and Lands of the
Church, he gave it to his Son, that dyed at Forly. In the fixed book he
adds, that he being poisoned, all the City ran in great troops unto the
Church of S. Peter, to see his body, and none of them could satisfy their eyes
to behold this Dragon dead: who by his immoderate ambition, pestiferous
dissimulation, and all sorts of examples, of horrible crueltyes, monstrous
covetousness, and unspeakable greediness, having sold without distinction,
both sacred and profaine things, had poisoned all the world.

He says that Rome is the place which God has chosen: Rome I say that has
been in horror and execration to all the world, since the Popes have usurped
this tyranny over the bodies and souls of men. Mounsier de Januille, that has
written, the life of S. Loys among other things, says: that the King
returning from Palestina, and passing thorough Italy, would not go to salute
the Pope, fearing to behold the vices and evil examples of the Court of Rome.
Petrarke in his Epistles says thus: here says he, dwells Namroth, the
fearful builder of the great Tower. Here is resident Simiramis with her
quiver: monstrous Minos guides the process, Rhadamanthus and Cerberus dwell
there. To be short, all monstrous execrations have their nestes therein: all
confusions, obscurites and horrors raygne therein most puisantly. The
Cannonists themselves cease not to speak of the corruptions yt are in this
court of Rome; As among the rest John Andre in his gloss upon these words; Gens
sancta, whereupon the Pope will ordain his church of Rome; In cap: fundamenta
de electione, et electi potest. In the sixth says thus, touching the malice of
the Romans, John the Monk, refereth us herein to the first Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, and says that Saint Barnard has written of them to
Pope Eugenius. Which we likewise read in the mirror of Histories. Lib. 29.
cap. 27. The said John the Monk said that Rome was Founded by rouers, thieves
and other such like persons, that it yet sauoreth of the beginning, and that it
was called Rome, as gnawing the hands, alleging a verse to the same purpose.
Roma Manus rodit, quos rodere non valet odit. This Pope adds, that it is the
spiritual Sion, the holy Jerusalem, not according to the letter (but by
antephrase) Spiritually, from whence the law of God, and the light of the
Evangelical truth, from the first birth of the Church, has been distributed
and spread, throughout all the world, etc.

We must not wonder why this holy Father and his Coherents so straightly
prohibit to the laytye, the reading of the holy Scriptures, unless they be
permitted by their Prelate. Because it is the only means to license them, to
prefer all what pleases them, and to make men believe that black is white,
and falsehood truth.

It is certain that the Church, assembled of the faithful, is the true
celestial Jerusalem. But what resemblaunce has it with the Church of Rome,
the which much more sauoureth of Agar the servant, then of Sara the free woman?
Gal. 4.
For even as the child of the servant, which was engendered after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit; So is it now. And to prove it,
read S. Paul Gal. 5. Continue, (says he) in the liberty by the which Christ
has delivered us. After that he adds, all ye are void of Christ, that are
justified by the law, and are destitute of the grace: for we stay for the hope
of justice, by the spirit which is of faith. For in Jesus Christ, neither
circumcision, nor vncircumcisio^, do prevail but faith which works by
charity: Now to tie man's salvation to good works, to induce an infinite number
of ceremonies, contrary to the liberty and freedom which Christ has obtained
for us, to entertain a great part of those observed in the old law, which were
al abolished at the coming of Jesus Christ, is it not an imposition of a most
insuportable yoke upon the shoulders of the faithful? Is it not to reduce a
more hard and straight servitude then yt, from the which Jesus Christ has
delivered us? And the P. would make us believe that the church of Rome (which
is this Agar, Apoc. 7.
yea two-folde more slave then Agar,) is the celestial Jerusalem and the
spiritual Sion: but he should rather say, that it is the great City, which
spiritually signifies Sodoma. But when he says that from Rome, the law of God
is derived, and the truth of the Euangelical faith, from the beginning of the
church has bin distributed throughout all the world: Esaias. 2.
Is not this a manifest contradiction to the holy ghost, which teaches the
contrary. The Prophecy of Esaias, was it not manifestly accomplished in the
city of Jerusalem, when the Apostles and other holy men, having there received
the holy ghost, and preached therein, went from thence, to go and preach the
Gospel throughout all the world, as Jesus Christ had commanded them? Does not
S. Mar. about the end of his gospel, say yt Jesus Christ after he had spoken
with his Apostles, was taken up into heaven, and there sits on the right
hand of God. And they being gone forth, preached the gospel in all places. Now
this issuing or going forth, ought to be understood of Jerusalem, and not of
Rome. Clement speaking so after his predecessors, does he not wrong to the rest
of the Apostles, as if they were Ciphers, or that they were idle persons,
contenting themselves with the names and titles of Apostles, as in truth the
Popes and other Prelates, of their tyrannical dignities do? for that only
excepted, they have nothing but the bare name. But is it not evident and
manifest unto us, by the Acts of the Apostles, Romans 15. that when S. Paul
wrote that Epistle, he had preached the gospel, from Jerusalem, and all about
it, unto Jlltrica and Esclauoma: that is to say, in diverse places of Asia and
Europe. Behold now ye Romans, how that because you neither would, nor will
receive the love of the truth, thereby to be saved. God sends you the efficacy
of deceit, These. 1.
that you should believe lies, etc. This holy father adds, yt it is that
happy City, whereof the faith being commended by the mouth of the Apostle, is
preached throughout the world, etc. Alas, where do men at this day speak of
the faith of the Romans? Is it in Turkey, Persia or Tartaria? but is it in
the places subject to the Pope? It may be, by those that know neither faith nor
religion, but believe only by heresy: and as they themselves allege,
believe in the faith of their Vicar. But all those that know what Rome is, and
how they govern and live therein, will say and affirm, that it is not only
the Schole of Epicurisme, but also of Atheism, and despising of God and his
holy word, the receptacle and support of all wickedness. But behold a right
papal lodgick: The faith of the Roman christians in the time of S. Paul, was
commended through ye world: therefore the faith of those that dwell in Rome now,
is commended through all the world, as if faith were successiue in them, if the
true faith did not make it self known, by good works. But for that corruption
is a thing successiue in such as are not regenerate by the holy ghost, we might
better and trulyer reason thus: the corruptions, intolerable vices, and
Sodomy, that reigned among the Roman Panims, were known to all the world. So
at this day, such vices reign in Rome, not only among the people, but among
the principal of this infernal Hirarchy, are known through all the world. The^
it is not there that we must search the faith of these first christians: for it
is wholly buried under the earth.

Now if such a consequent, as this which the Pope alleges, of the time past,
to the time present were receauable, we might say as much of those that dwell
in Thessalonia: for Saint Paul gives the like witness to those that lived in
his time, yea a greater then of those in Rome. You have been says he, patrons
to all the believers, as well in Macedonia, as in Achaia. For the word of God
has not only shined from you into Macedonia and Achaia: but your faith which
is in God, is spread throughout all the world. Behold then reasons well
grounded, to maintain the excellency and prerogative of Rome.

But behold one which crowns the work, that is, that the most blessed
Princes of the Apostles, S. Peter, and S. Paul have shed all their doctrine
with their bloudes, to the end that by means of S. Peter's chair, being made
the capital Citry in the world, it should be the Mother of all the believers,
and Mistress of all other Churches, etc. But if it should be denied him, how
could he prove it: but only that it pleased the Popes his predecefsors,
builders of this tyranny: for with other proof he could not furnish himself.
If the preaching of the Gospel with effusion of blood could obtain this
dignity, who knows not but that Jerusalem ought to be preferred therein
before all others? considering the great prerogatives that it had before, over
all the Cities in the world? For that besides them, the Prophets did therein
Preach the word of God, and likewise were therein stoned, and put to death.

There Jesus Christ did Preach: there he was scourged, beaten, spit upon, and
lastly put to death. Saint Peter also, and his companions were there beaten and
holden in prison, because they Preached Jesus Christ within the City: there S.
Stephen was stoned for the same occasion: and S. James beheaded, and the other
S. James killed with clubbes: this nevertheless gave no advantage to
Jerusalem, much less to Rome. The Pope knows well, or else he ought to know,
how much this primacy has bin debated between Popes, Pelagius and Gregory,
Bishops of Rome, and John Bishop of Constantinople: that Gregory condemned the
unmeasurable ambition of the said John: and that the Bishops of Rome, never
obtained it, until the time of Boniface the third, who by the authority of the
cruel tyrant and parricide Phocas, obtained the title of the universal
Bishop: and yet the Popes did not as then, mount up into so high a degree of
soueraignetie, as at this day they are.

For as it is found written in the first lesson, that is Song upon the first
day of November, which begins Legimus, (which within a certain time, has
been gelded of certain breuiaries) Pope Boniface, that was the fourth Pope
after Gregory, by petition obtained of the Emperor Phocas, one of the Pagans
Temples within Rome, called the Pantheon: which he dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, and to the Holy Mattirs, whereby it appears, that the Popes as then
were not Lords of Rome, to dispose of the Temples therein at their pleasure, as
at this day they do. So this Soueraigntye has been a most unjust, and more
then tyrannical usurpation. All that is added, that there is the stone of
faith, the fountain of sacerdotall unity, etc.

It is to be understood which S. Paul says, 2. Thessal. 2. That this Son of
perdition will come, with all fraud of injustice, in those that perish. For all
that, no not the least point, can be found within the City of Rome: namely,
that which he says, that it is the fountain of sacerdotall unity. For besides
that this Pontificats is an usurped dignity, contrary to the express
ordinance of Jesus Christ; tending rather to the ruin of the Church, then to
the conversation thereof. It is a total destruction of the sacerdotall dignity
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

But where was this fair spring of sacerdotall unity, when scismes reigned in
this church, more the^ in any other? especially when there were two seats: one
at Rome, the other at Auignon: and then when there was not only two Popes, but
many times three. Shall we say that there is the sincere verity, where the
traditions of men, are in the like, yea and in greater authority then the word
of God? There where those that shall have transgressed the commandments of:
that which they name the holy Mother Church, shall be more grievously punished
then swearers, and blasphemers of the sacred name of God: there where the Pope
usurps the authority to dispense against the word of God.

He says, that there (that is to say at Rome) are the keys of the kingdom of
Heaven, and the power to bind and unbind; but it is an usurpation, for this
authority does properly belong to all those that are called to the charge of
preaching and declaring the doctrine of the Gospel. As also that which he
adds that the Pope is the dispensator of the treasors of the Church, which
can never be diminished. For all the true and faithful Pastors of the Church
of God, are the true dispensators of the Treasors of Jesus Christ. And we must
mark well that which S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 4. That it is requisite that such a
dispensator should be faithful: but where shall this fidelity be found, in
Popes that sell, that which they call the Treasors of the Church; yea and all
things both sacred and profane for ready money? True dispensation, does it
consist in making a sign with two fingers; to present the Pantable to kiss;
and to give a piece of sealed paper or parchment? Is it not in the sincere
Preaching of the word of God, and the right administration of the holy
Sacraments? Where does the Pope this? It should be a wonder to hear him
Preach. So it is nevertheless, that in that sort the Apostles did dispense the
Treasors of the grace and mercy of God: as we may read in the book of their
Acts, and in their Epistles. But behold I pray you a right jest, and pure
mockery, to say: that the gates of the most ancient Churches of Rome, are
opened with solemn ceremonies, and that the faithful are purged from the
spots of sin, to the end that the souls redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ,
by the Divine virtues of the Sacraments, should be absolved and delivered from
the yoke of Iron, and the tyranny of the devil, etc. Is it possible, in more
manifest terms to mock with God? and to expose, and bring in reproach the
precious blood of his most dear Son, then in speaking in this manner? From
whence has the Pope drawn this goodly, yea rather damnable devotion, but only
from the pit of Hell? The ancient Iubile was established among the Jews, by
the express commandment of God. Where will the Pope find that Jesus Christ
has or dained this? which is the invention of Boniface the eight, and that
first they must give a blow with a small hammer, where with having stricken,
then with great blows of leauers and staves, open the gates of his Basiliskes,
to obaine all the benefits whereof he speaks? This manner of action, is not
to be found in any place of the holy Scriptures, neither yet in the books of
the most pure and first Doctors. But that it has bin revealed to his
predicessors: if it were, it was by the spirit of Satan, that transsigureth
himself into an Angel of light, that he might induce the simple people to
commit two evils: the one to sorsake God, which is the spring of waters, that
continually without ceasing run into life eternal: Ier. 2,
the other to dig broken cesternes, and such as hold no water. But touching
the true spiritual Iubile, the Apostles declared it, every where, and in all
places, as occasion served, and according to their charge. As S. Peter first in
Jerusalem, that all the house of Israel (says he) may know that this Jesus
whom you have crucified, was by God made our Lord and Christ. Therefore be you
repentant, and be you every man baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.
to the remission of sins. And in the Chap. following, repent you, says he,
and convert, to the end your sins may be defaced. And in the 10. God commanded
us, to preach unto the people, and to witness that Jesus is ordained of God to
be judge both of the quick and the dead: and also all the Prophets bear him
witness, yt all those that believe in him, shall receive remission of their sins.
Now faith comes, not by going a long iourny over the mountains unto Rome, or
else where, but by hearing the word of God, which is the word of faith; Which S,
Pa. also says, yt he Preaches; that is, that if we confess the Lord Jesus
with our lips, and believe with our hearts yt God raised him from the dead, we
shall be saved. Harken to that which S. Paul says in the Act. 13 Brethren I
would have you know, that the remission of sins by this Jesus, is announced
unto you and that every one of you by this man is absolved of all the things
whereof by the law of Moses, you could not be absolved. Now this was not at Rome
that he spoke this, but at Antiochia in Pesidia. He sent them not to Rome,
where according to Onuphrius allegation, Saint Peter as then was resident, but
assured them, (if they there believed,) of the remission and intyre absolution
of the pain and culpe of their sins.

For conclusion we will ad, that which S. Paul says to Agrippa, whereof the
Pope has inferred certain words in his Bull. That Jesus Christ had appeared
unto him, Act. 26.
to establish him a minister and witness, as well of the things that he had
seen, as of the things that he would show unto him, delivering him from the
people of the Jews and the Gentiles, to whom he sent him: to the end, says
Jesus Christ, that thou may open their eyes, and that they might convert from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan, to God; to the end that they
receive remission of sins, and part in the inheritance among the sanctified,
by the faith that is in me. Whereupon, says S. Paul, I was not disobedient to
the celestial vision. But first I declared, to them that are in Damas and in
Jerusalem, and throughout all Judea: after that to the Gentiles, that they
should repent and convert unto God, doing works worthy of those that repent.

Does it not many sestly appear by all these passages, that it is not at Rome,
nor in the Baselisques, that we must seek these great benefits which the Pope
promises us by his Bull; but in all places, where the word of God is Preached,
and at all times, such as by true faith do receive them, are partakers of
those benefits.

Wherefore, what pretense soever Clement the eight takes, as touching the
actions of his predecessors, whom he terms Sovereign Bishops, and of the
consent of the Cardinals: it cannot be, by Gods authority, which never
commanded it, much less by the Apostles, who never practiced the like, but
taught the contrary, yt he has published his Iubile: but rather by the
authority of Satan the father of lies, who by subtlety and accustomed
malice, has in such fort profaned this authority to remit and retain
sins, as God has given it to his church, in the persons of true and
faithful pastors, in causing it to be attributed unto such as have not any
vocation in the Church, if it be well considered (neither in matter nor form)
and that make trassique and Merchandise of the grace and mercy, yea and of the
justice of God. And which is more, make certain Stirrops, to lengthen or
shorten them, as their accursed ambition, avarice, favors, and wicked wills
leads them.

If therefore, poor Roman Catholics, you will be well assured to
participate, and have part of the Treasors which Jesus Christ has brought, and
daily presents unto us, and by consequent have peace in your consciences; It
is not in any sort necessary that you should so much travel your bodies to go
to Rome; there to stay 15. days, or a month, to go visit the Basiliskes and
Temples, every day during that time, to have a sign of the hand of a mortal
man, which you term the sign of the Cross, and a blessing: supposing by this
means, to have full and intyre remission of all your sins, as well mortal
as venial. The holy Ghost she weth you a way much more assured, and a great
deal shorter, Romans 10.
when by his vessel of election (S. Paul) he says, Now the justice which is
by faith, (that is the remission of sins, as S. Paul himself expounds it
in the 4. chap. precedent) says thus: say not in thy heart, who shall go up
into heaven? that is to bring Jesus Christ again from above. Or who shall go
down into hell, that is to recall Jesus Christ from the dead. But what says
the Scripture, the word of God is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart.
It is the word of faith, which we Preach: for if thou confessest the Lord Jesus
with thy mouth, and beleeuest with thy heart, that God raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. Then to believe we must hear this sacred word of
God, as the said S. Paul shows afterward. For by the same, the remission of
al our sins, by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, is declared unto us, in his
name and authority, if we believe. This word like wise teaches us in all
places to pray unto our only God, 1. Tim. 2.
in the name of Jesus Christ; exhorts us all the days of our life to walk
worthily, Luke 1.
and with a good conscience, in the vocation whereunto we are called: to live
holily and righteously: to labor in good works, Ephe. 4.
and not to do unto another, but as we would be done unto our selves. Now for a
conclusion, the holy Father adds most goodly demonstrations and exhortations.
First to the Patriarchs, Primates, etc. whom he says, are called to have part
of this joy. And what? not to feed the troop of the celestial pasture, which
is the Gospel, and bring men to Jesus Christ the sovereign Pastor of our
souls: But to incite them to go to Rome, there to find his holiness, to visit
the Basiliskes of the Princes of the earth, S. Peter, and S. Paul, behold the
word which he will have them teach, and the better to encourage them, he
calls them, the lights of the world. We must not then be abashed if the world
be holden in so great darkness: seeing that such lights are dark and full of
obscurity. Also the salt of the earth: yea, a salt that is not good, but has
lost the savor, and corrupts all the meat, that is salted therewith. For
what example of good do those kind of people show? Where shall you find more
riots and dissolutions, then in the Courts and houses of these Prelates? Read
what S. Barnard says, touching those of his time, who nevertheless, were not
half so corrupt, as these in our days. For that the world is daily worse and
worse: how does this holy Father speak to Pope Eugenius, that had bin his
Desciple? and how does he paint out these kind of people in their colors? Is
this fellow says he, a servant (for the Pope names himself the servant of
servants) to whom continually out of all places there repaireth, Simoniastes,
Sacrilegiers, whore-mongers, incestious persons and such like monsters, either
to obtain, or retain Ecclesiastical dignityes: Also upon the Canticles
Sermon 77. There are very few says he, that seek not their own, what so ever
it cost them. They love presents, and cannot likewise love Jesus Christ, for
they have made a league with Mammon. Behold how they walk in proud array,
apparelled in diverse vestures, or of diverse colors, like a Bride that issues
out of her chamber, etc. And after in the same Sermon. Whom will thou find me
among the Prelates, that desires not rather to empty the purses of those that
are their subjects, then to extirpe vices? Also in the Epistle 152. the
insolency of the Clergy (whereof the negligence of the Bishops is the
principal occasion,) does in all places trouble the Church.

But you will say, that the holy Father admonishes them of their duties,
according as he does his own, yea that which tends more to practice that
which S. Barnard says, touching the emptying of purses, then to repress
vices: whereof proceeds the old proverb, never horse nor man got any thing,
by going to Rome. I would gladly demand, if that be the preaching of the word
of God, if it be to beget faithful to the Gospel (which is to bring them to
Jesus Christ) to inuit all the world to go to Rome, there to visit the
temples of S. Peter, and S. Paul, the which Saints, this holy Father, the
better to set forth his Merchandise, and to make it of great value: calls
the Princes of the earth, and says that they declare the word of God
throughout all the world. These holy persons never once dreamed of such
impostures, and much less did they require them: Their holy Epistles are
sufficient testimonies to the contrary: but he will adorn them with this
goodly title, to the end that we should understand, that he, as their
successor, is the Prince of the earth. Also we read of Boniface the eight, that
at the first Iubile, having the first day showed himself in his Pontifical
habits, the next day, he appeared before an infinite number of people, armed
from the head to the feet, and by one of his Cryers, caused to be proclaimed:
I am Caesar. But who had given him this dignity? was it Jesus Christ, when he
says, the Kings of the earth, exercise, rule and dominion over the people, but
it shall not be so among you.

Let us hear what S. Barnard says, in the 2. book de consideratione to Pope
Eugenius. Thou have no need (says he) of Septer, but of a Mantle, after the
manner of the Prophets. The name of a Bishop signifies an office, and not
Dominion. But if thou challenge these things unto thy self by any
extraordinary means: it is nor by any Apostolical right. It is most true that
dominion and rule is forbidden unto the Apostles. Go thou then, and be so
bold to usurp, or rule the Apostles office, or being an Apostle, the
dominion, etc. This title then, does not in any sort belong unto the Apostles,
much less to their successors. It is a false pretense which this holy Father
would lay hold upon. But if he would speak the truth, he should rather
derive these titles from satan, as from his liege, Signior and Lord, from whom
he holds authority and rule, according to the words used by Satan, to our
Lord Jesus Christ: if in falling down upon the earth, thou will worship me, I
will give thee all the King dowes of the earth. For diverse Popes have attained
to this dignity, which they have left unto their successors, by having done
homage unto Satan, the prince of this world. And further, where do we find
that the Apostles have obtained this dignity? that for because they preached
the law of God through all the world, therefore their Temples must be visited.
Did not they teach every one, according to that which they had learned of their
Master, that all those that believe in Jesus Christ shall be saved? Jesus christ
himself, Ioh. 5.
did not he teach, that whosoever believes in him, is passed from death to
life, and that he shall not enter into condemnation? Did he send us to Rome,
or any other place? Does he not say, if we cate his flesh, and drink his
blood, (which he had preposed before in these terms, if we come to him, and if
we believe in him) he dwells in us, and we in him. Can there be any charity,
to expose so many persons to infinite pains, travails and dangers: to put
them in great charges, to leave their houses, and vocations, to go a long
journey to seek that which they may have at home at their own doors, if they
have a true faith working by charity?

But I pray you does not the holy Father and his supports show a manifest
contradiction in their opinions; and by consequent what spirit of error and
lying speaks by their mouths and not the spirit of truth? They proclaim with
hew and cry, that in their Mass, the Sacramental words being pronounced,
the substance of bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and the
wine into the blood. Now Jesus Christ ordaining the holy Supper, would there by
assure us, that if we communicate worthily, and examine our own consciences,
we communicate his body which was delivered for us, and his blood which was
shed for the remission of our sins. To be short, we are participants of the
efficacy and virtue of his death and passion.

If then it be so, that Jesus Christ, very God, and very man, is there, (as
they pretend) yea in corporal presence: Is it not a great folly and
indiscretion, to go so far to seek that which they may have among themselves?
Wherefore should Jesus Christ present himself there unto us, and should not
have so much power in his corporal presence, as men are made believe, that the
bones, sepulchers, Temples and Images of S. Peter and S. Paul have? Is it not
to make less account (without comparison) of the Master, then of the
servant? Yea, is it not a despising of the Lord, who is always living, to
adore and worship the putrified carcasses of his servants? If then it be true
that they are his servants, who will deny it to be a manifest blasphemy?
Wherefore all these goodly exhortations, by the Pope made, both to the
Prelates, and to Kings, and Princes, are like to Sugar and other Spices,
wherewith he seeks to sweeten his venomous drink, thereby the easier to
impoyson all the world. We must not stay nor attend the 100. year of the
Roman Iubile, to amend our lives, correct our vices, to dispose our selves to
do good, and to be intentive to the word of God, to read the holy Scriptures,
to exercise charity, to give honor to whom honor belongs, and tribute to
those that ought to have tribute; and to pray to God one for an other, and
namely for Kings, Princes, and such as are in authority. Such holy exercises
are necessary for all the faithful, and at all times and seasons. And also
such as are called to feed the Lords flock, ought not to attend until that
time to teach, and instruct the people committed to their charge: Act. 20.
but they are always to do it, as S. Paul writes to the Bishop of Ephesians.
yea, in time and out of time, according to the instruction by him given to his
Disciple Timothy. For that following their Masters example, they must travel in
his Vineyard, the 12. hours in the day, without staying till evening comes.

Wherefore you my masters of the church of Rome, if you desire to be
participants of salvation, harken rather to the voice of the great Pastor of al
Pastors, our only Savior and redeemet Jesus christ, Math. 11.
who so sweetly inuiteth you unto his word. Come unto me all you that are
laden, and I will comfort you. Also, If any man have thirst, let him come unto
me, and I will refresh him. Ioh. 7.
Then unto these false Prophets, which make you run from place to place,
binding your consciences, and cause you to doubt of your salvation. And the
better to empty your purses, set before your eyes a fire of purgatory, wherein
after you have bin tormented in this world, by fastings, abstinences
pilgrimages, and other corporal exercises, you must (as they make you believe)
pass through, and therein remain, to be as it were new boiled and refined,
before you enter into Paradise. But the Son of God makes one self same
promise unto all those,

This great eternal, and universal Iubile, whereunto God calls, and
summoneth us every day, has bin written by the precious blood, and signed by
the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the
eternal God, our great King, and only sovereign Sanctifier. Under written by
the holy Apostle, that Preached and declared it unto all the world, to be
indifferently received, and celebrated in all places, where the name of God is
called upon, and sealed with two great seals of his Majesty, Baptism and the
holy Supper.

Ga. 1. Whosoever Preaches any other Gospel let him be accursed. 1. Cor. 16.
If there be any man that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed.
Maranatha.

FINIS.

