A PLAIN AND perfect Method, for the easy understanding of the whole BIBLE:
CONTAINING Seven Observations, Dialoguewise, between the PARISHIONER, and the
PASTOR.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for the Widow Helm, and are to be sold at her shop
in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, the Lo: Bishop of Lichfield and Covent.
My LORD:
MY Honorable good Lord, these are to signify unto you, that whereas I
published in print, many and sundry Books for the reading and understanding of
the sacred Scriptures, and my self being worn with age near unto the point
of my pilgrimage, concluded with my self long since there to surcease:
Nevertheless, of late, my Lord, I was importuned for the new Impression of
this Book, which almost twelve years since has been in request; whereunto I
willingly yielded, the rather under your Lo: favor and protection, being my
Honorable good neighbor, (although not worth nor worthy your reading.) For
had it not been anciently and truly said, that He is freer from blame that
praises the dead, then he that praises the living, when the praiser cannot be
moved with flattery, nor the praised with vainglory; then should I have
spoken of your Lo: more worthy deserts, and that whiles you are alive, which I
therefore must leave to do to the best learned in the Land when you are dead.
And whereas also I durst not so much as think my writing fit your grave and
profound reading, I do here therefore humbly acquaint your Lo: that the
contents thereof is a kind of Scripture Catechism, by way of Questions and
Ausweres, between the Pastor and the Parishioner, the one plainly and
divinely, the other a little Philosophically and plausibly, for the manner of
handling. And so nothing doubting of your Lo: good acceptance, I humbly take my
leave, heartily desiring the Lord of eternal life, that by your good means,
we in these parts, and in your Jurisdiction, may have a more peaceable
proceeding in our preaching, and that the sincere professors thereof may by you
and such like, be more and more countenanced and comforted, as your Lordship
has well and graciously begun, to the glory of God, to the saving of many
thousand souls, and to your own heavenly happiness.

Your Lo: most humbly and dutifully in the Lord, ED: VAVGHAN, Pastor of
Stretton Leafield in the County of Darby, near Clifton Camuill.

A PREFACE to my Contrymen of WALES: and especially to my Contrymen, and
Kinsmen of that ancient Borough of Abergevenny in the County of Monmouth.
MAy it please you to remember, about some thirty years since, I wrote unto
you a Book, entitled, A method for the reading and understanding of the holy
Scriptures: the contents of my Epistle unto you was, if ever you would duly
tender, and apply the merits of Jesus Christ, to the saving health of your
souls, and the like good unto your dear children, that every man should live,
not according to blind zeal and old traditions, but according to the line
and level of holy Scriptures, which measures and weighs (as with a golden
Reed, and in the Balance of the Sanctuary, whatsoever is due to every man,
and according as he is able to use: And that the performance thereof could not
be without the true sight and perfect knowledge of the said divine Oracles:
Therefore I exhorted you in the fear of God, unto the careful and diligent
reading and hearing of the same privately and publicly. To all which intents
and purposes, I do here again in another sort and kind, write unto you, and
that more briefly, humbly and heartily desiring you all, even for Jesus Christ
his sake, and for your own souls sake, you will (sometimes) sequester your
selves from your public affairs, and sometimes from your most private
occasions, for the orderly and through reading hereof; assuring you upon mine
own experience, and upon the judgment of the best learned writers, that there
is nothing so effectual in all the world to move a regenerate man to solace in
sorrow, to mourn in mirth, and to apprehend rightly the use of all good means
which God has left in his Church for the saving of soul and body, as the
reading, meditating and contemplating in the holy Book of God given unto us by
inspiration. Thus I end, heartily (near the period of my life) desiring your
everlasting salvation in JESUS CHRIST, as mine own.

EDWARD VAVGHAN, of Stratton Leafield in the County of Darby: Late of S.
Leonard Shoreditch.

Some brief and necessary Introductions, to the reading of this Book, by way
of Questions and Answers, between the Parishioner and the PASTOR.
The Lamentation of a sorrowful sinner.
Parishioner. Having seriously, and sincerely searched into the most allowable
and laudable things of this life, I find (Right reverend Pastor) that these
titles, Master, Worshipful, and Honorable stand not in the dignity that men
have, but in the good works whereby they deserve: and yet for all that, I
find that many are violently pulled down without fault, and many are
favorably set up without merit. Moreover, I find that when flourishing state
is perpendicular, or when men are at the highest, then comes that evil day,
bringing with it fearful gusts from the South, and thunderbolt-lightnings
from the North: Then all turns like to the sacietie of honey, which is
loathsome to the stomach; and like to overmuch fecunditie, which never comes
to maturitie. Again, I find, although a man have the strength of Sampson,
Judge. 16.3. Dan. 2.5. 2 Kin. 5.1.
the power of Nabuchadnezer, the riches of Baltashar, and the applauditie of
Naaman in the Court and in the Kingdom, for 500. years continuance, without
any impeachment, all are nothing, all are but fantastical and sightly to the
eye: as those Kingdoms which the Devil offered to Christ, Mat. 4. Number. 32.33.
or as this side Jordan to Ruben, Gad and half the tribe of Manasses, in
respect of Canaan; or as Canaan, in respect of the Kingdom of heaven. And
whiles I thus searched into other men's estates, and did behold their lamentable
lapses, I found my self of the number, which is innumerable, that make no care
of the Lords Sabaoths, that make no conscience of his Evangelical doctrine,
nor any regard of them that do sincerely and purely profess Christ Jesus. O,
how surpassing sorrowful are the sights of these sins suddenly unto me!
Wormwood, Aloes, and Centory, was never so bitter to the mouths of men, as
these sins are tedious and troublesome to my mind. O, what cause have I to
call, to cry, and to curse the time, the place, and the persons that procured
me thus wilfully, as it were, to forsake my Savior! And why do I thus heavily
complain for these few sins, seeing I have many other sins! For as at a
marriage men are made merry with Music and with variety of meats: so is my
poor heart and soul made heavy and fearful with the variety of my sins.
As true love to a virtuous woman, that comes too late, does not desire a
witness, because the conscience is a thousand more then needs: even so,
repentance toward God, that is deferred, needs no witness; because when it
comes, the conscience does accuse, it does witness, it does condemn, it
does judge, and it is many times ready to execute. As Honey does make sour
things sweet; even so, I must tell you, that the sight of my sins does make
things that are in their nature sweet to others, sour to me. As he that is in
extreme heat, will be glad with a little cooling: as he that is in extreme
sickness, will be glad with a little ease: and as he that is in extreme
hunger, will be glad of a little food: even so I (good reverend Sir) extremely
tormented with the weight of sin, miserably vexed with the guiltiness of
conscience, and heartily frighted with the fear of Gods deserved judgments,
would be glad with a little comfort, with a little ease, with a little pittance,
or crumme of recreation. For, me thinks, I see Birds swim, and Fishes fly:
all things are so cross and so contrary unto me. Me thinks I see the lake
Troglodides, thrice sweet and thrice bitter in one day: and me thinks I see
the shore Lepanthus in the morning sending forth a sweet pleasant calm, but
in the evening lightning and thundering. Some persuade me, that by faith only,
I shall have comfort in conscience, and salvation; which glads me, and is
sweet unto me for a while: others dissuade me, and say unto me, that I must
obtain it by Faith and Works, which presently dampe me, and are as hot
thunderbolts unto me. I am as in a mismaze or labyrinth; Ariadnes thread would
wind me out: but conscience still pulls me in. As Dives being in hell, did
wish and desire that his brethren might be warned, lest they also should come
to that place of torments: so I, being thus perplexed, do heartily wish and
desire Almighty God, that not only my natural brethren, but all people, may
be warned by Gods word, that they may make conscience of his Sabaoths, and that
they may specially regard zealous men, lest they be tormented in conscience as
I am. Tell me therefore, tell me, I humbly pray you, tell me, what shall I say?
what shall I do? or what way or course shall I take in hand to be reconciled
to God, to have peace in my own conscience, and to have assurance that my
soul shall be received into the fellowship of the Saints in heaven? amongst
whom there are some that I most heartily desire to see.


A comfortable Confection for a sorrowful Sinner.
Pastor. YOu discourse so philosophically of natural things, as makes you
seem yet to me a natural man: in which discourse I observe two special
questions, or rather objections, well worthy the answering: One is your
perturbations for sins committed, the other is your doubt, whether Faith and
Works, or Faith only justifies, To the first I answer, that your great
griefs and perturbations in soul and conscience, are not arguments or notes
of reprobation, but rather of Faith and of Justification which is begun in
you: For by how much you have the sense and feeling of your sins, by so much
the more you have the assurance of mercy: as he who has the sense and feeling
of his natural disease, has some assurance that he is not in danger of death.
And by how much dangerous the disease of the body is found to be, so much the
more vehement and bitter a corosiue must be used, but first a Corasiue, then a
Lenitiue: Even so, Christ Jesus the holy Physician, heales the souls of great
sinners, by suffering them to call, to cry, to vex, to grieve, and even to
roar with the surpassing greatness thereof, and afterward when the extremity
and bitterness of the passion is past, then he hears, then he grants, and
then he receives to mercy, using therein the practice of a good natural
Physician, who ministers not medicine to a maladye when it is raging and at
the worst, but when it is somewhat mitigated, assuaged and abated. And it is
justice with God to do sometimes as he is done unto: he calls and cries early
and late, and man will not hear: he offers mercy early and late, and yet man
will not esteem of it. No marvel then if man call and cry, and God will not
hear him, if man call and cry for mercy, and God will not by and by hear him.
Hope confidently in Gods mercy, constantly and resolutely abide therefore, and
wait the Lords leisure, be strong and he shall comfort thy heart.

You have the example of David, of Ezekias, of Peter, and many others, who
called, who cried, who wept and roared bitterly, who hoped in God and were
resolute, at last the Lord heard them. As for your other scruple or doubt
concerning faith with works, or faith without works, the places befitting this
purpose, are far more then need or conueniency will suffer me to utter. That
faith only justifies Paul having no good work, but rather being full of
guile and cruelty, as his own story sets forth, was justified by faith only:
which makes him in great humility and thankfulness to preach the same, in all
that his Epistle to the Romans, and in many places of his other Epistles to
the other Nations. S. James in his Epistle catholicall writes no less, when as
he says; James 2.15
Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works:
meaning works that follow a true iustifiing Faith, and not works annexed as
justifying with Faith. S. Peter setting forth the excellency of Faith, says,
1 Pet. 1.
that the trial thereof is much more excellent then gold, meaning a trial in
tribulations after justification, and not before. S. John approving
Justification also by faith, 1 John 1.
magnifieth the mercies of God in Christ, and concludes all men under sin.
The allowance of faith only is manifestly proved by Christ's own examples, who
healed all manner of diseases upon sinners by Faith only, and also forgiving
sins, which was in effect the office also of John Baptist. Mat. 3.
And again, the use of ceremonies in the Law, forced no farther for
Justification then to faith in the Messiah. I must say in another sort, if
righteousness come by the Law, that is to say, if righteousness come by
works then Christ dyed in vain, and our Faith is of none effect. And I must
say as S. Paul said, 1 Cor. 15.
If there be no resurrection, then are we of all men most miserable: even so if
faith and works do justify, then am I with you and with infinite thousands
more, of all men most miserable. Genesis 11.
As Nimrod with his builders were far wide, when they thought with the strength
of their hands to work their way to heaven, and the Pharisee when he boasted
of his uprightness: even so are they that think to obtain salvation by their
works, far wide, and clean out of the right way. Like the Gibeonites who
dealt craftily, Ios. 9.
when for the safety of their lives they brought old sackes, old bottles, and
old clouted shoes unto Joshua, as though they had come from far, when they
indeed were neighbors: even so do they deal craftily and ignorantly, that
bring works unto Christ for the safety of their souls, as though they were
available, when indeed they are not. Alas, what is man? man is as light
seed, or as poisoned vessels, whence no wholesome things can proceed. There
are three special things that belongs for your good: First, grief and sorrow
for sins past, and corruptions present: The second is Hope or affiance in the
promises of God in Christ: And the third is Constancy or perseverance in the
expectation of Gods mercies. The first of these you have: which nevertheless
may bring you to inevitable destruction without the other two. Be careful
therefore to seek after the means of Faith, and then look for the blessing
of God to sanctify it unto your use: without the which, Faith and all means
are but bare instruments. Therefore S. Paul says; We are saved by grace
through Faith, and not of our selves: for it is the gift of God. So then it is
plain, that Grace and Faith are partners, Grace being the first, and Faith the
instrument, it comprehends and apprehends passiuely the promises of God in
Christ, and applies to himself the merits or righteousness of Christ. So that
Faith has two functions or holy callings: one is to wait for Grace, the other
is to wait and take hold of Christ.


The Sinner desires to know what Faith is.
Parishioner. IF the Estridge digesteth hard Iron to preserve her health, and
if the sick Patient swalloweth bitter pills to preserve his life, how much more
ought I to endure your doctrine, how cross and contrary soever to my body, so
as I may recover the life of my soul: but when you speak to me of Faith you
seem as upon the Macedonian mountain, called Olimpus, high above the clouds,
as the Cibind high in the heavens clasping with the Eagle, or as Magitians who
work prodigiously to allure simple people unto them. Sir, the union Pearl you
know has his affinity from the heavens, and yet breeds in the Sea: and a
Spericall figure contains nothing but earthly matter: even so, I poor wretch
being of an earthly body cannot comprehend what Faith is, though my Soul have
affinity with the Heavens, whence it came; but must live on earth longer then
I would, where all things that are above me, seem prodigious and wonderful
unto me. For as a Torch turned downward is extinguished: even so, my natural
affections press down my soul, leaving no light, spiritual influence or
reflection in me. The Leopard changes not his hew, nor the Ethiope his skin,
nor the Fox his subtlety, nor yet the little Mouse her wildness: even so,
nature will have course after kind. As Hiero King of Cicill heartily desired
to know of Simonides the Philosopher what God was, and as Apion desired of
Homer to know his original: even so, good Christian Pastor do I desire and
heartily entreat you to know what Faith is, and that thereby I may know my
original and beginning in Christ.


An Answer what Faith is.
Pastor. AS I am very heartily glad to hear you desirous after Faith: so am I
heartily grieved that you have so much Philosophy, and so little Divinity. The
powerful effect of Gods word to salvation, 1 Cor. 2.
is not as with the tickling and entising words of man's wisdom: and yet it is
in the foolishness thereof (as men account) to overthrow and to confound the
wisdom of the wise. As David was unwieldy and unfit in Saul's armor, 1 Samuel 17.
to fight against the Philistine: so I must tell you, that you are unfit and
unwieldy with this heathenish doctrine to fight against the devil: when as you
should foil him with the sword of Almighty God. And as David was feign to put
off that armor, and to content himself with a fling and a stone before he had
the victory and the triumph: even so, you must be taine to put off this
affectate eloquence, and trust to the weapons of our spiritual warfare before
you have comfort to your conscience and salvation to your soul. As the
Zodomites did strike with blindness Lots door when their eyes were open: Genesis
19.
The Assyrians went with blindness to Samaria amongst their enemies, 2 King. 6.
in stead of going to their own King at Aram when their eyes were open: Number.
22.
Or as Balaam road with blindness against the Angel, who resisted his going
to the people Israel, when his eyes were open: Even so, when you, or any man,
with the learning of men, with the bodily eyes, or with the force of flesh,
shall seek the atchieuing of Faith, or of any other heavenly matter, you shall
but seek to kill the Angels as the Zodomites did, to take Elisha as the
Assyrians did, or to beat an Ass, as Balaam did. Hear now with all
simplicity and holy fear what Faith is: Faith is a believing of that which is
beyond the use of Nature, or that which is beyond the use of Reason, or that
which by the power of earthly things can be any way performed, as the
conception of Isaac, the conception of Sampson, and the conception of Christ
Jesus, the miracles of Moses, the miracles of the Prophets, the miracles of the
Apostles, and the miracles of Christ Jesus, Genesis 15.16.7.18.21. Judge. 13.2.
King. 2.4.5.6. Math, Mar. Luke Ioh. and such like: The more a man does reason
with reason, or expostulate with flesh and blood, the more incredible they
shall seem. In another sort, as it were more plainly, Heb. 11.
the Author to the Hebrews says; Faith is a believing, that those things
which now are were not, and that those things which now are not, shall be in
time to come. Concerning the first branch of Faith, to wit, that those things
which now are were not, is to believe the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
creatures in the air, creatures on the earth, and in the seas, which now we
have use of, were not heretofore, and the earth was covered with water, or
rather there was no earth, and darkness covered the great deep. If a man do
consider of these things, with the use of Reason or natural Philosophy, he
will conclude and say, as Nichodemus said to Christ, How can these things be?
Now says the Apostle, you must comprehend or attain to the knowledge of this
by Faith. Again, that all those glorious things which now are were made of
nothing, but by the bare word of God, which seems more incredible to the
natural man: here then he must take knowledge thereof by Faith. The other
branch of Faith, which is a believing that those things which now are not,
shall be: to wit, that the righteous shall inherit the joys of heaven, and
the wicked shall be tormented in hell; that the bodies of men good and bad,
shall rise at the last day, and such like matters, cannot be comprehended by
the natural man, therefore he must attain unto it by Faith. This Faith
trains us to a third kind of Faith. For in every Triangle there are three
lines; the first begins, the second augmenteth, and the third finisheth the
figure: even so, there are three kinds or sorts of Faith, the first is
Historical, to wit, an assent to the truth of the Scriptures: the second
Legal, when a man stands partly upon his works for justification: the third is
Evangelical, to wit, a Faith that proceeds from Grace, and thence takes way
to the apprehending of Christ's merits only for his justification. This is the
true and catholic Faith, the other may be in the Devil. This true faith
which yields testimony to Gods word, is battered and bruised by many
temptations, but never broken, because it takes hold in meekness on Christ.
He that has this faith contents himself with weak means, because he
knows that God is powerful in them, and he contents himself without means,
because it is all one with his Majesty, and yet he omits not the opportunity
nor any good that is offered. To conclude, this faith is not idle, it works
by love, it ever sanctifies, and is profitable to every good work.


The Sinner desires to know how to attain Faith.
Parishioner. EPaminondas the Theban being in the danger of death, was told
that his Buckler was sound and unbroken. Ruben, Simeon, and Leui, when they had
unnaturally handled their brother Joseph, brought their Father his coat to
comfort him: even so, all that you have said and done is little worth, or
rather an aggrauation of my grief, unless you will direct me a ready way, or
show me a perfect course how I shall obtain faith, that great and effectual
instrument of comfort to the conscience, and of salvation to the soul. The Be
in a storm can counterpaize her self with a stone, that she may fly directly
to her hiue. The hedgehog can make two holes in his cave, the one toward the
South if the wind be North, the other toward the North if the wind be South.
The Fox can cure himself with the juice of Pine tree, the Serpent can cure
himself with Fennel, and the Tortise with Margerom: but as for me silly soul,
light or heavy si^ke or whole, sincke or swim, I have no means of comfort, I
have no place to hide my self, nor help to fly away Christ said to a rich
man concerning a pearl that was precious; Go sell all that thou have and buy
that pearl. O that Christ of his mercies would say so unto me! then would I
sell all, and give all, and if it would not be so bought, I would give my life
to boot. Lord, then would I fly away and be no more seen; then would I hide
my self in some great Obeliske for ever: nay, then would I mount up above the
skies, in the flames or sparks of Gods fiery chariot, into the glorious
presence of his all-sufficient Majesty, and into the joys of my most
faithful affected friends, whose joy would be my joy. O how am I ravished now
with holy desires! O how do I long to change the company of men, for the
company of Angels: nay, the company of Saints militant, for the company of
Saints triumphant. Come Lord Jesus, O come and welcome, Lord Jesus come, come
and welcome. As good Mary said to the Angel; How can this be, since I know not
man? so say I unto you, O my good Pastor, how can this be, since I know not
Faith, nor where to find it? O that I might have the answer of the Angel,
who said to Mary, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall ouershadow thee: O then should I not fail of Faith.


An Answer how to attain Faith.
Pastor. AS Ananias spoke sweetly and comfortably unto Saul; Acts 9.
Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, has sent me, that thou might receive
thy sight: even so, I perceive by your godly desires, and by your zealous
prayers, I may say unto you, from the ministry of his holy word sweetly and
comfortably; Brother, and faithful servant of God, I am ordained and sent to
say unto thee, and to assure thee, that by the preaching of the Gospel thou
shall have faith, and that the scales of ignorance, infidelity, and such like,
shall fall from thee. As the Lord himself said to Ananias; Seek in the house
of Judas for one called Saul, for behold he prays; go thy way, he is a
chosen vessel unto me: So the Lord says unto you, seek in my holy word for
my spirit, thou shall have faith, and shall be a chosen vessel unto me. And as
Saul saw in a vision Ananias, laying his hands on him that he might receive his
sight: so will the Lord reveal unto you and lay his blessed hands on you, that
you may receive faith. For the better testimony and assurance hereof, harken
how our fauiour Christ reasons with the murmering and maligning Jews,
concerning their incredulity, and concerning this question which you put
forth: What shall we do that we might do the works of God? He answered
thus, It is the work of God that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Io.
6.29.
To which effect Saint Paul reasons with the Romans, To. 10.9
saying: Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Which
proposition he unfolds with three interrogations or objections as it were on
the contrary, and then concludes as upon a necessary consequence that Faith
justifies, and Faith is obtained by the word preached. The first of which
interrogations is; How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
As if he had said, there is no calling upon God without faith. The second is,
How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? As if he would say,
no man can have Faith without the hearing of Gods word. And the third is; How
can a man hear without a Preacher? As if he had said, there is no benefit of
hearing the word without a preacher. The conclusion is then, that Faith comes
by the hearing of Gods word preached. Thus also it may be said on the contrary,
as the interrogations are laid: Take away the preacher take away the word, take
away the word take away hearing, take away hearing take away Faith, take away
Faith take away calling upon God, take away calling upon God take away
salvation in Christ. The same Apostle in the same place, magnifying the
ministry of Gods word, and the excellency of things which faith brings,
cries out emphatically; O how beautiful are the feet of them that bring
tidings of peace! As if he had said, it is far more joyful, and far more
profitable for a Christian congregation, to see a Preacher come amongst them,
because of faith, which they are to receive by his preaching, then it is to see
a Prince, who notwithstanding his great majesty, must himself also be
contented to sit down and submit himself to the preaching of Gods word, as the
meanest of the congregation for his faith. And again, the same Apostle faith;
The Gospel is the power of God to salvation: Romans 1.16.
that is to say, although God be most innarrably powerful in the execution of
vengeance against the wicked, and in the manifestation of his mercies toward
the godly, and can effect the one and the other which way it pleases him: yet
he has tied and bound himself to the ministry of his word preached, and the
same he has made powerful and effectual to life or to death, as a savor of
life, or as a savor of death. As for example, Cornelius being a just man, Acts
10.
and one that was endued with many singular virtues, yet he wanted faith, which
by the commandment of the Angel, he was to labor for, by the preaching of
Peter. God might have given him faith by the ministry of the same Angel, he
might have given him faith by his own mouth, by the motion of the holy Ghost,
or by some other way: but he would not, because he had sanctified and
dedicated his holy word for that purpose, and he would show throughout all
posterities, that the preaching of his word, was the only outward means of
faith. The like example of the Eunuch, Acts 8.26.
who was reading the Bible with great desire: God might have given him faith by
reading, or by the message of an Angel, or by one of his own company, or by
what means else he had listed: but his Majesty would not, because he would
dignifie his word, and because he had fixed his force and power in his word,
he would that way only effect faith in him. And therefore he sent Philip
from far to preach unto him: at whose preaching he indeed had Faith and was
baptized. John Baptist by his preaching won many to Faith. Christ himself
and his Apostles won many to Faith by the preaching of the Gospel. We have a
notable example in Ezra, Nch. 3.8.
who having read the Law unto the people, did go up into the Pulpit to preach.
And what shall I say more? The Devil does know that the preaching of the
Gospel is the means of Faith, and Faith the instrument of salvation:
therefore he labors all that he can, that it may not be preached When Paul
and Barnabas preached unto Sergius Paulus the Deputy, Acts 13.
Elimas the Sorcerer withstood him, and thought (as the holy Ghost says) to
turn the Deputy from the Faith. Many pregnant places are for this purpose, of
which I shall not need to speak. Hezekiah the King of Judah showed the
Ambassadors of Babylon all his treasures, and hid nothing from them: even so,
good Christian Parishioner, the King of heaven will show unto you, by the
preaching of the Gospel, all his holy and spiritual treasures, and will hide
nothing from you. And as no man upon the pain of death might come to Ahasuerus
the great King, without rich attire, and then not before he was called: so no
man may come unto God the King of kings, without faith, and unless he be
called thereunto by the preaching of his word. Our ears were specially given
unto us, to be as messengers and true ambassadors to the heart. Sounds make
not such perfect and plausible distinctions unto our ears, as understanding
words of men: and the best words that possibly may be uttered by men for our
good, are nothing so incomprehensibly and innarrably profitable unto our ears,
and so consequently to our souls, as the word of God preached, if the hearing
be carefully enrowled in the heart, because it brings and breeds Faith, which
the words of men or of Angels will not.

That preaching is the ordinance of Almighty God, to the obtaining and
strengthening of Faith, Read Leuit. 10.11. Deuteronomy. 18.18. 2 Chronicles. 36.15. Malach.
28.19. Romans 10.14. 1 Cor. 21 1. Ephesians. 4.11.



Whether the reading of gods word only avail.
Parishioner. A Husbandman had need to know what seed will best be fit his
soil, lest in harvest time he reckon to his loss: and a Gardener had need
to have both his eyes, left in gathering Roses he be stung with Nettles, or
pricked with Thorns: Even so good Sir, a man that deals with your Doctrine
had need to have both his eyes, both his ears, both his hands, and all the
faculties of his soul applied to that purpose, lest he gather Darnell in
stead of pure Corn, and Nettles in stead of Roses, I mean hard, harsh or
false matter with the Truth, or for the Truth. Larkes you know if they be
dressed are meat for Ladies, but not to be eaten raw of any; and the purest
Emeraud may be spoiled with oil: so a man may spoil a a good matter with the
handling (as you have almost) and thereby also spoil his auditor. For in
proving that faith comes by hearing the word preached, you go also about to
prove, that the word being read privately at home, or publicly in Churches,
auailes nothing: and therein I hold you a Puritan, my self less bound to
hear you; and in the more danger of further extremity, if I believe you. As
one Female treades another, and begets an egg, but naught comes of it; even
so, one Puritan Preacher holds with another, but naught comes of it. When the
Sun lightneth one Hemisphere, another Hemisphere is full of darkness: so it
seems you would conclude, that one congregation which hears Preaching shall
be saved; and another congregation which hears Reading, shall be damned. The
light of the one belike, is the darkness of the other; and the salvation of
the one, is the destruction of the other. If that were true (which God forbid)
many hundred Congregations were damned, whereof some I know that have not heard
a Sermon this twelve month, some others, not this seven years, and some
people not at all.

Of which sorts, I will name you six.

The 1 sort of them that hear not Preaching, are they which are holden with
Imprisonment 2 Sickness. 3 Deafness. 4 Restraint of law. 5 Want of a Pastor
resident, and would gladly hear Preaching. 6 Opinions or errors in judgment,
and therefore will not hear Preaching.

Can you of your charity condemn all these? Is it possible that so little
conscience can harbor in the heart of a man, professing so purely as you do?
If you make me no better an answer, I will leave you where I found you, as not
having bought nor sold with you.


An answer how far reading reaches for auailement.
Pastor. AS David when he heard that one son of his was dead rejoiced
greatly, 2. Sam 12, 18. 2. Sam. 18, 9. Judge. 6. 2 King. 6.
and when he heard that another of his sons was dead he wept bitterly: Even
so I heartily rejoice, that you believe me in one thing, and am heartily
grieved that you so unchristianly behave your self toward me in another
thing. When the earth was wet, Gidions fleece was dry: and when the earth was
dry, Gidions fleece was wet: so contrary are you to me, and so contrary am I
to you. Yet as Elisha pra^ed God at one time that the eyes of the Assyrians
might be opened, and that at another time they might be blinded: Even so I pray
unto God that your eyes may be opened at all times, to see the Truth, 1 Timothy 1.
and shut at all other times when you appose your self against the truth. 1 Timothy 1.
I say unto you as good Paul said to Timothy, fly the lusts of youth, put
away foolish and unlearned questions, knowing that they engender strife, follow
after righteousness, and call upon the Lord with a pure heart, hearken not to
them that are loueers of themselves, nor to such as have but a show of
godliness: for as Iannes and Iambres withstood the truth, so do they.
Absalom, being once reconciled to his father David, 2 Samuel 18.
became afterward a traitor, and in the justice of God hanged himself with
his own hair: where God wotte there was no remedy nor more ado, but Absalom
my son, Absalom my son my son, and so forth in a fatherly affection,
with a few funeral tears. Take heed therefore I pray you, I pray you take
heed, take heed (in Christ Jesus, I wish you) of relapse. As Judas when he
saw that his Master was condemned, Mat. 27.
repented, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver, saying, I have
sinned betraying innocent blood, and went and hanged himself, when he heard no
other comfort from the Pharisees, but What is that to us? Even so, when raylers
and reuilers shall see the pure and perfect professors of the gospel, whom
they taunted and tormented, in great glory with the Saints, with the Angels
and with Jesus Christ himself, then shall they sigh with grief of heart, and
then shall they confess and say, These are they whose lives we thought
madness, these are they whom we had in derision, and in a parable of
reproache. Thus shall it be when as there shall be nothing said for their
comfort, and when as their conscience shall say, goare your selves with the
sword of Gods wrath. Then shall thunderbolts go straight out of the
lightnings, then shall sea and land join together to execute vengeance against
the enemies of his people: and then shall they be feign to pronounce eternity
of joy in Christ Jesus to the righteous. Now I answer you, and that not few in
many largely, but many in few briefly. As by no Law I may be charged to charge
my conscience with relating that which yet is in my heart: Even so, by no law
ought you to charge me with that which I never spoke. Yet although you propound
it not as a question, but railingly, as an objection, whether vnpreached people
be damned or not, I will answer it with as great simplicity and sincerity,
as I hope the godly will allow, and as I am sure the ungodly shall not be able
to convince. Concerning the first four sorts of people which cannot have the
benefit of preaching in manner as you lay them, I answer jointly, that the
reading of Gods word by themselves, or the same being read unto them by some
others, may avail all such as have a precedent grace, I mean all such as God
has determined to save. Without the which, preaching is as vain as reading,
other then to condemnation. For it is all one with the Spirit of God, to effect
Faith either by reading or preaching, and to save whom he will, by the one or
by the other. And so much the rather, because that small means, miraculous
means, contrary means, or no means, are as powerful with God as the greatest
means. Again, whom God has signed to salvation, and truly as his own, how
can it be that defects in the nature of such, or defaults in the consciences of
others, should be any let or stop in their progress to faith and salvation?
And here I end this answer, desiring God either to join them in due time unto
the public ministry of his word, or else to stir them up to his holy
obedience by reading.


Par. You conclude favorably and mercifully for the first four sorts of
people that have not the benefit of preaching: What is your answer concerning
the two last sorts of people?


Past. One answer serves for them both, to wit, that their state of salvation
is very doubtful and dangerous: yea, I may say further, their state by the
revealed Word is damnable: the one, because they wilfully refuse the Word
preached, when they may have it: the other, because they wilfully neglect it.
For though they have not preaching in their own Parish, by the ignorance or
careless conscience of the Pastor, yet in this his Majesty's religious
government, they may have preaching else where, not far off: to these I
affirm, that private or public reading of Gods word, avail nothing in the
way of salvation. And I say farther, by whomsoever the want of preaching
comes, by the Pastor, by the People, by the Pope, or by the Prince, it is a
foretelling of eternal perdition to that place. Solomon after his conversion,
being directed by the spirit of God, entered into special consideration
concerning the evil of ignorance, and the necessity of knowledge, and
concluded resolutely, that where the word was not preached, there the people
perished. How much more they then, that having the word preached in their own
parish, do wilfully contemn it: and the other sort that might have it in the
next Parish, and do willingly neglect it, do mark themselves with the
stigmaticall brand of perdition. Saint Paul likewise, to set forth the benefit
of preaching, and the annullitie of public reading only, said; Woe unto me
if I preach not, intending thereby the great damage done to the people where
it was not preached, and the great good that came by preaching. And in the same
considerations he charge Timothy upon pain of eternal condemnation, to
preach, not monthly, or quarterly, but every Sabbath, in season and out of
season.

As the Gadarens and the pharisees wilfully refused Christ and his merits, when
he was amongst them, and were therefore justly condemned: even so, that sort
of people having the preaching of Gods word as a mean of their salvation, and
wilfully refusing it, are also justly condemned. And as the foolish virgins
neglecting the opportunity of getting oil, were shut out from heaven when
Christ the Bridegroom came; and as those guests that were invited to the
marriage of Christ the Kings son, did all begin to make excuse, and were
therefore not partakers of that holy and spiritual banquet: Even so, that other
sort of people that may hear preaching, and do always content themselves
with reading, do negligently defraud themselves of the food of their souls,
and shall therefore be excluded from heaven. We read that many thousand
souls were converted to Christ, by preaching, at sundry times, and by hundreds
and thousands at one time: but never of any that have been converted with the
reading of Gods word only. The opposition of wicked men, and of the Devil in
all ages of the world, against preaching, and his and their quiet allowance of
reading, argues the extreme evil of ignorance, and the destruction that
comes without preaching. The manifest difference between the conversation of
those congregations, where the Word is preached, and where it is not preached,
pleades the intolerable want of preaching, and the insufficiency of public
reading only. The right use of natural things, as the Air, Fire, Water,
Bread, and such like, without the which no man can live, displayeth the
leanness of their souls that want the food spiritual, which is the
preaching of Gods word. And the precious Stone Sandastra, is unsightly to the
eye, and unprofitable for the honor, whiles it is whole: but being broken, it
shines like the Sun, and is many ways commodious: Even so, the blessed
Scripture of Almighty God, whiles it is whole, little or nothing avails the
hearer or the speaker: but being wisely divided, and proportionably delivered
to Gods household, it ouerspreadeth and inlargeth it self through every
faculty of the soul. And so it is of every bodily provision, if it be not
handled meet and fit for the appetite and stomachs of them that attend for
it, what auailes the same provision? truly nothing. And as we judge him to be
mortally sick, that has no stomach or appetite at all, though the diet be
precious and dainty: Even so, by the word of God we judge him to be near unto
eternal death, that has no longing, no desire, or hungring after the
preaching of Gods word. I conclude with Nehemiah; Nehe. 8.
Reading and preaching go together, and may not be separated, no more then the
husband and the wife: for God has joined them together.


Whether all men are saved that hear Preaching.
Parishioner. AS the River Nilus, which necessarily waters all Egypt, is not
to be neglected and contemned, though it breed Aspes and Crocodiles; And as a
Garden may not be thrown open, which bears Roses and other commodities,
because it bears also Thorns and weeds; neither a Tree that is fruitful two
years, ought to be cut down for one years barrenness: Even so, the man that
has some virtues, with a desire of increase, ought not to be rejected as a
Reprobate, though also he bring forth many vices. If my evil words, my rash
censuring of you, and of other sincere professors of Christ, has offended you;
yet let reconciliation and repentance make you amends. Though the evils and
corruptions that are in me, make me incapable and unworthy the favor of good
men: yet let the hope of some good things which God has given me, withhold
you from shutting me clean out of your fellowship, and from casting me away
like a thing of naught, as indeed to confess the truth, I have deserved. You
know the Chalenger in the games of Olimpia contends and strives with every man:
even so an Atheist and dissolute liver contends, strives, and reuiles every
good man. Woe to the cause and to the company that brought me to ill counsel.
As Elisha warned the King of Israel to beware of the King of Ashur; even so I
wish and warn the godly to beware of ill counsel, and of carnal company. For
as an old tree is made saplesse by reason of Iuie clasping it, so all sorts
are made graceless by frequenting ill company. As Jacob desired and earnestly
entreated Esau to take a present at his hands, and to receive him to favor:
even so, I heartily entreat you take this reconciliation and repentance at my
hands, and let me have your instruction in the way of salvation. An Ass
breeds every year, but a Phoenix once in 500. years: even so, good Sir,
things naught worth are soon had, and easily kept; but pure things, as pearl
and precious stones, are hard to be had, and kept with violence. Therefore as
Naomie parted with one of her daughters, and kept the other for ever, as a
special comfort unto her: even so am I resolved to part from worldly men, and
all means of mischief, and will keep you and such other with me, as for my
special comfort. As Christ with the two men spent the way from Jerusalem to
Emaus, talking of Scripture: even so will I, with my desire to Christ, spend my
time with you, and with good men, talking of heavenly things. As Solomon said
unto G d; Two things I desire of thee, deny me not: even so, good Christian
Pastor, two things I desire of you, deny me not. One is, that you will not
think it tedious henceforth to answer me to all my questions: The other is,
that you specially pray unto God for me. And now, as nothing doubting the one,
and believing the other, I propound unto you, whether all men are saved that
hear the word preached, because you said that Faith comes by the hearing of
the word preached, and salvation comes by Faith.


An Answer how far Preaching avails.
Pastor. Genesis 8.7.8
AS the Dove returned to Noah with an Olive leaf, signifying peace and plenty,
and in a sort, according to her kind, to give thanks for her entertainment:
but the carrion Crow being sent, returned not again, which was after a sort a
declaration of her unthankfulness and contempt: Even so, there are many that
use Preachers only for a time, to serve their turn, and afterward do
malign them: when as the godly do use them as the special instruments of God
for the good of the Church and Commonwealth. What then? as David when he
heard that Saul sought to kill him, walked more innocently and warily then he
did before: So now, sithence the malice of men does so immoderately abound, it
concerns me, and other of Gods children, to be more wary and heedy then
before, that then such may have no just cause to condemn us: no nor yet any
way to malign us. 2 Samuel 14.
As David did exile his Son Absalom for his disloyalty, and afterward upon
reconciliation and entreatie, did receive him into his Court and into fatherly
and princely favor: and as the poor uncomfortable father having two sons, the
one at home, the other long and far from home, coming toward him having
wasted all riotously, he met him, he all to kissed him, and with fatherly
affection provided for him: Even so, whatsoever I have said, Almighty GOD will
in fatherly affection, and in godly and divine love, receive you into his
heavenly Kingdom, and most blessed Court: always provided that you be in his
sight inwardly, as you seem in mine outwardly, that is to say, heartily
sorrowful, and with godly repentance: and as for me, I heartily remit you, I
humbly pray and beseech God to remit you; and here I promise in the fear of
his Majesty, truly and sincerely to all your questions I will answer you.

Your question, as you propound it, is; Whether all men are saved that hear
the word Preached: because (say you) I said Faith comes by hearing the word
preached, and salvation comes by Faith. It is true as you say, that all men
that have Faith shall be saved: but all that hear the word shall not have
Faith, because they are not prepared by a precedent grace, and therefore all
shall not be saved that hear the word preached. Rom 1.
Saint Paul speaking to the Romans, concerning the excellent use of Gods word,
says that it is a savor of life unto life, and a savor of death unto death;
meaning, that as in a red hot sword, there are actions of two natures, the one
to cut, the other to burn: even so in the preaching of Gods word, there are
actions of two natures; the one a means of life eternal to them that believe,
the other a means of death eternal, to them that believe not. And it is said,
that many are called, Mat. 22.
but few chosen: that is to say, many are invited to salvation, as to the
marriage of the kings son; but few regard it, few believe it, and fewer live
according unto it: therefore many are damned, and few are saved, because they
want Faith. The preaching of the word, is as the sowing of seed, Mat. 13.
whereof some falls in good ground, the residue (which is the greater part) falls
into pestiferous places: so then by these words of Christ, not all that hear
the word preached shall be saved. As Manna was a wholesome meat to some, so
was it filthy and poysonfull to others. And as wine is good for the sound and
whole man, but dangerous for the sick man: even so, the word of God, is good
and profitable for some, and very hurtful for others: and yet God is not the
author of evil, because of them that want Faith: neither yet is the ministry
of his word imperfect, or unbefitting his royal glory, which is declared as
well in those that are lost, as in those that are found.


The Parishioner demands what else is to be done besides the hearing of
Preaching.
Parishioner. NOw in all humility and plainenes (as one seasoned with a desire
of farther knowledge, and as one seized with a good opinion of your ability
and conscience to teach, I ask you with all reverence, what else shall I
learn out of your last doctrine? The young man said unto Christ, Mat. 19.24.
what shall I do to inherit eternal life (intending that he had soundly
performed all the commandments) so say I, all that you have spoken concerning
the preaching of Gods word, I hau in heart subscribed unto: what other duty do
I owe at home after the preaching thereof? Mat. 13.12.
I remember what Christ said to his Disciples; he that has, to him it shall be
given, and from him that has not, shall be taken that which he has. In his
holy fear therefore and in the reverent account of that knowledge which his
Majesty has unfolded and afforded unto me by you, lest by omission the same
should be taken from me, I ask you again the third time, what other duty do
I owe in private to the holy word preached, after the hearing thereof in
public. Math. 25.1. to. 14. Math: 7.24.
There are two sorts of Virgins spoken of in Scripture, and two sorts of
Builders: both sorts had in a sort the commendation of Christ: but when his
Majesty had reuiewed them both, he found the one negligent and the other
ignorant, and therefore he pronounces one fearful judgment against them
both. Whose example moves me to fear and to care, least by too much laboring
the wrong way, and by too little laboring the right way, I be found guilty of
punishment, and accessory to my eternal destruction. Well then here I offer to
discharge you upon your answer, and here I take the charge upon my self, if I
follow not your direction.


The Pastor answers, the word must be meditated and privately exercised.
Pastor. THere are two necessary causes, or impulsive reasons, for the reading,
meditating, and conferring of Gods word, in every householder and his household
at home, after the hearing of Gods holy word preached: there is one reason
which does necessarily concern every householder for his own part (as if he
had no household) to wit, that he by reading, meditating, and conference may be
increased in knowledge, confirmed in memory, and strengthened in Faith. Two or
three places for proof will be sufficient, because one place will be
sufficient to condemnation, for him that does neglect it. The Jews seeking to
kill Christ, because he had healed a sick man on the Saboth day, and because
he made himself equal with God, his holy Majesty moderately and mildely
preaches unto them, and refers them to the reading and conferring of the same
which publicly they had often heard of him and of others. Again, the blessing
which the holy Ghost pronounces in the first Psalm, is appertaining to every
man that meditateth and exercises himself in the word of God: in which
general allowance, we must conclude also, every householder, that does
meditate and exercise himself upon Gods word: and it must follow in a
necessary consequence, that he who does not meditate and exercise himself in
Gods word, is cursed. Saint Luke records the example of the Noble men at
Berea, Act. 17.1. to 13.
who having heard Paul preach, searched the Scripture daily, whether those
things were so which Paul preached. Sithence God sets them forth to their
great commendation in his Church universal, why may it not suffice to make men
of modesty contented, to yield the like obedience to his holy ordinance.

The other cause, or impulsive reason of meditating, exercising, and conferring
upon the Scriptures, is the bettering and increase of knowledge, for the
quickening of memory, and for the strengthening of Faith in the chiidren and
servants of every such householder, or master of family, as he shall answer
for the blood of every one, that do offend the Majesty of God ignorantly, not
knowing the Scriptures. For as the blood of every Parishioner that dies
ignorantly in his sin, shall be required of the Pastor: even so will the Lord
require the blood of Son, Daughter, and Servant, bond or free, that dies
ignorantly in his sin, at the hands of every such master of a family. Deu.
6.4. to 10.
Moses having received to this purpose a charge from God, to discharge
himself; he charge householders after this manner: First, to hear Gods
word, in these words, O Israel hear: Secondly, that their conversation be
answerable to that which they heard, consisting in these words, take heed to
do it: Thirdly, he points out one thing three times in one verse, to wit, a
reward, consisting in these words, Jehovah our God, Jehovah our God, Jehovah is
one, meaning Christ Jesus the second person in Trinity, who is become theirs,
or one with them that hear his word and do it: and lastly, he particulateth
unto them, what specially he would have done, upon pain of frustrating of all
that was done before, and of that which should be done after. The words are
these: Thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and so forth.
Setting forth plainly, that the householder was to rehearse, or to repeat
unto his people the laws and ordinances of God so often, as that thereby they
were to be found expert in the knowledge thereof. When God was to destroy
Sodom and Gomorha for their sins, Deuteronomy. 18.17.18.19.
he told Abraham thereof, and why? Because as he said, Abraham would command
his Sons, and his household after him, that they should keep the way of the
Lord. And does not the Lord by the preaching of his word, specially warn every
householder of fearful and inevitable plagues that shall fall upon swearers,
drunkards, whoremongers, contemners of his word, violaters and prophane^s of
his Sabaoths, and so of all other sins? To what end does the Lord so
particularly by his word, in that place, and in many more, particulate the
sins of the wicked, and their plagues? Is it not because the young should
know it, and be warned by it, so well as the old? And who should so specially
look unto their profiting therein; as he under whose worldly and bodily
charge they are? And why does God so charge the Pastor for the public
publication of his will, is it not because the masters of households should
with the like charge receive it from them, and deliver it unto their people?
Truly, nothing is more plain. Have we not in this Christian kingdom three
special Censures of great force against such children and servants as do
wilfully refuse, or negligently demean themselves in these orders, which are
set forth by almighty God? The first Censure is, that none such shall undertake
for any child, as Godfather or Godmother: the second is, that he or she
shall not be admitted to the holy Communion: and the third is, that he or she
shall not enter into the holy estate of Matrimony. As these Censures are
grievous and shameful to household: so are they no doubt grievous and
shameful to the householder. And again, in forty days standing forth
without reformation after the decree of the Ordinary, they fall into a more
grievous Censare, to wit, into the sentence of Excommunication, and that
justly: by the which they are made incapable of the benefit of his Majesty's
laws, incapable of Christian company, and vncaple of any use of Gods holy word
in the congregation, and in private at home, incapable of baill or maine-prise,
incapable of their own goods, incapable of christian burial, and by the
revealed word of God incapable of the resurrection, with the body of Christ, to
the joys of heaven. For the Pastors discharge in the execution of these three
first censures, he has the aduertisements, he has the articles of inquiry
at every visitation, he has his Majesty's Injunctions, and his Majesty's
Statute-lawes, and that which is most current and conscionable, the law of
almighty God. Here I might say more: but I hope, that which I have said
already, will prove sufficient for you, and for such householders and
households that be of God.


Par. I am persuaded concerning this question: and here I promise you, that for
my own part, I will use all means that are good, and all diligence that is
convenient, as well for my household, as for my self. To the end therefore,
that I may be the better able to accomplish the one and the other, I pray you
prescribe unto me an order how we shall read the book of GOD.


Seven observations.
Pastor. I Will contriue the old Testament, for your better direction and stay
of memory, into sea^en observations: as indeed the times, places, and persons
principally do occasion: wherein you have need to be perfect; for it is the
maine matter and ground work of our enterprise.

The 1 is from the Creation to the Flood of Noah. 2 Flood Birth of Abraham. 3
Birth Departing of Israel out of Egypt. 4 Departing Building of Salomons
Temple. 5 Building Captiuating of Judah and Jerusalem. 6 Captivity
Proclamation of Cyrus for their liberty. 7 Proclamation. Incarnation of Jesus
Christ our sacred Redeemer.


Par. Now I pray you declare unto me, where every of these observations do
begin, and where they end in the books and chapters of the Bible.


Past. Your question is very necessary and profitable. I answer therefore
that; The 1 Observation begins at Genesis 1. and ends at Genesis 9. 2 Genesis 9.
Genesis 12. 3 Gene. 12. Exodus 12. 4 Exodus 12. 1 King. 5. 5 1 King. 5. 2 King. 25 6
Daniel Chap. 1. 2.3.4.5. 7 Ezra Nehem. Hester Daniel 6.7. to the end Haggi
Zacha. Malach


Par. I think it very convenient, that you do set down how long every of
these Observations or Ages did last.


Past. The exact knowledge of the Times, will fall out hereafter to be most
needful: fail not therefore, as you proceed, to carry it in your memory.


The first Observation, or Age, amounts to 1656. years, which I prove by the
Ages of these ten holy Fathers, thrice reckoned in Genesis 5. to wit; Adam who
lived exactly 930 years. Seth 912 Enos 905 Kenan 900 Mahalael 895 Iared 942
Henoch 365 Mathusalah 969 Lamech 777 Noah 500. at ye flood.
Their years are specially laid down, to instruct the world in two things;
One, as a golden reed to measure the Age of the old world before the Flood:
The other, that God sets down in his own counsel, the very year and day of
every man's departure out of this world.

Make your Addition, and you shall find my computation right. 1656.

Par. I am well and plainly satisfied concerning the first. I pray you, in
like manner, show me and prove unto me the Time or Age of the second.


The Age of the second Observation.
Past. The second Observation or Age of the world, amounts to 323. years,
which also I prove by the Genealogy of other ten holy Fathers immediately
after the Flood, to wit, these.

Genesis 11. Sem ye flood one year. Arphaxad 2 years. Sale 35 Heber 30 Peleg 34
Regue 30 Sarug 32 Nahor 30 Terah 29 Abraham 70

These Fathers, and their years, are specially set down for three causes.
First, to approve the age of the story. Secondly, to continue the Genealogy of
Christ. Thirdly to teach all nations, that as the decease of the former fathers
did declare the certainty of the time, in which every man is to die; so these
fathers by their conceptions which are named, do teach and point out a
certain time of every man's coming into the world, not sooner nor later.


The Age of the third Observation.
Par. Next in order, I pray you, set down the continuance of the third
Observation or Age.


Past. The third Observation lasted 505. years, which I plainly prove by the
Stories of these three holy Fathers, or Patriarchs; to wit, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob.

Abraham begat Isaac, when he was a 100. years old.

Isaac begat Jacob, when he was 60. years old.

Jacob with his household came into Egypt, in the time of famine, Genesis 17.17
21.5.25.20 47.9.
when he was just 130 years

Jacob and his seed continued there 115. years

Lay all together, and it arises as I said before, to 505. years.


The age of the fourth Observation.
Par. Now set me down the continuance of the fourth Observation, to wit, from
the going of Israel out of Egypt, to the building of the Temple.


Past. It arises to 480. years, which is to be seen by the years wherein
these religious men ruled and governed the people of Israel, from their
deliverance out of Egypt, to Saul, the first king, who were in number 17.

Rulers. Years. Chap. and Verse. 1 Moses 40 Deuteronomy. 1.3.29.5. 2 Joshua 40 3
Othoniel Judge. 3.2. 4 Ehud and Shamgar 80 3.20. 5 Deborah Barak 40 5.3 1. 6
Gedeon 40 8.28. 7 Abimeleck 3 9.22. 8 Tola 23 10.2. 9 Iair 22 10 3. 10 Iephthe
6 10.7. 11 Abesin 7 12.7. 12 Elon 10 12.8. 13 Abden 8 12.11. 14 Samson 20 12.13
15 Eli 40 1 Samuel 4.18. 16 Samuel 14 17 Saul 1 K. 12.11

Hereunto you must add 18. years to Judge Eglons oppression.

You must add the Medianites oppression, full seven years.

You must add also to the Philistines oppression 18. years, and you must add
hereunto three years of King Solomon.

Now cast the whole, and you shall find my reckoning according as I said, 480.


The Age of the fifth Observation.
Par. How many years were there between the building of the Temple, and the
captivity? which is the fifth Observation.


Past. You shall find the account to be 432. years, which I find by the
several years of the reign of the Kings of Judah in Jerusalem.

Kings. Years. Chapters. Solomon 37 2 Cro. 9.30. Rehoboam 17 2 Cro. 12.13
Abias 3 1 King. 15.2 Asa 41 2 King. 9.10 Iahosaphat 25 2 Cro. 20.31 Iehoram 8 2
Cro. 21.^. Ochosias 1 2 King. 8.26 Athalia 7 2 King. 11.1 Ioash 40 2 King. 14.2
Amaziah 29 2 King 15.2 Azariah 52 2 Kin. 15.33 Ioathan 16 2 King. 16.2 Ahaz 16
2 King. 18.2 Ezechias 29 2 King. 21.1 Manasses 55 2 Kin. 21.19 Ammon 2 2 Kin.
22.1. Josias 31 2 Kin. 23.31 Ioachas 3 Mont. 2 Kin. 23.36 Ioachim 3. Mont. 2
King. 24.8 Zedechias 11 2 Kin. 24.18

Now make your Addition your self, and you shall find 432. years, as I said.


The Age of the sixth Observation.
Par Declare unto me, the continuance, or time of the captivity in Babylon,
which is your sixth Observation.


Past. From the beginning of the captivity in Babylon, Ier. 25.13.29.10 Deu.
9.2. 2 Cro. 36.21.
unto the end thereof, are 70. years, according as it was foretold many years
before, by Jeremy the Prophet. The truth hereof in experience falls out by the
reign of three kings or Monarchs, under whom they were captiuated for that
time.

Nabucadnezer 45. years. Euilmeredech 30. Baltashar. 3.

The odd years are inuolued in Zedechias reign and Nabucadnezers, before the
second Captivity.


The Age of the seventh Observation.
Par. There remains for you to set down the age or continuance of the
seventh, and last Observation, to wit, from the end of the captivity, unto
Christ's most sacred incarnation.


Past. The sum thereof rightly reckoned, arises to 590. years, after this
manner. There was three goings forth of the people from Babylon. The first was,
upon the proclamation made by Cirus, King of Persia, who enjoyed the Crown of
Babylon, from which time unto Artaxerxes Long-hand, was 115. years: even then
Daniels seven seauenties, or seauenty weeks began, which by the Roman
computation is 490. years. But by the Hebrews computation, reckoning by the
moon, it is but 475. years: which 115. years, and 475. years amounts just
to 590. years unto Christ's incarnation, as I said before.


Par. I desire to know what memorable matter or stories of special account,
are in every of those seven Observations, having Analogy, reference, and
coherence with other places of Scripture.


The matter principal in the first Observation.
Pastor. THe first Observation comprehends one most famous and renowned story,
or memorable matter, to wit, Creation.


The matter principal upon the second Observation.
Par. What stories or memorable matter does the second Observation contain?


Past. It comprehends two stories, the one concerning the Flood. other the
building of Babell.


The matter principal upon the third Observation.
Par. What does the third Observation contain?


Past. It contains eight memorable matters of story: 1 ye story of the ten
holy Fathers. 2 promise to Abraham. 3 ^urning of Zodome. 4 birth of Isaac. 5
Jacob and his 12. sons. 6 Joseph. 7 Pharaoh. 8 Moses.


The matter principal upon the fourth Observation.
Par. What is there comprised in the fourth Observation?


Past. It contains ten most memorable stories and matters of weight.

1 the story of the Passover. 2 Israelits enlargement 3 Pharaoh. 4 Isreal's
peregrination 5 Iosuah. 6 Judges. 7 Samuel. 8 Saul. 9 David. 10 Solomon.


The matter principal upon the fifth Observation.
Par. What does the fifth Observation contain?


Past. It contains four special stories.

1 the story of the Kings of Judah with their prophets. 2 Kings of Israel 3
Captivity of Judah with their prophets. 4 Captivity of Israel


The matter principal upon the sixth Observation.
Par. What comprehends the sixth Observation?


Past. It comprehends the state of the Church under four sorts of tyrannical
government.

1 the story of Nabuchad: Euilmeredech and Baltashar. 2 Cyrus and Darius the
Persians. 3 Alexander the Grecian. 4 Kings of Syria and Egypt.


The matter principal upon the seventh story.
The seventh Observation comprehends the state of the Church, from Artaxerxes
Longhand, unto the reedifying of the Temple, and thence unto Christ's
incarnation.

Par. We will now return to the particular consideration of every
Observation, and of the stories recited in them.


The first particular of the first Observation concerning the Creation.
Parishioner TEll me I pray you, before we enter farther, who wrote the Book
of Genesis.


Past. Moses was the writer thereof, and of the other four Books next
adjoining.


Par. When did he write the same?


Past. When he was full forty years old, near about the time that God made
him Lord-Generall of his people Israel, 2414. years after the Creation.


Par. How was it possible for him to write such a large discourse of things
done so many hundred years before he was borne, so truly, so particularly,
and so substantially, as if he had seen all with his eyes, and heard it with
his ears?


Past. Indeed as you say, (reasoning with flesh and blood, it was impossible)
but he was specially and most highly in the favor of God, who by the motions,
stirrings, and instinctions of his divine Spirit, did write the same, with
which Spirit all other Scriptures were written: according as it is said, 1 Cor.
2.14.15. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. 2 Pet 1.20. 1 Cor. 1.25.26.
No Prophecy or foretelling came of any private or public man's motion, it
came not in old time by the will of man, but by the will of GOD. Holy men of
God spoke in old ^ime as they were moved by the holy Ghost, by means of which
Spirit Moses was able to set down, as is specified in the said book, all that
was spoken and done 2400. years before he was borne, and of all things else
most profoundly, that should befall the children of Israel many hundred years
after he was buried; yea, most directly of things that should be performed
until the birth of Christ. The Prophets likewise do testify, that they spoke
nothing of themselves concerning things to come, but as the Lord by his Spirit
did inform them, which they uttered in these words; Thus says the Lord. The
four Evangelists in like manner disposing themselves severally to yield famous
and renowned testimony of Christ Jesus the holy Messiah, they so agreed in
their writings, though many years and many miles sundred them, as that their
Gospels being compared together, they al agree for matter of weight and
substance, as if they had been personally present the one with the other at one
time. And S. Paul writing his Epistles, always confessed that he delivered
them nothing for matter of doctrine and life, more then that which was taught
him, and that which he had received from the Lords own hand directly. All
which manner of writing, and form of speech, plainly publishes to all ages
for ever, the truth and dignity of Gods word, the plainness thereof to some,
and the profunditie thereof to others.


Par. Now it remains by order to expostulate upon the Creation, which you
said is one of the chiefest and most memorable matters in the first
Observation: tell me therefore what did God create the first day?


Past. God made all things exceeding good, even out of that which was then
without any preiacent matter, or out of nothing: and that not all together
(which he might well have done) but as it were by degrees, day by nay, night
after night, upon divine deliberation. The very title or name given to this
book imports in effect, this wonderful work or creation of almighty God,
whence it is called Genesis, that is to say, a begetting, generation or
creation. And the first day he created that stately Element of Fire, which he
gathered out of the whole mass, setting it in the heavens as a glorious Globe:
whence it is said he made Light, which indeed is nothing else but a quality
of Fire: in which wonderful work he brought light out of darkness, as an
Element impugning the former. In this day he created those celestial Spirits,
which are called Angels.


Par. What was the second work?


Past. The second days work was that lively Element of the air or firmament,
or as I may say more properly, that vaste or void place betwixt the earth and
the clouds, which made a separation betwixt water and water, and which gives
breath and life to all living things.

The third day he made the Element of water, which he caused to retire into
more proper places, which fitly according to the quality thereof, was called
the Seas, to wit, a gathering together of waters. The fourth Element of Earth,
which according to the quality thereof was called Dry land, was also made, and
so continues as upon a firm foundation. The general creation of compound
bodies were ordained for the inhabitants of this great element, Earth. In this
general earthly creation, his Majesty goes forward, as from things that were
imperfect, to that which was perfecter, till at last he came to the most
perfect: as from trees, herbs, and plants, which have only life (whereby they
grow and increase) unto beasts, which have an increasing and a sensitive life,
and from thence to Adam, who has a reasonable life with the increasing and
sensitive: which Element of Earth his divine Majesty stored with all kind of
commodities meet for the use of mankind, to be and to remain for ever. This
order of Creation upon a sudden view may seem strange, to wit, that God made
corn, grass, trees, herbs, and such like to grow, and to have their being
before celestial bodies, as the Sun, the Moon and Stars, whence corn,
grass, and such like, have their growth and influence. But being rightly and
advisedly considered, the Almighty Creator shows that increase, propagation
and preservation of all things consists only in him and by him, and not from
the virtue of celestial creatures, as men have imagined and spoken.

The fourth day God made lights, the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and the
Stars to govern the night: both which are very great, that they might the
better give light to the dark earth, being so far from the heavens. These
two great ornaments in the heavens do distinguish betwixt day and night, the
month from the year, one month from another, and summer from winter.

The first day and night, he created in the night fishes, in the day, birds.

Fishes were compounded of the four elements, especially of the element of
water: whence it comes that they live in the waters.

Birds were made of all four elements, but especially of the air: whence it
comes that they take pleasure in the air.

The sixth day and night he made all sorts of beasts, some to go, and some to
creep, some wild, some tame: God then made man in both kinds plurally, to
wit, male and female, and yet of single bodies, the better to help one
another, and therefore said, It is not good for man to be alone, I will make
him an helper like unto himself. He was made after all other creatures, that
he might in the beholding thereof laud and magnify his Creator. The whole
Trinity deliberated and consulted concerning him, which he did not concerning
any other creature.

The seventh day God dedicated, by his own rest and ceasing from labor, for
an everlasting rest amongst all posterities. For when heaven and earth was
finished and furnished, God said: Behold, I have made all things, and lo they
are exceeding good: He blessed that day, he hallowed it, and sanctified it to
his own honor and glory, and to the commemoration of the eternal joy, peace,
and comfort of Adam, who was fallen and risen again in Christ Jesus. Adam
rested and sanctified that very next and first Sabbath with inuocations and
offerings, etc.


Par. Seeing that God made all things so deliberately, and (as he said)
exceeding good, why did he afterward destroy them with the inundations of
waters?


Past. Almighty God saw that the wickedness of man was great on earth, and all
the imaginations of his heart was evil continually: the sons of God married
with the daughters of men, only because they were fair, and it repented the
Lord that he had made man: therefore he said; I will destroy man from the face
of the earth.


Par. What say you of our first father Adam and of his original?


Past. Adam was made or created in the sixth day, being Friday, before the
Jewish Sabbath.


Par. What was that breath which God infused into Adam?


Past. It was an immortal, an invisible, and an Angelical, or holy, pure, and
immaculate substance, incorporated in an humane body, where it became sinful.
This great and innarrable creature so wonderfully wonderful, was made and
framed of nothing, as other creatures were. As when a man makes a blast or
breath out of his mouth, it proceeds not of his nature, but of the air which
he draws in, and the strength of nature enforces out, not the same, but some
other: even so, the Almighty breathed into Adam the breath of life, to wit, it
came out of his mouth, not out of his nature, nor out of this air about us,
but even of nothing. The natural man cannot extinguish or decay the soul,
because it has production, not from him but from GOD only. As the body is the
instrument of the soul, so the soul is the instrument of God.


Par: What be the affections of the soul?


Past. They are motions first, and then acts, either good or evil. There is
also a custom grounded or fixed in the soul to good or evil, which hardly
can be removed.


Par What difference make you of Souls, or how many sorts of souls be there?


Past. Trees, herbs, plants, and such like, have a soul, but it is only
effectual for growing.

Beasts are said to have souls sensitive, feeling and perceiving things
present.

Man is said to have a soul reasonable, and having both the former.


Par. Does God daily create souls as men come into the world?


Past. It were very offensive to affirm the same: for then we should infer
that God in the beginning, when he created all things, left something imperfect
or undone. Though sin possessed the soul originally, the sixth day, in which
Adam was created, yet God created afterward no new, but preserved the self
same soul by his divine wisdom, whereby it may be said he works always,
and yet not after the same manner as at the first.


Par. I remember that you said, the soul was created pure, holy, and
immaculate, how came it to pass that it was so suddenly ouerthrown, by
contagion, corruption, and such like?


Past. The breach of Gods commandment was the cause of that corruption. Such
is the nature of sin, that it seazeth upon the soul, possessing it with all
filthiness, and so consequently dispossessing her of all former integrity. As
in a sanctified and pure soul, the beams of Gods truth and clearness does
shine: even so, in a soul once touched or tainted with disobedience, all
deformities and works of Satan will appear. As the body fears death, and
other hurtful things: even so, the soul that continues in Gods favor, not
only shunneth gross sins, but also small sins, because they also prove
very pernicious.


Par. Prove the immortality of the Soul.


Past. The immortality of the Soul is substantially proved by the
resurrection of Christ. God said to Moses; I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
and Jacob. Whereupon Christ concludes that Abraham and the faithful shall
live for ever. If our souls were not immortal, no reward to the godly, nor
punishment to the wicked were to be expected. Then as S. Paul said, we of all
men were most miserable. In this life the soul does nourish the body with much
care: but being freed from the body, it nourishes it self with divine
contemplation.


Par. Why did the Serpent tempt Euah, and not her husband?


Past. As the Serpent being a most subtle creature, was a fit instrument for
the Devil, to traduce sin and disobedience into the woman: even so, the
woman being a goodly, garish and an intising creature, was a fit Instrument to
traduce sin into Adam, and so consequently into every man.


Par. How did the Serpent tempt her?


Past. He tempted her with the promise of greater felicity and glory, which he
effected by alleging profit, and omitting the penalty. Sometimes the Devil
peruerteth Scripture, giving it a false gloss, or a wrong interpretation, as
he did of that Psalm, when he tempted Christ himself.


Par. Why did God so severely punish so small a sin? and all mankind for one
man's sin?


Past. There were two reasons: one was to declare how loathsome a small sin
is to his Majesty, and withal to declare that a small sin does deface and
disgrace the holy Image of God in man.


Par. Why did God create all other creatures first, and man last?


Past. Thereby to declare his singular mercy and providence, in preparing and
in making all things ready, meet, and fit for man against he came, giving no
place for him, nor for his posterity to depend upon themselves, neither yet to
be doubtful of any thing that might satisfy the body, content the eye, and
delight the heart: for all things were ready.


Par. Whence have we the names, and the right use of these creatures?


Past. Even from Adam: for we read that God brought every creature; or rather
every creature came of his own accord, being commanded of God, and presented
himself before Adam.


Par. How were all things made and created?


Past. They were made even of this word Let: as though he would declare
thereby his exceeding power, to whose will or Let, there was no let or stay,
but all things had a present prosperous progress.


Par. Whereas in the creation of Adam God spoke of himself plurally, Genesis 1.26.
to wit, Let us make man after our own likeness: declare unto me, somewhat
briefly and materially, what God is; by whom, as you say, all things were so
wisely ordered, so effectually performed and miraculously maintained and
preserved.


Past. The Epicures, Atheists, and such like, are compared to the Hircanian
fishes, from whom comes neither good nor evil, because they are not danted
with the fear of God, nor delighted with his love. But you I find by this, to
be far otherwise minded, and therefore reverently and in the fear of his holy
Majesty, I will answer you. God before the creation was perfect, and after
the creation was the same. God is unknown according to his essence, and
infinite according to his Majesty. He illuminateth spiritual things, he
illustrateth intellectual natures, and he is the highest amongst intelligible
things. No man is able to attain unto the essence of a Star, much less of
God. As a man standing upon the shore of the Sea, sees not the breadth and
depth of it: even so, the Angels in heaven and the Elect on earth, may see God
really, and yet not comprehend the depth of his greatness, nor the height of
his everlasting essence. In regard whereof, he answered Moses, when he desired
to know what he was, with few words of innumerable difficulty, and
incomprehensiblenesse, Exodus 3.14
saying: I am that I am. As though he had said; Though I did declare my self
unto thee what I am, yet can thou not comprehend me, neither yet he to whom
I send thee. When he was to comfort Abraham, and to set him forward as an
example unto all his posterity, for faith and an upright life: Genesis 17.1.
he said unto him, I am God all-sufficient. As if he had said; Fear not, in me
is all knowledge, all power, all mercy: even that is my name.


Par. What is the Word, or second person in Trinity?


Past. He is the only natural Son of the most high and eternal God his
Father, his Word, his Image, and Character, coessentiall and coequall with the
Father and the holy Ghost. He is said to be the Son of God, in regard of his
Godhead, and not in regard of his manhood.


Par. Now let me entreat you to speak of his humanity.


Past. This divine nature took upon himself a reasonable soul, and an humane
body of a virgin: and was made flesh as of the seed of David, and of the root
of Iesse. The Godhead in no case can be said to have any conversion into the
flesh: neither the Godhead to stand in stead of the soul, no more then that he
could be turned into sin. After his glorious resurrection, these two natures,
to wit, his Divinity and his Humanity, continued still distinct in substance
and properties, and ever continued one and the same. And yet it is to be
granted, that there was great necessity of the Godhead in his humane action or
suffering, that by the virtue thereof he might overcome all sufferings, yea,
Death and the Devil. In the holy union or conjunction of these two natures, we
are to take them inseparably: even ^ince the moment or point of time, in which
the holy Virgin conceived, being made as one person.


Par. What use have we of these two natures in one person?


Past. It declares the obedience of Christ, performed in the manhood, with
innarrable wisdom, and surpassing faithfulness. In his wisdom, he was able
to deliver unto us, the whole will of his Father: and in his faithfulness, he
concealed nothing. As the Phoenix in her hot nest at Arabia is burned to ashes,
and yet says, I live still, and old age dies in me: even so, Christ, though
being in his grave like one dead, yet dies not, but mortality dies in him,
for the good of all men.


Par. What be the parts of Christ's mediation?


Past. It consists principally of two parts: to wit, his Priesthood and his
Kingdom. His Priesthood stands in teaching, and in doing: he is a Prophet,
Doctor, and Apostle, for that he plainly teaches the will of his father, and
says; I call you no more servants, because they know not what their master
does: but I call you friends. Christ taught by Prophets, by Apostles, and by
Evangelists, and himself taught by far greater authority then ever did any
before, or after. The priesthood of Christ, and the priesthood of Aron being
compared, we shall therein find two necessary parts to be considered: One is,
what manner one he ought to be that enters into this Office: The other, how it
ought to be executed. The manner or quality of him that enters, is twofold:
to wit; well qualified with gifts within, and well called without. He is to us
sanctification, that is, freedom from the tyranny of sin: the effects of
righteousness and sanctification go always together. For immediately so
soon as man is partaker of Christ's righteousness, he is also possessed with
the spirit of sanctification, which works mortification and vivification.


P. what is the third person in Trinity?


Past. He is said to be the holy Ghost, to wit, a divine and innarrable
majesty proceeding from the father, and the son: who in respect of his diverse
operations, workings and effects, is called by diverse effectual names: which
being considered in their natures, they do clearly enlarge his gifts and
graces toward the Church.

It is sometimes called Fire. Oil. Wine. Water. Dove. Cloud. Wind. Spirit.
Earnest pe^ny Comforter. God.



Par. What religion had these and the other holy fathers before recited, and
betwixt the Creation and the Flood?


Past. The law of nature. Genesis 11.
They had the Law of Nature, which was a rule of reason, or an hidden justice,
enforcing to do well. It was indeed the sum and effect of Gods divine law,
which was most lively expressed in the names of those ten holy Fathers, who
being linked together, makes up a Christian Sacrifice, or an holy sum of true
religion. As he is not rightly reckoned a man that wants reason: so he was not
then rightly reckoned to be of God, that wanted this religious rule. Saint Paul
said, as the eternal power and godhead, by the creation of the world, makes
all wicked men, without excuse, though they had no law: even so men knowing the
end of their creation, by the law of nature, are without excuse if they do
evil, though they were blind and saw not the creation. The Gentiles, said he,
that had not the Law written, did by nature the things contained in the Law;
they having not the law written, were a law unto themselves: even so the people
of the old world, and others, that sinned before the Law, perished
everlastingly: as those which afterward perished under the law. Romans 7.23
Saint Paul calls the Law of nature, the Law of the mind: showing thereby, that
as the mind is such an effectual power of the Soul, as makes all other
faculties thereof, and of the body to, pliable, and without tediousness to
perform matters beyond ordinary strength: even so, by the law (being
spiritual) he was urged to the performance of all other matters and laws
which were literal, beyond all ordinary strength: And as a line Diameter-wise
in a Geometrical figure does equally divide one side from another: even so
this Law natural divides equally that which is Gods to God, and that which is
man's to man. Nightingales are said to contend in singing, that they die in
their contention: happy, say I, is he that so contends with the law of his
mind, against the law of his members: for so to die, is indeed to live. The
East gate of Sala Temple was always shut and never opened, because the Lord
God of hosts once entered by it: and as into the windows of Noah's Arc, nothing
entered but light: even so the mind of man, wherein the law of God has once
entered, must always be shut against profane inclinations, and ever opened to
divine contemplations.


Par. Who were enemies in those times? and who, I pray you, were they that
privately or publicly opposed themselves against this Law, and the professors
thereof?


Past. These were open and known enemies, to wit; the Devil. Caine. Lamech.


From whom issued that wicked sort of people, who so highly displeased God,
that he repented him of the good he had done to mankind.


Par. What is there to be said concerning the Devil?


Past. The Angels seeing the excellency of their creation day by day, and
perceiving that they, and all creatures else were made but as servants to Adam;
they presently upon his creation murmured, and not being content, God threw
them into everlasting darkness. The head of these evil spirits was Lucifer.
As he was more clear and brighter then other Angels; so he fell into a more
filthy Apostacy. He was not evil by kind, but of his own aduisement turned
out of kind: he fell willingly, as Adam, from good to evil, he coueted
highness, not meet for him: therefore he was thrown into the lowest place, so
that he, with an infinite number more, were deprived of their beauty and
glory. They were at the first heavenly bodies, but upon their fall, they were
turned into the quality of the Air.


Par. What signified the Arc?


Past. It was a figure of Baptism: that as God saved Noah and his family by
the Arc from perishing with water, and the people of Israel from the red sea:
even so the Lord saves the faithful in the Sacrament of Baptism.


Par. Why was Noah and his household saved, and no more?


Past. Noah found favor with God because of the promise which God made
concerning Christ, unto Adam; and that his majesty might be derived, as
concerning the flesh, even from those ten holy fathers before the flood,
whereof Noah was one.


Par. How were the creatures, by two and two, and by seven and seven brought
into the Arc?


Past. They were brought after that manner voluntarily, and according to the
will of God, as they were brought before Adam to receive their names: the
virtue attractiue not being in the Arc, but in the will of God.


Par. Why was the Arc so long a making?


Past. Thereby to declare the long patience and sufferance of God, who desired
not their destruction, but rather their reformation. For as Felons being in
prison, that see the Judge come, and themselves araigned, must needs judge that
they are not long to live: even so the people of the old world, seeing the Arc
a preparing, might have easily perceived that their destruction was not far
off. He gave them an hundred and twenty years repentance (for so long the
Arc was a making) they not knowing of any one year: Yet they repented not:
wherefore God overthrew them ineuitably.


The second Observation, from Genesis the ninth to Genesis the twelfth.
Parishioner. THe second Observation comprehends the building of Babell: in
which was dispersed over the earth, the posterity of Noah: tell me the manner
of it.


Past. When as the people were increased mightily, Genesis 11.1. to 10.10.9.
and were altogether of one language: they, in the pride of their hearts, and
strength of their body, enterprised to build a city and a tower, whose top
should reach unto heaven: preventing (as they said their dispersion: But it was
in vain, because the power of God was set against them. The place was called
Babell, in the Land of Shinar, which was afterward called Babylon, and
signified confusion: according to that which did happen by the confusion of
their languages 130. years after the Flood. Nimrod was their ruler: He
oppressed them sore, and in regard of his tyranny, there rose a proverb of
him, to wit; The mighty hunter. He was the first hunter.


Par. Why did God withstand their building with the confusion of their
languages, and not some other way?


Past. It was to great purpose: for hereby God severed and separated them far
and wide in the world, by the variety of their tongues and languages, after
this manner. Noah had three sons; Sem, Cham, and Iaphet. Sem and his
posterity dwelt in Siria, in Caldea, and in Persia, being the East part of the
world: whence came the Syrians, the Aramites, Chaldeans, and the Persians.

Cham with his seed, went into Canaan, being the South part of the world: of
whom came the Cananites, the Egyptians, Ethiopians and the Arabians.

Iaphet went with his seed into the Western and Northern parts of the world:
of whom came the Greeks, the Medes, the Simbrians, the Germans, the
Scythians, the Turks, and the Thiatirians.


Par. Into how many languages, or companies were they divided?


Past. Heber was a rare man, a double Henoch: he was two seauens from the
creation. The Hebrew tongue remained in him, whence he had his name, which
enlarged his glory. In his time Babel was built by the curse of Cham: thence
they were scattered, over the world into 70. companies according to that number
of languages: But afterward they were in bondage 70. years, in that place: at
this building their ages were again halfed the third time.


Par. What say you concerning the first particular, mentioned in the third
Observation?


Past. There be other ten holy Fathers, Genesis 11.
wherein God begins to renew his Church, and to multiply it: over whom his
Majesty was very careful and provident when Christ should come, as of a
peculiar people: which Fathers are set down in their order, whose stories are
dispersed over the book of God. The particulars thereof have reference,
coherence, and analogy, to many other stories and particular matters, whereof I
have spoken sufficiently in another book heretofore. I have set down their
names only, because you may read their particular stories.


Sem. Arphaxad. Sale. Heber. Regue. Peleg. Sarug. Nahor. Terah. Abraham.
The second particular in the third Observation, concerning Gods promise to
Abraham.
Parishioner. What say you concerning the promise which God made to Abraham?


Past. Genesis 11.32.12.4.
God called to Abraham when he was in Chaldea or Mesopotamia his native
country, when he was 75. years old, 423. years after the flood, (at which
time Terah Abraham's father died, being 205. years old, at Haran) whence
Abraham and Sara his wife, went immediately after to Canaan, the land of
promise, as the Lord commanded him.


Par. Declare unto me the manner of the calling?


Past. The God of glory appeared unto Abraham, and said, Exo. 12.1.
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house,
unto the land which I will show thee.


Par. Why did God command him to forsake his Country, his kindred, and his
inheritance, and not name the place he should go to?


Past. Thereby to declare that his Majesty had otherwise determined concerning
Abraham: in regard whereof, his Country, his kindred, and whatsoever else he
had, was nothing to be accounted: and withal almighty God did therein teach
all nations the obedience that is due unto his voice and calling, and the faith
that every man should hold of better things, then those which they are willing
to forsake.


Par. Genesis 12.4.
How will you reconcile Moses and Stephen? the one says that Abraham went from
Haran to Canaan, Acts 7.
when God called him, the other says, that he went from Charran.


Past. The one and the other calls the place Charran, and so they understand
it: but the Latin vulgar edition calls the one Haran, which is not in the
original.


Par. Now declare unto me the promise that God made to Abraham?


Past. The words are these: I will make of thee a great Nation, and will bless
thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing: in which words God
promises Abraham two great rewards, or special gifts. One was that he should
have a son, who should rise to be a mighty people, or nation, over whom God
would have a special eye, above all other nations.


Par. What was the other promise, or blessing?


Past. It was, that in his seed all nations of the earth should be blessed: in
which words was Christ Jesus the Messiah closely and secretly promised.


The third Particular.
Par. Declare briefly the story of Zodomes burning?


Past. After the Lord had been with Abraham to renew the promise unto him,
concerning a Son, his Majesty imparts unto him the desolation and destruction
hanging over Zodom and Gomorrha, because of their sins. Whereupon Abraham
being moved with pity entreats the Lord for them; whose request was heard,
upon condition, that if there were found ten righteous, he would not destroy
the wicked for their sakes: which ten not being found the fire came down from
heaven, and destroyed all saving Lot, his wife and two daughters.


Par. Why did God impart the destruction of these wicked men to him? might not
he have done it without his priuity?


Past. Yea, God might have done then as now, Genesis 18.18.19.
what he would and without the knowledge of any, saving that Abraham was to be
a great Nation, and I know him, says the Lord, that he will command his
household, that they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness.


Par. What is meant by this that is said. Genesis 18.1.2.
The Lord appeared to Abraham, and in the next verse, Behold three men appeared
unto him as he sat in his Tent?


Past. Therein was declared the singularity and plurality of persons in the
Deity, one in three, and three in one: which the holy man Abraham manifested by
their entertainment. For it is said he saw three, but he reverenced and
worshipped one.


Par. How came it to pass that Lot (having had such special favor) committed
incest with his own daughters? a double sin doubly performed?


Past. Almighty God in the uprightness of his justice, gave him and his
daughters into their own wills, or rather into reprobate minds, to work such
uncleanness of the flesh: showing thereby how greatly he had sinned by
infidelity, when he forsook the city Zoar, which God had granted him, for
fear of the fire which was round about him, but nothing near to hurt him, and
would rather depend and rely upon his own wits and provision.


The fourth Particular.
Par. Rehearse briefly the story of Isaac?


Past. This Isaac is he of whom the promise was made, Genesis 21.1.
to Abraham his father in the chapters going before, who should multiply in
number as the sand at the shore of the Sea, and as the Stars in heaven; out
of whose seed also Christ should be expected for. The manner of his
conception, and birth, was so admirable, as did in some sort foretell and
prefigure Christ. For it is said, that he was an hundred years old when Isaac
was borne; yea, so old was he and his wife, that they had left off to be
together as man and wife, which made her to laugh when the matter was moved
unto her: Nevertheless according to the time which the Lord God had foretold,
Sarah conceived, and Isaac was born. According to which admirable conception
Christ was conceived, and according to which wonderful birth Christ was borne:
both the one and the other were performed duly and substantially, beyond the
use of reason, and beyond the understanding of all men.


Par. What have we to learn herein? to wit, by the strangeness of Isaacs
conception and birth?


Past. By the conception and birth of Isaac, which was not to be deemed in the
use of reason, all men are driven from themselves, and as it were to abjure the
expostulation with flesh and blood, when as the Lord has given out his word.
For howsoever it may seem unto the natural man impossible and incredible, yet
to the spiritual man, who has the eyes of faith fixed on Gods promises, the
same things are east.


Par. It is said that Isaac was circumcised the eight day after he was borne:
Genesis 17.10.
I would know of you what was meant by it?


Past. Circumcision was a covenant between God and Abraham's seed. Or
circumcision was called a covenant, because it signified or was a sacrament of
a Covenant and had the promise of grace annexed unto it. This covenant of
circumcision in the particular consideratio^s thereof, has relation to the
Sacrament of Baptism: by comparison the one does expound the other, and by the
right use or nature of both, the latter does abolish the former.


The fifth Particular.
Par. Declare first in some sort briefly the story of Jacob.


Past. Genesis 27.28.29.
Isaac had two sons, Esau his eldest, and Jacob his youngest. This Jacob having
gotten the blessing of his father, which by birthright was due to Esau, he
fled away into a strange land for fear of his brother; and having nothing but
his staff when he went over Iordane, was feign to lie all night in the maine
fields: where appeared unto him a vision of Angels ascending and descending
upon a ladder, and withal he heard a voice that said unto him, I will not
leave thee nor forsake thee, until I have brought my purpose to an end. This
Jacob, by the divine providence of God was brought to Haran, where Laban his
Uncle dwelt, with whom he continued 21. years. In which time he had gotten
twelve Sons, and exceeding great store of goods and cattle, and then
returned unto his own land, as the Lord commanded him: and as he travailed the
Lord appeared unto him again after another sort, to his comfort. When he came
safe to his own land, immediately he built an Altar for the service of the
Lord.


Par. Declare unto me what is to be observed in his twelve Sons?


Past. You shall see in these twelve holy Fathers, descending of Jacob, the
performance of Gods promises made unto Abraham: for in them he renews his
Church, stablisheth the same, and beautifieth it with divine ceremonies,
Sacrifices, and Sacraments, to be solemnized until Christ promised Messiah.
Read their stories in Genesis 49.


Par. Declare them by their names.


Past. 1 Ruben. 2 Simeon. 3 Leui. 4 Judah. 5 Dan. 6 Nepthalie. 7 Gad. 8 Asher.
9 Isachar. 10 Zabulon. 11 Joseph. 12 Benjamin.


The sixth Particular.
Par. Declare unto me the story of Joseph?


Past. Genesis 37. and 39.
Jacob loved Joseph his youngest son exceeding tenderly: wherefore his
brethren hated him, and devised to have starued him in a pit: but when they saw
Carriers passing by, they took him up again out of the pit and sold him unto
them, who brought him to Egypt: where, in short time he grew in such favor
with the King, as that he was made Lord and governor over all the land of
Egypt. By means whereof, Jacob his father and his brethren came and dwelt in
Goshen, being the best place of the land, because of the exceeding great famine
that was in all the world.


Par. What are we to learn out of this history of Joseph and his brethren?


Past. We are first to observe the unnatural affection of Joseph's brethren, in
hating of him when he had done them no hurt at all.

Secondly, we are to observe their extreme cruelty in selling their brothers
life as a beast, or at least as a bondslaue.

Thirdly, their wonderful disobedience, and undutiful affection toward their
old father.


Par. What special profit are we to draw out of these their villainies?


Past. Hereby is made clear unto us the maruailous wisdom, the secret
providence and exceeding mercies of God, even in these most vile and bloody
actions of theirs. For by this means Joseph was made a prouider for them and
their father, in the time of famine: Thus God draws good things out of the
wicked actions of ungodly men, thereby to discomfort the ungodly, and to
comfort the godly.


Par. Was Joseph raised by the King of Egypt, in respect of his learning, in
respect of his Chivalry, or in respect of any natural matter that was
extraordinary in him?


Past. Iosaph was the youngest of all his brethren, and a man of small or no
report: but the Lord was with Joseph and showed him mercy, and got him favor
in the sight of his Master. Insomuch that Pharao the King, said of him, can we
find such a man as this in whom the spirit of God is? There is no man of
understanding or wisdom like him. Genesis 41.38.



The 7. Particular in the third Observation.
Par. Where died Joseph?


Past. After he had ruled most renowmedly, 80. Genesis 41.46 ^^0.22.
years in Egypt, when he was an hundred and ten years old, he dyed in
Egypt, where he was honorably buried.


Par. Why did he so specially charge his brethren to carry his bones from
Egypt? Exodus 13.19.
Is there in the Judgment of the faithful any place better then other for
burial, or for the resurrection?


Past. There is no place better then other for the resurrection: but it was to
declare his great faith in the promise that GOD made concerning the Land of
Canaan, which his people should inherit according to the time prefixed, as in
plain words he utters unto his brethren at his death, saying; Surely God
will visit you, and will bring you out of this Land, which he swear unto
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.


Par. How came it to pass, that there was another King in Egypt called
Pharaoh?


Past. It cannot be but there were many Kings in Egypt, after the decease of
the King that favored Joseph, whiles Israel continued in Egypt. The Emperors
of Rome were always called Caesar's, the Kings of Persia were called
Artaxerxes, and so the Kings of Egypt were always called Pharaohs.


Par. Why did Pharaoh so enuiously and so hatefully deal with Gods people?


Past. Because he saw that they were like to grow great, and to be mightier
then he. Exodus 1.10
Therefore he said unto his Nobility, Come, let us deal wisely, lest when they
be multiplied, they join with our enemies.


Par. How did the King prevail with his policy and devise against Gods
people?


Past. So he prevailed, that by how much he vexed them, and sought by all
means to diminish them, by so much the more they multiplied, and grew to be a
great nation.


The eight Particular, concerning Moses.
Par Who were parents to Moses?


Past. Amram the Leuite was his father, and Iochebed the daughter of Leui was
his mother.


Par. How came he to be called Moses?


Past. Pharaohs daughter found him thrown out near a river in a basket, Exodus
2.3.4.
for the avoiding of her fathers bloody laws: then she took him for her
own, and called him in her Egyptian language Moses, signifying according to
the Etimologie thereof, delivered out of the waters. Wherein was the providence
of God.


Par. How befell it that the Kings daughter should have the nourishing of him,
in the hands of his own mother?


Past. It cannot be that it was any way imagined or devised by the Kings
Daughter, or by his Parents: but it was the divine providence of God that the
Mother should throw him there, and that the Lady should come there to bathe her
self, even at that time, and at no time else. And it was the providence of
God, that his own sister should be there to deliver the child to be nourished
by his own Mother at the Kings Daughters commandment.


Par. How long continued Moses under this Ladies government, and in the Kings
house?


Past. Until he was full forty years old.


Par. Why did he depart from the Kings daughter, and from the Kings house,
being far more royally maintained then any of his Nation, was it not a
tempting of God?


Past. He being a godly man was often vexed with their profaneness, and
heathennish impiety: therefore he departed from them, and refused to be called
Pharaohs daughters son, Heb. 11.25.26.
choosing rather to suffer adversity with the children of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season.


Par. How did Moses prevail in so great a message, with so great a King, and
himself being a mean man?


Past. He must needs prevail exceeding well, Exodus 7.8.9.10.
because the hand of almighty God was with him: as appeared by the signs and
wonders that he wrought upon Pharaoh, and upon his people, by the plagues also
that were poured out upon the beasts of the land.


Par. Why is it said that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh? If God hardened
his heart it was no marvel though he would not let the people go under the
conduct of Moses, to wander the world he knew not whither.


Past. God is said to harden the heart of Pharaoh, not because he did withdraw
his graces from him, but because indeed God did not give grace unto him, by the
which he might be qualified in heart, and obedient in spirit unto the will of
so great a Commander. And after this manner the hearts of all the reprobates
are set and inueigled against God, and against his people, and therein they are
authors of their own deaths.


The first Particular.
Parishioner. WHat was the Passover?


Past. Exodus 12.
It was a Lamb, that indeed was killed and eaten ceremonially by the people of
Israel, only at the commandment of the Lord, the night before they went out
of Egypt, and which was to be continued until Christ, who was the true
substance thereof. This has reference, analogy, and coherence in many
particulars with the Sacrament which our Savior Christ did institute the night
before his death: and thereby you shall see how the one expounds the other: and
how the latter does expound the former.


The second Particular, concerning the miraculous departure of Israel out of
Egypt.
Par. Declare unto me the manner of it briefly:


Past. Jacob the Father of the twelve Patriarchs, Genesis 47.4.11.46.6.27.
came into Egypt by reason of famine, (when as his own son Joseph ruled the
land under Pharaoh) and brought with him only 70. persons: but 215. years
after, when they went out of Egypt, Exodus 12.35. to 39.
they were in number six hundred thousand men on foot, beside women and
children: and they did as Moses commanded them in asking of the Egyptians
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and immediately after they
had eaten the Passover, they went their way out of Egypt. And Moses commanded
the people to dedicate that day in which they were delivered from Egypt, for a
remembrance, Exodus 13.17.18.
that GOD might be honored. God guided them in their way toward Canaan, by a
cloudy pillar in the day, and by a pillar of fire in the night: not the next
way, which was but forty days journey, but by the way of the Wilderness,
which was forty years journey.


Par. Moses says in Genesis, and in Deuteronomy. that 70. Genesis 46.27 Deuteronomy. 10.22.
Acts 7.14.
persons came to Egypt and no more: how comes it to pass that S. Luke says,
that there came 75. persons? and how can you reconcile them?


Past. S. Luke speaks not exactly of the time in which they came into Egypt,
but rather of the time of Jacobs continuance in Egypt: therefore he takes a
large scope in his computation, to make up his number of 75. persons, to wit,
by reckoning Er and Onan who dyed in Canaan, and Manasses and Ephraim, the
sons of Joseph, being already in Egypt, with the Patriarch Jacob himself:
and thus Moses and Luke are reconciled plainly.


Par. How can it be said by Moses, Gene. 15.13. Acts 7.6.
that the people of Israel were but 215. years in Egypt, whereas Saint Luke
says, they were 400. years there?


Past. The 400. years must needs begin when the seed of Israel was first
in affliction under Ismael, who at the birth of Isaac was rejected and cast
out: so it falls out right, and not otherwise.


Par. How can this act of Gods people be allowed or tolerable, to wit, that
they should borrow the Egyptians goods, and so carry them away deceitfully?


Past. The people of Israel indeed had jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
and raiment of the Egyptians, but not as borrowed and lent. For thus said the
Lord: Exodus 3 21 22.
I will make this people to be favored of the Egyptians, so that when they
go, they shall not go empty: Exodus 11.2.3.
For every woman shall ask of her neighbors Jewels of silver, Jewels of gold,
and raiment, and put them on their sons and daughters, and so shall you
spoil the Egyptians: Thus the people Israel were charged to do, by Moses
their governor, and this charge he received from the Lord, and they did
accordingly. So thus you see plainly, how God disposed of his own goods, to
his own special people: which was just in him, and holy obedience in them.


Par. Why did God lead the people as it were round about, and not the next way
to Canaan?


Past. Exodus 13.17.18.
God himself answers it thus: because the Philistines being a fierce, and a
most savage cruel people, who would have spoiled them by wars, and because
they might not be discouraged thereby, therefore the Lord sent them the farther
way about: and withal because in their journey through the wilderness they might
see the wonderful works of God, miraculously feeding with bread from heaven,
with water out of flint stones, and preserving them from the rage of wild
beasts.


The third Particular.
Par. Declare unto me the story of Pharaohs drowning briefly.


Past. When it was told the King that all Israel was gone out of his land,
Exodus 14.5 etc.
he was in a great wrath, and therefore he took 600. chosen chariots, and all
the chariots of Egypt and Captains, over every one of them, and ouertooke the
host of Israel, as they were camping by the great Sea. The people of Israel
being exceedingly afraid at his coming, cried out unto the Lord, and murmured
against Moses: And Moses being a faithful man and valiant, encouraged them,
saying; Stand still, fear not, behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you this day. For the Egyptians whom ye see this day, ye shall never
see again: the Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold your peace. And the
Lord said unto Moses; Stretch out thine hand with thy rod upon the Sea, and
divide it, and let the children of Israel go on dry ground through the midst
thereof. And so Moses did as the Lord commanded him, and the sea ran together
in heaps, or as banks on both sides, so as the people of Israel went over
dry shod: and the Egyptians seeing them pass pursued after them, and were all
drowned: For at the commandment of the Lord, the Seas returned in the former
place.


Par. What shall we learn out of this?


Past. There are many things well worth the marking, specially three things:
First, his divine providence in preventing the slaughter of his people Israel
by the Egyptians, who fiercely followed after them.

Secondly, that he uses to tempt and to try his own people how they will
behave themselves in dangers.

Thirdly, it did declare the omnipotent power of Gods glorious Majesty,
mastring and ouerruling the raging Seas, hurling them on heaps this way and
that way, as he would, opening and shutting, dispersing and gathering together
to the preservation of his holy people, and to the utter destruction of the
wicked. Wherein is showed that how great soever the power and devises be
against the Church or any part thereof, it auails nothing.


The Fourth Particular.
Concerning the 42. standings, stations, or habitations of the people Israel,
as they traveled in forty years space toward Canaan. Which progress or
journey of theirs serves very well to direct a man's memory, in all things that
were done during that time: whereof some of them were pleasant, and some
unpleasant. And also it serves to put us in mind of our travel or
peregrination toward the land of the living. Some of which standings,
stations, or habitations, (being Emphaticall) I will set down with their
deriuations, and what was famously done in every of them.

Par. What is the first Standing or place of their Habitations?


Past. The first place where they rested is called Ramases, Exodus 12. Numb.
33.1.2.
which signifies worms meat: giving us to understand, that such is the
nature of mankind; to wit, subject to corruption and to perishing, that travel
toward the celestial kingdom of heaven: and therefore he that will have a
prosperous progress, must wholly depend upon the power of God. Here the people
of Israel did eat the Passover, being girded about, having staves in their
hands, and shoes on their feet, the 15. day of the month Abib at evening,
which month was part of April and part of May, according to the computation
of the Hebrews. And it was called the first month of the year, which pointed
unto the time of the year in which Adam fell, and in which Christ should die.
This Passover had relation to the promised Messiah Jesus Christ, who just
according to this time in which Adam fell, should be sacrificed for the sins
of those that did expect for him in the flesh by faith. They did eat it being
girded about, with slaves in their hands, and having shoes on their feet,
signifying constancy, and all readiness to go forward even unto the end,
nothing esteeming the oppositions of men, the temptations of the Devil,
neither yet the rebellion of their own hearts.


Par. What is the second Station or Standing?


Past. Succoth, which signifies poor cottages, showing thereby as is our
nature or continuance of body in this life, so is our habitation, to wit, poor
and naught worth in comparison of our eternal habitation. Six hundred
thousand men besides women and children came to this place: of which great
multitude none entered into Canaan by reason of unbelief, but Joshua and Caleb.
And hereby men are taught that poor and beggarly are all things of this life
in comparison of things immortal in the life to come. And withal here is
declared that many thousands seem by words and by works to seek after the
Kingdom of heaven: but very few shall obtain it and possess it, through the
want of faith.

Exodus 15.23. Number. 33.8
Marah, which signifies bitterness. It might well be so called, for all the
waters were bitter in that place, which made them to murmr against Moses,
saying; What shall we drink? but he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed
him a tree, which when he had thrown it into the waters, they were sweet.


Par. What is the sixth place or Station?


Past. Elime, signifies strong hearts. There God cheareth and comfort them,
wishing them as it were to be strong and of a great courage: for then they were
brought from those rivers and wels that were bitter, to this place, where was
12. fountains of clear and pleasant waters, which did as it were, point out
aforehand, and give knowledge of 12. Apostles that should give testimony of
Christ. There also were 70. Palm trees, which gave them to remember, of 70.
souls that came to Egypt. After this sort God uses to refresh and to comfort
the weak and wearied in soul.


Par. What is the seventh place?


Past. Sin, which signifies thornie. There were thorns, brambles and briars,
according to the signification thereof: thereby showing that in our progress
toward the holy kingdom, there are many oppositions and lets.

Exodus 17.
Rephidim, which signifies temptations. That place might well be so called,
because God did there tempt and prove their faith and patience: for in that
place there was no water. There indeed they declared themselves to want both
faith and patience: for they contended with Moses, and said, Give us water that
we may drink: And Moses said unto them why contend you with me? Wherefore
do you tempt the Lord? And Moses cried unto the Lord saying; What shall I do
unto this people, for they are ready to stone me? And he took the rod
wherewith he had smitten the river, and he smote also a great rock, and
thence gushed out great streams of pure water in the sight of them all. Thus
almighty God uses to prove and to tempt his people with many miseries, and
specially with the want of bread and drink after plenty of both: showing hereby
that there is no means to get supply, but only in Christ, the rock, from whom
issues abundance of all things.


Par. What is the twelfth Habitation or standing?


Past. Mount Sinai, signifying, Exo. 19.20
everlasting temptation. There the mighty Majesty of God showed his power and
glory, with fearful voices, with sounds not usual, with earthquakes smoke
and fire: insomuch as that the people not daring to come near the Mount, he
called unto Moses, to whom he gave his laws, written with his own finger in
two tables of stone. After this manner (although not in form and fashion, yet
in effect) most admirably did the Lord deliver and publish the Gospel unto the
Apostles, to wit, with a rushing or noise, that was extraordinary, with a
mighty whirlewinde, which was not usual, and with tongues set as it were with
fire.


Par. I pray you tell me yet more largely concerning this Law given by God
himself.


Past. This Law Moral is that which almighty God delivered unto Moses, to the
end that he should deliver the same unto the people Israel. It compelled
obedience, therefore it was called a precept. Every man's conscience was to
yield unto it, therefore it was called truth. It instructed all men, therefore
it was called doctrine. Romans 7. Gal. 4.
As a wife is in subjection to her husband so long as her husband lives: even
so Israel was to be in subjection unto this Law, so long as Christ lived. And
as an Heir that is Lord of all, Gal. 3.11. Romans 7.7.
while he is a child, differs not much from a servant, but is under Tutors
and Governors: even so, Israel, though heirs by promise, were under the law,
as under Tutors, until Christ came. As Adam, by disobedience became subject to
death: so they by obedience to the Law, became subject to life, not by the Law
but by Christ. As the Estridge seems to fly, when indeed she flies not:
so righteousness seems to come by the Law, when indeed it does not. And as
the use of a Watchman is to give knowledge of the enemy, so this Law is to
give knowledge of sin, who is an enemy. We know that a Master teaches and
trameth up children in natural things, until they come to strength and
knowledge to live in the world of themselves: even so, this Law teaches and
traineth up young and old in holy duties, until they come to full strength in
Christ to live eternally.


Par. What use was there made of this Law?


Past. Out of this Law was derived or originally taken, the Judicial Law,
which is an humane Justice, disposed with good and understanding words, without
contrariety and with the ability of the subject. It enforces a restraint of
sins against God: and it commands the performance of those duties toward
the brethren, which they would have done to themselves. It appoynts directly to
every man his own, and his proportionable reward according to Justice and
equity. Exo. 20.24 Leuit. 26.3 2 Kin. 23.3. Ier. 32.13 1 Pet. 2.13
It was the same in effect as the Law of Nature. Moses ordained many particular
Laws of this quality.

1 For Apprehensions. 2 Judgments. 3 Executions.


Par. Against whom was this Law judicial in force and effect, and how long?


Past. Against the Jews only then and thenceforth, whiles they lived in Tents
and Tabernacles: and also unto the captiuating thereof. It is abrogated from
them that live under the Gospel, saving for the substance and the end. The
form and quality remains yet in the conscience and discretion of Christian
Princes: but so, and after that sort, as the maker thereof may be known to
love and fear God, and to desire the eternal good of his Subjects.

Of which,

Some did belong to the Tabernacle. Priests. Levites. Stirring up of holiness.
Keeping of things in remembrance. Preservation of peace.


All these and the rest had their release and discharge upon the sacrificing of
Christ the perpetual Aaron, according to the order of Melchisedech. As one day
takes away the credit of another, and one strain of Music extincts the
pleasure of another: even so, the Gospel takes away the credit of the Law:
and the present sight of the glorious substance of Christ, the long delayed use
of shadows. We are not bound to Ceremonies, as the Jews were, but to Jesus
Christ, who is to be worshipped in spirit and truth. As Mercury by his
eloquence subdued men, and reclaimed them from their Barbarism, and Orpheus by
his Music subdued wild beasts: even so, Christ Jesus by his glorious
Gospel, has reclaymed men from the Law, and by his blessed Spirit has
reduced them from savageness unto his most blessed will and pleasure.


Par. What special observations must I use in the reading and understanding of
the Natural, Moral, and Judicial Laws?


Past. These eight observations will very well serve you, by way of
interrogations.

1 the person of him that gave it. 2 persons to whom it was given. 3 time when
it was given. 4 place where it was given. 5 manner how. 6 punishments that were
inflicted. 7 executioners. 8 continuance.

Iotbatha, the next station, signifies, a turning away. So it might be well
called: for there Moses was in danger of his life amongst the people, by the
turning away, or rebellion of Corah, Dathan, Number. 16.
and Abiram, with other their associates.

Salmonah, signifies a shadow, or a portion, or a shadow of a portion. Thereby
was plainly showed to the people of Israel, what proportion or inheritance
should be given them by vanquishing the heathenish Cananites, who inhabited
those parts of the world. The people Israel were feign thorough the Kings
cruelty, to travel round about the kingdom of Edom, before they could come
again into their way to Canaan: in which journey they were exceeding weary, and
therefore they did murmur again at Moses: which made the Lord to plague them
with fiery Serpents in that place. But when they repented he eased them; yea,
healed them by looking upon a brazen Serpent. Thence they went to Moab, which
signifies, the Father, showing thereby that Moab was begotten in Incest by
Lot, on his own daughter: of whom came those wicked Moabites that always
persecuted Israel, and fell to Idolatry. They committed whordome with the
daughters of Madian. There Balack hired Balam.


Par. What Law, or what religion had the people of Israel, in those days,
mentioned in the book of Leuiticus?


Past. They had two laws, to wit;

Iudicall and Ceremonial derived of the Moral which was given on mount Sinay.


Par. What is the Iudicall Law?


Past. The Iudicall Law is an humane justice, derived out of the Moral, or
divine Law, disposed with good and understanding words, without contrarieties,
and with the ability of the subject. It inforceth a restraint of sins against
God, and the performance of those duties toward the brethren, which they
would have done to themselves. It points directly to every man his own, and
proportionably divides rewards according to justice and equity. It is the same
in effect, as was the law of nature, Moses ordained many particulars of this
quality, namely; for Apprehensions, Testimonies, Judgments, Executions,
against the Jews only, then and thenceforth while the Arc was in Tents and
Tabernacles, and also unto the captiuating thereof. This law is abrogated from
them that live under the Gospel, saving from the substance and the end: the
form and fashion lies yet in the consciences of Christian Princes: but so,
and after that sort, as the maker thereof may be known to love and fear God,
and also to desire the salvation of his Subjects. This law is not fearful to
them that do well: but to them that do evil, if he be not a mad man, a
child, or a natural fool.


Par. What other particular ordinances was there ordained by Moses, out of this
Judicial Law?


Past. There were very many glorious things, that did properly appertain unto
Christ, celebrated under earthly things, and under figures: All which
celebrations and ceremonies, had their discharge, and end upon the Sacrificing
of Christ. As one day takes away the credit of another: even so the Gospel
takes away the credit of this Law, and the present sight of the glorious
substance of Christ, the long delaying use of shadows. We are not bound to
ceremonies, as the Jews were, but to Jesus Christ, who is to be worshipped at
all times, and in all places, according to spirit and truth.


Par. What special invention have you for the reading and understanding of
this Judicial Law?


Past. These eight observations will very well serve for that purpose, if they
be used by way of interrogation.

1 The person of him that gave it. 2 persons to whom it was given. 3 place
where it was given. 4 manner how it was given. 5 punishments for every offense.
6 executioners of this Law. 7 time when the Law was given. 8 continuance of it.


Par. What kind and sort of Sacrifices were there used by this Law, to publish
and to prenosticate Christ?


Past. These seven sorts: to wit; 1 A Burnt offering is so called, because it
was burnt. 2 Meat was an oblation of diverse kinds of bread. 3 Peace takes the
name of peace from the Hebrews. 4 Sin had relation to the sin of the Priests,
and not the sin of the people. 5 Trespass was for sins committed of
ignorance. 6 Drink when men willingly vowed. 7 Vow was when men did curse
themselves, if they did not this or that.


Par. Now I pray you deliver something unto me, concerning the ceremonial Law
that you spoke of, contained also in this book of Leuiticus?


Past. The Ceremonial Law consists of diverse rites, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments, which were nothing else indeed but signs, shadows, and shows of
Christ, for to come in the fullness of time. As an Anchor fastened to the earth,
keeps a Ship safe in the midst of waves and billows of raging seas, until
the storm be past, and that it may arrive into a wished haven: even so these
Ceremonies staid and fastened on the promises of God, concerning Christ's death,
and the benefit thereof, kept the faithful Jews in comfort and hope, until
they arrived into the haven of heavenly happiness. As a good son in all his
troubles, affianceth his repose in his father: as a staff supporteth a
trauailer in his dangerous ways: and as pillars support earthly buildings:
even so these Jews, by faithful observations and ministration of these
Ceremonies were maintained, supported and defended unto everlasting joys
through Christ. As the blood of a Lamb does appease the rage of a cruel Lion:
so these Ceremonies, wherein was shedding and offering of blood, did signify
the blood of Jesus Christ, which should be shed to appease the rage and wrath
of almighty God. We read that nothing can bruise the Adamant, but the warm
blood of a Goat: even so in the holy Scriptures, we find, though no Ceremony
could bruise Belials bands, yet the blood of Jesus Christ has bruised, and
burst them into pieces. These Ceremonies were solemnised by the ten Fathers
before the Flood, by the ten Fathers after the Flood, and by the twelve
Patriarchs succeeding them.


Par. What particular observation shall I make for the better understanding of
this Ceremonial Law?


Past. There are diverse necessary observations: but specially these six, which
by way of interrogation you must find out.

1 The Tabernacle. 2 Feast days. 3 Sacrifices. 4 Sacraments. 5 Sacrificers. 6
Sabbath.


Par. Tell me first of all, what the Tabernacle was?


Past. The Tabernacle was a place principally dedicated for religion, whiles
they were in the wilderness, traveling toward Canaan. It was made by the
Lords commandment, of brass, of silver, and of gold, as an whole entire
work, or one thing to contain diverse things, but parted with va^es into three
rooms.


Par. What was the first room of the Tabernacle?


Past. The first room was Southward, containing an Altar of earth, whereon
burnt offerings were made by the people themselves, and also by the priests, on
the Sabbath day, and on feast days.


Par. What was the second room of the Tabernacle?


Past. It stood Northward, it was called holy, and it was made and framed with
Sethim wood, and covered with gold, that it might not rot, and that the priests
might burn incense thereon, both morning and evening. There was the table of
gold whereon was set the show bread, which was not lawful for any man to eat,
but for the priests, when it was stale: and they were to supply it with new,
against every Sabbath. In this room were set diverse instruments which were for
the service, and dedication of the Temple.


Par. What was the third room or part of the Tabernacle?


Past. The third part of the Tabernacle was Westward, called the holiest of
all, made of Sethim wood, but covered within and without with fine gold. In
this room was the Arc of the covenant, which represented God himself.
Therein were the two Tables of the law, the golden pot, Aarons rod, and the
Mercy seat, covered with Cherubins, and shadowing the Arc. This most excellent
workmanship of the Almighty, with the Arc and all the appurtenances, continued
amongst the people of Israel, until the death of Eli the high priest: at
which time the Arc was taken by the Philistines in a great battle, and it
continued as a pilgrim, tossed too and fro in private men's houses, until the
death of Saul the king, then king David (being moved with the zeal of God, and
being grieved that the Arc of his Majesty was so exiled and banished) joined
with the Levites, the priests, and Nobles of the land, to fetch it to Ierulalem.


Par. Now I would hear what is convenient, concerning feast days which you
spoke of?


Past. There were diverse feasts used in the ministrations of the law,
especially these five.

The feast of Easter. Pentecost. Trumpets. Tabernacles. New Moon.



Par. Tell me briefly, concerning the feast of Easter?


Past. Easter was one of the great solemn feast days, in the which all the
people of Israel were commanded to come unto Jerusalem, wheresoever they
inhabited over the world; that then and there they might eat the Passover, in
the commemoration of their deliverance out of Egypt, and also in expectation of
the holy Messiah which was for to come: who in Jerusalem according to that time
should be the true Passover, or Pascall lamb offered upon the cross.


Par. What was the feast of pentecost?


Past. The feast of Pentecost, or Whitsontide, was another such like feast, or
holy assembly, full (...) days after Easter, thereby to continue the
remembrance of that time in which God gave them the two Tables of stone written
with his own hand, and also to have relation by a spiritual expectation, to
the abundant graces of God in Christ, which shortly after his Ascension was to
be sent down upon his Apostles, in sign of cloven tongues.


Par. Set me down I pray you the feast of Tabernacles.


Past. It was a feast of seven days continuance, which was solemnized for to
put the people in remembrance of their estate, when they were in bondage under
Pharao, and when afterward they were in the wilderness without house or
habitation full forty years: that thereby they might be taught to endure with
the greater patience, in the consideration of their better and more continuing
habitaon which in time to come they should have in Canaan, and afterward in
the holy kingdom of heaven.


Par. There remains yet one more of the feasts, which you named, to wit, the
feast of new Moons?


Past. The feast of new Moons, was the beginning of every month, in which the
people were bound to offer burnt offerings unto the Lord.


Par. You spoke unto me of Sacrifices: I pray you tell me somewhat thereof, and
how many kinds or sorts there be?


Past. Sacrifices were of sundry sorts or kinds, especially four.

The first kind was a burnt Sacrifice or oblation, which was offered by the
common people, upon the Altar, as they would, and as they were able.

The second kind of Sacrifice was that, which the priests only offered for
the sins of the people, according as every man was able: after this manner,
for the governors they offered a Goat.

The third, for the poor they offered a pair of Turtle doves, or two young
Pigeons.

The fourth, for other of less ability, the tenth part of an Epha.


Par. What was the third kind of Sacrifice?


Past. The third kind for sanctification or consecration of the priests, was
of three sorts.

1 a Calfe. 2 Ram. 3 red Cow.


Par. What was the fourth kind of Sacrifice?


Past. The fourth kind was a Sacrifice or oblation of reconciliation, or of
atonement, which the high priest offered for himself (when he appeared before
God in the holy place) under these special kinds, to wit; A young Cow. A
Bullock. Two he Goats. Aaron was to cast lots which of these two he Goats
were to be offered and which should escape.



Par. You spoke of Sacraments: tell me I pray you how many Sacraments there
be, the difference betwixt the old and the new, and how I may know the
difference betwixt a Sacrament and a Sacrifice?


Past. Sacraments in the time of the Law, as in the time of the Gospel, were
in number two: Circumcision, and Paschal Lamb, before Christ. Baptism and the
Lords Supper. after Christ.



Par. Now declare the difference betwixt the old Sacrament and the New?


Past. The old did promise Christ for to come, the new does perform him
already come. Again, the old were but figures, shadows, and relations of
things to come: The new are the very same indeed, the most perfect and most
substantial matter.


Par. What difference is there betwixt a Sacrament and a Sacrifice?


Past. In Sacrifices men offer and give unto GOD: in Sacraments GOD offers and
gives unto men.


Par. Declare unto me the sixth particular, to wit, of Sacrificers, who they
were, and what else is fit to be learned therein?


Past. Sacrificers were the priests, as was Aaron and his sons. They were men
separated, and segregated, from ill and profane uses, to the service of the
living God, appointed at the Altar, by praying, by praising, and by sacrificing
for themselves, and for the people, in and about the Tabernacle whiles it was
in use, and afterward in the temple of Solomon.


Par. What is the seventh and last particular, to wit, the Sabbath?


Past. The Sabbath signifies according to the deriuation thereof, rest, peace,
and quietness. It was precisely kept through out all generations amongst the
people of Israel, upon diverse and sundry express commandments, so as neither
man nor beast might be seen doing any bodily labor therein: which outward
rest had relation and reference to the inward affections of the Soul, wrought
by the spirit resting from sin, and all profaneness. Therein also was an
absolute representation of heavenly rest, and peace of soul and of body, in
the life to come. They might not gather Manna on the Sabbath day, though it
came from heaven miraculously, for the nourishment of their hungry bodies;
because they might be occupied in a more special business, to wit, in
gathering spiritual Manna, a food for their souls. The Lord of the Sabbath
vouchsafed to dignifie the Sabbath with his own personal presence, and to
make it a sign, or pledge of warrantise betwixt his people and himself. And
this was published first by God himself; secondly, by Moses; thirdly, by Jesus
Christ; and fourthly, by the Church. This ceremonial Sabbath did properly
point out a time public for the ministration of the Law: which immediate
Sabaoths instituted by Moses are of diverse sort; A Sabbath of years, to wit,
every seventh year, in which the Israelites might not till nor sow. There was
a Sabbath every fifty year, in which was proclaimed a general freedom, which
year was called a year of Iubile. The Noemian is seven months. There is
another external and immediate Sabbath, to wit, the Sunday or Lords day, which
God appointed to his Church. There is also a spiritual Sabbath, to wit, an
holy rest from sin, which only appertains to the elect such as of whom S. Paul
speaks, who live not after the flesh, but after the spirit: these shall enjoy
the celestial Sabbath, which is that most pure and perfect Sabbath, which was
begun in the old Ceremonial Law, continued in the new Law, and which shall be
accomplished in the kingdom of heaven.


Par. What use or profit have we by the Judicial and Ceremonial laws?


Past. The use and profit is twofold: one is an humbling of all sorts at the
feet of God. For when our sins are gathered together, as it were on an heap,
and the entrance into our own unableness to make a kind of satisfaction, it
must needs strike a fear and a confusion into our hearts, and thereby
prostrate us before God. The other is the simple submission, and yielding up of
all the functions and offices of soul and body: which is impossible for man to
do, because the soul does consist of a mind, and of affections, and the
mind does consist of understanding, judgment, and memory: all which are
decayed, and to no purpose for the work of our redemption. Yea, all the
members of man's body, and all the parts thereof, which should be employed in
his holy worship, do easily and plainly bewray their stubbornenesse,
negligence, and contempt.


Par. What is the sum, or principal matter in the book of Numbers? besides
the numbering of the people, which makes the book called Numbers?


Past. Moses therein sets down diverse Laws.


some for the Nazarits. some against fornication. People. sedition. Levites.
ignorance. Priests. incredulity. Sabbath. murmuring. Sanctuary.

The fifth Particular, concerning Joshua.
Par. Now I desire to know, who wrote the book of Joshua?


Past. Joshua or Jesus the son of Nun carries the title of this Book, because
he and Eliazar did pen the same. He was a most fervent follower of the faith:
therefore by faith most admirably he slew mighty Kings, Joshua 10.26.
even one and thirty in number, and divided their dwellings and their lands by
lots, amongst the people of Israel, 11.12.
according to the word of the Lord, many hundred years before. He resembled
Jesus Christ the ouer-ruling and everlasting Conqueror. He was three and fifty
years old before he came from Egypt, he ruled seauent eene years, 24.29.30.
he died when he was one hundred and ten years old, and was buried in mount
Ephraim, which was his own limitation, border or lot.


Par. What special matter have I to mark therein?


Past. The book deuides it self by chapters, after this manner, in regard of
the matter.

From Chapter the 1 to chapter the 6 comprehending Joshua hisstory, the story of
the Spies, the story of Jordan, Circumcision, and Passover. 6 13 the story of
the Gibeonites, Sacrilege, the sacking of Cities, and killing of Kings. 13 20
Cities of refuge, the Levites portion, Manasses tribe, Joshua his zeal. 20 24
Israel have now rest, Ruben, Gad, and Manasses, are sent to their inheritances:
Joshua exhorts the people, and dies.


The sixth Particular, concerning the book of Judges.
Past. This book, according to the Greek and Latins, is called Iudicum,
because indeed the matter principal is concerning the government of Gods
people under Judges, from the death of Joshua unto Hely the high priest, about
299. years: and Samuel wrote it.


Par. Declare unto me the Judges in their order, and by their names?


Past. As I have set them down: so have you need to be perfect in their
particular stories.

Othoniel, of the tribe of Judah, who gave them rest 40. years.

Ehud of the tribe of Benjamin, who gave them rest 18. years.

Deborah and Barack of the tribe of Ephraim, who reigned 40. years.

Gedeon of the tribe of Ephraim, who slew his brethren and was slain himself,
ruled 40. years.

Abimelech of Isachars tribe, 23. years.

Tola of Manasses tribe, 22. years.

Iair of Ephraim, 16. years.

Iepthe and Abesan of Judah, 7. years.

Eglon of the tribe of Zabulon, who ruled 10. years.

Abden of the tribe of Manasses, who ruled 8. years.

Sampson of the tribe of Dan, who ruled 20. years.

Hely of the tribe of Leui, who ruled 40. years.

These Judges continued in story 450. years, reckoning withal the years of
the oppressors.


Par. Who were the oppressors?


Past. These they were by their names, and by their succession.

Philistines, Cananites, Sidonians, Heuites, Chusan,
under whom Israel were in bondage 8. years.

Eglon King of Moab, under whom they lived in bondage 18. years.

Iabine and Sisera King of Canaan vexed them 20. years.

Madianites vexed them 7. years.

Amalekites, and they of the East, with their Captains Oreb and Zeb.

Zeba and Zalmana Kings of Madian.

Philistines, who vexed them 18. years.

Ammonites, who vexed them 40. years.


Par. Who wrote the Book of Ruth?


Past. Samuel the Prophet is said to write this Book, because the Hebrews
do reckon it and the Book of Judges as one: for Ruth lived when Deborah ruled
Israel.


Par. What was this woman, of what Nation or kindred?


Past. She was a Moabitish woman, naturally descended from Lot, who committed
incest with his two daughters.


Par. Why then is Ruth here reckoned and accounted, sithence she came of such
an incestuous wicked man?


Past. She is set forth in holy Scripture, and the Book entitled by her
name, to the open view of the world, that the Jews might see the calling of
the Gentiles, by Jesus Christ to salvation: for he lineally descended of Ruth,
who was a Gentile. Therein God the Father declared that he received poor
sinners into favor, by revealing of the Gospel unto them, and by uniting her
and other of the Gentiles into the stock and lineage of Abraham.


Par. What is the matter contained therein?


Past. It contains a piece of David's genealogy, which by the Evangelists is
translated into the genealogy of Christ: that thereby men might know Gods
predestinate decree, for the salvation of penitent sinners by Christ, who long
after should be borne of sinners.


The seventh Particular, concerning Samuel, in the fourth Observation.
Par. Declare unto me I pray you, in brief answers, concerning the Book of
Samuel, and the Book of the Kings.


Past. According to the Latins there are four Books, to wit, two entitled
the Books of Samuel, and two entitled the Books of Kings: all which four
according to the Hebrew, are only two, reckoning both the books of Samuel for
the one, and both the Books of the Kings for the other. The Writers thereof
(severally a piece or a portion) were Samuel, Nathan, Gad, Ahiah the Shilonite,
Iddo the Seer, as may appear by these words; 1 Chronicles. 29.29.
The acts of David are they not written in the Book of Samuel the Seer, in the
Book of Nathan the Prophet, and in the Book of Gad the Seer?


Par What was this Samuel?


Past. He was the son of Elkanah an Ephrahite, whom Hannah his Mother
obtained at the Lords hands, by prayer, when she was in reproach amongst all
Israel by reason of her barrenness. She dedicated him to the service of GOD
in the Temple, who proved a most faithful and a most constant Prophet of the
Lord under King Saul.


Par. What does the first Book of Samuel contain?


Past. It principally contains the story of King Saul.


Par. What does the second book of Samuel contain?


Past. It contains principally the story of King David.


The eight Particular, concerning Saul.
Par. These three Kings, to wit, Saul, David and Solomon, who by succession
held the famous and renowned kingdom of the Hebrews, when it was yet whole
and entire, I would pray you to set me down their stories particularly.


Past. It is true: these Kings in their time, were the most renowned of any
that ever followed after them, and they were the first that ever was over the
people of God. 1 Samuel 9.10.11.
Saul was the son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin; which was a great
prerogative to that tribe, being the least and the last. By seeking of his
fathers Asses which went astray, he came by Gods providence unto the place
where Samuel the Lords Prophet dwelt. Samuel seeing him, and knowing Gods will
concerning him, he entertained him amongst the best of the people, and the
next day he anointed him King over the people of Israel: and because it
should not seem incredible, he gave him three special tokens, by the which
he should know that the Lord God had so appointed: all which tokens came to
pass that same day. Samuel having also assembled the people, he told them that
the Lord had appointed them a King, even in his wrath, because they refused to
be guided and governed by him, and he presented Saul before them: at which time
they cried and said, God save the King. And immediately Samuel having declared
what duty did belong unto the King from his subjects, the Lord touched the
hearts of a band of men, who hereupon followed the King to the wars against
Nahash the Ammonite, in the behalf of Iabesh Gilead that desired help of the
Israelites. The spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he was turned into
another man, that is to say, he by the same Spirit became more wise, and more
heroically valiant, then he was before, and in qualities meet for a King.


Par. How came it to pass, that Saul was sent to seek the Asses? His Father
being a man of great reputation and riches, he had many others no doubt to
send.


Past. It was the divine and secret providence of God, that the Asses went
astray, and that Saul should seek after them, whereby he might be brought as
it were by the hand, unto the place where Samuel was, and for that purpose
which his holy Majesty had determined. That which Almighty GOD has done
herein, was not to declare unto men what he could do, but what he would do,
for the better stay of faithful men upon his promises and providence, and
withal to teach all men, that when any matter happens to the good of the
godly, he should not attribute it to his own endeavor or pains, nor yet to
the feigned Gods, as by Fortune and Chance: but even by a secret divine rule,
bringing great and mighty things to pass by weak and small means. And that
the very guiding ^and of GOD was in it, appears plainly: for God told Samuel,
^aying; To morrow about this time I will send thee a man of Benjamin, named
Saul, him shall thou annoint to be governor over my people Israel.


Par. Why was God displeased with his people of Israel for asking a King,
sithence they had none?


Past. Almighty God was not angry with them simply for asking a King: 1 Samuel
8.4.5.6.7.8.9. to 22.
but because he himself had governed them, and guided them always before,
without a King, to wit, by Patriarchs, by Chiefetenants, and Judges: Under
whose government they always prospered so long as they obeyed the Lord in any
measure. And in that time in which they desired a King, they were governed by
Samuel a holy man, and the Prophet of the Lord: they desired a King, even in
wantonness and pride of heart, and not in regard of any want. Therefore the
Lord said to Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. to 11.
Hear the voice of the peopple: they have not cast away thee but they have
cast away me. As though he had said, thy government was my government, or as I
commanded thee: they do not reject thee in this, but me, therefore hear them,
and tell them what manner of man he shall be unto them.


Par. Does God appoint over any Nation such kings and rulers as shall tyrannize
and deal roughly with their subjects?


Past. When as the people are not thankful unto him for a good King, and when
they do not humbly acknowledge the benefit thereof, then he usually plagueth
them with wicked tyrannous Kings.


Par. How did Saul behave himself toward God, having received such a special
favor, as to be made a King over such a great Nation?


Past. After he had reigned two years over Israel, 1 Samuel 15.
he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, to wit, in offering a
burnt offering: Leuit. 1.
which was not lawful for any to do save for the Priests, upon pain of
death. Therefore the Prophet Samuel told him plainly from the Lord, that
therein he had done foolishly, and that his kingdom should not continue: and
so Samuel departed from him in great indignation, for the zeal he bare to the
Lord, and for the love he bare to the kingdom.


Par. Saul as we read was in great distress, 1 Samuel 13.
by reason of many thousands of the Philistines that were come against his
people Israel: and they by reason of Samuels long tarrying at Gilgall, 12
were scattered and fled, save six hundred men that remained with the King.
Therefore Saul fell to his prayers, and did offer as he said, a burnt Offering
unto the Lord: tell me what offense was this, as the present necessity
required?


Past. 1 Samuel 13.
Saul in like manner transgressed the voice of the Lord, in keeping the King of
the Amalekites alive, whereas he was commanded to kill him, and in reserving
for Sacrifice, the best of the Oxen, and the best of the Sheep, which was also
directly forbidden. Out of which place I will answer your demand or question
from the mouth of Samuel the holy Prophet: When thou wast little in thine own
sight, wast not thou made King over Israel? The Lord commanded thee to kill
the Amalekites, and to let none remain: Now thou have not obeyed the Lords
voice, but have turned to the prey: wherein thou have done wickedly in the
sight of the Lord. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression
is wickedness and Idolatry. Behold, thou have cast away the word of the Lord:
therefore he has cast away thee. Hereby you may see that sin or
transgression is not reckoned for the smalnesse or greatness thereof, with
God, as it is with men: for many times small sins in our sights are great
sins in Gods fight: and great sins in our fight are small in his sight. Men
must rule themselves by his word, by his holy Laws, and not according to good
intents, or earthly men's directions.


Par. How did Saul behave himself toward his subjects?


Past. Saul envied David's good report and just desert. When David returned from
the slaughter of the Philistines, the women by one consent, and as it were by
Gods appointment, met David, crying and saying, 1 Samuel 18.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand: and for this
cause only Saul was exceeding wroth with David, and ever after sought to kill
him: and in the persecuting of him he slew every of the Priests that favored
him, and took an oath of all his subjects to betray him. It were too long to
particulate his cruelties toward others his poor subjects, whom he should
have defended and maintained.


Par. What was Saul's end?


Past. The Spirit of God being departed from him, and his own heart given him,
he ever after followed that, even to the wars of the Philistines, at which
time he desperately slew himself.


The ninth Particular, concerning David.
Par. Next in order remains to speak of David.


Past. David was of the tribe of Judah, of the root of Iesse, borne in
Bethlehem. As it was said of Jerusalem, 1 Samuel 16.
Many excellent things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God: even so, many
excellent things are spoken of David. Saul being rejected of God for his
sins, David was anointed King in his room, by the same Prophet Samuel: 17.
and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him: insomuch that though he were but a
little simple man, yet he slew Goliath that defied Israel, he slew many of
the most mighty Philistines, 2 Samuel 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc.
who were enemies to Saul and his people. When Saul was dead he succeeded in
the Kingdom, according to the Lords ordinance, and valiantly subdued mighty
kings that made war against him. David renewed religion and offered to build
an house for the Ark of God. David sinned grievously in Gods sight, therefore
the Lord punished him exceedingly many ways, and afterward upon repentance he
received him into special favor.


Par. David being anointed king, and being so valiant in the wars, having
also the favor of the people, why did he run away and hide himself from
Saul, and why did he not withstand him?


Past. David having Gods Spirit, knew very well that he might not resist nor
rebel against Saul the Lords anointed: and though he were to succeed him in
the kingdom, yet he knew that he was not to enjoy it before him, nor to be
partner with him: and to avoid the rebellion and disorder of the people, the
Lord commanded Samuel to annoint him King secretly, lest the people should
offer him help, and rebellion against Saul. And farther, so godly and upright
in heart he was toward the King, that when he most injuriously and fiercely
sought to kill him in all lands, yet he would never carry a thought to use
bloody hands against his King, though many times he might have done it. He was
so far from causing any other to do it, 2 Samuel 1.
as that he slew those that brought him word that Saul was dead.


The tenth Particular, concerning Solomon.
Par. Now impart unto me briefly the story of Solomon the third King of Israel.


Past. There was never the like King before Solomon, 1 King. 3.
neither the like shall be after him, for his wisdom and riches. So soon as
ever he put foot into the kingdom, he loved the Lord, as the holy Ghost
testifies. Wherefore the Lord appeared unto him, promising to give unto him
whatsoever he would ask. Of all the glorious things of this life he desired
nothing: but he desired wisdom, whereby he might govern his people
prudently and religiously: wherefore the the Lord gave him wisdom and riches
above all men: both which great blessings he principally employed to the
building of a Temple for the Lord at Jerusalem, where his holy Name might be
called upon, in true religion. He governed his kingdom all the days of his
life quietly and peaceably.


Par. Some calls into question whether Solomon were saved or not, because of
his sins with so many outlandish women.


Past. It is certain that he sinned therein exceedingly. Yet Almighty God
seeing his repentance, in his rich mercies forgave him all, according as he
promised his Father David, 1 Samuel 7.13.14.15.
saying; He shall build me an house, and I will stablish the throne of his
Kingdom for ever; I will be his Father, and he shall be my son. If he
sin I will chasten him: but my mercy I will not utterly take from him.


Par. Seeing that the fourth Observation does end at the building of the
Temple, declare unto me briefly, concerning the same.


Past. Solomon took order with Hiram the King of Tyrus, 1 King. 5.
for Cedar trees and Fur trees. He had thirty thousand men, whom he sent to
Libanon by course, ten thousand a month: he had twenty thousand that bare
burdens, and fourscore thousand Masons in the mountains: he had three
thousand and three hundred men that ruled the workmen. The holy Ghost makes
mention that it was built in the 480. 1 Kin. 6.1.
year after the people of Israel came out of Egypt, 2 Cro. 4.
and in the fourth year of King Salomons reign.

It contained three rooms, that were specially dedicated. The first room was
called Salomons porch or hall of the Jews: wherein was an Altar of brass for
burnt offering. Therein was the fire of God continually maintained. There the
common people offered burnt offerings morning and evening, of such things as
were brought. There Christ taught: there Peter wrought miracles.

The second part or room of the Temple, was called Holy, because none might
enter into it but the Priests, who were many: and they were distinguished into
24. Orders. In it was an Altar of Gold, whereon was burnt Incense for a sweet
sacrifice, morning and evening. There were the golden Candlestickes, and the
Lamps burning day and night, there were two golden cups with Frankincense, and
that fine and costly veil, which at the death of Christ was rent from the top
to the bottom.

The third part or room was called the Holy of Holiest. In it was the inner
house or Oracle, made with Sethim wood and Cedar, covered with gold within and
without. Into this place none entered but the high priest: and that but once a
year, to offer for the sins of the people. Whereby was figured the
propitiation of Christ once for all. In the midst thereof was the Arc, the
two tables of the Law, the pot of Manna, Aarons rod flourishing, the Book of
Deuteronomie, Gods oracles and his answers. Near thereto was an I Will that did
pertain to the Gentiles, and to all people clean and unclean: therefore it
was called the court of the Gentiles. There was the treasury for the poor:
there the widow offered her mite. There the woman was discharged by Christ,
which was taken in adultery.


Par. What difference or odds, I pray you, was there between the Temple and
the Tabernacle?


Past. Indeed if you compare the Tabernacle, the Parts, Rooms, Furniture, and
Ordinances thereof, with the Temple, you shall find little odds or difference.

The first part or room of the Temple and Tabernacle had relation, analogy
and reference to the people of the old world before the flood, and thence to
the giving of the Law.

The second part of the Temple and Tabernacle, had reference, analogy and
coherence to the Church and Synagogue of the Jews, with all their laws and
Ceremonies, prefiguring Christ. The which people properly did appertain unto
God: And the shadowing of the Mercie-seate signified their defense.

The third part or room of the Temple and Tabernacle, had relation and
analogy both to the Jews and Gentiles which were to be saved, and to be
brought by Election and Grace unto the marriage of the Lamb Christ Jesus:
which thing was signified by the throwing down of the partition wall, and by
the renting of the veil. Thus the Temple and the Tabernacle, being one in
substance, and three in use, may well be compared to the holy and blessed
Trinity.


Par. Where was the Temple built?


Past. It is plainly recorded, 2 Chro. 3.1.
that this famous building was on mount Moriah, where Adam was created, Genesis 2.
near the Garden of Eden where Adam fell, where Isaac was offered, where Sem
or Melchisedech dwelt, and ruled with peace and justice, like the son of God.
The which place was first called Salem; upon Isaacs offering Ierisalec, and now
Jerusalem.


Par. Declare unto me briefly concerning the dedication of the Temple.


Past. King Solomon and all the men of Israel assembled, according to their
degrees: and they brought up the Ark of the Lord from the house of Abinadab,
into the City of David, 1 King. 8.
which is Zion: and they brought the Tabernacle of the congregation, and all
the holy vessels that were in the Tabernacle, those did the Priests and Levites
bring up. Then he and the people offered unto the Lord innumerably. And a
cloud filled the Lords house: for the glory of the Lord was there. Toward the
which King Solomon turning himself, and lifting up his hands and eyes unto
heaven, desired the Lord to dedicate that place to the honor of his name, and
that it might be to be comfort of his people that called upon him in that
place. And when he had ended his prayer, he stood up and blessed the people.


The first Particular concerning the Kings of Israel and Judah.
Parishioner. I Would gladly know the stories of these Kings and their
Prophets, in their order?


Past. First, 1 Kin. 12.
you must understand, that immediately after the death of King Solomon, the
same great and renowned kingdom of the Hebrews, 1 King. 11.11.12.13.
was divided into two parts; according as the Lord had fore-spoken. But after
490. years were expired, it was joined together again, Ezec. 37.16.17.18.19
20.
according as the holy prophet Ezechiel had foretold.


Par. Declare unto me the manner of this division or ruin;


Past. Jeroboam, 1 King. 11.26 to 40.
the son of Nebat, an Ephradite of Zereda, Salomons servant (according to the
word of the Lord, by the mouth of his Prophet Ahijah the Shilonite) had ten
Tribes of Israel, that held and took part with him, that he should be king:
who placed his seat and palace in Samaria, and his kingdom was thenceforth
called the kingdom of Israel.

The other part of that famous kingdom Rehoboam the son of Solomon
possessed; which was the lesser part: for only two Tribes held with him. His
seat was at Jerusalem: and his kingdom was called the kingdom of Judah. Thus
you may see two Kings in one kingdom: which indeed is prodigious.


Par. Now declare unto me why the whole kingdom was thus divided, and so
miserably distressed?


Past. I will answer you with Gods own words. Because they have forsaken me
says the Lord, 1 King. 11.33.
and worshipped Astaroth the god of the Zidonians, and Chemosh the god of the
Moabites, and Milcom the god of the Ammonites, and have not walked in my ways,
to do right in mine eyes, and for the sins of Solomon.


Par. How did the one and the other of these kings behave themselves toward
God?


Past. Jeroboam, 1 King. 12.26. to 31.
the king of Israel, thought in his heart and said; If this my people go up
and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the people
turn again unto the Lord, and so cleave unto Rehoboam the King of Judah.
Whereupon the King took counsel, and made two calves of gold: the one he set
up at Bethel, the other at Dan. Whose priests he made of the lower sort, and
basest amongst the people: and he commanded all his subjects to go thither,
and worship them, as their gods. The other part of the kingdom, that held with
Rehoboam and dwelt at Jerusalem, did serve the Lord, and worshipped him
according to the religion of their fathers.


Par. Seeing this great and royal kingdom was so divided, I would know what
kings successively reigned in the one and in the other. I pray you therefore
distinguish them?


Past. I think the knowledge therefore will be very necessary and very much for
your good: Therefore I will lay them down particularly, as they were divided
(the Kings of Judah, by themselves, and the Kings of Israel, by themselves)
with such prophets, one or more, as lived in their times.


The first particular concerning the Kings of Judah, at Jerusalem.
Rehoboam was crowned king at Sichem, 1 King. 12.1 to 25.14.21. to 31.
as heir apparent to Solomon, his father. All the people, with great
applaudite and gladness, received him, desiring only some mittigation of
their taxations which his father had laid upon them. But he, refusing the
counsel of the old grave Councillors, and admitting of young men's Counsel,
answered them with words of great cruelty and disdain. Whereupon the people
answered with one consent, and with great resolution, What portion have we in
David? We have no inheritance in the son of Ishai: to your tents O Israel:
Now see to thy own house David. Then fled King Rehoboam to Jerusalem. And two
tribes only held with him, to wit, Judah and Benjamin. The other ten tribes
held with Jeroboam and chose him to be their King. The people of Judah
committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord: they sinned as did their
fathers, and there were Sodomites in the land, whose abominations they
followed. Therefore in the first year of Rehoboams reign, the King of Egypt
came up against the city Jerusalem, took the treasures of the Lords house,
and the Treasures of the Kings house, and carried away all the shields of gold,
which Solomon had made. In stead whereof, Rehoboam afterward made brazen
shields. This King was one and forty years old, when he began to reign: he
continued seauenteene years, he slept with his fathers, and was buried in the
house of David.

Par. Was it well done of the subjects so to answer their lawful king, and
afterward to rebel as you have set down?


Past. I must needs say that they did evil in respect of their own sinful
inclinations, 1 Kin. 12.15 to 25.
and rebellious hearts. And yet it is most certain that God did accomplish his
absolute will and decree therein, which he had spoken by his Prophet Ahijah the
Shilonite: as appears also by the retraite which the King made upon the Lords
commandment, that he should not strive with them.


Par. Who was the next King?


Past. Abijah: 1 Kin. 15.1.2. to 10. 2 Chr. 13.
who lived wickedly in the sight of his subjects, and his heart was not upright
in the sight of God. He reigned three years, and died.


Par. Who was the third King?


Past. Asa, his son: and he did that which was right in the sight of God. For
he drove the Sodomites out of the land, 1 Kin 15.8. to 25.
and did put away Idols. So upright was he in the execution of justice, and so
zealous in the Lords work, that he favored not his mother, when she was taken
with Idolatry. And though all the monuments of Idolatry were not taken away by
him (because indeed he could not) yet his heart was upright in Gods sight, in
respect of his desire and good will. He established religion, and brought such
things into the house of God, as his father had dedicated to that use. It
happened in his time, that Baasha, King of Israel, came up against Judah, and
built Ramah, so that none could go in nor out to Asa their King. Thereupon Asa
took great treasures and sent unto the King of Aram, with special request,
that he would deliver him and his people out of the hands of Baasha: whereunto
the King of Aram harkned, and sent his captains, and smote diverse cities in
Israel. Hereupon Baasha left Asa, and returned. Afterward Asa, being very
old, became diseased in his feet: and, when he had reigned one and forty
years, he died, and was buried with his fathers.


Par. Who was the fourth King?


Past. Iehosaphat his son, who reigned in his stead. In the third year of
his reign, 1 King. 15.24.22. 1 to 55.
he and Ahab King of Israel consented together against the King of Aram, for
the winning and recovering again of Ramoth Gilead: but Iehosaphat would first
know the Lords pleasure therein, from the mouth of one of his Prophets. He was
five and thirty years old when he began to reign: and reigned two and fifty
years in the good ways of Asa his father. He died, and was buried with his
fathers.


Par. Who was the fifth King?


Past. Iehoram, 1 King. 22.50. 2 King. 8.16.17. to 25.
the son of Iehosaphat: who began his reign when he was two and twenty years
old. He behaved himself as the kings of Israel: he married with the daughter of
wicked Ahab, and lived as the house of Ahad did. Yet the Lord being merciful,
2 King. 8.24.25.26.27.28.9.27.28.
would not destroy Judah, for David's sake. So Iehoram died, and was buried in
the city of David.


Par. Who was the sixth King?


Past. Ahaziah, the son of Iehoram: who succeeded in the kingdom. His
mothers name was Athalia, the daughter of Omri King of Israel: and he also
walked in the ways of Ahab, as did his father; being the rather drawn
thereunto through his unlawful match in marriage. He went with Ioram the son
of Ahab to war against Hazaell the King of Aram: but Iehu slew him in the
pursuit of Iehoram his brother in law. And he was buried in the sepulcher of
his fathers in the city of David.


Par. Who was the seventh King?


Past. Iehoash the son of Ahaziah. He through the great providence of God, 2
King. 11 1. to the end. 12.1. to the end.
was preserved from Iehu, who slew all his brethren, and from Athalia the
mother of Ahaziah; who also slew all the kings seed, because she might reign
over Israel as Queen. But when he was six years old, Iehosheba his Nurse
(who had kept him secretly) brought him to Iehoiada the priest, who took
captains over hundreds with the guard, and gave them an order for their
places, and what they should do in the behalf of the young heir apparent. And
when all things were well contrived, they brought forth Iehoash and proclaimed
him king: and forth with they slew Athalia the usurping Queen. Then Ieho^ada
the priest (being the protector of the King) went and destroyed the house of
Baal with the Altars and Images that were in the Land. Which being done, the
King was established, and the subjects were quiet. He did that which was right
in the sight of God, as Iehoiada the priest had taught him. For he caused a
chest with a hole bored therein to be set near the Altar: wherein such as
would, might cast a piece of silver toward the repairing of the Temple. And in
short time there was found over and above the repairing, such store of money,
as was sufficient to make bowls of gold, and instruments of silver in great
abundance for the Temple. At which time came Hazaell the king of Aram with a
mighty army against Gath: and intending also to come against Jerusalem, Iehoash
the King of Judah took the hallowed things that his forefathers had prepared
for the Temple; and so he departed into his own Land; where he was slain by
two of his own servants. And he was buried with his fathers in the city of
David, after he had reigned forty years in Jerusalem.


Par. Who was the eight King?


Past. Amaziah, 2 King. 14.1. to 21.
the son of Ioash, succeeded in the kingdom. This King did behave himself
uprightly in the sight of God, according to all which his father had done: yet
the people did sacrifice in the high places. He slew them which had killed his
father: but not their children, according to that which was written: The
fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children for the
father: but every man shall die for his own sin. Afterward he warred with
the Edomites, and slew many thousands. And not being therewith content, he also
challenged the King of Israel: who answered him disdainefully. But Amaziah was
wilful, and would not be quiet. Whereupon the King of Israel, in open field,
took Amaziah, brake down the walls of Jerusalem, spoiled the Temple, and the
people of their treasure, and then returned to Samaria. Amaziah lived after
that war fifteen years. There was a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem:
whereupon he fled to Lachis, and the conspiratours followed after him, and slew
him there, and brought him to be buried at Jerusalem after he had reigned nine
and twenty years.


Par. Who was the ninth King?


Past. 2 Kin. 14.21.15.1. to 8.
Azariah, his son, was made King when he was sixteen years old. He did
uprightly in the Lords sight: yet because the high places were not taken away
where the people offered sacrifice, the Lord smote him with Leprosy until his
dying day; and Ioathan his son governed the kingdom under him two and fifty
years, and so dyed.


Par. Who was the tenth King?


Past. 2 King. 15.7.32 to the end.
Ioathan, the son of Azariah, immediately after his father took the
kingdom, as lawful heir. He did uprightly in the Lords sight: but yet he had
not taken away the high places, whereon they burnt Intense. And then the Lord
sent against him and Judah, Rozin the King of Aram, and Pekah, the son of
Remeliah king of Israel. And when he had reigned sixteen years, he dyed,
and was buried with his fathers in Jerusalem.


Par. Who was the eleauenth King?


Past. Ahaz, 2 King. 16.1 to the end.
the son of Ioathan, reigned in his stead. He walked in the ways of the
kings of Israel, and made his son to go through fire, after the
abominations of the heathen: and he offered burnt incense. Wherefore the Lord
raised the King of Aram, and the King of Israel against him. At which time he
called not for Gods assistance, but sent presents unto the King of Ashur,
craving his aid: whereunto the King of Ashur condescended. He was twenty
years old, when he began his reign: and he continued 16. years most
irreligiously and profanely, and so died.


Par. Who was the twelfth King?


Past. 2 King. 16.20.18.1.2.3.4. to 9.13. to the end. 19.20.
Hezekiah, his son reigned, and ruled so religiously, so zealously, and so
faithfully, as that the holy Ghost witnesses, none was like him amongst all
the Kings of Judah, that went before him: neither were any such after him. And
therefore the Lord God of heaven was with him, which made him to prosper in all
things that he took in hand. In his time, even in the foureteenth year of
his reign, Senacherib the King of Ashur came against all the strong cities of
Judah, and took them. Then Hezekiah sent unto him, desiring him to take those
treasures which he had sent, and to be at peace with him and his people. He
received the treasures, and yet nevertheless most tyrannously and trecherously
he sent Rabsaketh with an huge army against him: who most blasphemously railed
at, and reviled the King and the Lord God of heaven. Then the King of Judah and
his Nobility went into the house of the Lord, with their clothes rent, and
with tears, to pray unto the Lord for help. Then Esaias the Prophet, as being
sent from God, comforted them, saying; Be not afraid: for thus the Lord has
said: The King of Ashur shall return into his own land, and there shall be
discomfited. So Rabsaketh presently returned, and found it so indeed. For the
King of Aethiopia was come up to fight against him. Nevertheless Rabsaketh
sent men with railing Letters unto Hezekiah the King. Which Letters he spreads
open in the Lords sight, with many prayers and tears. The Lord heard him at
large, and sent an Angel, which destroyed the Assirian army: and as he was in
the Temple, worshipping his idol god, two of his own sons slew him.

About that time Hezekiah fell sick unto death: and through his great
intercession to God, he recovered within three days, and lived fifteen years
after, as the Prophet Esaias had said unto him. The Lord promised also to defend
him from the King of Ashur. And because he might be assured thereof, he gave
him a sign in Ahaz dial of ten degrees backward. At the same time came the
King of Babels son, with letters and a present to visit him: whom he
entertained very royally, and showed him all his treasures. At which deed the
Lord was angry, and sent Esaias to tell him, that in time to come all his
treasures and his people should be carried away captive into Babylon. He was
five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned nine and twenty
years.


Par. What do you specially observe in these four last recited Kings; to wit,
Azariah. Ioathan. Ahaz, and Hezekiah.



Past. It appears, that almighty God did specially favor them, in that he
gave them five Prophets, of whom they might inquire for the Lords will. Esaias.
Joel. Hosea. Amos. Micha.



Par. Who was the thirteenth king?


Past. Manastes, his son. 2 Kin. 20.21.21.1. to 19.
He wrought wickedness in the Lords sight, and lived in open view of his
subjects, after the abominations of the Heathen, whom the Lord had cast out
before him. For whatsoever his holy Fathers had done to the honor and service
of God, he wrought clean contrary, and gave himself to witchcraft, sorcery,
familiar spirits, and such like. He did lead the people from the Lord, and he
enforced Judah to sin, and he shed much innocent blood. Wherefore the Lord
God of Israel said, I will bring an evil upon Israel, that who so hears
it, both his ears shall tingle. I will forsake the remnant of mine
inheritance, and I will deliver them into the hands of their enemies, and they
shall be robbed and spoiled. Manasses was twelve years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned five and fifty years in Jerusalem.


Par. Who was the next king?


Past. 2 King. 21.18.19.20 to the end. 22.23
Ammon, his son: such a father, such a son. The Lord stirred up his
servants, against him, who slew him in his own house. He was twenty years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned two years.


Par. Who was his successor?


Past. Josiah, his son. He did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, as did his
father David: he turned not to the right hand nor to the left. And he took
severe order for the reformation of religion. Wherefore the Lord revealed unto
him the book of the Law, which was hid in the Temple. And when he heard it
read (for grief that Religion had so long been extinguished, and the name of
God abused) he rent his clothes, and wept sore. Then he commanded his officers
to inquire after the Lord by some Prophet. And they found a Prophetess in
Jerusalem, who answered them that the Lord would plague Judah and Jerusalem for
their idolatry, but would spare Josiah the King. Then he with all the Elders of
the people, went into the Temple: where he read the book of God, with a tender
heart unto them. And afterward he entered into covenant with the Lord, for the
people, that they should serve him all the days of their lives: and the people
yielded unto it with one consent. Then did the king purge the Temple, and all
his kingdom, of Baall, and of all that did appertain unto his service. He
brake down also the Altar at Bethell, and all the monuments of idolatry which
Jeroboam had made. He held a Passover; the like was not holden since the days
of the Judges, nor the like in any Kings days. Yet would not the Lords wrath
be appeased toward the people, because they had so long wallowed, as it were
in wickedness. Pharao Necho king of Egypt slew Josiah at Megiddo. He was eight
years old, when he entered into the kingdom, and he reigned one and thirty
years He was buried at Jerusalem, in the sepulcher of his fathers.

Jeremy and Zophonie were Prophets in his time.


Par. Who was the sixteenth king?


Past. Iehoahaz his son. 2 King. 23.31.32.33.
He did evil in the sight of the Lord. Wherefore he sent Pharao the king of
Egypt against him: who imprisoned him three months, which was all the time of
his reign. And he did put the land to an exceeding great tribute.


Par. Who was the next king?


Past. Eliakim, 2 King. 23.34.24.1 to 7.
the second son of Josiah: who was made king by Pharao Necho the king of
Egypt, and he turned his name to Iehoiakim: the rather because he was a wicked
man. Then came Nabuchadnezar King of Babell, and took him: but afterward he
rebelled against the King. Wherefore he sent an host of the Chaldeans, and of
the Aramites, Moabites, and Ammonites, against Jerusalem and Judah to destroy
it, as the Lord had spoken by his Prophets. Ichoiakim was five and twenty
years old, when he began to reign: and he reigned 11. years in Jerusalem,
and then dyed.

Jeremy and Zophony were Prophets in his time.


Par. Who was successor to Ichoiakim?


Past. 2 King. 24.8.
Ichoiakim his son. He was eighteen years old, when he began to reign:
and he reigned three months wickedly.


The second Particular of the fifth Observation, concerning the captivity of
Judah and Jerusalem.
Then came Nabuchadnezar the King of Babell against Jerusalem and besieged it:
And having won the City with great loss of blood, he took the King, his
Mother, and the Nobility, with ten thousand such as he liked, and carried
them to Babylon, with all the treasures of the Lords house. And Nabuchadnezar
made Mattaniah his Uncle King in his stead: whose name he changed to
Zedechiah, 2 Kings 24 17.25.
who then was one and twenty years old, and he reigned eleauen years in
Jerusalem wickedly: insomuch that the Lord was fiercely bent against Judah and
Jerusalem, to destroy them utterly. He therefore stirred up Nabuchadnezar
again, with all his host, to ransacke, and utterly to destroy Jerusalem, the
house of David, and the Temple. Thus you may see Jerusalem was destroyed three
times.

Jeremy and Zophonie were Prophets in his time: of whom he might have heart
and known the will and ways of the Lord.

Par. Now, I pray you, set me down (in like manner) the particular stories of
the Kings of Israel (whose place and seat was at Samaria) with the Prophets,
one or more, as they lived.


Past. 1 King. 11.26. to 49. 2 King. 12.12.13.14. to 21.
Jeroboam was the son of Nebat an Ephradite of Zereda, Salomons Servant. He
was a strong man and valiant. The Prophet Ahijah fore-tolde him by a sign,
that the Kingdom of Israel should be divided into two parts, and that he
should be king of the one part. Solomon hearing thereof sought to kill him:
which made him to fly into Egypt. But when Solomon was dead, it fell out so
indeed, as you may read: for he had ten Tribes that held with him, where as
Rehoboam the lawful heir, and the Kings son, had but two Tribes. Which
favor at Gods hands might have made him humble, and zealous after religion,
but he imagined, that if the people did serve the Lord (as they used) at
Jerusalem, they would turn and rebel. Therefore he made them Idols at Bethel
and Dan, and ordained them priests of the inferior sort of people, and
commanded the people to worship those Idols for their God. Herein he thought to
have done wisely: but the Prophet reprehended him in the open congregation, and
the Lord struck that hand of his wherewith he would have stricken the Prophet,
with such numnesse or dryness, as he was not able to help himself. And the
Altar claue a sunder at that time, as the man of God desired. Then the King was
feign to make intercession unto the Prophet, that God would restore him his
hand. And at another time, the Prophet Ahijah told him as from the Lord: that
for the wickedness he had done to provoke his Majesty withal, there should
not be left of him, nor of his generation so much as one. Dogs should eat
his stock in the City, and the Fowls of the air in the field. He reigned
two and twenty years, and then dyed.

Ahijah was a Prophet in his days.


Par. Who was the second King of Samaria?


Past. 1 King. 14 20.15.25. to 29.
Nadab his son. He reigned two years, and did that which was wicked, as did
his father Jeroboam. And Baasha the son of Ahijah of the house of Isachar
conspired against him, and slew him at Gibbethon: which did belong to the
Philistines.

Ahijah and Iehu were Prophets in his time.


Par. Who was the third King of Samaria?


Past. Baasha the son of Ahijah of Isachar: 1 King. 15 16. to the end. 16.1.
to 7.
who warred against Asa the King of Judah: insomuch that the King of Judah was
feign to hyre the King of Aram to assist him. And there continued wars between
Asa and Baasha all their days, to the great terror and undoing of the
subjects on both sides. Wherefore the Lord sent Iehu, saying; Forasmuch as I
have exalted thee out of the dust, and thou notwithstanding have walked in all
the ways of Jeroboam, and have made my people Israel to sin: behold, I will
take away thy posterity, and will make thy house like his house. So he dyed
having reigned four and twenty years.

Iehu was a Prophet in his time.


Par. Who was the fourth King?


Past. 1 King. 16 8.9.
Ela the son of Baasha. He continued at Tirzah, where Zimri his servant
killed him, as he was drunk in his Stewards house, after he had reigned two
years.

1 King. 16 9.10.11. to 19.
Zimri reigned as King in the room of Ela whom he had slain. He also slew all
that pertained to Baasha, even every one that were his friends or wel-willers:
according to that which the Lord had spoken by his Prophet Iehu: because he and
Ela his son had enforced the people of Israel to sin against the Lord. When
the people were in camp against Gibethon, and had heard that Zimri had slain
the King, and did set himself as king in his throne, 1 King. 16.16. to 28.
they made Omri (Captain of the host) King over Israel. And when Zimri saw
that the City Tirzah was taken, he went into his Palace, and burnt himself
and the Kings house, and so dyed. Then the people were divided into two parts,
the one half followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king: the other
followed Omri to make him king: But the people that followed Omri prevailed. So
Tibni dyed, and Omri reigned twelve years wickedly, as did Jeroboam, and so
dyed.


Par. Who was the fifth king of Samaria?


Past. Ahab his son: 1 King. 16 29.17.18.19.20.21.22. 1. to 41.
who did worse in the Lords sight then all that went before him. And for the
greater increase of his wickedness, he married the Daughter of the Zidonian
king: who brought him to set up Baall as a God. And thus he continued two and
twenty years: He had 450. false Prophets.

1 King. 7.1.2. to the end. 18.1. to the end. 19.1. to the end. 2 Kin. 1.2.
Eliah the Prophet of the Lord was in his time, and an hundred other Prophets,
who labored all that they could to convert him. But he nevertheless
increased in wickedness, and slew all that called upon the name of the Lord.
Almighty God made the heavens as brass, and the earth as iron, for the space
of three years, according to the words of Eliah: insomuch as that there was a
great dearth and famine: But the Lord provided miraculously for Eliah, by the
hands of the widow of Sarepta, and by other means. In the third year the Lord
sent Eliah to Ahab, who with his wife Iezabel exceeded in cruelty, killing the
Lords servants, and seeking in all Nations to find him also. But when Eliah
met the King, he told him to his face, that his sin was the cause of Gods
displeasure against Israel. Afterward, Eliah and the people agreed that the
God who answered by fire, (whether it were Baal or the God of Israel) the same
should be taken for the true GOD from thence forth. And when the people had
seen that Baal could do nothing in the time of need, and the great power of
God so admirable, they cried out, and said, The Lord is God, the Lord is God.
And then the Lord of his mercy gave them rain, at the prayer of Eliah. And yet
notwithstanding this great work of God by the hand of Eliah, Iezabel the
Queen sought to kill Eliah: so that he was feign to hide himself, and to
fly from place to place, as he did before. But the Lord had special care of
him. The assurance whereof was manifested unto him by the miraculous work of
God, renting the mountains, breaking the rocks, and shaking the earth.
Iezabel his wife caused Naboth to be slain, that she might enjoy his
Vineyard: and again, the Lord of his mercies, sent his Prophet Eliah to
reprove him: that he might repent. Afterward Ahab was slain in the battle
with the king of Siria, and he was buried in Samaria: but his armor and his
Chariot being washed in the poole of Samaria, the dogs licked his blood,
according to the word of the Lord, after he had reigned two and thirty years.


Par. Who succeeded this wicked King Ahab, in Samaria?


Past. 1 King. 22.51. 2 King 1.1 to the end.
Ahaziah his son: But he did worse, as the holy Ghost reports. For he walked
in the ways of his Father, in the ways of his mother, and in the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat. And when he was sick, he consulted with a
witch: he dyed when he had reigned two years.

Eliah was his Prophet, through the mercy of God, from whose mouth he might
have known the mind of the Lord, but he would not: Therefore in sign of
Gods fearful judgments, his Captains over fifties were destroyed with fire
from heaven, at the prayer of Eliah.


Par. Who was the ninth king?


Past. Iehoram his son: 2 Kings 1.17.3.1. to the end. 9. to the end.
He was not so wicked as his father, nor so wicked as his mother. For he
took away the Image of Baal, that his father had set up: and yet he cleaued
to the abomination of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin, and departed not
therefrom. The king of Moab paid tribute unto the king of Israel: but when
Ahab was dead, he refused to pay as he had done before. Then king Iehoram
took with him the king of Judah and the king of Edom with all their power, and
went to war against the king of Moab. And when they came to a place where
they wanted water, Elisha being earnestly requested, declared unto them what
success they should have against Moab: and the Lord ministered unto them a
whole valley of water without wind or rain: according as Elisha had said. He
was slain of Iehu, after he had reigned twelve years.

2 Kin. 4.1 to the end. 5.1. to the end. 6.1. to the end. 7. to the end. 8.1.
to 16.
Elisha was in his time, who wrought many wonderful things, for the
confirmation of his zeal and faith in the Lords business: but it took no
effect in him.


Par. Who succeeded Iehoram in Samaria?


Past. Iehu, a Captain, dwelling in Ramoth Gilead, the son of Iehosaphat, 2
Kin. 9.1. to the end. 10.1. to the end.
the son of Nimshi: according as the Lord had appointed. He slew Iehoram and
his Wife Iezabell: whose flesh the Dogs did eat, according as the Prophet
had foretold. He slew Ahabs Priests, and all the sons of Ahab, as the Lord
had said. He threw down the Image of Baall, and all that appertained unto
him. Wherefore the Lord promised him that his posterity should inherit the
throne of Israel unto the fourth generation. But yet he continued in the
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Almighty God
did then loathe the people Israel, and smote them with the sword of Hazael. He
reigned eight and twenty years and then dyed.


Par. Who was Prophet under this wicked King?


Past. Elisha, who had anointed him King upon the Lords commandment: and who
was well known unto him to be specially favored of GOD: as did appear by his
admirable works: Of whom he might have learned how to frame his heart and his
hands, according to right.


Par. Who was the tenth King in Samaria?


Past. 2 King. 10 35.2.
Ichoahaz his son: who lived as Jeroboam, that made the people to sin, and he
departed not from his sins. And therefore the Lord being angry with Israel,
delivered them into the hands of Hazael king of Aram: who vexed them very sore,
and wasted them so with the sword, as that there remained for Ichoahaz the
King, but ten Chariots, fifty Horsemen, and of all the people but ten
thousand footmen. After he had reigned seauenteene years he dyed.


Par. Who was the eleauenth king?


Past. 2 King. 13 9. to 14.
Ioash his son: He also lived like Jeroboam, and so dyed after he had
reigned sixteen years.

2 Kin. 13.13.14. to 21.
Elisha was yet living: of whom he might have learned the Laws of the Lord.
And then the Prophet also dyed.


Par Who was the twelfth king in Samaria?


Past. Jeroboam his son: And he did evil in the Lords sight, 2 Kings 13
13.14.23. to the end.
as did Jeroboam the son of Nebat. He restored the coasts of Israel from the
entering of Hamath, unto the sea of the Wilderness: according as the Lord had
foretold by his Prophet Jonah: who had decreed not to put out the name of
Israel, though they had sinned sore. After he had reigned one and forty years,
he dyed.


Par. Who was the next in succession?


Past. Zachariah, his son: 2 King. 14 29.15.8.9.10.
He departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. He reigned
six months in Samaria, and then was slain by Shallum; according as the Lord
had said by his Prophet to Iehu, to wit, that his seed should sit upon his
seat, unto the fourth generation.


Par. Who was the foureteenth King?


Past. Shallum the son of Iabesh: 2 King. 15 10. to 16.
who conspired against Zachariah the king and slew him, and afterward succeeded
in the Kingdom. He reigned one month, and then was also slain.


Par. Who was the fifteenth King?


Past. 2 King 15.14. to 23.
Mahanaen the son of Gady, who went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and
slew Shallum the King, and reigned in his stead. This Mahanaen was a most
fierce and cruel man. For he destroyed Tiphsah, and all that were therein,
and ripped the women that were with child, because they opened not unto him. He
exacted a thousand talents of silver from his Subjects, to give unto the king
of Ashur for peace. He dyed after he had reigned ten years in Samaria.


Par. Who succeeded this cursed King?


Par. 2 King. 15.23. to 27.
Pekahiah his son: He also did evil in the sight of the Lord, and departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to
sin. He reigned two years, and then was slain by Pekah, the son of
Remeliah, his Captain.


Par. Who succeeded this king?


Past. Pekah, 2 King. 15 27 to 31.
who also lived like to Jeroboam. He reigned twenty years, and then Hoshea,
the son of Elah, wrought treason and slew him.


Par. Who was the eighteenth King?


Past. Hoshea the son of Elah, 2 King. 15 30.17.1. to the end.
obtained the crown, by treason. He did evil, but not as other kings that
went before him.


The fourth Particular, concerning the captiuating of the Kings of Israel.
THen Salmanasar king of Ashur came up against Samaria furiously, as if he had
been the messenger of the Lords wrath (as he was indeed) and besieged
Samaria three years. But when he had gotten it, he carried away Israel to
Ashur, and put them in prisons at Halah, at Habor, and in the Cities of the
Medes, because they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord, but went a whoring
after their own inventions. And the King of Ashur brought folk from Babell,
and from those barbarous coasts and placed them in Samaria in stead of the
people of Israel: which people also regarded not the true God. Wherefore God
sent Lions and slew the wealthiest of them. The king of Ashur hearing thereof,
sent one of the Priests which he had carried from Samaria, that he might teach
the people to know the God of the country. Which Priest dwelt at Bethell, and
taught them the fear of the Lord. But yet they served their Gods, after the
manner of the nations about them. So these nations feared the Lord, and served
their Images also.

Par. What shall I observe in the Prophecy of Ezekiel?


Past. Ezekiel was ordained by the divine providence of God, to be a comforter
of the people Israel, all the time of their captivity at Babylon.


Par. What say you concerning Daniel?


Past. Nabuchadnezar at the time of the captiuating of Israel and the winning
of Jerusalem, brought Daniell with ten thousand more to Babylon: where he
proved most skillful in the Arabian, Sirian, and Chaldean tongues; and so
highly in the savor of God, as that he could speak of secrets that were
present, and of secrets that were for to come, concerning Gods people: and in
the mercifulness of God became a comfortable teacher amongst the people of
Israel, during seauenty years.


Par. Why was this great and mighty nation so ruinated?


Past. It was the wrath and high displeasure of the almighty upon them, for
their unthankfulness, for their cruelty one toward another, for the contempt
of his laws, and violating of his Sabaoths; as the Prophet Jeremy sets down
at large.


Par. They were a mighty strong nation and a fierce: and they had a city,
Jerusalem, which was compassed about with twelve hills, with three walls one
within another, with gates of iron and brass, with many Turrets, Towers, and
Castles, and within the city was the Tower of David, wherein were a thousand
Shields, and all the Targets of the mighty, I ask you therefore how came it to
pass that they were overcome and their City ransacked?


Past. It is true as you say, in the judgment of the most valiant Soldiers of
the world, they were invincible. But this was a matter foretold and threatened
by Prophets, many years before: And Daniel himself in the first Chapter
reports, that the Lord gave them up into the hands of Nabuchadnezar, to do
with them and with their treasures what he would.


Par. I pray you tell me somewhat concerning Babylon and Nabuchadnezar.


Past. The Assirian, Chaldean, or Babilonian Monarchy successively had 36.
Kings or Monarchs, who ruled and continued the same, as one Monarchy, 1240.
years. And at the death of Sardanapalus the last and worst of those kings,
Arbaces the President of the Medes, and Bellechus the President of Babylon, so
concluded together, that the whole Monarchy was divided between them. Arbaces
was crowned king of the Medes and Persians, and Bellechus was crowned king of
Siria and Babylon, whose Palace was translated from Niniuie to Babylon, being
the stronger city. Nabuchadnezar was the son of Nabuchadonosor, which was the
son of Benmerodach, which was the son of Merodachbaladan, which was the
son of Asser Addon, which was the son of Senacherib, which was the son of
Salmanasar, which was the son of Phull-Asser, which was the son of
Phull-Belochus. This Nabuchadnezer, of whom you inquire, is the same that
subdued the City of Jerusalem, burnt it, with the Temple, and captiuated the
Nobility.


Par. What was signified by the great Image which Nabuchadnezer saw?


Past. This Image consisted of five several parts. The first part was a head
of gold: which signified the great magnificence, power, and glory of three
Monarchs or Kings of Babylon, to wit: Nabuchadnezer, Euilmerodach, and
Baltasar.
whose Empire endured by the space only of seventy years: then was this head
of gold cut off and the glory of those kings quite extinguished: and then the
people of Israel were freed.

The second part was arms and breasts of silver, which signified the kings of
the Medes and Persians, who tyrannized 130. years, after the end of the
captivity. Of which one hundred and thirty years, these kings following
reigned nine and twenty years. Cyrus, Darius, Ahasuerus, Darius, Cambises,
Xerxes, Ochus.


In the twentieth year of the first Darius, the temple was finished, being
full nine and forty years in building, as Daniel had foretold in his seauenty
weeks. Chap. 9.

The other kings, that made up the 130. years, are these: Artaxerxes, Ochus,
Arses, Darius the Persian.


And at the end of these years, are the arms and breast of Silver cut off: and
the glory also of those kings wholly extinguished.

The third was belly and thighs of brass, which signified Alexander the great.


Par. What signified the legs of iron?


Past. The fourth was legs of iron: which signified these ten Kings: 1
Seleucus Nicanor. 2 Antiochus Soter. 3 Antiochus Theos. 4 Seleucus Callicus. 5
Seleucus Siranus. 6 Antiochus Negas. 7 Seleucus Philopater. 8 Antiochus
Epimanes. 9 Ptolomeus Lagi. 10 Ptolomeus Philadelphus.

These ruled cruelly; and were strong as Iron 294. years, unto Cleopaters
death, who confirmed Herod, the Idumean king in Israel.

The fifth part was feet and toes, being part of Iron, and part of Clay: which
signified the same Kingdom to be partly strong, and partly broken.


Par. What meant the King by that great Image of Gold, which he did set up in
the plain of Dura?


Past. Chap. 3.
He meant therein, as he expressed in plain terms, and in his deeds, to
make himself reputed and taken as a great God: which was most horrible
blasphemy and plain sacrilege.


Par. Might not Daniel have yielded unto the time and present necessity, which
was offered, as others did? and so have worshipped the Image with his body,
keeping his Soul and conscience clear, for the service of the true known
Almighty?


Past. No. He might not have so dallied with the service of God, who sees and
knows all things, and whose service is to be performed in body and in soul.
For that had been in him blasphemy and sacrilege, as in Nabuchadnezer. He
chose rather to dye a tyrannous death by confessing of gods true worship, then
to live by the denial thereof: which he should have done most plainly, if he
had yielded. But contrariwise, when the king persuaded him to yield as others
did, he uttered three worthy speeches, meet for every Christian. The first was
in these words; Behold, O King, God is able to deliver us. In which he declared
his belief in the power of God. The second was, 17.18.
God will deliver us. In which he showed his faith in things to come. The third
was; If not, O King, be it known unto thee; we will not worship the golden
Image which thou have set up. In which he declared his Christian magnanimity
and holy courage.


Par. There is mention made in the fourth chapter, Chap. 4.
of another vision or dream, which the King did see, to wit, a Tree, whose
boughs reached to the heavens, whose branches ouerspread Sea and Land, and
whose roots were fastened in the earth. What was signified by that?


Past. By this Tree was signified Nabuchadnezars territories and dominions, and
the exceeding great subjection that was yielded unto him of all nations, Kings
and Potentates of the whole world, as was also signified by the head of gold,
before recited.


Par. What was signified by the cutting down of the Tree, and the fastening of
the roots thereof in the earth, as with a chain?


Past. The holy Prophet Daniel says, that the cutting down of the Tree
signified Nabuchadnezar his seven years of exilement and eiection among
beasts. And the fastening of the Tree by the roots, signified that he should
return to his Palace and Kingdom, after that God had so corrected him for his
pride.


Par. Why did almighty God so discomfort Baltashar with such a fearful sight
upon the wall, before all such as were assembled to his ioyall feast?


Past. It was no marvel that God did so terrify him. For he and the most of
his nobility riotously wasted the good creatures of God, and therewith became
drunken, adulterous, and sacrilegious. For he was not content with the great
abundance of plate that he had of his own in great variety: but he would needs
drink in his drunkenness, out of the vessels that were brought from the
Temple at Jerusalem, and which were dedicated to the service of God.


Par. What was the writing and the signification?


Past. The writing consisted of three words; first Mean, secondly, Tekell,
thirdly, Vpharsin. The signification of the first word is, that God had numbered
the years of his kingdom and finished it. The signification of the second
was, that God had considered of his conversation, and found it not answerable
to his will. And the signification of the third word was, that his kingdom
should be forthwith taken from him by Cirus and Darius, Kings of the Medes and
Persians. According to which writing it came to pass, the self same night.


Par. What was the decree or law that King Darius made by the persuasion of his
Nobility?


Past. It was, that whosoever did call upon, or worship any other God save
Nabuchadnezar the King, for thirty days space, should be thrown into a den of
Lions.


Par. How came it to pass, that the Lions, being a savage sort of creatures
did spare Daniel, and so suddenly destroyed the conspiratours, with their wives
and children?


Past. Thereby almighty GOD did declare, that all creatures (of what sort or
kind soever they be) are but as ministers or instruments of GOD, in Mercy or
in Justice; and that he can alter their natures and qualities, even as the
time and occasion is offered.


The seventh Observation, comprehending, Dan. 6. to the end, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Hester, Haggi, Zachariah, and Malachi.
Parishioner. IN this chapter, Daniel makes mention of four most strange, and
fearful beasts; to wit, 1 a Lion with Eagles wings chopped off. 2 Bear with
three ribs in his mouth. 3 Leopard with four wings. 4 Beast out of the Sea
with Iron teeth, and 10. horns.

Declare unto me the meaning thereof.


Past. These four beasts have relation and special reference to the Image
which Nabuchadnezar did see before. Dan. 2.
For that Image which he saw according to his blind and carnal affections,
goodly, glorious, and most excellent, the very same God shows unto Daniel, in
another sort, to wit; in a beastly manner and in a terrible sort. Wherein, God
showed how great a difference is betwixt the carnal man's affection, and the
spiritual man's affection, what the one sees, and what the other sees. And as
in the former vision of Nabuchadnezar, the enemies of Gods people were
described by their names: so in this vision showed to Daniel, they are
described by their natures. The name of the first is Nabuchadnezar,
Euilmerodech and Baltashar: whose natures were as this savage Lion. The name of
the second beast is Cirus and Darius: who in nature were like a Bear, renting
and tearing Gods Saints. The name of the third beast was Alexander: whose
nature was like a Leopard. The fourth beast was the Roman Emperors: which
here, for their natures, are likened to a beast with iron teeth.


Par. What is meant by the Ram and the Goat in this chapter?


Past. To this belongs the belly and thighs of brass, spoken of in
Nabuchadnezars first vision: which does signify Alexander the great, and his
four Captains.


Par. Chap. 18.
What is there meant by Daniels seauenty weeks?


Past. Dan. 9. Leu. 25.
The Angel, which spoke to Daniell of seauenty weeks, means for every day in
every such week a year, according to the account of the Iubile year. The
whole amounts, according to that reckoning, to 490. years. The same Angel,
for perspicuity sake, diuides these seauenty weeks into three parts, after
this manner;

The first part, from the going out of the commandment concerning the freeing
of the people of Israel, in the first year of the reign of Darius, to build
the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem, shall be seven weeks, that is to say,
nine and forty years.

The second part of the Angels division of time is thus; Threescore and two
weeks shall be a troublesome time: after the which the prince of peace shall
be slain; and he shall destroy the city and the sanctuary.

The third part, or division of time, stands in these words; He shall confirm
the covenant with many for one week: meaning for one week seven years: a
day for a year. And in the midst of the week, he shall cause the sacrifice
to cease: meaning, by the midst of the week, three years and a half.


Par. What is meant by the vision of Daniell, which was so fearful unto him?


Past. The vision which he saw did relate and signify, that the Temple which
was in building at Jerusalem, by the commandment of King Cirus, should now be
hindered by wicked Cambises his son: who ordered the kingdom of Babylon,
whiles his father waged war with the Scythians.


Par. What is meant by the second vision, which Daniell did see so exceeding
glorious?


Past. Therein was described, by particulars or parts, Christ Jesus: who, in
the fullness of time, should come. Reu. 1.
The like description is made of Christ in the Revelation: He is called
Michaell the prince and leader of the Jews. This Michaell fought against the
Devil, for the peace of his Saints, and prevailed in nine and forty years, as
was foretold.


Par. How fell it out that he only saw the vision, and they which were with
him saw it not?


Past. By the saint is showed, that the wicked, being yet unregenerated, cannot
see those spiritual things of God, which the Saints and children of God do
see. Neither can they abide the glorious presence of his Majesty: which is
joyful and comfortable to the godly.


Par. What is meant by the King of Persia, who resisted one and twenty days;
and lo, Michael one of the chief Princes helped?


Past. The Prince of Persia, Greeks, and others, have relation specially to
the Devil: who stirred strife, and every way seeks the dishonor of God.


Par. What is the effect or sum of Daniels prophecy, in this chapter?


Past. Whereas before in the ninth chapter, and four and twenty verse, the
Angel, in the division of the seauenty weeks, reckoned seven weeks to the
building of the Temple, and in the tenth chapter, the trouble that fell out
about the same in nine and forty years: Dan. 11.
in this chapter he sets out, in a kind of prophecy, under whom the Jews
should be yet vexed unto the coming of Christ, for the space of 62. weeks;
that is to say, 434, years: namely, by Cirus, Cambises, Sanerdes, Darius
Histaspis, Ahasuerus, Zerxes, and Darius Longhand, his son.


Par. What is meant by the 62. weeks, after which he says Christ shall be
slain?


Past. He understands, that after these years of trouble, the Prophecy of
Jacob shall come to pass: in which he said, that the Scepter shall not depart
from Judah, till Shilo come. Meaning thereby that even then when as there is no
King in Judah of their own nation, Christ shall come.


Par. What is your judgment farther concerning this Chapter?


Past. In this Chapter is most effectually set out a lively description of
Antichrist, as it were in his colors. First of all he is said to contemn Gods
word: secondly, his pride: Dan. 11.
thirdly, his denial of Matrimony: fourthly, his Idolatry: and fifthly, his
utter ruin. And afterward in the twelfth chapter, is showed the persecution of
Christ's elect, the general resurrection, the power of the word, the reward of
the godly, the end of the world.


Par. Declare unto me somewhat concerning Ezra?


Past. Ezra was a Scribe to Jeremy, and afterward a Priest of the Lord. In
which office, he did behave himself zealously, and faithfully. This Ezra,
Ezra 7.6. to the end.
upon the commandment of Darius King of Persia, went from Babell with a mighty
band, and came to Jerusalem, in the seventh, year of the kings reign, having
a great multitude of the people Israel, and infinite treasures of silver and
gold, toward the ^^^hing and furnishing of the Temple, which was ruinated and
spoiled by Nabuchadnezar. The number of them that came from Babylon with Ezra,
Ezra 8.9.10.
and his zealous order for religion, you may read at large. In the second
chapter of this book also, is mention of Zorobabell: who first of all brought
a great company of the Israelites from Babylon to Jerusalem, at the
commandment of Cirus the King, who succeeded Darius. Which King Cirus, by
evil suggestion, revoked his former authority for the building of the Lords
house, and caused the same to stay unto the second year of Darius.


Par. Tell me first I pray you what comfort had they in this extreme misery?
to wit, when the building of the Temple was hindered?


Past. As in the time of their captivity at Babylon, they had two great
preaching Prophets, to wit, Ezechiel and Daniel, by whom they were mightily
strenghtened in hope of deliverance: so now his holy Majesty stirred up unto
them four other godly and diligent Prophets to cheer them, by telling them
most assuredly, that this their work should go forward: according to Daniels
Prophecy.


Par. What say you of the book next adjoining, to wit, Nehemiah?


Past. In this book is mentioned three special men, Ezra 2.2. to the end of 7.
raised up by the goodness and mercies of almighty God, for the comfort of the
people Israel, after their captivity. The first was Zorobabel, their Captain:
The second was Ezra, their Priest: The third Nehemiah, the setter forward of
their building: This book is thought to be written by Ezra, as the former;
because the Hebrews have reckoned both books as one: Neh. 2.
and it compriseth a story of 130. years. This Nehemiah, being butler to
Artaxerxes the King of Babylon, by the providence of God, found favor with the
King: insomuch as that he obtained leave to depart, with the Kings conuoy to
Jerusalem, for the reedifying of all the decayed places thereof. And after the
Temple was built, he took order for the restoring and continuance of religion.


Par. Who was Hester, that bears the name of this book?


Past. This woman, being one of the daughters of Israel, was sometime called
Hadasa. Ahashuerus, otherwise named Artaxerxes, successor to Cirus, took her
for his wife: as the history makes mention. For, after the return of some from
captivity, to the building of the Temple, many of the Jews remained still in
Babylon, as a people malecontent, and not willing to go any more to Ikrusalem.
And had not almighty God prevented it by his providence and mercy, they had
been all slame in one day by the decree of the King: which was procured and
instigated by Haman, for the malice and envy he did bear to Mardocheus a man
of that nation.


Par. What say you concerning the other Prophets, of whom you have neither
spoken amongst the Kings of Judah, nor yet amongst the Kings of Israel? to wit,
Obadiah, Nahum, Jonah, Abakkuck.


Past. Obadiah or Abdiah prophesied against Idumea.

Nahum and Jonas prophesied against Niniue.

Abakkuck prophesied against Babylon.


Par. Why have you annexed the Prophets with the Kings?


Past. There is great use thereof. For if you compare the doctrine of every
several Prophet, with the religion and manners of the king, and the people
under whom they prophesied, the one does plainly expound the other. And this I
would have you to mark; That every Prophet, in the beginning of his book,
does specially name under what King he prophesied; to the intent you should see
and mark how he applies his doctrine, according to the time.


Par. You have in a plain sort declared all the books of the old Testament,
saving some few: but you have spoken nothing at all of the books of the New
Testament. What, is there no use to be made of them?


Past. There is as great use to be made of those books which are omitted, as
of those books which are already handled. Therefore I will here set them down
in seven degrees, whereby you may benefit your self by both.


The first Degree.
Genesis. Exodus. Leuiticus. Numbers. Matthew. Mark. Luke. John.
The second Degree.
Deuteronomy. Acts
The third Degree.
Joshua. Judges. Ruth. 1 Samuel. 2 Samuel. 1 Kings. 2 Kings. 1 Chronicles. 2
Chronicles. Esaias. Jeremy. Hosea. Ioell. Amos. Michael. Zophony. Obadiah. Jonah.
Nahum. Abakkuck.
The fourth Degree.
Daniels first six Chapters. Ezechiel.
The fifth Degree.
Ezra. Nehemiah. Hester. Haggas. Zachary. Malachy.
The sixth Degree.
Job. Psalms. Proverbs. Ecclesiast. Canticles. Romans. 1 Corinthians. 2
Corinthians. Galathians. Ephesians. Philippians. Colossians. 1 Thessalonians. 2
Thessalonians. 1 Timothy. 2 Timothy. Titus. Philemon. Hebrews. James. 1 Peter.
2 Peter. 1 John. 2 John. 3 John. Jude.
The seventh Degree.
Daniels six last chapters. Revelation.
Par. Why have you thus disposed and sorted the books of the Bible? declare
your reasons severally.


Reason for the first.
Pastor. GEnesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, and Numbers, do specially contain the
Laws, Sacrifices, and Sacraments concerning Christ: Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, do comprehend principally an answer thereunto, or as it were a plain
demonstration of the performance of all former promises concerning him. So that
indeed, whatsoever was shadowed, figured, or foretold of Christ's divinity, of
his humanity and sufferings, together with the benefits thereof to the
faithful, these Evangelists do in their books declare.


Reason for the second.
Moses in Deuteronomie amongst other things, repeates summarily all that was
famously done and spoken from the going out of Egypt, until that time, in
which he wrote this Book: So Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, records the
whole story of the Church, concerning things done from the death of Christ, to
the time wherein he wrote.

Reason for the third.
As in the five Books of Moses were particularly handled the Religion and
manners of the people of Israel, from the promise made to Abraham, until they
came to Canaan: so in the first eight Books mentioned in the third Degree, are
recited particularly, their rulers and governors, from their entrance into
Canaan, until they were carried away captive into Babylon. Whereunto I have
annexed seven Prophets, who lived in those times, and taught under those
Kings, as may appear in the beginning of every first Chapter of the same
Prophets. Which Books of the Prophets and of the Kings, being laid and
compared together, the one will expound the other.

Par. Why do you set forth this woman Ruth, amongst the Kings and Rulers of
the people?


Past. Samuel the Prophet is said to be the writer of her story: and the
Hebrews do reckon this her Book and the Book of Judges as one. And again,
this story in this place answers to the time, in which the principal matter
recited therein was performed.


Par. And why do you place these four Prophets so odly by themselves, and
last of all? to wit: Obadiah. Jonah. Nahum. Abakkuk.



Past. These Prophets which are severed from the rest, had nothing to do in
the Kingdom of Israel, nor in the Kingdom of Judah: For, Jonah and Nahum
prophesied against ye Ninevites. Obadiah Idumeans. Abakkuk Babilonians.


Par. I do not understand why you sort out two of the great Prophets, and
place them so odly by themselves, in your fourth Degree.


Reason for the fourth.
Past. These two Prophets, to wit, Daniel and Ezekiel, are fitly placed
together, both in respect of the former stories, and of their allotted time of
prophecy. For, as the former Prophets did preach before the time of the
Captivity: so these (according to the riches of Gods grace, not leaving his
people utterly destitute) prophefled in Babylon, during the seauenty years
Captivity.


Par. Declare your reason why you place Haggi, Zachary and Malachie with Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Hester.


Reason for the fifth.
Past. These do lie in order according to the times. The last Degree that I
handled, does concern the time in which the people were in captivity: and
this Degree concerns the time from the end of their Captivity until the
finishing of the Temple at Jerusalem. And the three Prophets annexed unto them,
were such as God gave to comfort and to set them forward in their building, and
in Religion.


Par. What reason have you to sort some Books of the old Testament with the
Epistles?


Reason for the sixth.
Past. These Books old and new, for matter chiefly contained in them, are in
another sort and kind, far differing from the former. They are more properly
called Doctrinall and Sapientall: because therein the holy Ghost most
compendiously by similitudes, comparisons, allegories and examples, does
persuade all men to embrace Christ Jesus in holiness of life and conversation.


Reason for the seventh.
These Books fall out according to the Degrees so to be placed. For Daniel
entreats of matter and things done during the captivity, and somewhat largely
of things to be performed until Christ's Incarnation. So Saint John likewise in
the Revelation, points out by manifest particulars, to those great things that
were and are to be performed until the last day, in which Christ Jesus shall
come with triumph and great glory to pronounce the fullness of joy for his
Elect. Thus I end as I began, yielding all praise, empire, and dominion to his
blessed Majesty.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord, thou which couerest the night with darkness, and causest man therein
to take his rest, and by every day and night do show thy great glory in the
heavens, and also thy wisdom and power by governing and preserving all thy
creatures upon the earth: O Lord, I thy poor servant and creature, do most
humbly thank thee from the bottom of my heart, for my sweet and comfortable
rest this night past, and for watching over me by thine eye of providence, and
keeping both my body and soul by thy grace from sin and death: Beseeching
thee O Lord God, my Father, Savior and Comforter, to bless, to sanctify,
direct and preserve me in this thy new day, and that I may become a new
creature unto thee O God, in holiness and righteousness, laboring faithfully
and painefully in my calling: that so my labors this day, may be sanctified
and blessed unto me and mine: and that I may show forth thy praise in all my
ways, and declare my love and charity unto men in all my works: that after
the days of this my life and pilgrimage finished and ended here in this world,
I may live with thee for ever in the world to come, through Jesus Christ my
Lord and Savior, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, ever
one God world without end. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Gracious and merciful God, I am most bound unto thy heavenly Majesty: for
my preservation this day, because I and all men are continually subject unto
all dangers and perils, griefs and sorrows, sickness and death: yea, we lie
open (unless thy grace and might do defend us) unto the temptations and
tyranny of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: which daily seek and desire
our hurt and confusion both of body and soul for ever. Wherefore O gracious
and everliving God, as thy right hand and saving health has been with me
this day, and thou have directed, blessed, and comforted me thy poor servant
in all my ways and labors, for the which I most humbly thank thee: so I most
earnestly entreat thy Majesty, in thy love and mercy, for Christ Jesus sake,
to keep me and all mine in safety this night, and to cover us under the
shadow of thy wings from all perils and dangers whatsoever, and that our souls
as well as our bodies may take their sweet and comfortable rest and joy in
thee: and likewise that thou would grant that whenever thou shall knock
at the door of our hearts, to call us unto thee O God: we may with the wise
Virgins be watchful, and have oil in our lamps, that we may be received into
eternal rest: through Jesus Christ thy dear Son, and our only Savior, Amen.

FINIS.

