NEWFOVND LAND



THE GOLDEN FLEECE Divided into three Parts, Under which are discovered the
Errors of Religion, the Uices and Decays of the Kingdom, and lastly the
ways to get wealth, and to restore Trading so much complained of.

TRANSPORTED FROM Cambrioll Colchos, out of the Southermost Part of the Island,
commonly called the NEWFOVNDLAND, By Orpheus Junior, For the general and
perpetual Good of Great BRITAIN.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Williams, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Globe, over against the Royal Exchange, 1626.

THE MUSES AND THE GRACES, BY THE hands of Orpheus Junior, do here present
this Treatise of the Golden Fleece at the Feet of the most Noble, Mighty, and
hopeful King of Great Britain.
GReat Monarch, though You with Apollo's lore,
And with your Fathers rules are polisht more:
Though You of riper Judgments do not want
Proiectours rare, and full as elegant;
Disdain not yet to mark what we entend,
And to Your Grace by Orpheus recommend.
Though we no Gold, nor Precious Stones present,
The value notwithstanding here is sent;
King Gyges Ring to see the Cause of harms,
A Newfound Fleece to raise both Arts and Arms.
Christ was well pleased with the poor widows mite;
No less a Lark excels the greatest Kite.
A little Part a wise King will prefer
Of Practick Art before all Dreams, that err.
An Emperor, one of Your Name the fifth
Commines Books held as a peerless Gift.
So did King Phillips valiant Son account
Poor Homers Works rich Jewels to surmount.
This no Eutopia is, nor Commonwealth
Which Plato faign'd. We bring Your Kingdoms health
By true Receipts; which You will relish well,
If Humors rank by Physic You expel.
In pithy fresh Conceits Your mind may joy,
When sundry Troops of weighty Cares annoy.
Musae and Charites hoc Opus de Aureo Uellere Orphei Iunioris manibus traditum
ad Pedes Potentissimi and maximae spei Magnae BRITANNIAE Regis humillime
submittunt.
Magne Monarcha, licet scriptis ab Apolline magno
A Patre Praeceptis perpoliare tuo.
Nec Polypragmatici pollentes munere fandi,
Nec tibi deficiant Cognitione graves.
Ne de digneris tamen haec Documen^aprobare,
Quae tibi nunc Orphei mittimus hausta manu.
Non Aurum Gemmasque tibi sed ditius Auro
Et gemmis dignum Principe portat Opus.
Vota Precesque Deo, viduae Munuscula Christo
Regibus egregijs and placuere Libri.
Carolus Historiam Cominaei Quintus amabat,
Sub Ceruicali deposuitque su^.
Nec minus Iliados Proles animosa Philippi
Inter bellandum saepe legebat Opus.
Non hic Eutopiam, non hic Phantasma Platonis,
Regi nil praeter materiale damus.
Dulce reale tibi, cuius Men's obruta Curis
Multiplici rerum mole vacare neguit.
To the indifferent Readers.
IVdicious Readers, in this busy time I know you will wonder, how I dare bring
forth new Proiects shadowed under a glorious Title to reform Errors, and to
restore Trading, when men of far greater understanding do find themselves
puzzled, grauelled, and almost at their wits end, accounting the task to exceed
all the labors of Hercules. The presumption, I confess, is great. Yet when I
had called to mind that Action of Diogenes, how he tumbled up and down his Tub
very laboriously at such time, when all his Neighbors prepared themselves for
Arms, I resolved likewise to do somewhat, and by toffing too and fro the
barrel of my Conceits, albeit barren and inferior unto many thousands in this
Kingdom, to encourage others to lend their hands unto the Public prop, if
not perpetually to secure it, yet for a time to stay it, until their wisdoms
had concluded on stronger means. Among many Remedies, which I have here
produced, perhaps they may light on some not to be contemned. At the least
those which are Thriftie, will con me thanks for reprehending of
multiplicities of Law Suits and Prodigality: Both which do keep our State in an
under balance. The one vice disunites our hearts from the harmony of Concord;
making us unworthy of the Communion of Saints, and consequently of the Lords
Table, and the other disperseth our substance, that we cannot yield sufficient
supplies to save the honor of our Country. What a mass of treasure do we
yearly spend in foreign Commodities? What abundance of Silks do we consume
on our backs? What a deal of Gold and Silver lace? while the wary Spaniard,
who has the Indies in possession, contents himself with his own Fashion and
lesser moderation both in Apparel and Diet. The Dutch they follow no
extrauagant Attires. Every man is distinguished in his Rank: some by wearing a
Copper Chain, others a Silver; and the Nobler of Gold. In France the meaner
sort of women wear Hoods of Taffata, other of Satin, and the better of
Velvet. No man intrudes into another vocation. But with us, Ioane is as good
as my Lady, Citizens Wives are of late grown Gallants. The Yeoman does
gentilize it. The Gentleman scorns to be behind the Nobleman. Yea, many are
not ashamed to go as brave as the King. And if a Wiseman chance to tax them
for their prodigal humor: They will answer, that it is for the credit of the
Kingdom; which indeed is a most weak excuse: for what redounds to the public
damage, and loss ought not to be termed honorable, as not safe nor worthy for
a discreet Inhabitant to vaunt of. Such gaudie sights never last above a nine
days wonder, nay, sometimes one only day, like your Pageants, and then the
memory becomes stale, their Silks out of fashion. But the example, like a
Leprosy, is transferred from the Court to the City, from the City to the
Country. Of these and many other abuses, which our State had need to look
into, I purpose in this Treatise to discourse, submitting the necessity of
their Reformation to the Higher Powers consideration, as is meet and
convenient. In the first Part I will endeavor to remove the Errors of
Religion, in the Second the Diseases of the Commonwealth: And in the Third
Part I will discover the certainty of the Golden Fleece, which shall restore us
to all worldly Happiness.

To the uncharitable Readers or Deriders of our GOLDEN FLEECE.
MY Masters, You that slight the first Lesson of the Psalms, you that plot at
home, like crafty Crowders, torcape the fruits of all painful Trades without
wetting your Cats feet, though the Fish be never so dearly prized, you I say,
who repos^ your chiefest Felicity in playing on the Violl of Fraud, and in
idolizing a painted Strumpet, come not at Colchos, nor presume ye once, more
then Tantalus, to touch the Golden Apples of our Hesperides. There lies a
Couple of Dragons in the way. Pinge duos Angues, sacer est locus. The Place is
not for you. They that labor not with sweat, shall not taste of our Sweet.
Keep ye then at home, like Clinicall Apes to your Clogges. As a black Sheep
among some of you is accounted a perilous beast; no less offensive is the
grimme Porter of the Golden I Will. Yea and the Ram, which bears the precious
Fleece, has Horns more piercing then Pikes to assault the assaylant Lozell.
It is good sleeping in a whole Skin. Follow the example of Gryllus, who liked
so well of his Epicurean and Swinish shape, that when the wise Ulysses had
wrought the means for all his Companions to resame their manly forms from
their sensual and beastly shapes, into which the Witches of this enchanting
World had metamorphosed them, he utterly refused to return into a reasonable
Creature, saying, that of all forms, he best agreed with the Hogs, Epicurus
de grege Porci.

It is pity therefore to reform and reclaim any against their wills. If
wallowing in mire do so delight you, return to your dunghils, until you grow
fit for fat Bacon. Or else you may petition to Circe and Calypso to confer on
you the shape of Ganders, and to hiss bravely until the Foxes steal upon
you. O imprudent Readers! Will you still lull in the bosom of careless
Security? Will you never leave your carping at virtuous Proiects?

When the Rain raineth, and the Goose winketh,
Little knows the Gander, what the Goose thinks.
Little know you what your Wives and children are like to suffer after these
storms. Little know you, or at least your hearts, like Pharaohes, are so
hardened that you seem not to know it, that the chiefest Cause of our Decay of
Trading proceeds by Prodigality and the multiplicities of Law Suites nourished
for some private men's advantage. Veritas non quaerit angulos. The way of Truth
is plain without indirect turnings. This is the effect and event of your
uncharitableness. I write not in passion, that our indicious Senators should
esteem my words, like the fortune of Cassandra, who was said to have the Gift
of true Prophecy, but withal such ill luck, that none would believe
whatsoever she prophesied. Now the Impost^me is ripened, and Time the
Discouerer of deceits has made it manifest, that nothing hinders neighbourly
love, and the union of minds for the execution of Noble Actions, as much as
malicious rancour and civil discord at home.

It is in vain for me to diswade you from envying and inueighing at our
Golden Fleece, seeing our Preachers with their more Divine admonitions have
missed to convert you. Hiss then and spare not. Continue still in your
customary courses of scoffing and scorning, until you smart at last for your
Sardonicall Spleenes and ominous laughter.

But what a preposterous thing is it, That the Member which Nature formed to
utter the glory of the Creator, to serve like a Golden Trumpet, or sweet
sounding clapper in the Bell of Gods Temple to convert Sinners, to comfort the
sorrowful should degenerate from the proper Office, for which it was ordained?
and now to become so much perverted, as to flout at all good endeavors? Either
leave off your mocking, or make the World partaker of a better work.

Cum tus non aedas, carpis mea Opuscula, Mome;
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel aede tua.
Thou putst not out thy works, yet carpst at mine;
Leave off to carpe at mine, or put out thine.
In the mean space, as long as like Mules you cla^ one another, I assure your
wise Masterships, that you shall but minister matter to Buffones of rederision,
as some of your alliance sometimes felt from the mouth of Tarleton, who being
upon the Stage in a Town where he expected for civil attention to his
Prologue, and seeing no end of their hissing, he brake forth at last into this
Sarcasmicall taunt:

I lived not in that Golden Age,
When Jason won the Fleece:
But now I am on Gotams Stage,
Where Fools do hiss like G^ese.
In Commendation of the Golden Fleece produced by Orpheus lunior.
WE need not now complain for want of Tra^e
Since from the West we golden wares may lade;
Which Orpheus shows in this his Golden Fleece,
A Trade more rich, then Jason brought to Greece
From Cotchos Land; if by our slothful ease
And wanton Peace we lose not the increase.
What I first chalkt two years at Cuperts Cone,
New Cambriols Planter sprung from golden-groue,
Old Cambriaes Soil, up to the Skies does raise.
For which let Fame crown him with sacred Bays.
JOHN GVY.

An Epigram upon the Golden Fleece, moralized by the Author for the good of
Great BRITAIN.
ORpheus but late our Woods did make to ring, Cambrens, Caroleia.

And to his Harp great Charles his Carols sing.
Since that he touched upon the Italian shore, The New sound Politic.

Whence Boccalinies News of State he bore.
But Orpheus now for saking Eastern Greece,
From Western Colchos brings the Golden Fleece;
Which no Eutopia is, nor Fairy-land,
Yet Colchos in Elisian Fields does stand.
Three luckie Births his Brain makes to appear,
Whereas most Creatures breed but once a year.
Men Hercules among the Stars did put,
'Cause Hydraes triple Head He off had cut.
Unto the Sphere shall He advanced be?
And our new Orpheus have no high degree?
Three Monsters Heads that lops off at one blow,
Error, Vice, Want, which in our Country grow?
The One foul mouthed Cerberus did quell,
And chayning fast, him dragged about Hell:
The Other Error, which in Hell was bred,
Has by strong Reasons bound and Captiueled.
The Augean Stables He of filth did cleanse:
The Other Men, of vice and foul Offense.
The Hesperian Apples He by waking got:
But Orpheus greater Gain does us allot.
For which let Paris judge, who now shall have
The Golden Apple, which the World does crave?
STEPHEN BERRIER.

In Honor of the Golden Fleece described by Orpheus Junior.
O How my heart does leap with Joy to hear,
Our Newfound I Will by Britains prized dear!
That hopeful Land, which Winters six I tried,
And for our Profit meet, at full descri'd.
If Hope of Fame, of quiet Life, or Gain
May kindle Flames within our minds again:
Then let us join to seek this Golden Fleece,
The like never came from Colchos into Greece.
Orphens remoues all Errors from the way,
And how this Land shall thrive, he does bewray.
Thus ships and coin increase, when least we thought,
For Fish and Trains Exchange, and all unbought,
JOHN MASON.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Part of the Golden Fleece.
THe occasion of this Treatise, called the Golden Fleece. And the Reasons which
moved the Author to intermingle merry and light conceits among matters of
consequence. Page 1. CHAP. I. The great care, which Apollo takes for the
Monarchy of Great Britain.

The singular and respective love, which he bears toward the hopeful and
magnanimous King Charles.

And how by his Proclamation, he caused Mariana the Jesuit to be apprehended
for animating Subjects against their natural Prince. page 18.

CHAP. II. The Conviction of Mariana the Jesuit by the Testimonies of the
Scriptures, and of the Ancient Fathers.

Apollo condemns Mariana the Jesuit, to be tortured in Ph^laris his Brazen
Bull, and banisheth the pernicious Sect of Jesuits out of the Territories of
Parnassus. page 30.

CHAP. III. How Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford, espying in a Church at Athens, a
Franciscan Friar a kissing of a Maidof Honor belonging to the Princess
Thalia, brought S. Frances to surprise them, who of mere idiotisme applaudes
the Fall. page 38.

CHAP. IV. Doctor Wicliffe connents Saint Frances and the kissing Friar before
Apollo.

Saint Frances defends the cause, and discovers seven sorts of kisses.

Apollo refuteth his defense, condemns the Friar, and abolisheth all
Monastical Orders. page 39.

CHAP. V. Apollo censureth Thalia and her Gentlewoman for their lascivious
prankes; and reformeth the Comicall Court. page 50.

CHAP. VI. The Author of the Nuns discovery at Lisbon exhibits a complaint to
Apollo against Father Foster the Friar, Confessor to the English Nunnery at
Lisbon, for committing carnal copulation with sundry of them.

Apollo makes a discourse of Auticular Confession, adiudgeth Foster to Ixions
Wheel, and suppresseth all Nunneries. page 59.

CHAP. VII. Thomas Becket of Canterbury, accuses before Apollo Walter de Mapes
Archdeacon of Oxford in King Henry the Seconds time, for defending the Marriage
of Priests against the Pope of Romes Decree. page 65.

CHAP. VIII. Walter de Mapes is commanded by Apollo to defend his Positions
against the Pope and Becket, who accordingly obeys, and proves the
lawfulness of Clergie-mens Marriage, both by the Testimony of the Scripture,
and of the Ancient Fathers. page 68.

Apollo reuerseth the Popes Canon made against the Marriage of the Clergy, and
to that purpose sends out a Proclamation. page 73.

CHAP. IX. Apollo upon Information given him by the Greek Church of Images,
erected by the Pope in the Western Churches, and of Inuocations on Saints
confuteth these Idolatrous Traditions, both by the Testimony of the Scripture,
and by the Positions of the Primitive Church. page 74.

CHAP. X. Martine Luther arriving at Parnassus, shows to Apollo, how the Popes
under color of redeeming men's Souls out of Purgatory, used to conicatch
Christians by the sale of Pardons.

Apollo condemns both the Fable of Purgatory, and the use of Popish Pardons.
page 81.

CHAP. XI. Gratian the Canonist conuents the Waldenses and Albigienses before
Apollo for celebrating divine service in their Country Language, and not
according to the Rites of the Romish Church.

Zuinglius defends their cause by the Authority of the Scriptures and of the
Primitie Church.

Apollo pronounces a definitive Sentence against the Pope, on the behalf of
the Waldenses and Albigienses. page 85.

CHAP. XII. Berengarius renews his opinion of the Lords Supper, and proves
both by the Scriptures and by the Authority of the most ancient Fathers of the
Primitive Church, that the same is to be taken after a spiritual manner, and
in commemoration of the Lords death. page 91.

CHAP. XIII. The Romish Church accuses the Church of Aethiopia, for denying to
acknowledge her to be the Mother and Catholic Church.

The Patriarch of Alexandria challenges the Pr^macie over that Church, and
proves the Pope of Rome to be an Intruder, and to have no Right at all over the
Church of Ae^hiopia.

Apollo determines the difference by discovering the ways how the Pope got
the Supremacy over the Western Churches, and how both he and the general
Councels err in matters of Faith. page 96.

CHAP. XIV. Scotus the Master of subtle Questions conuents Sir Geffrey Chaucer
for calling the Pope Antichrist, and comparing the Romish Church to the griping
Griffon, and the true Church to the tender Pelican. page 110.

CHAP. XV. Sir Geffrey Chaucer being provoked by Scotus to defend his Cause,
proves the Pope to be the great and uniuersall Antichrist prophesied in the
Scriptures. page 121.

CHAP. XVI. Apolloes judgment of Chaucers Apology concluding that the Pope is
the great Antichrist. page 131

CHAP. XVII. Apolloes sentence promulgated for the Impurity of the Church
Militant.

Doctor Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, complains against Cartwright,
Brown, and other Puritan Separists, for inuaighing against their Superiors.

Apollo condemns this Sect, exhorting them to unity and to return to the
bosom of their Mother Church. page 133

CHAP. XVIII. The memorable Synod of Dott accuses Arminius before Apollo, for
broaching out of new Opinions in the Church to trouble the brains of the
weaker.

Apollo confutes Arminius, and shows what a sober minded Christian ought to
conceive of deep Mysteries.

Arminius is commanded to recant. page 137

The conclusion of the first Part. page 146.


The Contents of the Chapters of the Second part of the Golden Fleece.
CHAP. I. MAlines and Misselden, two Merchants of Great Britain, do
severally declare their Opinions touching the Decay of Trade, and the Causes of
the vnder-ballance of their Native Commodities with the Foreign, which were
brought into that Kingdom.

Apollo bewaileth their misery, and commands a further inquiry to be made of
the Causes. page 1.

CHAP. II. Apollo causes a Jury to be impanelled out of the Universities of
Oxford, Cambridge, S. Andrews, Aberdine, and the College at Dublin, to find
out these persons which sold Ecclesiastical Linings.

The Presentours discovering some, bring them before Apollo.

His Majesty's censure, with his discourse of the Right of Tithes. page 6.

CHAP. III. Upon a Bill of Complaint exhibited by Aeschines and Papinian,
against Rewards unequally conferred on persons of mean desert and descent,
Apollo pronounces a peremptory Doom. page 15.

CHAP. IIII. Hugh Broughton upon some coffeehouse taken in seeing his
inferiors promoted to eminent places before himself, complains unto Apollo,
that Florio, Deane of Thaliaes Chapel, profaned the sacred name of the
Letany, by singing the same intermixed with triuiall toys.

Apollo causes Florio to repeat his Letany. pa. 18.

CHAP. V. Apollo, after some show of distate against Florio, for his new moral
Letany, at the last gives him leave to defend it.

Florio in a brief Oration declares the reasons, why be innented such a
strange form of Letany.

Apollo pronounces his Censure. page 26

CHAP. VI. Apollo asks the Author of the Golden Fleece wherefore his
Countrymen of Wales, having the commodionsnesse of the Sea with a large scope
of land, are notwithstanding very much impouerished of late.

The Author imputes the cause unto the multitude of Law Suites. page 29.

CHAP. VII. Orpheus Junior exhibits a Petition unto Apollo to diminish the
number of Lawyers, and to punish their offenses.

Apolloes Answer, showing how they may be restrained and punished. page 36.

CHAP. VIII. Bartolus and Plowden, by the instigation of the Jesuitical
Faction, do appeach Orpheus Junior before Apollo, for certain Offenses
supposed to be committed by him. page 40.

CHAP. IX. Apollo commanding Orpheus Junior to answer the Accusation of
Bartolus and Plowden, who obeying extoilesh Charity, taxes Conicatching and
Hatred, and commends the Laws.

Apollo smiled to see the impudency of these Lawyers, yet not to seem
partial in his Servants cause, he commanded Orpheus to defend himself, who
thus began. page 44.

CHAP. X. The learned Universities of Great Britain do find themselves
agrieued, that Popish Physicians are permitted to practice Physic in this
Kingdom.

Apollo remedies their grienances; and decrees that the Popish presume not to
minister Physic to any Protestant, but to them of their own Sect. p. 54.

CHAP. XI. The Nobility of Parnassus do complain, that their Inferiors with
their Wines do wear richer Apparel then themselves, showing likewise, that
they have encroached on other Privileges of theirs to be hurried in Coaches,
by which presumptions many other corruptions are lately crept into Apolloes
Court. p. 57.

CHAP. XII. Apollo commands certain of his Attendants to prescribe remedies,
how Husbands should live with their Wines chastely, and without jealousy to be
Cuckolded, as also how men should contemn the baits of beautiful Women. page
62.

CHAP. XIII. A Corollary or an epitomized Censure of Apollo pronounced after
the aforesaid Opinions delivered. touching the Election of Wives and their
usage. p. 72

CHAP. XIV. Cato the Censour of good manners having arrested certain Persons a
drinking more then the Laws prescribed them, brings them before Apollo.

His Majesty reproues them for their Drunkenness, and banisheth them for ever
out of the precincts of Parnassus. page 73.

CHAP. XV. The Author of this Treatise called the Golden Fleece, exhibits a
Bill of Complaint against the Tobacconists of Great Britain.

Apollo condemns the immoderate use of Tobacco, and recommends the care of the
extermination thereof to the Clergy and to the Temporal Magistrate. page 78.

CHAP. XVI. Traiano Boccalini the Author of the Book called the Newfound
Politic complayneth to Apollo, that the Seven Wisemen of Greece, who were put
in trust to reform the World, did deceive his Majesty's expectation; and that
the World was worse then ever it was.

Apollo retires himself in discontent; but at length by the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, he is comforted and walks along with them in Procession. page 83.

CHAP. XVII. The four Patrones or Patriarchs of Great Britain do sing in
Procession the ensuing Rithmes.

Apollo pronounces a conclusiue Oracle to remedy all Abuses, preparing the
way to the Golden Fleece. page 87.

CHAP. XVIII. Orpheus Junior shows that one of the chiefest causes of the
Decay of Trading in Great Britain, proceeded by the rash Adventures of the
Western Merchants in passing the Straits of Gibrakar, and i^ fishing on the
Coast of New foundland, without wasting ships to defend them from Pirates. page
102.


The Contents of the Chapters of the third Part of the Golden Fleece.
CHAP. I. Orpheus Junior is required by Apollo to discover where the Golden
Fleece lies.

Orpheus performs his Majesty's commandment, shows that there be sundry
kinds of the Golden Fleece, all which, after an allusion to the English
natures, he reduces into one main Trade, to the Plantation and Fishing in the
New foundland. The general cause, which moved Orpheus to regard this Golden
Fleece. Page 1.

CHAP. II. Orpheus Junior particularizeth the manifold benefits of the Golden
Fleece, which might serve to repair the decay of Trade, lately complained of
in Great Britain, and to restore that Monarchy to all Earthly happiness.
page 11.

CHAP. III. Apollo calls an Assembly of the Company, for the Plantation of
Newfoundland, where Master Slany, Master Guy, and others, meeting by his
Majesty's commandment, Captain John Mason is willed to disclose, whether the
Golden Fleece be there, where Orpheus Junior alleged it to be. Captain Mason
a^erreth it to be in the same Island more abundantly then in any other place.
page 19.

CHAP. IV. Apollo commands John Guy, Alderman of Bristow, to show how the
Plantations in the Newfoundland might be established and secured from the cold
vapors, and foggie mists which in the Spring are supposed to molest that
Country. page 26.

CHAP. V. Sir Ferdinando Gorge is accused by the Western Fishermen of England,
for hindering them of their stages, to dry their Fish in New England, and from
trading with the Savages for Furs and other commodities. Ferdinando Gorge his
answer. Apollo reconcileth their differences. page 30.

CHAP. VI. Apollo moved to pity upon a Petition preferred unto him by
certain Sailors Widows, whose Husbands perished in the Voyages under the East
Indies Company, causes four famous Knights of Great Britain, Sir Francis
Drake, Sir Martin Frobisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button, to
signify their opinions, where about the best passage to the East Indies did
lie. page 39.

CHAP. VII. Apolloes censure of Sir Thomas Buttons Voyage to the Northwest
Passage.

His directions for the preservation of health in frostie seasons, and for the
preventing of the Scuruy.

An Elegy in their commendations which adventured their persons for the
discovery of the aforesaid Passage. page 46.

CHAP. VIII. The Merchants of Lisbone do complain on the English and
Hollanders, for trading into the East Indies for Spices, Drugges, and other
Commodities. Apollo rejects their complaints, and advises how they may sail
thither with lesser inconveniences, then heretofore. page 51.

CHAP. IX. Apollo sends for some of the Merchants Adventurers of every several
Company out of Great Britain, graceth them with his countenance, and promises
them the continuance of his Favors. page 58.

CHAP. X. Apollo to make the Golden Fleece a complete Catholic Restoratine to
the State of Great Britain, commands the seven Wisemen of Greece to declare
out of their experience, some more means for the enriching of that State:
which they severally perform. page 59.

CHAP. XI. Apollo not thoroughly contented with the proiects of the seven
wisemen of Greece, commands others, viz. Cornelius Tacitus, Comminaeus, the
Lord Cromwell, Sir Thomas Chaloner, Secretary Walsingham, Sir Thomas Smith, and
William Lord Burleigh, who were known to be far more Politic Statesmen, to
deliver their opinions, how Great Britain might be enriched. page 71.

CHAP. XII. The Order, which Apollo Took for the settling of the Golden Fleece,
before his late Progress into the Tropicke of Cancer, recommending the same to
the care of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, the four Patrons of Great
Britain.

The consultation of the four Patrons for the good of Great Britain. The copy
of Saint David's Sonnet, which he pronounced in the Amphitheater ^t Parnassus,
in honor of the King of Great Britains Marriage and Coronation. page 81.

CHAP. XIII. Upon an Information preferred before the Lady Pallas against
Scoggin and Skeleton, for interrupting of Saint David in his Sonnet, She vtters
some Observations on the behalf of the Learned, and thereby takes an Occasion
to banish all Scoffing Companions from Parnassus, and from becoming at any
time after partakers of the Golden Fleece, discovered in this Treatise. page 93.

The Conclusion of Orpheus Junior to his Sovereign, the King of Great
Britain. page 95.


OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE: THE FIRST PART.
The occasion of this Treatise, called the Golden Fleece. And the Reasons which
moved the Author to intermingle merry and light conceits among matters of
Consequence.

IN the Month when the Celestial Ram famous for the Grecians Golden Fleece
had renewed the last Spring 1626. with an equal Proportion of Days and
Nights; the one presiguring Joy for the Second Years Reign of our Rising
Sun, and the other Sorrow for our crying and presumptuous sins; while I
attended at Court to know his Royal Pleasure about our Fishing Fleets and
Pla^tations of the Island commonly called the Newfoundland, in the latter
whereof, I have for these ten years together, engaged both my self and a
great part of my fortunes: it was my good hap among other Noble Courtiers, to
become acquainted with Sir William Alexander Master of the Requests, and
Secretary for Scotland. After some formal Complements, it pleased him and my
ancient Friend Master William Elueston, sometimes Secretary to the most
Excellent Princess Elizabeth, and now Cupbearer to his Majesty, to appoint a
Meeting at the Chamber of Sir William Alexander; where all three of us being
met together, this learned Knight with a joyful countenance and alacrity of
mind, taking me by the hand thus began: I have oftentimes wished to confer
with you, but until this present, I could not find the opportunity. It is
necessary, and this necessity iumps with the sympathy of our constellations
(for I think we were borne both under the same Horoscope) that we advise and
devise some Project for the proceedings and successful managing of our
Plantations. As you obtained a Patent of the Southermost part of Newfoundland,
and transplanted thither some of your countrymen of Wales, baptizing the same
by the name of Cambrioll: so have I got a Patent of the neighboring Country
unto yours West ward beyond Cape Briton, Christning it New Scotland. You have
spent much, and so have I in advancing these hopeful Adventures. But as yet
neither of us arrived at the Haven of our expectations. Only, like a wary
Politician, you suspend your breath for a time, until you can repair your
losses sustained by some of Sir Walter Raleighs company in their return from
Guiana, while your Neighbors the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Falkland,
and my Lord Baltimore, to whom you assigned the Northerly part of your Grant,
do undergo the whole burden, supporting it with a brane resolution, and a
great deal of expense, which otherwise you were obliged to perform. The like
inconveniences I have felt, even in the insancie of my Attempt, whether the
defects proceeded through the late season of the year, when we set out the
Colony, or by the slownesse of our People, who wearied in their passage at Sea,
by reason of contrary winds rested themselves too long at Saint John's Harbor,
and at my Lord of Baltimores Plantation, I know not; but sure I am, it cost me
and my friends very dear, and brought us into much decrements; and has
wel-nigh disheartened my poor countrymen, if at my humble Suit, our most Noble
and Generous King Charles had not out of his Royal magnificence and respective
care to us and our Posterities restored and revived our courages by conferring
such moneys as might arise by the creation of Knight Baronets in Scotland,
toward the erecting of this new fabric and heroical Action. And yet I fear
all this will not suffice and defray the charge. In such abundance does my
native Country of Scotland, ouerswarme with people, that if new habitations
be not suddenly provided for them, as Hiues for Bees, they must either
miscarie of want, or turn Droanes unprofitable to the Owner, as you well
remembered in your Poetical works, which you termed Cambrensium Caroleia.

Si noua non apibus condas, Rex, aluea, Fuci Ignani fient, nec tibi lucra
ferent. We need not complain with our Savior in the Gospel, that the
Harvest is great, and the Laborers few; for we have many Laborers, which
would willingly manure this maiden Soil, and with the painful sweat of their
brows reap what they sow. But the charge of transporting them with such
implements and domestical cattle, as must be had now at the first, cannot but
grow to an excessive cost. To expect more helps then it pleased our most
bountiful King already to bestow upon us will be in vain, I doubt,
considering the scarcity of money in these days, which not only Scotland, but
likewise all his Majesty's Dominions do affirm to be true. The native and
genuine salt of the earth, which fructified our Corn fields with so many
infinite ploughings of our Ancestors and ours is spent; nor will Lime or Marle
ever recover them to the pristine and ancient vigor and fertility. English
Cloth, which heretofore was dignified with the Title of the Golden Fleece,
grows out of request, yea (and with inward grief I speak it) in contempt
also among the Owners and Inhabitants themselves. Our Tin, Lead, and
Coale-mines begin to fail. Our Woods, which Nature produced, and our Fathers
left us for firing, for reparations of decayed Houses, Ploughes, and Shipping,
is lately wasted by the Covetousness of a few Ironmasters. What then remains
in this famous I Will? Except we relieve our wants by Navigations, and these must
be by Fishing, by hook or by crook, by Letters of Mart, by way of reprizals
or revenge, or else by Traffic and Commerce with other Nations besides
Spaniards. I would we could invent and hit upon some profitable means for the
settling of these glorious works, whereto it seems the divine Providence has
elected us as instruments under our Earthly Sovereign.

Here Sir William Alexander stopped. To whom I returned this answer: Much
honored Sir, I grant the setting forwards of Plantations, with all needful
appurtenances, requires the purse of rich Spencer, or of wealthy Sutton, in
regard of the many difficulties and disturbances, which either Malice, Envy,
causeless distruct, casualties unlooked for, or the carelessness of inexpert
Agents may procure now at the beginning to blast our hopes in the blossom.
Nevertheless, inuita Inuidia, in despite of Envy, and of all malicious
Angels, which by their invisible wheeling about the brains of Castawayes, do
use to seduce their fantasies to cross the very best Designs, whereof no man
living has more cause then my self to complain: we ought to persevere in
constancy, and to out-dare Fortune under the Almighties Banner. What
encumbrances did the Israelites feel, before they conquered the Land of
Canaan? How many Persecutions did the Church endure, before the true Christian
Faith was planted? None enters into Heaven without Crosses and fiery trials
composed of briers and brambles, which the Romans termed the unlucky Woods.
Therefore let us lay aside all scrupulous doubts. Let us cut our Coats
according to the cloth, taking care thriftily to husband the means allotted
to our Plantations; which we shall the more easily accomplish, if we have not
passionate Superiors to control us, nor Coadintors in counsel to condemn
us. Commonly where many Directors are, the Directions prove confused: which is
the cause, that private houses be better built, and with lesser charge then
public edifices of the like proportion. Yea and we shall do more in these
places, where we have elevated our cogitations, and leuelled our ends for a
thousand pounds, then others have in Virginia or the Summer Islands for forty
thousand, so that we transport for the space of the first two or three years
none but Fishermen and Laborers. By these we shall perform miracles, and
return yearly into Great Britain a surer Gain, then Iasons Golden Fleece
from Colchos; even with six months provision and Nets, three men in one Boat
shall reap a Golden Harvest, and get worth ten pound a week in Fish being
brought into Europe or exchanged there in the Country; which besides the
increase of Shipping and Mariners will propagate our Plantations in a short
time. Only here lies the Gordian knot to undo, a Rich man will not forgo his
native smoke, nor are poor men of ability now at first to get thither. For
although we have his Majesty's countenance propitious unto these profitable
Enterprises, specially you of New-Scotland, yet all our wits cannot work that
impression in Misers heads to lend their helping hands to this goodly Project.
We sue for no Lottries, we beg for no Bene^olences, as others in the like
cases have done. And if we should, men are now-adaies so Penny-wise and Pound
foolish, they will sooner bestow forty pounds upon a glorious suit of
apparel, then forty shillings to better their brethren. Although these Golden
hopes do shine as clear as the noonetide Sun, yet will not they enlighten
muddie apprehensions, nor quicken earth-creeping wits, unless we could more
firmly build up and restore the Office of Assurance, which the Moorish Pirates
have lately endamaged. After I had ended my Answer, Master Elueston thus
addressed his speech unto us: In my judgment you are both too suspicious and
distrustful of our noble Countrymen. For some particulars you must not tax
the general. Although some rake to themselves, neglecting the fruits of their
Christian Faith: yet many love their Neighbors as themselves, and will strain
the uttermost of their powers to succor the poor members of Christ. There be
Heavenly bodies as well as Earthly Bodies. Me thinks, you being both judicious
and Publishers of Books might so combine and contriue your studies together,
that the World, were it as blind as Beetles, might see with Lynceus eyes the
certainty of the Commodities, the conueniencie of the Trade, and the infinite
benefits which may arise by these heroical enterprises, which you Sir William
Alexander for your part have already chalked out, and delineated in Print. And
I doubt not but this Gentleman even by a virtuous emulation, may if he please,
second you with some pleasing Motives of substance and spirit able to insinuate
into the minds of the dullest Creatures, the sweet fruition of the Golden
Fleece, and like another Jason with a brave Company of Argonauticks, stir up
the most stonie-hearted to relent and relieve their distressed Brethren, which
now groan, and in a manner saint under their penurious state. What will not
patheticall persuasions work? Orpheus, as Poets feigned, with his harmonious
Harp, drew a far more hard-hearted Nation to follow his tune, and to dance
after his motions.

To this Sir William Alexander replied, we live not now, Master Elueston, in
such simplicity and candor of mind, as those people of the Golden Age. Men
for the most part are now become perverse Pigmeyes in respect of their generous
Ancestors. They are better fed then taught, fair without, and foul within,
if not rotten like that Spaniards apple:

-- Como la Mancana
De dentro podrida, y de fuera galana.
They are more heauie-spirited, dull-headed, and almost grown out of kind. He
had need of a choice conceit, of a quaint and transcendent wit, which will
attract the minds of Earthlings to these brave Flames. An Ape will be an Ape
though you clothe him in purple; and a Hog will wallow in mire, though you feed
him never so daintily. Do not we find by experience that the Books of many
rare Divines lie on the Stationers hands, as it were moth-eaten, or inuerted to
base Offices, and sold for wast leaves to Apothecaries, to Glouers, Cooks,
and Bakers?

Nay said Master Elueston, I dare assume, Sir William Alexander, that your
Books shall never be put to such vile and servile uses; nor any lively
monument, which issues from a well tempered brain, like an old bough full ripe
with bark, vt ra^^ale vetus. No Work lights on that fatal period, but some
frothie and abortiue Birth, which the Muses disdayned to inspire; or some
melancholy gross burden, which Lucina that skillful Midwife condemned for a
Monster; or else some Book which wants the true symmetry and proportion of
Seasoning, it being not composed according to the capacity of the Reader.
Here consists the magisteriall secret, the mystery discovered and practiced
by few Writers in our days. And I pray what mystical Receipt might that be,
quoth Sir William Alexander. which may heal the Lethargy of our modern
Readers, or inflame the slow Spirits of the multitude? Have not Books their
Destinies as well as Commonwealths? Must not all things under the Sun wax
old, frail, and fail at last? Senescente mundo consenescunt omnia. The nearer
we are to the end of the world, the more childish and doting is the judgment
of the wisest man. How much more then must we bear with the Common sort,
whose wills change with the weathercocke? If great Scholars, whose lives
Learning ought to purify, do feel their fancies tossed with strange
Chy^^^nes, with many capricious temptations; why apply we not our selves a
little to temporize with them who are yet children in wit?

St^ltiti^^ st^^lare loco Prudentia summa est. It is no less prudence to dally
and put on the Fools coat sometimes, as to seem an anstere Cat^ at some other
times. Do not we see Pamphlets, Ballads, and Play-bookes sooner sold, then
elegant Sermons and Books of Piety? The most part are disposed to fopperies
and worldly vanities, insomuch, that many worthy Preachers are saine to
conceal their talent, and to cover their admonitions under a cunning method,
according to the times importunity, and to the nature of their Chamelion
Flocks. Yea, and these profound Teachers do oftentimes curtall their sacred
Lessons, or else their Auditors ouer-cloyed with grave Doctrine will either
despise them, or fall asleep during their Sermons. Therefore unless a Book
contain light matters as well as serious, it cannot flourish nor live Iouially,
but like leaden Saturn stand still in the stall, or languish like a bedred
Creature.

At this discourse of Sir William Alexanders, Master Elueston as a man ravished
with admiration, went forward in the like Proposition. Now, quoth he, indeed
you have traced my meaning, and happily coniectured at that, which renders
grace to the wise and eternal Muses. Whosoever will commit to Press that
mixture, which savors of some trifling fragments and historical figments
enterlaced among weighty and serious matters shall please the Judicious and
the Simple. Now adays it is wisdom for a Writer to produce wisdom under a
disguised style, and so to weane the nurcelings of his brain, that the Common
People may be edified by a discreet kind of Folly. Let us follow the example
of Saint Paul, who ministered milk only unto Babes; and not meat of too solid
and hard digestion. The Bible comprehends pleasing Relations, as well as
profound mysteries, gellies for the Sick, and venison for the strong; where
likewise a Lamb may wade and an Elephant swim. To this end do we use
Olives, Capers, Oranges, and Limonds for sauceto tender stomachs, when as men
of abler Constitutions can feed on meat without such prouocations. Excellent
in this Art of Cookerie were those Spaniards, which wrote the life of Guzman the
Rogue, and the Adventures of Don Quixot de la Mancha, the former serving to
withdraw a licentious young man from Prodigality, Whoredom, and Deceit; and
the latter to reclaim a riotous running wit from taking delight in those
prodigious, idle, and time-wasting Books, called the Mirror of Knighthood,
the Knights of the Round Table, Palmerin de Oliua, and the like rabblement,
devised no doubt by the Devil to confirm souls in the knowledge of evil,
Honest Mirth I like, but if it be accompanied with Scurrilitie, Baudrie,
notorious lies, or with profane and too frivolous fopperies, I utterly dislike
all such pretended recreations. As the former is necessary for the prolonging
of health and life: so likewise it is for the sale and approbation of a Book,
wherein triuiall toys and tales shall be intermixed among matters of
importance, that they may breed a longing desire in the Hearers to have such
novelties repeated again and again. For As Marsilius Ficinus writes concerning
a Heavenly body here on earth What Old man soever will renew his age, and
reduce his body to a youthful temper, he must lay aside his gravity, and be
a child in mind. Oportet prius, vt repuerascat animo.

This Discourse of Master Elueston did highly satisfy Sir William Alexander,
and confirm him in his resolution of applauding Books of this stamp and
miscellaneous humor: so that converting his speech to me who attentively
listened to their communication, he said: Noble Friend, by our caueats you may
observe what course you must take to win the good will of our Ilanders; for
except you season your Anisoes with some light passages with wits, fits, and
fancies, like ballads and bables to refresh the capacities of your Auditors,
as Aesop the Phrygian under Fables couched and shadowed Policies of great
moment, they will hardly yield due attention to your Counsels, be they never so
important, and consequently never assist us for the getting of the Golden
Fleece, so requisite for the supplies of this Monarchy, that in all likelihood
it cannot long subsist without this maine and special Trade, which rightly may
be termed the Nurcerie of Mariners, the propagation of shipping, Great
Britains Indies, Corn^copia Amalthea. You shall do a work of Charity, yea
and of Liberality, for this free-hearted virtue consists in distributing good
Counsel as well as of money, to animate our careless Countrymen. The Planets
delight in motion; and by so much the nearer do our Spirits approach to these
superior bodies, when with a resolution undaunted, we undertake noble
enterprises, tending to the public good as to our own particular. Go on
then, dear Friend, having virtue for thy Guide. What will it avail a Scholar
to reserve his knowledge to himself, to hide his Candle under a bushel, or to
vaunt: We write to our selves and to the Sons of Art? Who will take notice
of such a Mystery?

Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc seiat alter. After these and the like
Discourses were ended, we departed, they to the Court, and I to my study;
where I began to rouse up my thoughts, and thoroughly to ruminate on some Plot,
which might inuit our Worldlings for their present and future Good to embrace
those fortunes, which with open arms this Sister-land offers unto us. For the
accomplishing whereof, under a Poetical style not too much degenerating from
the Evangelical gravity, I have resolved to use the name of the great Apollo,
not Heathenish, but Christian, after the example of Traiane Boccalini, who
under that Title brought forth most plausible Raggualioes, and by me now of
late communicated to our English Readers: or rather ^imitation of the ancient
Romish Church, which beautified their Temples with painted Bables, as baits in
worldly policy to allure the barbarous Goths, and the wauering-minded Romans
of thosetimes to repair thither from their more Superstitious Idols, lest
otherwise the Religion, which they had planted, might have fallen to contempt,
like the Sanctum Sanct^rum of the Jews Temple, which when the Romans under
Titus at the destruction of Jerusalem had observed to be bare without any
graven Images, or other outward garnishing, they despised the same as a
Monument of no value, and at length consumed it with fire. For the like cause
Apothecaries do sometimes gild over their ugly and bitter Pills to please the
Sick man's view, which to other Patients for want of such deceitful daubing,
have been so fastidious and loathsome, that even at the very sight of the Pills,
their Imaginations preuayling so powerfully over their bodies, their stomachs
wambled, and they have fal^e into as violent a Purge, as if they had already
swallowed them down. So nice and tender is many a man's nature, whereof we
cannot ascribe any other reason, then the depraved Fantasy, and the sundry
mixtures of the Spirits partaking of the Elementall Qualities corrupted, which
cause us to delight in fair outward shows and varieties, but commonly of the
daintiest taste, of the newest Cooking.

To which I add this one Accident more, as a special motive to my Apology,
for inserting vulgar Toys among matters of Consequence,

Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis. As A^sonius writes in his Catoes Morals.
Since the Conference I had with those judicious Gentlemen aforespecified, it
was my chance to be present at a Booksellers shop, where I saw the Writings of
the learned Bullinger, one of the chief Pillars of our Reformed Religion, and
the Works of that curious Schooleman, whom the Romists term the Angelical
Doctor, sold for wast Paper, even for two pence a quire. Which when I beheld to
my great wonder, I thus expostulated with my self: what then shall become of
my Books, which I have already published to the World with so many hours
pains and vigilant cares? Or of those, which hereafter upon urgent occasions I
may wrest from my indulgent Minerua, seeing that Books of a higher Genius, of
a more sublime nature prove thus unfortunate, and vilified? Shall I write or
betake my Muse to Melancholy? On the one side the Iniquity of the times
terrifies me from further writing. On the otherside, the care of my Countries
welfare sollicits, nay, exacteth my present help, at the least some lenitiue
Medicines toward her recovery, which now pants with a difficult breathing,
whether the Infirmity proceeds ex angustia praecordiorum, from some
straightness in the midriffes; or of a bastard Plurisie, which requires
bloodletting; or of some abstruse and secret cause in the lungs; or of some
superfluous humor engendered in the brain, where the Intellectual Faculties
ought to reside, and to direct the inferior Functions. How soever, the Cure is
not impossible: yet perhaps a thanklesse Office for a man uncalled to take in
hand. This last is the cause, and none but this, which makes me the more
sparing of my remedies. In this confusion of thoughts fearing to play with
Jupiters beard, or to dally with Saints and higher Powers, who might misconster
my Goodwill, I thought once to be silent, left in lending my hand to save
others, of tender charity and compassion, I might fall my self into the
Whirle-poole, and there sink or swim, I should rather be laughed at then
pitied.

Sic aliquis nanti dextram dum porrigit, ipse
Incidit in liquidas non been cautus aquat.
For this cause I minded to lay afide my Melody, one of my chiefest Receipts,
to restore mad men to their wits, in respect of these thanklesse times; and
thus to lament my doubtful disaster, as Sir Walter Raleigh did to our late
Queen Anne of happy memory:

My broken pipes shall on the willow hang,
Like those, which on the Babylonian banks,
These joys foredone, their present sorrow sang;
These times to worth yielding but frozen thanks.
At last, the Cloudie sable veil of jealous doubts being removed, which for a
while had interposed themselves betwixt the Light of my understanding and the
other attributes of my Soul: I valiantly resolved on this Treatise of the
Golden Fleece, and in regard of the fraikies, which the greatest part of my
fellow-subiects do, as it were, by some vnluekie influence of the Stars,
participate, I have prepared sundry kinds of arti^ce; so that if some prove
distasteful and nau^eati^e, yet others may sort out well according to my
expectation.

I will therefore divide this Work into three Parts. In the first, I will
refute the Errors of Religion, preparing the way to V^ilie. In the second I
will endeavor to remove the Diseases of our Kingdom, that Contraries may be
cured by Contraries.

And lastly, I will lay down those Helps, which may repair the ruins of our
State, as the surest Elixir, and Restoratiue, which my poor Experience has
attained unto.

THE FIRST PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE, Discovering the Errors of Religion with
the remedies.
CHAP. 1.
The greatest care, which Apollo takes for the Monarchy of Great Britain.

The singular and respective love, which he bears toward the hopeful and
magnanimous King Charles.

And how by his Proclamation, he caused Mariana the Jesuit to be apprehended
for animating Subjects against their natural Prince.

Above all the magnificent courts, which the sun beholds from East to West, and
from the one Pole to the other, It is noted that Apollo, as it were by Sympathy
of some Heavenly Influence bears particular affection to the Regal Court of
Great Britain, and tenders the welfare thereof as of his own Parnassus:
Insomuch that his Imperial Majesty, foreseeing that G^y Faux and his damned
Confederates would have blown up the Parliament house, with the King and
Estates there assembled upon the fifth day of November in the year 1605. and
that they afterward intended to set up their Romish Religion, he first caused
one of the Aeriall Spirits to insinuate into Tressams brain, and by often
nibling on his imagination to procure from him that Aenigmaticall Letter unto
his brother in Law the Lord Mounteagle. Then out of his divine love toward
this Monarchy, he assisted the Genius of the learned and most noble King James
to discover the whole plot, by vnlocking with the key of Prophecy the Mystery
of that intricate Letter more intricate and dark then Sphinx his Riddle. So
odious appeared this Butcherly and Diabolical Treason unto his Sacred Spirit,
That no Scrutinies of Trial, nor legal Consultations were by him omitted to
know the hidden motives and quintessence of this bloody and unnatural
practice, so much degenerating from man's nature, as with the Giants of old time
to scale the Heavens, and to assault the Author of nature, by whom they lived,
moved, and had their being. But for all his Examinations and vigilant cares
Apollo could by no means ferret out the Fox; for the Devil had transformed
the beast into an Angel of light, until Ra^illiac that monster of Mankind had
massacred the great Hercules of France King Henry the fourth. Upon which
Accident one Peter Ramus a learned Parisian, whom the Papists sometimes
nicknamed the Hugenotes Champion, informed Apollo, that the said Rauilliac, the
very morning of the same day when he committed this lamentable murder, was
heard to maintain that Paradoxe, how justifiable and glorious an Act it were
for a Subject to kill a Tyrannical or Heretical Prince. For the verifying and
approving of which position, he quoted down certain leaves of Mariana the
Jesuits Book de Rege and Reg. Instit. cap. 6. whereby he subjects all Powers
and Dominions to the beck and dispose of his earthly God my Lord the Pope, and
frees them from their allegiance to their native Prince, if his Holiness
storm, or themselves do imagine him to become an Apostata, or to favor
Apostasy or Heresy. Apolloes grief, conceived by this Assassinate and
Tragical event became somewhat assuaged, when he knew the cause of this
inhumane butchery proceeded through the Kings own credulity and tenderness
of heart in admitting the Jesuits into France, against the will of his
judicious Sorbonists, and afterward sostering them like Aesopes Snake in the
Louvre his Regal Palace: whose common Maxim he knew to be: One God in
Heaven, one God on Earth, and one Catholic King. Yet notwithstanding to let
his virtuous followers understand how heinous crying sins, and the
treacherous shedding of humane blood, seemed in his unspotted presence, Apollo
commanded Robert Earl of Essex, Lord High Marshall of his Empire, and Sir I
hilip Sidney the Provost Marshall of his Court, to make diligent search and
inquiry within the Precincts of his Territories for the body of Mariana, and
him to apprehend, and in sure and safe manner to bring before his Imperial
Highness. These Noble Gentlemen endeavored to perform the contents of his
command, but in no wise could they light on Mariana's person. For while the
warrant was a writing by the Clarke of the Counsel, it chanced that Pererius,
Tolet, Posseuinus, Bellarmine, and Cotton of Paris ouer-heard the charge and
tenor thereof. And it is to be suspected, that they gave him notice, for the
repute and credit of their Society to hide himself, for indeed the Varlet
fled before the Warrant was signed. Apollo perceiving that his Marshals had
taken exceeding great pains, and yet in vain, for his attaching he caused a
public Proclamation to be fixed on the Gate of his Palace at Parnassus, that
what persons soever could bring this fugitive Jesuit before him, his Majesty
would prefer him to some Office or place about his Court. For all this, no
man could find out his haunt or tracke. So wary and careful were these
subtle Jesuits to preserve their wicked brood, according to the old saying:
Birds of a feather will cling together.

Every year continually for these sixteen years space this Proclamation was
renewed. Now about the first of April last according to the ancient style after
many years inquiry and busy search, it was Mariana's fatal luck to be
discovered and apprehended. And because the manner, means, and persons,
whereby this egregious and notable adventure came to light, may be known to
after ages for the honor of Great Britains Court, I will lay down my
knowledge. When swift winged Fame by sound of Trumpet had published at
Parnassus, what great contentment and pleasing comfort the wise and courageous
Prince Charles Monarch of Great Britain, took in reading the Ragualioes and
Auisoes of this high and transcendent Court, written by Boccalini in Italian,
and with kind and gracious acceptance received them Englished at the hands of
one Vaughan a Cambrobritain together with certain presents called Cambrensium
Caroleia, which were sent from the Muses and the Graces by the said Messenger,
and withal, that his Highness had devoted himself and his Kingdoms to be
perpetually governed by the Laws, Charters, and Prescriptions of Apolloes
Court, being fully resolved to settle Charity in his Subjects minds, to cut
off multiplicities of wrangling suits, Extortions, Heresies, Arminianisme,
Excess of Apparel, Tobacco, Drunkenness, and Gluttony and other vain
expenses which in these modern times, have well-nigh beggered the most part of
his Ilanders. Upon the Relation of these Reformations, deliberated by this
Thrice famous Prince there shined in all men's hearts (the Papists and some
Lawyers excepted) such lightsome gratulations and apparent demonstrations of
joys, that Apollo himself not able to conceal the exorbitant pleasure he
conceived at this gladsome news, caused all the Bells of Parnassus, Del^s,
Pindus, Libethrum, and of all his other Temples to be rung for three days
together, and bonfires to be made of Juniper, Cipresse, Aloes, Storax,
Frankincense, and other Aromaticall Gumms abundantly strewed and burnt. And
because the said Vaughan, whom his Majesty graced with the title of Orpheus
Junior, and one Democritus Junior, which published the Anatomy of Melancholy,
and one John Florio a learned Italian were the first messengers which blazed
and reported these joyful tidings, Apollo admitted them all three into his
Palace, as extraordinary Waiters. Where when Orpheus Junior had attended a
while, and observed the small pittance he was like to be fed withal, drinking
only of the liquor of the pale Pirene, while Prodigals, Papists, and Idolaters
were glutted with Ambrosia and Nectar (for indeed the Learned of all Religions
were favored at Parnassus, so that they behaved themselves morally honest)
meeting one day with his friends Democritus, a new commer as himself, and with
John Florio aforenamed, sometimes servant to the virtuous Queen Anne, he
brake forth into these speeches? How long shall we suffer our selves to be
dallied with hopes of preferment in this Learned Court? We are here daily
besprinkled with holy water, tired with complements, and welcomed with many
ceremonious salutations, without any profit at all, so that we spend our
precious times in attendance, which avails as much, as if we prick^ flies
with Domitian? And we are like as I see, after a few Summers spent in tedious
and toylesome expectation, to starve with cold in the first hard winter. How
happy should our wives and children have been if we had betaken our selves to
some base mechanical trade, and so by cogging and lying to advance our
fortunes? If we had studied Divinity, we might have had some fat benifice. If
we had spared but two hours or three in a week from our more serious
employments, in the Laws which they term Common, though sometimes wrested
according to private fancies, by this time we had heaped together whole pyles
of treasure by the ruins of such Clients as run headlong, like tame
Woodcocks, into known nets. If we had practiced Physics, by the death of
some few Patients, we might have scraped together a better estate, then thus
to consume our fruitless laboursin awaiting for Offices, which no sooner
become vacant, but others do step before us, like the sick at the Poole of
Bethesda. For my part, except I find my worth better respected and requited,
I Will retire my self from Court, and bend my fortunes to the Newfoundland,
whereby Ciuilizing the Satyrs and manuring that Maiden earth, I may like the
Gracian Orpheus, leave this memorial to posterity, that a Cambrobritain has
founded a new Cambrioll, where he made the deaf to hear, and the woods to
mo^e. To this Democritus Junior answered: My noble friend, I must confess,
that true and solid Learning is almost down the wind in this decrepit age of
the world, by reason of the multitude of scambling Scholars and riotous
Writers, who like empty barrels yield a hollow sound without substantial
fruit. Your many swarms of ouer-swaying Lawyers lend their greedy hands to
pull down this famous fabric:

Since hired double Tongues grew in request,
Nor Arms nor Arts could take their wonted Rest.
In regard of the many emulous concurrents for places here in Court, which
importunately prosse upon his Majesty for promotion, it is difficult and in a
manner impossible for such modest persons, as we are, who out of our
magnanimity of spirit scorn to fawn like spaniells, to climb into any high
vocation. There be two kinds of Factions here, the Papists and the Lawyers,
who although their number be but few in this virtuous Court, yet powerful
enough to suppress and supplant a greater man then you, if they join together
and bandie against you. The one you have exasperated and angered in your Books,
specially in your Golden Grove, and your Circles called the Spirit of
detraction coniured and convicted. And the Lawyers vow to be revenged on you
for seeking to diminish their Gain (as Luther did the bellies of the Monks)
in your late Cambrensium Caroleia. And if that sentence of Politic Philosophy
be true, that it is no hard matter to discover ones gui^ie mind by his
countenance;

O quam difficile est vultu non prodere crimen. Me thinks I read in Robert
Parsons looks yesterday last, when he eyed you so intentiuely and wistly,
this reuengefull threat: I owe you an ill turn. But, said Flori^, if you will
be both ruled by me we shall not only wind our selves into Apolloes better
liking, but win eternal honor, and triumph at length over our envious
adversaries. Ye see what a strict Proclamation there is yonder fixed upon the
Gate of his Majesty's Palace, for the arresting of Mariana the Jesuit. Now if
by our industry this seditious Sectarie may be brought before Apollo,
doubtless we shall both receive condign recompense and convenient
satisfaction. To this replied Orpheus Junior, and do you believe that it is
possible to hood wink the Serpent, and to go beyond the Jesuits the
cunningest race of all mankind? I assure you, it is easier to plough up Godwins
sands and to make them habitable, then to find out Marianaes hole; except you
have the Spirit of Eliza the Prophet. But I guess at a ready way indeed how
we may come by this hidden Traitor, and that is this: I have lately retained
into my service old Argus, whom the Poets faigne to see with an hundred eyes,
because of his watchfulness and indesatigable cares about any matter committed
to his trust, he sees by night as well as by day, and never goes without a
perspectiue glass, through which he will discover above thirty miles off.
Ever since his misfortune in loosing his sweet charge, The most beautiful lo^,
he wandered up and down the world very melancholic and dejected in mind, as
one much ashamed, that having so many eyes in his noddle he could not keep one
creature in sa^ecustodie. Yet many noble Personages have offered him large
Stipends to look unto their wives and daughters, which he would never more
undertake by reason of the loss of lo^, whom he made full account to guard
against the cra^tiest soliciter of the world. For as he says, let a man look
unto a woman never so narrowly, nay, let him lock her up in a close chamber
after the Italian manner: her own free heart cannot say nay, if she be
wantonly dis^osed, and meets with an earnest Suitor. This old Lad will I
employ sentinel or scout about the Jesuits houses, in one of the which he
resides without question. In the mean time repair you to your friend Master
Secretary Walsingham, and get of him a warrant dormant, and let him alone to
act the rest. At these words they departed. And the next day meeting together
again, Orpheus Junior acquainted them, that Argus had spied about an hour
before day a man with long locks, like a swaggering Gallant, disguised in a
light colored suit of apparel, entering into Claudius Aquauiuaes house, the
General of the Jesuits, and by all likelihood it could be no other then
Mariana, whereto Florio all ravished with joy said: O happy man borne under a
luckie constellation, and reserved by destiny for great enterprises. It is not
for naught that thy surging seas refused to swallow the honest corpse, when in
a violent storm thou did fall ouerboord the ship. It is not for small or
ignoble effects, that thou were saved, as a firebrand taken out of the flames,
in that fatal accident, when thy house was battered about thy ears with
thunder and lightning, those fearful artilleries of GODs glory. My mind
gives me, it can be no other then Mariana: And here is a straight warrant for
his apprehension. Let us immediately get some Pegasean horses, for delays breed
danger. And so without more words they procured post horses for themselves and
a dozen more of their friends, in whom they reposed most confidence, and about
the dawning of the day the next morning they arrived near Claudius Aquauiuaes
house, which lay about ten leagues distant from his Majesty's Court at
Parnassus, where finding Argus very circumspect and watchful, they certainly
understood of him, that the party was still within without the least mistrust
or alteration. Whereupon, as soon as the Jesuits meniall servants had opened
the Gates, they suddenly rushed in, not omitting to leave Argus and a competent
company without doors, for fear of an escape at the Posterne. After some
search they found Mariana closely cubd up in Aquauiuaes Library, with a new
begun Treatise before him, wherein these Questions of maine consequence were to
be decided: Whether it were more commodious for his Catholic Majesty to bend
his forces against his Neighbors the Moors, or against the Lutherans? The
other Question was, whether it were expediens for the better maintenance of
Saint Peter's Chair, and for the propagation of the society of Jesus (at whose
name all Creatures were to bow) to seize upon the revenues and livings of all
other inferiou^ orders whatsoever, and to convert the same to nobler uses, the
one moytie betwixt his Holiness and the Catholic Princes, and the other to
the most worthy? In his Majesty's name both Mariana and Aquauiua were
arrested, and presently set upon a couple of Pegasean S^eeds, who no sooner
mounted and placed in the saddle, but the horses began furiously to winch and
fling like mad creatures, and the Riders were most violently cast down from
their backs, so that if the standers by had not rescued them from the fury of
these incensed horses, doubtless they had there breathed their last with their
Brains about their Ears. For the nature of these kind of Horses, which are
bred in Hellicon and always watered at Bellerophons Well, is to hate, kick,
and trample under their feet all factious, proud, and presumptuous spirits; As
on the contrary to show themselves, as obedient as Bucephalus to Alexander,
very tractable, and milder then Lambs unto the learned Riders, who acknowledge
their own infirmities, with a lowly conceit of their brains capacities and
virtues, though never so much extolled by others. These new Officers informed
by Argus of the Horses disposition, would no longer contend against nature, nor
work against Antipathie, but made my two grave Gentlemen for all their bruises
very orderly to march a foot, until they came to Parnassus, where being
returned about four in the night they delivered them over to the Lieutenant
criminal at the Tower ergastulare, who immediately committed them to Sysiphus
his rolling mount, which the Poets called the Room of little Ease.

CHAP. II.
The Conviction of Mariana the Jesuit by the Testimonies of the Scriptures,
and of the Ancient Fathers.

Apollo condemns Mariana the Jesuit, to be tortured in Phalaris his Brazen
Bull, and banisheth the pernicious Sect of Jesuits out of the Territories of
Parnassus.

APollo being informed by his Marshals, That both the Jesuits were now in safe
custody, assembled all his Estates upon the fifth of November last, 1625. in
the great Senate House at Parnassus, and caused Mariana and Claudius Aquauina
to be brought forth: Unto whom his Majesty spoke in this manner: How long, O
disloyal Ignatians, have ye tempted our Patience in broaching out your
virulent doctrine, for the dethroning and destroying of Princes, whom the
Eternal Mouer and King of Kings had ordained out of his inscrutable
providence, to be his Deputies here on earth, for sweet or for sour, as a
blessing or a plague? Could not their awful state and Maiesticall Authority
dazzle your corporal eyes, and astonish your inward senses from scribbling such
prodigious positions, as did animate subjects against their Native Kings, even
to seek their dearest blood? Could not the example of Machiauell, whom ye
knew to be banished from our peaceable Court, terrify your turbulent spirits
from putting Dogs teeth in Sheep mouths, to the apparent danger of their
Sheepheards, and the unspeakable discommoditie of all humane kind, who must
now defend themselves from these profitable beasts, as from ravenous Wolves? By
your means Garnet and many others lost their lives, who might have succored
and relieved your own Sect, if relying on these cruel teeth of yours, they
had not sought utterly to undo, and to devour both their Pastors and quiet
Owners; ye profess your selves to be Jesuits, that is, Saviors, O Jesus esto
mihi Jesus, but yet meant nothing less. If ye did, why followed ye not the
Lantern of your Saviors life: He paid tribute to Caesar, though an
Infidel; when he was smitten he opened not his mouth, but stood silent, like
a Lamb before the Shearer. When Peter struck of Malchus ear, he rebuked the
Act and miraculously set it on again: his Kingdom was not of this World. His
chiefest and last command was love and not Revenge, Charity and not debate,
peace and not dissension. This love, as an accident inseparable, his Apostle
Saint John recommends; And this not only in one to another, but toward all
the World, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, as Saint Paul confirms: have
peace with all men, as much as in you lies. This peace have ye most
traitorously and feloniously infringed in plotting to blow up the King and
Estates of great Britain; This sacred bond have ye cancelled, when Rauilliac
that devil of men, by the instigation of your seditious Book, did massacre
the Prince of his native soil Victorious Henry the underminer of that
Catholic Monarchy, which the Spaniards dreamed of. This Chain of Charity
have ye violated and torn asunder, when at sundry times ye whetted on simple
Creatures more silly then Sheep to take arms against their Native Prince.
Here Apollo paused. And then asked of Mariana, and of Aquauiua, what they
could allege in their Defense? Mariana answered, that he published that
Doctrine for no ill intent or treacherous plot, which he ever minded to put in
execution against Princes, but because he hoped by humouring the Pope, he
might enjoy the happiness to become one day invested with a Cardinals Robes
and the red Hat. But for the Doctrine it self, said Aquauiua, howsoever our
tender Consciences serve not to act, yet the same must needs remain
authenticke, until a general Council shall mediate and interpose their
opinions betwixt his Holiness and Kings, how far one another powers shall
extend, and for what occasions he may pronounce the dismal Sentence against
them.

Apollo much incensed at these obstinate positions replied. And must my
virtuous Princes live in continual iealousies in the interim? What if my Lord
the Pope do never call a Council, shall I endure to see these bloody Plots
and Practices acted in my presence? Know then, O ye virtuous of Parnassus,
among whom I reckon not these Caitiues, that by the will of God all Kings do
reign; that the most High bears rule over the Kingdoms of men, Proverb.
cap. ^ Daniel cap. 4.
and gives them to whom he will. It was out of the Apostles Commission to
meddle with earthly Powers, but with Heavenly, whereof they had the keys to
open the entry unto the Penitent. It was out of their element to dispose of
Soueraignties. Did Saint Peter, Saint John, or Saint Paul, suborne Traitors by
word or deed against the Caesar's, who persecuted them and their new Church?
Nay, so obedient were the Christians of the Primitive Church unto those
tyrannous Emperors, that they prayed for their prosperity, health and life;
as we may read in Iustine Martyr and Tertullian. Many of them served Soldiers
in M. Aurelius Camp, and by their Prayers caused Rain to descend in a great
drouth, when the River of Danubius scarce yielded water Tertul. Apolog. cap. 30.
to bear a Boat.

The Donatists first sought to exempt themselves from the Emperor in
Spiritual matters. Whereupon a learned Father of that Age accounted Donatus a
mad man for that his foolish Opinion. Donatus, says he, inflamed with his
wonted madness, Optat. con^. Parmen, lib. 3.
burst out into these words: Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia? What has the
Emperor to do with the Church?

To shut up my Jesuits mouths for the Emperors superiority over the Pope
himself, let them consider of these following Examples. First, of Donatus
lately specified, who accusing Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage to Constantine
the Emperor: His Imperial Majesty commanded Caecilianus to repair at a
prefixed time to Rome, and by his Commission, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5.
the Copy whereof is extant in Eusebius, authorized Miltiades Bishop of Rome,
with some others joined with him to hear and determine the Complaint. These
Commissioners examined the matter, and finding Caecilianus innocent, they
condemned the Accuser Donatus and his Accomplices. Whereupon he and they appealed
to the Emperor himself after the example of Saint Paul, who appealed to
Caesar from Festus and Agrippa, as his Act. Apo. cap.
supreme Judge on Earth. Which Appeal the Emperor Constantine accepted, and
ordered the difference. The Eight first Councels were appointed by the
Emperors, which no learned Papists can deny. Insomuch that Leo Bishop of Rome,
made earnest suite to Theodosius the younger, that the Council which afterward
was kept at Calcedo^, might be held in Italy, the which the Emperor by no
mean^s would assent unto. For all that, the Bishop of Rome continued his
supplications by the Princess Pul^heria, an earnest Mediatrix for him, and
also by sundry Noble Courtiers, who interceded likewise. But all of them
missing to prevail, the Council was kept at Calcedon. And afterward the
Bishop of Rome to testify his obedience to the Emperor, that had thus
slighted his supplications, he with the other Bishops of his Jurisdiction and
limitation subscribed to the Canons agreed upon in that Council, as himself
records in these words: Because Leo. Epist. 59.
I must show my self obedient to your Religious and sacred will, I have laid
down my consent unto those constitutions.

The like obedience Gregory another famous Bishop of Rome about five hundred
years after Christ showed, as his Predecessors had done, and caused a Law,
which himself much disliked to be published throughout his limits, returning
this Certificate to the Emperor: I being subject unto your commandment have
caused the same Law to be sent into diverse parts.

What more evidence will my Ignatians require? Here they may see three
several Bishops of Rome obedient to the Emperors as their Supreme Head, yea,
for Ecclesiastical matters, much more in Temporal Jurisdictions. If these
Examples cannot satisfy their turbulent fantasies, let them yet remember these
further speeches of Gregory Bishop of Rome, wherein he frankly confesses the
Emperors Superiority, and calls him his Lord: Gregor. Epist. 2.
unto my Lords piety is given power over all men from Heaven: which likewise a
more ancient Father justifies in these words: Above the Emperor there is none
but God, which made the Emperor. Optatus con^ra Parm. lib. 3.


Aeneas Siluius, who was afterward Pope by the name of Pius the Second,
expounding that place of Saint Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, confesses this Superiority. Neither, says he, does he except the
Soul of the Pope Aeneas Siluius, l. 1. de Basiliens. Council.
himself.

Reverend Bid interpreting that place in Samuel, where David's heart smote
within him, because he did but cut the lap of Saul's garment, utterly
condemns these Regicides, and dethroners of Kings in these words: This Action
of David does morally teach us, that we must not smite our Princes with the
sword of our Lips, though they wrong us, nor that we tear the hemme of their
superfluous deeds. Beda lib. 4. Exposit. in Samuel.


If we approve not the holinesst of their lives, let us applaud the holiness
of their Unctions.

In the English Chronicles, even when the Pope was at the highest staire of
worldly triumph, it is registered, that Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, in
some difference betwixt him and King William Rufus, would have appealed to the
Pope: And that the King and the Bishops withstood it.

In the Reign of King Henry the Second, a Law was made on pain of Treason,
not to appeal out of the Kingdom of England.

Thus from time to time, it is manifest that the Popes power has been
inferior and subject to Earthly Princes. And therefore to broach out such
damnable Paradoxes for the justification of murder, and the warranting of
private men to conspire against their Sovereigns, is a Doctrine, which God
hates. Sometimes men are plagued by the immediate hand of God, sometimes by
mediate and secondary means for their sins. Sometimes men are forced to endure
extraordinary storms, tempests, famine, wars, and also crosses at their very
friends hands. Sometimes their women are delivered of abortiues or misshapen
Creatures. All which they must patiently brook: Much more must they bear with
the spots of Princes, who have long Ears and long hands.

It is not safe or virtuous to meddle with litigious wares, nor to trouble the
brain with these kind of Problemes. For if men live in a Monarchy, which is
hereditary, the Fault is the greater. If in other Kingdoms, the fundamental
Laws must be regarded by the public States, and not by private persons; If
the Kingdom be Elective as Poland, let the Chancellor look to it. If in
Germany it belongs to the Electors to decide the quarrel betwixt the Emperor
and the Subjects.

We do therefore utterly detest these Jesuits, for maintayning of these
bloody Tragedies; and from henceforth we banish that pestilent Race of
Sectaries out of our Jurisdiction of Parnassus. Mariana here we do order to
be perpetually tortured in Phalaris his Brazen Bull, and his Books also to be
burnt, and the ashes to be scattered in the River of Lethe.

CHAP. III.
Now Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford, espying in a Church at Athens, a Franciscan
Friar a kissing of a Maid of Honor belonging to the Princess Thalia brought
Saint Frances to surprise them, who of mere Idiotisme applaudes the Fact.

IN May last, when all living Creatures followed their natural motions and
kinds, Doctor Wicliffe of Oxford who in King Richard the Seconds time, by the
countenance of John of Gaunt and the Londoners opposed himself against the
Romish Clergy, as he was entering into the Temple of the unknown God at
Athens, espied a Franciscan Friar very heartily kissing a Gentlewoman, which in
that jouiall and merry time, had made choice of that lusty Friar to confess
her, whereupon Doctor Wicliffe being ever held to be of an unblemished
behavior, and as chaste as Origin, but that he had not gelt himself as Origin
did, burned with Zeal, and like another Phinehes, thought once to have run
upon them both, to have scratcht their eyes out, for weapons he had none to
offend with (such was the Law of Apolloes Court) But remembering himself of a
place in Homer, how Achilles, as he intended to draw out his Sword against
Agamemnon, was prevented by the Lady Pallas, who inuisibly restrained his hand
from that reproachful Act, he reculed back unseen by the youthful Couple,
whose lips were so fastened together, that, as if they had been in a trance,
the Church might have fallen by piece-meales about their ears, before they
would been parted from their sugared kisses, and like an Arrow out of a Bow he
rushed into Saint Frances cloister, where meeting with the Old man a mumbling
on his Orisons and Rosaries, he desired him in all haste to come and visit the
Corpse of one of his Friars, which was struck dead by the Planet Venus,
together with a Maid of Honor, belonging to the Princess Thalia. At these
words Saint Frances flung away his devout Offices, and went a long with Doctor
Wicliffe to the place, where he found the Friar and the gentlewoman a kissing.
After that Saint Frances had considerately noted, how lo^ingly the Friar lay,
as it were in an ecstasy, with his lips as close as Iuy to an Elm, unto the
Maids lips: the good man fell down upon his knees, and thanked God, that he
had seen so much Love and Charity in the World, which before he doubted had
forsaken all humane race.

CHAP. IIII.
Doctor Wicliffe connents Saint Frances and the kissing Friar before Apollo.

Saint Frances defends the cause, and discovers seven sorts of kisses.

Apollo refuteth his Defense, condemns the Friar, and abolisheth all
Monastical Orders.

DWicliffe the next day after this adventure, loath to be accessory to such
baudy deeds, made the matter known unto Apolloes Majesty, who immediately
sent Mercury for both the Friars. And upon the Friday after appointed a
special Convocation for the ordering of this lascivious Cause. About nine a
clock in the morning upon the prefixed day, both the Friars being brought
before the Lords of the Connocations, Apollo spoke in this wise to Saint
Frances: The first time that you were initiated in moral Precepts, and
sithence matriculated in our Court, you undertook as well for your Monastical
Order as your self to live chaste, and not to minister occasion of scandal to
the married Society, to suspect the least token of incontinencie in your
carriages. But we find that you are flesh and blood, subject to concupiscence
as well as others. Saint Paul therefore advises you rather to marry then to
burn. But you on the contrary do forbid your Clergy to marry at all, although
in your consciences you know it a most grievous yoke, the which our Savior
Christ said that no man can bear, unless as a special Gift some few receive
it from Heaven. And therefore Saint Paul tells you, It is the doctrine of devils
to forbid Marriage. Why then have you imposed such a burden, such a vow on
these silly Nouices of your Fraternity, which they can never keep without
hinneying and lusting after the Female Sex? Have not you heard that a certain
Hermit cockolded the chiefest Nobles of a Princes Court, whose Wives used to
repair to his Cell for Spiritual Physic, as if he had been another
Baptist? Endeavor ye never so violently to expel the affections of nature,
they will break into your thoughts and bodies do what ye can, as on a time
another Hermit, but more holy of life experimented in a Nephew of his, who
notwithstanding that he had brought him up even from his cradle in his
hermitage shut up from the sight of all Women-kinde, and afterward by chance
following his Ghostly Father to a Town when he had looked on the Sex of
women, and asked his Father what creatures those pretty things were, to whom
though the old man answered, that they were a kind of Goslings, yet the young
Religious man could not rest so satisfied, but he would needs have one of
those Goslings home with him for his recreation. There is a Record yet to be
seen in England of a Grant made by an Abb^t of certain lands, upon condition
the Tenant would provide a pretty young wench once a month for my Lord Abbot ad
purgandos renes, to purge his reins. Many other examples may be produced to
prove the impossibility of fulfilling your monastical vows. Why then do you
tolerate with unlawful lust, with billing and bussing like Owls, while ye
may go neately about it without any disparage, and marry in the open face of
the Church. To this Saint Francis answered, that he measured other men's
dispositions by his own; and for his poor brother, if he erred, he erred not
of any malicious thought, but of pure Love, which is the Soueraignest blessing
required in all honest men, to root out the contrary, which is Hatred.
Likewise, he showed out of profound Schoolmen, that there were seven kinds of
Kissing. The first a charitable kiss, a kiss of charity, which the
Patriarchs and the Saints in old time used one to another, as also in the
Scripture is implied by our Savior: Kiss the Son least he be angry. And
again, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Psalm 2.

Cant^c. cap. 1.




This sacred kiss did his loving Brother substantially engraue on the lips of
his sweet Sister. And because the memorial of his virtuous Love might stick
there, he infused it with a long temporizing breath of half an hour together,
as with a deep Seal and Character not to be forgotten by her, which kiss
being so imprinted could not but argue an entire union in their Souls by a
pleasing harmony, and a honeyed participation of excellent Charity. As for
Doctor Wicliffe impeachment, he hoped that an Heretics supercilious taxation
was not of force to condemn an act of Charity, being a man ever reputed even
among his own Sect too rigorous and austere, whose teeth might perhaps water at
such a dainty object, because he had not met with the like happiness
himself. And if the said Doctor Wicliffe did misconster their true intent, he
retorted that emblem, which the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, by
the Institution of Edward the third King of England, used for many years to
embellize: Honte soit qui maly pensoit. Shame to him that evil thinks. The
second sort of Kissing is called a Complementall Kiss, which the English allow
by way of Complement and friendly ceremony, to salute their friends wives
withal, or any of the Feminine kind, oftentimes giving it with a smacke to
relish the better. This is a harmless Kiss, justifiable both at coming and
parting. But more then two Kisses at one meeting, a severe Lord President of
Wales could not endure.

The third kind of Kissing is a natural token of Love among the married
couples, whereof let them discourse whom the Church has so conjoined in the
Honorable state of Matrimony.

The fourth degree of Kissing is called a Lecherous kiss, used unlawfully
among them that shun the light, or in the Stews, to despite their Angel
Guardians, and to call the Sun as a witness of their obstinate standing out
against their Great Creator.

The fifth sort of Kissing is termed an unnatural kiss of man with man, a
minion-kisse, such as Jupiter used to Ganymede his Cup Bearer, and which I am
sorry to hear of, such as some of our Italians do practice to the obloquie
of our Catholic Romish Church. This kind of kissing, Pygmalion falling in
love with an Image of his own caruing, often used:

It seemed a virgin full of living flame, Master Sands in O^ids Meta lib. 10.

That would have moved, if not withheld by shame
So Art it self conceald. His Art admires.
From the Image draws imaginary fires,
And often feels it with his hands to try,
If 'twere a Body or cold Iuorie.
Nor could resolve. Who kissing thought it kissed.
He courts, embraces, wrings it by the wrist.
There is a sixth kind of Kissing called a Judas kiss, where with he bearing
honey in his mouth, and gall in his heart, mel in ore, fell in cord, did most
treacherously betray his Master Christ, such a kiss likewise as Ioab gave to
Amasa at the instant, when he killed him, being compared to the salutation of
the ancient Irish, who when they purposed to do an ill turn, laughed and
smiled, thereby to make the innocent stranger secure and careless of his
safety.

The seventh sort of Kissing is styled the kiss of Grace, or Honor, which
Potentates and great Princes have used to confer on inferior Persons by
reaching their hands or feet to be kissed by them

This last of the Foot does properly belong to my Lord the Pope, to countenance
and favor Emperors and Kings, like the Sun, which lends the beauty of his
rays to the Moon and lesser Stars though in very deed they are no more
worthy (being worldly-minded creatures) to kiss his holy and sanctified Foot,
then Saint John Baptist to approach unto Christ, whose shoe latchet he
confessed that he was no way worthy to undo. I know Doctor Raynolds in his
works de Romana Idololatria mislikes this, as a mark of Antichristian Pride
not accepted by Saint Peter, though a meaner man then an Emperor would have
done that vassalage unto his Holiness. But Heretics know not the reason of
Saint Peter's refusal. Let them therefore understand, that the Triple Crown
was not at that time settled on Peter's head; and withal, that Saint Peter's
denial, saying, My self am also a man, sauoured not so much of modesty, as
of a Courtly putting by the urgent presumption of such an inferior Person, as
Cornelius was. For perhaps if the Roman Emperor himself would have sued for
that Honor with tears and humility, he might have had the grace to kiss his
Foot. When a subject sues to a King for some extraordinary Gift, which he is
not willing to bestow, he will not daunt him with a rigorous repulse, but
answers him, that he will consider of it, Le Roy se auisera. Of these six
last kisses I dare clear my good Franciscan. He is as harmless as my self I
can assure your Majesty, being of my own education, and like me in conditions.

And a very Idiot then replied Apollo. But the young Fellow looks as if he had
more wit then his Tutour, more Knave then Fool. You have discoursed of sundry
kinds of Kisses. Yet for all your simplicity you have learnt that
magisteriall trick of State, for the credit of your Order propter bonestatem
domus to cover the sinful pollutions of your Brood, because they are sweet
venial sins. But if a Lay man had committed such a crime in the Church, it
had been exorbitant, worthy of fire and faggot. Old Couper of Westminster
found no such favor nor Advocate to defend his innocence for one poor kiss
which he unwittingly gave to a Lady Abbess in Siuil. For when this honest man
at the time when K. Philip of Castile by his marriage with Q Mary was also K.
of England, and by that occasion freedom of Commerce betwixt both Nations
allowed, he being Factor for certain Merchants of London, arrived at Civil,
where hearing that an Abbess would buy some of his butter, he went with his
Broker and others to compound for the price with her. Couper, the chamber being
somewhat dark, thinking after the manner of England, that the Broker and the
rest that bare him company, and he the hindermost, had saluted the Lady
Abbess on the mouth, whereas they kissed but her vesture, he as his course
came, popt a swinging kiss on her bare lips. Whereupon, as a woman ravished,
not with joy, but of her personal honesty, she exclaymed; O Vellaco,
Lutherano, Perro. Villain, Lutheran, Dog. No excuses could serve his turn,
but all the Merchants goods and ship under his charge were confiscated to the
Holy House, together with his Person, where after much entreaty he got the
favor at last, only with the forfeit of the ship and goods, to do a years
penance there in the Inquisition house with wearing a Iackanapes Coat of ma ny
colors, which they call Saint Benets hood or Sanbenita, every Holy Day during
the time of Mass for one whole year. I like very well of your distinction of
kisses. To these you might likewise adioyne the Fatal or Pocky kiss, which
some Gallants use to infuse with their contagious breath, as a sign of their
service to their Mistresses, in imitation of that East-Indian King, whose
breath being tainted with the often use of poisons, never kissed any of his
Concubines, but they dyed within four and twenty hours after his kissing.
But your approbation of kissing the Popes foot, as if he were no mortal man,
subject to Peter's infirmities, but an Angelical Creature, I utterly abhor
with that Noble English Gentleman, who bearing Charles the fifth company, as
one of his nearest attendants to kiss his Holiness Foot, as soon as he saw
the Emperor fall down on his maribones, and to kiss that contemtible place,
he ran out with great speed, which the Emperor much wondered at. After these
Ceremonies were ended, he called for the Gentleman, and asked him why he
forsook him so rudely, and staid not for the happiness to kiss his Holiness
Foot? To whom he answered, that when he saw so great a Prince stoop to
receive a kiss at that unworthy place, he verily thought, that in regard he
was but a private person, the Pope would not have done him that Imperial
grace, but that he would have turned his backside unto him to be kissed.

If a Kiss proceeds from a Superior to a meaner Person, not of Pomp and
Pride, but of a sweet tempered nature to honor precious worth, it is like a
shower of rain in a dry Summer, and may cause the party that receives it to
increase in virtue. Sometimes a Kiss may be unexpectedly wrested from a
Superior, as lately fell out by a Gentleman of the Innes at Court, who
traveling homewards with some of his Cameradoes, laid a wager that by drawing
lots one of them should kiss the the first Lady they met. The lot arriving to
this Gentleman, it chanced that a great Countess passed by, which somewhat
amazed the Gentleman: yet loath to pay the wager and remembering the old saying:
Faint heart never kissed fair Lady, he boldly repaired to the Countess, and
related the occurrence. The Noble Lady understanding his demand, bid him thence
forwards to take heed how he laid any such rash wagers. And with that asked to
see his knife, which he drew out, and humbly presented the same unto her. The
Countess after that she well looked on it, returned it back saying, that
because he had kept his knife so neat and clean, he seemed to be a spruce
Gentleman, and therefore deserved a kiss, which she presently gave him. The
like favor Queen Anne of France the wife of Lewis the twelfth, voluntarily
imparted, in her love to learning, unto Allen Chartier. This Queen passing on
a time from her lodging toward the Kings side, saw in a gallerie Allen
Chartier a famous Scholar, leaning on a tables end fast asleep, which this
Princess espying, she stooped down to kiss him, uttering these words in all
their hearing: We may not of Princely courtesy pass by and not honor with
our kiss the mouth from whence so many golden Poems have issued. All these
examples cannot excuse your Pupils long breathd kiss. For if Cat^ the Censour
banished a Senator of Rome for kissing his own wife in presence of his
daughter, how much more to blame is a Religious man, which vows Chastity, and
under color of auricular confession lays an ambush for his Patient?

Oscula qui sumpsit, si non and coetera sumpsit,
Haec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erat.
He which kisses once received,
Faint-hearted Gull is foul deceived,
If after favors such he miss,
To crop the flower and rightly kiss.
This is the end of most of your Confessions, like unto Boccalini his Whelps,
who at first did nothing but snarle, bawle, and bark aloose. Then they fell to
gamboling, to play, and to toss one another upon their backs, until at last
they roundly rode and mounted upon each others back.

In regard of these gross abuses we decree, that all your Orders of Monks
and Friars shall from henceforth cease, and if any Spiritual person find in
himself those pricks in the Flesh, that without too much striving and
struggling with nature, he cannot live continently, we counsel him to marry in
the Name of God. Or if his conscience permit him not so to do, lest his Wife,
as Salomons, draw him from the contemplation of Spiritual matters, let him
imitate the Monks of the Primitive Church, conioyning bodily labors to his
mental. Saint Paul was a Tent-maker, Many of the Apostles Fishermen. The
Monks of Bangor lived on their handy-workes, that thereby contiguous
businesses might wear out fantastic and idle thoughts, the procurers of
succeeding Acts. What stratagems will not a Soldier of Cupids Camp work for
the fruition of his sweet conceived pleasures and beauteous booties, as those
ancient Verses insinuate: Non audet Demon facinus tentare, quod audent
Effroenis Monachus plenaque Fraudis anus.
The devil himself dares not attempt that fact,
Which the unbridled Monk and Baud dare act.


To conclude our Sentence is that this lusty Franciscan Friar for profaning
our sacred Temple be had to the House of Correction called of the Spaniards
Tescuto, and there by inter changeable courses to assist Sysiphus in rolling
the painful stone; for it is fit, Compulsory labor should be imposed on
them, who of their own accord would not fall to it to prevent the baits of
Asmodeus the lustful Spirit.

Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. This Sentence pronounced, his
Imperial Majesty caused the Clerk of the Crown to publish it.

CHAP. V.
Apollo censureth Thalia and her Gentlewoman for their lascivious prankes; and
reformeth the Comicall Court.

IN the afternoon of the said Friday Apollo fate again with a full intent to
reform the World, specially, the Christian World, of such venereous stolen
pleasures, which by the Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergy, were
continually fo^^ered in in hugger mugger. And for this cause his Majesty had
willed the Comicke Princess Thalia with her Maid of Honor, whom Doctor
Wicliffe had surprised with the Franciscan in their kissing sport, to be
present. Where the Parties being come, Apollo demanded of the Maid, whether
she was not ashamed of her late kissing. Whereto she answered that none but the
faulty ought to be ashamed. She affirmed, it was a sin in the Friar by
reason of his vow to kiss, and to entice her to such game-somenesse, who might
very well have been without it, or received the like pleasure from another as
good as he. But for her part, as long as she attended on the Comedian Lady,
she hoped, that she might enjoy the like contentment, which her Fellows
partaked off. That she was tutoured by the famous Anacr^on and Catullus, two of
the principal Favorites in her Ladies Court, and ever since she attained to a
doozen years of age, she had learned this conceited Lesson of her said
Tutours, To look amiably, to speak merrily, to write wantonly, and to kiss
kindly. That to do these parts was no dishonor to the virtuous Corporation;
as long as she kept her self from a great belly. That she was skilled in
Poetry, which could not be exquisite without some loose strains, as her
Master Catullus had proclaimed in these Verses:

Nam castum esse decet pi^m Poetam:
Ipsos versicul^s nihil necesse est;
Tunc verum retinent salem and leporem,
Si sint molliculi ac parum pudici.
A Poet by Virtues education,
Must chaste be in life and conversation.
But if his Verses light and wanton prove,
They relish best of Salt and graceful love.
Apollo much incensed at this shameless Apology found great fault with the
Princess Thalia, for not teaching more Civility to her Maid. Thalia touched to
the quick, fearing least this frowning of the Emperor might eclipse the
honor of her Palace, and cause contempt to her Followers, whereby
Beare-bayting, hawking, and hunting might perhaps grow in more request then
Stage Plays, and laziness, which she patronized; and not out of hope yet to
salve her reputation, she begged leave of Apollo to speak for her self; which
being granted unto her, she thus began: It is no marvel, Renowned Sovereign,
if women, whose sex is accounted the weaker vessel, not enabled with the
Noble courage of a man has obtained the prerogative and toleration at the
Husbands hand to speak what they list, yea, and otherwhiles for matters of
profit to scold and play the Shrewes, so that they fooled them not afterward
by Satyrs Garlands, by Antique Dances, or by graffing Actaeons badge on their
manly foreheads. For indeed all our power lies in our Tongues. Give me leave,
then Noble Prince, while others fawn and wag their tails, to wag this little
member of mine in my Maids Defense. Have I flourished and lived uncontrolled
for many hundred years, even before Pla^tus, Terence, Roscius, and Martial
published their works, inspiring Poetical wits to vent most rare conceits,
and am I now questioned after so many ages for my Gentlewomens gamesome
behavior? Wherefore have not I been traduced in former times for the like
petulance. If it be a fault to kiss, it is a greater fault to do worse. If
your Majesty had an Opticke Glass to see into all the Ladies and Gentlewomens
hearts attending on this virtuous Court, the very palest of them would quickly
change their hew into a Scarlet die. Let her which is innocent of these raging
flames fling the first stone at my Gentlewoman, who erred (If it be an error)
not of beastly lust, but of harmless ignorance, following the custom of my
Court, who ever allowed clipping and kissing, the more the sweeter. My Maid did
but that which her Mistress has done a thousand times before her. Such a
destiny was read at my Birth:

Comica lasciuo ga^det sermon Thalia. The Comic Muse in wanton speech
delights.

Here Thalia ended. His Majesty perceiving that most of the wanton abuses
incident to the wilful unmarried Romish Clergy, to Comedies, and Courtly Dames,
yea and to many Citizens wives and their daughters proceeded from the mistaking
of Thaliaes Desteny, he out of hand sent for the Princess Minerua and the
Lady Mnemosyne Thaliaes Mother to know the certainty. Presently the Noble
Ladies appeared as it were in the twinkling of an eye; whom Apollo caused to
sit in two stately Thrones richer then the King of Chinaes golden chair, the
great Queen Minerua on his right hand, and the Lady Mnemosyne the Princess of
Memory on his left hand, to whom he related the whole passage of the
business, how a certain Sect pretending themselves to be Christians, but far
remote from their Masters Doctrine, had troubled the Society of Mankind by a
counterfeit abstinence from the Nuptial bed, because they would seem more
holy then God made them; and all this, because they might cloak their
sequestration from marriage and their foolish vows under the Lady Thaliaes
licentious birthright; that the Fates had ordained her and all her Attendants
to delight in wanton dalliance and Confession in corners, by which means the
men sounded not only into the Secrets of his Court, but also into the Ladies
inward dispositions, so that after amorous conference they fell roundly to
kissing: a thing prodigious and intolerable in his virtuous Court. Therefore
he now desired them to declare there openly, whether the Destenies had
prescribed such a baudie sentence at the birth of Thalia, that she should joy
in lascivious Discourses, the forerunners of beastly acts. To this the Lady
Mnemosyne answered, that at the birth of Thalia, she had gotten a sudden
cold, which produced a thickness in her hearing, whereby she did not
perfectly understand, whether she was alloted to wantonness, or to a
harmless pleasing solace: for the Lady Venus contended, that the Fates had
predestined her for wantonness, but the rest of the Gossip-Goddesses
contested otherwise. Whereupon Apollo asked the Princess Minerua, what she knew
of that matter; The very troth is, said this prudent Goddess that this and no
other sentence did I hear, and I think that my hearing was as perfect as
another:

Comica festiuo gaudet sermon Thalia. The Comicke Muse in pleasant speech
delights.

That the Generation of mankind ever addicted to the worse, had perverted the
sense, and inserted lasciuo for festiuo, wanton for pleasant, or graceful.

Apollo thus informed of the truth, converted his speech to the Comicke
Princess; Madame, said he, such has been the disorders of your Court, that
the stinking smell of them is ascended up unto the Heavens, and the infamy
here on earth so exorbitant, that your self for not reforming the depraved
lives of your Dependants have had your Palace enstiled the Baudie-court, as
bad as Messalinaes or Queen Jones of Naples, who for their strange lusts were
commonly called the Salt-bitches. The Nunneries by your inspiration cannot save
their credit. Yea, the Pope himself by your conuinence, or rather by your
allowance does openly tolerate Courtezans and Stews in his Holy City, and by
them reapes a yearly Tribute, which I may no longer endure in any, which
pretend themselves free of my Court. And whereas you claim prescription of
time, and many hundred of years to warrant these enormities, you may as well
allege, that the wearing of Codpieces, which men used in ancient times, ought
still to be continued. Because the World before Linus and Orpheus converted
them, did eat Acornes like Savages, will you have men to return to their old
vomits? This is like the Jews Opinion. They will not believe Christian
Religion, because the Law of Moses was the more ancient. The Papists in all
their Disputations rely upon Antiquity, for all that Paul tells them, that
there must be an Apostasy and a general departure from the Faith, before the
Son of Perdition be made known. Speak no more of Antiquity, for without
Truth and the Scripture, it is but an old doting Sin. Nunquam sera est ad
bonos mores via. The way to good manners is never too late. Repent of your
light-heeld tricks, for perhaps there is mercy in store. You hear, what a
mistaking fell out at the reading of your Desteny. Let Apelles in steed of that
idle Verse engraue these regenerated lines on the forefront of your Palace:

The Comicke Muse makes this report,
She loves no more dishonest sport.
For now she finds, that at her birth,
She was ordained for harmless mirth.
If hereafter I hear of any lascivious prankes practiced by your countenance
in your Palace, I will discard you from my Court, and accept of the chaste Lady
Sapho in your place. The Sabbath Day, which the very Jews and Turks do
observe holy and reverently sacred, you have hitherto profaned in licensing
your women debauchedly to dance the Cushion kissing Dance, with Roysters and
Ruffians, yea, and with Hob, Dick, and Hick, until the virtuous and
magnanimous Prince Charles of Great Britain made a late Statute at Oxford to
restrain such unlawful sport, on that Sanctified Day.

How many Religious persons under color of your wanton Genius infused into
their changeable fantasies, have played the parts of rutting Bucks? How many of
them have taken sacred Orders, and made Vows impossible to be kept in their
thoughts, (for if a man's wandering fancy longs after his neighbors Wife it is
Adultery, though he never perform the deed) and these pollutions only they
cover under your Mask of holy wantonness? It is not long ago, that a
Protestant being to marry with a Papists Daughter, the Parents liked so well
of the Match in regard of neighborhood, and the uniting of their Manors,
which bounded near to the other, that the parties should be Contracted. The
Maid desired first that she might consult with a Friar her Confessor, who was
instantly sent for. With him she went into the Garden, and having declared the
agreement, the Friar made a difficult matter of it, in respect of their
dinersities of Religion. But the Conclusion was, that her Womb must be first
sanctified by his devout person, which she contradicting, he pronounced her a
lost sheep out of the Catholic Flock. Upon which words of his she departed
from him, and grew in such detestation of that hypocritical dangerous
Religion, that she became a reformed Christian, and by opening the cause to her
Parents, she likewise won them to be converted. But these Examples are rare.
Where one such sadgeth, we find many on the contrary seduced by this secret
whispering, and diuing into the affections of the simpler sort, so that your
Comicall beginnings end in Melpomenes Tragedies. How many idle Comedies have
you permitted under your name, to entrap ingenuous and soft natured people?
Knavery once discovered, you will say, may be ever after the more easily
avoided, as the burnt-child will take ^eed of the fire. But you know Lady,
every one is not an industrious Be to suck the choicest flower, and to make
use of what they find. Most men are inclined to embrace the worst. A witty
Comedy, I confess, represents the lively Actions of frail persons, if the
Lookers on were endued with the like equal discretion to discern true Gold
from Alchymie. Those Caueats I wish you to imprint in your flexible brain, and
not to suffer your giddie-headed Gi^les to gad abroad without some staid person
to ouer-see and curb their natural disposition.

After Apollo had thus ended his Discourse, to the intent that some good effect
should ensue after his admonitions, and knowing how exemplary and useful the
presence of gra^e Personages served to reclayme lewd people, he cashiered
Catullus, and in his rome appointed John Flori^ Deane of the Princess Thaliaes
Chapel, as a Reward for his care and pains in the apprehension of Mariana.

CHAP. VI.
The Author of the Nuns discovery at Lisbon exhibites a complaint to Apollo
against Father Foster the Friar, Confessor to the English Nunnery at Lisbone,
for committing carnal copulation with sundry of them.

Apollo makes a Discourse of Auricular Confession, adiudgeth Foster to Ixions
wheel, and suppresseth all Nunneries.

AT the second Sessions of Parliament holden at Parnassus in Lent last, 1626.
according to the ancient style, the said Informer framed a heinous Accusation
against Friar Foster Confessor of the Nunnarie at Lisbone, that he being an
old man almost destitute of natures heat, had under color of sanctifying them,
deflowred some of them. To this the Friar answered, that for all his old age
he might have a Colts tooth in his head; that yet notwithstanding he entered
not into these venereous encounters of doting lust, but as a considerate
Confessor, supplying the place of a Master of a Family and of a Physician, to
purge those Nuns of their superfluous and depraved humors, who were so full
of the Green Sickness, that he feared an incurable Melancholy or Lunacie, as
bad as Saul's might possess them, if he had not taken some pains in his own
proper person to help their indispositions, or acting at fit times these
deeds of Charity in mere pity and commiseration.

Apollo having heard the Accusation, and the weak defense of Friar Foster, to
let the wauering-minded Christians of his Court understand the true use of
Auricular Confession discoursed, as follows

There is no Discipline nor Tradition invented by man, but may be corrupted
for some sinister respect or other, to the end that the Elect of God may know,
how all things devised by worldlings, shall perish with the world, and that no
Law nor Custom, though for a time it seem never so useful can long stand,
except it be firmly grounded on the Scripture. Witness this Tradition of the
Confession in the Ear, an excellent Policy of the Church to force obedience
unto the Clergy, and to work regeneration in the mild spirited. But because
it was not soundly grounded on the Word of God, it grows contemptible, and
worthy to be suppressed for the monstrous abuses which we find in these times
to flow by the indirect use thereof.

In the Apostles time it was no other then an humble acknowledging of one
Neighbors Infirmity to the other, and an asking of forgiveness reciprocally
at their hands, whom they had offended, in remembrance of that clause in the
Lords Prayer: as we forgive them which trespass against us, that thereby they
might the more confidently receive the Communion. This the Apostle advises in
these words: Confess your sins one to another, and pray ye one for another.
Which Confession they used James cap ^.
publicly and privately: Publicly before all the Congregation, if the Sin
were great, as that of the Incestuous person in Saint Paul, that Shame might
work the fruits of repentance in the Offenders Corinth.
heart; Privately, as Saint James advised by way of Charity, to succor one
another conscience.

Afterward Confession became far more private, and their minds being puffed up
with Pride, or ashamed to let many know their dissimulations, they repaired to
some one of the Elders of the Church, as Patients to a Physician to be cured,
or to receive Counsel for their Souls health. At last, the Clergy noting the
simplicity of the unlettered people in those days, they got them in lieu of
Penance to disburse pence and pounds, sometimes to the Poor, sometimes to
build Churches, Chapels, Monasteries, and to offer presents to the honor of
their Parish Saints, as the Heathen in those days did to their Idols. All this
while there was no great fault, saving that they began to make it somewhat
meritorious. But when the Popes had forbidden Marriages, and in time had barred
the Clergy of their Concubines, which was for a long time dispensed with, then
this laudable Order of Confession began to be grossly abused, and women's
Chastities suffered shipw^ack^. For themselves being to continue for ever
unmarried, they burned in lust, and left no trick unattempted to beguile wives
and maids. But among all their sleights, they prevailed above all, when they
drew men to build Nu^^eries, that they might allure pretty wenches thither,
with whom they might join the more freely to cool their raging lusts.
Insomuch, that the wariest of them seeing some of their sweet hearts too
fruitful, they studied Physic, and gave them drenches to destroy their
Fruit; or if that wrought not the effect, for the credit of their V^taries they
held it no great sin to murder it, as soon as ever it came to light: which
Devilish Acts of theirs since the preaching of the Gospel are daily discovered
in Ponds and other hidden places, where the skuls of many Infants have been
lately found.

What mad men are they, which will commit their daughters to a Confessors
charge, as lambs to wolves, knowing that flax will flame, if it be too near
the fire? Lust by degrees corrupts. The wisest man lives not without some touch
of folly. Shall we then think, that Flesh and Blood can wax cold, finding
sweet opportunity and solitariness to warm sensible nature? At first, they
look babies in their eyes, they wring or kiss their lillyed hands, and induce
them to read their Louesonnets, Madrigalls, and other Poems of Cupids baits.
Then, they fall to a nearer form, the preambles and forerunners of beastly
pleasure, they obtain the graceless grace to play with their iuory breasts,
and to endure (...) (...) writes that unmannerly Grobi^^^:

Tange eti^^ parts qu^^ g^^^^t F^mina t^^gi. Arrived to this happiness, they
must needs sanctifi^ their lips with Nectarean kisses, vowing that they would
not for all the King of Spaines I^dies proceed to a further Act.

So mean perhaps, but Time brings alteration,
And a fair woman is a shrewd Temptation.
As George Withers notes. Having thus seduced these weaker vessels to
condescend to the elements of Love, they teach them the baudie A. B. C. instead
of Aue Maria.

Were I disdainful or unkind,
Or coy to learn, or dull of mind.
But no such thing remains in me
To let me learn my A. B. C.
At last, they win the precious Fort, which once they doubted to be
inexp^gnable. The whole building is razed; and these poor Souls pend in this
pound of bondage, forsaken of their friends, find no other ease for this
disease, but to sang this doleful Di^tie, to the t^^e of too late Repeatance:

Which shall I do? or weep, or sing?
Neither of them will help mourning.
The Treasure's stolen, the Thief is fled,
And I lie bleeding in my bed.
If it were not for these (...), Confussion in the Ear would much benefit a
diseased Conscience, and the whole Commonwealth of the Christian Corporation.
And we could wish it still in use: yet with this limitation, that no Papist
presume to confess any woman under 50. years of age, except he be first
soundly gelded.

And for your part, Friar Foster, who claim the prerogative to have a sear
top with a green root, to mingle a dead coarse with a living body, after the
example of Maxentius the Tyrant, without regard had to your old age and decayed
nature, we Order you to be tortured on Ixions wheel, because you have
profaned the vestall house, Ixion henceforth to be set at liberty for his
petulant attempt against Juno, and all Nunneries to be dissolved, which after
the imitation of the Gentiles, you procured to be built more for your lecherous
interest, then for the honor of your Savior. Whereby I let you all good
Catholics to understand, that we suppress them for the same reason, as
Hezechias supplanted the Brazen Serpent, good of it self and of the first
erecting, being a figure of Christ's saving Office and healing virtue, but
since, a cause of Idolatry, as the Cross also which the Reformed Churches by
reason of the fottish misvsage have lately put down, to take away the
occasions of Idolatry.

CHAP. VII.
Thomas Becket of Canterbury, accuses before Apollo Walter de Mapes
Archdeacon of Oxford in King Henry the Seconds time, for defending the
Marriage of Priests against the Pope of Romes Decree.

THomas Becket of Canterbury, that opposed himself so obstinatly against his
anointed King here in England, about some livings which he pretended to belong
to the Sea of his Archbishopric appealing to the Pope from his Countries
Censure, exhibited an Information before Apollo, against his ancient Friend
Walter de Mapes Archdeacon of Oxford, for withstanding the Popes Legate, that
came to London with a strict Decree to command all the Clergy men in England
to put away their wives. Walter de Mapes was sent for, at whose coming Th.
Becket having license to make good his Information, spoke as follows: Most
Puissant Emperor, Our Holy Father the Pope, the visible Head of the Roman
Church, Saint Peter's famous Successor, whether by Revelation from Heaven, or by
the Spirit of Saint Peter, points not to be questioned by Earthly men, or else
by the motion of his own Transcendent and never erring Brain we know not,
nor matters it much to speak off (for Ipse dixit his Godhead will have it) in
his reverend regard unto these remote Flocks of his, sent over his Holy Legate
to me and my Brother of York, to prohibit all Religious Persons, of what
quality soever, from thenceforth to defile their sacred bodies with those
imperfect animals called Women, as well because they might follow their books
the better, not caring for the vanities of this transitory world as also lest
like New Fues they might tempt us to taste what God had forbidden, that is,
Jealousy, Anger, Deceit, Simony, and Pride to compass means for their
haughty minds. After much difficulty we executed his Holiness good will and
pleasure. Nevertheless, this Seditious Sectarie, not only openly with
opprobrious words, but with an infamous Libell he presumed to tax our Holy
Father of Error (or Heresy if he durst) for this Divine Ordinance. The
Contents of his Libell are these: That it was a grievous torment for a Priest
to put away his wife, because she was his darling, affirming that the Bishop
of Rome made an il Decree, and wished him to beware he dyed not in so great a
Sin. That his Holiness forbad that pleasure now in his old age, which he
loved in his youth. That Mapes defended his Error by the authority of the Old
and New Testament, citing Zachary the Priest to be the Father of Saint John
Baptist, and that S. Paul allowed a Clergy man to be the Husband of one Wife:
That it became a Priest better to marry then to borrow or deflowre his
Neighbors daughter, Niece, or Wife. And in Conclusion, he was so impudent as
to require all Priests to bestow together with their Sweet Hearts a Pater
noster a piece for this his goodly Apish Apology.

His Majesty smiled to hear the Conceit. And thereupon caused the Pronotarie
to read the Libell as Walter de Mapes had framed it, who with an audible voice
did recite as follows

O quam d^l^r anxius, quam tormentum gra^e
Nobis dimittere, quoniam suaue.
O Roman Pontifex, stat^isti pra^e
Ne in ta^t^ crimine moriaris, cave.
Non est innocentius imo nocens vere,
Qui quid facto d^cuit, studet abolere.
Et quod olim luuenis voluit habere,
Modo vetus Pontifex studet prohibere.
Giguere nos praecipit vetus Testamentum,
Vbi Nouum prohibet nusquam est inuentum.
Praesul qui contrarium donat Documentum,
Nullum necessarium his dat Argumentum.
Dedit enim Dominus maledictionem
Viro, qui non fecerit generationem:
Ergo tibi consulo per hanc rationem
Gignere, vt habea^ Benedictionem.
Nonne de Militibus Milites procedunt,
Et Reges a Regibus qui sibi succedunt.
Per Locum a Simili, Omnes Iura laedunt,
Clericos qui gignere crimen esse credunt,
Zacharias habuit prolem and vxorem;
Per virum quem genuit adeptus honorem,
Baptizauit enim nostrum Saluatorem.
Pereat qui te^eat nouum hunc Errorem.
Paulus Coelos rapitur ad superiores,
Vbi multas didicit res secretiores,
Ad nos tandem rediens, i^struensque mores,
Suas, inquit, habeat quilibet vxores.
Propter haec and alia Dogmata Doctorum,
Reor esse meliu^, and magis decorum
Quisque suam habeat, and non proximorum,
Ne incurrat odium and iram eorum.
Proximorum Foeminas, Filias, and Neptes
Violare nefas est. Quare nil disceptes.
Vere tuam habeas, and in hac delectes,
Diem vt sic vltimum tutius expectes.
Ecce iam pro Clericis multum allegani,
Nec non pro Presbyteris plura comprobaui.
Pater Noster nunc pro me quoniam peccaui,
Dicat quisque Presbiter cum sua Suaui.
CHAP. VIII.
Walter de Mapes is commanded by Apollo to defend his Positions against the
Pope, and Becket who accordingly obeys, and proves the lawfulness of
Clergie-mens Marriage, both by the Testimony of the Scripture, and of the
Ancient Fathers.

AFter the Pronotarie had ended, Apollo commanded Walter de Mapes to defend his
cause who thus began: I am glad, Most Noble Emperor, that my Adversary has
cited me to defend my Cause in this judicious Court; where Bribes, blindness
of Affection, and Passion cannot wrest the infallible reasons of Truth, as
oftentimes we see fall out in worldly Judgments. Here I need not fear the
Popes Thunderbolt of Excommunication. And therefore with a resolved countenance
and a mind undaunted, I will prove out of the Holy Scriptures, and by the
authority of the Primitive Church, that we Clergymen may and ought to
marry as well as others.

By the Old Testament, it is evident, that the Leuits, as Aaron, Phinehes,
Eleazar, Zadock, Samuel, and Zachary were married men. Saint Peter himself, as
we read in the New Testament was likewise married, for our Savior Christ
cured his Wives Mother of an Ague. Saint Paul advises a Bishop to be the
Husband of one only wife, and in another place avouches, that it is better to
marry then to burn. Yea and Christ himself avouches it to be a very hard
matter for any man whatsoever to continue chaste, except it were given him from
heaven as a special gift (as rare a Miracle, as a black Swan or a white Crow.)
And shall we expect such miraculous and rare sightes in these tempestuous
times, when the Church it self has much ado to steal out of Babylon? When
the purest of us all do feel tumultuous Hurliburlies in our members striving
and struggling to ouer-master the faculties of our Souls? As we are men we know
our irresistable frailties. We must acknowledge our natural Infirmities; or
else we are Liers, and the Truth dwells not in us. How much better then were it
for us to join in lawful Marriage, then to stay as stale Batchelers, and
hypocritically to take upon us that task, which our weak Tabernacles cannot
support? Sometimes we save those Souls by Marriage, which perhaps might prove
lost, were they not our wives. By these we beget children, whom we train up
and graffe into Christ. We enjoy this happiness oftentimes in our wives and
children, that by our examples and society they shine as Stars here on
Earth, giving light to them that sit in darkness, we increase the Kingdom of
Heaven; and here in this World we leave no scandal behind us, as the
unmarried Romists do by their Stews, and stolen pleasures. Have not we power
to lead about a Sister, as well as the rest of 1. Cor. cap. 9.
the Apostles. This Tertullian one of the first Latin Fathers auerreth in
these words: It was lawful for In Exh^r. ad Cast.
the Apostles to marry, and to lead their Wives about with them in their
iournies. What plainer instance can there be, then Saint Paul's advise to
Bishops and Deacons to content themselves with one Wife apiece, having children
in subjection. For if a man T^tas 1.
knows not how to rule his own house, how shall he care for the Church of
God. Thus in admonishing the Clergy to satisfy themselves with one wife, the
Apostle leaves the Temporal to their choice, who accounted it in those times
one of their chiefest felicities to have many children. And therefore in regard
of their Custom, of their hot Climate, being far more unfit for procreation,
of children then the cold Countries, as also for that their wives were busied
in giving suck themselves two or three years unto their little Ones, Saint
Paul meddles only with the Clergy-mens marriage, which laudable custom none
contradicted, until the Manichees and Ebienites first began to tax them for
Marriage. So we read, that Saint Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen had a Son
called Gregory, who succeeded him in his Bishopric. Saint Jerome a Bishop of
Afric had a Daughter called Leonti^, who was martyred by the Arrians. Saint
Athanasius writing to Dragontius says, that he knew many Bishops unmarried,
and Monks married; as also he saw Bishops married, and many Monks singlemen.
The sixth general Council kept at Trulla did In Can. ^3
much detest this Antichristian Policy against Priests Marriage; and therefore
made this Constitution.

For as much as we are informed, that a Canon has been lately enacted by the
Roman Church, that no Priest or Deacon shall have to do with a Wife: We
following the Apostles Orders and Discipline do order that the lawful
Marriage of Priests be for ever useful and available. And a little after they
yield the reason why they did it: lest, say they, we be compelled to dishonor
Marriage, which was first instituted by God, and sanctified by his presence.

What greater evidence will my friend Becket expect then these Primitive
Lights. If these will not satisfy his curious Judgment, but that he yet
relies on the Decree of the Romish Church, let him believe the Devil himself
out of the heard of Swine confessing the Truth of my allegations; even your
famous Canonist Cardinal Panormitane; continency, Panormit^d Cler. coning.
ca^. comoli^^.
says he, in clericis Secularibus, in Secular Clergymen is not of the
substance of their Order, nor of the Law divine, because otherwise the Greek
Church should sin, nor could their custom excuse them. It follows, and I
do not only believe, that the Church has power to make such a Law: but I
likewise believe, that such a Statute were expedient for the health of their
Souls, that all that were willing might marry; seeing that Experience
teaches, how a contrary effect ensues out of that Law of Continency, seeing
they live not spiritually, nor are they clean, but defiled with unlawful
copulation to their most grievous sinning; whereas they might live chastely with
their own wives. If this man's authority, who was one of your principal
Darlings, seems but a Conceit in your Saint-like understanding; yet, me
thinks, my Lord the Pope, upon your discreet motion might mitigate his rigor,
and tolerate with us to marry, as well as he tolerates the Jews and Stews
at Rome. What stirs and tumults have lately ensued upon this Edict in the
Church of Saint David in Wales, our friend Giraldus Cambrensis, who is our
Coaetaneus with many honest Clergymen can assure you. For when you sent this
Canon under color of your Metropolitan Visitation, that whole Diocese
withstood not only this Canon, but also your own Prerogative pretended from
the Romish Church, clayming themselves, as heretofore for the keeping of their
Easter, to live according to the Rites of the Greek Church, at Constantinople,
to which place, as the Seat of the Roman Empire appointed by Constantine, they
appealed for the deciding of all doubts. Insomuch that our King Henry the
Second, was feign to entreat for aid from the Lord Rice Prince of South
Wales, to bring in your Visitation of Canterbury. If these clouds of witnesses
serve not to confirm the truth of my Poem, which you term a Libell, let us
then be dispensed withal to keep pretty Wenches in corners, and these to be
dignified with the old Titles, The Lords Concubine, the Priests Leman, and the
Kna^es Whore.

Apollo reuerseth the Popes Canon made against the Marriage of the Clergy, and
to that purpose sends out a Proclamation.

APollo well noting the speeches of Walter de Mapes, and the great
inconvenience, which the Prohibition of Marriage to the Clergy, had wrought in
the Christian Church, with the Consent of al his Parliament assembled at
Parnassus, reuersed that Canon, whereof Saint Paul had prophesied, that it was
the doctrine of devils to forbid Marriage, and withal caused this Proclamation
to be fixed in all places subject to his populous Jurisdiction.

Of late there rose a Sect of Caiphas kind,
Which great renown with Pen and tongue assigned
To Wedlock-bands, and with a large extent
Confirmed the same to be a Sacrament:
Yet ne'rethelesse by quirks and tricks they push,
As if they found a knot within a rush,
Forbidding it to all the Clergymen:
A doctrine sure come from the Devils de^.
But what is the fruit? Their bodies Lust inflames,
That they do burn, as scorcht in Aetnaes flames.
Enamoured they wish for cruel death
To end their watchful cares, and wearied breath.
Their mind runs all on Love. Love moves the brain
To muse upon sweet Beauty died in grain.
This is the vpshot of their rash made vows,
Unless the Baudy-house, which Rome allows,
Like to a lakes, do ease their pampred reins,
Or like a Horse-leach suck their puffed up veins.
Return then, Marriage to thy free estate.
Repent, ye Shauelings, ere it be too late.
Use lawful means, and leave of stolen pleasure,
Account of Marriage as the Churches treasure.
Christ's easy yoke (ye need not stand in awe)
Dissolues old vows, and for Dianaes Law.
Christ's easy yoke yields Priests a freer life,
That one man be the Husband of one wife.
CHAP. IX.
Apollo upon Information given him by the Greek Church of Images, erected by
the Pope in the Western Churches, and of Inuocations on Saints confuteth these
Idolatrous Traditions, both by the Testimony of the Scripture, and by the
Positions of the Primitive Church.

THe Greek Church, seeing that by no persuasions the Pope would condescend to
abolish Idols and graven Images out of the Roman Church, but that still he
suffered even in the chief Temples at Rome, the Pictures of the Virgin Mary,
and of many other Saints to be worshipped and called upon with Prayers and
Oblations, they resorted to Parnassus on Good Friday last, showing to Apollo
that the Popes not satisfied by their cunning practices and treasons to defeat
them of the Primacie belonging to Constantinople, as to the Head City of New
Rome, but likewise they set up Charles of France, about the year 801. to
inuest himself in the Empire of the West, and so by their Confederacy to
compel all Christendom to wander after the strange Beast of the seven hilled
City, which now grew to such a height, that his voice stood peremptory as a
Law, and Idolatry he accounted the Mother of Devotion. The Romish Church were
summoned to answer these Accusations, who made choice of Thomas Aquinas the
famous Schooleman for their Advocate, and him they sent to patronize their
Cause before his Majesty upon the first of April last according to the
ancient style 1626. this Doctor appeared in the Delphick Hall before Apollo,
and said, that he came thither on the behalf of the Latin Church to maintain
the lawfulness of Images in their Church. Apollo bad him proceed, and show
what he could in their Defense, Aquinas then began in this manner: Most sacred
Prince, far be it from us to adore any graven Images. We that are learned
know it is damnable. But when your Majesty shall understand the reasons why
we tolerate them in our Churches, we shall not be found much in fault. For
herein we follow the counsel of the famous Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome.
This Grgor. Sereno. lib. 7. Epist. 109.
learned Father hearing that Serenus his fellow Bishop had defaced and broken
all the Images in his Church, he commended his Zeal therein. But afterward
wished him to permit them in Churches, to the intent that the unlettered might
be edified by their view on the walls, seeing they could not read them in
Books. Yet with a prouiso, that those ignorant people should be admonished
not to worship them. The like advice do we give to our unlearned people, that
they adore not Idols, but only that they invoke and honor the Saints which
those Idols do represent. We worship not the Images of Christ or of the Virgin
Mary because it is Idolatry so to do. But we worship Christ and his Mother
before their Images, because their Images do allure us to love them. For mine
own part, I confess it were good to abolish them, but we are constrained to
tolerate them, to the end the simple sort of people might be won by the sight
of them to give the more reverence to holy mysteries.

Apollo having heard this glozing Apology answered: By your subtle speech you
would make the Learned believe, that you worship not these Images at all, but
only that you offer your service unto them, like a Courtier. Yet nevertheless
you bow your bodies and kneel unto them; you beg for their favors to be
intercessors for you. Saint Anthony must help you for the Pox, Saint Margaret
must come from Heaven to assist women in Childbed: Saint Vitus must learn you
to dance. Saint James must defend you in your Pilgrimage. The Pagan Poets never
had so many household Gods Lares and D^^s Tutelares, as your Superstitious
Religion allows you to have. O foolish men! will ye still repair to muddie
pooles, neglecting the Fountain of living waters? God is a spirit, and they
Ioh. cap. 4.
which worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth. He is invisible to
mortal eyes, so that no man should presume to mould his likeness into Gold or
Silver Plates. His Saints are at rest, and must not be raised up, like Samuel,
by any Endor Witches. The Virgin Mary lives in eternal joys, not to be
disturbed with the clamorous inuocations of worldly Creatures. This was the
Heresy of the Collyridians, as our virtuous Epiphanius, who flourished within
four hundred years after Christ, quotes down to the memorial of all
Posterities Whose Arguments with the Cause I will not repeat unto you, because
all ye which go under the naked name of Catholics, may leave off to tender
your service to the Creatures, iniuring your Creator, who will not communicate
his glory to any whatsoever Saint, Angel, or Principality, according to our
Saviors speech: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. Matthew. cap. 4


In Arabia certain women used upon some Holy Days in the year to bear about
a four squared Table with a cloth spread, and Bread thereon laid, which they
offered to the name of the Virgin Marie.

Epiphanius confutes this Heresy, saying, that Epiphan. in Here Is. 79.
this was mere madness, and a Sickness of Eve now again deceived, nay, of the
Serpent, which abused Eve. His Arguments are these. First, No women ever
sacrificed in the Old Testament. Secondly, If any women, it had been a regular
Custom in the Church, that Mary her self did sacrifice in the New Testament,
which we never read of. Thirdly, Nor was the Sacrament of Baptism ever
committed to Mary. Or else her Son would have made choice of her and not of
John. The Gospel was committed to the care of the Apostles, and not to any
woman. Fourthly, The Daughters of Philip did prophecy, but never meddled with
those mysteries which belong to men, who only executed the Priestly office.
Fistly, Women were forbidden to speak in the Church.

Out of these Propositions he proves, that the Virgin Mary is not to be
worshipped. First, Because he is a Devil, which making a God of a mortal
nature in the eyes of men, does express by the varieties of Art any carved
Images, which represent the shape of man. Secondly, Because the mind commits
adultery, which falls from the everliving God to honor the Images of the
Dead, like to a Whore, which forgoes the lawful use of a Husband to lie with
others. Thirdly, Because Mary was not given us to be worshipped, but that her
self should worship her Son. Fourthly, For that these words in the Gospel
does warn us to take heed: Woman, what have I to do with thee? That by these
words we might note in calling her Woman, that others might not admire her, as
a Virgin too holy and sacred. Fifthly, Because in the Scriptures we do not
find, that any of the Prophets ever commanded us to worship any man, much less
a woman. Sixthly, God allows us not to worship Angels. Therefore he will not
have us to worship Mary. She may be mentioned with honor. But Worship and
Adoration is a mystery due only unto God. The greatest Angels receive not
that Glorification. These be the reasons which Epiphanius exhibited against
the Collyridians.

There was a Sect called Caianes, which Epiphanius noted likewise to call upon
the Angels. The which also Saint Augustine ascribed to those Heretics which
were termed Angelici. The same Augustine mentions another sort of Heretics
called the Carpocratians, which worshipped the Images of Jesus and Saint Paul.
Saint Ambrose auerreth Augustine n. Here Is 71.

Ambros. de Obitu. ^ beodos. Ierem. cap. 17. Epiphan. in Epist. ad Johan.
Epis^op. Hieros.


it an Heathenish I dolatrie for any man to worship the Cross, whereon Christ
suffered. The Prophet also denounces him accursed, which reposeth hope in man,
saying, Cursed is the man which puts his trust in man. Singular is that
Example of Epiphanius, who on a time beholding a veil in a Church painted with
the Image of Christ thereon, hanging on the doors contrary to the Authority
of the Scriptures, he tore it down, and delivered it so defaced to the
Wardens, bidding them to bestow it for a shroud on the next poor body, that
died. And when the Churchwardens murmured, saying, that seeing he had tore it,
he ought to have bought a new one, or not to have rent it so much as he did;
Epiphanius promised to send them another veil to be hanged up in lieu
thereof, which afterward he performed, and in a letter to that effect to John
Bishop of Jerusalem, he recommends the said veil, charging him to beware how
he permitted any such Idolatrous things to be set up in any place within his
Jurisdiction.

To conclude, let it suffice, that Christians honor the memory of the blessed
Saints upon those Days which the Church have allotted for that purpose. Let
them glorify God for vouchsafing to send those Servants of his as the chief
Elders and Pillars under their Savior Christ the Head of their corporation.
But in no wise let them pray unto them for fear of that Jealous Ear, which
hears every word No man can come to the Father but by the Son. Nor can any
man come to the Son, except the Father who sent the Son, do draw him. Our
Savior by his Godhead knows the secrets of our hearts, He alone is enabled
with power to help us. He alone is the Master of Gods Court of Requests. Come
unto him all ye which are heavy laden, and he will refresh you without suing
unto any other Mediator whatsoever. Remember the words of Saint Paul, that
Jesus Christ alone is our Advocate with the Father. One God, one Mediator.

CHAP. X.
Martine Luther arriving at Parnassus, shows to Apollo, how the Popes under
color of redeeming men's Souls out of Purgatory, used to conicatch Christians
by the sale of Pardons.

Apollo condemns both the Fable of Purgatory, and the use of Popish Pardons.

MArtine Luther a famous Divine of Germany, whom some of his Countrymen call
the second Elias, for his bold and constant asseueration of the Truth against
the Ahabs of his time, came in great pomp to Parnassus on Tuesday in the
Easter week last, 1626. associated with Er^smus, Melancton, Bucer, and many
other valiant Champions of the Protestant Religion. And having lighted off
their Pegasean horses, they entered into the Parliament house, where they
attended until Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and other
Princely Courtiers of his Majesty's train, were seated in their classicke
ranks. As Soon as they saw the Ceremonies ended, Martin Luther made this
Oration Most noble Emperor, It is now above an hundred years since I first
preached against the inualiditie of Popish Pardons grounded on those dreams of
Purgatory (for the life of these Pardons is derived from this Acheron) and as
far as I see, notwithstanding all my vigilant cares and toilesome labors,
matters are like to issue to their first elements and former confused Chaos,
except some course be suddenly taken to banish these Indulgences and doting
Pardons into the abisme of Lethe, never more to be remembered. What a shameful
thing is it for the Pope to usurp a higher prerogative then our Savior
himself ever affirmed that his Almighty Father left unto him? He knew not
the Day of Doom, nor did he seek to know more then became the Son of Man
to know. And yet the Pope in worldly craft to bring more sacks to his mill, and
a concourse of trading to his Babylon, has granted a Pardon of 6000. years to
come, unto all such as shall resort to the Church of Saint John de Laterane in
Rome, and also an absolute Pardon of eight and twenty thousand years, with
plenary remission of their Sins, to as many people as shall repair thither
upon the Feast day of Saint John the Evangelist: when as the Elect of God do
surely believe that this world cannot last so long, but that the Sun of
Righteousness shall shine before that time, and descend from the Heavens to
judge all the Sons of Adam. Many of my poor Countrymen of late since the
Conquest of the Palatinate have been forced to shift their Religion, and to
accept of these idle Pardons against their consciences. Our humble motions now
are to your Imperial Highness, that you will curb this Man of Sin in making
frustrate histricks of Legerdemaine. Let Purgatory fables be taken away,
these Indulgences and Pardons will cease. And if they cease, the Revenues which
support his Pride will become abated. But as long as this Gulf does lie open,
the Christian World shall never enjoy peace in body or mind.

Apollo at these speeches of Luther seemed much to bewail the condition of the
times. And to firret out the better the Original of Purgatory, and of the
Popish Pardons he asked Peter Lumbard Master of the Sentences, who flourished
about five hundred years ago, whether in his time the world did believe,
there was any such place as Purgatory. Peter Lumbard answered, that there was
not the least thought of such a place in his time. Nor do the Greeks to this
hour (said he) credit any such matter. And shall I sleep still, replied
Apollo, while this Enchanter beguiles with his false lure the ares of simple
Souls? The Poets had their Elisian fields, as this Fellow his Fable of
Purgatory. They devised theirs of pleasure. But He invented his of base
covetousness to rake to his Treasury what others got with infinite troubles.
Hence arose that Proverb, that the Pope can never want money, as long as he
has a hand to hold a pen. While every Chimney in England paid the taxation
called Peter Pence, they wanted not sanctified wares, like amulets and charmed
scrowles, to defend their souls from Belsebub Princes of Devils. They wanted
no Pardons to ransom them from the jaws of Cerberus. But if they slighted
them, as scar-crowes, no penny no Pater noster, sink or swim, they were
abandoned and left to the fatal Ferriman.

O childish Popelines, shall papers thus bewitch you? Shall Pedlers deceive you
with false trinkets? Shall Iugglers and Mountebankes circumuent your
understanding with trifles and nifles in a bag, or with a pigge in a poke? Here
in this World is your Purgatory, your place of trial, where the Righteous,
which lives by Faith, which loves his fellow Christian, shall possess Heaven
for his Reward, as on the contrary; Hell, if he be over worldly minded, and
cares for no man but himself and his own Family. Dust returns, as the Prophet
testified, into Eccles. cap. 12.
dust from whence it came, and his soul returns to God, from whence it came.
Saint Cyprian makes no doubt of any other place. When men (says he) are once
Cypr. contra De^netrium.
departed out of this life, then there is no place of Repentance left. There is
no more effect of any satisfaction. Here in this World everlasting life is
either lost or given. Saint Augustine who lived above a hundred years after
Saint Cyprian, writes that some in his time began to move the question,
whether there were any such third place after this life? Yet for his own part,
he positiuely concludes upon those two, of Heaven and Hell: But, quoth he, of a
third place Aug. in Hipognost. contra Pelag lib. 5.
we know not. Neither do we find any such in the holy Scriptures.

Therefore let no man trust to the moonshine in the water by other men's
merits, his Savior excepted, to redeem his soul from the place where God
appoints it. David when he understood that his child got on Bethsabe was dead,
left off his lamentation and comforted himself. It is in vain and too late
for a man to seek the reuersing of the divine Judgment, when he has not the
Grace to go to the Physician, before he fall sick. It is a sacrilegious sin
in the Pope to make men believe, that it lies in his power to redeem any man's
soul from the place where the Almighty has seated it seeing that he cannot
add one year more to his own life, then is allotted him by the course of
nature, nor borrow one minute of an hour to allay the pangs of his own death.
The very Best have enough to do to save their own souls without presuming to
undergo a fruitless labor for another man. Yea, though these three men were
among them, Noah, Daniel, and Job, they should deliver Ezeth. cap. 14.
but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord God. Seeing that
Jesus Christ by his death and Passion has satisfied his Fathers Justice, and
makes continual intercession for the Penitent, let none despair, nor trust
any other besides this powerful Mediator.

CHAP. XI.
Gratian the Canonist conuents the Waldenses and Albigenses before Apollo for
celebrating divine Service in their Country Language, and not according to the
Rites of the Romish Church.

Zuinglius defends their cause by the Authority of the Scriptures and of the
Primitive Church.

Apollo pronounces a definitive Sentence against the Pope, on the behalf of
the Waldenses and Albigienses.

NO sooner had Apollo refelled the use of Popish Pardons invented of purpose to
make good the old saying, that Purgatory is a very pick-parse, but Gratian the
Canonist framed a supplication against the Waldenses and Albigienses, wherein
he showed, that whereas Ignorance was the Mother of Devotion, and thereupon the
Church of Rome to retain true hearted simplicity in the bowels of her
children, had like a politic Mother, forbidden the reading of the Scripture
in their Countries language, to the intent that green-headed people,
sowgelders, and base Mechanickes should not dispute of divine Mysteries, which
surpassed their vulgar capacities: yet those rude mountanists, Montanae belluae
presumed to unlock the cabinet of the Bible, and to read Gods Service in
their barbarous Tongue. Whereby much evil, contentions, and continual
bangling arose of late years among Christians, which otherwise might have lain
covered, as fire under ashes.

Zuinglius a notable Divine of Suitzzerland, being deputed by the Waldenses and
Albigienses to defend their cause stood up and said: with what face can you, O
Gratian, blame these honest men for seeking the surest means of Salvation? Who
will still stand groping in the dark, that may enjoy the free light of the
Sun? Have not they souls to look unto as well as the Pope himself and his
Cardinals? In reading the Word of God, Faith increases. And the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost multiplyeth in relen^ing hearts. So that Peace, Unity and Love as a
^uster of Grapes do spring up together, and bear down the wrangling
opposites. Neither is it any new Religion which they profess. For all your
Chronicles can testify, that these people have departed from the Romish
Church, and proclaimed the Pope to be Antichrist above three hundred years
before Luther was borne. And for the reading of divine Service in a more
familiar language, they have the Scriptures for their warrant and the Primitive
Church for a pattern.

The Prophet David pronounces that man blessed, Psalm 1*
which studies the Laws of the Lord, and therein exercises himself day and
night. Saint John recommends them to the weaker sex and children, as appears
by his Epistle written to the Elect Lady, and her children. Saint Paul
protests, that he had rather speak five words to be understood, then ten
thousand in a strange language. And in another place he prayseth Timothy, that
he knew the Holy Scriptures of a child. Saint Basil in his infancy was 2.
Tim. 13. 1^. Basil. Epist. 74.
instructed in the Bible by his Nurse Macrina. Saint Jerome extols Paula a
learned Matron for teaching her Maids to understand the Scripture. Theodoret
speaking of the ancient Christians in his time; You shall, says he, see every
where the chief points of our Theod de Curand. Graecor. Assect. lib. 5.
Faith read and understood not only of our Doctors, but also of shoo-makers,
Smiths, and weauers, and of all kind of Artificers: not only of our learned
women, but likewise of them which get their living by their Needles, and of
M^id servants not only of citizens, but also of Husbandmen, insomuch that you
shall be (...) among us ditchers and Heardsmen arguing of (...) Trinity, of
the Worlds creation, and of other deep^ points of divinity. Saint Chrysostom
called for his Eloquence the Golden mouthed Doctor, exhorts all men to read
the Scriptures. Hear me all ye Laymen, get ye Bibles, which are Physic for
the Soul, Or at least wise provide your selves of the New Testament. Saint
Paul prophesied, that Antichrist In hom. 9. in Coloss. 1. pist. 2 Thessalonians. cap.
should be consumed with the Spirit of the Lords mouth. What is the meaning of
this, but that he must be condemned by the Word of God, declared in the
Canonical Scripture? Even by this Testimony, the Sword of the Spirit, at the
bright brandishing whereof the Romish Clerks run away like Cowards, and fly
from them as if they were their mortal Enemies, relying in stead of God
Spirit, upon the Spirit of man, which speaking without such immediate
Revelations cannot but Err, and grossly Err. The consideration of this
weighty point enforced Doctor Fisher Bishop of R^chester in Rossens. Artic.
37. aduer. Luth. Apocalypse. cap
his Book against Luther, to wish for some other means to put down the
Protestants, then the Holy Scriptures. Therefore (quoth he) when Heretics
contend with us, we must defend our cause by some other helps, then by the
sacred Scripture. In this they verify the effects of that wonderful Book,
which Saint John in the Revelation auerred to be as sweet as Honey in the
mouth, but afterward bitter in the belly, that is to say, sweet to read,
because it promised everlasting life, but for all that bitter in the stomach
when Crosses came to be digested, when they were to forsake the pomps and
vanities of this seducing world, and specially, when that counsel of our
Savior came to be put in execution Sell all that which thou have and come and
follow me. No wonder then, that the Pope and his Cardinals delighting in
temporal glory, cannot abide to try their Controversies by the evidence
thereof, but with the hazard of some poor Scholars lives, they send them
abroad as Frogs out of the Dragons mouth, to croke and crake of Antiquity and
Traditions, Ibid
but in no wise to contend with us by the Bibles Testimony. This Book proves
indeed very bitter to their stomachs, who hunt after worldly Preferments. While
the Bodies of the two Testaments lay despised, moth eaten, and shut up in their
libraries, the Great Men of the world after their massacring in the Cities of
spiritual Sodom and Apoc. cap.
Egypt, sent Gifts and Presents, the one to the other in token of gladness.
So iocond were worldlings, as long as they might do^ what they list, and at the
last obtain for a little money full remission of all their Sins, mortal as
venial. But now that the Spirit of life is entered into their Carcasses, and
they Ibid.
stand upon their feet, according to Saint John's Prophecy, Fear seizes on
them, they wax amazed, shunning their glorious Light. They reele to and fro,
Psalm:
and stagger like drunken men.

Apollo liked exceeding well of Z^ing lius his zealous speech. And further
adjoined this Admonition to Gratian and the rest of the Popes Favorites; Not
without a profound mystery did Saint John in the Revelation compare the
Romishh Curch to Spiritual Egypt. For even as the Children of Israel were
for many years kept in Bondage under the yoke of Pharaoh: so the Souls of
Christians in the times of the general Apostasy and departure from the true
Faith were miserably subjected under the Popes Tyrannical Command: insomuch
that they were prohibited to have Service in any other language save in the
Roman, whose chief City the Tyrant himself usurped, and in subtle policy
would admit of no other Tongue then of his own Latin, which some hold to
comprehend the mystical name of the Beast, who possesses that seven hilled
City. We do therefore ordain, that it shall be lawful for ever hereafter
to every Kingdom and Province to celebrate Divine Service, and to read the
Scripture in the Mother tongue, following the examples of the Primitive Church.
And even as the Greek Church, the Georgians in Armenia, the Abis^ines in
Aethiopia under Precious John, and other Christians in the East, have from the
first time of their Conuersions used their Godly sacrifices, prayers, and
thanksgiving, every Nation in their own language: so now we do here allow,
ratify, and decree, that the Waldenses and Albigienses shall honor and
glorify their Creator in Unity and Trinity after the same manner in their
own known Tongue, as they have accustomed for these five hundred years last
past. And if any person be so hardy as to bring in a Bull of Excommunication
from the Pope against them for so doing, we do by these Presents pronounce the
same to be void, siustrate, and of no effect; and that the Publishers of that
thundering Libell, be laesa Maiestatis reus, guilty for wounding our Royal
Majesty, and to suff^^ the Punishment due for Capital Treason.

CHAP. XII.
Berengarius renews his opinion of the Lords supper, and proves both by the
Scriptures and by the Authority of the most ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Church, that the same is to be taken after a spiritual manner, and in
commemoration of the Lords death.

VVIcklisse understanding that his old Master This Berengarius was famous about
260. years past.
Berengarius had for fear of Death recanted his notable Demonstration of the
use of the Lords Supper, which in his flourishing years he had maintained
against the Pope and all the Romish Clergy, caused him to be cited into his
Majesty's Court at Parnassus to show the reasons of his Recantation, and
whether he did the same in good earnest, or else out of the frailty of flesh
and blood. Berengarius appeared, and being asked of Apollo, wherefore he made
that attestation contrary to his Conscience? Berengarius trembling with tears
confessed, that the Pope extorted that Recantation from him with menaces and
threats; but that like to Hippolitus in Euripides he kept a mind unsworn: and
that he still perseuered in the truth of the Doctrine which he formerly had
taught, that the Body and blood of Christ ought to be taken spiritually and not
really. Apollo observing his contrition and inward sorrow, freely forgave him
upon condition, that he would yield sound proofs out of the Scriptures, and
the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church to convince the Papists, whereby
they might be thenceforth toungtied, and fully satisfied touching that
material point of Faith. Berengarius glad of his Majesty's pardon, promised to
declare his full knowledge, and out of hand drew out of his pocket this
schedule, which Apollo presently caused Saint Bernard to read before all his
learned Courtiers. Saint Bernard obeyed his Sovereigns command, and publicly
read the Contents, as follow: Even as by the Law of Moses there were two
Sacraments ordained to be kept until the coming of Christ that great
Prophet, whom God promised to raise up like unto Moses, viz. Circumcision and
the Passover, or the sacrifice of the Lamb at Easter, the one serving to
bridle their carnal affections, the other to prefigure the eternal Lamb,
which was to be crucified: so in the New Testament two Sacraments were
instituted to Christians in their stead. Baptism and the Lords Supper, the one
supplying the use of Circumcision, the other of the Lamb at Easter, both to
testify our admittance and incorporation into the Christian Church, as ou^ward
visible marks, signs, or badges of our Faith only in Christ. To these the
Pope added fine Sacraments more in worldly policy to gain money,
Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Extreme unction, and Marriage, which last his
Holiness debarres his Clergy of, because Gods Elect might suspect the rest as
humane Traditions. These five sometimes may be necessary, as other Divine
virtues, Love, Humility, Sobriety, and such like, but not properly to be
called Sacraments. Which Saint Augustine very plainly affirms in these
words: Christ and his Disciples delivered unto us a few Sacraments instead
August. lib. 3. de Doctrina Christ. cap, 9.
of many, Baptism and the Lords Supper. Neither was the Pope content only so
to add more yokes of bondage to the free Church of Christ, but likewise for
his further condemnation he perverted with those old Heretics the
Capernaites, the true sense of those words, This is my Body, saying, they must
be taken literally, and really, which a sober minded Christian lothes to hear
as much as Auerroes the Moore, who detested Christian Religion for nothing more
then for that they did eat their God with their teeth, and sought to hale
their Savior from the Right hand of God, where his Father had placed him
until the Day of Judgment. After the Consecration of the Bread and Wine we
confess that there is an alteration in respect of the End and use of this
mystical Sacrament, to put us in mind of the Lords death, until he comes to
judge the world, but we utterly deny that there is any alteration at all in the
substance of the Bread and Wine, which remains as it did before, and enters
into our Bodies to be digested and concocted, like unto other natural and
corruptible Food. Yet most significantly they may be called Sacramental Bread
and Sacramental Wine, representing the Body and Blood of Christ, if they be
taken with a spiritual mouth and a devout mind, that is, by Faith, and not
received with a carnal mouth and bodily appetite. For, as Saint Paul wrote,
have not we houses for that purpose? As a bodily mouth requires bodily meat,
so a spiritual mouth must have spiritual Food to refresh and nourish the
Soul. And this manner of Eating Christ's Body did himself expound, when some
grew displeased, saying, that it was a hard speech for a man to eat his Body,
and to drink his Blood, by adjoining these words afterward: It is the Spirit
which quickneth, the Flesh profits Ioh. cap. 6.
nothing. The words which I speak unto y^n are spirit and life. What plainer
sense will any man look for, then the speech it self? This is my Body, that
is, this very Bread is my Body; which bread he broke into pieces before he
suffered on the Cross and gave it in commemoration and remembrance of his
after-passion. The Papists will not allow, that the bread is broken, but that
it is transubstantiated and changed into his very Body, which the Apostle
utterly conuinceth, saying, the bread which we break is the Communion of the
Body of Christ. And in another place he writes, that it is to be taken in 1
Cor. cap. 10.
remembrance of the Lords death until he comes. To which manner of taking it,
all the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church subscribe with one consent.
Iustine Martyr, who lived within one hundred and In Tri^^on. p. 2. Propos. 3. ^
6.
fifty years after Christ, protests, that the Lords Supper is (...)
recordatio a remembrance of the Incarnation and Passion, which Christ sustained
for penitent sinners. Irenaus who lived about the same time calls it Res
terre^as earthly things. Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived about ninescore years
after our Savior, says, that it is the Body and Blood of Christ allegorice
allegorically, or by Lib. 2. Ta^ageg.
an obscure Figure. Origin which flourished within two hundred years after
Christ, writes, that it is the Image of Spiritual things, and words feeding
the Soul. Tertullian the first Latin Father, which wrote about two hundred
years after Christ, Contra Mar ^ 4
terms it the Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ. Dionysius Areopagita
says, that the Bread and Wine at the Communion were sensible images and
apparel symbolically put about our Savior Di^n^s. l. de Ecclesia ^. Hic^a ch
ap. 1. Chrysostom. ad Caesar ^^^ Ho^^^ 15. ^^ Mat.
Christ. (...). Bishop Chrysostom that was called the Golden-mouthed Father,
makes this protestation of it: The Bread after that is sanctified, is worthily
termed the Lords Body, although the nature of Bread do still remain in it. Of
this belief was Saint Augustine. To eat the flesh of a man (says he) and to
drink his blood, one would think it were a heinous matter. Therefore it is a
figure which August de Doct. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16.
our Savior used, commanding us to communicate his Passion, and in our
memories profitably to lay up, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

CHAP. XIII.
The Romish Church accuses the Church of Aethiopia, for denying to acknowledge
her to be the Mother and Catholic Church.

The Patriarch of Alexandria challenges the primacie over that Church, and
proves the Pope of Rome to be an Intruder, and to have no Right at all over the
Church of Aethiopia.

Apollo determines the Difference by discovering the ways how the Pope got
the Supremacy over the Western Churches, and how both he and the General
Councels err in matters of Faith.

THe Church of Rome seeing that by the help of Printing, the Spirits of the
Western Empire were illuminated with the bright Rays of the Gospel, and
thereby had shaken her Foundations, Superstitions, and Traditions, which she
had invented to inueigle men's Souls, and to maintain her temporal Ambition,
by diuing into their secrets and treasury, and that which was was the greatest
Corrosiue to her heart, she had found Apollo and the most part of his learned
Troop, ardently bent to cross her proceedings by trying her impostures and
suggestions on the Touchstone of the sacred Scriptures, she utterly
despayring of repayring her credit in that Part of the world, before her last
motion to enter into the herd of Swine, with the unclean spirits in the
Gospel, made intercession unto Apollo, by some neutrall Papists, and luke warm
Lutheranes, that she might have some Sovereignty over those Countries, which
lay remote from his Majesty's Court at Par^^ssus. Apollo not accustomed to
grant any Charters, Monopolies, nor other appendants to the state of his
Empire, which might prejudice either the Revenues of his Crown, or the weal of
his Subjects, without the advice of his Parliament, willed her to prefer her
Suit on the sixteenth day of June next after 1626. at the first Sessions of the
Parliament to be held at Parnassus. The Romish Church failed not to motion upon
the said day, and signified, that whereas she had lived in infinite glory and
pomp for the space of eight hundred years, and that now in her old Age like
to the decrepit Lion in Aesops Fables, every beast had a fling at her, even the
veriest Ass and cowardly Hare began to contemn her commands, to vilify her
Jurisdiction, and to esteem no otherwise of her thundering Bulls, then if they
were the windy brauadoes of a Braggadochian, or the bellowings of the Bulls of
Basan. The consideration whereof did now prick her to entreat a Boon at his
Majesty's hands, that it might be lawful for her to exact the same obedience
of the Christians in Aethiopia, under Precious John's Scepter, which sometimes
she had extorted from the Christians of Great Britain, Germany, and other
Provinces in Europe; whereby she might live in some reputation as yet in her
ancient years.

The Patriarch of Alexandria netled with this request, and fearing les^ by the
suffrages of those lukewarm Ecclesiastics, which like Iacks on both sides,
stood as it were betwixt Heaven and Hell, this Imperious Lady might prevail
and deprive him of the Primacie which he and his Predecessors had successively
enjoyed from the Apostles time, opposed her with this Oration: Was it not
enough for you, O Ambitious Dame, to tyrannize in your youth, to prostitute
your body for gain to all comers, but now you must be like another Roman
Flora, after your abominable whoredoms adored for a Goddess? and triumph over
those innocents, which the scorching Sun has divided by the Aequinoctia^^
line from the Meridian of Rome? what interest? what color of Title can you
prescribe to have in those places where your Constantine, your Phocas, and your
Charles of France never trod, nor ever any of the Roman Legions? These People
were first converted to the Christian Faith by the Eunuch in the Acts of the
Apostles, Servant to the Queen Candace, not without a singular mystery, that
there she might soiourne during the time of the Great Apostasy, when Faith
was departed according to Saint Paul's prophecy, and the Bible represented by
the two Witnesses in the Revelation of Saint John did lie worme-eaten in the
Sodomites Libraries. Saint Matthew confirmed them afterward in the Truth; And
from his time until this present, we the Patriarchs of Alexandria have had the
Prerogative to install their Bishops, to institute their Priests, and to order
their controversies. Nor did you, proud Lady hear of the manner of their
Liturgy and Ecclesiastical policy, but within these seuenscore years. It is
true you sent your flying Spirits thither of late sundry times to pervert them
and to kindle a combustion in their Religion, but all in vain, for they smelt
out your drift, and banished your Jesuits to requite some part of your
hospitality to strangers, in that for the space of a whole year and better
you restrained their Ambassador at Lisbone from entering into your
Hypocritical Church. And as he wrote to Damianus a Goes, such was your
insolency, that by no means you would admit them to communicate nor keep
company with you, as if they were the arrantest Heretics of the world. The
Romish Church much agrieued that the Patriarch of Alexandria had prevented her
in a Suit, which she had cunningly canuased, and almost brought to perfection,
pleaded, that all the world ought to be under her Government. For our Savior
Christ after his Passion said, that all Power was given unto him in Heaven and
Earth. And this Power with the keys did He before his Ascension into Heaven
commit unto Peter. Which Sovereign Authority after Peter's death, rested, like
the Spirit of Elias on Eliza the Prophet, upon the Successors of Peter. For
proof of which Princely pre-eminence, she alleged the testimony of Pope
Gregory the ninth, who flourished in the year 1225. how God made two great
Lights in the firmament of Heaven, that is to say, of the Catholic Church,
the which two Lights are the Pontifical Authority, Greg. 9. lib. 1. Decret.
tit. 33.
and the Regal Power whereby men might know, that there is as much difference
betwixt Popes and Kings, as betwixt the Sun and the Moon. At these words the
Patriarch reioynd, and said, these arrogant words of yours, pronounced now in
your drooping and declining Age, do decipher you to be like an old Bawd and
graceless Strumpet. Was not the cure of Souls sufficient for you, but you
must also domineere over their bodies, and more over their Purses? This last is
the cause of your discontent. How does the Spirit of Saint Peter rest on you
more then the Spirit of Saint Matthew or Saint Philip rest on me or my
Ethiopian Clergy? By that similitude Caiphas might vaunt, that he had the
spirit of Aaron. But their Glory ought not to countenance our Infirmities.
Neither, as Saint Chrysostom said, is the Place able to sanctify the
Successor, nor can the Chair make a Priest. Saint Peter was Chrysostom. did. 40.
of a higher Function then a Pope, an Apostle to travel from one place to the
other, having the charge of the Circumcision, as Saint Paul of the Gentiles.
He was not tied to any one peculiar City. O I would, that both of us were able
to follow his godly steps, and to labor up and down the world in converting
of Idolaters, and to preach nothing but Christ crucified, without collateral
Mediators and worldly respects of Dignities, Pompes, or in hunting for
Superiority, Gain and fat Benefices. Saint Peter had no Gold nor Silver to
give, as himself Act. cap. 3.
told the Creeple in Salomons Porch. He wore no Triple Crown, but rejoiced in
the Crown, in his Masters thornie Crown, the Crown of Martyrdom. He wore
no filuer Crucifixe, but in his heart he bore the contemplation of the bloody
Cross, which day and night he earnestly beheld. He taught his converted Flock
to be subject unto Kings. The Pope exalts himself above all Kings, 1. Pet.
cap. 2.
above the General Councels. Saint Peter would not suffer Cornelius to kneel
unto him. The Pope expects that even the mightiest Monarchs should kiss his
Feet. Et mihi and Petro. Saint Peter willingly endured reproof at the hands of
Paul. But who dares rebuke the Pope and tell him of his faults? Galat. cap. 2.
Saint Peter acknowledged the rest of the Apostles for his Brethren and
Fellows. The Pope allows of no Patriarch, nor Bishop to be his equal, nor of
any Clergy man to be made but by his Authority. Saint Peter and Saint Paul
preached that Christ was the Head of the Church, as the Husband of the Wife,
and for that end he sent the Holy Ghost as his Vicar general to direct the
Souls of the Elect in spiritual mysteries during his residence in Heaven,
without apointing any Earthly Potentate or visible Head to execute that high
Office, and left their bodies to the Gods of the Earth, to be tried, as Gold
in the furnace. It is the Soul, the noblest part of man, which he takes most
care of. Why should He then ordain a visible Head, an ambitious Pope to
domineere, nay to tyrannize over that I^uisible Part? What need any other Head
as ministerial over our Consciences? He that ouerlookt the seven Golden
Candlestickes, that is, the seven Churches in the Revelation, and further
promised the presence of his Godhead, I am with you to the Worlds end, no
Math. cap. 18.
doubt, but he will supply the place of a spiritual Head, and infuse both
spiritual nourishment into our Souls, as also afford food and necessaries to
our bodies, though not according to the vain desires of flesh and blood, which
gape after superfluities, yet enough to content nature. O miserable state of
Rome! In what danger lies thy Soul? Saint Bernard long ago reprehended this
aspiring humor of the Romish Clergy. And yet such is the force of tempting
Gain, dolosinummi, that if Moses himself and the Prophets arose from the
dead, they would not hear them as long as they spoke against their worldly
profit. At first you began says he, to usurp as Lords over the Clergy,
contrary to Saint Peter's admonition, and within awhile after against Be^.
Epist. 230
Saint Paul's counsel, who was Peter's fellow Apostle, ye got the rule over the
Faith of men. Nor yet do ye stay here, but ye have gone further and
obtained a peremptory dominion over Religion it self. What remains now, but
that ye climb on high to bring into subjection the very Angels of Heaven?

Apollo very well approved the Catriarkes reproof of the Romish Church, and
fell into such detestation of her intolerable ambition, that he made this
speech against her: Three things have wrought this absurdity in the Religion
of the Western Christians, the one happened by the Opinion of the Popes
extraordinary Power imprinted in men's minds by their Ghostly Fathers, that his
Holiness, as Saint Peter's Successor cannot err in matters of Faith. The
second, and most crafty, that all men whatsoever, who believe not in the
Catholic Church, which you must persuade your self to be only the Romish,
are undoubtedly in the state of Damnation. The third are the lies of
Purgatory, the which being at his dispose as Judge and Iayler, made every man,
specially the melancholic, to take heed of angring him or any of his tribe, as
on the contrary to appease his humor with Gifts and the buying of his idle
Pardons. But now, my Beloved of Par nassus, the veil is taken from his painted
face, and you shall see and read in his eyes the affections of his heart. And
least some of you be not so quick sighted as others, I will briefly run
over the two first causes of his Greatness.

After our Saviors death for the space welnigh of three hundred years, the
Christian Religion was so persecuted by the Roman Emperors, specially, at
Rome it self, and in the nearest places adjoining unto Rome, that no
Ecclesiastical Policy could stand on foot, nor erect public Churches, and
consequently no Mitred Bishops, to solemnize or order the affairs of that
spiritual Commonwealth in any complete form, no more then at this day we see
in France, a few places only by their Civil Wars tolerated: Specially in
Paris the chief City, they of the Reformed Religion cannot have any, but by
permission about two leagues from the City they are allowed their Divine
Service. The like, though not so openly, those ancient Christians were
tolerated to enjoy privately in their Houses, as in hugger-mugger at Rome, the
Capital Seat of that Empire. In process of time Constantine the Great
attained to the Empire, who for some causes, and principally because he would
be a nearer Neighbor to the Northern Nations, and also to the Persians, who
infested his State with sundry inrodes and hostile invasions, he was
constrained to remove the Imperial Seat to Constantinople, leaving the Bishop
of Rome some power at old Rome, whereby in his absence he might, as a Reverend
Prelate with his grave and Christianly exhortations retain the Citizens in
their Allegiance. In this sort these good Bishops continued loyal to their
Prince and subject to their Command and to their Successors in the Empire,
until the year of our Lord, 606. about which time after a great contention
for the Primacie betwixt them and the Patriarch of Constantinople, which then
was called New Rome, Phocas by the murder of his Lord and Master Maurice the
Emperor, having gotten the Sovereignty made Boniface the Third Supreme Bishop
above all other Bishops, and to that end sent forth a Decree, that all the
Churches in his Empire should obey him as their Sovereign Bishop, which
Jurisdiction he held only Naucler.
in Spiritull matters. After this the Emperor Iustine Justinians Son
reigned; who sent Longinus as his Deputy into Italy, to settle the confused
state thereof after the expulsion of the Goths, who altered the form of
Government in Rome, and abrogated the Senate and Consulary Dignities, which
till that time continued and carried with it a glimpse of the ancient Majesty
of the Roman State, and in steed of them appointed one Principal Governor,
whom he called an Exarch or Viceroy. This innovation ministered an occasion to
the Lumbards to enter into Italy. And then the City of Rome felt new
troubles. But at last, Theodoricus King of the Goths by the Popes Counsel
removed from Rome, and erected Rauenna to be the Head City of his Kingdom,
and there keeping his Royal Court gave room to the Popes to flourish in Rome.
Sometimes they took part with the Emperor, some other times with the
Lumbards, accommodating their fortunes warily to the strongest parties liking.
Thus they continued until the Emperor Heraclius his time, who being oppressed
by the Persians, Saracens, and Arabians under Mahomet, was so far from
looking into the affairs of Italy, and into the Popes aspiring designs, that
he found much ado to defend his nearer territories from those bloody Enemies
and Infidels. The Popes watchful to take advantage partly by their Religious
carriage among the common people, and partly by Rewards got themselves to be
equal in Power with the Kings of the Lumbards. And then Pope Gregory finding
himself reasonable strong, assaulted Ra^enna the chief City of Italy and
took it. But being presently expulsed out of it by Astulfus King of the
Lumbards, he was reseized thereof again by succors sent unto him from Pipin
King of France. After Astulfus death the Pope falling at ods with Desiderius
the son of Astulfus, he sent for aid to Charles the Great King Pipins
Son, who in proper person came into Italy, took Desiderius Prisoner,
augmented the Popes Dominion, and at his motion crowned himself Emperor of
the West at Rome. At which time he again to requite his good will enacted,
that from thenceforth the Bishop of Rome as Christ's Vicar should never more be
subject to any Earthly Potentate. And whereas before that time they were
themselves confirmed Bishops by the Emperor at Constantinople, now by this new
Emperor of the West, they began to be of themselves, and by their wits got the
Emperors to be invested at their hands. This Pope was Leo the third. And this
notable Accident and alteration fell out about 801. years after Christ. After
Leo his decease, Pope Paschale after the example of his Predecessor Leo; who
had wrested the nomination of the Pope from the people of Rome, and also the
confirmation from the Emperor at Constantinople, caused those Priests of the
City, who had elected him as the next neighbors to be enobled with a glorious
Title, and to be called Cardinals. Thus in less then two hundred years after
their Supremacy, obtained from Phocas in spiritual matters, the Popes aspired
to a Supremacy in temporal affairs, not so much for their hypocritical
holiness, as indeed for the Dignity and repute of the Place and Seat, their
City of Rome having been the Lady of the world, and the eyes of all men being
fixed on that Place, brought at length most Princes of Christendom, as Factions
grew betwixt them, to make profitable use of their friendship, either to
appease their Aduerfaries, or under color of their Excommunications and Saint
Peter's keys to oppress one another. Yea, and that which was most strange, as
Machiauell observes in his Florentine History, King John of England upon the
dissension between him and his Subjects yielded himself at the Popes dispose,
when he dur^^ not show his face in Rome, by reason of the Factions of the
Orsini and Columneses, and of the Gu^^ses and the Gibellines, but was feign to
translate the Papacy to A^inion in France. Whereby our Politicians may gather
this remarkable Rule, that things which seem to be and are not such in very
de^d, are more feared or regarded afar off, then at home by reason of the
uncertain knowledge, which strangers have of other men's states. Thus may all
good Christians note by what means the Church of Rome arrived to her
Greatness, and how like a Fox by little and little the Pope crept up to the
double Supremacy, which Saint Peter and the blessed Apostles never once
dreamed, nor would our Savior Christ by any means accept of the Temporal
Sword. For he utterly defied the Devil, when he motioned unto him of an
Earthly Kingdom. And when some purposed afterward to make him King, he
forsook that Coast. To conclude this point of the Popes Supremacy, Pope
Hildebrand, whom some call Gregory the seventh, after much contestation with
the Emperor and his Gibellines was the first which triumphed over him about
one thousand years after Christ. Of whom an ancient Historiographer thus
testifies: To this man only does the Latin Church ascribe, that she is free,
and plucked out of the Emperors hands. By his means she stands enriched with
so much wealth Onuph. in vit^ Greg. 7.
and Temporal Power. By his means she stands enriched with so much wealth
and temporal Power. By his means she got the Sovereignty over all
Emperors, Kings, and Christian Princes; whereas before she was kept under
like a base maid servant not only by the Emperor, but by any Prince assisted
by the Emperor.

To return now to the other cause, which augmented the Popes Greatness, that
he cannot err in matters of Faith, and therefore men are persuaded to believe
in his Church, as the only Catholic in the world, or indeed as if she were
equal unto Christ in Purity, and therefore partaker of our Creed. But the
Truth avouches otherwise, that all men are Liars and full of Sin, even from
the beginning. The most Righteous man sins every day in the week. The
Apostles in Christ's time contended for Dignity. After his death Peter and Paul
varied in opinion. Paul and Barnabas could not agree. Liberius Bishop of Rome
subscribed to the Arrian Heresy. Honorius Bishop of Rome was a Monothelite,
and condemned for the same Heresy by the General Council held at
Constantinople. Saint Augustine mentions of the Error maintained by Innocent
Bishop of Rome, that Innocents could not be saved, except they received the
Communion. And as Popes erred thus in matters of Faith: so did General
Councels themselves most grossly err. The Council of Arimine established the
Arria^ Heresy. The Council of Nice decreed the Souls of Angels and men had
bodily shapes. The Council of Ephes^s enacted Canons on the behalf of the
Nestorian Heresy. The consideration of which Errors, whereto all mortal
Creatures are subject while they soiourne in their earthly tabernacles, moved
holy Augustine to reject the authority of a General Aug co^t. Man lib. 3. cap
4.
Council, which Maximinus alleged against him. Neither ought I, said he, to
be tied to try my cause by the Council of Nice, or the Council of Arimine, to
better or prejudice one another cause, but to decide the Question to the Holy
Scriptures Testimony which are indifferent to both of us, and not partially
bound to either of us. And indeed there may be yielded a reason of Policy for
not standing to any Humane Positions. In a General meeting all men are not of
the same mind, nor of the same opinion but every particular man as he has his
voice, so he has his several will.

Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vinitur vno. Commonly where many meet, some
are self opinionated, some factious, others ouer-swayed by the most voices; so
that the Godliest being the fewest are abandoned; and then the Canons do pass
according to men's affections, and very oftentimes in favor of the Pope and his
Cardinals in hope of worldly preferments, dispensations, or for fear of
angring their Superiors in Authority, which the Holy Ghost observing, he
withdrawes his powerful presence from their Consciences, and leaves them puris
naturalibus, to their own natural endowments, and consequently to be seduced
by the world. Which of the ancient Fathers lived free from Errors? Iustine
Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertullian held the Millenarian Heresy. Saint Cyprian
erred in his judgment of Rebaptization.

Why then does the Church of Rome arrogate to her self such Holiness as to
condemn all other Churches, because they conform not themselves with her
Doctrine and Traditions? It is one thing to believe that there is a Catholic
Church, and another thing though blasphemous, to believe in the Catholic
Church. And now for the concluding of this present difference betwixt the
Church of Rome and the Ethiopian, whereof the Patriarch of Alexandria
challenges the Primacie, we do order that every Nation be allowed their
several Jurisdictions. As in like manner has heretofore been enacted by the
Council of Nice, in the year 325. Let the ancient custom be still in use,
that the Council. Nicen. Canon. 6.
Bishop of Alexandria have the Jurisdiction over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis,
even as the Bishop of Rome enjoys the like liberty in his Parts. And so let
the Churches of Antioch, and of other Provinces have their preheminences
maintained as informer times.

CHAP. XIIII.
Scotus the Master of Subtle Questions connents Sir Geffrey Chaucer for
calling the Pope Antichrist, and comparing the Romish Church to the griping
Griffon and the true Church to the tender Pelican.

SCotus that famous Schooleman for subtle qui^ks and quiddities having watched
for these two hundred and sixty years, opportunity to insinuate himself
into his Majesty's favor by some notable exploit, and ^ow seeing that the
Church of Rome began to totter, he repaired to the Delphick Hall upon the
sixteenth of June last 1626. Where after an eloquent Oration against the
Lutherans, he complained of Sir Geffrey Chaucer the English Poet, that he
about the latter end of King Edward the thirds Reign, had published in his
Plo^-mans Tale most abominable Doctrine, which infected not only diverse rare
wits of that Age, but likewise wrought so much alteration in succeeding times,
that John Wickliffe, John Husse, Jerome of Prague, Luther, and others now
stiling themselves Protestants, had quite abandoned their Mother Church of
Rome, which had flourished in stately Pomp and Pontificalibus for many hundred
of years before. And particularly he charged Chaucer for calling the Pope
Antichrist, and for comparing his Followers to the Griffon, and the pretended
Reformed Church to the Pelican.

Apollo willing now utterly to abolish those Patrons of Equivocations, lies,
and deceits, was glad of this occasion, which so fairly presented it self
unto him.

And to that end iudicially to proceed against them, he caused the chief
points of the said Ploughmans Tale to be openly read by the Pronotarie of the
Court, who with a loud voice thus repeated the same.

Even as I wandered in a wro,
In a Wood beside a wall,
Two Fowls saw I sit the.
The falser foul might him befall.
That one did plead on the Popes side
A Griffon of a grimme stature,
A Pelican withouten pride
To these Lollers laid his lure:
He mused his matter in measure:
To counsel Christ ever began he call.
The Griffon showed as sharp as fire.
But falsehood foul might him befall.
The Pelican began to preach
Both of mercy, and of meekness.
And said Christ so began us teach,
And ^eeke and merciful began bless.
The Evangelists do bear witness,
A Lamb he likeneth Christ over all,
In tokening that he meekest was:
Since pride was out of Heaven fall.
And so should every Christian be
Priests, Peter's Successors
Both humble and of low degree.
And ^sen none earthly honors,
Neither Crown nor curious couetours,
Nor Pillour, nor other proud Pall.
Nor ought to coffren up great treasures,
For falsehood foul might them befall,
Priests should for no cattle plead,
But chasten them in charitee.
Nor unto battle should men lead,
For enhaunsing of their own degree.
Not wilne sittings in high Sea,
Nor Soueraig^tie, in house, nor hall.
All worldly worship defy and flee.
For who so wills Highness foul shall fall.
Alas who may such Saints call,
That wil^eth weld earthly honor.
As low as Lucifer such shall fall,
In balefull blackness ybuilden their bower,
That eggeth the people to Error.
And makes them to them thrall:
To Christ I hold such one Traitor.
As low as Lucifer shall fall.
That wills to be Kings Peers,
And higher then the Emperor.
Some that were but poor Freeres,
Now wolden wax a Warrior.
God is not their Governor,
That holds no man his Permagall.
While Couetise is their Counselor,
All such falsehood mo^ght need fall.
With Pride they punish the poor,
And some they sustain with sale,
Of holy Church making a Wh^^re.
And glut their bellies with Wine and Ale,
With Money they fill many a male:
And chaffren Churches when they fall,
And tellen the people a lewd tale.
Such false faitours foul them befall.
And Mitres more then one or two,
Y perled as the Queens head.
A staff of Gold and pirrie too,
As heavy as it were made of lead:
With Cloth of Gold both new and red:
With glitter and Gold, as green as gall.
By doom they damn men to dead.
All such faitours foul them befall.
And Christ's people proudly curse
With broad Book and braying Bell.
To put pennies in their purse,
They will sell both Heaven and Hell.
And in their sentence thou will dwell:
They willen guess in their gay hall.
And though the sooth thou of them tell,
In great cursings shall thou fall.
Christ's Ministers clepen they been,
And rulen all in robbery;
But Antichrist they seruen clean.
Attired all in Tyranny:
Witness of John's Prophecy,
That Anticrist is their Admiral,
Tiffelers attired in Treachery.
All such faitours foul them fall.
Who says that some of them may sin,
He shall be doomed to be dead.
Some of them would gladly win,
Against that which God forbad.
All Holy they clepen their Head,
That of their Rule is Regal.
Alas, that ever they eaten bread,
For all such falsehood will foul fall.
Their Head loves all Honor,
And to be worshipped in word and deed.
Kings must to him kneel and cour,
To the Apostles which Christ forbad.
To Popes Hests, such taken more heed,
Then to keep Christ's Commandment.
Of Gold and Silver be their weed,
Who hold him whole Omnipotent.
He ordains by his Ordinance
To Parish Priests a power.
To another a greater advance.
A greater point to his mystery.
But for he is Highest in Earth here,
To him reserueth he many a point.
But to Christ, that has no Peer,
Reserueth he neither rib nor joint.
So seems He above all,
And Christ above him nothing,
When he sits in his stall,
Damneth and saves, as him think.
Such pride before God does stink.
An Angel bad John to him not kneel,
But only to God do his bowing.
Such willers of worship must needs fall.
There was more mercy in Maximian,
And in Nero, which never was good,
Then is now in some of them,
When he has on his furred Hood,
They follow Christ, which shead his blood,
To Heaven, as Bucket to the wall.
Such wretches be worse then wood,
And all such faitours foul them fall.
They maken Parsons for the penny,
And of Canons their Cardinals.
And Y scarce amongst them all is any,
That has not glozed the Gospel false.
For Christ did never make Cathedrals
Nor yet with him was Cardinal
With a Red Hat, as vsen Minstrels:
But falsehood foul might it befall.
That say that Peter had the Key
Of Heaven and Hell to have and hold.
I trow Peter took no Money
For any men's Sins, which he sold.
Such Successors be too bold,
In winning all their wit they wrall.
Their Conscience is waxen cold,
And all such faitours foul them fall.
Peter was never so great a fool,
To leave his Key with such a Lorrell,
Or to take such a cursed tool:
He was advised nothing well.
I trow they have the Key of Hell,
Their Master is of that place Marshall.
For there they dresse^ them to dwell,
And with false Lucifer there to fall.
Christ had twelve Apostles here;
Now, say they, there may be but one
That may not err in no manner.
Who loves not this be lost each one.
Peter erred: so did not John:
Why then is he clept the principal?
Christ clept him Peter; but him self the Stone,
All false faitours foul them befall.
What is Antichrist to say?
But even Christ's Adversary?
Such has now been many a day,
To Christ's bidding full contrary,
That from the Truth clean vary.
Out of the way they been quite wend,
And Christ's people untruly carry.
God of his pity it amend.
They live contrary to Christ's life,
In high pride against meekness.
Against patience they vsen strife,
And anger against sobern^sse,
Against wisdom wilfulness.
To Christ's words they little tend,
Against measure outragiousnesse.
But when God will it may amend.
A token of Antichrists they be;
His charactes now been wide yknow.
Received to preach shall no man be
Without token of him I trow.
Each Christen Priest to preaching ow,
From God above to them been send
The Word, to all folk for to show,
Sinful man their sins to amend.
Christ sent the poor for to preach,
The Royal Rich he did not so.
Now dare no poor the people teach,
For Antichrist is all their Foe.
Among the people he must go,
Whom he has bid; But such suspend,
Some has he hent, and thinks yet mo.
But all this God may well amend.
The Emperor gave the Pope sometime
So high Lordship him about;
That at the last the seely kime
The proud Pope did pull him out.
So of this Realm is in great doubt
But, Lords beware, and them defend,
For now these folk be wondrous stout.
The King and Lords now this amend,
Antichrist they seruen all:
Who I pray you can say nay?
With Antichrist such shall fall.
They fellow him in deed and fay,
They seruen him in rich array:
To serve Christ they falsely feign.
Why? at the dreadful doomes-day
Shall they not fellow him to pain?
Popes, Bishops, and Cardinals,
Chanons, Parsons, and Vicar
In Gods Service I trow been false,
That Sacraments selle^ here;
And been as proud as Lucifere.
Each man look whether that I lie.
Who so speaks against their power
It shall be holden Heresy.
The Griffon said, th^^ can no good
Thou never camst of Gentle kind
Either I trow thou waxest wood,
Or else thou have lost thy mind.
And the Pope were purely poor,
Needy and nothing he had:
He should be driven from door to door,
The wicked of him would not be dread:
Of such a Head men would be sad.
If the Pope and Prelates would
So beg, and bid, bow, and borrow:
Holy Church should stand full cold,
Her servants sit, and sup sorrow.
The Pelican cast a huge cry,
And said: Alas, why say thou so?
Christ is our Head, that sits on high.
Heads ought we not for to have m^,
We be his members both also.
And Father he taught us to call him als,
Masters to be called defended he tho.
All other Masters be wicked and false,
That do take maistry in his name
Ghostly, all for earthly good.
Kings and Lords should Lordships ha^^,
And rule the people with mild mood
Christ, for us that shead his blo^d,
Bad his Priests no Mastership have,
Nor to carke for cloth, or for food.
From every mischief he would them save.
Their Clothing should be Righteousness,
Their Treasure pure life should be.
Charity should be their Riches:
Their Lordship should be unity.
Hope in God their Honesty:
Their vessel clean Conscience.
Poor in spirit, and Humility
Should be Holy Churches defense.
The Griffon said, thou shall abie,
Thou shall be burnt in balefull fire;
And all thy Sect I shall destry.
You shall be hanged by the swire.
I Will cause you soon to hang and draw.
Who gives you leave for to preach:
Or thus to speak against Gods Law?
And the people thus false to teach?
Thou shall be cursed with Book and Bell,
And disseuer'd from Holy Church,
And clean ydamned into Hell,
Otherwise but you will work.
The Pelican said, I do not dread.
Your Cursing is of little value;
Of God I hope to have my meed,
For it is falsehood, which you show.
For you been out of Charity,
And would do vengeance, as did Nero.
To suffer I will ready be,
I dread not that, what thou can do.
CHAP. XV.
Sir Geffrey Chaucer being pro^oked by Scotus to defend his Cause, proves the
Pope to be the great and universal Antichrist prophesied in the Scriptures.

AFter that the Pronotarie had read that Part of the Plowmans Tale, which Sir
Geffrey Chaucer had published against the Pope and the Romish Church he was
commanded by Apollo to defend his Doctrine. Sir Geffrey Chaucer obeyed, and
framed this extemporary Oration: Most high and redoubted Emperor, I am glad
that Scotus has provoked me this day to open that Secret; which by the craft
of our Arch sorcerer of the Christian Church has been concealed from the
vulgars knowledge until this fullness of Time, which the Holy Ghost has
appointed for his Discovery. The Waldenses, Albigienses, and many others long
before my time have done their endeavors in other Countries to reveal him: but
here in England Abbot Ioachim excepted, who in K. Rich. the firsts days
proclaimed the Pope Antichrist, no man durst for fear of his formidable
Tyranny disclose what they knew in their Consciences to be apparently true.
This Illumination and Gift of discerning Spirits was indeed kept from the
Common people, by that execrable Policy of withholding the Bible from our
English translation, so that these two Witnesses, which lay martyred and yet
unburied in the streets of Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, could not perform
their proper offices. Now that it has pleased God to remove that palpable
Darkness, they begin to revive and to stand upon their feet to the amazement
of the Carnal Beholders. By their sacred motion the eyes of my understanding
are likewise opened: and I doubt not but all your Majesty's Court shall know
out of my mouth this day, that the Pope and none but he is that Antichrist,
which was so long ago prophesied to come and seduce the Christian Church with
lies, Equivocations, and the wonders of Satan. For the manifestation of which
damnable practices, inspire my heart, O fiery Comforter; Inflame my mind with
true Zeal, the seal of thy sacred Spirit, that I may soar up, like an Eagle,
to the Sun of thy Grace with feruencie founded on Divine Discretion, for
Feruencie is but foolish fury without Divine Discretion.

The first mark of Antichrist I gather from our Savior himself, who
prophefied, many shall come Matthew. cap. 24.
in my name, and shall say, I am Christ, under this Title the Pope does most
blasphemously co^er his Temporal Power. For what signifies the word Christ but
Anointed? Insomuch, that whenever any of his Clergy has offended, the
Temporal sword must not punish them; but for their protection his Holiness
wardeth them with that saying of the Prophet David, Touch not mine Anointed:
Meddle not Psalm 105.
with my Christ's. Though they be taken fighting in the Field with Armor on
their backs, he terms them his Sons, the Conqueror must leave them to depart
in peace. Which made a Prince sometime to return him this Answer: I have sent
your Holiness your Sons Coat, the Armor, in which I found your Bishop
fighting, when I took him Prisoner. And if you be as quick-sighted as Jacob,
let me know, whether this be your Joseph's Coat? until King Edward the first
his time, Clergy men were the Lawyers in England, as an Ancient Writer
testified: Nullus Clericus nisi Causidicus. They sat as supreme Judges in
Temporal Causes. But when their King should chastize them for their briberies
and extortions, then they shrouded themselves under the Spiritual keys, and
appealing to the Pope they freed themselves from all Accusations. Thus did
Errors play upon the pre-eminence of Kings, until they were beaten out from
their Law, and at the last from their chiefest holds by the valor of King
Henry the Eight; and well worthy, seeing that they presumed to make use of the
name of Christ to cloak their falsehoods and lewd tricks.

The second Mark of Antichrist I collect out of Saint Paul, that in the last
days men should be highminded, 2. Tim. cap 3.
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but
denying the power thereof. All these are verified in the Pope and his Clergy
He exalts himself above Emperors and Kings, comparing himself to the
Sun, and them to the Moon and lesser stars. Yea, he ranketh his Courtly
Cardinals with Kings. Which ambition moved Cardinal Wolsey to place himself
above his King: Ego and Rex meus.

What greater pleasure can worldly men enjoy more then the Pope and his
Hierarchy do? They have a large command of Cities, and huge Territories.
Besides Rome, Romania, Bolonia, Ferrara, Auinion, the Pope is like to possess
very shortly the Duchy of Vrbin. Nor does his Ambition cease in these
pleasant places, many other Episcopal Seats out of Italy does he dispose
of. In Humility far from Christ's life, yet pretending sanctimonie, and a
virtuous life, but denying the effects thereof, as his tolleration of the Jews
and Stews, his serving of Idols, his unlawful Dispensations, and monstrous
Pardons do plainly demonstrate.

The third mark of Antichrist is derived from another place of Saint Paul, Now
the spirit speaks evidently, that some should fall from the Faith, giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in
hypocrifie, forbidding Marriage and Meats. 2. Tim, cap. 4.


Now what Church is the same which forbids Marriage and the eating of flesh
at prefixed times? Is it not the Romish? The Greek Church, whom for Antiquity
none can deny but they stand parraleld and equal with the Roman, do prohibit
no such things. Their Clergy, as the Abissines in Aethiopia have always
continued marriage. Therefore let this Mark serve for one to convince the Pope
of the Doctrine of Devils, as Saint Paul calls it. And for their prohibition of
meats, who do insist more strongly then the Pope and his Clergy? To eat
Flesh upon some days is a mortal sin, unless it be with their special
dispensation, as the Castilians have bought out their freedom upon some
forbidden days.

To abstain from Flesh they account it meritorious, and yet to eat Fish,
Caueare, Almonds, Figs, and other lustful viands they profess it lawful.

Our Savior notwithstanding warrants us to eat Flesh, saying, that which
goes into the mouth defiles not a man. And this he proves by a forcible
reason: because that whatsoever enters into Matthew. cap. 15.
the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out.

I condemn not the true use of Fasting with bread and water, in them, who
find their bodies carnally bent, or so full of gross humors, that they
breathe up into their heads, like cloudie and foggie vapors, to eclipse and
darken their understanding, wills, and memories, those noble Organs of the
Soul, if they cannot otherwise without such mortification subdue their fleshly
longing desires, and fall to fervent Prayers. Likewise I commend Fasting to all
the unmarried and lazy Persons, who have lived without much exercise, faring
well and lying in downie beds. Such indeed have reason above others to embrace
Abstinence as a Jewel, least their Gluttonic with ease should fill their
veins with too much blood, least their spleen grow to a bigger proportion
then is fitting, least through oppilations and obstructions, fevers, the small
pox, the plurisie, the green sickness, the consumption, and chefly the
Scuruie, that unsuspected Guest, and hardly discerned Traitouresse at the first
approach to the wisest Physician, do seize upon them as their slaves, never to
be redeemed.

But to make it a point of Religion, and to persuade men, that Fasting can
satisfy Gods justice, or appease his wrath justly conceived against us for
sin, is the Doctrine of Devils, and a mark of Antichrist. To the clean all
things are clean, as the Apostle said. And the Elders of the Church ought Tit.
cap. 1.
not to clog and burden the consciences of their younger brethren, with such
yokes of men's inventions and Traditions, as Touch not, taste not, handle not,
which as Saint Paul again says, be things of no value, since they belong to
the filling of the Flesh. For it is the soul and not the Flesh, which good
Colos. cap. 2.
Christians ought to keep pure and undefiled. Which moved that ancient Father
Tertullian, who lived Tertul. contra Psych. cap. 2.
within less then two hundred years after Christ to auerre: that the Apostles
imposed no burden of set and solemn Fasting, but left it to our liberty, as
every man saw his occasion.

The fourth mark of Antichrist is manifested that he must be a mystery, the
mystery of Iniquity; he must sit in the Temple of God. For the expounding 2
These. cap. 2
of which place Saint Chrysostom delivers a notable Commentary: Antichrist
says be, being seated in the Church, and possessing the chiefest places of
the Church, is to hold all that in show, which the Chr^^^in Oper. imper^^n
Matthew. 49:
true Church of Christ holds in truth, that is, he shall have Churches,
Scriptures, Bishops, Priests, Baptism, and the Communion, etc. He is a
mystery, that is close and hidden, until the Prophecy be winded to the
bottom. For as Saint Paul wrote, before the time of his reueali^g must come,
their must needs fall out a departure from the Faith, and then that Man of
Sin should be known, which had abused the world with lying signs and
deceits.

The fist mark is expressed out of the Revelation of Saint John, where
Antichrist is termed the Where of Babylon, the Beast, the false Prophet, all
signifying the same, having his power from the Spiritual Dragon, which fought
with Michael and his Angels. By the name of Whore we must note, that none is
called by that name, but one which had been once an honest woman. The Church
of Rome was once pure, but afterward by pride and ambition grew to be impure,
as now we see her domineering Head sitting in the great City on the seven
Hills, adored above all, which is called God. As on the Triumphall Arch
engraven in Lions 1555. was proclaimed:

Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deu^.
By thy Tongues mighty Oracle
The World thou gouern'st all.
On Earth thee without obstacle
Of right a God we call.
The sixth mark of Antichrist is taken out of Saint Paul, that he began
mystically to work in his time: But that which then withheld and let his
revealing, did let and hinder until the splendor and glory thereof, that is,
the Maiestic of the Roman Empire was taken out of the way, which afterward in
fullness of time came to pass, when the Imperial Seat was translated from Old
Rome to New Rome, which Constantine called after his own name Constantinople.
In Saint Paul's time he o^ept on his feet and hands like an Infant, about three
hundred years after he grew to his stripling age. But about the year 666.
which is the number assigned in the Re^elation, he was in his strength, and
ever since until my time he showed himself in his own colors, a mighty
Potentate, with a Triple Crown and under color of Saint Peter's keys he
arrogates to himself a higher Power then Nabuchadonozor, the Caesar's, or the
great Turk ever presumed to have here on Earth. As long as the Roman Emperors
lived in the great City, the Bishops stood inawe and followed their books,
not carking for the vanities of the world. But when the Place by the Emperors
absence became an habitation for his Holiness, then that Bar which withheld
his discovery, was also taken out of the way, so that now all men of Judgment
may clearly see the mystery of I^iquitie manifestly discovered.

The seventh mark of Antichrist is the great wonder and marvel, which Saint
John had, when Apoc. cap. 17.
he saw this unlooked for alteration, which he would not have confessed, if in
his vision he had beheld an Heathen Antichrist or any Infidel Tyrants. For he
had sufficient trial of their Tyrannies. But when he saw in the Temple of God
a Reverend Prelate attired in Purple and Scarlet with Imperial Ornaments and
Princely Authority, which Christ forewarned his Apostles to take heed of, he
could not choose but wonder.

The eight mark of the Antichrist is, that his Sect shall magnify him with
one consent and with one mind. In this they glory, and in all their
communications you shall hear them brag of Catholic Antiquity, and of the
Popes succession, never heeding Saint Paul's prophecy, that before the
discovery of Antichrist, a general defection of the Faith was necessarily to
come, nor yet giving credit to Saint John, that the Church was to fly into a
Desert. This very ostentasion passed of the Jews that they crucified the Lord
of life, and persecuted the Apostles as the Founders of a new Religion. Upon
this did the Roman Idolators insist, and by Antiquity defended their idle
Opinions.

The ninth mark of Antichrist is apparently deciphered by his vaunting of
Miracles, a token which our Savior delivers, that there should arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, which should do great wonders and signs, so that
if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect, if it were possible.
Matthew. cap. 24.
The like admonition Saint Paul gives us, that in the Church under Antichrist,
there should be working of Sat^^n with all Power, Signs, and lying 2. These.
cap. 2. Apoc. cap. 16.
wonders. The like does Saint John prophecy of Spirits of Devils working
wonders. In the Primitive Church, when the Gospel was settled, Miracles ceased.
Which made Saint Chrysostom to answer their curiosity, which looked for such
rare signs in this wise: There be some, says he, that ask why men now ada^es
do not work Miracles, as the Apostles did? If thou beleeuest Christ, as thou
ought, thou have no need of Miracles, for these were given Chrysostom. in Johan.
cap. 2.
to unbelievers, and not to believers. Sometimes God permits men with iugling
tricks and legerdemaine or by the Devils devises to deceive them, either to
^rie the soundness of their Faith, or to confirm them in their Errors. As
heretofore he suffered the Israelites to be deluded with Baals Priests and the
Golden Calfe, who assuredly produced the like Miracles, as the Jesuits boast
of.

The tenth mark of Antichrist, whom Saint John calls the Wh^re of Babylon, the
mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth, is that she shall be drunken
with the blood of the Saints and the Martyrs of Christ Jesus. Of whom may this
be more significantly spoken, then of the Pope? How many thousands have been
murdered in France, in the Low Countries, and other places of Christendom by
his procurement, even those which acknowledge Christ Ies^^ for their only
Mediator with the Father, which confess the everliving God in Unity and
Trinity, has he caused to be burnt for Heretics, or made to row as slaves
in Spaines Galleys. O bloody Tyranny! O poisonous Imposture! which under the
color of the Catholic Faith does shed the blood of Innocents, like
merciless H^r^d, not sticking to wound Christ anew through his servants sides!

CHAP. XVI.
Apolloes judgment of Chau^ers Apology concluding that the Pope is the great
A^tichrist.

AFter that Sir Geffrey Chaucer had ended his speech, Apollo gave his
definitive sentence in this wise: Even as all the lesser sicknesses in man's
body does grow and descend into the Plague, when contagion reigns: And as by
reason of oppilations, the shutting up of the spirits passages, and their want
of transpiration through the veins, all other inferior diseases fall into the
miserable Se^r^y, and principally for want of the Suns presence in the
winter: So for want of the Holy Spirits illumination caused through the
corruptions of men's depraved wills, by little and little the Antichrist
increased, and grew as it were with an inundation into one great Sea, the
Romish Sea. Even as Mahomet composed his Alcoran of many Sects, so the Romish
Religion by the policy of the Pope, is stuffed and stored with many Heresies,
which all meeting together in his ambitious spirit, and transferred to his
successors, do make him that great Antichrist. From Elixay the Heretic he
borrowed his Doctrine of celebrating Divine service in an unknown language. For
such was his Heresy. From Montan^s ^pipb Here Is. 14 Euse^. l 5. c. 18. Aug.
Here Is. 71.
the Heretic he learned to prescribe his rules of Fasts. For he first limited
times of Fasting. From the Collyridians he was inspired to worship the Virgin
Marie: From the Caianes to invoke on Angels From the Carpocratians to adore
the Image of lesus and Saint Paul. From the Manichees and the Aebionites he got
that damnable precept, to prohibit Marriage unto the Clergy.

Even as all true Christians have a relation unto Christ their Head, being
through Faith his ingraffed members, like as also the Patriarchs and Prophets
until Christ, had a dependence upon that great, Prophet, whom God promised to
raise up like unto Aloses: so on the other side all the lesser Heretics
depend upon Antichrist, through whose lying mouth they oppose the Truth and the
Apostles Humility: And as Machiauellian members they join with one consent to
advance his Maiesticall power, though many of them in their consciences are
fully persuaded, that such state and pomp in a Clergy man, cannot but
displease the Author of Humility, who pronounced them blessed, which are poor
in spirit.

CHAP. XVII.
Apolloes sentence promulgated for the Impurity of the Church Militant.

D. Whitgift Arch bishop of Canterbury complains against Cartwright, Brown,
and other Puritan Separists, for inuaighing against their Superiors.

Apollo condemns the Sect, exhorting them to unity and to return to the bosom
of their Mother Church.

AFter Apollo had condemned the Arch-hereticks of the Christian Church, he
caused that saying of that Ancient Father to be retorted against the like
erroneous seducers: Ecclesia non di^ post Apostolorum tempora mansit virgo.
That the Church Eusebius.
after the Apostles time continued not long a Virgin. And this his Majesty did
to the end all mouths should be stopped, which arrogate to themselves
extraordinary Holiness, as the Popes do, who as his Courtly Cardinals
affirm, cannot err; or which ascribe to themselves a degree of greater
purity, in calling and conversation then others of their Brethren in Christ,
forgetting his never failing prophecy: All men are liers. Another cause, why
his Majesty advised his Religious Christians to remember that saying, was to
the end that they should not become amazed nor troubled, when any hot-spurs and
busy braind people do maintain new opinions differing from the old; but
rather to call into their memories* that many false Christ's, many fraudulent
Sects must from time to time spring up in the Church like taxes among the good
seed, to show likewise that no Creatures can be long pure without some spots
or taint, and that God alone, who created them, is only pure.

No sooner had Apollo ended these reasons for the Churches Impuritie, but the
grave and learned Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury informed his Majesty,
that one Cartwright, Brown, and others stiling themselves Puritans,
Precisians, and holy ly Separists, inueighed against him and his fellow Bishops
with Libels and defamations, worse then O^id against Ibis, or any woman scold
put in a Cuckinstoole; because he gave order in his visitations to present
refractaries and stubborn minded persons, disobedient to Authority, and
kicking against things indifferent, triuiall, and indeed very bables in respect
of Faith, Humility, Charity, and Divine Gifts, which they had now more cause
to pray for, then to spend their precious times in railing and withstanding
those outward things, tending only to distinguish the Leuits from the Temporal
Tribes, to the view of the outward man, whose fancy must be stirred by
outward objects as well as inward.

Apollo at the report of these selfe-opinions like to break into a schismatic
combustion, became mightily perplexed. Yet like himself recollecting his
spiritual tempers, and resuming his wonted Majesty, he said to Cartwright,
Brown, and the rest of the P^rit^^icall Sect: How long will you persist by
your peenish positions to minister scandal unto your Christian Corporation? I
have long since heard of your rash and turbulent oppositions against your
Churches Canons. But I hoped, that the calm dew, which awaites on the ^iluer
and staid age of Maturitie, had by this time cooled your over fervent humors,
and ^amed your winching tricks. Saint Paul became a Jew among the Jews, a
Gentile among the Gentiles in his outward and ceremonious habits. The like the
subtle Jesuits, who take upon them to be Puritan Papists have lately
imitated him like Apes, in disguizing themselves, not like ruffians, as
sometimes they do in England, but in the Priestly attires of the Chinensian
Bunzies, because they might either convert souls in China, or in default of
such meritorious works search into the nature of their State affairs, because
they would not be said to come home empty. But you strive not altogether for
apparel; you would have an equality, as in Sir Thomas Moore Eutopia of
Degrees and Livings, under pretext of the Apostles paritie, that none of them
should be greater then the other, every one would be a Pope in his Parish. But
I must put you in mind that this paritie and good order ceased at the Apostles
death. They were endued with equal authority to work Miracles, to convert
unbelievers, to lay the foundation of the Churches. After their death, Miracles
ceased, which were but to confirm the Evangelical Doctrine, to be heavenly
and not humane. And then men having no such extraordinary callings, apparent
Gifts of discerning Spirits no visible and sudden illumination of the Holy
Ghost, they returned in worldly businesses to their old bl^s, and left off
their rare and Angelical Communion, in having goods in common, in living by
their handie works, and in their mutual Charity.

Yet not withstanding, even in the Apostles time, Bishops, Deacons, and Elders
began to bear sway above others, being appointed to those offices, by
impositions, of hands and benedictions of their Elders, as also by the
suffrages of the Parochians themselves. Their charge was to keep good order to
repress the proud young people, to rebuke sin, and to suppress the fiery
comm^tions of unexperienced persons, who breaking the bonds of Unity might
broach innouations. Therefore obey your Elders, wherein your mother Church has
ordained Tutors over you, seek not to crucify your Savior again, by
seperating your selves from the Communion of your fellow members: for in so
doing, you divide his body into parcels, who ought to be respected entirely
one, and identified in your souls, without the least rent or scandal. Submit
your bodies in civil policy, and in matters indifferent, Apocryphal, or
Temporal to the Gods of the Earth. Offer up your Souls unto God by Faith as
an holy Priesthood, and a spiritual sacrifice 1. Pet, cap. 2.
in Christ Jesus. And for your Purity, seeing that Peter confessed himself
for all his Apostleship to be chief among Sinners, usurp not the name of a
Puritan. For the Angels are feign to become veiled before the Majesty of God,
who alone is p^re and undefiled. Let the worm of Conscience satisfy your
ouer-weening imaginations, that all your (...) consiste rather in the (...) of
your Sins by the spiritual apprehension of, Christ crucified, then in the
Purity of any vertue^ whatsoever.

CHAP. XVIII.
The memorable Synod of Dort accuses Arminius before Apollo, for broaching out
of new Opinions in the Church to trouble the brains of the weaker.

Apollo confutes Arminius, and shows what a sober minded Christian ought to
conceive of deep Mysteries.

Arminius is commanded to recant.

ABout a month after that Apollo had established concord and unity in the
hearts of soberminded Christians, when all the members of the Church Militant
thought that they were restored again to the earthly paradise, and there
should sit ouery man under his vine and Fig Trees, as in the Golden Age of
Peace, upon wednesday in the Easter week, 1626. the famous Synod of Dort,
exhibited the names of sundry persons, who relying on Arminius his idolized
Patronage for some new paradoxes in Divinity, had refused upon Easter day to
communicate with them and others their fellow Christians. Apollo asked Arminius
what moved him to breed and hatch new conceits, and those to scatter abroad for
the offending of tender consciences. Arminius answered, that the Opinion which
he maintained, was not new, but grounded on the Scriptures. And he hoped that
all Positions which did not diameter wise and flatly oppugn the Word of God,
might still be held and questioned if for no other end, then for the trial and
exercising of one another wits, which might like Iron, wax rustie without
some use or furbushing. And what might your quaint Question be, replied
Apollo, which tends now at this sacred time to refine wits, when men should
join together in commemoration of the Lords last Supper, to sanctify and
purify their humane wills? Most dread Sovereign, said Arminius, It is not
unknown unto your blessed Majesty, how many Communicants do yearly resort
unto the Lords Table, more fit to be whipped at a Carts tail, or to be thrust
into the Spanish inquisition, then to keep company with regenerated persons
at the celebration of the holy Sacrifice, which whosoever presumes to touch
unworthily being unprepared, eats his own Damnation, or in the mildest
censure he deserves to be made an ugly Leper with King Vzziah. The zealous
consideration of this imminent danger, which might ensue to my sick Brethren,
moved me to take care for their Souls health, and to require them to try
their Spirits, whether they were in the state of Grace or back-sliders? whether
they feit an alternate motion, not often subject to alteration in the bottom
of their hearts, pricking them forwards to do good works. If they did, I told
them that the Spirit of God cooperating with those sweet motions of theirs,
would frame an harmonious symphonie in their Souls, which so contuned and
continued would likewise sympathize with Heavenly Mysteries. But if they found
their wills depraved, led with the least concupiscence, they should not
adventure like Judas to come near their Savior, or partake in the Eucharist
at this Feast of Easter. Now because I catechized them in this manner, adding
further for their greater terror from sin, and that they might repent in
time, that though they were elected and justified by Grace, according to the
purpose of God, yet they might totally and finally fall, unless their own
free will did work with the will and Grace of the fiery Comforter.

Apollo hearing this protestation of Arminius told him, that he was like a
skittish Cow, which gives a good pailefull of milk, and afterward flings it
down with her foot. And moreover adjoined this paraneticall counsel, I liked
very well of your whole narration, until you arrived at the period of your
Apology. If you did it in terrorem tantum, to scare them from sin, and to
prepare their minds to Repentance, you showed your self a cunning Merchant in
the spiritual Trade, or rather a politic Statesman; both which agree not
with Christ's candor, with the Holy Spirits ingenuitie. Plain dealing is ever
best in matters of Conscience. For whatsoever proceeds not from Faith, is
Sin. You did very ill thus to offend the weak constitution of their brains,
who without such terrors might walk on simply and sincerely toward the Feast
of the Lamb. But this is not the first Easter, which you have disturbed. For
the common voice goes, that your Sect under your name have alienated one
Neighbors love from the other, and done more harm in the Low Countries, then
all their wars with Spain. Which inconvenience Affricke sometimes felt, as
an ancient Writer testified, plus incommodi capiebat Africa ex Secta Arriana,
qua insecti erant Vandali, quam ab auaritia corundem, vel crudelitate ijs
innata, Afric received greater hurt from the Arrian Sect, wherewith the
Vandals were infected, then by their griping covetousness, or cruelty, though
the same were natural unto them.

In alleging that man's free will must aid and cooperate with the Grace of
God, you cannot but ascribe glory unto flesh and blood, which is frail and
honor unto Nature, which the Serpent wounded with a mortal sting. For what is
Free will but an Elective power to deliberate and determine what it pleases.
In natural things, as to eat and drink, to sit or walk, to sing or play, I
allow of such a Free will in humane affections. But in heavenly matters it is
sacrilege worse then Prometheus his flealth, whom the Poets fabled feloniously
to convey away some of Jupiters fire. It is indeed traitorous impiety to rob
God of his Prerogative. Grace is only his to confer on his vessel of honor
unto men shame only belongs, as the Prophet protested. And as another
confirms of more ancient writ: The way of man is not in himself, neither
Ier^^^. cap. 6.
is it man to walk and to direct his steps, meaning any power to make use of
in Godly Actions. Man planteth, Apollo waters, but when all comes to the
vpshot, it is God which gives the increase, as Saint Paul confesses. How dare
ye, O bewitched Arminians, attribute the least glory to a putrifide carcass?
How dare ye avouch that a man being called and justified according to Gods
purpose, which never changes, may fall away from Grace, wholly and finally? To
bring in a Decree respectively argues you are better seen in Tautologie then
in Theology, in Sophistry then in the Doctrine of Predestination. This is to
eclipse Gods Sunshine of Grace, and to set up Phacton, to pull down his
power and to set a beggar a horseback. For in affording such excellency to a
man, you must needs ascribe somewhat to his worth and merit, which can be no
other then Damnation.

Though man has Faith, Love and Charity, he cannot say, that God made choice
of him for one of his Elect number, because he foresaw that man was able to
take hold of these Divine Gifts, for these are not the causes but the effects
of his calling, but only because of his own absolute pleasure, it seemed good
unto his wisdom to choose him without any such cause of merit, foreseen in
man, though afterward, when he had called him, he bestowed upon him these
Heavenly gifts at the intercession of his Son, who was to be incarnate for
man's salvation. By this means and for this cause were sinful men elected,
called, justified, and glorified before the world began, even for his own
honor and for our Redeemers sake, by whom and in whom we were to be
incorporated and ingraffed as bastardslips quite salne from the state of
innocence by Adams succeeding fall, which his all-seeing Majesty saw as in a
lively Map already come to pass, as afterward Adam and his whole Progeny
sensibly perceived. And there by the way I signify unto you, O heedlesse
Arm^nians, that your too much regard of natural causes and effects, your
humane calculating and intentive computation of Time, according to the errors
of the outward man, has been the prime cause of this absurdity. For God
sees not as man sees. His foresight is eternal, that ^. Sam. cap. 16.
is, always present. There is no Time past nor future tense declined by his
everlasting Grammar; though mortal race in respect of their limited capacities
use this manner of calculation, A thousand years in his fight are but as
yesterday: He is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and last, uncircumcised,
Psalm. 90.
infinite, and without end. So that he which searches, and diueth
ouercuriously into this depth of Predestination, he may fall into the Gulf of
Scilla by seeking to avoid the danger of Charybdis.

Therefore the safest way for man is with Saint Paul, to rejoice in his
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in him. His Grace is sufficient
for him, for his power is made perfect through man's weakness. Let not your
eyes gaze too long upon the Suns beams, lest they become dazeled or blinded
with the glorious Majesty thereof. Content your selves with such nourishment
as serves fittest for your tender constitutions, and for the reach of your
humane capacities. I say, as the Apostle said, through the grace that is given
unto me, I say to every one that is among you, that no man presume to
understand Romans cap. 12.
above that, which is meet to be understood; but that he understand according
to Sobri^tie. Leave off your curious inquisitions, and do your best endeauours
to let the world know that you are of Gods elected number by your Faith, Love,
Charity, and Humility.

And for you, Arminius, we take it in ill part, that you without acquainting
us with your theoricall Project, would diuulge abroad your Theses and Problemes
to confound the Intelligence of your younger brethren. How much better and safer
had it been for you to smother your profound doubts then to work confusion by
the publishing of them, unless you thought by this improuident dispersing of
the notions of your brain, to go beyond Erostratus, who fired Dianaes Temple
at Ephesus, for no other intent, then to be spoken of in after ages to have
done some Act worthy to be recorded in the Chronicles; as likewise Guy Faukes
attempted in England to blow up the Parliament house. We do now order, that
you for these presumptions do openly before our Congregation, to be held at
Libethrum, upon the M^nday following after Trinity Sunday next, make a full
recantation of your scrupulous Paradoxe, and there penitently confess that God
called and elected sinful man out of his own free, secret, and unquestionable
pleasure, without having any respect at all to ma^s ensuing merit, or free
will, but only to his own attribute of Mercy to the absolute power which his
Deity has over the workmanship of his hands, as the Potter over his vessels,
and to the righteousness of his Son, the undefiled Lamb, which redeemed
Sinners out of the Devils jaws. And also you shall here protest, that all men
whatsoever, though they were as just as Henoch, as faithful as Abraham, as
meck as Moses, as zealous as Phinehes, as patient as lob, as penitent as David,
as constant as Elias, as wise as Daniel, as godly as Saint John Baptist, who
wasmore then a Prophet; yet all these notwithstanding were predestined to be
saved, not for any deserving virtues, which God foresaw in their own humane
wills, able to justify them, but because they were clothed with their Redeemers
merits, and through Faith and Gods mercy from the beginning of the world,
promised and prophesied by him, ingraffed into this mystical Head, who bruised
that of the Serpents, and consequently repaired the breach between the Angels
and them, healing also the leprosy of Sin, derived from Adams blood into all
his Posterity, for in him all men lived, and from him all men are equally
descended. Besides, you shall acknowledge, that those whom God has elected he
justifies, and whom he justifies he glorifieth; And that whomsoever he once
has elected, he ever loves, and in despite of all temp^^lous ^ee will lead
them safely to their Redeemer, who continually makes intercession for them at
the right hand of his Father, according to the Divine agreement made in Heaven
for their reconciliation and fortunate atonement. Lastly, you shall protest,
that as God predestined some to damnation for their Sins, which He
foresaw, leaving them in the corrupted lump, with the other vessels of
dishonor: so he predestined some to Salvation for his Sons sake, not in
regard of any Goodness at all which he fo^^saw in them, or because that they
were any whit better then the rest, but to the end that he might make them
better; For as I said before, mortal men can haueno more goodness, then it
pleases him out of his superabundant grace freely to infuse into them. The
Creator is the Author and Cooperator of all the virtues which are in the
Creatures, according to that saying of Dionysius Areopagita: Every good thing
springs from God, and Lib. 1. de Hier. Coelest. cap. 1.
the same returns again to him, as to the Sovereign Cause and last end. It
is a foul shame for men of the Reformed Church to show themselves worse then
the Jesuits in this profound mystery, who of late being convinced with a
Cloud of Witnesses, have been like Balaam and Caiphas, enforced to enrank
their Opinions with ours in this Question; as Bellarmine confesses in these
words: Non elegit Deus (...). 2. de (...). A. bit. cap. ^^.
homines, quia vidit ipsos boni operis fructum allaturos and in b^no per
seueraturos, sed elegit vt faciat been opera^tes and in b^^^ persenerantes. God
chose not men because they should bring forth the fruits of good works, and
persevere in those works, but he chose them because he might make them doers
of good works, and so in them to persevere.

The Conclusion of the First Part
SInce the Discovery of these Errors at Parnassus, which I quoted down of
purpose to remove the stoniest rubbes, which might stand betwixt us and
Felicity, the true scope and end of the Golden Fleece, I was informed, that
some pettish Monitors do vpbraid me for writing of serious matters in an
extraordinary form, disguized under the name of Apollo. To you that are
Judicious I need not yield any satisfaction in this point. But lest Error
play upon me too violently, by mistaking my meaning, and the true sense of the
moral, let the Ignorant know, that this work alludes to a Poetical rapture,
wherein the names of Apollo, of Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and of Parnassus
are taken for Wisdom, and the Court of wisdom either Divine or Humane. If
they regard the Celestial Globe, the precisest Critics shall find the name of
Apollo or Phoebus still in use. The seven days of the week have their
denomination from the Pagan Gods, among whom Apollo (...) receives the
appellation, as the Prince of (...). That Divine Poet Salust Lord of Bartas in
(...) parts of his Books uses this name for the (...) as he does also Minerua
and the Muses for Learning, Mars and Beliona for war, Bacchus for wine, Ceres
for Corn, V^lcan for fire, Venus for lust, Diana for chastity, Neptune for
the sea, ^^^olus for the winds, Styx and Ach^ron for hell. It is not the bare
name but the inward sense, which a discreet Reader should pry into. Saint Paul
expounded the Heathens unknown God at Athens according to his own belief of
the true God. Because those fond people at Ephesus, preferred the worship of
Diana, Great is Diana of Ephesus, before Saint Paul's Doctrine, it were great
folly in a Minister to refuse the Christning of a child by that name, though
never so Idolatrous in those times of darkness. While men of understanding
know the moralized sense, they will not mislike this course. They which have
read the works of the Nominalists and the Realists, can distinguish betwixt
substance and shadows. They will respect matter more then form, and the
Spirit of Evidence and power more then the enticing words of men's wisdom. By
either of which kinds, who so has the happiness to edify the Church of
Christ, to reform Errors, or to restore decayed Trading to his languishing
Coun trey, he ought not to be accused, whether he (...) the part of tickling
Horace, or of carping I^^^^all, of an Orator, or of a Poet; whether (...) puts
on the large Surplice of a reverend ^inister, or the curtalld gown of a
crabbed Stoic. For it is not the Outside, but the precious Inside, which the
Eye of wisdom looks into. And I have seen more pride under a course cloth
garment, then under a silken Robe.

To satisfy further their Objections, I have couched the subject of my
Discourse under the Titles of Apollo, Walter de Mapes, Sir Geffrey Chaucer,
Berengarius, Wicliffe, and other famous persons, which flourished many years
before Luther was borne, even by the self same Authority, as Vigilantius the
Martyr confuted the Heretics of his time. In his fifth book against Eutyches,
this ancient Writer testifies, that he published works in Athanasius his name
against Sabellius, Photinus, and Arrius, to the end that they being present, he
might seem to treat with the present, vt cum praesentibus videretur agere.

If these reasons cannot prevail, but that still they will mutter, and seek a
hole where none is, I must refer them to the reading of Sir Thomas Moors
Eutopia, and to Plat^s imaginary Commonwealth, on which as ^hymerizing
notions or Ayrie Castles let their Fantasies pore, while I run over those
real and actual vices, which lately have gotten the upper hand over their
minds, and bodies to the scandal of their Christian Profession, and the decay
of their worldly fortunes.

And if for all that my curious Masters will not desist, but menace me with
more violent animaduersions, even to fire and faggot, or rather to a milder
punishment of Banishment, I shall much more contentedly embrace this last with
Boethius, then to continue in their Neighborhood, like a lazy Drone, and to
consume the fruits of the Earth, which the industrious Bees have labored for,
thereby to verify that saying of the Poet: fruges consumerenatus; And so at
last to hazard the late Grace, which I received in the Court of Wisdom: where
at my matriculation I vowed to disclose all such enormities which might
prejudice the mystery of the Golden Fleece, and to live upon mine own without
extorting from others.

To conclude, if notwithstanding all my allegations, these B^sie-bodies will
play the clamorous Stentors, and refuse to allow, either the form, matter, or
Decrees set out in this Treatise, let them lay them by, as unripe fruit, or
Orders fitter for me to diuulge in the Newfoundland, and there to see them
executed among my own Tenants.

The end of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.
CHAP. 1.
Malines and Misselden, two Merchants of Great Britain, do severally declare
their Opinions touching the Decay of Trade, and the Causes of the vnderballance
of their Native Commodities with the Foreign, which were brought into that
Kingdom.

Apollo bewrays their misery, and commands a further enquiry to be made of
the Causes.

Upon a grievous Complaint made before his sacred Majesty, as he deliberated
with some grand Statesmen of England for the restoring of decayed Trade,
certain Merchants experimented in the Art of Commerce, offered their service
to discover those secrets, which they understood of in that kind. Apollo
commended them for their respective care and duty, in tendering themselves so
voluntarily like honest Patri^ts to succor their diseased Country; And bade
them severally to deliver their knowledge. Gerrard de Malines first related his
Opinion: That the wealth of a Kingdom could not decrease but by three manner
of wa^es, viz. 1. by the transportation of ready money, or bullich out of the
same. 2. by selling their own Commodities too good cheap. 3. or The Canker of
Englands Commonwealth.
by buying foreign Commodities at too dear a rate, and that in the
inequality of one of these consisted the one ouerballa^cing of Trade, like the
fortune of an House-holder, whose ruin and downfall may befor^seene and
foretold if he continually buyeth at the dearest rate and never sels. As
contrariwise he is observed to thrive, if he sels, and seldom buys. Then he
showed, that Money, which ought to be the square or measure of a Kingdom to
set a price unto every thing, and therefore in permutation and Exchange among
Merchants it was termed Par, yet lately this Regina Pecunia, this Queen of the
Republic, was unnaturally sold to be deflowrd by some of her nearest
kinsfolks; who not looking into her beauty, nor regarding the finenesse and
weight of her metal, as politic Exchangers ought to do, but altogether
careless of their Countries good, they bargained by bills of Exchange to pay or
receive (...) for Commodities, as the Money is valued in other parts
transmarine. If the price of Exchange be there high, where generally our
Merchants are the deliuerers of money, then they must give much to have their
Moneys made over, whereby the gain of their Commodities being formerly sold,
is clipped. And yet most commonly they give no more then the value of our money
is; for the money, which they deliver there, is according to the toleration by
them received at high rates fatre above the value, and in the same manner paid
out. But when the Exchange goes high, our Merchants buy Foreign Commodities,
or barter theirs for the same. Wherein they lose, in taking these at their
forraigners own Prices; and their native Country suffers for it at their
return together with the Merchants, the one in selling dear, the other in
buying dear. So that our home Commodities are abated four manner of ways by
the abuse of this Exchange. 1. by searcity of Money, which makes things good
cheap, occasioned by the Exchange. Secondly, by the gain sought upon Money,
which otherwise would be sought upon the commodities. Thirdly, by a high
Exchange with us, which causes men to deliver that money by Exchange in nature
of Trade, which otherwise might be employed by some upon the Commodities; as
likewise by a low Exchange, which causes exportation of our Money. Fourthly,
by the rash sale of our Commodities by young Merchants, or Factors, that
^^driuen to pay Money taken up by Exchange (...) in England, thereby spoiling
the Market of others. In like manner to make this probably seem true, Malines
manifested, that Foreign Commodities were raised and enhansed four manner of
ways. First, by plenty of moneys out of our own store transported into other
Countries. Secondly, by a high Exchange beyond the Seas. Thirdly, by the
toleration of moneys beyond the Seaes, to go current far above their value.
For by the alteration of moneys, the price of Commodities does alter also.
Fourthly, for that the principal Commodities Veluets, Silks, Fustians, etc.
are engrossed by the Bankers that sell them at their pleasure, our immoderate
use giving them the greater cause. By this means hapens an ouerballancing of
outlandish Commodities with those of our own Country, which also carries away
out of this Kingdom five hundred thousand pounds a year at the least, when
we are thus enforced to give both money and our home Commodities for Foreign
wares at a most excessive rate.

Edward Misselden a learned Merchant utterly misliked. Malines Par in Exchange,
saying that there were two manner of Exchanges, the one Personal, The Circle
of Commerce.
the other Provincial, and that it was not possible that the Personal, which
respected only the Contracts made betwixt private men, or party and party,
should so much prejudice the Commonwealth, unless there were an inequality in
the Prouincial Exchange between our Kingdom and other Neighboring Kingdoms
or States. The losses whereof, as also of the Personal, could not be known,
until the returns thereof be made, that is, until the Foreign Commodities
were brought in for the native Commodities carried out, and then both cast into
the balance of Trade, to be waighed and tried the one against the other. For
if the home Commodities carried out of the Kingdom, do downe-waigh and exceed
in value the Foreign Commodities imported and brought into the Kingdom, it
is a sign, that the Kingdom grows rich and prospers, because the overplus
must needs come in in treasure. But if the contrary chance, that the Foreign
Commodities brought in, do exceed the Native in value, it is most certain
that the Stock of the Kingdom wastes, and that Treasure goes out of the
Land. To discern this, there is no surer way then by the Customs, where in
the goods of this Land exported and imported, being multiplied by twenty, will
appear; for of every pound there is twelve pence for Custom. As for example,
we find to our great grief, that there were brought into this Land of
Foreign goods by the Customs for the same paid, and thus multiplied by 20.
for one whole year from Christmas Anno. 1621. to Christmas 1622. The total
Sum of 2619315l. 00 00.

The total Sum of goods carried out of the Kingdom, from the said Christmas
1621. until Christmas 1622. amounted to 2320436l. 12s. 10d. which lamentable
president shows, that there was more that year brought in of Foreign
goods, then carried out of the home Commodities by the Sum of 298878l. 7s. 2d.

By this positive form of a Balance truly made and taken out of the
Custome-houses, our State may see how we are fallen into a great vnder-ballance
of Trade with other Nations, and that it is high time now or never to look
about, before we be driven to a narrower pinch. The causes, in two words, of
this ouer-ballancing, is Prodigality and Poverty. The one brings in by Excess
of Foreign goods into the Kingdom an ouerballancing. The other by the Defect
and having too little from their partial Mother, keeps our Trading back in
under balance.

Apollo sighed at the relation; and all his Court which favored the Protestant
Religion, both outwardly and inwardly demonstrated great heaviness for this
Decay of Trade in Great Britain, that in the days of peace under a Religious
King, this vnder-ballance should happen, and openly protested, that Peace
consumed more men and goods in that Kingdom, then all their Wars with Spain
and Tyrone. Likewise, his Majesty said, that if the Noble King James had not
betimes raised the Iacobus piece to twenty two shillings, and his other Gold to
the like proportion, other Nations had by this time attracted all the treasure
of this land unto themselves, and that the riotous flaunting in Apparel with
their prodigal Feasts, did help to vnder-ballance their Trading, which
together with many other abuses crept into that State. he wished some of the
Inhabitants, if they had any feeling of their Countries smart, should present
without delay or partiality.

CHAP. 2.
Apollo causes a Jury to be impanelled out of the Universities of Oxford,
Cambridge S^. A^drews, Aberdine, and the College at Dubin, to find out those
persons which sold Ecclesiastical Livings.

The Pres^ntours discovering some, bring them before Apollo.

His Majesty's, censure, with his discourse of the Right of Tithes.

APollo perceiving, that one of the chiefest causes of the miseries which
perplexed Great Britain, proceeded from Si^^ny, and the enforced Perjury of
some Ministers, who being driven by meet necessity, were feign to accommodate
themselves to the iniquity of the times, caused about Whitsontide last. 1626. a
Jury to be impanelled of the precisest Preachers in that Monarchy, viz. six
out of the Vniuersit^ of Oxford, six out of Cambridge, six out of St.
Andrews, six out of Aberdine, and the like number out of the College at
Dublin in Ireland. 30. in all, integros vitae scelerisque puros, men of
unattained lives, and pure from notorious vices. These his Imperial Majesty
appointed to enquire of such Patrons as presumed directly or indirectly to play
the Merchants, and sell those worldly means, which God himself had allotted
to his earthly Angels, toward their maintenance and wages, in laboring to
reduce his astrayed flock to their true Shepherd. Ou^r this impanelled rank
he placed D. Raynolds, a man of very austere Conversation, so temperate in his
affections, that he made choice rather to be Head ^^ Corpus Christ's College
in Oxford, then to become a Bishop, which the famous Queen Elizabeth offere^
unto him. About ten days after, the Inquisitors returned and presented the
names of 40. Patrons, and so many Ministers, which had truckt and bargained for
Benefices. Likewise they presented that 6. Widows, whose Husbands had coped
and given 4. years purchase for Benefices, were ready to starve, some of them
having seven or eight children lying on their hands: And that before the first
fruits were satisfied, without receiving one penny for their purchase, their
poor Husbands died.

Apollo moved to Commiseration, to see the wretched estate of the Church
brought to this woeful plight, said, that it was no marvel all things went to
wrack and ruin in that Noble Island, when the Patrimony of the Church became a
prey and pillage to Marchandizing Greedy-guts. For how, (quoth he) can virtue
harbor in their hearts, when the Rewards of virtue are ravished, embezeled,
and turned topsy turuy? This inequality compelled many brave Spirits,
desperately to run into the gulf of coffeehouse. This made Campian,
Parsons, Harding, Stapleton, Creswell, Dallison, Garnet, and infinite others to
forgo their native Country, and betake themselves to the Seminary Colleges in
Doway, in Valladolide, Civil, Rome, and other Popish places. After these
speeches, his Majesty ask't the delinquent Patrons, what infernal fury
possessed them to wrong the Ministers the selected servants of their Heavenly
Father? Why they forced them to buy their own Right and due? The Patrons
answered, that they held a hand over the Aduowsons and Ecclesiastical livings
in their gifts, as well as over the impropriate Tithes. Both which being wrested
and extorted by the Clergymen themselves heretofore in time of Popery, toward
the Religious houses, belonged as a lawful spoil unto them for ridding the
Land of such Lazy Lordanes and Abbey-lubbers. Likewise, they alleged, that they
could not support their magnifique Port and pomp, without making sale of such
Benefices, as were in their donations. To this Apollo replied: Though ye have
been tolerated to detain the impropriate Ti^hes, dare ye adventure to take
money for those Spiritual Livings, which appertain not unto you? ^ (...) ye
again devour the forbidden Fruit? Could not the many examples of them, which
felt the Stroke of Divine vengeance for purloyning of forbidden Wares, terrify
your mercenary minds? Ach^n, for the wedge of Gold and the Baby^o^ish ^ayment,
was stoned to death. Gehezi, for receiving the two Talents and the change of
garments from Naaman, was stricken with Leprosy. No ill gotten goods can long
thrive with any man. Male parta, male dilabuntur, which ye might observe by
the Crane in the (...)
Emblem, which having a wrongful prey, could not digest it. As in like manner
it befell to an Eagle, which snatching a Coal from the Altar, fired her nest
therewith. Famous are the destructions of sacrilegious persons in all ages. Of
Heliodorus, who was scourged by an Angel, for seeking to rob the treasure of
the Templeat Jerusalem: of Pompey, which took away the Golden Table out of
that sanctified place; of the Galls, which spoiled the Delphicke Church; of
C^pi^, who robbed the Church of Toloza, that gave an occasion to the Proverb,
Aurum Tolozanum, which proved fatal to the takers. Although these two last
serve not so fit for our turn, because they were Heathenish yet in as much as
they portend fatal success, Mal^ome^ to the rakers of Church goods, let men
fear to share in Sacred things, or in any Commodity annexed to the Spiritualty.

But now-a-dayes ye are not content only to exact of the poor Ministers such
unreasonable prizes, but ye must get some by humane reasons and unwarrantable
authority to justify your Acts, training their ouerfluent wits, to prove the
Word of God, to become mutable in matters of Tithe; for the ^onfounding of
which leprous opinion, I will now onuert my speech unto you, my learned
Courtiers: Be it known unto you, that Tithes are due to the Clergy Iure
Diuino, before the Law, by the Law of Moses, and under the Gospel. Before the
Law Abraham paid Tithes to Melchised^ch, even the tenth Genesis Cap. 14. Heb.
Cap. 7.
part of all which he had, as the Author to the Hebrews explayned. He paid
Tithes as a temporal Prince to a spiritual Prince. But now vice versa,
contrariwise the spiritual person is constrained to pay Tithes to the
temporal Parsons. The Patriarch Jacob made a vow unto God, that if he would
be with him and keep him in the way which he should go, giving him bread to
eat, and raiment to put on, he would surely gi^e the Tenth unto him. Whereby
Genesis Cap. 28.
it appears, that the Tenth is still reserved by the Law of Nature, imprinted
by the Divine character in men's hearts before the Law, as a certain and
unchangeable portion to the instruments of Gods glory, his sacred Ministers.
Likewise by the Ceremonial Law, All the Tithe of the Land, whether of the seed
of Leu. Cap. 27.
the Land, or of the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords, it is holy unto the Lord.
And the like Tenth was allotted of their flocks of Cattle. All which God
bestowed upon the Tribe of Leui for their pains, care, and N^m. Cap. 18.
maintenance in attending his service. The detayning of these Tithes afterward
from the lawful Owners, procured the curse of God upon the Land of Iewry, as
the Prophet protested: Ye have robbed Mal. 3. 8, etc.
God. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offering. Ye are
cursed with a Curse, for yet have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring then
all the Tithes into the S^^rchouses, that there may be meat in my House, and
prove me herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open the windows of
Heaven, and power you out a Blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. By the Moral Law under the Gospel, where our Savior reproved the
Pharisees Hypocrisy, it appears how injurious a deed it is, to keep the
Tithes from the rightful Prop^ieta^ies; when the Pharise justifies himself
with this point, which the English Patrons would countermaund, I Luk Cap. ^^.
pay Tithe of all that I h^^e. The which the Divine Wisdom liked, as he had
told the Pharisees before, that those things ought to be done, and not to leave
the other undone. Neither let them color their Promethean thefts, as (...), as
thieves of the Godhead, by abr^gating all the Laws of Moses, as if they were
all void at the coming of Christ. For those only were (...), which ^^ood for
types and figures of his (...), Passon, and Resurrection; as Circumcisio (...)
for Baptism, and the Feast of the Passover, for the Feast at Easter. Some
other petty things appropriated to that Nation, in regard of their hot Climate
and natures, are also abolished. But for the lawfulness of Tithes payable to
the reverend Clergy, it was never questioned for these 5000. years and upwards:
yea, so powerful a respect did the Frimitiue Church attribute unto the Laws
of Moses, that Ele^therius Bishop of Rome, at such time as Lucius King of Great
Britain, or as others think, Viceroy under the Roman Emperor, sent unto him
for some good and wholesome Laws, this holy Prelate wrote unto him, that he
should collect out of the Divine Laws, what he thought most agreeable and
convenient.

If this will not satisfy their covetous apprehensions, let them believe the
Apostle S^. Paul, who confirmed the paying of Tithes after the abolishing of
the Ceremonial Law. ^eb. Cap. 7.


In former times Priests would take the fattest of the meat, but now-a-daies
Phinehes and Samuel must catch at the crummes which fall from their Patrons
tables. In those purer times the Children of Israel offered so plentifully,
that Moses was feign to restrain their bounties. Yea the women offered their
Bracelets, Jewels, and Looking-glasses, in which they took much delight. But
now temporal persons must have a large sum of Aaron and Eleazar, for
Presentations, to buy their wives Jewels and stately Looking-glasses, to view
the picture of Pride and the face of Simon Magus. In time of Popery there was a
Law enacted of Mortmaine, to keep back and cu^be the charity of devout
persons, for fear lest all the revenues of the Land might in time be
conferred on the Church. So freely did men in those days dispose of their
temporal means to advance the House of Prayer, and the Master of that house,
that they thought all which they possessed, to be too little to pleasure their
Ghostly Father. The Galatians would have pulled out their eyes to have done
Paul good. But now some are so far from doing any good to their Ministers,
that they would put out their eyes, if they durst. Let any of the poor
Ministers show himself never so vpright^, zealous, painful in his vocation,
if his purse, gravity, and precise carriage sure not with the Patr^^^ humor
roundly come off, he will sooner accept of a brutish Dunce, that scarce knows
the Canonical Scriptures from the Apocrypha, then of this Elect Servant of
God. Nor yet perhaps will he dismiss him so clean, but at his departure and
after, he will besmeare his coat with the filthiest lees of oil, and lay an
aspersion on his good name and fame, that he is a peevish Purita^e, unworthy of
his presentation. Thus do those Patrons, like the Ammonites, curtall the skirts
of David's Ambassadors garments, playing the Barbers with their Beards, until
God sends his Nemesis, his three-stringed whip of Famine, the Pestilence, and
the Sword, to afflict them for their greediness.

The Poet Mantuan bewailed the state of the Romish Clergy, that all things
belonging to the Church, were Simoniously exposed to sale, as at Mart or
Market; Venalia Romae Iura, sacerdotes, altaria, etc. Laws, Priest-hoods,
Masses, what you will, for money; For money given, all sins forgiven, as the
Popes Pardoner proclaims. From hence arose that proverb against a Simoniack
Pope, who had sold much Church-liuings.

Vendere iure potest, e^erat ille prius. By right he sels what he had bought
before.

It is a far greater fault to purchase a Bishopric, then for a poor
Minister to buy a benefice. For the one does it of an ambitious mind to bear
rule over his brethren, I mean him that gets in by Sim^ny: and the other is
merely compelled and driven, as iron, by the Patrons heart of Adamant to give
all the temporal means he has, and perhaps more then his own, if his
credit serves him to borrow. The one might live contentedly, without aspiring
to Lordly superiority, except he be called gratis, or deemed worthy of that
Reverend place. But he that inioyes nothing after all his watch fulness, study,
spending his spirits, impayring his health, and wasting all his heritage, or
means in food, apparel, and books, after 20. 30. or 40. years attendance,
but is enforced, poor man, unfortunate man, to compound by some sinister
contract with him, which makes no conscience to see another perjured, though
himself think, that by a trick of wit he may avoid it. I could willingly
pardon him, yea and reward him well for discou^ring the necessity of his
fortunes, and the ravening pillage of the Patron. Until this cloud be removed,
Faith, love, and charity cannon set^le in men's h^arts. What wr^ught the ruin
of the Romish Church, but the Bishops ^iming up to the highest place by the
golden Ladder? About the y^re 605. he obtained the spiritual supr^^^^y at the
hands of the Tyrant Phoc^^ and in the year 801, he got his Temporal power
over all things that may be called God. And the most part of these popes, which
sithence have been elated to that eminent seat, came in by indirect ways, and
for Money, as Platina and other Papists have observed: so that if the
succession of the keys were bequeathed to Rome, Simony has made that place
vacant above 800. years ago: We do therefore order and decree, that if any
Clergyman do buy a Bishopric, he shall lose it, and be utterly banished out
of our Jurisdiction. If any Patron receive the least gratuity of a Minister,
he shall for ever forfeit that Presentation to the Bishop. And now, for these
poor widdowe^, we adiudge that the Patrons shall restore such moneys, as
their Husbands gave for their Benehces, twice so much of current English money.

CHAP. 3.
Upon a Bill of Complaint exhibited by Aeschines and ^apinian, a^aiust Rewards
v^equally c^^ferre o^ persons of mean desert and escent, Apollo pro^ounceth a
pere^ptory Doo^ne.

AT the great Assembly held at Parnassus, on the fourth of ^une last 1626.
the^e was exhibited a Bill of Complaint by Aechine, Deane of the Lycea College
at A^hens, and by Pa^in^an the famous Lawyer, Advocate to the Lady Thermis on
the behalf of the Students of the Empire of Greece, That whereas Rewards ought
to be confe^red on the virtuous, which wore out many nights in cares and
thoughts, how they might increase Trade lately decayed, how they might cut off
superfluous suits of L^w, whereby Charity might heat men's hearts, as in the
Golden Age, and Justice flourish without the least pollution now to their great
grief they found many Offices bestowed on one man, which might serve sundry
more sufficient persons, and which work some of those of the meanest rank, to
sit in the supremest places, whilst that many generous Spirits of Noble
descent and of brauer flames, adorned with multiplicities of knowledge, whom,
as Scaliger wrote of Picus Mirandula, the Muses themselves would pronounce to
be of that immortal race, adjudged from Heaven to pass for great and
wonderful Sp^sits, whiles these lay contemned, without any preferment at all.
For which cause they humbly begged at his Majesty's hands, that some course
might be taken, whereby Rewards should be thenceforth conferred more equally
on men of good desert and of Noble descent. Apollo at these ominous tidings, as
it were with Commotion of mind, estranged some what from that sweet composition
of gracious manners which he was wont to deliver, with a voice more fearful
then ordinary, sounded out these Verses following, which argue, that his
Majesty took great indig^^tion at the contents of the Bill exhibited.

Why keeps one man three Offices alone,
Another yet deserving more, has none?
Either the Stars shoot out some crooked rays,
On this low world, or Fortune on it plays.
Or else the Ayry Prince this business guides:
For surely God more equally diuides.
More Offices then one, it is great pity.
That any in Country hold or City.
One Charge, and yet I am no puritan,
Will serve one man, and that a careful man.
Graces and Muses twelve in number are;
Which for their Troops look equally to share.
A Prince had need to mark, and well to know,
On whom he does great Offices bestow.
In Horses race men look into the Si^es.
Like Crow like Egg. The gracious Grace inspires.
Here Apollo stopped, and about half a quarter of an hour after renewed his
speech in this manner:

Since with the Parents seed their manners slow,
And in the Sons derived by Birth do grow,
Why do some Lawyers prey on Labors hires,
This Lesson they have conu'd from Clownish Sires.
Those Clowns their Sires, which hating Heaue^l^ right,
Them from their Birth defiled with Earths delight.
Whereby their Sons so trained up at first,
By natures kind commit that act accursed.
It Is seldom seen, that one of Noble Race,
Peruerts Tribunal Seats by tricks so base.
It Is seldom seen that one of Noble blood,
B trayes his King, or sels his Countries good.
If one among a thousand such you find,
Some Treacher him se^uced of Clownish kind.
If any Lawyers play the Tyrants part,
Thundering out fines, to make the virtuous smart,
Or prove notorious for deceit and bribes,
They are descended of base Clownish Tribes.
Nothing more base then is the Ruling Clown,
Not Antichrist for fraud can put him down.
No change of manners, though he change his weed,
He what his father wore, does never heed.
Whiles that such Moles in naught but Earth delight,
They snort in ease, and snatch at others right.
Nobles like Planets mo^e with noble thought.
A Royal Virgin forth our Savior brought.
The Commons should be ruled, the Nobles rule,
Laws rule them both, as Bits the Horse and ^^ule.
Peers placed in Office, by their peerless King,
Are just, least blots they to their Honor bring.
The vulgar Sort fit for Mechanic Trade,
May help their country with the Plough and Spade.
CHAP. 4.
Hugh Broughton upon some coffeehouse taken in seeing his inferiors
promoted to e^ ine^t places before himself, complains unto Apollo, that
Florio, Deane of Thaliaes Chapel, profaned the sacred name of the Letany, by
singing the same intermixed with triuiall toys.

Apollo causes Florio to repeat his Letany.

HVgh Broughton, a very learned Divine, and an admirable Linguist, specially in
the Hebrew and Chaldaick tongues, having for a long time awaited in Apolloes
Court for some place of preferment, and seeing many persons, whom he thought to
be far beneath him in knowledge, or at least, that his penny was as good
silver as theirs, exalted to promotion, grew about this time of the Moon
maruellously discontent; and chiefly for that Signior Florio, a new commer into
Parnassus, had been lately promoted to be Deane of the Lady Thaliaes Chapel,
a place of honor more fit for a Cabalisticall Rabbine, as himself was, then
for a Nouelist Italian; he fumed, he fietted to see the world thus run on
wheels, verifying those words of Seneca, that there was never as yet any great
wit, without some touch of madness o^ folly. Hugh Broughton thus pe^plext, less
his swoh^e conceits, like the embotteled ane for want of vent, might burst
their bodily instruments, repaired o^ the ^f teenth of May last 1626. unto
Apollo, complaining that Fiorio, Deane of Thal^aes Chapel, had (...) is
Princes Birth day sung a strange moral Letany, more agreeable to a Sceltonical
Dogrell Rimer, which shootes verses at ^andome, then to the reverend Prelate of
the Comicall Court. Which fault of (...) he aggrauated, by fetching the
Genealogy of the word Letan, not only from the Greek s^u^r^d Dialects of the
Atti^kes, the Dorickes, the Ion^^kes, the Aeolickes and other exotic
pronunciations, but also from the mystical Thalmuds of the Jews, wherein he
surpasled most of the Phoebean Academy; Apollo wo^dred much a^ this sar-fetcht
Etymology, and sublimated pedigree, and therefore willed Florio to repeat in
his presence that moral Letany, which ministered such an occasion to this
high-spirited Scholar, so to traduce the memorial of it with such curious
aggrauations. Florio obeyed, and with a mild-composed gesture reiterated his
Letany.

FRom blaspheming of Gods name,
From recanting words with shame,
From Damnation eternal,
From a sick Soul internal,
From a Sinner will not mend,
From a friend, that will not lend,
From all modern abuses,
From much things to no uses,
From Ignatians cursed swords,
From an Alchymists fair words,
From those Friars, which Cloakes use,
As from such that haunt the Stews,
From such Sins as do delight us,
As from dreams which do affright us,
From Parasites, that stroke us,
From morsels, that will choke us,
From false Sycophants, that sooth us,
As from those in Sin do smooth us,
From all profane Discourses,
From all ungodly Courses,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
From Craggy hills and mountains,
From mire and muddy Fountains,
From touching Toades and Spiders,
From Shooters hill rank Riders,
From the Exchequer Promooters,
From prying Spies and Tooters,
From Baylifes and Informers,
That faigne to be Reformers,
From Cutthroat City Catchpoles,
That care not how they vex souls,
From Bridewell and from Newgate,
From dear wit, that is bought too late,
From the Law of Halifaxe,
From the loan of the Tower axe,
From fraies and causeless battle,
From murren in our Cattle,
From one that's ever prating,
From Entortion and grating,
From S^Nicholas Clerks at night,
From such crew, as shun the light,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
From flowtes, which friendship sunder,
From Lightning, Storms, and thunder,
From Nouelists coind rumors,
From all Phantasticke humors,
From such scolds as bite and scratch,
From a causeless masticke patch,
From all such as purses cut,
From a filthy durty slut,
From an old man luxurious,
From a young man litigious,
From a riggish wanton Trul,
That her Lover seeks to gull,
From Setters, Canters, Cheaters,
No better then men-eaters,
From an ill name and bad fame,
From much need and open shame,
From stolen Goods receauers,
From closesly Deceauers,
From a wanton that will rig,
And delight to dance a lig,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
From a Priest that will mumble,
From a Nuune that will iumble,
From rude Knaves that Mai^s tumble,
From Cattes and Rattes, which rumble,
From servants, that will grumble,
From a Jade, that will stumble,
From Drunkenness and Lechery,
From scarcity and Penury,
From excess of meat as drink,
From Tobaccoes no^some s^^nke,
From opinions of Doctors,
From business with Proctors,
From conuersing with wranglers,
From the patience of Anglers,
From Lawyers visitation,
From waste and desolation,
From one that delights in Law,
From a Lions bloody claw,
From bawdy Court^ Citations,
From Excommunications,
From a State full of factions,
From all ungodly Actions,
Sweet Angel free deliver me.
From all hard-hearted Masters,
Which use not words, but wasier,
From a new O^st, proud and poor:
From a stale and graceless whore,
From bold Bayards down right blows,
From sly pe^kings of night-crowes,
From Musicians Phantasticke,
From Tradesmen grown scholasticke,
From any Bonds to merchants,
From acquaintance with Serieants,
From the mercy of ^aylors,
From the long Bills of Tailors,
From Bankrouts too latewishes,
From all unwholesome dishes,
From conversation with Clownes,
Which will sell both Verbes and Nownes,
From a Castellian drugger,
That poison sels for Sugar,
From the Sicilian vesper,
From bits more hard then I^sper,
Sweet Angel free deliver me.
From men with Murthe^ tainted,
From women which are painted,
From all far fetched New fangles,
From him that ever wrangles,
From every ^arlot-mo^ger,
From heat, cold, thirst and hunger,
From a rough-handed Barber,
As from an Irish Caruer,
From o^e that is brow branded,
From him that is left handed,
From a feast without some wine,
B^^ to Supper or to dine,
From drinking much cold water,
From a coozening false Cater,
From po^dred Beef sans mustard,
From a thin and s^wre Custard,
From rotten Chee^e and addle Eggs,
From broken Shins and gowty Legs,
From a decrepit Capon,
From stinking fish and Bacon,
From stale and filthy Sturgeon,
A^ from a foolish Surgeon,
From a Pudding has no end,
From a Bow that will not bend,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
From straggling on a strange heath,
Which once had near wrought my death,
From bribing and vile Traffic,
From Monsters bred in Affrik,
From daily Contributions,
From partial distributions,
From a Cook that is a slut.
From a knife, that will not cut,
From a short-heeld skittish wife,
Worse then any Cutpurse knife,
From men too rash and testy,
As from wild Iades or resty,
From Essex styles, and Norfolk wiles,
From York miles and thieves night files,
From Shopmen that will palter,
As Knaves deserve a halter,
From a bribing Consiable,
From the winds of Dunstable,
From a young Justice of Peace,
That from prating does not cease.
From his Fellow that never speaks
A wise word, but Currat Lex,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
From men clean void of Reason,
From dishes out of season,
From men too nice and curious,
From men too rash and furious,
From Courtiers honey-spoken,
From Merchants that be broken,
From Chanceries Injunctions,
From dearly bought Presumptions,
From any rash Intrusions,
From purchased Pollutions,
From strong Beer and heady Ale,
From a long and tedious Tale,
From a Sophistick Bruer,
Then whom the Devil is truer,
From anguish, grief, and sorrow,
From any need to borrow,
From the Counter or the Fleet,
From doing Penance in a sheet,
From all straight and pinching shoes,
From all Corns on Feet or Toes,
From a light and Pennilesse Purse,
As from a sore and dismal Curse,
From Suites by Friends procurme^ts,
From all the worlds allurements,
Sweet Angel free, deliver me.
CHAP. 5.
Apollo, after some show of distaste against Florio, for his new moral Letany,
at the last gives him leave to defend it.

Florio in a brief Oration declares the reasons, why he invented such a
strange form of Letany.

Apollo pronounces his Censure.

APollo having heard this kind of Letany, more for the appeasing of Hugh
Broughtons precisian humor, then for any dislike, which his wisdom found in
it, seemed to frown at Florio, for uttering in such a form and unusual tune
the sacred Letany. Florio doubting lest his Majesty had in good earnest
controuled his merry-conceited Letany, which as a new Liturgy he devised of
purpose to insinuate himself into the good grace of his Princess, whom he
knew was naturally affected with mirth and iollity, desired of Apollo, that he
might speak what he could in his defense. His Majesty gave him leave. And
presently without further premeditation, Florio made this Apology: It is not
unknown, most illustrious Prince, both to your matchless prudence, and to all
discreet Politics, that a new broom sweepes clean, that every Servant at his
first entertainment into a great Ladies Court, must suit his affections to
hers, as near as possibly he can with conueniency, and study by all means of
solace to give her content in some degree or other. To this end I invented this
new Letany, knowing that my gracious Mistress liked pleasant raptures, better
then the grave and austere rules of the Stoics. As for the pro^a^ing of the
name of Letany, while under the shadow thereof I couch matters of some moment,
I hope, it redounds not so preiudicially infamous to your virtuous Court, as
for a Papist to be called a Catholic, or for a smatterer in Logic, to be
termed a Sophister, or for a peevish Divine, to be styled a Puritan. If my
Letany be thoroughly scanned, under that title M^. Broughton shall meet with as
much substance to edify the common sort of people, as with his Hebrew
Genealogies to enrich the learned. It is not a Cowle or hood which makes a
Monk: Cucullus non facit Monachum. nor is it a shaven or bald Crown which
makes a Priest: for a man may lose his hair with the Pox, or for want of
radical moisture in that part of the head, as chanced to the Poet Aeschylus,
on whose bald pate an high soaring Eagle did let fall a shelfish, with intent
to break it, as on a stone. Nor does along beard make a man aiudicious
Socrates.

bar batum hoc creed Magistrum
Dicere, sorbitio quem tollit dira Cicutae. Pers. Sat. 4.

whom a forced draught of Hemblocks juice did kill.

We see the Goat stalking with a long beard. Yet who will take him for a
religious beast, that climbes up to the Altar, and feeds on the sacred flowers?

Barbatus, li (...) Caper, tamen esse negamus
Hunc recta et pura Relligione pecus.
It is not the ba^e outside, the usurping of a naked name, which can disgrace
an honest Action. If under the name of Letany, I have alluded to any lewd
passage, whereby youth may be corrupted, or the state of Parnassus defamed, I
appeal to Caesar, to your Majesty's judgment.

Apollo, after that Florio had thus defended his cause, yielded his censure in
these few words: Whosoever goes about to deprive men of all kind of pleasure,
seeks to deprive them of freedom and of a cheerful nature, which God
preferres before a sullen crabbed mind, as was that of Cains. Being tempred,
it consorts well in an ingenuous Scholar. For thereby he shall avoid the name
of a laughing Democritus, with his tickling spleen, and also of a weeping
Heraclitus, with his melancholy passion. The title of Letany, derogates not
from gravity, while it tends not to base scurrility, but rather to a virtuous
morality. There is a time to teach, to exhort, and there is a time to fling
stones against the wind.

There is a time of earnest things to write,
A time to talk of matters small and light,
A time to walk, to run, to ride, or praunce,
A time to sit and laugh, or lead a Dance.
There is a time for men to fast and pray,
And so a time to sing like Birds in May.
CHAP. 6.
Apollo asks the Author of the Golden Fleece, wherefore his Countrymen of
Wales, having the commodiousnesse of the Sea with a large scope of land, are
notwithstanding very much impouerished of late.

The Author imputes the cause unto the multitude of Law Suites.

Upon Thursday in the Easter week 1626 while the rest of his Majesty's
Subjects of Great Britain consulted how they might repair the decay of
Trade, lately happened by Prodigality, Excess of Aparrell, Tobacco, and other
enormities in this Island fostred and cherished, besides our losses a broad by
the M^^rish Pirates, and now of late by the Dunkirkes, it was my good fortune
to be present at Apolloes Court in Parnassus: Where likewise his Imperial
Majesty sat in Council, about the same affairs, because there might be a
perpetual correspondency betwixt his divine Court and our humane actions.

As soon as Apollo saw Orpheus Junior, it pleased him to demand of him the
resolution of (...) Questions, which he presently proposed. Whereof the former
was, wherefore his native Cou^^ (...) Wales being a Peninsula, almost an Island,
compassed about with the Sea, in form of an horse-shoo, like little Britain
in France, from the river Dee and Chester, round about to Gloucester, having
above 100. Rivers running out into the Sea, beside Seuerne, and Dee: yet for
all this large Tract and commodiousnesse, they had not ten Ships; whereas
Deuo^shire alone our neighbor upon Seuerne, not containing the tenth part of
land, flourished with 150. ships. The other Question was, wherefore their
enclosed lands, as also their mountains and Commons lay desolate, not half
stockt, and their Corn fields in most places so bare of Corn, that a stranger
would think, either that the earth produced such grain naturally wild, or
else that the Locusts of Aethiopia had wasted and harried the same?

Unto these demands he craved an hours respit to answer. At the end whereof
he returned his resolutions in this wise: I could have wished that these
Questions had been asked of some judicious Gentlemen of these parts, whom p^^tly
by familiar acquaintance, and partly by fame, I know to be far better
experienced; and consequently more sufficient to yield your Highness
satisfaction in these demands of import. But seeing (most virtuous Emperor)
the Fates, that is, your incuitable pleasure, allotted this charge unto my
weak capacity, I will not spare to display the causes, according to that
measure and tale^t which God has given me. In the entrance whereof, a Story
comes into my mind, out of an old Spanish Book printed at Salamanca, above one
hundred thirty years past, entitled, The causes of the poverty of Spain,
dedicated to F^rdinand^ and Isabella, before the conquest of Granata, and the
discovery of the West Indies by Columbus. Among other reasons the Author
imputes the breeding of Asses, and the use of barren Mules, in stead of B^ls
and Oxen, to be the prime and waightiest cause of their necessities. For
whereas in Hercules time the goodliest Kine of the world were found with Gerion
and Cacus in that Country, since the rearing of those unprofitable Beasts, and
the Golden Mines of Bebellio in the P^renean Mountains, and the grains of
Gold in Tagus Sands were exhaust^d dry, Spain became the most miserable Region
of Europe.

Now, my Country of Wales appears, in my judgment, to have some resemblance
with Spain, as it stood in those days, being like unto it for situat^^n, and
the uneven ^esse of ground, up hill, and down hill; yet enriched with fair
valleys, and a boue all, with the benefit of the Sea, as your Majesty has well
observed.

But our grieuance is, that in stead of plentiful droues of Cattle, which
heretofore served us, as well for our sustentation, as to supply our necessities
abroad, we have studied that fabulous Book of Ouids Metamorphosis so much,
that our stock is decayed, and now-a days we rear up two-legged Asses, which
do nothing but wrangle in Law the one with the other.

By this means we consume our precious time not to be redeemed.

By this ungracious brood we become so impouerished, that our Neighbors of
Deuo^shire, notwithstanding our large Circuit of the Sea, and our infinite
extent of land, go far beyond us in shipping and necessary Trading.

Apollo informed of this heinous abuse, replied, No man proves unfortunate, but
by his own procurement.

In whom lies this fault, but in your selves?

Who can redress this gross absurdity better then your own selves?

Pardon me, most Noble Prince, said Orpheus Junior.

It consists not in our powers to withstand what Heaven has decreed, as a
punishment for our Ancest ours sins and ours.

The means for our Education, are far short in espect of the wise English
Nation.

In times of Superstition, most of our Churchliuings, by our too much
simplicity became a pr^y to Religious houses.

Which being dissolved in King Henry the Eights days, and by Act of Parliament
confiscate to the Crown as Impropriations, our Curates stand, as before, but
reasonably provided for, not able scarce to have Whay to themselves, much less
to feed their weanelings with milk, as Saint Paul advises.

I know many Parishes, whereof the Tithes of every one amount to two hundred
pound a year, and yet the poor Ministers receive not ten pounds a piece, yea,
and some of them but twenty nobles: out of which they pay Tenths, Subsidies,
and other impositions.

So that for want of maintenance both Shepherds and Flocks do oftentimes
miscarrie; and we two-legged Asses can hardly recover true humane shapes. Nor
is this the only cause of our Poverty. We are subject to more inconveniences
then the English Nation; for we stand in fear (and our fears are not in
vain) continually without intermission to be sued at the Courts of
Westminster, at the Counsel of the Marches, at the Spiritual Courts at home
and in London, notwithstanding that we have the Courts of Assize of double the
term, then they have in England, besides our Quarterly Sessions of the Peace,
our County and Stewards Courts. Nor yet have I ended all the afflictions of
poor Wales. Within these two and twenty years, the number of Clerks and
Sollicitours, at the Counsel of the Marches, have increased so exorbitantly,
if not prodigiously, that whereas I knew not above one or two of these Clerks
in a Shire, now I can point at a doozen and more in most Shires, whereof many
of them have three or four Foot-posts, which they call Cursitors belonging
unto every of them, whose Office is continually to run for Processes:
insomuch that one of these Clerks sent for a hundred and forty Processes,
against one of their times called the Appearance, for they sit ofner then
Westminster, the most part of them for matter not appertaining to the
Jurisdiction of that Court. I have known men sued for a shilling and under, to
that remote place. I will speak all I know: for the reverence I bear to
Authority, and to the Seat of Justice, which ought to be sacred. But I could
wish all Courts to live within their Precincts, and not to go one inch from
their Instructions; to take away the occasions of debate, and not as our late
King James of blessed memory noted, to seek more moulture to their Mill, then
of right belongs. In former times they never used to direct binding Processes,
but against Fugitives. They never sent Pursuiuants nor Serieants at Arms in
matters of Debt betwixt Party and Party, but only in Criminal and high
natured Causes, where the King was immediately interessed. They seldom used to
fine the Plaintiff for charitable yielding to an atonement at home, or if
they did, it was but small in the nature of a mild amercement. They endeavored
by all means to establish Love and Charity among Neighbors, and were glad to
hear those good news of their Conuersions, though their Gain came in the
less. They often used to repeat that Proverb of Solomon, even at their
meals: Better it is to sup a mess of Pottage with quietness of mind, then
to have a whole Ox with strife. They trembled and made a conscience to take
money of any fellow Christian, though due unto them for sentence or verdict, if
the same came like so many drops of life-bloud from his heart. They cared more
for the Defendant, then for the Plaintiff, unless the Cause were too
abominable.

Why then I see, said Apollo, if some of your Courts were abolished, you might
quickly grow wealthy both by Sea and Land. For if the Occasions of Suites were
taken away, men would follow their Husbandry diligently at home, fall to
enclosures, plant Orchards, marle their Lands, and not scratch the Earth with
weak Heyfers or Steeres. They might then keep strong Oxen to plough withal,
which now they are enforced to sell for their Lawiers use. The Sea might be
as well frequented by you, as by the Devonshire men. Surely, if the Noble King
of great Britain would release you from the Courts of London, or else
discharge the Court in the Marches, I see no reason but you might fall to
industrious courses, as well as others. Dcuonshire and Cornwall are a great
deal further from London, then the remotest Part of Wales and their Terms of
Assizes shorter by half then yours. And yet they live in good security one
Neighbor with the other, and do all join in honest Trading both at home and
in the Newfoundland, augmenting their fortunes, and breeding store of Mariners
and shipping. Your Court at the Marches was first instituted to suppress
rebellious Attempts, and Traitors, specially Owen Glyndowrdie, who was so
called for taking part with King Richard the Second. But now, me thinks, it
might very well be spared, seeing that those storms be long sithence, by King
Henry the Seventh, coming to the English Crown quite vanished, and that
now-adayes a man may travel in Wales, as safely as in any other Part of the
Kingdom. The consideration of the Premises we do nevertheless refer to
your Prudent and generous King. And I believe, there is never a poor man worth
forty shillings but will contribute somewhat with all his heart toward the
Wars, or for a grateful Benevolence to his Prince, to be acquitted of some of
these Courts. For indeed I heard that a Knight of Staffordshire, who dwelt but
three miles distant from the Jurisdiction of the Marches, should say, that he
would not for a 1000. Marks his house had stood those three miles further
toward Wales, by reason of those troubles which they were subject unto more
then his Country.

CHAP. VII.
Orpheus Junior exhibits a Petition unto Apollo to diminish the number of
Lawyers, and to punish their offenses.

Apolloes Answer, showing how they may be restrained and punished.

ORpheus Junior understanding that Apollo burned with Zeal and Charity, to
reform the superfluiries of Lawsuits, which were not the least causes of the
Decay of Trades in great Britain, and fearing that in time to come, their
sufferance and continuance might yet work a greater impediment to his Project
of the Golden Fleece, which with infinite care, pains, and some charge he has
for many years managed, and almost now brought to perfection, upon the
abouesaid Thursday in the afternoon, he exhibited this Petition unto his
Majesty, as he came out of the Delphick garden. The contents as follow.

Magnus honos extra pacem componere, mayor
Discordes animos conciliare domi.
Erga viciuos Amor incipit. Ard^a quaero,
Eripe ^os odijs viscera chara Dei.
Membra licet collisa sumus: Rex vniat aequus,
Subdola si studeat subdere bella Fori.
Rabula Bella mouet plusquam Cinilia Legum
Pratextu: liber nullus, Auarus eget.
It Is honor great abroad to settle peace,
But greater far our countries broils to appease.
Toward the Next true Love must first begin.
High things I beg. From iars defend Gods Kin.
Though mangled we, you may unite us all,
If you reform the subtle pleading Hall.
The Lawyer maskt with Law on us does feed.
Few men escape. The Niggard stands in need.
Apollo after he had perused the Petition, delivered it to Doctor Haddon one of
the Masters of Requests, charging him to remember the redeliuery thereof unto
him back at the first sitting of the next Court, which was about two days
after. At the time and place limited, Doctor Haddon failed not to restore the
Petition to his Majesty, who instantly made a full demonstration of the
effects, that it was high time to bridle the insolences of those fellows,
which studied more to drive the Holy Ghost with his Heavenly Gifts, of Love,
Charity, and Humility out of their own and Neigbours hearts, then to inform
their Clients of the truth of their cause. First, therefore he enacted, that
every man should lay down his matter in the briefest manner. Secondly, that no
Advocate should defend a wrongful Cause. Thirdly, that the Advocate must pay
his Client all his money back again with arbitrarie damage by Apolloes
prescription, if the Cause by his Counsel went forwards, and afterward
chanced to be ordered against him. Fourthly, that no Attorney nor Advocate must
delay or lose the benefit of one hour in advancing to a hearing their Clients
Suite. Fifthly, that the Judges, as in Denmark, follow the Reports and
Judgments formerly put down in Books, without adding or altering any new
Opinions out of their own, though more solid, heads. Sixthly, that no man
presume to become a Judge in the Newfoundland, which ever received a Bribe; or
which took a Fee within the space of seven years, before he enter there; for
that Country being as yet pure, we will suffer no impure hands to touch her,
nor impure lips to Court her. Seventhly, that whosoever takes a Bribe in the
Newfoundland directly or indirectly, or tolerates with any Gehezi to receive
it, he shall be convicted of Rape, for polluting that blessed Nymph, with
adulterous injustice, and to be punished more Maiorum, as the Senate of Rome
had adjudged Nero; or to be used as a Blasphemer against Saint Mark at Venice.
Eighthly, That no Lawyer nor Officer should exact more fees, then were appointed
in those Tables, which he caused to be publicly engraven and set forth upon
pain to forfeit his Ears.

After the promulging of these Ordinances, which his Majesty willed to be
engraven on Cedar-boords, and to be inuiolably observed like the Laws of the
Medes and Persians; for the further rooting out of Extortions, Bribes, and
Exactions of Lawyers, Apollo with a loud voice, which made all the Earth to
tremble, pronounced this Oracle:

Crimina non potuit Rex extirpare Johannes
Strata Lutherana quae modo cernis open.
Et Coelum Pelagusque suo discrimine distant:
Vt variant mundi Climata Tempus crit;
Cum Themidos pariles noua Constellatio libras
Reddet, and, vt Daniae, singula nota libris.
Arcanam proprio Cabalam nec pectore seruent
Vt semel optasti, Diue Iacobe, tuis.
Iuridicus peccans non coram Iudice Sectae
Eiusdem poenas suppliciumque luat.
Nobilis, aut gratis conuincat Episcopus illum
Pro repetundarum crimine, Fraud, mora.
Altervtras Parts non Conciliarius audax
Fulmine fucato, seu reticendo iuuet.
Dic mihi, quid differt multos tolerare Tyrannos,
Radere Caufidicos aut aliena pati?
His domit is: Martis Seruorum millia multa
Sustineas Auro, quod modo praeda Midis.
King John his Crown did to the Pope expose,
Which, as you saw, poor Luther durst oppose.
Both Skie^ and Seas with sundry motions rage;
Yet now is come Astreaes Golden Age.
A King of Denmarks Blood Laws out of ioyns,
As there in written Books here shall appoint.
None then shall wrest, as would K. James ordain,
A secret Law hatched in one Lawyers brain.
If he offend for Bribes, Fraud, or Delay,
Twere fit that Noblemen or Bishops may
Judge him, where he shall not prevail with gold,
With Friendship, quirks, Demurres, nor facing
What differs it to see a Tyrant rule?
Or a rau^nous Judge riding on his Mule?
A King may keep his daring Foes in awe,
With lesser charge then men do spend in Law.
CHAP. VIII.
Bartolus and Plowden, by the instigation of the Jesuitical Faction, do
appeach Orpheus Junior before Apollo, for certain Offenses supposed to be
committed by him.

LOng did Robert Parsons, Father Cotton, Cardinal Bellarmine, and others of
the turbulent Ignatian Sect consult together, how they might be revenged on
Orpheus Junior, for his discovery of Mariana, and the public shame, which all
their Society had incurred ever since their restraint, after the said Marianes
conviction. But finding, that Orpheus had smelt out their drift, and for that
cause kept himself continually at the Well head, near to his Majesty's Court,
and commonly in Court, they deferred the shooting of their enuenomed arrows at
a person of that eminency, whom not only Apollo graced with more then
ordinary favors and familiarity for frequenting the sacred Cloisters of the
Muses, but likewise all the Noble Spirits of Parnassus, loved and respected him
for his care, pains, and charge in advancing forwards the Golden Fleece, and
the Plantation of the New found I Will. But at last these Hamans sat in Counsel,
and devised together, how they might cunningly wound the honor of this
careful Mardocheus, who had discovered the treacheries, falsehoods and knauish
tricks of many persons, who had sometimes lived gloriously in Parnassus; as
the other Mardocheus had revealed to the Persian King, the Treasons of his
Servants. They won Bartolus and Plowden, two notable Lawyers, who were also
grievously offended for the Petition he preferred against the multiplicities of
Suites to take their parts, and by some scandalous surmises to lay an ambush
for the surprizal of his rising Fame. For the intrapping whereof they heaped
together Articles of sundry natures, which going current this day, they would
themselves condemn the next day. Nevertheless, being egged on by the
Jesuits, they took heart at grass, and at length with two tedious Orations
more bitter and violent then the Phillipica, which Cic^ro framed against Marcus
Anthonius, they inueighed in their Preambles, most sharply and Satyrically
against Orphens Iuniors Book, called Cambrensium Caroleia, saying, that he
had openly discovered with Cham Noah's nakedness, he had polluted his fathers
ashes, and ragingly snatched at Jupiters golden Beard in disclosing the
mystical secrets. Of the Cabalisticall Science, whereon as the Mercurian
Grinder, the wits of many Proficients in the Laws, were so finely whe^^ed,
that some would gain whole Manours with a shrill whyning voice, yea, and they
held one another a beggar, unless a Kite could ^lie about their Purchases in
one day. Others with a Stertorean roaring throat used to astonish the
Auditors, as if Thunder had come out of the Clouds suddenly to destroy them.
The Report of which noise, like a Canon or Basilic^ did so terrify some
faint-hearted Meacocks, that they fled out of the Country into the Isles of
Creete, Lesbos, and the Rhodes, perpetually abandoning all their Right, Title,
and interest in such Lands hereditarie, or purchased, which they had or might
have in time to come within the Territories of Parnassus, and quite clayming
the same unto those terrible Roaters. So powerful, said they, was the red
clapper, before these Mysteries were made manifest by this Cambr^-Britaine,
like Green the Detectour of Conicatching, that a Lawyers Tongue could do many
feats, trot, or amble, gallop or halt, save or slay, chide or charm, with more
pretty and proper conditions then the Sorcerers of Egypt could vaunt in the
presence of Pharaoh. The Delphicke Sword, which did cut, file, saw, and shave,
came not near in operation to this pleading member, which all the virtuous
applauded, Orpheus excepted; and must still domineere it in the World, as long
as the e^mity shall last betwixt the woman's seed and the Serpent.

They further alleged, that this Author of the Golden Fleece had usurped the
name of Orphens Junior, which he ought not to have done, unless he could draw
life out of the Rocks, and by melodious strains enduce the greatest Oak in
this Kingdom to dance the Canaries.

Likewise, they found fault with him for dissuading men from going to law, like
an Anabaptist, for speaking against their Profit, for seeking to lessen their
numbers, and to debar them, like Charles the Fifth, from dwelling in the West
Indies, and consequently, in the Newfoundland, where they hoped one day to get
a good booty among the simple Fishermen, if the Monyed Queen chanced
hereafter to withdraw the sweet influence of her Countenance from them in this
flourishing Kingdom.

Finally, they charged him particularly with these Verses by him published in
his said Book, tending to discourage men from spending their means in Law; so
that this Corporation might put up their pipes, and in time fall into disgrace
to the great scandal of the Lady Themis, their Sovereign; if such a Toy
should take men in the heads to live at home quietly, and not to pay their
quarterly rents. No penny, no Pater noster, was the Song of some Divines
heretofore. But for Lawyers rents, it was never questioned since Demosthenes
his time till now. Therefore as a Libeller against the sacred persons of
Lawyers they desired Apollo to censure him, which presumed to set out these
unlucky Verses:

Fulmina Iuris huic, Favor illi, casus at idem:
Explicitusque rigor, implicitusque d^lus.
Omnes venantur questum qui lura sequuntur
Nummus vbi tinnit, candida lura silent.
Spem tibi vox nutrit, Men's da^na. Colu^ba fit Aspis,
Mel Fell. Conueniunt quam male Lis and Amor!
One's thunder struck, Another's graced amain.
The cause the same. Such is the force of Gain.
Without dear coin, the Lawyer says but mum:
Yet when it sounds, the laws themselves are du^be.
The tongue vows hope, his mind loss. Doves turned Aspes.
Sweet honey gall. How ill Love Hatred claspes!
CHAP. IX.
Apollo commands Orpheus Junior to answer the Accusation of Bartolus and
Plowden, who obeying extolleth Charity, taxes Conicatching and Hatred, and
commends the Laws.

Apollo smiled to see the impudency of these Lawyers, yet not to seem
partial in his Servants cause, he commanded Orpheus to defend himself, who
thus began.

BRight Light of Love, which know the Originals,
And Principles of Supernaturals,
Which measur'st Globes, and the 7. wa^dring Spheres,
Inspire my heart. Let not subrustick Fears,
Nor bashfulnesse of Virgins crimson hew
Astonish me from speaking what is true;
But that with free and lofty voice I sound
Sweet Peace, which may strife, and not Laws, confound.
Doves build in holes of Rocks: but thou, my Dove,
In holes of bloudied Rock must build thy Love.
My Soul, like to a Dove with silver wings,
Flies to Christ's wounds for fear of Vipers stings.
He is my Rock, my Savior, and Defense,
While I stand clothed in Robes of innocence.
He knows my aim is fair, jarres to sub due
And Charity in Lawyers to renew.
Some think it a hard task, impossible;
But unto God all things are possible.
Others subject men's frail intelligence,
And Reformations to Stars Influence:
As though Errors wait on Reuolutions,
Bald times pleasure, or Constellations.
First, let the^ learn; although the Suns clear beams
With his pale Sister, Lady of the streams,
Do rule the World, and work in Trees and Flowers,
Yet can they not control Diuiner Powers,
Such as our Spirits be, nor yet our wits,
Which Policy refines with sacred Writs.
Who can deny, but Craft's the cause of Evil?
As Truth will shame Promooters and the Devil?
As Vnicie and Justice I adore,
So these turned topsie turuy I deplore.
Of Old it was not so. Then, no Surmizes
Could wrest Laws, nor Pleas m^^k^ in disguises.
Few Sentences then served to unfold
Great matters. Then they pleaded not for Gold;
But every man in person to the Judge,
As unto God, his Case showed without grudge.
This made them quiet, and stored with Treasure,
Where we spend, attending Misers leisure.
We spend our Thrift, our Brains, and precious times
By lewd men's counsels filled with heinous crimes
In needless Suits, whom they hold for Clients,
Or Tenants, like greedy Leaches Patients.
Through thick and thin up to the ears and chin,
They make us drudge to bring them money in.
But what is the end? Their Heirs do seldom thrive.
Although in Pomps their aged Starlings live,
And sucking Pigeons blood turn Cormorants:
Yet never Apes will grow to Elephants;
Nor will God suffer an Impostors Race
To flourish long, nor wisdom, to embrace.
Some Nations He plagues for their Drunkenness
With bloody wars; some for their Beastliness
With Famine of his Word. But us He smites
By letting double Tongues, use base despites.
Then friske like Foxes brisk, and fqueak like Rats;
Or bark like Curres, or caterwaule like Cats.
Fear no thorns, lift up your horns; each Brother,
Like juggling Gypsies, deceive another.
This man rake, him to the stake; hold your own.
Cheat kindly, my Masters; There Is Gold in Town.
By Hook or by Crook, by Right or by Wrong
Cramme Purses with Curses. O dismal Song!
All Is Fish that comes to Net in Sea or Brook.
No surer angling then the Golden Hook.
Glad is false Judas of his silver pouch;
Glad is fond Midas of his golden Touch,
As Whales do play upon the lesser Fish,
Till Harping-irons spoil their latest wish;
So These wound Christ again through Neighbors sides,
Till Earth denoures her due, their hideous hides.
O curuae in terras Animae Coelestium inanes!
O stooping Souls to Earthly trumperies,
And quite deuoid of Heavenly Mysteries!
Shall I sleep on both ears, as the Proverb says, while these indignities
range abroad unpunished, or conniued at among the learned Society of
Parnassus? No, mighty Monarch, I feel an inward motion in my Soul pricking
me, like a spur, to run as at a deified Devil, against the defied foes of
Charity; And now the rather, being here enforced in your Majesty's Court of
Parliament, the transcendent Light of all worldly Actions. Take away the chain
of Charity, take away the Communion of Saints established on the eternal
union of the Son of God, who left us at his departure this last Commandent:
Love one another. And do we love one another, if we live in hatred, and watch
opportunity to hurt the members of Christ? Decretum profer Apollo. I appeal
to this high Tribunal. How can we say, that God is in us, if our Souls and
Bodies be not his Temple? The Groundwork of this Temple is Faith, as Saint
Paul writes, Faith is the ground of things hoped for. The walls are the Gifts
of Hope, without which, we of all men were most miserable. And what is the
perfection of the Heb. cap. 11. 1. Cor. cap. 15.
Roof, which couers this Temple, but Charity? This is the fruit of all our
Actions both immanent and transient. This brightsome virtue extends to God and
man, to Heaven and Earth. It lifts it self up to God, as the prime Mouer of
our wills, to the Angels, as our Guardians, and to the triumphant Saints for
their participation and spiritual fellowship with our Souls in the harmonious
concent and agreement of Holy Works, expecting our humane minds, to join with
them in their universal Alleluiahs without iarres, discord, or disproportioned
tunes. O Angelical Concord, which requirest this Contemplation and Practice of
all such, which are predestined to be saved! O the depth of Gods scope, which
exacteth this obedience of the true Catholic Church, to love our Neigbours, as
we would have him to love us, to do evil to no man, to wish well to all the
World, like unto the Sun, which not only casts his beams upon all, but
refreshes the very earth, which bears weeds!

In what a miserable case then stand those Lawyers, which polish their wits,
and with hired tongues go about to defeat O^phans, Widows, and other
innocents, by desending wrong-doers? Cursed be ye, which speak good of evil,
and evil of Esaias cap. 5.
good, says the Prophet. Which likewise the Wiseman testified: He that
justifies the wicked, and he Prou. cap. 17.
that condemns the Just, they both are abominable unto God. What auailes it
a man to gather wealth for a small time, when he knows he must leave them
behind him and answer for every idle word and sentence, which he produced to
disgrace or hinder his Neighbor, whom he was bound to tender and love as
himself? What profit shall he get by his golden fees, when Death dogs him at
the heels? When his pulses shall faintly beat, his senses fail, and his
eyelids shut, never more to open, until they see the gates of New Jerusalem
shut fast against their wretched Master? No doubt, but some of our Lawyers do
happily think upon this fatal stroke, but (alas) that weak thought for want
of Zeal quickly perishes, like those seeds, which were sown by the
Husbandman, and afterward for want of care suffered to be ouergrowne with
weeds and choked with avarice. The want of employments in some other
Professions or Trades which might benefit them in their worldly thoughts and
dreaming conceits of private lucre do constrain many great Spirits to fall to
this wrangling course of life, who otherwise would prove more notable members
for their Countries Good. But seeing no other way then this to arrive without
danger of a bloody nose to a great estate, they forgo those brave flames,
which Nature had kindled in them, and in their steed do harbor earthy and
slimy cogitations, like the Serpent, whom God cursed, and destinated to creep
upon his belly, and to lick the dust of the earth. All their mind runs on
Gain. Gain is their God, the God which delivers them out of the Land of
bondage, out of the jaws of Poverty. Gain is the golden Angel, which leads
them out of the Wilderness into the Land of Canaan. Gain is their Iosuah,
that gouernes their battles, and gives them superiority and victory, not over
the uncircumcised Philistines, but over their own Brethren, the heirs of
Salvation in the world to come. What fair protestations, and goodly hopes will
they not fail to promise at the first opening of their Clients Cause? yet when
the matter by their unlucky Counsel succeeds not, as they promised, they will
shamelesly stand unto it, that their Clients had not thoroughly informed them,
or else with admiration and eyes lift up toward Heaven, they will join to lay
an aspersion on the Judge, whereas themselves were the chief Procurers of the
Suite. About twenty years past it was my fortune to be present in a
Counselors Chamber at the Counsel of the Marches, where a Gentleman of
Worcestershire bitterly complained, that the Counsel had ordered him to pay
seuenscore pounds, which he might have compounded for fifty pounds. And that
this rigorous sentence proceeded by his relying altogether upon his Opinion,
that the Counsel would not deal in matters above fifty pounds, being limited
by their Instructions from the King. To which the Lawyer answered, that he had
hard measure offered him, that the Counsel reduced his Cause from a Common Law
business to be a matter of Conscience, wherein the King had left unto them
the determining at large without tying their powers to a certain Sum. That
he was sorry to see such extreme severity. Yet notwithstanding somewhat glad,
that the matter having been so chargeable and trouble some for a long time he
might now enjoy the continual company of his wife and children at home, which
before he could not do. That Peace was a blessed thing, and Patience an
excellent virtue. Which the Gentleman hearing, and having no comfort else for
his great expense, pains, and troubles, he brake forth into Passion, saying,
what do you tell me of Peace and Patience, and going home to have the company
of my wife and children? All this I had before I met with your unfortunate
Counsel, and but for you I might have had more means to do for them, then
now I have. Which Answer of his calls back into my memory Captain Eliots
Tragedy, which about five and twenty years ago he related unto me at Paris.
In Queen Elizabeth's days being enticed by a Jesuit here in England this
Captain Eliot went to Lisbone, with a Pinnasse of the Queens, which he
purposed thence forwards to employ for his New Masters service the King of
Spain. And for this cause, with his commendatory Letters from a Jesuit in
England, to his brother Jesuit Robert Parsons at Madrid, he posted thither in
hope of high preferment. In the mean time his men, which he left a ship-boord
finding themselves betrayed by Captain Eliot, and destitute of necessaries to
relieve their wants, they complotted to steal the Pinnasse away. But the
matter casually discovered, some of them were hanged, and the rest made
Gally-slaues, which coming to the ears of Captain Eliot at Madrid, and
hearing, that his Brother, whom he had left to ouer-see the Pinnasse, had
likewise tasted of this Spanish Courtesy, he repaired in this malcontent to
Father Parsons, pitifully complaining of his cruel fortune, and this bloody
course extended toward his people, which he brought of purpose to serve the
King of Spain, hoping of reward rather then to be so inhumanely dealtwith.
Father Parsons at that time being more in a mood of devotion, then willing to
show himself a Statesman, began to read a Lecture to Captain Eliot of
Patience, Humility, and of Mortification. The which he for a while gave ear
unto; but at last perceiving that his speeches tended to defeat him of his
Ship, and to get him into a Cloister: he brake into these impatient terms:
What do you preach unto me of Patience and Mortification? Can flesh and blood
rest satisfied with this usage? Can I be patient, when I see my brother and my
friends executed, and the rest of my men condemned to the Galleys? Had it not
been for the advice which your friend and brother Jesuit gave me to betray the
Q Pinnasse, I might have lived in my own Country a happy man, far from this
barbarous end.

Surely it were fitting that those which undertake for money to direct their
Clients, should requite them for their charges, if by following their sinister
Counsel the matter goes against them. If a Smith having but a penny for his
pains, unwitting ly chance to prick a horse to the quick, whereby the horse is
the worse for it, there lies an Action of the (...). d^na^ r. ^^eu.
Case against the Smith. How much more then ought a poor Country fellow
altogether without the rudiments of Law have remedy against a learned Master
of the Laws, which takes upon him to know the whole proceedings of Justice,
as well as the wisest Judge of the Kingdom? O I would that men would become
more charitable the one to the other that I might hear from time to time the
like complaints as Lawyers made at the end of Michaelmus Term last, 1625. They
bewailed their misfortune, that whereas some one of them used to have sixty
Clients, he had scarce eight at that Redding Term, which complaints moved me
no more to pity, then to see a Goose go bare foot. I rather rejoiced to
hear the tidings, that Suites of Law were not become eternal; And presently I
ministered this Pill unto them: My Masters, said I, you seem for all the world
to be like the Sextons and Diggers of Graves now of late in London, who when
any asked them how they did; they answered with you, Never worse. It is a hard
time. For whereas one of us have received fees for ringing and opening of four
hundred graves a week, now the Plague being abated, we receive not money for
eight graves. A pitiful Case.

To end this my Apology against Doctor Bartolus and Master Plowden, for my
usurping of Orpheus Iuniors Title, I do it, permissu Superiorum by your
Majesty's command, emboldned by the examples of those, which in the like
matters borrowed the like Titles, as Terentius Christianus and Democritus
Junior lately have done to their great honor and the Readers satisfaction;
even as Ausonius before them had imposed the name of Cato to his little Book
of Manners. Nor can any man much blame me, if he compare the Adventures of our
Newfoundland with the Argona^ticks Golden Fleece, though more sweetly sounded
by the elder Orpheus

Apollo after this Apology seemed highly to extol it. And further to let the
world know his fuller resolution, he uttered these words: God forbid, that
Vice should reign without controulement. If my Attendants shall be tongue
tied, when such uncharitableness possesses mortal men, it is to be feared
that men will sooner glory in evil, then turn to good; nay more, it is to be
suspected, the whole world but for our peales of Charity and sounding retraits
from Hatred will fall under a general Excommunication from the presence of
God. Take away the abuse, which is merely accidental; and let the substance
of Law remain still. Long may Justice flourish without eclipse or stormy
oppositions.

Florescat viuat, vigeat, celebretur, ametur. CHAP. XII.
The learned Universities of Great Britain do find themselves agrieued,
that Popish Physicians are permitted to practice Physic in this Kingdom.

Apollo remedies their grieuances; and decrees that the Popish presume not to
minister Physic to any Protestant, but to them of their own Sect.

Upon the Wednesday after Low Easter Sunday, there arrived at Parnassus
certain Deputies sent from the Learned Universities of Great Britain,
pitifully complaining, that whereas sundry honest Persons of wonderful rare
Spirits, and singular dexterity, had spent the most part of their time in
ruminating and reuoluing the works of Hippocrates, Cornelius Celsus, Galen,
and also had read the volumes of other Physicians, as well Arabian as
Paracelsian, Ancient as modern, there crept notwithstanding some false
Brethren, servants to the Mystical Whore, as Drones, which under a counterfeit
mask of more pregnant knowledge, had engrossed the Gain and Rewards due unto
them, as the laborious Bees of their Country, and wrought so effectually with
some of the Greater sort, that by their example others repaired to them for
helps in their Bodily Infirmities, forsaking them being of the same Religion,
and no way inferior unto these Romish Physicians. The danger both eminent and
imminent which by this conniuence might happen, they submitted to his Majesty's
good will and pleasure. Apollo nettled at this complaint called for the Romish
Physicians, and caused some Patients which had lately taken Physic at their
hands to be brought before him to whom he said: O ye of little Faith, what a
lunacie and distemper of the Brain has perverted your understanding, as to
move you to abandon the medicinable waters of Silo and Bethesdae, and to have
recourse unto muddie Pooles not derived from the Rock of living waters? Is it
because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to the God of Ekron to
enquire and look counsel. Did the example of Lopez the Portugal, who by
warrant from the great Dispencer of Murders poisoned some Noble Personages of
your Country, nothing terrify your mutable fantasies, but ye must resort for
cure unto your known Foes, the Foes of Christ? Is it possible, that my
Remedies shall work their proper effect, which are ministered by profane hands?
but rather the contrary, being accursed like the Fig Tree in the Gospel? It
was a sin in Asa King of Judah, for putting his trust in Physicians of his
own Religion. How much more had it been, if he had relied on succor from the
uncircumcised? If God bless not the Physic it proves ominously unlucky, and
perhaps to the ruin of the Patient; though for a time it may seem to ease.
Do we not often see, that many men rise up miraculously, as it were from death
to life like Hezechias when all earthly helps prove vain and fruitless, even
by Kitchen Physic? So all blessings with Faith must concur together with
the Medecin, or commonly it ill succeeds.

In tender consideration of these ensuing perils, and in commiseration to the
states of your Souls and Bodies, which may suffer for want of mature
Discretion to discern Friends from Foes, We Order, that no Papisticall
Physician minister Counsel, nor Receipt in Physic to any Protestant from this
day forward: but that every Patient do repair to some of their own Religion,
to whom Rewards belong, and whom God has ordained for a virtuous purpose. We
do also order that these Verses of Orphcus Iuniors, be annexed to this Decree.

Misso pecunifices volo te Medicosque cauere,
Caedere Magnates quos Mariana, docet, etc.
Beware of Physic mixed by Romish brood,
Whom Mariane taught to let great Princes blood.
By Lopez learn by poison hired to kill,
What mind those have a Christians blood to spill.
Tobacco, late which men have brought from Spain,
Is thought to taint the blood, heart, lungs, and brain.
The Jesuits this teach, as a point of merit,
To murder some, and Heaven to inherit.
Lust creepes and Theft by opportunity.
Then cheer not Aesops Snake with iollitie.
CHAP. XI.
The Nobility of Parnassus do complain, that their Inferiors with their
Wives do wear richer Apparel then themselves, showing likewise, that they
have encroached on other Privileges of theirs to be hurried in Coaches, by
which presumptions many other Corruptions are lately crept into Apolloes Court.

Upon Thursday in the Easter-weeke last 1626. the Noble Families of the
Fabricy, and Len^ul^, and others as well of the Romans, as of the ancient Blood
of the Argines, complained unto his Majesty showing, that one of the chiefest
Causes of the decay of Trading and of the want of Money in these Times
proceeded through the proud affectation of men of Inferior Ranks, who
contrary to the Prescriptions of Civil Government, following the Example of
Lucifer the Prince of Pride, had perked up so high, that they wore gorgeous
Garments, more glorious then Princes. And not so content, they pestered the
streets of Parnassus, with needless Coaches, so that Carters and Wainmen could
hardly pass to and fro with necessary provision and commodities for the
Courtiers and Citizens use. Apollo informed of these indignities sent for the
Lords Reformers before him, and asked how this Excess got into his Imperial
City, which ought to be the mirror and sountaine of morality. They answered
that the World as it grew in Age, so it multiplied in Infirmities. That the
Prince of this World perceiving the state of Religion to become better purified
then in former times, whereby he lost many Souls, had infected a great number
of his Majesty's Subjects with the poison of Toades, to make them swell with
Ambition, to the end they might burst, and that he by that means might repair
his great losses, which the Protestant Religion had caused to his Infernal
Kingdom; And that for the further settling of his poisonous power, he had
employed Asmodeus the Spirit of Lust, and other petty Agents of his to sow
Tares in the night season after the Dinine Preachers had in the day time plowed
and sowed pure seed in men's hearts. That likewise he had seduced their
embosomed second selves, whom they term the Night-crowes, to insin^ate on his
behalf the Pompes and vain glory of humane loftiness into their Husbands
Heads, and never to cease pecking, until they prevailed of their purpose to
expel his mortal Enemy the Spirit of Humilitic, which the Holy Ghost had
placed for his Deputy Guardian in their minds. The Reformers also declared
that the Devil had so strongly possessed some of them both men and women, that
to continue their bravery of Apparel and charge of Coaches, they mutually
agreed sometimes to horn the other, but yet so slily and politickly, that they
might take off their Horns at set times, and lay them in their pockets to
keep, for fear of too grievous a headache. To this end they used this Song
the one to the other:

It matters not so much to wear the Horn,
If that it might be free from others scorn.
Horns have no cure, but when thy self art sped,
To graffe those Horns upon another head.
If the Wife want embroydered Peticoates and Wastcoates, if her Husbands means
and credit extend not to furnish her with Jewels equivalent to the greatest
Countess, or if she cannot honestly devise how to maintain her Caroach, the
debauched Gallant will in this distress and exigent lay that which she can
spare, even Honesty it self to pawn. In the mean time my Cuckoldly
Gentleman winkes for his profit. Non omnibus dormio, sed Mecenati solum. He
will not dissemble sleeping for any man's pleasure, but only for hope of
treasure. And if any of us your Majesty's Officers should chance to cry out
upon it, or to say with that innocent King Henry the Sixth, Forsooth you are to
blame, when he beheld certain Ladies, with their breasts nakedly discovered,
with their hair cut like a Tomboy, one of these horned rank will retort no
other counterplea, then Tarletons:

Woe to thee, Tarleton, that ever thou were borne,
Thy Wife has made thee a Cuckold, and thou must wear the Horn,
What and if she has? Am I a whit the worse?
She keeps me like a Gentleman with money in my Purse.
Hope of Gain to supply immoderate expenses extorteth a thousand complements
and ceremonious services; so that it is not Lust alone (for indeed Tobacco has
almost mortified that motion) which causes many to Court their Mistresses, or
these to entertain Servants, but the in finite charge of New Fashions of
Apparel, one while with the Spanish, another while Frenchified, does make
Clownes to wear Gowns, to polish their dull wits, and of Carterly dispositions
to become Courtly Musicians and Poetical Courtiers: As that English Satyrist
observed:

O those fair starlike eyes of thine, one says, ^^thers in his Sa^y^^.

When to my seeming she has look^ nine ways.
And that sweet breath, when I think out upon it
It would blast a flower, if she breathed on it.
But be she never so well qualified in affections, never so full of virtuous
qualities, Maid, Widow, or Wife, unless she have sufficient to defray this
endless cost of prodigality, she may stand long enough without courting, even
until moss grow to the soles of her feet.

Apollo having bewailed with tears the miserable Condition of his virtuous
Followers seduced now of late to regard the outside more then the precious
inside, which of old was reputed for the Temple of the Holy Ghost: and so to
respect gay Clothing and pompous Formalities, that even his chief Dependants
for Divinity with Aarons silver Bell in their mouths began to be polluted
with this enormitie to ruffle in rich Robes, and to flaunt with silken Sails,
he first commanded the Englishmans Picture standing like a Taylour with a pair
of Sheares in one hand, and Stuff in the other hand to apply himself to any
New Fashion, to be presently defaced; and one proper comely Fashion, to be
accomodated to every several Nation specially, to the English, of whom there
was a Proverb, that no sooner sprung up a Fashion among the Lackies at Paris,
but the Gallants in London would like Apes take it up as a pattern. Item, that
all persons, which attired themselves in time to come, contrary to this Edict,
should be branded with Infamy, and to we are Saint Bene^s Hood of Red, Green,
Blew, and Yellow Colors, which the Spanish Inquisition have ordained for their
Heretics converted upon every ^estiuall Day for the space of one whole year
next after the Offense committed. Item, that no Nation should hereafter presume
to wear Rayments of any other stuff, then was wrought within their native
Country, the Nobility only excepted. Item, that none should go up and down
hurried in Coaches to trouble the Carters and Passengers, unless they would
give a thousand pounds toward the Plantations in America, the Nobility
always excepted. And lastly, his Majesty knowing that without severe
Executioners, this Decree of his could not be kept inuiolably sacred, but that
some would escape unpunished by some Protection, or potent mean, like the
Spiders Cobweb, where the lesser Flies were entangled, and the Greater did
easily and robustuously break through, he charged Cato the Censor to see the
due performance without partiality.

CHAP. XII.
Apollo commands certain of his Attendants to prescribe remedies, how Husbands
should live with their Wives chastely, and without iea^^^sie to be Cuckolded,
as also how men should contemn the baits of Beautiful Women.

APollo having observed, that many Women cuckolded their Husbands, and by their
cunning pretenses had so gulled them, as to forsake their secure Demaynes in
the Country, and to compa^le Offices in the populous City of Parnassus, where
they might enjoy their unlawful pleasures, caused the Noble Knight Sir Philip
Sidney, together with Sir John Harrington the Translatour of Orlando, the
Satyrist Master Whatley the Preacher of Banbury and Orpheus Junior to set down
some wholesome remedies for married men to govern their Wives, that they horn
them not; and also that themselves might not be surprised with the subtilties,
or outward seeming beauty of strange women. Whereto they all obeyed, and Sir
Philip Sydney thus began:

Who does desire that chaste his Wife should be, Sir Philip S^dney.

First, be he true, for Truth does Truth deserve.
Then be he such as she his worth may see,
And one man still credit with her preserve.
Not toying kind, nor toy^shly unkind:
Not stirring thoughts, nor yet denying right:
Nor spying faults, nor in plain Errors blind:
Never hard hand, nor ever reins too light:
As far from want, as far from vain expense:
The one does force, the latter does entice.
Allow good Company, but keep from thence,
All fil^hy mouths, that glory in their vice.
This done thou have no more, but leave the rest
Unto thy Fortune, time, and woman's breast.
Concerning wives take this a certain Rule,
That if at first you let her have the rule, Sir John Har^^g^on.

Your self at length with her shall bear no rule,
Except you let her ever more to rule.
Yet in the house, as busy as a Be,
I am content my Wife sting all but me.
O rather let me love, then be in love;
So let me choose as Wife and Friend to find. Sir Thomas Ouer^ery.

Let me forget her Sex, when I approve.
Beasts liknesse lies in shape, but ours in mind.
Our Souls no Sexes have. Their Love is clean.
No Sex, both in the better part are men.
Domestic Charge does best that Sex besit
Contiguous business so to fix the mind.
That leisure space for fancies not admit.
Their leisure it is corrupts womankind
Else being plast from many vices free,
They had to Heaven a shorter cut then we.
Women's behavior is a surer bar,
Then is their No. That fairly does deny
Without denying; thereby kept they are
Safe even from hope. In part too blame is she
Which has without Consent been only tried.
He comes too near that comes to be denide.
Like a true Turtle with thine own Dove stay,
Else others twixt thy sheets may falsely play.
If thou will have her love and honor thee, A^i^s^^.

First, let her thine Affections largely see.
What she does for thee kindly that respect,
And show how thou her love do well affect.
Remember she is neighbor to thy heart,
And not thy slave: she is thy better part.
Think it is enough that her thou mighst command:
Whilst she in Marriage bonds does loyal stand,
Although thy power thou never do approve,
For that's the way to make her leave to love.
To go to Feasts and Weddings' among the Best,
It Is not amiss: for their suspect is least.
Nor is it meet that she the Church refrain,
Since there is virtue, and her Noble Train.
You have accutely run over, O immortal Spirits, said Master Whately of
Banburie, the duties of man and wife reciprocally, as they ought to bear the
one to the other if they lived virtuously; But what if the wife exceed in
wilful repugnancie or rather rebellion against her Husband, who is her Lord
and Head, as Christ is the Head and Crown of the Husband according to S. Paul,
and as I have punctually proved in my Work called the Bridebush, shall the Man
degenerate from his virilitie and Christian vigor, as to suffer his Subject
and underling to wax proud and to wear the Breeches? Shall he like
Sardanapalus, or effeminated Hercules sit spinning in a Petticoate among her
Maids, whiles she flaunts it, like an untamed Gallant, and iadishly kicks up
her heels with a knave, making her Lord accessarie to capital baudry? This
were an argument of base stupiditie in the Husband. Upon such an occasion, or
the like intolerable misdemeanure, as causeless scolding, or for fooling her
self and her Head before company by nicknaming him, or wantonly detracting
from his reverend authority, with the abbreuiated words of Jack, Tom, or Dick,
he must show his manly prerogative, and rebuke her for such ridiculous
carriage. Yea, and if there because he must like a wise Surgeon, use Cauteries
and sharp medecines. He must let her know the wise man's sentence, that a Rod
becomes the back of a Fool.

Orpheus Junior here interrupted Master Whatley. You need not cite Scripture
for beating a woman for that's her hearts desire, to verify the profane
Proverb, that an Ass, a Nut, and a Woman will never be good without beating.
And at Constantinople our Merchants report, that where a Turk has three or
four wives, that wife esteems her self happy and best beloved of her
husband, whom he most often graceth with correction. The Moscouites do
commonly practice this kind of Bencuolence on their wives skins. But whether
our women's hides can brook such favors, I do much doubt. For the truth is,
their skins in Moscouie are thicker, tougher, and buffe leather in comparison
of our soft skind Creatures; as also in all such cold Countries, Nature has
armed the very Foul and Beasts with strong thick out sides, to weather out and
endure the blustering blastes, and penetrable joy cold the better. Whereas in
our Climate, and from thence to the Tropickes the women's skins are tender,
and silken, which makes me somewhat to mislike that course, except her Husband
be well assured by some skillful Tanner that his Wives skin is as hard as
the Serpents both in the temper and the superficial toughness. For then he
may beelabour her coat soundly without danger. But if he feels her more
smoothe then Beuer, or softer then the Lambs, let him suspend his passion, and
refer his lambs skin to his arbitrament, that other whiles is forced to hold
the Wolf by the ears. Neither yet am I so obsequious a Servant to the Femal
Sex, nor care I to become an Idolist of a painted shrine (for whatsoever
earthly thing a man does too much magnify, or to speak more significantly,
what he dotes upon, is to commit Idolatry with that thing) but that I wish
the Husband to esteem Discretion more then debate, Instruction more then
Discipline, and to do as he would be done unto. Above all things I advise
him which lothes the brand of a Cuckold, not only to look into his wives
inward disposition with the wary eyes of Discretion, and to observe what
company she affects: but likewise that himself beware how he glance and
gad abroad after strange flesh. Which because he may the more easily perform,
let him fix this rule in his imagination, that his Soul combined with his
wives makes an harmonious union; that all women, specially other men's wives
have many foul defects. And if for all this, his judgment be so cracked, that
another woman becomes his amorous Saint, the only She in the world, and the
very Paragon of Beauty, with her hair, as Democritus Junior writes, more
yellow then Gold, with black eyes, a little D. Barton in his Anat. of
Mclancholy.
mouth, white teeth, of a pure sanguine complexion, soft and plump; an absolute
piece, her head from Prague, her paps from Austria, her belly from France, her
back from Brabant, her hands out of England, her feet from Rhine, her buttockes
from Switzerland, with the Spanish gate, the Venetian Tire, Italian complements
and endowments, let him nevertheless remember the continual casualties of
humane natures, how that a little Sickness, a Fever, the small pox, a scarre,
loss of an eye or limme, excessive heat or cold, childbearing, increase of
Age will riuell, mar, and dis-figure her all on a sudden; insomuch, that he
himself would scarce know her, whom he before did adore and admire.

Whereto let a man add her wanton face, and varieties of longing fits after
those things which will alter far stronger bodies then hers, as sweet wines,
strong drink, spiced caudells, slibber sauces, Suckets, Aqua vit^, Balm, or
wormwood water, being persuaded by idle-headed Midwiues and tattling Gossips,
that they are wholesome for the Body, whereas indeed they destroy the true
heat of life, so that by the use of these unnecessary drugs and liquors,
wherewith they glut themselves in corners, you shall not find one among a
thousand women, specially after Marriage, but she is diseased, either with
unnatural heat, a stinking breath, rotten teeth, a withered face, with a
windy mattrie stomach, casting up whole gobbets of snottie phlegm, like rotten
oysters, with the dropsy, or loathsome issue in her legs; or else she is
inwardly possessed by reason of those inflammations, with intolerable
peevishness, haughtiness of mind, or with such railing scolding moodes, that
she is fitter to be cubd up in Bedlem, then to cohabit with a civil
Gentleman. I say nothing of the disease called Pi^a, breaking out to the Green
Sickness in the unmarried, and in both sorts to a monstrous stupendous
lusting after such offensiues to nature, that I blush to name them, being fully
assured by him that wrote the Treatise of the passion of the mind, that a woman
of a temperate sparing diet will hardly be overtaken with this Infirmity. What
if this Goddess of his be not such beauty in very deed, as he believes,
but so fashioned by Art, perhaps her face is painted, done over with some
curious lick, as few of them are without it. Or else it is her gaudie clothes,
that set her out, so to beguile his eyes. There be other circumstances, which
an understanding man will muse upon, before he yield himself a slave to an
unconstant woman.

A puling Female Creature, which has smiles
Like Sirens Songs, and tears like Crocodiles.
As Withers exclaimes in his Satyrs. I have spoken the more pathetically of
this abuse, because I know it is one of the chief Causes, which makes our
Gentlemen to linger at home degenerating from their Ancestors, while the
industrious Spaniard houers abroad, and takes up the principal Harbors of the
Newfound World.

To conclude, It is not Force, Fear, fair words, Gifts, nor deeds of due
benevolence can keep a woman honest, if she be borne and bred of a skittish
Mother. For Cat after kind, she will follow nature, do what you can. To
verify this, let Man and Wife look on this Glass of fair Susannaes
education; and by the model of her nurture, let man learn a Mate to choose:

Vita piae Matris Susannae regula morum Ex Aglaia in Cambrens. Carol. Ad M^riam
Reginam.

Qualis erat Matter, Filia talis erat.
A cunis odit Miracula ficta Baalis
Polluit indignanec simulachra prece.
Non Abrahae, Mosi, Samueli, vota nec vlli
Sanctorum, soli fudit at ista Deo.
Vt scopulos fugit consortia vana malor^m,
Nunquam suspectos passa venire proc^s.
Quando rebellantes, quos raro, sentijt astus
Hos ieiunandicum precemulsit aqua.
Debita pensa suiper soluens muneris aeque,
Multiplici forma lintea pinxit acu.
Mollia filatrahens, fusis praestabat Arachnen
Sieve nouum tenui pectine finxit opus.
Nablia laeta sonis, operis pertaesa Dauidis
Increpat, and te^ero pollice filatrahit.
Psalmata saepe iu^at modulari voce recenset
Gesta Creatoris, Plasmata viua Dei.
Nunc canit Aegypti Miracula, Praeli^, Mannam;
Nunc sonat Haebraei rudera clara soli.
Inter dum Diuina legit, mox scribere tentat;
Ipsa quod exarat scribere tentat Opus,
Ne testudo domi videatur tetrica custos
Alterna visit rura paterna vice.
Interbum cum Matre pialoca publica visit,
Nec sine Test foris contulit illa gradum.
As Mothers are, so will the Daughters be:
Chaste was Susannaes Mother, chaste was she.
Baals Miracles she from her Cradle knew,
As how veins Tombs with Idols to eschew,
She honored Abram, Moses, and the Saints;
But unto God she framed her Complaints.
Bad Company she shunned, as Rockie shelues,
And feared suspected Suitors worse then Elues.
If Flesh and Blood in her began to tickle,
She mortified her thoughts, that were so fickle.
She fasted often, but oftener used to pray;
To which she joined some labor every day.
No Day without a Line. She daily wrought,
Sometimes on Needle, when she fitting thought.
Or spunne by Distaffe, or the Wheel she rowld,
Sometimes on Loome, her skill she would unfold.
At times she stirred more busy then the Be,
And was well pleased the Maids to ouer-see.
Tired with household business on Harp she plays
Or Violl, which she tunes to David's Lays.
One while she sings for her recreation
Of Noah's Arc, and the first Creation.
Another whiles of Aegypts Miracles,
Her Nation blessed with Sinaes Oracles;
Their wandering forty years with Manna fed,
And in the Desert by an Angel led.
Now of their Wars she tells with warbling voice,
Anon of Iewries fall with doleful noise.
One while she reads, another while she writes;
She writes those rules, which she herself endites.
Some other time, to draw the Countries Air,
She went abroad, but never to a Fair.
Least, Tortoiselike cub'd up, she might take harm,
She goes abroad to see her Fathers Farm.
The Fields she likes, but more the Garden walks,
To note Gods works in seeds, herbs, flowers, and stalks,
Yea, and though seldom, she the Town suruayes
With her dear Mother witness of her ways.
CHAP. XIII.
A Corollary or an epitomized Censure of Apollo pronounced after the aforesaid
Opinions delivered touching the Election of Wines and their usage.

AFter these Gentlemen had delivered their several Judgments how men should
not only choose their wines, and conform them to their wills but like wise take
away all the Occasions of unlawful Love, ie pleased his Imperial Majesty to
add these few Admonitions: Well have ye, O my vertnous Minions, discoursed of
the affections of the (...)
Female Sex. And I do approve and confirm your positions, with this Caveat
to the Man, that he make choice of a Wise by the Ears, and not by the Eyes.
And to the woman, I advise her not to presume on her own Conceit, either of
her honesty, wit, or love of Company, as to give way unto fl^ttering and idle
speeches of any Man whatsoever, but at the first touch with a brave, yet modest
disdain to bid Satan a^oid, though he speak in an Angels shape, lest
otherwise she be misconstrued loose. For it is enough for a Man, because he
is a Man to be honest, though he does but seem so. But for a woman, because
she is a woman, it is not enough to be chaste, if she be not known to be
chaste; yea and apparently known, in despite of the Devil and all his
Followers.

CHAP. XIIII.
Cato the Censour of good manners having arrested certain Persons a drinking
more then the Laws prescribed them, brings them before Apollo.

His Majesty reproues them for their Drunkenness, and banisheth them for ever
out of the precincts of Parnassus.

Upon the tenth of June last, 1626. Cato the diligent Inquisitour and Censour
of good manners having apprehended four persons in a Wine-tauerne, which had
drunk ten quarts of strong wine at a sitting, brought them before Apollo to be
censured, and humbly desired his Majesty that he would show some exemplarie
punishment on those bestiall persons, who albeit they drank more then a dozen,
yet could they not perform the deeds of two able men, either in the bodies
Actions, or in the Spirits functions. Apollo asked them what tempted them to
lade their bodies with so much strong Liquor? They answered, that it was not
the love of the wine, but of the Company, which drew them to carowse so many
pots. And further they alleged, that their natures being accustomed to drink,
they bare it out well without the least giddiness in the head, reeling, or
staggering, which as long as they could so do, they hoped no man might tax
them of Drunkenness. To this Apollo replied, that by the late Statutes of
England no Travelers might drink above one q^^rt of Ale or Beer at a penny
the quart, upon one ^itting or meal: so that to drink more then that measure
prescribed by Law, ought to be construed Drunkenness, because the wise
Lawmakers of that State foresaw, that so much would serve any reasonable
Creature. But to exceed that quantity in a stronger kind of liquor, in
Corsicke, Greek or Falerne wines could not but redound to Drunkenness in the
superlatiue degree. And whereas (said he) ye would cover your Drunkenness
with the ableness of your brain, I must tell you, that he is to be termed a
real Drunkard which surpasses the set stint of his Countries Laws, or if he
enters after his bibbing into any unseemly passion or borrowes the gesture of
a raging Lion, of the toyish Ape, of the sensual Hog, or of the lascivious
Goat, prattling or acting any feats more then are decent, or more then he used
at other times, he may be branded with the note of a Drunkard, then which
nothing is more odious in the sight of our virtuous Society. Bring a horse to
the water, all the world cannot urge him to drink more then suffices nature
at that time. And yet man a Creature enriched with free will in natural
things, will prove himself worse then the Beasts which have no understanding.
Most honorable be those Masters of Families, which hate and curb this wanton
excess of Drinking in their Servants. And worthy of applause in our Court is
that Nobleman, who seeing no admonitions nor change of Butlers could restrain
his unruly Servants from this Swinish vice, caused his seller to be removed,
by building one within his Parlour, whereby shame, his Eye being upon them,
might bridle their inordinate affections, freely protesting, that he would
have nothing spent which might be honestly spared, nor any thing spared which
might be honestly spent; that it was not the expense, but civil government to
settle sobriety in his house, which made him to take so strict a course. In
this he imitated that Learned Emperor Antonius Pius, which banished all the
Winetauernes in Rome, because he saw his Subjects begin to turn Drunkards,
and that none but Apothecaries should presume to sell any wine; and that, as
Phy sick to the sick and weak. Heretofore a King of England noting that by
the Company of the Daues all his Subjects were infected with this Sin, he
imposed a fit and limited measure for every man to drink by. Within these
fifty years Drunkenness was scarce known in England. At such time as the
Low Country wars began, the soldiers at their return by the Devils
temptations brought it thither to impouerish their native Country. And until a
set s^int be provided for pledging and carowsing with a Law to make the
misdoers infamous and incapable of promotion, it will hardly be rooted out. What
a preposterous thing is it, that one man should drink more then might satisfy
sour honester men then himself? What a shame is it that the Ilanders of Great
Britain should wast in wine, malt, and hops more then would serve to
maintain forty thousand men in the Field?

How simple is that excuse of yours, O ye children of Bacchus, that ye care
more for the company then for the liquor? Do not ye know, that he which
touches pitch shall become defiled therewith? In Holy writ it is registered:
Thou shall not follow a maltitude to do evil. And again, have Exodus cap. 23.
no fellowship with the Instruments of Satan, but rether reprove them. Which
likewise King Solomon Ephesians. cap. 5.
long before admonished to take heed of. Be not (says he) of the number of
them, which are bibbers P^ou. cap. 23.
of wine, for the Drinker and the Feaster shall become poor. In like manner
the Prophet rouzeth them up with an alarm: Awake, ye Drunkards, weep and
howl. And in another place, the Wise man denounces a woe unto them which rise
up early to follow locl. cap. 1. Prou. cap. 5.
Drunkards. If the fear of Gods Judgments work not in your heedlesse wills,
yet the daily tortures, wherein ye see before your eyes thousands afflected
ought, to imprint some sensible motion in you to beware by others harms of
drunken Company. The Apoplexy, the Gout, Dropsy, Ague, spring out of this
enchanting fountain.

In regard of these gross abuses, we do utterly banish these present
Drunkards out of our Territories of Parnassus; And we do also enact that none
of this infamous rout presume hereafter to touch our sacred two topt Mount.
Provided nevertheless and be it excepted out of the Premises, that it shall be
lawful at the end of every meal for any honest man, without impeachment of
Drunkenness to pledge and carowse one draught of good liquor to their gracious
Adversaries, as a token of reconciliation, as the cup of Charity, poculum
Charitat is, which the Founder of Trinity College in Oxford decreed for ever
among his Fellows and Scholars, or poculum boni Genij, the cup of good
fellowship to the health of their cheerful nature, which the Romans practiced
at their Feasts. And because the Coel. R^odigi^. lib. 28. cap. 6.
representation of this ugly vice may appear in men's imaginations with some
more feeling dint, we require our Pronotarie to publish these verses:

What at this day do Britains Tongues bewray?
That by strong liquor some have gone astray.
Faiths Temple they pollute with Cup and Can,
In Duties failing toward God and Man.
They spend their wealth, spoil their health, mar their wits
By drinking more then sober men befits.
Thus have our bordring Dutehmen lately swill'd,
Until their Pots with Neighbors blood are filled,
Repent, be wise in time by others harms;
Fly witching Cups for fear of after-harmes.
If not: your King your Tauernes must destroy,
Least suffering Sin himself do feel annoy.
Curtua vox titubat, mea magna Britannia? Baccho
Dederis, and Templum contemerare Dei. Euphrosine in Cam^rens. Caro.

Ebrietate scatet Germania; pocula vindex
Replet at humano plena cruore Deus.
Toll moras, iubet ipse Deus, resipisce, Tabernas
Effuge Circ^as: Luxuriare cave.
Qui mala non prohibet, cum possit, conscius esto:
Has potes infames, Rex, prohibere domos.
CHAP. XV.
The Author of this Treatise called the Golden Fleece exhibits a Bill of
Complaint against the Tobacconists of Great Britain.

Apollo condemns the immoderate use of Tobacco, and recommends the care of the
extermination thereof to the Clerg^e and the Temporal Magistrate.

THe Author and Publisher of this present Treatise, seeing the beastly vice of
Drunkenness like to be quite cashierd out of his native Country, with a streit
commandment from his Majesty to the Coustables of every several Division, to
conueigh the Offenders, from Parish to Parish toward the Seaside, where they
should take shipping for the Low Countries or Germany, from whence they first
had it: he like wise burned with zeal to have the common Takers of Tobacco
sent after them. For, as he informed Apollo, it was not possible utterly to
banish Drunkenness out of the Land, as long as the shooinhorne stand behind,
that Tobacco-taking of late years supplied the use of Preparatiues, Leaders,
or drawers on of drink, such as Caueare and salt meats were used among the
Sibarites. To this Apollo answered, that it were fit Physicians should cause
some skillful Surgeons to let them blood, in vena cephalica, in the head vein,
or to purge them with black Hellebore, for surely men began to grow mad and
crazed in the brain in that they would adventure to suck the smoke of a weed,
nay if it were never so Catholic Medecin, at all times, feasting and fasting,
in health as well as sickness, without regard had to the persons, ages, sexes,
times, temperatures, moist or dry, hot or cold. All this has been sundry
times repeated unto them by many zealous Physicians of the Soul and Body,
replied the Complaynant. And for my poor Talent, albeit neither Divine nor
Physician I have not buried the same, but in most of my works I have rebuked
the excessive taking of Tobacco, and chiefly, in my Book entitled Directions
for Health, I have canuased this abominable vice, I freely showed, that by the
inordinate taking of it, the course of Nature was perverted, the state of the
body turned topsie turuie, when the Nose, like a Chimney, did vent out
unnatural smokes, which ought to exhale and breathe with natural Air, when
the mouth ordained by nature to receive in sustenance for the whole body is now
become a privy hole to spet, to spew, to spatter, and bel^h without need, yea
and to cast up whole gobbets of most necessary fleame, like stinking Oysters:
when the stomach the bodies Kitchen, which ought to be kept sweet, must
harbor loathsome dampes, filthy excrements, and bad smells worse then the snuff
of a Candle, which otherwise would quickly pass through the guts to the sink
of the body.

Apollo at this relation demonstrated apparent tokens of sorrow, and commanded
all the devout Preachers of Parnassus to join their heads together to beat
the inconveniences into their Auditors consciences, and under pain of the
Thunderbolt of Excommunication to will them to desist from making that crooked,
which God had made straight, from defiling the house where the Holy Spirit
ought to reside as a sanctified seat. Whereto the sacred Ministers made
answer, that they had employed the uttermost of their endeauours to cleanse
that pure place, but by reason of sundry invisible spirits, which the Devil
sent to tempt their Flocks, they contemned their wholesome counsels. And for
the other point of Exconsmunication, that wrought less effect, by reason that
that spiritual power in these days degenerated from the proper use, being too
commonly wrested and fulminated against men, even for not paying of some petty
Fees due to the Officers of the Court.

Well then, said Apollo, if Saint Peter's Keys cannot prenayle, let Saint Paul's
Sword, or rather that of Saint Peter's, where with he struck off Malchus Ear,
serve to cut off this superfluous member. And to this end I require the
Politic Magistrates for their Countries good to punish all such common
Tobacco-takers; and because they may do it with our warrantable authority,
let them proclaim these rules in every place within their Jurisdictions.

Regna Britanna libras ter centum mill quotanne
Expendunt morbos accelerando nouos.
Non opus Helleboro: iam quisque Tobaccon ab Aula
Principi^ ad caulam pauperis vsque bibit.
Vnde duplex vacuum sentit Respublica, Nummi
Et Cerebri: vacuo gaudet vtroque Satan.
Cur tuba tardescit? Cur non taratantara Martis
Horrida crudeli vis nec ab host venit?
Corporis and Belli neruos Gens Anglica per dit;
Deficit Argentum, deficit humor alens.
Qui fumo gaudet, pereat caligine fumi;
Pectoris arctati nec been purgat aquam.
Hecticus hinc morbus crassisque mephitibus auctus,
Qui Climacterico tempore finit opus:
Finit opus Fatale; facit quoque Prolis abortum.
Ah nimium Veneris perfidus hostis Odor!
Eius at Hyssopi substantia mixta liquore
Conferat Asthmaticis vt medicina data.
Three hundred thousand pounds ye yearly spend
In hastening griefs unto a deadly end.
Ye need not Hellebore. Tobaccoes fume
From Court and Cottage will expel the rheum.
Alas fond Fools! which spend your means and health,
With Satan's joy, and hurt to Commonwealth.
Why come not in your Foes to do you harm?
The English faint, if they but hear Alarm.
When Humors quail, the Spirits move but dull,
When Subjects fail, the Exchequer is not full.
Let them, that love the Smoke, fall with the smell.
It Is true, Tobacconists; why do ye swell
With anger at the truth? Ere seven years end
Tobacco will the banefull force extend.
It breeds a wheezing in a narrow breast,
The Hecktick Fever, or thick Fleame at least.
A bastard heat within the veins it leaves,
Which spoils the Infant, if the Wife conceiues.
Yet sipt with Hysops juice, or held in mouth,
Or snuft, it cures the Lungs, and Tisickes growth.
CHAP. XVI.
Traiano Boccalini the Author of the Book called the Newfound Politic
complayneth to Apollo, that the Seven Wisemen of Greece, who were put in trust
to reform the World, did deceive his Majesty's expectation; and that the World
was worse then ever it was.

Apollo retires himself in discontent; but at length by the Fraternity of the
Rosy Cross, he is comforted and walks along with them in Procession.

TRaiano Boccalini the late Publisher of the News of Parnassus, whether of
Zeal, or of Ambition, or of envy to see many of his equals promoted in
Apolloes Court, informed his Majesty, that the Seven Wisemen of Greece and
others, whom he had deputed to reform the World of their late corruptions, had
more theorically and scholastically discoursed of remedies, then really found
out any in substance to curb or cure them. The Wiseman Thales, he said, would
feign have a Surgeon of the Fairy-land to open a little window in the heart of
man, whereby all his deceitfulness might appear to one another sight. But
forsooth for fear of a greater peril in launcing a musckle or principal
vein in this miraculous fabric of man's body, this speculatiue window must be
let alone. Solon persuaded them to take away the inequality of Mine and Thine,
and to divide the whole world anew, whereby every man the Beggar as well as the
King, might have his just share. Chilon advised to banish the use of those
Metals of Gold and Silver, as the pestiferous root of all Evil. Pittacus laid
the fault of the modern abuses upon Rewards conferred on men of mean deserts,
who entering into the sacred seats of Justice perverted all the Blessings, which
God bestowed on Mankind, and caused their Attendants and Officers to be
nicknamed Leaches, Butchers, and Tyrants. Periander would have the imaginary
virtues of Fidelity and Secrecy restored and stamped in men's minds. Bias his
Project was to hunt men into their ancient habitations, where their old
Ancestors inhabited a thousand years past to give elbow room to the rightful
Owners. Cleobulus pronounced his definitive sentence, that all the scope of the
worlds reformation consisted in Rewarding the Good, and in punishing the
wicked. Cato would have the Catarrattes and windows of Heaven opened and the
whole World drowned again, excepting some few of the male Children, to whom
he wished an ingendring and spreading power to be given like Bees, to
continue the race of men without being beholding unto any more women, whose
vnvnluckinesse, pride, and vanity, as he said, occasioned all the villainies,
which deformed the present World. In conclusion, Traiano Boccalini accused
these Reformers for their Hypocritical suggestions and conspiracies against
the sacred honor of Apollo, in setting out Proclamations only to please
Fools, that no Hucksters should sell oaten meal, or pease by a false dish,
and such like trifling matters. And these frivolous Proclamations they divulged
of purpose to blind the eyes of the multitude, to seem to do somewhat, when
as their Office and charge was to see a general Reformation of all the most
notorious Vices, which infected the Generation of humane kind, as Simony, sale
of Judges places, Bribery, and the like.

Apollo knowing this to be true, which Boccalini with his too too lavish
tongue had blabbed abroad, and ashamed, that every common Citizen of Parnassus
began now to smell out the drist of his Statesmen, and could readily descant of
those secrets, which in ancient times as a divine mystery they concealed from
vulgar minds, he retired himself much discontented as well in respect of this
cause, as for that it lay not in his absolute will to root out the knowledge of
Evil from the Christian World. The Lady Minerua and the nine Muses labored to
mitigate his Matesties grief; telling him, that Sin must reign, as long as
men bear sway in the World, vitia erunt donec homines. But no persuasions
prevailed. No Company pleased his humor, save sad Melpomenes, insomuch that
many doubted lest some strange kind of Melancholy, which the Physicians never
heard of, would whirle about the brains of the virtuous, and at the last
eclipse the glorious light of their understanding, if the chief Lord of
wisdoms Society should continue long in his retired Lodge.

While both the Head and members of this sacred Corporation suffered in this
Labyrinth of sorrow and shame, the Lady Mnemosyne brought his Majesty word,
that four grave personages were newly arrived at his Court Gate, stiling
themselves the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross. At the first he seemed to
slight the news, thinking they might be some of those Cabalisticall
Mountebankes, which went abroad selling of smoke, and making credulous persons
to believe, that they were of a Mathematical fry, and race of wise
Philosophers, to whom Mercurius Trismegistius had transferred the never erring
Art of discerning Truth from falsehood, the means to unite the variable will of
man, and that which Worldlings do most prize, to make the Philosophers Stone.

But when he better understood, that this Fraternity were attired in long
white Robes, with Olive branches in their hands, and that they were the four
famous Patrones of Great Britains Monarchy, Saint George, Saint Andrew,
Saint David, and Saint Patricke, and that they attended at his Palace Gate for
his coming forth to Procession, great was his Joy; and presently without
intermission his Imperial Majesty came forth, and after he had reverently
embraced and graced this Noble Fraternity, he told them the Causes of his
late discontent, and that he took himself to be much favored, that they
resorted to visit him now in his griefs extremity. Saint George answered,
that the causes of his sadness conceived for the vices and decays of Great
Britain proceeded of a fellow-feeling of a virtuous Conscience, and to that
end they came now to discover their knowldge, and to lay open the general
faults of that Monarchy in a new kind of tickling strain, not so much to
content the Judicious, for they that be whole need no Physicians, as to draw
the carnal minds of the Common people to hear their vices blamed, and
consequently to make them ashamed, which are not altogether past grace. And
now, said he, if it please your Majesty and your Learned Train to walk
along with us in Procession round about this eminent City of Parnassus, we
will consecrate the Churches anew, which perhaps will work some remorse and
contrition; and for the obstinate, we will bless our selves and the Godly
from their contagious Company.

Apollo bad them go forwards, and that himself, the Lady Pallas, the Muses,
the Graces, and all his Court even from his Bedchamber to the Kitchen should
follow to see the Consecration, and to hear the Vices and Errors of the
Britains discovered.

The famous Patriarchs went forwards in such manner as the modern Clergy are
wont to go in Procession, and every one of them successively sung as follows
against the Corruptions of the Times.

CHAP. XVII.
The four Patrones or Patriarchs of Great Britain do sing in Procession the
ensuing Rithmes.

Apollo pronounces a conclusiue Oracle to remedy all Abuses, preparing the
way to the Golden Fleece.

S. George. FRom painting of the Trinity
From jesting with high Majesty,
From the Alcoran and Papistry,
From Brokers rotten Tapistry.
From deep Mysteries too holy:
From mad Fits and Melancholy;
From Jesuits Monks, and Friars:
From Hypocrites, Knaves and Liers.
From trusting Saints, distrusting God
From feeling of his wrath and rod.
From Romes Pardons, Bulls and Masses:
From Wine Lees, and broken Glasses.
From Sale of Souls, and Heavens Gifts;
From Beads and bables, Whoorish shifts.
From wounding Christ on Gods right hand:
From grounding Faith upon the sand.
From parting thence by any way
His Body placed until Doomesday.
From condemning sacred Marriage:
From secret shrift, and lust full rage.
From Trust to Merits, except Christ's
From Iuglers tricks and Antichrists.
Our Christ's great Genius Bless and defend us.

S. Andrew. FRom blaming things indifferent:
From working in our Faith a rent.
From aselfe-will'd rash Puritan,
As from a Fool, or Mauritane.
From him that railes against a Cope,
And yet would be his Parish Pope.
From engrossing from a Brother
Goods or Charge due to another.
From many Offices alone,
Or Benefices more then One.
From causing Scandal to my Place,
Usurping much with shameless face.
From Clergymen non Residents:
From such as show ill Presidents.
From s^it Pick-locks, and Cutpurse Knines:
From stealing Honey from Bee-^ines.
From sta^^ting in another Coat,
Like Aesops Daw, preaching by roat,
From Dancing on the Sabbath Day:
From showing Youth lewd Cupids way.
Our Saviors Genius Shield and protect us.

S. David. FRom swallowing Law with greedy throat:
From tearing Christ his seamelesse Coat.
From selling Christ for Earthly dross;
From wealth gained by good Christians loss.
From Judges sentence after Sack:
From Thunder, Tempests, and Sea-wracke.
From those, which Plaintiffes most approve;
As from Munkeyes, which Spiders love.
From Laws, which wrest the Sickmans staff:
From Swine, which ^ate mo^e Foul then draffe.
From letting Lawyers have their wills:
From Scammonie made into Pills.
From hirelings Tongues, and Make-bates hiss,
Betraying Law with Judas kiss.
From a corrupted starely Judge,
Which makes good Clients moyle and drudge.
From Magistrates too insolent:
From needless Courts impertinent.
From them which speak not what they think;
Which blame small faults, at greater wink.
From Judges vpstars late from Clownes:
From Serpents stings, or Tyrants frowns.
The Worlds bright Genius Keep and defend us.

S. Patrick. FRom hired Spies, and hidden Foes,
More dangerous then any woes.
From Leaders young, or too too Old:
From Soldiers known of nature Cold.
From Butchers, which man's blood do spill:
From sparing those, whom God bids, kill.
From a Commander meanly borne:
From reaping Tares ins^eed of Corn.
From hopes in Captains not beloved;
From ordring Bees, when they are moved.
From meeting Straglers night or day
Left unprovided by the way.
From Soldiers tumul^s, ta^^ts, and quips,
If long unpaid in Forts or Ships.
From Leaders without stratagems;
From letting Hogs have precious Gems.
From a Leader too out-ragious:
From a Captain not courageous.
From filthy moors and Irish bogs,
From Scottish mists and English fogs.
Discretions Genius Shield and prevent us.

S. George. FRom Spanish Pensions, and their Spies:
From weeping Cheese with Argus eyes,
From slumbring long in careless Peace:
From dreaming often of curelesse ease.
From fond Maskes, and idle mumming:
From feigned Plays and causeless drumming.
From preferring Peace with danger
Before just War, wrongs revenger.
From suffering Foes to triumph still;
From letting Satan have his will.
From falling from Saint Michaels arms,
Not taking heed by others harms.
From puffing up proud Giants grown:
From pulling David's courage down.
From loving Money more then God;
From keeping Beans within the cod.
From disbursing needful treasure,
To maintain phant astick pleasure.
From greasing Lawyers hands with Gold,
Which better serves to keep a Hold.
From fostring Suites (O poys^ous Toad)
For Money, which ends Wars abroad.
From those men, which sue Protections
To shroud their lewd shrewd Defections.
Great Britains Genius Guard and restore us.

S. Andrew. FRom Jesuits old converted,
As from Brownists young per^erted.
From the Simony of a Priest;
From Mills, which spoil the Owners griests.
From glorying in an outward Robe:
From tainting Faith. The Saints Wardrobe.
From a Priest, that couets money;
From a Bee-hiue without Honey,
From Preachers, which to Pride incline,
Or from old plainness may decline.
From those, which in silk Robes do ruffle,
Which more for Goods then Good do scuffle.
From such as line upon the l^rch,
Like Dogs and Hogs within the Church.
From men, whose wits lie in their beards;
From Goats, and all such impious herds.
From the Bibles false construction,
As from ruin and destruction.
From all Aequiuocation,
With mental reservation.
From Romes Charms and Babels Ballets:
From Lumbards bits and Spanish Sallets.
Our Christian Genius, Save and protect us.

S. David. FRom Westminster Hals Out-laries:
From causeless long vagaries.
From meeting strong Competitours:
From Judges grown Sollicitours.
From contesting with Superiors,
Or despising ^^r ^^feriours,
From contending with our Equals,
Procuring anger, blows, or brawles.
From crossing men in their disputes;
From losing love, and Friends salutes:
From angring Lords, or Court Minions:
From self-will and wits opinions.
From Lawsuits worse, then Spanish Pox,
As bad as Horns, or Widows box.
From ignorant Clerks and Deacons;
From seeing of fired Beacons.
From angring God with Cup or Can:
From drinking more, then serves one man.
From keeping Drunkards company:
From Agues, Coughes, or Timpany.
From Alehouses, Bowling Allies;
From Bulls Pizzles, and Spaines Galleys.
Sweet virtues Genius Bless, shield, and save us.

S. Patrick. FRom all Actions, which are evil;
From vain shows, the Flesh, and Devil.
From all State Reason hatched in Spain,
Which will do wrong, and wrong maintain.
From bloody Clements cursed Knife,
That sought to spoil his Souereignes life.
From Rauiliacks dawned Dagger:
From Jesuits, that will swagger.
From Foreign F^^s invasions:
From Papisticall persuasions.
From them, which make free Christians (...).
Ambitious Do^s with Moorish branes.
From sudden Insurrections:
From poisoned Confections.
From the Spanish Inquisition:
From want of good Munition.
From false and lewd Conspiracies:
From Rouers and Sea Pi^acies.
From rampant Nuns now clad in gray:
From Strumpets wholly given to play.
From burning baits and Sins desire;
As from the smoke of Sea-coale fire.
Our Saviors Genius Save and defend us.

S. George. FRom carrying Coin out of this Land
Without the which it cannot stand.
From Wares and Bills of Bankers strange,
Except we cloth and fish exchange.
From bringing back the Foxes Tail
For many Skins sold by retaile.
From private Gain by public loss:
From coming home by weeping Cross.
From wasting Woods for Timber fit;
From Trojans too late after wit.
From high Sails, and costly Coaches:
From Pickpurse Drugs, and much Loches.
From all Tobaccoes stinking fume:
From a foul breath, and store of Rheum.
From wearing Gold or Siluer-lace,
While Dearth and Wars rush on apace.
From Meat and Drink served in much Plate,
When Pe^^ry afflicts the State.
From such, as English Carzey slight,
Preferring Spaines Silks weak and light.
Our States great Genius Bless and defend us.

S. Andrew. FRom eating Flesh instead of Fish:
From having Scandal in my dish.
From spending time at Tragedies:
Or hard got Coin at Comedies.
From reading foolish Rimers Books,
Or lying Tales, like bayted hooks.
From much Play at Noddy and Trumpe:
As from the Smell of foul ship-pumpe.
From many Horses, Hounds, and Hawks
Actaeons end, or plots of Faukes.
From idle Tales, Wares and Fables:
From Primero, Gleeke, and Tables.
From Irish, Lurch, Chance, and Ticktack.
The Boot deserving or the Rack.
From the Truth maskt in disguises:
From all friuolus surmises.
From Cursing and from Perjury:
From Coining and from Forgery.
From Parasites, Knaves, and Sharkers,
From such Dogs, as are no barkers.
From an Alchymist grown threed-bare:
From much carke, and foolish care
The Heavens high Genius. Guard and refine us.

S. David. FRom being unthankful unto friends:
From leaving Angels, loving f^ends.
From all Physicians Recipes,
Which commonly prove Decipes.
From Physic at a Papists hand:
From him, which hat es his Native Land.
From an Emperickes experience:
From a Scriueners straight-lac't Conscience.
From Tauernes, Tables, Cards, and Dice;
From Beggary, bad Name, and Lice.
From boystrous storms and blustering blasts:
From ships at Sea, which have no masts.
From Pot-bardhs and Poetasters:
From all unthrifts, and great wasters.
From them, which dine always in Powles:
From all Carousers in great bowls.
From a Crab face, which never smiles:
From Lawyers full of quirkes and wiles.
From Usurers, and base Brokers;
From Attourneyes, that be soakers.
From Cutthroat Mercers baits and Books:
From Bears, big bugs, and ravenous Rookes.
From women's smiles and tempting looks:
From Crocodiles and Cheaters hooks.
From a woman, which is frantic:
From a Seruingman Pedantick.
From too much sweat and trudging toil,
As from a Lamp without some Oil.
Heavens bright G^nius Shield and prevent us.

S. Patrick. FRom Vagabonds, Kn^nes, and Gypsies:
From Comets and Suns Eclipses.
From bloody Surgeons, that would purge us:
From cruel Judges, that would scourge us.
From a young Physicians Physic;
From the Lungs, Consumption, T^sick.
From brain sick Lovers f^nd Conceits:
From coozening Pedlers strange deceits.
From Coughes, Blindness, and Vettigo:
From Biles, Tetters, and Serpigo.
From all Poxes and the Meazels;
From a House too full of Weazels.
From the Plague and putrid Fever
Bless me, Lord, and keep me ever.
From the Scuruie, Crampe, and Itches,
From Bone-aches, and sore Stiches.
From the Gout, the Stone and Collicke;
Which some hinder to be frollicke.
From numme Palsies, and p^le Dropsies;
From secret Griefs and Pleurisies.
From Scabbedhands and foul Blisters:
From Purgations and much Glisters.
From Gluttony and Drunkenness
Causing these, and every sickness.
True Physics Genius. Convert and heal us.
FRom Seruingmen without good parts:
From feeding such fit for dung-carts.
From Lubbers that will eat and drink,
Doing nothing else, but lie and stink.
From r^de Carters, and raw Sailors;
From Quicksands, and Bedlem-Raylers.
From Bonds for Debts, or Indentures;
As from perilous Adventures.
From one that fears to tame a Scold:
From a Coward and a Cuckold.
From proud Ladies use of Pattens:
From the Popes and Paris Mattens.
From those which scorn their Countries tire,
And to Outlandish bend, like Wire.
From those, which long for each trifle.
And their Husbands Purses rifle.
From those, which hunt for curious cheer,
Chicken Peepers, and Phesants dear.
From Ladies use of waters hot;
From pimpled faces, and teeths rot.
From them, which love themselves alone;
Or such, as love more Mates then one.
From a woman, that's wont to friske:
From Wine, which tastes not lively brisk.
Our Souls bright Genius Divert and keep us.

S. Andrew. FRom Men's long locks, and Maids cut hair;
From these with points, those painted fair.
From Citizens like Gallants dressed:
From Apes vngrac't, and so unblessed.
From things, Scandal which engender;
Geese with Ganders changing gender;
From Periwickes and curled locks:
From Womanizers, and Smel-smockes.
From Newfangles, and Fond-fashions;
From fools fancies, and wild Passions.
From setting Maids to Dancing Schools,
Or Music much, to make them Fools.
From a Cockney shallow-headed,
Tells not what legs a Sheep has dead.
From gazing on a Beauteous skin:
From a fair Apple, foul within.
From kissing much a Damsel sweet,
Though for a Pope a morsel meet.
From sucking on a lickrish bait:
From making crooked what is strait.
From fair Gazers out at Casements;
From false Mistresses embracements.
From Slanders cutting worse then Swords;
From bawdy Jests, and beastly words.
The Stars fair Genius Save and direct us.

S. David. FRom lulling in a Ladies lap,
Like a great Fool, which longs for pap.
From Time ill spent, and vain Repute:
From Apple Trees without some fruit.
From Faith without wrought Charity;
From false pretending Piety.
From love of Pelf and worldly wealth,
Not carking most for my Souls health.
From Silver Pictures love or Gold;
From fancying Earth, when I am old.
From buying Lands Old and cruel;
From losing Heaven, gayning Hell
From Dives fare, and hardened mind;
While Lazarus with hunger's pined.
From tumbling in a downy bed,
While Godlier men for cold lie dead.
From Misers, and those greedy Elues,
Which love no Creatures but themselves.
From wishing Neighbors lazy bones,
When Hiues are full, to play the Drones.
From sneaking like a Snaile at home;
When Foreign Climes yield elbow rome;
From them which hate Plantations:
From Satan's combinations.
Our Christ's bright Genius Bless and reform us

S. Patrick. FRom a fair House which seldom smoakes,
While the Owner in Riot soakes.
From slavish prodigality:
From miserable frug alitie.
From a Cloak that is full of patches:
From a Hen which never hatches.
From seeing Elues or strange Monsters;
Or those men my mind misconsters.
From those which causlesse do arrest us.
When we would gladly sit and rest us.
From such sights make us amazed:
From a Chamber not well glazed.
From rude people in a fury:
From a false and partial Jury.
From Almanacks false predictions:
From the Exchange and Currents fictions.
From White Spaniards, or Red headed:
From all Women which are bearded.
From Black-haird Women, stubborn proud:
From Little Devils scolding loud.
From the Faire-snouted held for Fools;
From all long slow-backs, idle tools.
From Red-hair'd Foxes, closely bad:
From pale and lean, too peevish sad.

The Worlds great Genius, Bless and defend us.

After these devout Patriarchs and famous Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, had
made an end of their Hymns with an applauding Alleluiah to the Divine
Majesty, for the discovery of themselves now at a pinch, when Satan thought
to sist us all as Wheat, and utterly to eclipse the glory of this Monarchy,
they interceded unto Apolloes Majesty, that he would proclaim some
favorable Edict on the behalf of their humble and penitent Clients. Whereupon
the Noble Emperor rose up from his Sunny Throne, and pronounced his Oracle.

If Britains King like valiant Hercules,
His Stables cleanse, and those Foxes footlesse, Apolloes Oracle.

Which Christian Vines destroy, do firret out;
His Provinces shall rise without all doubt.
And bravely flourish by our Golden Fleece;
As Rome was, saved once by the noise of Geese,
So he restrain some of these vagaries:
For Contraries are cured by Contraries.
CHAP. XVIII.
Orpheus Junior shows that one of the chiefest causes of the Decay of Trading
in Great Britain proceeded by the rash Adventures of the Western Merchants
in passing the Straites of Gibraltar, and in fishing on the Coast of
Newfoundland, without wafting ships to defend them from Pirates.

THe next day after this memorable Procession of the famous Fraternity. Apollo
caused a public Proclamation to be set up on the great Porch of Neptunes
Royal Exchange, willing and requiring all such as wished well to Great
Britain to repair with their grieuances before him into the Hall of the said
Exchange, where he had appointed a particular meeting for the affairs of that
Commonwealth in the afternoon of the said day. Orpheus Junior finding by
experience, that one of the late causes of the Decay of Trade arose by the
misgouerned and straggling courses of the Western Merchants, which either of
foole-hardinesse, carelessenesse, or of a griping humor to save a little
charge, adventured in their return from Newfoundland, without Fleets, or
Wafters to guard them, or any politic Order to pass through the Straits of
Gibraltar, to the Dominions of the King of Spain, to Marseilles, or Italy,
where yearly they met with the Moorish Pirates, who by the conniuance of the
Great Turk, were suffered to prey upon al Christians, which they encountered.
With these inconveniences Orpheus Junior being grieved to see his Country
suffer through these Merchants sides, he exhibited a Petition to his Imperial
Majesty. Showing these irregular courses, as also how that the Golden Fleece
which now became rife in all men's mouths might be quickly surprised and
anihilated, if his Providence did not becimes take some safe course to secure
the labors of those new Argonautickes, which spared no shipping to sail into
those Coasts, where this precious Fleece flourished on the backs of Neptunes
Sheep.

Apollo upon this Information examined the proceedings of the English, and
comparing them with the Hollanders, as also with those of other Companies
established with Privileges and Civil Order; found more confusion among the
Fishermen of New foundland, then in any other. For where soever the Hollanders
either fished or traded, they went strongly guarded with wasting Ships to
prevent all casualties. The Spaniards likewise being taught in Queen
Elizabeth's time by the English, and sithence by the Moorish Pirates to go well
provided with some ships of Defense. Yea, and all those Companies in London,
which the King of Great Britain had graced with Charters and Freedoms
prospered, and never went abroad without sufficient strength. Only, those
petty Merchants, which were led with desire of Gain, not willing to enranke
themselves into an orderly Society, but as it were in despite of Government
singled and severed from Fleets, these became continually a spoil to the
Pirates.

His Majesty viewed the East India Company, and found them Rich with many brave
serviceable Ships.

He searched into the strength of the Turkey Merchants, and saw them stored
with warlike Munition and abounding in wealth; yea, and by their painful
Trading getting the start of the Italians, which heretofore in Argosies gained
and exported great treasure out of this Kingdom.

He pryed into the state of the Moscouie Company, and found them very able
subsisting of themselves, and ready to supply their Country with many rich
Commodities.

He entered into the Mystery of the French Society, and also into the Eastern
Merchants, and beheld them winning the Trade from the Balticke Sea, and the
Hans Town in Germany.

Only the Western Trading he saw out of square, and all for want of settled
Fleets.

At last it came into his Majesty's mind, that the Noble King James of happy
memory did about three years past see into these discommodities, and thereupon
directed out a Commission at the suite of the Corporation for the Plantation of
the Newfoundland, to provide a couple of good Ships on the charge of the
Fishermen, which yearly frequented that Coast, continually to assist them
against the invasions of Pirates, who had in a few years before pillaged them
to the damage of forty thousand pounds, besides a hundred Pieces of Ordnance,
and had taken away above fifteen hundred Mariners to the great hinderance of
Navigations and terror of the Planters.

Upon mature consideration of this Royal Commission Apollo pronounced, that it
was necessary to keep this Commission still a foot, as well in time of peace as
of War, both for the rearing of expert Commanders at Sea, as for the securing
of that most hopeful Country. And to this purpose he commanded Orpheus Junior
to attend at his Majesty's Court of Great Britain, and to solicit his
Sovereign to conclude that Noble Design, which his Royal Father upon most
weighty deliberation had formerly granted.

The end of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF The Golden Fleece.
CHAP. I.
Orpheus Junior is required by Apollo to discover where the Golden Fleece lies.

Orpheus performs his Majesty's commandment, shows that there be sundry
kinds of the Golden Fleece, all which, after an allusion to the English
natures, he reduces into one maine Trade, to the Plantation and Fishing in
the Newfoundland. The general cause, which moved Orpheus to regard this Golden
Fleece.

APollo secretly informed by the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, that Orpheus
Junior could well tell where the King of great Britain might perpetually find
Trading both in time of Wars, as Peace, to enrich himself and his subjects;
which Trading they styled the Golden Fleece, more certain then Iasons Fleece
transported from Colchos, or the Philosophers Stone, so much dreamed on by the
Chemists, because the sheep which yields this precious Gain, were to be
shorn for eight months space without intermission, and of bodies far bigger
then the Peru sheep, which the Spaniards br^gge to equalize Asses for
proportionable greatness. In May last, 1626. he commanded Orpheus Junior, as
he tendered his service, and the good of his languishing Country, to discover
where these Golden-coated sheep pastured, and the manner how the noble
Britains might attain unto them.

Orpheus Junior answered, that the Golden Fleece which the fraternity of the
rosy Cross insinuated to his Majesty, was parti-colored like the Rainebow,
so produced by the Patriarch Jacobs Art, according to the several objects
represented, and likewise divided into the Natural, the Artificial, and the
Mystical; sometimes singled out the one from the other, sometimes mixed, as
politic Merchants and Diers know best; yet all of them comprehended under one
general name, viz. Trading. That it was necessary for the Commonwealth of
Great Britain, to pursue all the kinds of these objects, lest the English
Nation, who never likes any thing how profitable soever, unless it be
diuersified, Pragmata non Angli invariata probant. might take surfeit of one
sort of Trading, and at length fall to a loathing thereof. Whereto he adjoined,
that by many years experience, he had learnt the skill of discerning spirits.
And that he found out this quality of the English, to delight in varieties; of
News, though for the most part false; of Apparel, though they sold their
lands for it; of multiplicities of Law suits, though oftentimes they knew
themselves bought and sold by them which they most trusted; of meat and
drink, though they felt the event in grievous torments. And as in their
natures they respected choice and change, so in their outward senses he
observed first that their sight received more contentment in many colors, then
in one alone; specially, those colors of Gold and Silver, they preferred
before the pure and simple, which they held in contempt as fitter for
Hob-lurkins, then for generous spirits. As for their smelling, they approved of
sundry sorts, as Ciuet, Ambergris, Musk, Storax, and above all, of Tobacco,
though some of them lost their wits and the use of their senses in the taking
of it; and though most of them were ready to choke for good fellowship. The
like he said, he could discourse of the rest of their senses, outward and
inward. But these instances would suffice, as he conceived, to open the way to
many kinds of Trading, as well to furnish that Nation with those several
Commodities, though superfluous, as to replenish the Kingdom with more
supplies, lest in providing themselves barely on their Countries charge with
all those wares which their newfangled imagination provoke them to long for,
their Country might in a small while devour her self, or else eat up her
own tail like a Munkey.

Now to explain what he had spoken of the mystical Golden Fleece, he only
at that time offered to declare the nature, use, and place where it
flourishes, as how he came to the knowledge of it, if it pleased his Majesty
to afford him audience. Apollo bad him proceed, signifying unto him, that the
principal scope of the Meeting at that season, was to have that beneficial
Trade communicated to all his virtuous Attendants in Great Britain.

Orpheus Junior then went forward in this discourse: About ten years past,
most mighty Prince, musing with my self what might be the Psalmists meaning of
those words: Their sound is gone out into all Nations, I happily coniectured at
the last, that the Word of God should not only be spread abroad and planted by
those which ought of zeal and charity to teach it; but by those, which like
the frogs out of the Dragons mouth, might publish it for temporal ends. And
when I had thoroughly Apocalyp.
looked into these ends, the one neglected by the Professors of the Gospel, the
other begun and continued with prosperous success by the Spaniards in the
West Indies, where within these 120. years, many thousand Heathen people have
received the Christian Religion, though not so purely, as we could wish, I
collected this memorable observation, that our Savior makes use of our worlaly
desires to serve his divine intentions. In this fashion deals an Earthly
Father with an untoward Daughter, for whose advancement in marriage, he gives a
large portion to counteruaile her imperfections. By which meditations of mine,
I perceived, that nothing but gain could move the careless minds of our
Ilanders to seek abroad for new habitations. I looked into the Plantations at
the Summer Isles, Virginia, yea into Afric, as far as the Cape of good hope,
where for the ease of our East-Indian Fleetes, I conceived at Sancta Helena, or
Soldana, a fit Plantation might be erected. But after that I had considered the
many difficulties by reason of the tediousness of the voyage, the charge, and
above all, the malice of the Spaniards, who being like to the Dog in the
Manger, do want people to plant, and yet they will not permit others to plant.
I saw that God had reserved the Newfoundland for us Britains, as the next land
beyond Ireland, and not above nine or ten days sail from thence. I saw that
he had bestowed a large portion for this Countries marriage with our Kingdoms,
even this great Fishing, that by this means it might be frequented and
inhabited the sooner by us. And I verily think, that his Heavenly providence
ordained this Island not without a Mystery for us of Great Britain, that
Ilanders should dwell in Islands; and that we should ponder on this ensuing
Moral:

Even as our Savior Christ making Fishermen, Fishers of men, preferred, Peter,
Andrew, and others his Apostles, being plain persons and simple, before the
great Lords of the earth, as also the Lillies of the field, before the
Royalties of Solomon: so in these latter days, his unsearchable wisdom
preferring necessary maintenance, before needless superfluity, has allotted
Newfoundland, the grand Port of Fishing, to the Professors of the Gospel. And
because the depraved nature of mankind delights in appetite and some
appearance of profit; therefore his sacred Majesty discovered that plentiful
Fishing unto us, to allure us from our homebred idleness, to this necessary
place of Plantation. It is not Gold, nor a Silver mine, which can feed either
body or soul; but the one requires nourishment to be gotten by the sweat of
the brows, the other must have spiritual repast by the Word of God. Before
the Spaniards inhabited the West Indies, and had found those rich treasures in
Peru; Sincerity reigned among the Nobles, and Simplicity among the Commons. But
now money being grown in some places more rife then in times past, neighbourly
Love and Humility are fled back into Heaven: so that we may well curse the
time when these Mines were first seized on by the Spaniards. For, as the Author
de la nouvelle France affirms: when I confider, says he, that by these
Golden mines, the Spaniards have kindled and entertained wars in all parts of
Christendom, and have studied to ruinate their neighbors, and not the Turk;
I cannot think, faith this French writer, that any other then the Devil, has
been the Author of their voyages. Ie ne puis penser qu' autre que le Diable
ait este Autheur de leurs voyages. In this resolution being confirmed, I
transported two several Colonies of men and women into those parts with full
intent to follow after, and to lead the remnant of my life in this new
Plantation.

It seems strange unto my virtuous followers in Parnassus, replied Apollo,
that a man of your fashion, not driven by need, which as the proverb says,
makes the old wife trot, but sufficiently provided for in your native Country,
should now in the midst of your age, spend the best and rarest part of your
life, which is yet to come, in building and tilling of new places.

To this Orpheus Junior answered; I confess, most Noble Prince, that sometimes
I feel my Pillow very uneven, my head tossed and turmoyled with many a netled
thought, and my mind playing loath to depart from my native soil. One while
the conceit of my supposed worth, reputation, kindred, acquaintance, ease,
conuenience of means at home, and other symbolized ornaments of this present
world, do recall me back, like another Demas, from this charitable work in
the Newfoundland. But instantly I blush for shame, when I think on the
magnanimity of Heathenish men, who may rise against us at the judgment day,
and plead their good deserts before our frozen zeal; That a Citizen of Rome,
for the safety of his City of Rome, sacrificed his life in that horrible gulf;
That Codrus of Athens, though a King, did disguise himself as a private
Soldier, of set purpose to dye for the saving of his people; That the chiefest
Nobility among the Goths and Vandales, forsook their own habitations, to
accompany the meaner sort of people, and to lead them into foreign Countries,
who without their personal presence, would have staid at home like Drones, and
pined for want of living.

Patria magnanimis est vbicunque been, That Is my Country which gives me my
welbeing. Every place agrees with an honest mind, and that as naturally, as
the Sea with the Fish, as the Air with the Foul. Another while I meditate on
that saying of S. Paul: He which prouides not for them of his own household, is
worse then an Infidel: Whereby the care of my Wife and Children, kindling an
indulgent love within me, reuokes my resolution from this enterprise. But
presently after I see the same God ouerlooking Newfoundland, which ouerlookes
Europe, and all the world over, sounding out this Proclamation: He that loves
his Father and Mother above me, is not worthy of me: which the Jesuits
embracing somewhat too meritoriously, do to our shame, put in practice,
abandoning all the pleasures of their native Country, and betaking themselves
to the uttermost parts of the earth, so that China and Iapan do ring out the
name of our Savior Christ by their means and travels.

Sometimes I suspect the Action, because I see men of my rank so much given to
laziness, and the love of their dunghils at home, that they will endure any
smart of oppression or crack of credit, rather then they will depart into a
remoter place to live in perpetual plenty. But this cogitation quickly
vanishes, when I consider the estates of our rich and poor, how the one will
not, the other cannot. The one lies besotted with the lullabies of carnal
ease, caring more for this worlds vanity, then for heavenly Bliss purchased by
works of charity, which as S. James wrote, will help to cover multitudes of
sins. And the other for want of means, cannot get thither without some good
peoples devotions. In which latter discommodity I am sorry to find so many
helpless in my Country of Wales. Whereas close by us, I see our neighbors of
Devonshire scorning to become Gossips to poverty, yearly to send above 150
ships to salute the Newfoundland, transporting therehence those Commodities,
without which, Spain and Italy can hardly live.

This is our Colchos, where the Golden Fleece flourishes on the backs of
Neptunes sheep, continually to be shorn. This is Great Britains Indies,
never to be exhausted dry. This precious Treasure surmounts the Duke of
Burgundies Golden Flecce, which he called after that name by reason of his
large customs which he received from our English Woolls and Cloth in the Low
Countries. From this Island, our English transport worth 20000. pound; and might
yearly treble this sum, if the Plantations go forward as happily as they
do, and may with the tenth part of the charge, which has been defrayed about
other Plantations. So many men, so many minds. Every man has his peculiar
fancy, either by the motions of good Angels, or by the instigation of the
Spiritual Tempter, or by the constitution of the brain, hot cold, or
deprauedly mixed. But let men in cold blood lay aside their crotchets, and the
sparkling flames of imagination, and iudiciously weigh the vtility of this
business, comparing the dangers, the remoteness, and charge of other voyages,
and no doubt but God will give them a new heart, to embrace this project, which
experience for these 80. years space has confirmed unto us to be more
beneficial, then any other whatsoever.

Here Orpheus Junior suspended his speech; when as all the Auditors and
standers by shouted for joy, to hear that a new Colchos was found out for the
restoring of Trading, which lately began to fail in the North-west parts of
Europe. There were many Ladies which purposed out of hand to imitate Isabella
Queen of Castile, in selling their Jewels, Rings, and Bracelets, for the
furthering of this Plantation and Fishing, as the other had done to furnish out
Columbus for the first discovery of the West Indies. Great was the zeal, and
most hopeful the Charity like to spring from this zeal, (for every man
prepared an auspicious offering for the gratulation of these joyful news) when
they also understood that all the profits of this Golden Fleece were to be
distributed among the Professors of the Gospel, and that Great Britains
Monarchy might in a short time arrive to as great riches as the Spanish. After
these applauses, his Majesty beckned to Orpheus Junior, that he should
proceed in his discourse. But suddenly the Lady Pallas interrupted him, saying,
that it were requisite, all his Nobles and Governors of Provinces should be
present at the discovery of the Golden Fleece, whereby some timely order might
be taken for the guarding of the Coast, which produced this precious increase
of Trade. Apollo liked very well of this wise admonition, and against that day
seuennight, required his Pegasean Postmasters to summon his Provincial
Governors, all other businesses set aside, that they should appear before him
in the great Hall of the Court of Audience at Parnassus.

CHAP. 2.
Orpheus Junior particularizeth the manifold benefits of the Golden Fleece,
which might serve to repair the decay of Trade, lately complained of in Great
Britain, and to restore that Monarchy to all earthly happiness.

Just on the prefixed day, the aforementioned Governors appeared before his
Majesty, at the place appointed, where Apollo, the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the
Graces, the Nymphs of Great Britain and Ireland, and all the wise Counselors
of State, with the choice spirits of his Empire attending on his Majesty, he
commanded Orpheus Junior particularly to certify unto them the necessity and
commodity of the Golden Fleece, which might supply the defects of Great
Britain, and restore it to the most flourishing estate, wherein it ever stood
in former times. Orpheus Junior after some few excuses of his disability,
proceeded to epitomize the singular properties of the Golden Fleece so much
expected in this wise:

Most redoubted Emperor, and next to our great Creator, the prime Author of our
worldly happiness, I am glad after the manifold crosses, which I have
sustained by sundry accidents, that God has reserved me an Instrument this day
to discover that gain, which helps our Commerce personal betwixt party and
party, and the Provincial betwixt our Kingdoms and the foraigne, and both in
the scale and balance of Trade. But before I declare the Commodities of this
Trade, I will first show the Necessity wherein we stand, if it be not suddenly
advanced forwards.

To begin with my Native Country Wales; Although many strange sicknesses have
diverse times of late years afflicted us, yet notwithstanding the multitudes of
people are here so great, that thousands yearly do perish for want of relief.
Yea, I have known in these last dear years, that 100. persons have yearly
died in a parish, where the Tithes amounted not to fourscore pounds a year,
the most part for lack of food, fire and raiment, the which the poorer sort of
that Country stand in greater need of, then the Inhabitants of the Champion
Countries, by reason of their Mountains and hills, which cause the winter
there to be most bitter with stormy winds, rain, or snow, and that for the
space of eight months. As also experience teaches that Mountainous people
require more store of nourishment for their bodies, then they which dwell in
the plains or valleys: which was the reason, that in the North parts of
England, Servants used to covenant heretofore with their Masters to feed them
with bread made with Beans, and not of Barley from Allhalontide until May.

Another point of Necessity to procure us to set 2
forwards this most hopeful Plantation, and consequently the Fishing, proceeds
of the want of woods. For the Ironmongers upon what warrant I cannot learn,
have lately consumed our woods, and those fit for timber, within less the^^
miles to the Sea, so that we must shortly repair to other Countries for woods
to be employed toward shipping, building, husbandry, etc. which poor men are
not able to do. The decay of these woods also will cause our breed of Cattle to
decrease, which heretofore stood as a shelter unto them against tempestuous
blastes.

Thirdly, this maine business is to be promoted 3
in regard of the General Populousness of Great Britain, which is the chief
cause, that Charity waxes cold. Every man has enough to do, to shift for his
own maintenance, so that the greatest part are driven to extremities, and many
to get their living by other men's losses; witness our Extortioners, Periurers,
Pet^ifoggers at Law, Conycatchers, Thieves, Cottagers, Inmates, unnecessary
Alesellers, Beggars, burners of hedges, to the hindrance of Husbandry, and such
like, which might perhaps prove profitable members in the Newfoundland. But
above all, the state of younger Brothers is to the pitied, who by the rigor of
our Norman Laws being left unprovided of maintenance are oftentimes
constrained to turn Pirates, Papists, fugitives, or to take some other violent
course to the prejudice of the Commonwealth.

For these important reasons arising out of mere necessity, Pantations ought
suddenly to be erected. And where with lesser charge then in the Newfoundland?
Where can they live to help themselves, and benefit their Country better, then
in joining to increase the revenues of the Crown of Great Britain by the
rich trade of Fishing? The Commodities whereof, I will here cursorily repeat.

First, this Trade of Fishing multiplyeth shipping and Mariners, the principal
props of this Kingdom. 1
It yearly maintains 8000 persons for 6. months in the Newfoundland, which
were they at home would consume in Tobacco and the Alehouse twice as much as
they spend abroad. It releeues after their return home with the labor of
their hands yearly their wives and children, and many thousand families within
this Kingdom besides, which adventured with them, or were employed in
preparing of nets, caskes, victuals, etc. or in repayring of ships for that
voyage.

Secondly, It is near unto Great Britane, the next Land beyond Ireland, in a
temperate Air, the 2
south part thereof being of equal Climate with Little Britain in France,
where the Sun shines almost half an hour longer in the shortest day in the
year, then it does in England.

Thirdly, it will be a means for us to reap the rest of the commodities of
that Country, which 3
now we cannot enjoy for want of people to look after them, and also for want
of leisure, our men there being busied in the Summer about the fishing, or in
preparing of their stages and boats, and afterward returning home against
winter. The commodities of the Land are Furs of Beuer, Sables, Black Foxes,
Marternes, Musk-rats, Otters, and such like skins, as also of greater beasts;
as Dear, and other wild creatures. To this I adioyne the benefit, which may be
made by woods, being pine, birch, spruce, Furre, etc. fit for boords, Masts,
bark for tanning, and dying, Charcoales for making of Iron. Out of these woods
we may have pitch, Tar, Rosen, Turpentine, Frankinscence, and honey out of
the hollow trees, as in Muscouy, and heretofore in our own woods before they
were converted to the Iron Mills. There is great store of Metals, if they be
looked after.

The Plantations well and orderly there once erected, will help us to settle
our Fishing Trade 4
far more commodiously, then now it is. For whereas our Fishermen set out at
the end of February, they may choose to set out before the end March, if every
man has his stages there ready against their coming, and not by the first
comers destroyed most barbarously and maliciously, because their country men
which come next after them may be behind them a fortnight in building of
others. And likewise the Planters themselves may fish for Cod there a month
before our English men can arrive thither, and also after they are gone they
may fish almost all the year after.

They may fish there for other kinds of fish besides Cod, as Mackerels,
Salmons, Herrings, and Eeles, salting them and barrelling them up: 5
which will much advantage this Kingdom being hither transported.

They may erect salt houses there, having woods 6
sufficient for that purpose, which may save this Kingdom much money, which
now goes out to other Countries for the same.

The Plantations may in a short time supply us with Corn here in England, when
the same 7
grows dear, as commonly it does within the space of every five years,
whereby we are feign to be beholding to Danzk, and Poland, expending that way
much of our Treasure. That Land having the vegetative salt and virtue of it
unwearied, entire, and fresh, cannot but bear a world of corn, considering
also the gummes and liquors which from time to time since the Flood or the
Creation have with the heat of the Sun distilled out of the trees into the
earth, which renders it most fruitful. The which may be likewise gathered by
observing the commodities and fruits, which now the earth produces without the
industry of man.

No place of the world brings naturally more store of Gooseburies, and those
bigger then our Garden ones, R^sburies, Mulburies, Filbirdes, Straburies,
H^irtles, Cherries, wild Pease, and b^undance of Roses.

By this Trading into Newfoundland, no commodity is carried out of the
Kingdom, as in other 8
voyages, which is a matter of great consequence. But by the labor of their
hands they bring home Fish wet and dry, and Train Oil; Or else they bring
home Salt, Wines, Spice, Sugar, etc. in exchange of their Fish out of France
and Spain, a special enriching of this Realm, and an augmenting of the Kings
Customs and Impostes.

The Plantations there will save many a poor 9
man's life, who falling sick, as among so great a number some may chance to
be, may quickly recover their healths by fresh victuals and good lodging.

This Plantation will prevent other Nations from engrossing the Country and
the Fishing to 10
themselves, as perhaps hereafter some may go about such a Plot. It will
reduce such as resort thither, to acknowledge our Kings sovereignty over that
Land. It will serve to bridle their outrages, and also the abuses committed by
our own Countrymen about the taking away with strong hand one another stages
and boats. It will serve to restrain their insolences, who now bragging,
that they are there West and by Law, do wilfully set fire on the woods. It
will bridle their thefts, which filch at their departure all the railes of
other men's stages, together with their salt, which being full laden with fish,
they are forced oftentimes to leave behind them. It will serve likewise to
hinder their barbarous casting of their ballast into the harbors, which in a
short time will overthrow both the havens and the Fishing.

To these motives I could join others; But because I think here are
sufficient to lead men of understanding to see into their profit, and what may
most easily be performed, I will leave off to trouble your patient ears any
longer with a more tedious discourse, hoping that these will suffice as
restoratiues to repair the languishing humors of our Country. To the
furtherance of which worthy work I inuit the Inhabitants of Great Britain,
like true Christian Patriots, to put to their helping hands. What for mine own
particulars I have done, our Newland Merchants know. And more as yet I would
do, were my means answerable to my mind; Howsoever, during my life I shall
rejoice that in this vale of misery I have set out my talent to some good
behoof. And in the hour of death it shall be my comfort, that I have labored
to keep the Faith not altogether fruitless and imaginary, but accompanied
with some actual deeds of Charity.

CHAP. 3.
Apollo calls an Assembly of the Company, for the Plantation of Newfoundland,
where Mr. Slany, Mr. Guy, and others, meeting by his Majesty's Commandment,
Captain John Mason is willed to disclose, whether the Golden Fleece be there,
where Orpheus Junior all^ adged it to be. Captain Mason auerreth it to be in
the same Island more abundantly then in any other place.

APollo having with acute judgment, and mature deliberation resolved to
countenance and continue the Plantation of the Island commonly called the
Newfoundland, after his Majesty had by public proclamation commanded the same
to be hereafter called Britannioll, and to be divided into three parts, as
Great. Britain was at the first planting by the Trojans, or as others affirm
by the valiant Cimbrians, he assembled all those expert gentlemen, which had
either adventured their fortunes or persons in that hopeful Country. And in
the magnificent Hall of the Delphicke Palace, there appeared the noble minded
John Slany Treasurer of the society for that Plantation, Humphrey Slany his
brother, and others of the Corporation out of London and Bristow; Then entered
John Guy Alderman of Bristow, who was the first Christian, that planted and
wintered in that Island, establishing an English Colony at Cuperts Coue within
the Bay of Conception, about 13. years past. After him, came Captain John
Mason, who dwelt in that Country six years. Next to these, many others out of
Bristow and Wales succeeded, who had spent some few years in that Land. And
particularly, one Captain Win a Cambro-Britan was much noted in this
Assembly for his personal abode and painful care in settling the Plantation
at Feriland in the South part of this Coast, where for the space of 4 years
he did more good for my Lord Baltimore, then others had done in double the
time.

Apollo not mindful, that there were any more Adventurers and Planters of
eminency then these, which he beheld there present, was about to frame a speech
unto them, when the Lady Mnemosyne Princess of Memory whispered his Majesty
in the ear, that there were other Noble Britains, which had likewise advanced
this glorious enterprise. And why said Apollo, do they absent themselves from
this Assembly? They have reason for it, answered the Lady Pallas; For if they
repair hither to your Majesty's Court, and their Enemies watching that
opportunity should enter into their charge, the remedies which you consult upon
at this present, will fall out to be applied, as Physic to a dead Coarse;
Some of the Dunkirkes may take their progesse into your Britanniol, to solace
themselves there with your Nimphs, and to glut their greedy throats with
Cods-heads. In what a case think you will your Iasons be with their Fishing
for the Golden Fleece, if some of these Raggamu^^ins make havoc of their
Ships, Mariners, Goods, and Plantations? Before you borrow the personal
presence of those Gentlemen who are here wanting, it were fit you took some
order to secure that Coast from Piraticall rouers. The Lord Vicount Falkland
looks unto his great Government in Ireland, to see the same well fortified
and guarded. The Lord Baltimore is likewise busy in supplying his Colony at
Feriland. Sir William Alexander attends on the valiant King of Great Britain,
night and day, taking care by what means he may most commodiously transport
his Scottish Colonies into those parts. Sir Francis Tanfield, and Sir Arthur
Aston, two generous Knights, which to their immortal glory, do employ their
times in building and manuring that new ground, cannot be spared from their
Plantations, lest the wild Boares break into their Gardens. I think, said
Apollo, I must send for Hercules from his starry Sphere, or get another
Medusa, whose very sight shall turn these Dunkirkes into stones, before my
virtuous followers shall endure the least affront at the hands of malicious
Erynnis, that Patroness of barbarous Pirates. In the mean time we will think
on some convenient course to restrain these threatened thunders and blustering
blasts.

And seeing that you my dear servants, are here assembled at this time, I must
have you to satisfy the wavering world, whether the Golden Fleece be in
greater plenty and abundance in this Island or in New England, Virginia, the
Summer Isles, or in some other foreign Coast, which your Nation may easily
possess. At these words, there was much muttering among the English and
Scottish. For some contended on the behalf of Virginia; others contested for
New England. Every man had his opinion according to his imaginary object,
wherein most preferred private fantasies, before the intellectual faculty.
His Majesty having patiently awayted for their unanimous resolution, like
Brethren of the same Island, borne under the same Prince, Religion and
Government, and seeing no end of their disputes, he willed Captain Mason to
break the Ice, in respect he had been six years acquainted with ice and
frosts at Cupert Coue, one of the coldest places of those Countries, and boldly
without partiality, fear, or sinister regard, to disclose the secrets of the
Soil, the benefits of the Land, and whether this Plantation were such an
inestimable jewel as Orpheus Junior had delivered, or to be had in more
estimation then any other place.

Captain Mason after some complementall excuse of his disability, answered in
this wise: I could have wish that Mr. John Guy, my predecessor in Britannioll,
a man both learned and experienced in these exploits, had spared me the
relation, which your Majesty has imposed on me: But seeing the lot is fallen
into my share, I will repeat those passages, which he and others here know
better then my self.

This Island now in question is altogether as large as England, without
Scotland. And at the degree of 51. of Northerly latitude. Where England ends,
there this blessed Land begins, and extends it self almost as far as the
degree of 46. just in a manner as the climate lies from Caleis to Rochell. The
weather in the winter somewhat like unto it in Yorkshire, but far shorter,
for the Sun shines above half an hour long^r in the shortest day, then it
does in London. The Summer much hotter then in England, and lasts from lune
unto Michaelmas, specially in the Southerly part. I have known September,
October, and November, much warmer then in England. But one thing more I found
worthy of an Astrologers search, wherefore the Spring begins not there before
the end of April, and the winter comes not in before December or January: the
causes I know not, unless Nature recompenceth the defect of the timely Spring,
with the backward and later winter. Or else because our Plantations lay open to
the Easterly winds, which partaking of the large tract of the Sea, and of the
icie mountains, which flote there, being driven by the current from the
Northerly parts of the world, might happily prove the accidental cause of the
Springs backwardness; yet tolerable enough, and well agreeing with our
constitutio^s. Toward the North, the land is more hilly and woody; but the
South part, from Renoos, to Trepassa, plain and champaine even for 30. miles
in extent. It abounds with Dear, as well fallow Dear, as Ellans, which are as
big as our Oxen. And of all other sorts of wild Beasts, as here in Europe,
Beuers, Hares, etc. The like I may say for Foul and Fish. I knew one Fowler in
a winter, which killed above 700. Partridges himself at Renoos. But for the
Fish, specially the Cod, which draws all the chief Port towns in
Christendom to send thither some ships every year, either to fish, or to buy
the same; it is most wonderful, and almost incredible, unless a man were
there present to be hold it. Of these, three men at Sea in a Boat, with some on
shore to dress and dry them, in thirty days will kill commonly betwixt five
and twenty and thirty thousand, worth with the Train oil arising from them,
one hundred or six score pounds. I have heard of some Countries, commended for
their twofold harvest, which here we have, although in a different kind: yet
both as profitable, I dare say, as theirs so much extolld. There is no such
place again in the world for a poor man to raise his fortunes, comparable to
this Plantation; for in one months space, with reasonable pains, he may get
as much as will pay both Landlords Rent, Servants wages, and all Household
charges, for the whole year, and so the rest of his gain to increase.

As for the other question, whether the title of the Golden Fleece may be
conferred more deservedly upon this Island, then on any other foreign place,
where his Majesty's Subjects of Great Britain do use to Trade? By the last
part of my Discourse, it is plain, that it goes far beyond all other places
of Trade whatsoever, and justly to be preferred before New England, Virginia,
and other Plantations, for these four reasons: First, it lies nearer to Great
Britain, by three or four hundred leagues, then either of them. For we may
sail hither within twelve or fourteen days, being not above six or seven
hundred leagues passage: whereas Virginia lies as far again. Secondly, it is
better in respect of Trade, and the concourse of people, which with 500. or
600. Ships, do yearly resort thither. By which means they augment their
Princes Customs, and do maintain many thousands of their fellow-subiects,
their wives and children. Thirdly, he conueniency of transporting Planters
thither at ten shillings a man, and twenty shillings the Tun of goods. And
if the party be a Labourer, it will cost him nothing for his passage, but
rather he shall receive four or five pound for his hire to help the
Fishermen on the Land for the drying of their Fish: whereas every man which
goes to Virginia, must pay five pound for his passage.

Lastly, we are better secured from Enemies, for we have no Savages to annoy
us in the Southparts: And if any wars should happen betwixt Great Britain
and Spain, we need not fear their insolent invasions. For we have a Garrison
of three or four hundred Ships, of our own Nation, which fish at our doors
all the summer, and are able to withstand an Armada, if their King would but
confirm that Commission, which his blessed Father, about three years already
past granted, that two warlike Ships be yearly sent as waftors to defend the
Coast, and to be authorized with power to leuy men and Ships there, if occasion
so require; and all upon the charges of the Fishing fleet. This Commission I
obtained, and sithence I left it with my friend Orpheus Junior, to bring to
perfection, who as I am informed, is at this present in the Court of Great
Britain, an earnest solicitor to that effect. To conclude, after the Fishing
Fleetes are returned homewards, we are safe, for the winds are commonly from
August out Westerly, whereby none can come to us. And if they should; we have
other places in the Country to go to, till our Enemies be gone. For there
long they dare not stay for fear of the Frosts, which perhaps their tender
complexions cannot brook as well as our Northerly Nations.

CHAP. 4.
Apollo commands John Guy, Alderman of Bristow, to show how the Plantations in
the Newfoundland might be established and secured from the cold vapors, and
foggy mists which in the Spring are supposed to molest that Country.

APollo having noted how important to Great Britain the Plantations are like
to succeed and fall out for the restoring of their State to worldly felicity,
that it prove a paralleled Monarchy to the proudest of the bordering kingdoms,
made choice of John Guy, Alderman of Bristow, to show in what manner the
Britains should order their Plantations in this Golden Island, and secure their
new habitations from the icie and cold foggy Air, which in some seasons of the
year were reported by the Fishermen, to molest and damnifie the Inhabitants.

Master Guy earnestly sought to post over the handling of this serious
determination to Captain Mason, in respect he had wintred there longer then
he had. But Apollo by no means would alter his imposition, saying, that in
regard that Mr. Guy had oftentimes been personally in the Land, and wintred
there twice, being the first Christian, which made it apparent to the world
that it was habitable and commodious for the use of mankind, and also for that
he had calculated the mutations of the seasons, keeping a Iournall of every
Accident during his abode in the Country; he, and none but he should direct
what might be convenient for the settling and prosperous propagation of these
most hopeful Plantations.

Mr. Guy seeing that by no entreaty or excuse, he could put the task off from
himself, with a lowly reverence to his Majesty, he said; If the Noble
Emperor had asked my poor judgment a dozen years past, concerning these
secrets, it may be, I might have given him more agreeable contentment, then at
this time. For then the model of the Country and Climat lay more fresh in my
apprehension. Notwithstanding, seeing the lot is cast upon me, I will produce
the best remedies which I know for the correcting of the malignant air, if so
I may without scandal call it. The Country I assure your Majesty, is as
tolerable as England, Caeteris paribus, comparing all the seasons together.

And if some nice persons feel one winter among many, more snowy and frosty
then other, they seem to forget their own Country, where the like
inconvenience happens. But to avoid the worst, if every Householder dig up
the next ground to his habitation, and round about the same, and then burn it,
those moist foggy vapors will not appear, specially after the Sun has once
warmed and pierced into the earth so dismantled and laid bare. Secondly, let
them dig wells near their houses against winter, that they may have water in
despite of the frost or snow. Thirdly, let them provide them of fuel enough
before winter, to have the same more sear and dried. Fourthly, let them build
their houses with a hill, or great store of trees interposed as a shelter
betwixt them and the sea-windes, which there are Easterly and very nipping.
There is no winter to speak of before the midst of January. And when the
Easterly winds blow, the weather is no other, then it is in Holland. And I
verily believe, that in the south part of the Land, where it trends toward the
west, and where the ground is eauen and plain without hills, it differs not
much from the temperature of the south part of Germany. And for the further
encouragement of our Planters, I can auow this for a certain rule, that once
being passed a mile or two into the Land, the weather is far hotter. I found
Filberds fix miles distant from the Sea side, very ripe a month before they
were fit to be eaten by the Seaside. So great an alteration there is within
six miles space, by reason that those raging Easterly winds are defended and
assuaged by the hills and woods which stand as walls to fence and break
their force.

Above all things, I wish the Planters to sleep in boorded rooms, and not to
be too idle the first winter for fear of the Scuruy. For in all Plantations
this disease commonly seaseth upon lazy people the first winter. Yea, Sir
Walter Rawleighs Colony in Virginia, though a hotter Country, 1586. could not
avoid this mortal sickness. These rules observed, our Planters may live
happily. They may fish a month before others, which come out of England
thither to fish, and they may fish three months or more for Cod and Herring,
after they are departed, which will much enrich them.

CHAP. 5.
Sir Ferdinando Gorge is accused by the western Fishermen of England, for
hindering the^ of their stages, to dry their Fish in New England, and from
trading with the Savages for Furs and other Commodities. Ferdinando Gorge his
answer. Apollo reconcileth their differences.

Upon the Friday seven night before Easter, in Lent last, 1626. there arrived
here at Parnassus, certain Western Merchants out of England, just about that
time, as Apollo had decreed straight execution against some for the eating of
Flesh on some prescribed days, for that weighty and political respect of
maintaining Navigations, wherein the works of our Creator do show themselves
no less admirable, then the land. As Soon as these Merchants had heard this
necessary Law, with the execution, one of them, a person of very discreet
behavior, desired liberty to speak on the behalf of his poor Country men
for some oppressions, which Ferdinando Gorge Governor of the Fort at Plymouth,
whom they pointed at, present in the great Hall of the Court of Audience, had
under color of a Patent derived from his Earthly Sovereign of great Britains
Prerogative, most uncharitably and unlawfully committed against them, their
Factors, and Mariners on the Coast of New England in America. Apollo willed
them to declare their grieuances. First, they particularly showed that this
place was an Heathenish Coast, untilled, and void of Christian Inhabitants: in
regard whereof they took it to be lawful for them being Christians, who in
such remote wild Countries were to pass for Freemen, and equal for right with
Alexander the great, that went into the East Indies, as they into the West,
there to enjoy the benefit of the Law of Nations, to discover new Countries, to
exchange wares for wares, Cloth for Furs, Ciuility for rudeness, and
likewise to transport Fish, which they labored hardly for, Pitch, Tar,
Masts, and such like, which they could not have in Europe, without a far
greater charge. All this notwithstanding, Sir Ferdinando Gorge by his
Lieutenant and Agents, opposed their Commerce, forced them to compound for
their Stages, and pretended the Commodities of the Country to be due to him,
and his Associates, who first discovered the same, and afterward had obtained
a Patent thereof, of the Noble King James for their use. Likewise, they
intimated, that the Sea was free and common to all men, more common then Ergo
in the Schools, or the word Homo; which the Grammarians, even since Orbilius,
Quintilian, and Priscians time, have stoutly maintained to be a common name to
all men, civil and savage; yea, and to all sorts of women, the chaste, as the
strumpet. In respect of which Community, warranted by the Laws of the Rhodes,
the statutes of Oleron, by the Constitutions of Holland, and lastly, by his
transcendent authority which wrote the Book called Mare liberum, they hoped to
settle a beneficial Trading, as well for Fishing on these foreign Coasts, as
for such Land-Commodities, which the Savages would trucke with them.

Apollo understanding of these oppositions, tending in appearance to be a
public grieuance, demanded of Sir Ferdinando Gorge, wherefore he sought to
engrosse those merchandises, and to make a monopoly of the Furs, which being
bought of the Savages, might in time by this concourse of his fellow
Christians, prove a mean to ciuilize those rude Nations; and specially his
Majesty asked him why he went about to appropriate the Sea Coasts to some few
of his adherents, which ought to be common, which served to exercise honest men
in industrious courses, and to make good his Law against the eating of flesh
upon prefixed days?

Sir Ferdinando Gorge answered: Most dread Sovereign, the honor of a King
consists as well in advancing the building up his Saviors Church, as the
enlarging of his Territories, which may prove an addition to the strengthening
of his Forces, and the enriching of his Crown. For the perfection of which
glorious work, it pleased God to raise me and others to adventure our means
for the discovery of this Country called New England, which before lay
unknown. Having found it a habitable place, commodious for the use of many
distressed people, whom I saw to groan under the burden of poverty in my
native Soil; I resolved to imitate the painful Bees, to build houses, like
Hiues, and therein to transplant them. For which purpose to avoid the confused
state of an Anarchy, I prepared the Plantation intended with the support of the
Regal countenance, and to that end got the Patent specified by my Adversaries
with large privileges, immunities, and power, whereby our Planters might rest
assured, not only of security against Drones, but also of the quiet fruition
of their profitable endeavors hazarded with their lives, and not to be
attained without labors and the sweat of their brows. Of what consequence not
only this Plantation is, but likewise all others of the like nature, who knows
better then your Majesty, who once a year suruayes the uttermost parts of the
earth, even to the Southern Pole? For what is it, which renders a Nation
unhappy? Next to the want of Gods knowledge, which the Scripture terms
Darkness, it is the want of necessaries for the sustentation of life, as meat,
drink, and apparel. And when through a long peace, and their ouerspent
fields, their Countrymen do increase and mulply, so that the extent of their
native Land is not capable nor sufficient to maintain them, what (poor
souls) shall they do? If they rob or steal, they are hanged. If they look
for work, perhaps they may meet with some covetous wretch that will retain
them during the harvest of Hay and Corn: but in the Winter, which in this
Climat is longer then the Summer, they may starve for lack of food, raiment
and fyring. This inconvenience was foreseen above 100. years since by Sir
Thomas Moore, who grievously bewailes the ouer-sight of our Policies, for
condemning men to be hanged, who robbed of mere necessity; In lib. de Eutopia.
whereas their Country, like a provident Mother, ought rather to provide them
relief, whereby they might live like men borne of a wise and politic mother.
Some mothers have loved their children, that they have hazarded their own
lives, to get heritages for their younger children: yea, and were content to
suffer want themselves, rather then their offspring should miscarry.

Examples we can produce many. How came the world first to be planted? If the
first Generations after Noah's Flood, had all abode in Armenia, Chaldea, and
Assyria, the rest of the world had been created in vain. Therefore God
sundred them by confounding their languages at Babell, that the glory of his
power might be noised in all Regions, and the sound of his Name, throughout all
Nations. This made Saturn to plant in Italy. This made Hercules to travel to
the Atlantique Isles, and to ingraue his name on those memorable Pillars at the
Straights of Gibraltar. This made Iaso^ with his brave Fleet of Argonantickes
to sail into Cholchos, in hope of a perpetual Trade for the Gold of that
place with his Grecian Commodities. How came the Isles, the Isles of the Gentiles
to be peopled, but by Plantations transported upon the charge of able and
substantial persons. Marseiles was ciuilized and inhabited with a Greek
Colony. From whence are we all come into these parts? We are not Natives, but
after many hands led into this Kingdom. We came from Saxony our selves, as
the most of Italy do descend from the Northerly parts of Germany. The
Spaniards derive their pedegrees from the runnagate Goths, or from the Moors,
who likewise glory to be a remnant of the fugitive Arabes.

O what a shame is it unto us at this day, to see whole numbers of our English
and Scottish dispersed abroad in Popish and Moorish Countries, turned
Apostataes, and in time forgoing the memory of their natural Mother Tongue, as
of the tue Faith, wherein they were baptized! Now how easily might this
monstrous and inhumane absurdity be prevented by a timely Plantation?

To this end have I and my Copartners labored. But as we were laying the
foundation, these Antiplanters envying at those hopeful attempts like those
which repined at the rebuilding of Jerusalem, would needs enjoy the fruits of
our labors, despoyling us of our Stages, and the plain plats of ground
bounding on the Sea; and not thus content, they would cut down a tree worth
forty shillings, fit for a Mast, where a tree of two shillings might serve
their turn. Sometimes they would either of despite to the Planters, or in a
wanton unbridled humor, set fire on the woods two or three miles together. We
never gaine-said them to fish upon our Coast, but on the contrary, we were very
glad of the occasion. Only we sought to curb their in solencies, which
committed these outrages. We endeavored to hinder their wilful casting their
ballast into the harbors, which in small time will quickly decide this present
controversy, when the harbors shall by this outrageous abuse, be choakt and
dammed up without any hope of recovery.

As for the Trade of Furs, how can this be a grieuance more then it is in
England, where the petty Lords of Manors claim a far greater Jurisdiction
there, to enlarge their Forests and games: yea and some have obtained a Free
Warren, that none whatsoever should hawke or hunt upon their Lands, or within
their Precincts. If this be allowed in Old England, much more ought we to stand
upon out Royalties in New England, in lieu of our infinite charge and pains
taken in our voyages, and settling there our new inhabitants. What Gentlemen of
fashion will forsake their Country, except they shall have a larger extent of
command, and more hopes of benefit then at home? To suffer such barbarous
insolences to be done on a man's Freehold, cannot but trouble the meekest man
on the earth: yea, another Moses, another Job. To this I add, how some of
these Antiplanters led by an unheard of greediness of gain, have sold unto
the Savages, Muskets, Fowling-Peeces, Powder, Shot, Swords, Arrowheads, and
other Arms, wherewith the Savages slew some of those Fishermen, which had so
inconsiderately sold such dangerous wares to Infidels. By which means they are
now become dangerous and formidable to the Planters themselves. And far more
fearful would they have proved unto us, if the King of Great Britain our
Soueraign, had not strictly made a Proclamation to the contrary, that no
Subject of his should presume to sell the^ any such unlawful ware. Up on the
brute of which Proclamation, the Savages being hopeless ever to receive of our
Nation more Gunpowder; they very circumspectly sowed in the best cornefields
they had all the Powder which remained, with full expectation to reap a goodly
harvest thereof, as of Mastard or other seeds.

Apollo according to his wonted manner, having paused and meditated on the
Plaintiffes and Defendants allegations about one quarter of an hour: at last
pronounced this definitive sentence. Forasmuch as we conceive both this
Plantation, and the Fishing Trade to be very expedient to Great Britain: we
order both of them, like Hippocrates Twins, to consociate together in
brotherly amity, and to assist one another without malicious emulation. That
the Fishermen have convenient places for the drying of their Fish on the land,
with as much woods as will serve for their fuel during their abode in that
Country, and for their return homewards by the way, and also as much woods as
will build up on repair their Ships and Stages; provided that the common sort
of Mariners shall not of their own heads, without their Master of the Ship,
and one of the chief of the Planters be present, cut or cast down any woods,
but what by them shall be seen fit for those necessary uses. Secondly, that
none of the Fishermen shall throw their Ballast into the Harbors to deface the
same. Thirdly, that for some few years, they shall not traffic with the
Savages, but shall leave the same to the Planters, until the Plantations be
compleately strengthened, and of sufficient power to live of themselves, and
be conveniently armed against those barbarous people. Fourthly, that all such
plats of plain lands, near to the Harbors, which the Planters shall from
henceforth rid of woods, and make apt for Stages to dry fish upon, shall belong
to the Planters: And that all such places which the Fishermen have already rid,
and built Stages upon, shall appertain to them for ever. As also al such
Stages, which they shall hereafter build for that purpose. In lieu of which
privileges, every Ship shall transport a Tun of such provisions which the
Plantations want, receiving for the same, ten shillings, toward the fraught,
and the price of the goods by them disbursed in England. Fifthly, that both the
Planters and the Fishermen shall join and suddenly assemble all their forces
together with their best endeavors to expel Pirates, and their Countries
enemies; if any arrive on that Coast, with intent to prey upon either of them.
Sixthly, if any dissension happen betwixt the Fishermen and the Planters, the
matter shall be compromitted to twelve men's arbitrament, six of the one side,
and six of the other, and if they miss to accord the parties difference, then
the chief person in the Plantation, and the Master of the Ship, whereof the
Fisherman is, to end the business as Vmpires and principal Judges.

CHAP. 6.
Apollo moved to pity upon a Petition preferred unto him by certain Sailors
Widows, whose Husbands perished in the voyages under the East Indies Company,
causes four famous Knights of Great Britain, Sir Francis Drake, Sir M^^^in
Furbisher, Sir Henry Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button, to signify their
opinions, whereabout the best passage to the East Indies did lie.

Upon the Feast day of Saint Mark the Evangelist last past, 1626. as Apollo
was conferring with certain Cosmographers, for the advancing of the East Indy
Trade, the Lady Pallas whispered his Majesty in the ear, to admit some into
that conference, which had been principal Nauigators employed for discoueries
toward those Coasts. For said she, though speculation be the most noble
Science in Philosophy, yet for the atchieuement of a real and beneficial
Trade, it serves to no other use, then as a Preparatiue in Physic to make the
humors pliable and tractable for the ensuing Purgation: the which
notwithstanding may prove erroneous and deceivable, if it meets with a
malignant, stubborn, or perverse matter. For who can by a coniecturall
knowledge, pierce into more hidden occurrences? There is as much difference
betwixt speculation and practice, as is betwixt a clinicall scholar,
discoursing of Countries by his Map or Globe on a Table, as a Mariner
traversing the Ocean, where oftentimes he meets with such difficulties, that
he is forced to return home, and to wait for a more seasonable opportunity.
Therefore if you mean to hold up and continue this Company, it were good you
sent for some choice and well experienced Nauigators which may direct this
business, associated with the Gentlemen above named.

Apollo liked very well of this advise, and presently caused these four famous
Knights to be sent for, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Martin Furbisher, Sir Henry
Middleton, and Sir Thomas Button. As soon as they were come into his Majesty's
presence, he related unto them, that upon a Petition exhibited unto him by many
poor Widows of the City of London, and of other Cities and Towns in Great
Britain, how their Husbands perished in their voyages to the East Indies, by
the distemperature of the climate, in passing so often under the Tropickes, and
the burning Zones, they therefore desired either that he should dissolve the
East Indie Company, or find out a more convenient passage to these Countries,
where the Spices grew, which their Country men wanted. Otherwise they must of
necessity continue still unmarried; or live in daily fears to lose their
succeeding Husbands, who for their relief would hazard their lives, as the
others had formerly done. For such was their inevitable Fate, they said, that
none would adventure on Sailers Widows, but men of the same vocation. Upon
which clamors of these distressed Creatures, his Majesty being moved to pity
and commiseration, required them to yield their several censures, by what
passage the English Nation might traffic into those Lands of Spiceries with
less perils and losses of Sailers. Sir Francis Drake first delivered his
opinion, that the modern Cosmographers agreed upon four ways to the East
Indies: Two imaginary, by the Northeast, which Pliny mentioned, Sir Hugh
Willowby attempted, and the Hollanders prosecuted upon the North of Muscouy to
Noua Zembla, Waygate, and the Ri^er Ob, but all in vain: and by the
North-west, which Sir Martin Furbisher first entered into, and Sir Thomas Button
sithence pursued, but without fortunate success. The other two ways to ^aile
into the Lands and Islands of Spices, were famous, which himself had past. The
one through the Streights of Magellan, the other by the Cape of good Hope. Of
these, he liked those of Magellan, and now the rather, for that Tierra del
fuego, which is the South part of those Streights, is lately found out by
certain Hollanders, to be an Island: And that himself had been driven by
foul weather, as far as 57. degrees of Southerly latitude, where he found
some Islands, and in all likelihood, an open passage about the 60. degree, which
the Hollanders tried to be true, now stiling the same, Lameers Streights. This
way he approved less dangerous then the other, specially to the Molucca
Islands: so that they would begin their voyage about the end of August from
England: that they might arrive there by the end of December, which falls out
to be the first of June, or end of May, in these Streights. Sir Maurice Abbot
contradicted Sir Francis Drake, and said, that the greatest comfort in such
long voyages, was to be sure of fresh victuals, which they could not be
assured of, by those Southwest Streights.

To this Sir Francis Drake answered: that for Wood, Water, Fish and Foul, they
might have enough on this side, and near the Streights; that they might be
relieved in distress at the River of Amazous by their Countrymen, where
Captain North, Captain Parker, and Captain Christmas had planted, whereof
the two last lived there of late, four years in despite of the Spaniards, whom
they wearied out of the Country with the help of the Natives, for all that
they came with 1500. men to surprise them. Being past the Streights, they might
have fresh victuals in abundance at the Island of Mocha in the height of 38.
degree, which is subject to the States of Arauco, deadly enemies to the
Spamards, and but five or six leagues from that Centinent. Or else they may
get some with ease at the Island of Saint Mary's, twenty or thirty leagues
further. If the Trade be to the Moluccaes, they may spare two months voyage
this way; and also they shall meet with Salomons Isles, and many rich places
upon the Coast of New Guinea, which afford plenty of victuals, Gold, Pearls,
and Spice. Sir Henry Middleton much misliked this Southwest way, because of the
uncertainty of provision, and the solitariness of the voyage; whereas he was
sure all the way by the Cape of good Hope, at Sancta Helena, Soldana, at the
Island of Madagascar, to be stored with necessaries until he came to his
iourneyes end. Further, he said, as also the East India Company confirmed the
very same to be true, that they had small doings now to the Moluccaes: For
their Trade lay about laua mayor, where they had a Factory at Bantam, and to
Serrat in Cambaia, to Sumatra, and the Persian Gulf.

After some altercation betwixt these last aforespecified, Apollo commanded Sir
Martin Furbisher to declare his opinion touching the Northwest passage, which
he accordingly did, proving that the most part of Meta incognita, where he
had been, seemed by all probability to be broken lands and Islands, and that
if he had had sufficient store of provision, he would have adventured through
in despite of the mountains of Ice, which threatened to immure him in. And that
he much marvelled at their slownesse of late, which finding the passage clear
and open in a far more temperate climate, then where he had been, did
notwithstanding miss to find it out.

Sir Thomas Button much incensed to be taxed for slownesse, who had busied
himself all the days of his life in warrelike actions, having been at the
sacking of Cales, and employed in Ireland against the Spaniards, in Hispaniola,
at the voyage of Algiere, and many other Sea voyages, for answer said, That if
Sir Martin Furbisher had wintred in the 58. degree in America, which experience
taught to be as the 63. degree of Europes coldness, he would not have been so
brief to impute slownesse unto him. As for the Passage, he verily believed as
Sir Martin did, it lay open. And that he would have done his endeavor to have
sailed through. For in Hudsons Bay, he saw two very likely passages toward
the Northwest, to enter in; but that he was otherwise authorized and commanded
to go on Southwestwards to the bottom of Hudsons Bay, so that he durst not
but follow the tenor of his Commission. Yet notwithstanding he hoped, that he
had not spent his time in vain, during his voyage in those angry climates. For
first he discovered, that those Seas could not be sailed through, but in June,
July, and August, being always subject to foggs, ice, storms, and sudden
winds. The sun seldom seen, so that the best Nauigator can hardly observe
the certain height thereof. Only his chiefest comfort during his abode there,
was, that the days were very long, with very short nights: though otherwise
the want of cleernesse to observe either sun or star, were able utterly to
overthrow the whole voyage. Further, he noted, that Trumpets might not be
spared, but most necessary to be had of such as pass in those Seas. For if two
ships went together, they would quickly lose one another by reason of the
thick mist, though they went so near as they might hallow one to the other.
Likewise, he said, that shirts of male might not be spared, for fear of the
savages arrows out of some ambuscado: Or else thick leather Targets made of
Buffe, as the Spaniards use. To this he added, that by experience he found
another necessary note, which he wished all such as were employed in these
remote Enterprises to bear in mind, to carry with them good tools, as well
for repayring of their Ships, as to dig on the land, if they suffer shipwreck:
And withal, the fittest engines which can be devised for weighing of shipping
upon such occasions; and in any case a couple of Crabs to be brought along with
them in these unknown Discoueries, for the hoising and landing of their Ships,
or other heavy necessaries, as Artillery, Timber, etc. Also, that the
Discouerer should mark the set of the Tide. For whenever he loses his
strong Tide, or finds ground in 100 fathomes, let him rest assured, that he
goes out of his direct course, for the finding of this hopeful passage. To
conclude, Sir Thomas Button delivered two notes more of great consequence for
the preservation of the Discouerers healths and lives, which Apollo better
liked then all the former Discourses; whereof the one was, that he observed
Aqua vita, Sack, and such hot liquors, to become most hurtful to his men in
the cold Winter, and on the other side, small drink and Barley water most
sovereign to maintain them in health. The other observation was, that the
juice of th^se tender branches or sprigs of trees which flourished fresh and
green in the Winter, out-daring the bitter blasts, and withstanding the
extremity of the frosts, being pressed out, and ministered to the sick, did
miraculously restore them to their health, And the means of his first
knowledge thereof, proceeded by seeing of the multitudes of Partridges, which
fed and lived thereon all the Winter, to become fat and plumpe.

CHAP. 7.
Apolloes Censure of Sir Thomas Buttons voyage to the Northwest Passage.

His Directions for the preservation of health in frosty seasons, and for the
preventing of the Scuruy.

An Elegy in their commendations which adventured their persons for the
discovery of the aforesaid Passage.

APollo seemed much delighted with these narrations of Sir Thomas Button; and
to let the virtuous of Parnassus know somewhat more of these remarkable
events, he made this discourse: How many famous Captains here have I admitted
into my Court, which never entered into these hidden and magisteriall secrets of
nature? Nay, how many wise Philosophers be there here graced with my favors,
which understand not these wonders of natural effects? This Gentleman has
sufficiently performed his part in the discovery of the Northwest passage,
considering the power limited unto him by his Commission, which he might not
with safety transgress. Yet I could wish such as be in authority in assigning
the like Commissions hereafter, to add that Clause, which King Henry the eight
of England sometimes used to enable his Generals with, that if that service
proved disastrous and unfortunate, notwithstanding the former words of the
Commission, they should preserve the Honor of their King and Country by some
brave exploit of their own proiecting. For many occurrences may, like rubbes,
light in their way, which the cleerest Eyes of State could not possibly
foresee. Sometimes the Enemy may have a silver bridge by slye intelligencers
into his Neighbors Land. Sometimes a Commander may meet with a good booty at
Sea, though he were beaten off from the Land. Or if one place be strongly
barricadoed, he may find another most easily to be won. What overthrew and
utterly dispersed the invincible Armada in 1588. but the precise rely, which
the Spanish Admiral stood upon in regard of his Commission limited by the
Council of Spain? Let this suffice to excuse Sir Thomas Button for his not
entering into one of the two passages, which he suspected to crown the
Discouerers voyage with eternal fame. And now to enter into the latter points
of those secrets, which he mentions to have tried, so useful for his peoples
health; know this, O ye that study Physic, that as Hippocrates wrote, men's
inward parts, specially the stomach, is hotter in Winter then in Summer. Look
in an extreme frosty Winter, how all the sap and virtue of Plants and Herbs,
shoot inwardly, and descend into the root, running thither as to their
sanctuary, refuge, and last help in nature. Even so stands it with the body of
man, which for vegetation and vigorous constitution, may in some sort be
compared to a Plant. In Summer, the heat and radical moisture is dispersed
here and there, up and down, and through all the parts of the body, so that
the heat in the stomach is of a mild oily warmth, and at that time more truly
natural, then in the winter. For Experience teaches, and Anatomists confirm
it, that in the winter, chiefly in frosty weather, man's liueliest heat setleth
it self in the stomach, near the heart, the center and root of life, the
other parts being oppressed with cold. There likewise it will begin quickly
to inflame in frosty seasons. When the raw air gets into the body at the
mouth, and at the pores, or at such time, when these pores of the skin and
outward superficies become thickened, whereby the spirits may not have their
free euaporation. Hence grow oppilations and obstructions; and consequently the
Scuruy, being aided on by the meseraicall veins, full of putrified dampish
blood, or by the melancholic spleen, swollen with too much windy nourishment.
For the abating of which infirmities, moist opening medicines of a biting
nature, cooling and piercing liquors, somewhat of a milky mildness, and the
juice of springing herbs, must be regarded by a wise Physician, and preferred
before strong liquors and fiery Drinks, which commonly are too too binding. I
do therefore much commend this Knight for this careful observation, as for
the discovering of those tender Plants which Jacques Cartier applaudes to be so
sovereign against the Scuruy, and called Anneda, by the Savages of Canada. But
now of late years, this precious Plant has been sought after by Champleine
and other Frenchmen, albeit without success; until this Gentleman renewed the
memory thereof. And most famous had he yet been, if he had transported hither
some Setsor Slips of these powerful Plants, which by this time might have
increased to succor many an honest man's life distressed by this hidden and
treacherous Guest. I have spoken the more largely of this sickness, because our
modern Practitioners in Physic should take this observation for a watchword,
that most of the new diseases, Agues, putride Fevers, and such sicknesses as
spring in the winter or in the beginning of the Spring, they be but
waiting-Maids to this traitorous Lady; and for this cause, let them begin
their Cure with the Scuruy, and with the cleansing of the Blood, and the rest
will vanish away, as it were by miracle.

As soon as Apollo had ended this speech, he charged Hippocrates, Galen,
Aegineta, and other famous Phisicians, to take care over all the English
Sailers, which from thenceforth, should hazard their lives to the Indies. He
likewise commanded the East Indies Company to be more bountiful to the poor
Widows, whose Husbands chanced to miscarry in their service. Lastly, his
Majesty caused the London Merchants to join together for the prosecuting
further of the Northwest passage, and for the honor of those brave spirits,
which had already adventured their persons in the discovery, to ingraue on a
brazen Table these verses following, and the same to place as a Frontispice on
the Delphicke Palace:

Orbis in Occidua latitat via part sub Arcto,
Ducit ad Eoum qu^ magis apta mare.
Dux Frobisherus, Dauis, Hudson, et inclitus ausis
Buttonus validis hanc petiere viam.
Cambria non tantum, sed et Anglia laudibus effert
Te, Buttone, suis; aequiparatque D^ako.
De quot te memorem saluum euasisse periclis?
Sint testes Indus, Maurus, Ie^rnus, Iber.
Non glomerata tibi Glacies imperuia ferro,
Non Hyemis longae nix numerosa nocet:
Quin tunc vlterius transisses, altera naui;
Obuia succedens sireleuasset onus:
Albione mque nouam nobis incognita Meta
Tum benc vulgasset per fretanostramaris.
Near to the Pole, there lurkes within the West,
A shorter way to sail into the East.
Brave Furbisher, Danis, and bold Hudson
Sought out this way with the valiant Button.
Not only Wales, but England rings his name,
And with great Drake compares our Buttons fame
Though Ireland, Spain, India, and Afric rage,
To bear the brunts of his stout Pilgrimage:
Yet they will prize him more, when more they know
How he endured a winter deep with' Snow.
For eight months space, besides the Icy hills,
Which Natures ears with strange amazeme^t fills.
And if supplies had come in his distress,
New Pillars he, like those of Hercules,
Had raisd, but with Plus vltra in the place,
Where Drakes new Albion waits for Britains race.
CHAP. 8.
The Merchants of Lisbone do complain on the English and Hollanders, for
trading into the East Indies for Spices, Drugs, and other Commodities. Apollo
rejects their complaints, and advises, how they may sail thither with
lesser inconveniences, then heretosore.

APollo having given order to the Inhabitants of Great Britain, to set
forwards some Ships for the discovery of the North west passage: word was
presently brought to the Portingals, that his Majesty had interessed the
Protestants in the Trade of Spiceries. Whereupon the City of Lisbone sent to
Parnassus four of their most substantial Citizens, where being arrived, they
made means by Osorius one of their learned Bishops, to have a full Audience of
their matter the next Court day, which fell out on the fifth of June last, 1626.
as Menante the grand Postmaster delivered the last week at Paris. But
Mercurius Gallobelgicus affirms otherwise, that this weighty cause was
discussed on the ninth of June. Such is the disparity of judgments, and
inequality of reports, that we cannot rightly be informed by any of these
Currents concerning those passages, which happen in our nearest times. How much
less then shall we credit Historiographers of elder ages, which have left us
the occurrences of many memorable affairs, which ought to serve as mirrours to
posterity? Howsoever, most true it is, that the East Indy Cause was decided
before the sun entered into the Tropic of Cancer, in this Month of June
last. The ground of the Plaintiffes suit was fixed most upon the Division,
which Pope Alexander the sixth made betwixt the House of Castile, and the House
of Portingall, about 120. years past, that all the whole world then newly
discovered, or to be discovered, should equally be shared betwixt them both;
the East Indies to belong unto the Portingals, and the West Indies to the
Castilians; the same to have and to hold to either of the said Nations, their
Factors, and Agents for ever warranted contra omnes gentes. Under color of
which authenticke Patent, they freely inioyed the same, until the bold English
and Hollanders lately intr^ded into their Liberties, and have usurped many of
the Coasts in those rich Countries. Apollo not wont suddenly without mature
deliberation to order causes of such high consequences, sent for Peter Martyr
the Author of the Decades, and asked him, how that Partition became ratified?
Peter Martyr now a member of the Corporation of Parnass^^s, and not daring to
conceal the verity of that business from the sincere Head of the virtuous
Society, answered, that indeed such a Capitulation was treated of betwixt those
Princes, and that just, as the said Commissioners intended to divide the whole
world by certain Lines and imaginary points in the Globe, they were quite put
out of their agreements by a Knauish Boy, who at that time accidentally bathed
himself in a river near unto them, as they debated of these Lines, and
hearing the Commissioners varying and wrangling about the drawing of these new
Lines, he turned his back side unto them, and wished them to form the same
equally, as if they should delineat from the Center of his Ano, and so taking
the same for a pattern, the one half should appertain to the one, and the
other half to the other. Upon which ridiculous interruption, the Commissioners
being abashed and ashamed, that a Child should touch so seriously upon their
Masters ambition, they departed, leaving the partition imperfect.

Apollo perceiving that the Portingals drift was to ingrosse the whole Trade of
Spiceties as a Monopoly prejudicial to others of the Christian Profession,
utterly misliked their a spiring and greedy purposes, and after some bitter
exprobration of their Covetousness, he framed this speech unto them: In going
about to appropriate the whole world to your selves, ye seek to eclipse the
power of the Omnipotent, to forestall the wonderful Art of Navigations, and by
keeping back the Protestants, to let the Mahumetans still to join with you in
this beneficial Trade. I confess your Nation deserves to be commended for
your discoueries of the Cape of Good Hope under Vasco de Gama. But afterward,
for you to ingrosse into your hands more Coasts and Trades then ye are able to
manage, is mere avarice, and a wrong to your Creator, who happily by these
your Neighbors adventures, may in time to come discover as yet more unknown
Countries, and settle in those remote places the word of God, even beyond New
Guiny, where more Noble Nations do yet reside then ye have found out. What
greater glory can arrive to this part of the world, then to search into the
uttermost parts of those Southern Regions? In all civil Countries, the
Inhabitants must as well look into the Artificial ways of acquiring wealth,
as into the natural means abounding in the places of their abode. This
consists in Corn, Cattle, Wool, Lead, Tin, or in the like Commodities,
which are ordinarily and without much Art derived from their native Seats. The
other depends on their industry and more curious skill to work upon those
materials, as by their Wool to Compose Stuffes of Serges, Perpetuanaes,
Paropous, or the like; or else by Commerce and Traffic to exchange some of
their superfluous wares with Forraigners, for some of their superfluities. Now
in trading to these remote Countries, questionless some of these goods are
exported to counteruaile those Wares, which Strangers might otherwise, to the
prejudice of the Kingdom, import and bring in.

Before the Londoners and the Hollanders did set out Fleetes to the East
Indies, the Turks used to share with the Portingalls in those Commodities
which now the Protestants trade for. Heretofore they paid at Lisbone, Aleppo,
or Alexandria for every pound of Pepper, two shillings, whereas now they pay
but three pence in the East Indies, for Mace four shillings six pence, which
now stands them but in nine pence. Cloves at Lisbone or Aleppo, four shillings
six pence, and now but ten pence. Nutmegs there two shillings, here but
four pence. Indico four shillings, here twelve pence the pound. Likewise they
paid for raw Silks out of Persia, twelve shillings, but now they pay at the
Persian Gulf, not eight shillings the pound. Whereby a good Commonwealthsman
may observe, what Gain there may redound to Great Britain, if this rich Trade
be graced and followed. And if they transport no coin out of this Kingdom,
but Spanish Reals, Dolers, or outlandish monyes, carrying also some of their
Tin, Carzeyes, and Broad clothes, to the Persian Gulf, where they are best
vendible; there is no question, but this Kingdom will become much enriched.
For the sound of Denmark, the Hans-townes, and France will return us more
money, then they have need to bring into the Indies.

But first I could wish Aesculapius to call a consultation of his best
experimented Physicians, and to lay down a dietary for their healths, for a
Northern man taken out of his natural Element, and placed but for a small
while in those fiery Climates, will quickly droope. And now in the interim
until this consultation be concluded, out of the experience of such as
traveled into those parched Countries, I wish them to ballast their ships with
Turnips, as a Defensatiue against the Scuruy, to carry along with them the salt
or juice of Scuruygrasse well sodden, and stopped up in glasses, and above all,
the juice of Lemons.

Item, to bring along with them, good store of White wine Vinegar to mingle
with water, a liquor which preserved Sir Francis Drake in his long voyage round
about the world.

Item, to use Cider, and such cooling drinks, more then Wines or Aqua vitae;
saving at times of excessive heat, when the body becomes fainty, and the
spirits are withdrawn into the outward parts. Then, a little draught of their
hot waters, or a cup of Sack, will refresh nature, although they sweat never
so much. For it is found out by experience, that the moisture which lies within
the body, is exhaled and forced into the exterior parts, and that the inward
part then forsaken of that moist comfortable humor, and being cold, gladly
receives a sudden restoratiue to repair those annoyances, which the violence
of that unusual heat has extracted.

Item, to feed betimes in the morning, and not at noone, when the Sun is
vehemently hot, or else late in the euenings, once or twice a day, as their
stomachs serve them.

To wind up this discourse in a word, I exhort our East India Merchants, to
bear in mind these few verses:

If Englishmen, which Indias Coast do range,
May not have Spice for English goods exchange:
Far be it from a Christian to transport
Our Treasure hence into an Heathnish Port.
It Is better with plain cheer to make our Feasts,
Then with repentance late to welcome Guests.
While these A^isoes I to England give,
The Hollanders I mean not to forgive.
Beware, lest whilst great bulkes of Ships ye raise
In hope of Gain, ye reap not more dispraise.
How many men by Fevers to our cost,
Bred of Suns heat and salt meats have we lost?
Cum sine Thesauri massa, nec Aromata vendat
India, nec mutet quae sua Terra refert:
Absit, vt hunc Belli Neru^m Mercator auarus
Tranferat, a^t ditet Regna inimica Deo.
Qua^ satius foret absque dapu^prandere patellis,
Excidio Patriae quam saturare gulam?
Dum tibi vaticinor, non Belgis parco: cauete,
Ne Nautas, moles amplific ando ratum,
Diminuatis opum spe; manducare salita
Accelerat rabiem Sole calente Febris.
CHAP. 9.
Apollo sends for some of the Merchants Adventurers of every several Company
out of Great Britain, graceth them with his countenance, and promises them
the continuance of his Favors.

AFter this business of the East India Trade was thus recommended and blessed by
his Majesty, with all auspicious graces, bonis auibus, and with sails of
comfort velis secundis committed to Neptunes protection: His Imperial Majesty
sent for the other Adventurers to foreign Countries out of Great Britain,
some of the Moscouy Company, some of the Turkey Merchants, some of the French
Trade, of the Sound, of the Dutch, of the Greenland Company, some of the
Virginian, of the Summer Islands, of the River of Amazons, of Guiny, and Binny,
and of other Adventurers, he caused some to appear before him, charging them
to follow their Trades without any more fear of Moorish or Dunkirk Pirates.
And particularly he charged the Adventurers into these last recited Coasts to
pursue their enterprises, to save their Country that wastfull expense of
Tobacco, which yearly would be exported out of their Country, if they did
plant that weed in those hot places, specially at the Amazons, and at the
uppermost part of the River of Gambra in Guiny about the 13. Degree, not a
Months sail out of England, they should reap a rich harvest of Tobacco;
besides in this last, they might get Hides, Elephants teeth, Cotton yarne, yea,
and perhaps meet with another Golden Fleece, if it be true, as some report,
that the King of Morocco has his fine Gold in exchange of Sale, from People
inhabiting not far from this River of Gambra. All these hopeful Proiects did
his Majesty lay before our Britains, exhorting them to become more
industrious, to cast by the hideous coat of Poverty, and with an undaunted
courage to sail into the uttermost Ocean.

Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
CHAP. 10.
Apollo to make the Golden Fleece a complete Catholic Restoratiue to the State
of Great Britain, commands the seven wise men of Greece to declare out of
their experience, some more means for the enriching of that State: which they
severally perform.

NOtwithstanding all these profitable proiects, and more then real appearances
of the Golden Fleece, Apollo in another Assembly held at Pindus by reason of
the violent Summers heat, which infested the populous City of Parnassus, in a
Speech reiterating that as yet the Scales were not eq^all, for the benefit of
Great Britain; his Imperial Highness concluded, that the Golden Fleece
should be a Catholic Restoratiue as well for the Inlanders and the Sea Coasts,
as for the Plantations to be advanced forwards; and therefore he wished the
seven wise men of Greece to repair their reputations lately lost in missing to
reform the world, and to devise some new Remedies and Commodities for the
perpetual good of that Monarchy, which he labored to preserve as the apple
of his eye.

Byas was chosen first to signify his Opinion; who discoursed in this manner.
I have traveled over all this spacious Island, and by a curious suruay, I found
more Parkes for Dear enclosed in this Country, then in all Christendom
besides. I found many Commons, Mountains, Heath, and wast grounds, which might
be better converted and severed for bearing of Corn, Grass, and Hay, wherein
the labor will quickly defray the charge, and mightily enrich the Natives. In
Lincolneshire about the Washes and Marshes, there may many new habitations be
erected in imitation of the Low-County men, who have won from the Sea, as the
Venetians before them their famous City, more unlikely grounds then any I saw
in Lincolneshire. A Pattern wherefore let them take from Sir Hugh Middleton,
that renowned Barronet, which makes London for ever obliged unto him for her
water, a piece of work eternizing his Name so far, that a Spanish Ambassador
upon the sight thereof ravished with admiration, protested, that if such an
enterprise had been achieved in Spain, his King had ennobled him with the
Title of a Count. This industrious Gentleman, together with Sir Ambrose
Theloall, pursuing on the like profitable works, recovered above 1000 acres of
Land from the Sea, in the I Will of Wight, worth a thousand pound a year. And if
others would follow their virtuous examples, doubtless the event would crown
their designs and cost with prosperous success. If Commons were husbanded and
tilled, by such enclosures the Commoners should reap that commodity severally
in 20. Acres, which they could not in 100. while they lay confused. A little
Good is better managed, t^en much disorderly inioyed. Some men will get more by
their Gardens and Orchards, then others by their Plow Lands. How many
Mountains, Heaths, Wastes, and Furzy grounds might be converted to better uses
then they be at this day? Yea, and many thefts, robberies, and other
intolerable abuses, might be prevented by these enclosures.

Here Bias ended; when Pittacus began to discover his Plot. Well has my
Collegiat Bias manifested a matter of great import, beneficially tending to
restore Great Britain to prosperity. But what shall the Inhabitants afterward
do, when the genuine and native virtue, which now is verdant, of a lively
saltish vigor, spicke and spanne new, what shall they do five or six years
hence, when they have thoroughly gotten the maidenhead of these wastes, and
wearied all the youthful grain of these grounds with bearing of Corn? Will
they feed and suck still on the blood of their decayed veins? The best
grounds will grow out of heart in a short time, unless they be helped by Art.
I confess the subject, which I intend now to commend, is sordide, rude, and
more beseeming a Clownish Coridon, then one of my education in this magnifique
Court; yet nevertheless, because the same serves to enrich his Majesty's
Territories in these Western Coasts, which he holds as dear as his
Thessalian Tempe, I will disclose the secret means to renew the life of
ouer-wearied Lands. There is no ground but has Marle, either near the
superficies of it, or deeper in the womb of the earth abounding. This Marle in
some Countries, by the revolution of time, is turned to lime, or limestone, and
this lime in some places is grown to a finer mould, even to chalk, which is
the perfection of all Marle. Where none of these abound, nature having not as
yet wrought her self to her fullness; I wish every Landed man with an Augur,
boarer, or piercing worm, to search and try in the deepest part of his earth,
where the same lies hid; for surely shallow or thick, he may find Marle upon
his Land. If it be oily, unctuous, and clammy, then it is fat and rich. It is
of sundry colors, and different likewise in the goodness. For there is a
yellow Marle, a Red, a Gray, and Blew; all which are good, if they be oily and
slippery as Soap, and mixed with earth; as also weak, if it be incorporated
with gravel, stone or sand. The red Marle is the worst, unless it be found to
lie near the blew. For the best is the blew in operation, and will last
longest. Next unto it is the yellow, and the gray better then the red. All
which may be searched after in the veins of the earth. Having met with it,
let the Husband man glory, that he has met with treasure, able to supply his
own and his Countries necessities. Only let him take this for a Caveat, that
at the first marling of his ground, he must look he plow not with broad and
deep furrows, but narrow, lest he throw his Marle into the dead mould. For
the nature of Marle is to send all the goodness downwards, and for that cause
it must not be buried too deep, but still kept aloft on the upper mould. And
in this it differs much from Dung and Mucke, which spend their virtue upward,
and will ascend by their misty vapor springing up to the face of the ground,
though they be buried deeper then they ought to be. I could admonish men
oftener to hearten their outworne grounds with other remedies, as with the
soil of old Ditches, or with sand, or to transfer and temper fresh earth
brought from lay grounds, with their ouerspent mould, as they use in
Devonshire. Or to add tough clay to the tender sandy, for the one is life to
the other being so incorporated, specially moist with the dry. But I hope this
being practiced, their Corn fields will produce sufficient increase, so that
they shall not become too often beholding to the Sound of Denmark for Rye, as
commonly heretofore every five years they have been.

Periander after this speech, produced his opinion: Seeing we have, like Moles,
begun to treat of earthly Commodities to enrich this decayed Country, let me
exhort them to plant Orchards, the benefits I dare well say, will counteruaile
the French Vineyards if they be rightly followed, and need but small pruning
and looking to after the first planting. By this way they shall have Cider,
which with a little help of some Spice, will go beyond most of their Wines,
and consequently, save above six hundred thousand pound a year, which now
most lauishly are consumed by them, even to the cutting and ending of their
fatal thread. Already some discreet and circumspect Landlords have couenanted
and conditioned with their Tenants, that they shall every year during their
Leases, plant fruit Trees: which if others will imitate, not only wines will
grow in less use, but malt will be spared out of the superfluity of their
store, to furnish the needy, and supply Nauigations and Plantations abroad.

As soon as Periander had done, Thales the Milesian took his turn and spoke:
Many small pieces of meat put into the Pot, make fat pottage, and as the other
Proverb implies, many a small makes a great, and mountains were made of
small motes or atoms, which I allege in my defense at this present, for
though I cannot promise Golden Mountains to augment the State of Great
Britain, yet I dare auow, that I shall reveal one Project which shall spare
them sixty thousand pounds a year now of mere necessity transported into
France and Spain for Salt. Why may not they erect good store of Salt-houses in
England near those places, where Coals are dug, about New Castle, in
Lancashire, and in Wales, where lately an Alderman of London had one, which
supplied Bristow, and those Western parts with very fine Salt? I know not what
makes men so backward now adays, unless they are made to believe by the
Spirit of Error, that a bare naked Faith will justify them with doing any
deeds of Charity. For besides their yearly gain, they may do very
meritorious deeds equal to Alms giving, which as S. James writes, will cover
a multitude of sins, in setting the poor at work. If they think it much to
erect so many Salt houses, as will serve all the Ilanders, by reason of the
dear rate of Coals to be converted for other uses, let them set up some in
Newfound land, some in New England, and others in New Scotland, where they may
have plenty of woods. And it is known, that Wood fire without converting Wood
into Charcoale, will serve to boil Salt as well as Coal. There Salt being at
hand to be had for the Fishermens use, it will save at the least twenty
thousand pound, unto the English, which now with the tunnage and the Salt
Discovery of Newfound Land.
they are forced to be at charge. Captain Whithorne in his book of the
Commodities of that Country, among other exceeding good notes by him there
delivered, writes, that one Pan will make above 20. bushels of good Salt in
every 24. hours, only with man's labor and the Salt water; and not, as some
do use to make Salt upon Salt; which so there made, shall not stand in three
pence the bushel to those that provide in that manner: Whereas Salt now stands
them in twenty pence at the least every bushel. And as the said Captain
Whitborne further affirms, that Salt thus orderly boiled, does much better
preserve Fish, whether it be Ling, Codde, or Herring, and keep it sweeter,
then if the same were seasoned with any other kind of Salt. Yea, and Fish
preserved with this white fine Salt, will sell dearer in Spain or Italy, then
if it were salted with the other muddy Salt.

After Thales, Chilon began his relation in this wise. I think there is money
enough in the Land, if people would bring it forth to take the Air, that Air
which God made common for the poor as the rich. What a deal of Plate is there
in London, and in rich men's houses, which some had rather go directly into
Hell, then to sell it for the common good. It were fit that such creatures had
Tutors, or as the Ciuilians say, Curators to manage their Estates for them,
seeing they have not the benefit of reason to distinguish what is convenient
for mortal men, which must suddenly return to the dust of the earth, and then
whose shall these Goods be, which these Fools have prepared with curses, and
disquietnes of mind? If Commissioners and Presenters were upon their oaths, to
sound and search into every man's ability; Subsidies might be trebled on some,
and the needier sort eased. But in vain do I speak of Tutors, Commissioners,
and Iuries, if Merchants be not looked unto, that they transport not Money,
Plate, or Bullion, as the Statutes of Edward the 3. Richard the 2. Henry the 4.
Henry the 6. Henry the 7. and Edward the 6. do all strictly prohibit. Erasmus
in King Henry the 8. days, was like to feel the severity of those Laws, if
that Magnificent King had not highly favored him. For when this famous
Scholar thought to take shipping to go into the Low Countries at Grauesend,
the Kings Officers con^iscated 300. pound which he had gotten in London, by
the liberality of the King, Sir Thomas Moore, and other favorers of Learning
in those days; so that poor Erasmus, like another Pauper Henricus, was
constrained to return back to London, where after that he had bewailed his
mishap to Sir Thomas Moore, and other friends of his, he was advised by them
to repair to the Chamber of Presence, when this noble King sat at dinner. The
King wondered to see Erasmus, who had taken his leave of him above a fortnight
before. And thereupon merrily asked him, what wind drove him back again to his
Court, whom he imagined to have been at Rotterdam? Erasmus showed the Case,
how his Majesty's Officers used him. The King understanding the matter,
bestowed on him 60. pound toward his stay, and wrote to the Searchers,
commending their dutiful care, that they should repay Erasmus all his money.
Many Noblemen also being present, encouraged by the Kings liberality, presented
Erasmus with good gifts, which with the Kings, amounted to 300. pound more; so
that he returned home into his Country with twice so much more money, then he
brought with him into England. And from thence forth in all Companies,
applauded the justice and liberality of the English Nation. If Officers would
watch to do their endeavors for the seizing of Coin, which may be
transported yearly in^o Foreign parts, doubtless money would become more
plentiful within the Land.

Here Chilon ended. And Cleobulus framed his speech in this manner: So great is
some men's Covetousness at this time, that they had rather hazard their souls
to hell, rather then to employ their money for the honor and weal of their
Country. They will rather keep it by them, then lend part to relieve their
dearest friends. And I know not how to compel these wretches to bring it
abroad, unless the Commonwealth would order Tutors over them, as my Brother
Chilon advised, grounding the equity of this Order upon the ancient writ, de
Lunatico inquirendo. For surely a spirit possesses them worse then that, which
madded Saul. There is no other way to draw money out of misers hands, but by
hope of profit. Since the Statute enacted in King James time, for 8. in the
100. money is far more scarce. And therefore in my judgment, if that Act
were repealed, there might ensue a twofold benefit. First, money would become
more plentiful. And then if an Act were made, that Usurers might be tolerated
to take 9. pound in the 100. pound, for one years use, and that the party
which borrowes, should pay 20. shillings more to make it up 10. pound, as in
former time, and this last to be converted toward some meritorious work, money
would wax more abundant, and no man would grudge to pay 20. shillings for a
virtuous purpose. And perhaps the same would lessen the exaction of the rest in
the mercy of God. To this furtherance of money I would have those Brokers and
extorting Iackes receive corporal punishment, who shall by indirect tricks and
monthly bills exact upon pawnes more interest, then ever the Jew of Malta took
of his deadly enemies.

After him the Lawmaker Solon discoursed, as follows: I have heard this day
sundry pretty proiects pronounced by my Colleagues for the enriching of Great
Britain. But if all these fall out happily, and the Devil still continue to
sow his seeds of dissension in men's hearts to go to Law one with another for a
Goats hair by the procurement of Makebates, and the advice of some covetous
Lawiers, to what end shall his Majesty spend his time to succor and supply
them with money, and they presently after to bestow the same on others for the
molesting of Innocents.

This were to make our great Appollo accessory and privy to injurious
dealings. First, let my good Ilanders weed out, or at least wise restrain the
insolences, deceits, and equivocations of Lawiers, and then seek for remedies
to heal their indispositions. Shall the mild Comforter of humane souls
minister an occasion of scandal to reprobates, and fuel to their iniquities?
If they get wealth, men, as I see, have not the wit to keep it. Therefore I
think fit, and it is a treasure inualuable, to tame the Lawiers, before any
more riches be given, as swords in mad men's hands, to offend the servants of
God. What intolerable knaueries have been exercised of late years by fellows
of this rank against honest men, yea against whole Countries, whose blood,
like that of Abell, does cry for vengeance? I know one poor Lordship in Wales
which was persecuted by them, and forced for four thousand pounds to compound
for their native freehold, which by Records found in the Tower their Ancestors
had enjoyed 300. years, and all upon that far fetched maxim, Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, that no prescription of time might bar the Prince of his
Right? And if the wise King James of blessed memory had not set a period to
their insinuations, by limiting 60 years to his titulary demand, God knows to
what event their dangerous positions would have issued unto? It is an easy
thing for a man to find a staff to beat a dog, and for a cunning Lawier with
the crochet of his brain to circumuent harmless people. How many thousand
pounds are yearly spent in Wales alone to maintain suites at Law, which might
be well spared, if the fountain were damned up? Let the King of Great Britain
shut up the spring, which enuenomes multitudes of his poor subjects, who groan
under their burden, worse then the Israelies under the bondage of Egypt, and
Wales alone shall save above 40. thousand pounds a year, which row they
consume, besides their dear time not to be redeemed, in unnecessary suits at
Law.

CHAP. 11.
Apollo not thoroughly contented with the proiects of the seven wise men of
Greece, commands others, viz. Cornelius Tacitus, Co^minaeus, the Lord Cromwell,
Sir Thomas Chaloner, Secretary Walsingham, Sir Thomas Smith, and William Lord
Burleigh, who were known to be far more Politic Statesmen, to deliver
their opinions, how Great Britain might be enriched.

APollo liked reasonable well of the inventions demonstrated by the Seven wise
men of Greece. But for all that, some of them he deemed to be more theoricall
then really practick; and therefore He caused some of his virtuous Attendants,
which had been famous for their Active diligence in managing matters of State,
to discover more proiects, whereby Great Britain might attain to a present
fruition of Treasure. For, as his Imperial Majesty said, Philosophers being
Clinickes, and retired to close chambers delighting more to be, as Persius
notes of them

Esse quod Arcesilas arumnosique Solones,
Obstipo capite and figentes lumine terram,
Like to Arcesilas or Solons found,
With down bent heads, and eyes upon the ground* then personally to bestirre
themselves, as men of motion ought, in bringing their purposes and plots to
execution, they could not prove so necessary members to act what he intended,
as those which had by their industry got the start of them in actual
business. The event his Majesty saw in Cicero, and Caesar, which moved our
most prudent Apollo to refer these Pragmaticke affairs of Great Britain to
the experienced Cornelius Tacitus, to Philip Comm^naus, to the Lord Cromwell,
which flourished in King Henry the 8. days, to Sir Thomas Chaloner sometimes
Ambassador in Spain, and author of those admirable books de repub. Anglorum
instaur. to Sir Francis Walsingham, to Sir Thomas Smith, which wrote the
Commonwealth of England, and to William Lord Burleigh Treasurer of England.

Cornelius Tacitus as the most ancient, was elected first to certify his
censure, who with a free Roman candor framed this discourse: There is as much
difference betwixt the face and state of Great Britane at this day, and the
fashion as it stood in Domitian; time, when I lived there with my victorious
father in law Julius Agricola, as we see betwixt it and the Country of the
Crime Tartare. Then, there was elbow room for the Inhabitants sufficient
without multiplicities of Law-suites, subtle shifts, conycatching, or
contagious thronging and hudling together: But now,

Sunt homines alij, natura Britannica differt.

In Britanes Isle both men and Land are changed.

We Romans by our Legionary Cities won them to ciuility, which they
according to their quick capacities speedily apprehending, embraced the
Christian Faith, paid tribute to Caesar, and continued in loyal obedience
under his Lieutenants, until our Monarchy became translated to Constantinople,
that so the fullness of time might inuest Antichrist in old Rome, the Babylon
of the West. Since which time, as the Children of Israel were sometimes aloft,
sometimes cast down, this Island endured sundry changes. But in my judgment
next unto suits at Law, which the wise Solon observed to beggar both Town and
Country, the populousness of some chief Cities, and specially of London, does
impouerish the Royal Chamber of that Empire, insomuch that it is in a manner
impossible to enrich them, before the Drones, and young hungry Bees be removed
to some foreign Places by an Act of Parliament, and so pressed by transcendent
authority. The people which I would have thus pressed, are the Inmates, the
Cottagers, the needy, and needless numbers. An honest Minister assured me,
that in his Parish at London, there were many which perished of want, being
ashamed to beg; and that he knew ten persons having but a room of twelve
foot square to contain them, and but one bed for them all. Many of the like
calamity might be found in that City, two or three households crept into one
house; that I have diverse times wondered, that they are not every second year
visited with the Plague, or Purples, considering the multitudes of Channels,
Iakes, and other unpleasing places which infect the Air, able to poison the
strongest Snake. For the verifying of this my allegation, I will produce one
example which may serve to confirm the same. I have heard it reported by very
credible persons, that about 4. years past in a house near S. Dunstons of the
West, the Priuies there being emptied on a night, the next morning they found
not only their Brass and Pewter in the lower rooms soild and filth'd, but
likewise their Plate two sto^^s higher standing on their Cupboord, tainted and
corrupted with a yellowish unseemly color. Yea and that which Aristotle
himself would admire at, they found their money in their purses to have lost
the color, as if it had been of purpose varnished with smoaky dung. If the
serious regard of their healths move them not, yet let the wisdom of
Magistrates foresee the inconvenience which yearly accrues to the Generality,
by suffering unnecessary people to hinder the gains of the industrious, and
withal to know this, that too many of the industrious Craftsmen themselves
flocking together, do so divide the profit, which more politikely being fitter
for a few, that both the one and the other, are often seen to faint under
their own weight. Better it is for a City to content themselves with a few
substantial neighbors, then to be troubled with many rakers. If the City of
London, which is thought to hold eight hundred thousand Souls within it, and
the Suburbs were rid of 40000 of these, the rest would thrive the better, and
save at least two hundred thousand pounds a year, which now are spent in vain,
and hereafter will be converted for the weal of the whole Island. In one year
there were suppressed 700. Cottagers in Glocestershire, since which time, that
Country flourished.

Comineus Lord of Argenton, the great Statesman of France, whom Katherine de
Medicis Queen Mother, and sometimes Regent of that Kingdom, was wont to term
the Heretic of State, because he disclosed the secrets of Princes, uttered his
opinion next after Cornelius Tacitus. In the wars betwixt the House of
Burgundy and my Sovereign Lewis the eleventh, I remember, that Money fell out
very scarce, as it does now in Great Britain, for all that saying, which this
wise King was accustomed to repeat, that his France might be compared to a
Meadow ready to be mowne twice a year. And one of the principal means,
which he invented to be stored with money, was to raise his Coin. From the
Saxons time until my time in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, an ounce of
Silver was divided into 20. pieces, and so passed for 20. pence. King Henry by
reason of his wars with us, and afterward with the House of York, proclaimed
the ounce at 30. pence. King Henry the 4. upon the like necessity, enhansed it
to 40. pence, which so lasted until King Henry the 8. days, who raised the
ounce to the value of 45. pence. King Edward the 6. proclaimed it at five
shillings. If Money continues still scant, I see no reason, but that it might
be raised higher, as in former times; which also would induce men to bring
forth their Plate. In France, Venice, yea and in Golden Spain, Brass money
goes current, two and thirty Marauedis amounting to six pence; which they call
a Real. Of these Marauedis, I heard a Rhodomonting Castilian vaunt, that he
would bestow 600. thousand of them with his dear Daughter, to her marriage. In
some Countries they use Shelles, Pepper, and lether pieces for money. In other
places, gaddes of Steel or Iron. At the first troubles of the Low Countries,
they made stampes on Past-Boords, which they licensed to go current for Money.
In the last wars of Ireland, base Coin was ordained to supply the use of the
finest Silver. As long as it will pass in estimation, and warranted by public
authority, either Money may be raised, or the same of a mixed alloy, as the
Venetian Liver, or the French Souls, or of such other metal as the Prince
likes, may serve the Subjects turn in time of wars, as it serves those
Nations both in War and Peace.

The Lord Cromwell succeeded this Noble Frenchman, and said: that he was one
of the chiefest Instruments under King Henry the 8. to dissolve the Religious
Houses in England, and wished, that now some of those Farms and impropriated
Tithes, were for a few years lent by the State of England to support
Ecclesiastical persons in the new Plantations, meaning those, which the State
could spare in their places. And he hoped by this means, the Clergy being
provided for in those New Lands, Churches would there be built the sooner, and
the Plantations in a short time would help to enrich this Kingdom with many
sorts of Commodities, specially if some of the Religious that went in person,
and others well beloved in their Country: that for their sakes, others of good
account would accompany them, and so assist the Commonwealth by their power
and example.

Sir Thomas Chaloner renewed the old project of building Busses and flat
Flemish boats for fishing on the Easterly coasts of this kingdom, saying,
that it was a shame for his nation to look on while the Hollanders yearly
took worth 300000 pounds of fish upon our sea coasts, and in our liberties,
although they fished farther off then they did; for the truth of which
assertion of his he alleged the testimony of Bartolus the famous Lawier. As
Islands (says he) in the sea next adjoining, so likewise the Sea it self to an
hundred miles extent is assigned to the bordering Country, I^ Insul ff ^de Iur.

Secretary Walsingham was of opinion, that letters of Mart or Reprizals would
furnish the land with treasure, so that they went forth in Fleetes more
strongly prepared then in Queen Elizabeth's days; For that now-a-dayes the
Pirates of Algiere had taught the Spaniards more wit not to go so weakly mand
and stored as in times past. In Drakes, Haukins, and other brave Adventurers
voyages, our English found a Golden age. But that now the case was otherwise.
Therefore they must go strong, if they mean to surprise any rich Carricks.
Likewise he wished them, whose powers extended not to supply themselves with
many Copartners, to watch about the lesser Islands in America, and not to draw
too near those Forts where the Galleys freque^ted, nor to be aduenturous about
the time when the Spanish Fleet repaired thither. About Brazill, and the river
of Plate he supposed they might intercept good booties and with more safety:
or if they entered into Lameeres straights, they might in the South sea meet
with rich prizes. Further, he animated the East Indy Company to join with the
Hollanders to drive the Portingals out of the wade of Spiceries. Further, he
advised the English to provide the like kind entertainment for the Spanish
prisoners, if not in their own Country, yet in the Summer Islands, and other
Plantations where they might be put to labor as well as they employ them in
their Galleys, until they paid sufficient ransomes. Lastly, he counseled them
to erect a special society of men of war to join together in the Nauall
expedition, and to lend upon reasonable considerations some of those ships,
which they took, to waft our Fishermen, and to defend the Plantations.

Sir Thomas Smith protested, that there must be strait Laws enacted against
superfluous commodities imported into the land out of other Countries, before
the Golden Fleece could possibly become the Catholic Restoratiue. Among many
superfluities he insisted principally on three. 1. upon the extraordinary use
of Tobacco. 2. upon foreign stuffes and silks, which wrought the Decay of
English cloth, and consequently of many poor Households, which lived by
spinning, weauing, fulling and dressing of cloth. 3. He enueighed against the
multitudes of wine tauernes, and Alehouses, saying that a great part of our
Treasure were yearly wasted in these fiery houses; That half of them might
well be spared, and that in Cities and Towns, next to the contagion of the
Air formerly mentioned, they were the chief causes of the inflammation of men's
blood, and so of Fevers, and most of our late sicknesses. And in conclusion he
pronounced these verses.

In anciant times they used much to Fast,
And what was spared they turned to Alms at last:
But we the Sabbaths make Saturnall Feash:
On Holy days Drink makes some worse then beasts.
If men did Custom pay for Ale and Beer,
Great Charles then Spaines King Philip richer were.
Our bloods inflamed: Diseases grow by Wine:
Our Barnes wax less: The Poor do groan and pine.
Tempore Maiorum leiunis multa colebant,
Inque Ele^mosynas Copia versa suit.
Sabbata nunc mutant in Satur nalia Bacchi,
Patrum Festa di s ebri tate scatet.
Si pro Ceruisid persoluer^t Anglia Censum,
Ditior Hispano, Carole magne, fores.
Corporis hinc nimy facta ebull^tio morbos
Accers^^, minuunt Hordea, languet Egenis.
Lastly, William Lord Burleigh brought forth his opinion, and said, that all
the means, restoratiues, and good orders, which he had heard delivered would
prove of no validity, nor ever come to perfection, except his Majesty of Great
Britain might find some zealous ministers to execute the Laws and statutes
concerning the hindrance of Trade. And further he signified, that one maine
point for reformation and repair of Trading consisted in rewarding those
vigilant spirits, which like Sentinells, awaked when others slept, or proiected
for the common benefit, while others spent their time like belly-gods in
bibbing of sugared sack, and in pampring their guts with gluttonous fare. In
these two positiuely he laid the foundation of Great Britains well fare: In
the execution of these new Decrees, and in rewarding of the industrious:
whereby the obstinate might be punished, and the virtuous heartned. And in
conclusion, this prudent Atlas, on whose unwearied shoulders sometimes relied
the weight of Englands cares, made this discourse: In one thing more I note the
provident Remedy, which the divine wisdom lately manifested in this Kingdom
by removing from hence many people with famine, war, plagues, fevers and other
sicknesses; A remedy surely applied for two beneficial respects; In his love
to these, by translating them to a happier place: In his mercy to the rest,
which survive, that they take heed by such terrible and sudden accidents, how
they wast those means whereof they are but his Stewards in lavish feasts, in
Tobacco, Apparel, in suites at Law, or in drinking more then suffices nature:
And to bestow the estimate of what they shall save hereafter by their thrist on
nobler monuments, in offering of sweet smelling sacrifices to his sacred
nostrills, by helping to build places of succor for their distressed brethren,
seeing that the noney-bees do ouerswarme at home; for certainly, if all
these, whom He lately took to his mercy, had been yet living, their native
Country could not contain them, but that a greater Decay of trading would
necessarily have ensued; nor could all the wits of our wisest Politicians have
devised remedies to restore it, which now may in all humane probability serve
to make the Golden Fleece an absolute Catholic Medicine. God grant, that the
same may work effectually, and convert the steely heart into a relenting,
tender, and into that which is truly Christian. Let all good Christians say,
Amen. Fiat voluntas Domini.

CHAP. 12.
The Order, which Apollo took for the settling of the Golden Fleece, before his
late Progress into the Tropic of Cancer, recommending the same to the care of
the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, the four Patrons of Great Britain. The
Consultation of the four Patrons for the good of Great Britain; The copy of
Saint David's sonnet, which he pronounced in the Amphitheater at Parnassus in
honor of the King of Great Britains marriage and Coronation.

THe day before the summers Solftice in June last 1626. Apollo sent for the
famous fraternity of the Rosy Cross, St. George, St. Andrew, St. David, and
St. Patrick, those careful Patrons of Great Britain, and in the presence of
the Lady Pallas, the Muses, the Graces, and other virtuous persons his
Favorites, he delivered this short speech: The time now draws on, that we must
take our Progress into the Tropicke of Cancer, where we must exhilarate with
our influence those rude subjects of ours, which inhabit near the Northern
Pole, to gratify their natures, which otherwise would prove more fullen, with
some perpetual Days without Nights, for their patience in tolerating so many
long nights without days at the winters Solstice, during which timeof our
Progress, I require you, my Gracious friends, to assist the planters of the
Newfoundlle, which we have lately styled Britanniol, and to treat on their
behalf with that magnanimous King Charles of Great Britain, that he confirm
the commission and orders, which his Father of blessed memory granted about
three years past for the establishing of Wafting ships for the defense of that
hopeful Plantation, and of the fishing fleetes against the oppressions of
Pirates, assuring him from us, that there lies the principal part of the Golden
Fleece, which Orpheus Junior has sounded out in his Cambrensium Caroleia,
which he published at the celebration of his Marriage with the Paragon of
France; which likewise he lately renewed here before us at Parnassus: And not
only he, but others have intimated the benefit of this Project, namely, the
Noble Sir William Alexander in his New Scotland, and Master Misselden in his
Circle of Commerce, who in most lively terms paints out the substance of this
Fleece.

A brave Dessigne it is, as Royal as Real, as Honorable as Profitable. It
promises renown to the King, reuenew to the Crown, Treasure to the Kingdom,
a purchase for the Land, a prize for the Sea, Ships for navigations, Navigations
for ships, Mariners for both: Entertainment for the rich, employment for the
poor, advantage for the Adventurers, and increase of Trade to all the
subjects. A mine of Gold it is; The Mine is deep, the veins are great, the
Oar is rare, the gold is pure, the extent unlimited, the wealth unknown, the
worth inualuable. All this you shall signify unto that Noble King. And in the
interim of our progress, we command all the rest of my virtuous Corporation to
obey the Lady Pallas, whom we do substitute in our stead as Queen Regent to
see our State well and peaceably gonerned. At these words the vigilant Emperor
mounted up into his fiery Chariot, and began his stately Progress.

After whose departure the four Patrons consulted how they might grace the
mighty King of Great Britain. St. George he devised a triumphant show to
honor the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, the Portraiture whereof
Menante means shortly to express. St. Andrew framed an eloquent Oration of
Unity upon that Emblem: Henricus Rosas, Iacobus Regna. St. Patrick composed a
brief book of the Military Science, enterlaced with that late project of the
double armed squadrons, wherein every Bowman was taught to use of the Pike as a
Rest to his Bow; whereby his Country of Ireland might be secured from hostile
invasions. St. David made choice to rejoice the Kings heart with a sonnet in
memory of his hopeful Marriage and Coronation. The which when he had perfected
and sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus, Scogin and Skeleton the chief
Advocates for the Dogrel Rimers by the procurement of Zoilus, Momus, and others
of the Popish Sect, very saucily interrupted him. The true copy whereof as it
is registered in the Library of that Court, is this that follows:

St. David.
I Long to sing of Charles his Waine,
And with due praise to ralse
The Flower deluce of Charle-le-maine.
New days bring forth new Lays.
O happy Star! O hopeful days!
Brave Iasons Golden Age!
Kind Courtiers, hear S. David's Lays,
Free from wiles, far from rage.
Who Cambriaes Joys then Cambers Son,
Should for this match express?
This match, whose Beams do strike upon
Towers, Fields, and Wilderness?
Scoggins interruption.
What will thou prove a Phaeton?
Stand back, and do not press:
Among our wits a Coridon,
Thy self a Swain confess.
Base is thy tune, so seems thy state
In Courtly Eagles eyes;
None may come in at heavens Gate
Without S. Peter's Keys.
Without great means none out of Wales
Shall greet our Noble King.
Dare thou then come with Newfound tales?
And them before him sing?
Thy Cambria is a barren land
For Goats and Satyrs framed:
Like to the Alps, or that wild Strand,
Which thou have Cambrioll named:
Thy Nation meet to be still gulled
With Lawyers quirks and quips:
Thy Muse unholy, too much dulled,
No drop of life she sips.
No Wedding Robe, have thou on, Fool,
Yet look here wedding Cheer:
A Guest vnbid must bring his Stool;
Stand back and draw not near.
St. David.
Stand back thy self, thou greedy Elfe,
Shall Slugges the Haven hold?
And merry Greeks run on a Shelfe
From Colchos bearing Gold?
Both Sea and Land in league conspire
Rich Cambrioll to deface,
If Argonautickes thou aspire
To keep from Courtby Grace.
O how thy Midriffe swelles with Gall
Against an Ancient Race!
We are no Slaves, true Britains all
May see his Highness face.
If Cats may look upon a King,
And Curres bark at the Moon:
Arcadian Swains like Swannes may sing,
And Da^y beg one Boon.
That David which made Pagans bow
To Christ, though Fiends repine.
That man which made Polagians know
Then faults, and truth to shine:
That name, which through Great Britains Land
The first of March does ring:
If not; the fame of Newfound land
Shall lead me to our King:
Whose Heart I feign with Orpheus strain
Would cheer; and then salute
The Queen, which Fates for him ordain
With Violl and the Lute.
The sacred Muses sent me here,
And, if Might quells not Right,
I will draw near, (O do not ieere)
The Light, their Angels sight.
To whom I Will show what is yet vnshowne,
My Countries grief and need;
And in thy ear (although a Clown)
I Will whisper through a Reed.
Our Cambria is a fertile soil
Abounding with all store;
Else would not her Hells-brokers spoil,
And suck her blood so sore.
Had Cambria not more Drones then need,
Her shoares would yield good ships:
Her Land more wealth, where now we feed
With honey needless lips.
Till Hydra suits be well restraind,
Our Iarres will never cease:
Our means grow mean, our honor stained,
Void of Grace, void of peace.
But if our King play Hercules,
And daunt them with his Mace:
Old Cambria shall with Cumbers less
Sustain new Cambriols case.
And both together Tribute pay
More store then Peru's Oar,
Which at his feet they will yearly lay,
With some in hand before.
S. George did kill, as Legends say,
A Dragon fierce of prey:
Next under God this Monster may
None but our Sovereign flay.
Mark well my words, whose Pedigree
Is fetched from Cambers line;
And with our Leekes who do agree
Thy Roses to Combine.
Take wares unbought, a thing that is strange,
Fish, Iron, Salt, and Pit^h,
Train, Skins, and Masts: or in Exchange
Fruit, Wine, Gold, Silks most rich.
Our Seuerne goes not far behind
The Thames for fruitful ground:
Nor this my Muse shall any find
Vnrelisht or unsound.
Let Friends or Fiends, or Momes accursed
Tax her for want of life:
With sweet the best, with sour the worst
She pays to end the strife.
Is It not folly? and unholy
For Bayards to discern
Of doubtful colors suddenly,
Before the right they learn?
Although I am no Puritan,
Pure kisses I commend.
Pureiests I praise in any man,
So they to goodness tend.
I have not read, I must confess,
Those books called Lutherane:
And thine, O Wickliffe, have I less;
Yet am not I profane.
These Mysteries I leave to such,
Who pale with study teach*
Or unto such, whom overmuch
Wants Fear commands to preach.
Skeltons interruption.
Why do thou smite, O busy wight,
Our ears with thy discourse?
Art thou a Jew, or Rome-a-Night,
A brutish Turk, or worse?
Thy Song some Welsh Sidanens Love
May gain to thy desire:
But Courtly Dames will thee reprove,
Fly from high beauties fire.
Haunt thou Bride-Cakes, and Country cheer
As fits a Cambrian Peer.
Thy Mumsimus, thy murmurs here
None will but dizzards hear.
Bray there aloud, and roar complete
A midst thy Pipes and Ale:
From Babels seat springs thy conceit,
Thy sonnet is so stale.
S. David.
I come not here for Belly-cheere,
Nor for Tobaccoes fume.
With mirth for mirrh my Sovereign dear,
To perfume, I presume.
Whom mighty Jove means to destroy,
He lets them qua^^e a while:
And mads them with a smoaky toy,
Themselves till they beguile.
Bayte thou those Beasts: and I Will take leave,
To greet our Charles his waine:
Whose rays shoot on, as I conceive,
The stock of Charle le-maine.
Their Star I saw from Cambria West:
Which made me Gifts prepare,
Leekes crowned with Pearls; yet to contest
Against me still you dare.
You gape for Fees, but a Gold Ring
Suits not a Meazells snout.
A Lamb shall wring your Adders sting
And canuase all your rout.
Rather then you should term me Jew,
Lean Bacon I will eat:
Or Pudding nere so black of hew,
or Hare, though beauties meat.
But if you please and stand precise,
Upon those Jewish Laws:
Your double tongue I Will Circumcise,
Which marres your Clyents cause.
I worship not false Mahomet,
Who bars the Ivy sign,
As ignorant, how some have met
In wine the sisters nine.
Nor Romes good will seek I to win,
Which orders me to plow
Red furrows up in naked skin,
And merits seed to sow.
Such Grace let Popes grave on themselves,
And leave me as I am;
Who brooks it worse then Egypts Elues
The Devil, or his Dam.
I count that Church Ba^des Pedlery,
Which all for money cares;
Sells Masses, Pardons, Letchery,
Souls, Beads. o precious wares!
Though lack a dandy, when he houles,
Frights children from the dugges:
Will men give bribes to keep their souls
From Purgatories bugges?
Though Apes wear coats, and some birds p^a^e,
Not knowing weal from woe:
Yet sober men (though somewhat late)
Owls Mattins should forgo.
I hunt not for more miracles,
The Gospel to confirm:
Nor outward shows, Gulls Spectacles,
To hold my Inside firm.
The Golden Calfe old Jews averred
With manly voice to crake:
Christ's body some are not a^eard,
From Gods right hand to rake:
I like as ill the Cloister life,
Unless a Nun I school.
Let him that hates an honest wife
Be gelt, or begged a fool.
No Priest shall cozen me to fast
To pull my courage down,
If once of Shrift my Wife had taste,
Or loved a grasse-greene gown.
At Tombs and Shrines I dare not call,
On Saints this match to guide:
Nor Heavens Queen; let Idols all
Lie from this marriage wide.
But unto ONE, that is always prone
To pardon humane vice,
I vow them both in Christ alone
A lining Sacrifice.
The Stony-heart who can deny
But union tender makes?
Of diffring Tunes an Harmony,
In spite of Hellish Snake;?
No venom shall their souls defile,
No dreams, no magic spells:
Not Crocodile tempt them with guile.
So sweet Loves Posie smells!
No Beast shall touch their honey flowers,
No flashing curse them sindge,
What God has set he weeds at hours;
Gods knot let none infringe.
With Oil of Gladness, Bathes of bliss
Dipped shines free Majesty
In Albions Throne, where Thamesis
Extolls their Amity.
The Crowns they wear, no Fiends can tear;
S. Michaell guards his own.
The Golden Scepter which they bear
With Laws swayes Field and Town.
With might and maine their mind contends
The Dragon to put by,
Who red with blood at last intends
The western Monarchy.
Yet let him reckon with his O^st
For his warre-fares wages:
Not all his Rents in Indiaes Coast
Will pay the arrerages.
Let none wonder, if God Thunder
Vengeance for our Iarres:
While we under Satan wander,
Himself with David wars.
But reconciled he wills to fight
His Battles valiantly.
Though David's might Goliath slight,
On God all Conquests lie.
Courageous King, then bid us smite
Tyrants down, Giants grown;
Down with those Do^s, which Britains spite,
Tara tantara down.
Me thinks Lisbon I see now won,
The Isles ransack't, the Indies sacked,
And sweet Eliza thought undone;
Rein-stald by us swakt.
In March, like June, their springs first light
Reuiues our Garden beds
With lovely Roses, red and white,
And Leekes with siluer'd heads.
The Spirits Gardner will keep green
With Buddes perpetually,
Our Rosy King and Lillies Queen,
On him if we rely.
Whom last I pray, as Pageants gay,
As Maskes, or Gemmes in Gold,
My Muse to prize, though clad in gray,
My Will, though too too bold.
CHAP. 13.
Upon an Information preferred before the Lady Pallas, against Scoggin and
Skeleton for interrupting S. David in his Sonnet; she vtters some observations
on the behalf of the Learned, and thereby takes an occasion to banish all
Scoffing Companions from Parnassus, and from becoming at any time after
partakers of the Golden Fleece discovered in this Treatise.

THe next day after this Sonnet was sung in the Amphitheater at Parnassus by S.
David, Spencer the Emperors Attorney for the English Poets, being moved with
the unmannerly and rude interruptions of Scoggin and Skeleton, informed against
them as Libellers before the Lady Pallas, who sat as Queen Regent in Apolloes
absence. These dogrell Rimers confessed their Error, that they were seduced by
the Spirit of Detraction, to disgrace this Reverend Prelate as much as in them
lay, because his Gravity had composed that Sonnet in such a homely strain, as
seemed more convenient for men of their rank, then for a venerable Patriarch,
whose vein ought rather to flow with Heroical blood, then to borrow their
plain robes of Poetizing.

Upon this Confession of the Dogrell Rimers, ore tenus, the wise Regent
proceeded, and uttered these notable resolutions; that Scoggin and Skeleton well
deserved to be punished as Libellers in that Starre-Chamber-Court. First,
because they had interrupted a person of that high worth, and that publicly,
before they had heard the Sonnet thoroughly repeated, which argued, that they
did it more out of spleen and pre^udicate judgment, then out of the
apprehension of their titulary liberties. Secondly, that a simple course Poem
enriched with lively matter and juice, ought to be preferred before an
heroical swollen verse puffed up with the barme or froth of an inconsiderate wit.
Thirdly, that no man should critickly quote down the imperfections of any
Book or writing, except he also would note the best and choicest conceits
thereof, whereby it might appear in the balance of understanding, that the
one did downe-waigh the other. For it is easier to find faults, then to mend
them, to pull down a house, then to build one up. And whosoever would mark
the worst things, leaving the sweetest and most worthy of commendation behind;
her Grace compared him to that Fool, which forsook the Rose, and smelt to the
pricking brier. Fourthly, that many men used to reprehend the works of the
learned, which their own muddy Pates could not apprehend nor comprehend,
because they might seem wiser to the standers by then the Muses had made them.
Fifthly, that a judicious Writer should not care what censure a malicious
Sycophant gave of his works; For it were more honorable to be praised of one
Socrates, then of a hundred Mo^ists. That Scholar therefore, which with an
Apology defends his innocence against these vipers toungs the most prudent
Queen likened him to that harebraind Traveler, which in the scorching Month
of June being troubled with the croaking noise of Frogs, would needs light
down from his horse to be revenged on them for offending of his tender ears.

All this, said the noble Queen, did our Reverend Patriarch know, when he
went forwards with his Sonnet notwithstanding the crosse-oppositions of these
Buffones, scorning out of a brave Britain courage to revenge himself on such
contemtible creatures. Nevertheless, because their floutes and taunts tended to
the breach of Civil Orders, her Majesty banished all scoffing companions, and
base ballet Rimers quite out of the Jurisdiction of Parnassus and Colch^s, and
for ever after to become incapable of the mystery of the golden fleece.

The conclusion of Orpheus Junior to his Sovereign the King of Great Britain.
IF with kind words your Majesty approve
This Golden Fleece sprung from a subjects love:
I Will swear you hold your Fathers worth by right,
That from your lips there shootes a quickening light.
But if your mind more weighty cares withdraw,
One fingers touch suffices me for Law.
I Will dream that you have read, what I present,
Or deemed it meet for wisdoms Parliament,
Or else I Will feign new fancies in my Brain,
That to your state this work might bring some gain:
Or that you do of Vaughan well conceive;
But to your Cooks this as a prey you leave:
I care not, whilst crowned Lillies you become,
While Trade helps Arms abroad, and Peace at home.
Orphei Iunioris conclusio ad Magnae Britanniae Regem.
SI placidis verbis tibi nostra probetur Opella,
Quae Maiestatis ponitur ante pedes:
Dignum iuro Patris te, maxim Carole, Sceptr^,
Et iuro labris lumen inesse tuis.
Sin magis impediant grauiora negotia mentem,
Sat mihisi digito tacta sit ipsa t^^.
Idaeas fingam, te perlegisse: Senatu,
Aut Aulae scribis hanc meruisse legi;
Vel de Vauhanno been te sentire: sed Orsa
Tradere nostra Coquis igne voranda tuis.
Nil moror: Albionis decorant dum Lilia Serta:
Dum foris Arma, domi Pax, Noua Terra viget.
FINIS.

