MOST APPROVED, And Long experienced VVATER-VVORKES.

Containing, The manner of Winter and Summer-drowning of Meadow and Pasture, by
the advantage of the least, River, Brook, Fount, or Waterprill adjacent;
there-by to make those grounds (especially if they be dry) more Fertile Ten
for One.

As also a demonstration of a Project, for the great benefit of the
Commonwealth generally, but of Hereford-shire especially.

Iudicium in melius perplexus cuncta referto,
Vera rei, donec sit manifesta fides.
By ROWLAND VAVGHAN, Esquire.

Imprinted at London by GEORGE EID. 1610.

A PANEGYRICKE, In the deserved honor of this most profitable work, and no
less renowned then much-desired Project.
I Sing of him that is as dear to me
As to the World; to whom both aye are bound;
Then brief, for Bond so long, I cannot be;
Unless my Love were (like my Lines) too round.
Proportion does so please Wit, Will, and Sense,
That where it wants, it grieves Sense, Will, and Wit:
Then by Proportion of his Excellence,
Thus must we shape our praise of Him, and It.
When as the Earth all soild in sin did lie,
The Almighty's long-prouokt inraged-HAND
Emptied Heavens Bottles, it to purify;
And made that Noah's flood.
FLVD that mud to countermand.
So, for like crimes, of late, we plagued have bin
With like The Inundation caused by the boiling up of the sea in Munmouth and
Glamorgan shire, the year 1607.
O'reflowings, washing all away
That lay the Earth upon, or Earth within,
Within the limitts where this Deluge lay!
Which Inundations were for Earth unfit:
But he whose Hand and Head this WORK composed,
Shows how to drown the Earth to profit it:
And being Ill, to make it Well-disposd.
Some with their Lands, do often so sinck themselves,
That they to it, and it to them yield naught,
But, in the Ocean what do yield the Shelues;
Which when they see, they Fevv Hadlands take pleasure to behold the lands
they had.
flee, with pensive thought.
But in His Drownings, He makes Lands arise,
In grace and goodness to the highest pitch;
And Meades, and Pastures price he multiples;
So, while some lies, He rise does in the Trenches, by which his works are
affected.
Ditch.
His royal TRENCH (that all the rest commands)
And holds the Sperme of Herbage by a Spring)
Infuseth in the womb of sterile Lands,
The Liquid seed that makes them Plenty bring.
Here, two of the inferior Elements
(Joining in Coitu) Water on the Leaze
(Like Sperme most active in such complements)
Begets the full-pancht Foison of Increase:
For, through Earths rifts into her hollow womb,
(Where Nature does her Twyning-Issue frame)
The water soakes, whereof does kindly come
Full- By equivocation it may be taken for Infants as well as Barnes: Barn
being the name of Infant in some places of England.
Barnes, to joy the Lords that hold the same;
For, as all Women's wombes do barren seem,
That never had society of Men;
So fertile Grounds we often barren deem,
Whose Bowels, Water fills not now and then.
Then, Earth and Water, warmed with the Sun,
Ingenders what does make Mankind engender:
For Venus quickly will to ruin run,
If Sine Cerere and Baccho, friget Venus.
Ceres and her Bacchus not defend her.
Then look how much the Race of Man is worth,
So much is worth this Art, maintaining it;
Then o how dear is he that brought it forth,
With pain and cost for Man-kinds benefit!
Though present Times (that often ungrateful prove)
May vnder-valew both his Work and Him;
Yet Aftertimes will prize them Price above,
And hold them Dirt that do their glory dim.
For He by Wisdom, ouer-rules the Fates,
By Wit defeating passions of the Air;
When they against his welfare nurse debates,
While fools (ore-rul'd by each) die through despair.
In dropping Summers, that do mar the Meads,
His Trenches draine the Raines superfluous Alms;
And when heat wounds the Earth ( The Sun exhaling all radical moisture
from thence by the wounds or chaps which are made by summers heat.
to death that bleeds)
He cures the chaps with richest VVater-balmes.
So, when Heaven (ceaselesse) weeps to see Earths sin
He can restrain those Tears from hurting him;
Until his Tears the Heavens to The tears of sinners, are the wine of Angels.
joy do win,
While other Grounds are torn, the life from limb.
And when the Earth grows Iron, for Hearts so grown,
He can dissolve it strait (as Wax it were;)
Mantling the Meadows in their Summer-Gowne;
So joys in hope, while others grieve in fear.
"Thus wisemen Ars dominabitur astris.
rule the Stars, as Stars do fools;
"And each man's manners do his Fortunes square;
"Art learnes to thrive in Natures practick Schools;
"And Fortune favors men of actions rare.
Such one is this rare Subject of my Rimes,
Who reigns by mirry motion, 'ore my Spleen;
Such is this Or clear Mirror.
Water-glasse, wherein these Times
Do see how to adorn their Meades in Green.
He from a Molehill (from whose hollow womb*
Issued a From the observation whereof, proceeded the rest of his works, as in
this his book more at large is expressed.
Water-fount) a Mount did rear;
A Mount of large Revenues thence did come;
So, a Molehill great with young a Mountain bare!
How many Rivers, Founts, and Water-prills,
(Tendering their service to their Lords for Rent)
Are nere imployde but in poor Water-mills,
While the dry Grounds unto the Bones are brent.
To Tantalus I can resemble those
That touch the water that they n'ere do taste;
And pine away, Fruit being at their Nose,
So, in Abundance, they to naught do waste.
The Brooks run murmuring by their parched Brincks
(Pure virgin Nymphs) and chide against the Stancks,
When as their sweetest profer'd service stinkes,
So coyly kiss the chapt-lippes of the Banks.
And (weak as water) in their Beds do stretch
(As it were to yield their Ghost for such disgrace)
Their Crystal limbs unto the utmost Reach;
And In dry Summers the Rivers grow lowest.
shrink from The Arms that (vselesse) them embrace.
When as the Meads, wherein their Beds do lie,
Make toward them, and fall by lumpes therein;
Who (of the yellow Iaundise like to dye)
Creep to their When the Banks are ch^pt, they (cleeuing) fall by mammocks
into the River.
Beds, their love and health to win.
O Landlords see, O see great Lords of Land
These senseless creatures moved to eithers aid
But for your help, who may their helps command:
Then well command, you shall be well obaid.
Help Nature in her Works, that works for you;
And be not idle when you may do good:
" Pains are but Gains take away the thought of Pains.
Sports when earnest gains ensue:
" For, Sport, in earnest, lies in Liuelihood.
The Golden-age is now returned again,
Since Gold's the God that all commands therein;
By Gold (next God) Kings conquer, rule and reign;
With Gold we may commute, or grace our sin.
Briefly, by Him we may do what we will,
Although we would do more then well we may:
For He makes ill too good, and good too ill;
And more then God, the ill do him obey.
Then if ye would be either Great or Good,
Or Good and Great (all which he Wealth helps Virtue in her operations; whose
hands were else bound from ouert action.
can you make)
Take pleasure (o) to save your Livings Blood
And stream it through their Limbs, for Profus sake.
This Esculapius of diseased Grounds,
(Casting their Water in his Vrinalls)
(His Trenches) sees what Humor ore-abounds,
And cures them straight by Drought or Water-falls.
This little-great-great-little Flash of Wit.
This Soul of Action, all composed of Flame,
(Mounting by Action to high Benefit)
Exalts his State, his Countries, and his Fame.
He well deserves to be a Lord of Land,
That ore All gauly and too dry grounds rebel against nature, and men's profit
rebellious Lands, thus Lords it well:
O that all Lords that can much Land command
Would so command it, when it does rebel.
But Pleasure, Pomp, and inter-larded Ease
Possess great Landlords; who, for rebel Grounds,
Do Rack their Rents, and idely live on these
Or spoil their Tenants Cropp with careless Hounds.
But this rare Spirit, (that has nor Flesh, nor Bone,
But Man even in the Abstract) hunts for Wealth
With Wit, that runs where Profit should be sown
By wholesome Pains; so, reaps both Wealth, and Health
Whether the Cost, or Time, which he has spent
Be most, it is hard to say: for, twenty years
His Pounds, by thousands, he his Grounds has lent,
Which pays now use, on use, as it appears.
The Place wherein is fallen His happy Lot
Hight Golden-Valley; and so justly held:
His Royal TRENCH, is as his melting Pott,
Whence issues Liquid-gold the Vale to gild!
O that I had a World of glorious words,
In golden Verse (with gold) to paint his praise,
I would blind Enuies Eyes, and make Landlords
By this Suns rising; see their Sons to raise.
But o! this is not all thou do behight
Dear Vaughan, thy Dear Country for her good;
For, thou resolu'st to raise that The Countries good.
benefit
Out of thy private care; and Liu'lyhood.
Thy many trades (too many to rehearse
That shall on thy Foundation steadfast stand)
Shall with their Prayers, still the Heavens pierce;
And bless their Founders rare Head, Heart, and Hand!
That public Table which thou will erect
(Where forty every Meal shall freely feed)
Will be the Cause of this so good Effect
To plant both Trades and Traffic there with speed.
There shall thy Iouialist Mechanicalls
Attend this Table, all in Scarlet Cappes;
(As if they were King Arthures Seneschals)
And, for their pains shall fill their Chapps and Lapps.
For, never since King Arthurs glorious days
(Whose radiant Knights did Ring his Table round)
Did ever any such a Table raise
As this, where Viands shall to all abound!
Nay this, shall that frank Table far exceed
If we respect the good still done by each:
For, that fed none but such as had no need;
But this (like God) shall feed both poor and rich!
This Table then (that still shall bear thy Name
In Hyrogliphicks of the daintiest Cates)
As often as it is spread shall spread thy Fame
Beyond the greatest conquering Potentates!
They spill with spite, what thou in pity spend'st;
They only great, thou good, how ever small;
Subversion they, Erection thou intend'st;
They foes to most, but Thou a friend to all.
Thy virtuous care to have thy God adored
(Among thy Pains and Pleasures) all will bless
Thy Pension for a Preacher and Curate for daily service.
Preacher of his Word,
Shows thou seek'st Heaven, and earthly happiness.
A Chapel and a Curate for the same
(The one maintained, the other built by Thee
For Gods Diurnall praise) shall make thy Name
In Rubricke of the Saints enrold to be.
Thine Almes-house for thy Any way mischanc't in their Bodies, So that they
cannot work.
hapless Mechanics
Shall blaze thy charity to After-ages;
And longer last in Breasts of men, then Bricks;
Increasing still thy heavenly Masters Wages.
If holy David had great thanks from Heaven
But for the Thought to make the 2. Sam. 7.2.16.
Arc an House;
Then thanks of all, to Thee, should still be given
Whose purpose is to all commodious.
O happy Captain! that have past the Pikes
Of sharpest Storms, still wounding Soldiers states,
To end thy Days in that which all men likes,
Joy, Mirth, and Fellowship which ends debates.
Thy Drums and Trumpets ( Mars his melody)
That wonted were to call thy foes to fight,
Shall now but call a friendly Company
(For honest ends) to feasting and delight.
Glory of Wales, and luster of thy name,
That give to both sans Parralel'd renown,
Upon the Poles inscribed be thy Fame,
That it to Worlds unknown may still be known*
That they may say a Nooke but of an Isle
That Northward lies, does yield a rarer Man,
Then larger Lands by many a Thousand Mile,
Who can do What is before expressed.
Thus, and will do what He can.
But many Monarchs, many Worlds have won,
Yet, with their Winnings have not won that praise
As this great-litttle Lord of hearts has done,
For good-deedes done to These, and After-dayes.
Now Envy swell, and break thy bitter'st Gall
With ceaselesse fretting at these sweet Effects,
The Eternal good which he intends to all
His Fame (well fenced) above a Foil erects.
Lived He among the Pagans, they would make
His glorious Like Mars, Jupiter and Saturn.
Mansion some auspicious Star;
And make their Altars fume still for his sake
As to a God, to whom still bound they are:
For, Bacchus but for planting, first, those Vines.
Plants
Whereby men's Wealth, and Wit are often ore'throwne
Which wanton Nature rather craves, then wants,
They, as a God, with Gods do still enthrone.
But let us Christians, though not yield Him this,
Yet give him Love and Honor due to a Man,
That makes men live (like Gods) in Wealth, and Bliss,
And heave his Fame to Heaven if we can.
Vain Hanno taught his less vain Birds to say
He was a God: and then he turned them loose
That they abroad might chaunt it still; but they
(So gone) with silence proved their God, a Goose.
Then, though no God he were, yet might He be
A right Geese (by reason of their vigilance) kept the Pagan Gods in the
Roman Capitol.
God-keeper in the Capitol:
They Geese (at most) and so (at least) was He;
Or, if ought less, his Godhead was a Gull.
But what I say, none taught me but thy VVorth;
Nor shall it (like those Birds) thy Fame betray:
But these my Lines shall then best set thee forth
When thou art worse then Worms, and less then Clay.
As well thy Crest, as Coat (o wondrous thing!)
A Serpent is, about an Infants Neck:
Who was thine Ancestor, as Bards do sing,
So borne (alive) the Fates to counterchecke.
From him thou came; as one, in him preserved;
(By way of Miracle) for this good end,
As, by thy skill, to have so well deserved
Of all the Kingdom, which it much will mend.
This praise (perhaps) which thy deserts exact,
By Envy will be thought poeticke skill,
Playing the Vice, but in a glozing Act,
And so wrong Wit to sooth an erring will.
But yet if Art should leave true Art vnprais'd,
(The only Meed the Time all Art affords)
What Spirit by Art, would then at all be raiz'd
(From this Worlds hell) if Art should want good words?
Then, be the mouth of Envy wide as Hell
Still open in thy spite, yet say I still
Thy praise exceeds, because thou do excel
In these thy works, that work Good out of Good Grass out of ill ground.
Ill.
If I be lavish of good-words; thou art
As lavish of the good which thou can do:
Then, must thy praise be greate-good, like thine Art,
That goods thy praisers, and dispraisers too.
In short (since on thy praise I long have stood
VVhereon my verses Feet do freely fall)
As thou do work by Floods, so thou art a Flood
Of working, running to the Good of all.
For as the Sun does shine on good and bad;
So do thou ( Sun of Useful Science) still:
Then, Flood, and Sun, thou art the ground to glad,
And make it fruitful to the good and ill.
But since th'obscurest Spark of thy bright Descended from his Ancestors.
Tribe
Speaks thus of Thee, (thou small-great man of worth)
It may be thought I praise to thee ascribe
As part mine own; so falsely, set thee forth:
But those, so thinking, when thy Worth they prove,
With me, will thee both honor, praise and love.
Your poor kinsman, and honorer of true virtue in whom so-euer. JOHN DAVIES
of Hereford.

In praise of this no less pleasant then most profitable work.
Lo here a work; a work? nay, more then so,
A work of works: for all it does contain,
Makes wealth by Water, over Land to floe,
Where-to works run, that reach to honest gain.
Then, have thou Land? and Water there-with-all?
A little Land and Water so may stand,
That Land shall rise by that small Waters fall
To high esteem, and raise thee with that Land.
This is no Dream; or if a Dream it be,
It is a Golden one; and shows by It
That golden Worlds of wealth shall compass thee
If, in this dream, thou art this work of Wit.
Then shall thou (waking) see (for thine avail)
Thy Grass all Gold as in the Golden-Vale.
John Strangwage.

In Libri Auctorem.
THe Be is little, yet esteemed much,
(With no less cause) for Works as sweet, as rare:
Who, but with Dewes, do make their owners rich;
And, but for others, work with ceaseless care.
Then here is a honey- Be, that, but with Dewes,
(Exchequer'd in some Trench, as in a Hiue)
Sour grounds with Milk and Honey ouer-flowes.
Whereon both He and Others sweetly live.
Which, not so much for his own good, he gets;
(Though (like a Be) at need, he feeds thereon)
But to fill others too, with honyed Sweets;
So, with a Be, holds just comparison.
In this they differ; Bees for this do dye,
But He, for this shall live immortally.
Robt Corbet.

In praise of this most profitable work.
NO Plant can prosper if it water wants,
Nor Herbage flourish in a thirsty soil;
But give that Drink; with water ply your Plants,
And both will yield you profit for your toil.
Some Grounds yield Cellers, wherein Nature putts
Her choicest liquers to refresh the Mould;
There, Founts, and Channels, for their Streams, she cuts,
To cheer the Grounds where they their course do hold.
But Natures providence but little boots,
Where water runs at waste along the Land;
None giving drink unto the thirsty Roots,
Out of those Cellers, being hard at hand.
Then to the Common and the Private weal,
How dear is he that does this art reveal?
Henry Fletcher.

To the worthy Author and his work.
VAVGHAN, thou have a Soul surmounting Souls,
In high Conceit, and Action; whose bright fire
Mounts to the Sphere, that Gain to Glory rowles,
Which Men still seek, and Gods themselves desire.
Who, for thy countries profit, do not spare
Thy Pains, thy Means, thy Body, and thy Mind;
Whose will is bent to make all well to fare
By honest labor, in a diverse kind.
A Project here thou have (in pleasant phrase)
Objected to the worlds Desiring-eye,
That while some practice, some it does amaze,
To see men marred, soon made again thereby.
Then since (like God) thou can make Men of Clods,
We needs must rank thee with the Semy-gods.
Richard Harries.

In praise of these most praise worthy Water-workes.
BY Fire-workes many have exploited things
Past all belief, and made the World admire;
Which Element, being on her flaming Wings,
So Active is, that all it strikes is Fire.
That comes to naught, that so is overcome:
But, these rich Water-workes work leisurely
Most quick increase, in Earths most barren Womb,
Which bears what One does ten times sextuply.
Then who believes by Fire to find that Stone
Proiecting Gold, much err in that their Creed;
Since it is Earth, that is kindly ouer-flowne,
That is the Stone (indeed) that does the Deed:
Then would thou make pure Gold? ore-flow thy land;
So, shall thy Soil be turned to golden Sand.
Siluanus Dauies.

In praise of this as pleasant as profitable work.
Would have great pleasure? then take pains to read
This little Tract: which little pains will do:
Look thou for profit? then, thou here may speed;
Where pleasure great brings forth great profit too.
Upon a Subject rude, as is the Earth,
Never was Pleasure so predominant:
Nor never so blithe was profit at her birth
As here, since here, she is so puissant.
All famous Writers still directly shot
The Shafts of their Endeavors at these two;
For hitting these, they gain and glory got;
The gain of Love, and Learnings glory too.
Then love and laud him, who has close compact
Pleasure and profit for thee in this Tract.
Tho: Rant.

In the praise of the Author and his effectual works.
Dear Rowland, let thine Oliver have leave,
Among thy Lauders, his short Breath to spend,
To help them so, to Heaven thy fame to heave;
Whose Works are Means t'an Earthly-heau'nly End:
Then, Rowland, take me with Thee Here, and There;
That Rowland still may have his Oliver.
Oliver Maynson.

In praise of the Work and Author.
MY little ROWLAND you may look that I
(All things considered) MVCH should say of you:
Then, this your WORK (to say that MVCH in few)
Shall work the Workers endless Praise: and why?
"A worldly Wit, with Heavenly Helps endowed,
"Getts Ground, and Glory of the Multitude.
John Hoskins.

Once more for a Farewell. In deserved praise of this neuer-too-much praised
Work.
GOod Wine does need no Bush: (Lord! who can tell
How often this old-said-Saw has praised new Books?)
But yet good Water (drawn from Founts and Brooks)
By Sluice (the Sign) makes dry Grounds drink it well.
Men may have store of Water, and dry Land;
Yet, if they draw it not through Trenches fit,
(By Sluice, that shows how (well) to utter it)
It idely runs, while scarce the Owners stand.
Good Water, then by Sluice, through Trench must pass
For good return; that else runs to no end;
Which Sign does draw it in, it self to spend
On dryest Grounds, that (drunken) cast up Grass;
Which giddy Simily, in sober Sense,
Shows the Effect of this Works excellence.
John Dauies.

THE AVTHOR.
I Would not fear with Cinick Dogs to fight
Came they in Front: But, this will ill be borne;
Perhaps some Curres behind my Back will bite:
But that is their shame, my glory it to scorn.
ROVVLAND VAVGHAN.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILIIMA EARL OF PEMBROOKE LORD HERBERT OF CARDIFFE,
MARmion and S. Quintin; Lord Parre of Rosse, and Kendall; Lord Warden of the
Stanneries: Captain of his Majesty's Garrison-towne of Portesmouth; and Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter; My most honored and respected Lord.
MOST HONORABLE, and my Noblest Lord: I have out of my lives experience,
prepared a Watery workemanshipp, which I think the Gods forbad the excellent
creatures in former times to handle; but I have performed That, that has
begott a world of work in Me (which some men say will either impair my wit,
or hazard my estate (they said so in the execution of my water-workes) but they
ouer-said themselves, and the most part have given me satisfaction by maine
submission or reconciliation) I doubt not but the rest, in my mechanical
undertakings, will do the like, because some have subscribed, and many offer
conditional pertakings.

What blessing soever Invention does raise, your Lordshipp knows is subject to
a hotchpotch of speech; and until it be performed, Envy, Malice, and all
spightfull detraction follows; so is it with me. But (my good Lord) seeing
that Custom is a great Lord of command.
Lordly custom wills that great Lords should patronize invention; I do most
humbly beseech your Lordshipp (on my behalf) so to do; you being (next unto
my dear Sovereign and His) heir apparent to my heart; having intaild my
dutiful services to the heirs male of your body; and for want of such issue,
to the heirs male of my Lord of Mongomery, for ever, without reuocatio^: these
affections, proceed not (my honorable Lord) from any sinister respect; these
following consideratio^s be the cause: The remembrance of that worthy Prince
your Father, and more worthy (if might be) your Grandfather, and great
Grandsiers, from the battles of In these several battles, the Vaughans mine
Ancestors followed yours.
Cressy, Poytiers, Egincourt, and Banbury, with many others before, and since.
Where the many services of mine to yours has been such as Tradition will tell
your Lordshipp, and I tell you with all, tha abundant favors we found, makes
me think my self bound to your Lordship in recognisance of duty, and you
tied (by honorable and parrall covenants from them, to protect me and all my
endeavors, laboring for the good of the commonwealth, and your glory. Now, if I
make it not appear a most flourishing commonwealth; and such as never poor
Subject in the Kingdom did raise, put me by with your hand, as unworthy of any
favorable respect.

Your Lordshipp shall find no Monopole required; but, this I require at your
hands: In matters of commonwealth, Expedition is always of the Quorum; It is
one of the chiefest friends (my Lord) the Suter (except he be a wrangler) has
in all the Kings courts: therefore I can require no less then that your
Lordship command I may have convenient access, without restraynt to perform
my commonwealths desires, with these limitations and due observance, that I
disturb not your Lordships quiet, nor conferences, with honorable persons,
and others of account: watching, and taking the aduantage-of Time, and Place; a
word at one time, and two at another. Think not (most Noble Lord) that I am
either insolently saucy, or too bold. Your Lordshi^pp shall here-after
understand the quality and condition of my undertakings will admit little
delay; I speak partly out of the complaint of an old servant of your
Grandfather Pembrookes, my Uncle Thomas Vaughan: who was to take his trial for
his life at Kings-bench-Barre at ten of the clock in the morning, having
forgotten my Lords remembrance to some good friend, prayed pass of the Groom
of his chamber being French: who with hard words stopped his passage; but he
putting one of his Arms betwixt the French-mans twist, the other about his
neck, threw him at my Lords feet, and told his Lordshipp the cause was, he
came for his life: My Lord hearing that, allowed this his coming with a
vengeance, in respect of his necessity to prevent a mischief, and with patience
priuiledg'd the offense, beating the Groom for his ill respect: So good my
Lord, make me free of your presence; and command your principal Attendants (as
Secretaries, but especially the Gentlemen of your Chamber, and Grooms) to take
special notice, My coming is to do you all honor. If I should attend
Hours, Times and Seasons, I should be in that case as if I wear to deal
with your Lordship by Petition, and to purchase your speech with a price, so ye
memory of three hundred years dependancy should be trodde^ under foot as of no
value.

As Lawyers not fed every Term, breeds neglect of their Clients, with
discontinuances and cessations; so, your Lordshipp may handle the matter, and
post me over by discontinuance, that you will forgett I have not done my duty
this two years and more. But your greatest and dearest Servants can witness
my appearance: Though happily not furnished with such glittering Garments as
might light my way to you: for, Scarlet of Bilth (Welsh frizes other name)
has now little grace amongst great ones: But the Hood makes not the Friar, not
a brave Coat a brave man.

Now be it known to your Lordship, and to all men (with the help of my Lord
God, the Kings most excellent Majesty, and you my dear Lord:) I purpose to
raise a golden world (for commonwealth) in the Golden-Vale in Herefordshire
(being ye pride of all that County) bordering on Wales, joining to Ewias Lacy
(from whence your Lordshipp is descended) being the richest: yet (for want of
employment) the plentifullest place The richest Country breeds the idlest
(therefore the poorest) people.
of poor in the Kingdom, yielding two or three-hundred-folde* the number so
increasing (Idleness having gotten the upper hand;) if Trades be not raised;
beggary will carry such reputation in my quarter of the country, as if it had
the whole to halues. Therefore (my honorable Lord) put not only your hands,
but all your will and all your strength hereto, praying my Lord of Moungomery
to assist your Lordship (if there be cause.) Let it be Vaughans supplication
of Beggars unto his Royal Majesty, that they may have means to work, and so
to live.

There be within a mile and a half from my house every way, five hundred
poor habitations; whose greatest means consist in spinning Flax, Hemp, and
Hurdes. They dispose the seasons of the year in this manner: I will begin with
May, How the poor of the country dispose of the seasons of the year.
June, and July, (three of the merriest months for beggars) which yield the
best increase for their purpose, to raise multitudes: Whey, Curdes,
Butter-milke, and such belly-prouision, abounding in the neighborhood, serves
their turn. As Wountes or Moles, hunt after worms, the ground being
delue-able: so, these Idelers live intollerablie by other means, and neglect
their painful labors by oppressing the neighborhood. August, September and
October, with that permision which the Lord has allowed the poorer sort to
gather the Ears of corn, they do much harm. I have seen three hundred
Leazers or Gleaners in one Gentleman's corne-field at once; his servants
gathering and stouking the boundsheaues, the sheaues lying on the ground like
dead carcases in an ouer-throwne battle, they following the spoil not like
soldiers (which scorn to rifle) but like thieves desirous to steal; so this
army holds pillaging Wheat, Rye, Barley, Pease, and Oats: Oats, a grain
which never grew in Canaan, nor Egypt, and altogether out of the allowance of
Leazing.

Under color of the last grain, Oats, it being the latest harvest, they do
(without mercy in hot blood steal, The Beggars good husbandry of my
country.
rob Orchards, Gardens, Hop-yards and Crab-trees: so what with leazing and
stealing, they do poorly maintain themselves November, December, and almost
all January, with some healps from the neighborhood.

Thus your Lordship sees (before God and the world) the principal means of
their maintenance. The last three months, February, March, and April, little
labor serves their turn: they hope by the heat of the Sun, (seasoning
themselves like Snakes under headges) to recover the month of May with much
poverty, long-fasting, and little-praying: and so make an end of their years
travel in the Easter holy days.

There is not one amongst ten that has five shillings to buy a Bale of Flax,
but forced to borrow money to put up their trade, and run to Hereford
(loosing a days work) to fetch the same: This done, they be driven to buy
half a bushel of corn three or four miles off, and in their return attend
the grinding of it; which if a better Customer come, they are sure to be served
last. Withal, they spend one day with the Weauer, and after it is woue, before
they can sell, they make many iourneyes to markets, and honest men's houses: And
thus many days are misspent in most miserable manner.

The means to amend the Countries misery.
Now (my Honorable Lord) to help all these miseries; I have, out of a years
consideration, put a foot a Remedy which cannot well be done, unless your
Lordship do promise to countenance my discovery; if you do, I Will make your
glory shine as far above all other Subjects, as my Plot is hateful to many
envious persons.

The first work is the Mill.
My Mill is my first Work, governed by a little Bastard- Brook, fed with
eight living Springs, built with no desire to intertaine Customers, but only
to grind mine own corn.

In my first Foundation, the Country said I should never be able to perform
the same. They said with-all, I could not command the water; and that I should
want custom to counteruaile the charge. I have built my Mill, and acquainted
the water with his course. Unto this Mill, I build all Offices and necessary
rooms serving my Mechanicals.

The dining room to entertain Knights and Gentlemen: The use of the
dyning-roome.
Buttry, Pantry, Kitchen, Larders, Pastry, Surueying-roome, Back-house,
Brew House, Sellors, Killning for Malt, Slaughterhouse, Sellors belonging to
the Slaughterhouse, Vting-roomes, Officers.
Garnars, Malting-roomes. Officers; the Clarke, Miller, Loder, Mault-maker:
Butcher, Chandler, Cooks, Bakers, Brewers, Trades.
Tanner, Shoo-maker, Cobbler, Glouer, Currier, Sith and Sickle-maker, Nayler,
Smith, Ioyner, Cooper, Carpenter, Gardener, Mercer, Cutler, Barber,
Stocking-knitters, Hosier, Lanthorne-maker, Fletcher, Bowyer, (hold breath) The
Tailor, Sempster, Launderers, Wheeleer, Card-maker for Spinners, Hatter,
Point-maker, Sheapheards, Hindes, Dairy-people, Swinheards; two Vittelers, and
a noise of Musitions with the Greene-Dragon and Talbot.

If I mistake in marshalling my Mechanicals, your Lordshipp must understand I
am no Herold: they be a disordered Company; the offense not great to place one
knave before another. All which be appointed Attendants to maintain and
furnish Twenty broad loomes imploide for fine cloth.
twenty broad Loomes for the finest cloth; ten narrow Loomes for courser
Wool, Flax, Hemp, and Hurds. Ten Fustian Loomes, with such Silk-loomes as
necessity shall require: A Walker, Dier, Cottoner, Sher-men, Spinners, Carders,
Sorters of wool, pickers, and Quill-vvinders; which number will rise to some
Two thousand imploide in the vnderbusinesse of the Commonwealth.
two thousand and upward. For all which (except Spinners and Carders) I find
convenient house-roome. They shall never loose an hours time to provide for
such means as the back or belly requires: bread, beef, mutton, butter and
cheese of mine own provision, shall attend their appointed hours, without
their trouble or loss of labor to any Market or other place, at the best rates
of the Kingdom, unless it be in the Mountains, where Owen Glindovr was
shutt up: A place unfit for Trades. There, a Crafts-man may have twenty Eggs a
penny, a good round Bullock for two Marks, and other necessaries rate-ably.

But I speak of the Golden-Vale, the Lombardy of Herefordshire, the Garden of
the Old Gallants and Paradise of the backside of the Principallitie. The Golden
Valley is the Paradise of all the parts beyond Seuern.
I protest, had I four little Livings joining to some I have, I would not
change my poor estate to be great Duke of Muscouia, where the flesh falls
from the face in a frosty morning, like Lime from a Seeling soaked with Rain.
But to prosecute mine argument, and that your Lordship shall not think I
forget my self, I must let you know they shall neither Roste, Bake, nor Boil:
mine own Range, Ouens, and Furnesse, shall ever do them that service without
their trouble or charge, with little loss unto me. All Trades under my
obeisance, shall be at their election, whether they will buy their flesh Raw,
Roasted, Boiled, or cold. No Tradesman shall rate his own commodity, but the
Clarke, Recorder of the company, (being of the quorum) shall say to the Tanner:
you bought so many hundred Hides of my Master, you may afford a Dicker of
Leather at such a price: and Shoo-maker, you, your shoes at such a price. You
Glouer, bought so many thousand Pelts; you may afforde your Gloves at such a
rate. And so every Artificer shall be limited to Merchandise each to other,
The commerce of the Company.
at rates reasonable agreeing with their good gain. But for all out and
In-commers that will traffic with my Mechanicals, I leave them subject to
their fortune. I will have but one of each trade: But one of each Trade.
as a Tailor, with as many servants as his Tailorship thinks good: and the
rest, as each trade requires. I hope (my Lord) I have told you comfortable
news: yet I will increase your comfort, with comfort upon comfort: and so
comfortable, that all our company will turn their Songs, and Carrols, into
singing of Psalms and Himnes to the honor and praise of the living Lord, the
Kings most excellent Majesty, and your Lordship. But before we shall be able
to sing in tune, you must be Master of the Music, and Organist with-all.

Now I have made known unto your Lordship my morrall and Mechanical
mysteries, you see what preparation I have made for the body: If care be not
had for the salvation of the soul, all my buildings and foundations be
shuttle and sandy. I am by the virtuous and honest Gentlemen, and others in my
neighborhood, importuned to raise a famous Preacher amongst them. A famous
preacher shall be maintaind.
Their importunity shall not need, I will desire only their assistance with
but a little more help then my own; your Lordships favor ever assisting us.
The case stands thus. There came unto me, a dozen years since, a young
Minister, having a good wit, a good memory, and a pretty dribble of learning:
who made himself fit to teach children. He was entertained like a Leuite;
and had the liberty of a Leuite; but with-in short time he became a
counterfeit Puritan. Under color whereof he ingros'd half the good opinions
of the Parish, to retaile them to his profit and advantage, and though
himself were presisely given, yet he did little harm: I know not that he
has reconciled any to that quick-siluer-brain'd pure faction (as good happ
is.) I had ever a good hope, that he would-subscribe, and obey the Cannons and
Institutions of our Church, as he did.

A Benefice being void near unto me (in her late Majesty's gift) an
honorable kinsman of mine, gave me the presentation for this counterfeit. He
had Institution and Induction according to the common course: but (my honorable
Lord) as every licquor serves not to coullor all coulors: so, every soil fitts
not every person. He had no sooner received the benefit of this Benifice, but
the principal of his parishoners told me I had planted a Machiuel amongst
them; a cunning Pollitician, and an horrible usurer, Three special virtues to
withstand the Flesh, the world and the Devil.
making complaint to the Bishop thereof. But (my good Lord) because he had bin
my servant, I praide the Bishop with patience to hear his defense, and for
that time prevented the likelihood of his disgrace. Whereupon I wrought with
him to depart with that thing, and had agreed for his remove, with a purpose
(as the Bishop does know) to plant a famous Preacher there, and told him all my
intendiments: and to that end I most humbly praide the Bishop that it would
please his Lordship, to give liberty to one of his Chaplins, a learned and
virtuous man, (Master Best) to be the man. That one living of his, not able
to maintain a preaching Minister, there was one other joining thereunto,
which we purpose to unite: Having gotten the consent of the Lord Bishop, with
promise of his best endeavor. But (my honorable Lord) here comes in the hindrer
of the salvation of souls, this counterfeit Puritan, this Machiuillian, this
politician, and Usurer, by the gift of a friendlye Patron, has as yet gone
beyond the uniting of these Churches; and disapointed us of our Preaching-
Minister, (as I learnt) by plain symonie; and some treachery (withal) to his
old Master. Policy, in wordly businesses, preuailes more then Piety.
There were not two Sermons in the Golden-Vale this 500. years, unless some
Circumselion came by chance, until my Lord his Grace, that now is, of
Canterbury his coming to that See. Now, whether we deserve to have a
Preaching Minister or no, we appeal to the World. There was an old Monk
upon the dissolution of the Abbey of Doier, that was cast from thence, came
unto the place where this Minister serves: He did expound without license,
divide and sever the corpse of the word, from the Spirit; so spoiling the
Scripture with idle inventions, that at his end he left neither Protestant,
Puritan nor Papist; but a few of the simpler sort, more inclined to Mass then
to sound Religion. And of late, the late Canons do straightly appoint four
Sermons, yearly. In this manner (My Lord) this Machiuilian, Politician, and
Vserer having gotten two Benifices, thinks it sufficient with his eight-quarter
Sermons in his two Churches, to clear the infection which the old Monk bred:
He not cunning enough to dress and cure the crazed of his flock, has only
judgment with his Hook to catch and hold a sheep; which by ouer-hard
handling he does so bruize, that now they can by no means endure that
all-catching-fast-holding Instrument.

And of late has lent a young Preacher (being his prime practice) ten pound in
money to make eight A most vnholy-holy kind of Usury.
quarter-sermons yearly: which Preacher venters his life sixteene-times over
the great River of Wye, and as many more up and down a huge hill lying in his
way; the danger of the least of which is able so to distract a good Scholars
memory, as to forgette a Sermon well pend, and no worse cond. I have wondered
many times of the young Preacher, who did but learn to preach the other day,
how he was furnished with one in the fore-noone, and another in the after:
Herein shall I use your Lordshipps means, that we may have this Vserer
removed. It must be done; and I think this to be the best means: Your
Lordshipp may commend him to some strange Ambassador out of Asia or Afric;
not in Europe, he will learn the Language instantly: He is fit for any
strange Religion. He will serve for an Intelligencer to execute any cunning
Stratagem belonging to matters of State. When your Lordshipp has understood
the trunesse of all my invention (which happily you will run over withal
expedition, like an old Priest Swift reading an enemy to like understanding.
reading an Homily to task, (which I wish not.) Then will you undo all the
hopes I have, in with-standing the pride of many ill speakers.

If you do not particularly examine, that you may be able to defend, and
report that we build no Monasteries, nor succor Seminaries, nor much respect
vn-preaching Ministers.

We build our Church which is down: A Chapel for Prayer for all my
Mechanicals: Chapel built, and a Curate maintained.
A famous Preacher to rectify their hearts and show them the way to Heaven:
These, with an Almes-house (my Lord) to provide for the ouer-aged persons,
lame, blind and all such as necessity does cause to for-beare their own
gettings. Your Lordship does see I am no Papist, nor Puritan, but a true
Protestant according to the Kings Injunctions. And where the Puritans babble
against one Minister to have two Livings, let the Superintendant of them, with
some other of their purified number, come to the Hundred I dwell in, Twenty
four Parishes in Webtre Hundred, and not one able to maintain a Preaching
Minister.
(which is Weabtre) I will show them four and twenty parishes; not any one of
all able to maintain a Preaching Minister. If these be they whom they call
Puritans that speak against a Preacher to have two or three Livings together
in my Hundred; I wish I were a poor Burges of the honorable house of
Parliament, then would I indeauor to diet them so for Livings, that I would
make them fast Extempore, as well as pray, and preach as the Spirit prompts.

The most men now do say, if I had money enough, I might perform my
undertakings* So (my Lord) if a man had money ynongh (with the LORDS
permission) He might build a Tower of Babell. I cannot see how money can be
wanting, I have so many honorable friends; Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
Bishopp Babington, Bishopp Benet, and Bishop Parrie, grave and venerable
Prelates of the Kingdom. Lords Temporal: Your Lordshippe, my Lord of
Montgomery, with many other great Lords (my Kinsmen) I mean not to trouble:
Only my dear Lord the Lord chief Justice, and one Judge more, who is a Lord
in Westminster Hall, I hope to see him a Lord to the last: And do tell your
Lordshippe (betwixt you and me be it spoken) He is one of the best Lawyers
in the Land; else very good ones are deceived; and though he be so, let him
use what dilatory Plea he list to put me off, I mean to putt his Pursse to
the push of the pike: He said he would do nothing therein: but, he swear
not; or if he had, I know he makes a difference betwixt Me, and a Rash oath.
But to our purpose; Your Lordshipp is now become General of that Army; and I
your Lieutenant; If any muteny against our Commonwealth, or speak (out of a
hott brained humor) that that they understand not: My Lord, silence them with
your wisdom, or defy them with your power, which can never be better
imploid in worldly respects, then for the protection of a Common-good. Though
all the world should say I should want money in my first beginnings, yet I
thank God they cannot say I want honorable friends, such as the Lord Bishops,
your Lordships with others; which may lend me money (if please you and them) I
will not for a million anger any of you, to make a motion to borrow money: if
lendings come in out of your honorable dispositions, I would I might never put
up my Trades, Beginning is half the whole.
if I refuse any for a year, two or three. Its a better course (ten to one)
then to take money to usury; knowing what I know: and I know as much (perhaps)
that way as any poor Gentleman in Wales (without vain glory be it spoken.)
First (my Lord) he that will take money upon usury, must deal with the
Scriuener in Dialogue manner; thus for example: Sir, have you any money? What
is your name (says the Scriuener) Sir Brute Bankcrout Knight, late of Hadland
in the County of Cumberland. Who be be your sureties? Sir Alexander
All-spent, and Sir Lancelot Little-left: I know them well; worshipful
Gentlemen: But I tell you (Sir Brute) you must find Citizens: The Scriuener
(withal) rounds the Knight in the ear, saying The World is dangerous and full
of iniquity, but if your worship can procure such and such Townes-men, you
shall command my pains from six to six months. Now it may be sir Brute,
with Sir Alexander, and Sir Lancelot, may spend six times six days (unless
they meet with a dear friend to furnish them after twenty in the hundred)
before their turn be served. Once (my Lord) I thought to borrowe a hundred
pound at a Pinch, but the Gentlman that owed the money would not traffic with
me because I dwelt beyond Seuern. A foul indignity to your Lordshipps Hauings,
having such royal Livings in Monmouth and Glamorganshire. I beseech your
Lordship order may be taken yt we may be as free of ye Vserers Courts of
Requests as other Shires be; we are out of the principallity, and the Kings
Subjects: then to be barred from those Benefits and Immunities which the Law
does allow, were lawless and unreasonable. Our Shire is a Shire-royall; and we
pay as royally for our usury as if we dealt with Vserers as Jews by their
trade.
Jews, the cursedst Generation of all Adams children. Another time I dealt for
a hundred pound with an Vserer Hold-borne-ward; and having neglected my Hour,
his VViues Sheet-trauell with him by night, gave (O course fortune) my days
labor the Canuase: and driven to become suter to her mightines (great
Princess of darkness) so what by means of some else of Lawn, a Sugar-loafe, and
a pair of silk Stocks (Wood ones being much more meet) I was beholden to
neither of them, thanks be to my means: But missing my day, with this
consideration-Taker he set Sentinel, two Sergeants, on the height of the Hill
near Paul's; I shall never forget the fashion of their faces, two
Orange-tawny-beards, in a bloody field (Gules my Lord:) they walked as if they
would have ouer-walked me; but, having gotten my broadside, they said stand. I
had the word ready, at whose suit? (thinking I had bin in the wars, and they
Sentinels to give pass) they brought me to a Counter in the Poultry.
Garrison near the Exchange guarded with a number of Varletiers. God knew my
heart when I saw all Halberds, and no Muskets, for then I thought the dispatch
in mine execution would be the slower: howbeit I did with as much speed as I
could, ransom my self: I speak not as if it tended to prouok any of your
Lordships to pity me; but to lesson such young Gentlemen, as (at careless
liberty) serves under your Lordshpps coulors, that they accept of no office
under the Vserers or Brokers check: your Lordship shall hear many of the
Nobility (out of their honorable zeal to publik profit) commend my
Commonwealth: yet if any of the^ (like Puritans) burn with zeal to lend me
money to so good a purpose, the heavens fore-fend that I should quench it; no,
it is good to be zealous in a good matter.

Thus having tired your Lordships attention, I thought to have made an end; but
my love to you exceeding the ordinary love of men, draws me on to trouble you
further for your Strange Paradox, yet true if a man's increase of estate tends
to his ease.
ease.

Once I heard your Fathers name (being my Lord and Master) ill spoken off by
a world of people, and two other great Earls, three Knights, and diverse
Genlemen, ill spoken off by the inhabitants from Tintarne to Comtyder, on both
sides Wye, threescore miles a head; I being a servant, the Cause stood so
strong with the Country, I could by no means devise how to make a quarrel to
defend my Lords honor. I little thought I should have been in place to have
heard so many ill-speakers, and so few defenders, against so many honorable
persons and others of account, and durst do nothing.

I praid to hear their Greeuances: They said time out of mind, as appeared by
their Records (Kept in the Castle of the Hay, burnt by one Owen Glindovr) the
River of Wie (their free and Mother-Riuer) was (in the troublesome times,
between the houses of York and Lancaster) so Weared and fortified, as if the
Salmons therein (on pain of imprisonment) had been forbidden their usual
walks; and on pain of death (as in case of high treason) not to trade with
any of the Earl of Marches men.

The humble request of four or five shires will be, that your Honors (with the
rest) will take pity on a whole country, groaning under the burden of
intolerable Wears; which (for private) are the very Dammes and Letts of
public profit. Your three houses, with one Lords more, having more interest in
those shires (under his Majesty) then all other Landlords.

The Countries relief rests al-most in your Lordships hands: the duty you owe
my Lord of Shrewsbury, and his dear respects of you, commands that Wear. My
Brother and my self being Commissioners in a Commission of Shewres, not daring
to do our duties without my Lord your Fathers priuity, (he having one Wear
on the River, being Lord President of Wales, and our Lord and Master:) we
acquainted him with the Commission, and upon my salvation (I protest) he
commanded us that his Wear should be pulled down, if it appeared profitable to
the country.

That noble Earl of Worcester, with his Honorable and virtuous son the Lord
Harbart, how their Wears will be dispensed with-all in these days, all the
shires will refer unto their honorable dispositions. Patience perforce.
For Sir Edward Winter; there is nothing (I take it) but true honor in him: My
acquaintance with him is but small: yet if I be not much deceived, he
respects more the common-good, then his own private; although (indeed) he was
(to say the truth) upon the last Commission a Commissioner very bitter against
the Wears overthrow. I saw the reasons thereof; and did allow of his
unreasonable prosecution. He showed much wit therein, and did us more harm
then all the rest: God forgive him, and make him as firm to the ouer-throwers
of Wears, as he is fast to their vpholders. Sir John Scudamore, has always
been the comfort of the country: Nurse to the Infancy of many young Gentlemen
bred therein, and cherisher of the rest, that were not adverse. He has ever
said, A good offer of a good heart.
if there were any hope that the ouer-throw of the Wears would make the River
(Wye) Nauigable, Portable, or Sammonable, he would pull down his first, to
give an instance to others.

I beseech your Lordshipp bear witness, I say nothing of Sir Roger Bodenhams
Wear; nor of none of the Wears above Hereford Bridge. But this I say, it is a
pitiful thing that any of your Lordshipps Wears with the rest, (built like
Babell threatening the skies with their eminence) should hinder the
Salmon-fishing, which gave that sustenance to five or six shires, as many
thousands, were a thousand times better sustained and comforted then now they
are, or can be.

All that can be said, why the River cannot be made Port-able is; Some Fords
when they are at the lowest will want water. A poor and needy speech! As if
there were not means enough to channel such shallows, in Summer they being at
the smallest, and peaceablest time to be wrought.

Good my LORD, down with the Wears, let us have Wine with our Venison. the
carriage of it from London by land, Bristoll better served with Sacks then
Gascoine wine.
makes a cup of Claret look like a weak lean wench that has the green
sickness. And such as we have from Bristowe, is fitter to be drunk with a
Welsh Goat, then an English Buck.

We are barde of our Meat, bound from our Drink, and many other provisions,
which almost all other shires have. During your Fathers lifetime our hopes
were a foot, we had the Vantgard in the war: But, since his death, put to
the Rear, by occasion of your nonage, and such accidents as beefell.

But now seeing your sacred Sovereign puts his hands on your shoulders
(without which the greatest Subject cannot put his hand on his heart, for want
of one) forget not (my noblest Lord) to fall at his feet in favor of your
Fathers favorites. If a Commission of Shewres happen amongst us (by Gods
visitation) then I hope you will most earnestly beseech his Majesty, that his
Supersidias knock not out the brains of the Commission of Salmon-fishing. The
foresaid Supersidias has always been our utter ouer-throw. My good Lord,
compare all the Rivers in the Kingdom together; and you shall see and hear by
all antiquity, the River of Wye, did exceed all other for Salmon. These
Wears your three forementioned Lordships, with the rest do owe. They do you
and them but the least service; they bring some few of your Salmons in season
to your Table: and a hundred thousand be served unseasonably. In my memory, it
has bred an inbred murmr amongst us, which has made the most so melancholy,
as I think the brains of many be not settled in their true situation. They
confess their error, and report their mistaking: It is manly to err, beastly
to continue in error.
first, to be from a worthy old Gentlemen, Master Philip Jones, who out of a
blind zeal (like Papists that go on pilgrimage) yet wanting the true length
of the three Lords legs, (but held a true course agreeing with all acts of
Parliament) did put a foot the Commission of Shewres, not thinking the Earls
of the Land to be the Gods of the Earth. His years worn out, and memory
decayed, foure-score odd years drawing on the day of his death, never trained
at the Counsell-table, durst not press into the presence, and (like a dotard)
did never New-yeares-gift ye Ladies of the Privy and Bedchamber: then what
with illiberality of breeding, some misery and vntidy handling, suffered to be
shuffled into the Commission of Shewres, friends and foes: so, by often
meetings and ouer-long delays, harazed and wore out all his hopes in doing
any good. The first Commission having made a peaceable end by Supersidias; the
death of which Commission bred more lamentation in three Shires, The private is
more respected then the public weal, of men private.
then the death of three Earls (best commonwealths men) would do in all
England. The last Commission might be played on the Stage: The principal
persons were Commissioners; all which had Wears on the River: and all had
reason enough to overrule Baby-Commissioners. As at a quarter Sessions, one
great man will undertake the managing of matters belonging to all the Bench.
If poor I, should but speak to countenance a cause (for a wench made woman
before her time.) He looks on the one side, as if I were put in Commission
only to certify Recognisances for Alehouses: or to give a respective voice
if a faction happen to arise: so, these Baby-commissioners for the River of
Wye, hold their Hattes in their hands, the one leg lower then the other,
ready to do all their duties at once: and the grand Commissioners (like Bishop
Bonner) with Riding-rods, Alluding to that in master Fox his Acts and
Monuments.
threaten displeasure, or utter destruction, to all that were not of their
devotion toward the Wears. This has been the common course and custom of
the Commission of shewres, to outcountenance the cause by the greatest persons:
but, the LORD of Heaven ever so wrought, that the Weare-owners were more
beholden to the supersidias then to twelve men: twelve men having given their
Verdit, a Judgment against the Wears and after all this a supersidias! O! The
consideration of it would have made old Ployden (had he been living)
forswear the Law in his latter days. Master Blonden being of counsel with
the Country, it so moved him (being overcome with puffing and blowing) that
he wrought upward and downward, as if he had taken a vomit or a purgation. A
Trinity of Ladies able to work miracles.
I remember in Queen Elizabeth's days my Lady of Warwick, Mistress Blanch
Parry, and my Lady Scudamore, in little Laye-matters would steal opportunity
to serve some friends turns; but where and in whom the supersidias rests at
command, this mystery I would my good Lord would learn; because none of these
(near and dear Ladies) durst intermeddle so far in matters of Commonwealth.
Twenty Commissioners attend the service, whereof four to be of the Quorum,
ever in place: the greatest men of the number, having no desire to proceed:
Many days meeting disappointed for want of appearance: the Iewry sworn, their
appearance, by penalty, appointed twentye miles off: the twenty Commissioners
present, some to uphold and some to ouer-throw. In this manner, for a long
Summers day (which dured six months) we bare the brunt of all opposition. Our
last meeting was at Chepstovv, and at the mouth of ye river Wye, the Iewry
(having day given for their verdit, riding over the bridge) upon a sudden saw
the water swollen with a sea of Salmon. The Inquest enquiring of them what news?
they answred by signs (since they were as mute as fishes) they were bard of
their native country, where all their ancestors were bred and borne: An assault
toward, against Chepstowbridge by Salmons.
and in their infancy nursd, till they came to Salmons estate. This moan they
made by instinct of nature: the Jury praid they would commit no riot, but
endure the day of the Iuries verdict without their further approach; and order
should happily be taken for egresse and regresse as of old: The Bridge being in
a dangerous case mean while; for it seemed their so near coming, tended to
no other purpose but to strike up the heels of the Bridge, not laying his
glory in the dust, but the water: For fear whereof (as if the Bridge had lost
his heart of Oak) it fell down (heartlesse-lubber) of it self within one
year following; and for the Salmons further comfort, the Iewrie told them the
great Lords were Lords of the sticks and stakes, not of the River; the River
was the Kings: no prohibition lay against them, but that they might lawfully
enter into their old habitations and places of resort: only the great Lords
will say, they have three years possession, or it may be, challenge
prescription; which cannot be; you being the Kings Tenants, no time going
beyond the King. I am not satisfied, It is most strange, and yet most true.
how after such a world of Labor and Toil by the Commissioners and Jurors,
that the bare Information of a VVeare-owner (perhaps) could annihilate all our
painful Endeavors for the good of six Shieres with a supersidias.

If I should forget to tell your Lordshipp it has been in the memory of many
yet living, that the River of Wye did yield Salmon so plentifully as Sturgeon
in some parts of Germany: and that a Hereford-shire servant would surfeit on
fresh Salmon as often as a North-Hampton-shire-man on fatt Venison: and since my
nativity, till years of discretion had ouer-taken me, I could not Learn this
lesson. For my Foster-mother Woodhill, old mother Webb, and mother Spooner
(such Mothers there are (my good Lord) though you know not their Fathers)
telling the Wonders of the Wears so pitifully, as if they had been in the
captivity at Babylon: How thirty Salmons were taken such a morning at a
draught, and thirty three, at another time!

The Supplication of Beggars so moved the heart of that famous King Henry the
eight in his later days, that he did nothing else but platform Foundations
for true and sound Religion.

If these Wears had bin in his days in such manner as they be now, he would
have taken the like order with them as he did with Abbeyes and Monasteries.
Behead them like Traitors.
As an Heresy is bred and hatched amongst those that understands no true
Religion soonest; so, in the tender time of that sweet and gracious King
Edward the sixth, these Wears had their breeding and increase.

But GOD determining his time untimely, the Weare-owners got a descent against
us: and on a sudden we fell into the hands of a King of a strange Language;
then we (being Britains) could speak no Spanish; he and his queen too too
much troubled in establishing their own Religion, we had enough to do to
defend our bodies from Bishop Bonners Bon-fiers: and deferred all our intended
Supplications to a hope-fuller time.

Our late, and blessed Sovereign Queen Elizabeth (Englands joy, defender of
the faith, and faithful establisher of true Religion; (whose matchless
Princely virtues, the world did, and ever shall admire) yet her aged years
troubled with a discontented war That of Tyron.
forced us to silence with many a sorrowful heart.

Now (my Lord) the time is come to exhibit our supplications: the King of
glory has sent us his sacred servant King James, together with a fruitful
Queen and royal Issue, according to our own hearts: A King that can teach
Religion; a King from beyond his Cradle, and free from strange devotion;
succeeding a most religious Maiden-Queene.

Time is now most opportune.
Now, is our time most humbly to beseech your Lordshippe (you having immediate
grace and favor from his Majesty, we poor wretches not daring to speak,
being people of the quietest and peaceablest dispositions of the Kingdom) not
to neglect our Commonwealth. Remember the love your Father and Grandfather
bare their-our Country: remember we were their kinsmen, and servants, and of
the dearest respect of any what-soeuer with them. We desire but passage of the
Law of the Land; and that your Lordship will not speak in favor of your own
Wear (O super-naturall virtue!) nor my Lord of Shrewsburies, nor any of the
rest, no, nor suffer a supersidias to land near Chepstowsbridge least it make
it shake for fear, of a second Commotion of Salmons against it. I have
acquainted your Lordshipp with this matter-mechanical, and made known unto you
the raising of our Church, the planting of our Preacher, the Chapel and
Almes-house with the rest apendant: if your Lordship take but a superficial
view of this giddy Invention (as some of your late servants termed it) it will
satisfy me, it being but a particular plot, not able to be performed by any
whose estate exceedes mine a million; because the place of my Residence affords
Meddow, Pasture, all kind of Corn, Wood, Water near at hand; and especially
blessed with such a number of Beggars as are able to undo a Country. But my
Lord, I do most humbly pray, yt in the reading and viewing of my
VVater-workes, you will unite your heart and eyes to read respectively, for
retention sake, to the A gainful end of painful reading.
end you may call to account, your Stewards and Suruayors of your Lordshipps
Manors, Lands and Tenements; What Rivers, Brooks, Fountains and Springes do
inhabit the compass of your command, and that your Lordshipp will spare
sporting-times for some few hours, that I may give you such information, and
precepts withal; that (at your pleasure) you may charrecter what profit this
Watery Element will raise you, more then ever was raised.

I do not say I will; but I could, in your Monmoth and Glamorgan shire-countrey
single out (in a short time) all the Rivers, Brooks, Fountains and Springs
which owe duty or speak well of any of your Lordshipps Lands. If my Labors be
in that manner commanded, it will cost your Lordship Warrants for Bucks, and
Letters of Privilege, that your Tenants raise not Fear of private harm makes
public hatred often to arise from long-laid* rest.
head against me: weening my coming to be the overthrow of their Posterity.

I protest that's not my purpose, but to put a foot the Mystery of Winter and
Sommer-drownings, to the comfort of the Country, and present profit of the
present Inhabitants: humbly praying your Lordshipp, as you shall receive a
great increase: so, you do not (according to the new fashion) by extreme
racking, ransake the succeeding Issue of the faithful Followers of your eldest
Ancestors, whose old gotten-glory, at Rodes and Malta (in defense of the
holy land) the British Traditions and Records, in great abundance, do
testify.

I have done with my Mechanicals, and the hopeful river of Wye; only I will
fix this accidental merryment in the Frontispice (or broad-brow) of my
Preface to my Water-workes: signifying the cause of these excursions to proceed
from unbelieving creatures, possessed and puf-pasted with pride and peevish
opposition.

An act of Parliament will be required for joining of Peter-Church, Vou-church
and Torneston, there distance being not a mile a sunder; Torneston having
only one inhabitant to make a Congregation; the living extending it self but
unto ten pounds yearly; two of them straining themselves to make forty in the
whole.

A most miserable alowance for a Preacher and his Curate; and most miserable
the time when Ignorantes (out of heat of a preposterous zeal not able to
render a reason of the faith they hold, nor well know whereof they do affirm)
will adventure (with libellous Articles) to inform (against men conformable) a
reverend father, Bishop Bennet (Bishop of the Diocese) whose heart was
prepared with all his power to the higher house of the Parliament to settle
this president (viz: to unite three Parishes into one) in the Border of the
principallity; Yet a new fangl'd fellow, presumed to falsefie the testimony of
the Inhabitants of those three Parishes, and sought a Preaching Minister of
purpose to alter the antiquity of their religion, and change the true
ceremonies thereunto incident, unto a strickt observation of
quicksiluer-brain'd Discipline: and cause me to be questioned before the
Bishopp for these misdemeanors, as if Heresy or Sacrilege had been the
ground. But the Bishop (most iudiciously) quitte me as no way taxable. I
desired by Act of Parliament to unite these Churches into one body (being
patron of two of them, the third under a prebend of the Cathedral Church:) but
they wrought with the Ecclesiastical state by principal men, that an homily
audibly red would be as edifiable unto the simpler sort as a presician-Sermon
unto the reformed phantastiques. These troubles, the African-Politician has
raised: And I fear a further mischief, that he will enforce those Lunatikes
to stir up the Patron Prebend to a higher pitch; his infirmity offering
nothing less then all the likelyhoods of coffeehouse. But having gotten a
fee-simple in the Bishop, a freehold in the Deane and chapter; an inheritance
in the rest of the Cathedrals, we beg at your Lordshipps hands to add the Act
of Parliament to put us in possession. In following which Act, it is necessary
your Lordship warrant my descent from gladis de gam Daughter of S. David Gam,
slain in the vangard of the battle of Egincourt; who being sent by Henry the
fifth to discover the force of the French; Answered, they were ynow to be
slain, e-now to be taken prisoners, e-now to run away: which speech continues
to his everlasting praise: this Gladis being mother to your Lordships Ancestors
and mine: the Earl of Pembrook, Sir Richard Herbert, Vaugha^ of Bradwardin,
Vaughan of Hergest, and Vaughan of Tretowr her 5. sons-al 5. brethren and al 5.
ouerthrown at Banbury field. Five such brethren out of one woman, ye 13. shires
of Wales has seldom yielded: my Lord, I am By Gladis, kin to most of the Old
Nobility: which aged descent is almost worn out, yet not so worn, but either by
consanguinity, or affinity, I can light on a Howard, a Herbert, a Somerset, a
Carew, or a Knowles, ever ready to assist an Act of Parliament to raise a
preaching Minister. These turbulent ouer-frighted, stirred up ye hearts of the
poorest people to a dangerous mislike with inuectiue breathings, that they must
go above a mile to a sermon; that their Church would not contain the three
Parishes at a Sermon time; that it could not be done by Law, and that forty
pound was sufficient for a Preacher, and that I did it not out of zeal, but
out of ambition; seeking mine own glory and gain, wherein (God is my judge, my
Lord) they wrong me as much as their own charitable judgments.

NOw my (honorable Lord) I come to the point: to make rehearsal, and to
demonstrate my vnder-takings; setting forth the Clothier (with his twenty broad
Loomes) for the finest cloth, to be the worthiest. Ten narrow Loomes for course
Wool, Flax, Hemp, and Hurdes. Some Fustian-loomes, with such silke-loomes as
shall be needful: Two thousand poor Spinners, Carders, Wooll-pyckers,
Quil-winders, with the Broad and Narrow-weauers; Fifty Habitations with Shops,
Chambers, Chymneys, and Cesterns for washing their hands; for several
Artificers, that neither Clothiers, VVeauers, Pyckers of VVoll, Quill-winders,
Spinners and Carders, shall ever loose an hours labor. No women, children,
nor Prentises, shall be free of this place, but all selected Iourney-men of the
best ability of body and Art that may be had. I give fifty pound yearly and
perpetually unto a Preacher; twenty pound yearly and perpetually unto a
Curate; who shall always attend the Artificers, to read morning and evening
prayer in their Chapel. An Almes-house for such as (I said before) necessity
does cause to for-beare their own gettings.

Many Honorable Gentlemen finding mine ability such, as not suddenly able to
raise the same: they wished I would prepare a number of beneuolent Contributers,
persons of the greatest worth, best affected, and known to be most
comfortable to the Commonwealth: out of which Number, I do most humbly inuit
your Lordship, with my Honorable Lord of Mountgomery to this beneuolent
preparation.

I likewise inuit some venerable and reueuerend Bishops (my especial good and
loving Lords) the Lord Bishops of Worcester, Hereford and Gloucester.

I inuit my Honorable Lords the Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England, and that
worthy Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the Common Pleas: the Lord Chiefe-Baron, and my
Lords the Judges in general.

I inuit the Knights of the Bathe, Knights of the Field, and Knights of GREAT
BRITAIN, Master Talbott of Grafton, Master Sheldon of Beley, Master Dutton
of Sherborne, and Master Harley of Brompton-brian, with-all Esquires and
Gentlemen of all the Counties of the kingdom.

I have separated your Lordshipps (with the rest) from the society of the
sullied leier of Subjects: so respective have I been in the execution of this
Invention.

If your Lordshipp will know what has induced me to these purposes: being
ouer-questioned by the Tag-ragg-rable of dull-pated Ignorants; that I had
protested and promised to publish my Water-workes long before this:

And euer-hoping to reduce it into that form which might be pleasing to all
posterity, and not quarrelled at by any, it being so full of difficulty and
varyetye of form and matter.

Not possible to give it his Ornament without this that follows; having
neither President nor Example, to stir me up any way to the like labors:
Ever desirous to use a correspondencie: So as a Soldier I will leave some
testimony or Relicke of that Honorable rank wherein I had my breeding: and
end my days with a Souldier-like farewell.

Being one of her Majesty's Captains, raisd in eighty-eight, having my
directions from my Honorable LORD and Master your Father: I have spent that
small Talent and skill: Never curious in concealing from my Lieutenant,
Ancient, Seriant, Corporalls, and Drum, the worthynesse of the war: unto
which I am much inclined.

Most humblye beseeching your Lordshipp, if you hear any say, I am
fantastical, say you (my dear LORD) I am but curious; so excuse mine
Imperfections the best you may, and I will ever honor you.

The time is spent, and I must spend some time with the Printer: and a little
more in sorting, cowching, and planting my dyning-roome, free from all disorder.

In what manner my Table shall be furnished; What attendance the Mechanical
Artificers shall perform; how industrious my Ancient and Serieant shall be in
preparing all these Artificers for his Majesty's service, into what place it
shall please his Highness to command them.

Now (my Lord) I end with this material circumstance being extracted out of
mine own means. I signified in mine Epistle to your Lordshipp, A dining-roome
to entertain a world of worthy beneuolent Contributers: The Table perpetually
furnished to intertaine forty of those Contributers daily in expectancy; A
hundred Artificers subject to the Service of the Table: Twenty five attending
at Dinner, and twenty-fiue at supper: fifty more on the morrow: and so the
hundred Artificers shall attend the Table in this manner Daily and Perpetually.

In recompense whereof they receive the benefit of the Reuersion with all the
comfort I can afford them.

All the Artificers to attend the Preacher to Sermon and home again. The
Visitor of the Negligencers Attendant to inform their misdemenors to the
chief of the Company, if there be cause that no common Swearer, Drunkard nor
Swaggerer shall live within the limits of my allowance. His first offense
warned, the second punished, the third discharged for ever from the place:
Every Artificer shall unto every Contributor (at their coming thither) humble
themselves with (all respective obedience) acknowledging them by word and deed
to be the Founders of their well-doing, and happy Commonwealth.

The Dining-roome wainscoted, and fairly hanged with Arras.

Touching the Fare to be served to the Table daily and perpetually, forty full
dishes of variety of meats; with a Pasty of Venison to Dinner, and another to
supper, when they are in season.

A Sentinel set from ten to eleven in a Turret, for discovery, to see what
Contributer comes: If a Footman dwelling in the neighborhood; he gives the
Larum by the toule of a Bell, signifying him to be a Footman; which heard,
then the Drum soundes. If a Horseman, by the Larum he signifies him to be
a Horseman, and then the Trumpet soundes And upon their coming into the
Dining-roome, All Officers of the company intertaine the Contributers with all
joy and merryment: the wind Instrument, with all sorts of Music plays
Dinner and Supper: and to add all the comfortable contentment to all
Contributers, from Bartholomew day to Mid-may.

The Groom of the Chamber shall at his peril prepare a good fire with Ash,
Hawthorne, and Char-cole.

My LORD, that honorable and most worthy Judge the Lord Chief Justice Poppham
hearing of my Drownings; said Cousin, how do thou drown? I told him by help
of a River or Brook; by Wear and sluice to take part, or all, into my
Trench-royall. What Is thy Trench royal (says he?)

The Trench-royall is a Cesterne that serves al offices in a Noblemans house.
As a Cesterne in your Lordshipps house, that serves all Offices: My
Trench-royal serves my Counter Trenches; my Defending-Trenches, my Topping or
Brauing-Trenches, my Winter and Sommer-Trenches; my Double and Treble-trenches;
a trauersing-trench with a point; And my Euerlasting-trench, with other
troublesome trenches, which in my Mapp I will more exactly demonstrate.

The good Lord hearing all these words, (able to raise a Spirit) said: Cousin
art thou out of thy wits?

My Lord for distinction sake (said I) I must give them significant names, such
as my servants attending my Winter and Sommer-Drownings may understand to
execute my commands.

So, my Lord, I having given satisfaction to ye honorable person, I will make
it most plainly appear to your Lordshippe how fecible this Work is: that all
Cynick-Doggs or Lamb-biters, may with shame be silenced, and their foul
Mouths muzled.

It is yet wondered at, by almost all, how a particular and private Gentleman
should be able to bring all this to pass.

But my good Lord (on my behalf) I humbly pray you to pray all of the better
sort, To speak what we know not, is to think what we should not.
to be sparing of their censures herein; for artlesse- Aims seldom hitts the
mark.

I would that no man should say, I do it out of ambition or other sinister
respect: for the Rule of Charity is: in cases doubtful, we should judge the
best.

But if any (notwithstanding) should be so injurious to say so, then (my LORD)
they may say the Clothier; the habitation for Artificers, the Chapel, and
Preacher, Curate, Almeshouse; My Table for the benefit of poor Artificers, and
whatsoever else is good (yea a Common-good) is out of ambition.

I hope (my good Lord) I shall hear no more of such Objections; if I do,
though I am no Poet yet I can make Ballads, To the tune of vp-tayls-all: For
I Will lash them Ifayth with Rimes that shall make it rancle where they fall.

But to take away the wonder of the World, and to give satis-faction to the
enuious-vnsatisfied

I can keep three hundred Kine, three hundred young Cattle, This I mince thus
for ill digesting stomachs.
three thousand Sheep, all these Winter and Summer: Having besides ten
Plough-Land, all hard at hand; four Milles as near, and within two mile of
the place Timber sufficient for all my Buildings. And Firewood enough for all
the Artificers, the Inholder and the rest; Wallstone, Tyle, Lime and Brick, as
necessary as any man living.

My good LORD, I do not thus Inuentory my Estate, A just excuse.
and paint forth the Particulers, as if I were to sell it by the Drum; or as
looking thereon with Vaine-gloryous Eyes. No, no, my good LORD, nothing less
(for there is no such cause, I am the more sorry.) But I do it (perforce) to
give the doubtful Inquisitor satisfaction for the settling of his belief
herein, That I attempt nothing with out the limmitts of mine own strength.

But now your Lordshippe shall hear an end of the VVonder. All men will
confess, three hundred Kine will raise, Braunes, Bacons, Porks, Piggs, Geese,
Turkeis, Capons, Hens, Chickens, Ducks, and the like. They will confess ten
Plow-land in several places, all with-in a mile, with my Tithe-barnes, will do
the like.

They will confess my four Milles being within a flight shoot one of
another, will do the like: They will confess my Brew House, my Backe-house,
my Kitchen, my Beare-seller, my shambles; and the water from my Vtingvats will
do the like. Besides in a M^ste-yeare I can feed a world of Hogs.

Your Lordship sees I am forced to do, and ouer-doe, as one that must do All,
else nothing will be done* I think I have besturd my self pretty well, to
make the whole world wonder at me.

Your Lordshipp shall now see what benefit I receive for the perpetual
continuance of this Table. What benefit can be raised.


The Butter and Cheese of my three hundred Kine, I sell, and furnish the
Clothyer, his Broadeweauers, Spinners, Carders and the rest; with all the
Mechanicalls therewith. The Corn of ten Plowlands, Wheat, Rye, and Malt made
in my own Killing; I grind at my own Milles: Baked, and Brewed in my
Bake-house and Brew House; and sold to the foresaid persons: My Wool, my
Muttons, Lambs, and culld-sheepe, of my three thousand I sell to the said
persons: I sell yearly one hundred of my eldest Oxen, Kine, and my cul'd young
Cattle fat to the persons aforesaid: I sell yearly one hundred of my eldest
Oxen, Kine, and my cul'd young-cattell, fat to the persons aforesaid: I find
all Artificers; and In-keepers wood, which will be ten times more profitable
unto me then now. Let Men judge what benefit I may make of my Brew House, and
what of my Bake-house, what of my shambles, my Hay and Prouender; my
Chandlers-shopp, my Bark unto the Tanner: to whom I sell all my Hides; the
Glouer has all my Pelts: what provision my own estate will not afford, the
neighborhood can provide it, that neither want nor scarsitie shall afflict any
of his Majesty's servants and subjects.

My good Lord, let it not seem irksome to you, nor cloy your dainty ear,
that thus I belabour your attention with repetition of these
countrey-commodities, and commonwealths Requisites; so to season your courtly
pleasures, as sharp sauce does sweet meats, but when you bend your regard
to these things (as I doubt not but you will: For active wit in short time
turns to working wisdom:) The worlds observation will then know, you wax
ripe for the highest employments: For it strongly argues youth is then well
mellowed, when it begins to look into these necessaries for man's life with
Ages eyes. Pleasures, that tickle our senses, make us but spoil Pretious-time;
while they betray our Reason, that should rule rebellious affections that ought
to obey. The sooner these enemies* to man's dignity, are shaken off from the
Mind, the sooner will the Mind advance the Body to dignity.

It is a glorious (how ever troublesome) thing to have a chief Oar in the
Shipp of a well-gouernd state. The benefit of life in great men cannot be
better imployde then to the benefit of good men. For the Back and Belly is
Natures chief care; these being provided for, she sweetly takes repose. What
is over and beside, is for Ornament, which she wants not: for pomp which she
requires not: or for pleasure, which if she wanted, she would the more abound
in all goodness.

Now, (my good Lord) these Indeuoures and Works of mine (tending to thee full
supply of the Back and Bellyes wants) are to be heedfully respected in their
particulers, by you that one day may have this care cast upon you, by God,
King, and Country, to see to the necessities of All, while you consult but
with a Few. Its merry in hall, when beards wagge all, (says the old Proverb).
And it is a merry Weale-publick, where euer-enough is as good as a feast,
suffizing all by good government.

The manner of my Drownings.
AFter I had spent some years in Queen Elizabeth's Court, and saw the greatness
and glory thereof under the command of Mistres Blanch Parry (an honorable and
Virtuous Gentlewoman, my Aunt and Mistress) my spirit being too tender to
endure the bitterness of her humor; I was by her careful (though crabbed
austerity) forced unto the Irish wars, where I continued three or four years
sometimes twist deep in that country-water: and what with long fasting and ill
diet, I was possessed with the Country-disease: Flix.
the extremity whereof hasted me to return to my Fathers home in the County
of Heref. for recovery of my health: which within six months I obtained. After
it pleased GOD to give me recovery, I resolved for the Lowe-countrey-warres
again: and having begun my journey thetherward, I happened on a
Country-Gentlewoman, who was seized of a Manor, and ouer-shot Mill: which
converted all my martial endeavors and hopes of honor, to these
country-labours: Having soiourn'd two years in my Fathers house, wearied in
doing nothing, and fearing my fortunes had been ouer-throwne in putting by my
Martial occupation; I began to expostulate with my self what was best to be
done to preserve my reputation with my martial companions, and with-all to
give contentment to my virtuous and loving wife. And while I was to settle a
resolution, comparing these desires together, my Wives importunity caused me
to quitt their ordinary familiarity, yet with limitation; at such times as
conueniency might afforde.

This restraint of hers, drew me to the attendance of home-labours; who
prayed me with-all in my walks abroad, to have an eye to her Millers true
dealing. I prayed her to put over that service to some servant of hers: for of
all trades I had least confidence in their truth: and therefore required the
more pains to be taken in watching their water, and looking to their fingers,
which I was loath to undertake: not-with-standing, (upon better consideration,
least she should have held me careless of her good, and so ill deserve her
love) I obeyed her will, as many do, and many miseries do ensew thereby. So,
in the month of March, falling (with the stream) to the milneward within my
Meade (with no desire I protest) to fashion or form Husbandry) I happened to
find a Mole or Wants nest, raised on the brim of the Brook, like a great
hillocke; from which nest or hillocke, there issued a little stream of water,
(drawn by the working of the Want) down a sheluing or descending ground, one
pase broad, and some twenty in length.

The running of which little Stream, did, (at that time) wonderfully content
me, seeing it pleasing Green; and that other on both sides full of Moss, The
first cause that the work was undertaken.
and Hide-bound for want of water. This was the first cause I undertook the
drowning of grounds.

Now, to proceed to the execution of my work (being persuaded of the
excellency of the water) I examined how many footefall the Brook yielded,
from my Mill to the vpper-most part of my grounds, being in length a measured
Mile.

There lay of old Meadow-ground thirty acres ouer-worne with age, and heavily
laden with Moss, Cowslips, and much other imperfit grass, betwixt my
Mill-streame, and the maine River; which (with two shillings cost) my
granfather, and his gransire, with the rest, might have drowned at their
pleasures: But from the beginning, never any thing was done, that either
tradition or record, could witness, or any other testimony.

Having vewed the conuenientest place, the vpper-most part of my ground would
afforde for placing a Commanding-Weare, or Sluice, I espied diverse Water-falls
on my neighbors grounds, higher then mine by seven or eight foot; which gave
me greater advantage for drowning of more ground, then I was (of my own power)
able to do. I acquainted them with my purpose: the one (being a Gentleman of
worth and good nature) gave me leave to plant the one end of my Wear on his
side the River* the other (my Tenant) being very aged and simple) (by no
persuasion I could use) would yield his consent: alleging it would mar his
ground: yea, sometimes his Apple Trees: and men told him water would raise
the Rush, and kill his Cow-slipps, which was the cheifest Flower that his
Daughters had, (being many) to trick the May Pole withal. All which with
scilence I past over for a time, knowing his simplicity to exceed his
discretion; yet in the end I re-enforc'd my perswations, and told him (next
unto the King) I was to be obeyed in matters reasonable: and that it became
him not to provoke his Land lord; nor to stand at the staffes end with his
Commander. Yet these Buggs-words would not move him. Then gave I a fresh
charge, and to draw him on with a Bait which he would soon bite at, told
him I had a Meddow-plott in his neighborhood, worth ten pound, which I would
part with on reasonable terms: but before I could make him believe he was a
fool he got the Fee-simple thereof. For no simple fee.
Which President does falsify the old-said-Saw, Thou art an old doting fool.
After I had wrought this far, I caused my servant (a Ioyner) to make a level
to discover what quantity of ground I might, (from the entry of the Water)
obtain: allowing his dubling-course, compassing Hills to carry it plym or even:
which fell out to be some three hundred Acres. After I had plimmed it upon a
true Level, I be-tooke my self to the favor of my Tenants, Friends and
Neighbors, in running my maine-trench (which I call my Trench-royall) I call
it so, because I have within the contents of my work, Counter-trenches,
defending trenches, topping, or brauing-trenches. Winter and Summer-trenches,
double and treble-trenches, a traversing trench with a point, and an
euer-lasting trench, with other troublesome-trenches: which in my Map I will
more lively express.

When the Inhabitants of the country wherein I inhabit, (namely the
Golden-Valley) saw I had begun some part of my work, they summoned a
consultation against me, and my man John the leuellour: saying our wits were
in our hands, and not in our heads: so, we both for three or four years, lay
level to the whole Country-censure for such Enginors as their forefathers
heard not of, nor they well able to endure without merryment.

When my labors took beginning, they became subject to discourse: Diverse
Gentlemen with others, inquired from whence I had my Examples; and where I saw
any such work? I could not answer them but with an other question: namely,
where saw you any such? They said, no where. Truly nor I.

In the running and casting of my Trench-royall, though it were leueld from the
beginning to the end, upon the face of the ground, yet in the bottom I did
likewise level it to avoid error.

For the Breadth and Depth, my proporcion is ten foot broad, and four foot
deep; unless in the beginning, to fetch the water to my drowning-grounds, I
rann it some half mile, eight foot deep; and in some places six-tenne-foote
broad. All the rest of the Course, for two miles and a half in length,
according to my former proportion.

When my Work began, in the Eye of the Country, to carry a show of profit,
it pleased many (out of their courtesy) to give it commendations, Ignorants
praise good endings, but doubt, or dispraise their beginnings.
and to applaud the Invention.

The Ioyner hearing the commendations to be general, and he the Leueller
(which was (he thought) the chief Agent in the Action) there grew a brabble
betwixt us. He began to insult and arrogate as a Coadiutor, by reason of his
leuelling, and desired he might be signified a principal party to the
Invention.

I bad him have patience, the Invention was mine, together with the dignity:
and told him withal the ambition of soldiers would not endure society with men
of Mechanical trades: I only employed his hand, and not his head.

So having compounded the brabble between us, I fell into the hands of an
unskillful Carpenter, in planting my commanding Wear or Scluce, cross the
maine River.

He gave me such assurance for the safe continuance thereof; that he
undertook to maintain it with twelve pence a year, during his life.

After he had prepared it ready for the foundation, he planted some thousand
stakes in the bottom of the Brook to carry the maine Syll. When the Syll was
lodged upon the Pile of Stakes, I began to suspect the foundation, and told
him a great part of the water would undermine the Syll, and that I should
hardly endure the want thereof at my Drowning-times; especially in Summer.

He grew teasty, hott, and peremptory; and said it was not the Masters manner
to control; but, to examine: and that all his VVater-workes were according to
the Venetian foundation, built altogether upon Piles: but the Venetian-fashion
forced me to want water ten years space, which was out of my way two thousand
pounds.

The reason was this; the water undermining the Syll, it forced the Earth
beyond the posts, which were placed in the firm ground; and having gotten the
upper hand of the main-Land it could not be holp until the Sylle were raised
again. I had a continual purpose to re-edifie it, but that I was interupted
by the ordinary course of Process out of the honorable Courts of
Star Chamber, Chancery, and Wards; the last of the three bredd more white
hairs in my head in one year, then all my Wetshod-water-workes did in
sixteen. Not that I had cause to complain of Injustice; but, because I
understood not the course of the Courts, being pusled with an old Feodary, and
a foolish Escheter, (the life and death of my cause resting in their mercy.)
Twelve Jurors who passed against me, law, equity, and conscience. Upon which
Verdit, I was, by Iniunction, commanded to deliver the body of a Ward I had in
keeping, which I refused to do: It happened my Council found Error in the
Office, and ouer-threwe the former proceedings, which was the ouer-throwe of my
Water-workes for five years space.

The ouer-throwne- Office was a stolen Office, and found before I had notice of
it. But being ouer-throwne, matter of greater consequence followed.

The Queens Attorney commanded the Feodary, who had gotten a grant of the
Ward, to exhibit enformation against me in his name: we had Commission upon
Commission: we endured heavy and chargeable examinations.

Upon which Examinations I had a Hearing in that Honorable Court; and though
it could not pass against me, yet it passed not with me. One other Commission
came down, A lury impanalled, Witnesses re-examined. That Jury found with me,
and (in my conscience) not one of the number understood his evidence: All which
I show to satisfy the Inquisitor, why so long I neglected my begun
Water-workes. When the Escheator, Feodary, Commissioners, and Jurors had putt
their hands and seals to the Office, I prepared my self to my forsaken
Waterworks; having left my wanton Ward in London in the custody of a Precisian
or Puritan-Taylor, who would not endure to hear one of his servants Swear by
the Cross of his Sheares, he was so full of Sanctity in deceit. But the
first news I heard, Holy fraud is the falsest fraud.
he married my Welsh Niece to his English Nephew; and at my return I was
driven to take his word that he was neither privy to the contract, nor the
marriage.

I desired but his oath for my satisfaction; he badde me have patience, it was
not his fashion to forswear himself. Thus hoping I had been quit of the
cause, I prayed recompense of the Offender: But within six months a new
Commission came down; and a new Office found against me: which manner of
proceeding (I think) was able to breed white hayres in a Britains beard.

SINCE THE FIRST Time I undertook the drowning of my grounds, I (as carefully
as I could) sought to better my understanding by other men's labors: yet in the
whole Kingdom I never found, nor heard of a work worthy observation: Having so
many Rivers, Brooks, Fountains and Springs, which run idely unto the Sea:
without Wear, Sluice, stay, stanke or dam, to turn some part of them upon
grounds that need them, or to contain the substance of plowed lands and
dunghils, which by violent showers wash away, As good no running, as running
for no good.
and runs ranging by those grounds that hunger and thirst for want of
moisture. Our Husbandmen brag of raising Corn: How? out of there painful
labors, but (if they want compost) their increase is but barren, and for ought
I have seen (except some few Soiles which yield plenty of Hay, by often
ouerflowing of fresh Rivers, or the Tide staying upon them as it were by damm)
those fresh-waters yield their increase by nature, without industry. I would
ask how many Shires be in England, and in every Shire how many Rivers,
Brooks, Fountains, and Springes? If the number be great, I would know how they
be employed, and what our Corne-maisters (which carry the reputation for good
husbandry) will say to it? They will say (peradventure) and so will all
Husbandmen (without peradventure) it is easy to raise Corn with store of
Compost: but (wanting Hay;) I would learn how compost may be raised? The
question between errable converted to meadow, and errable not converted, will be
this: some will say, there is no reason to put good errable to bad pasture. So
say I too, Others will say, ordinary errable exceedes ordinary Pasture. It may
be true: but I speak of good errable appointed to be drowned: I will give no
estimat of English Errable; situate near London or Haven Towns, or to places
more vendible then the country wherein I inhabit. Yet this will I exemplify
out of my experience, if the Principality were duly employed, and each acre
handled according to some plots begun, I would hope to live to see Wales called
the Garden of England: for our Welch-mountains yields infinite Fountains and
Springs, the Grounds Fearny and broomy, it being of as a excellent temper to
intertaine water as heart can wish; unless we fly to the maine
Sandy-grounds, which are but sparingly found in Wales; the Country lying in a
hot quarter of no cold Climate.

Now, to speak of drowning, At what time, with what water, and how long you
ought to down your Grounds.
at what time of the year, with what water, how long it may continue on the
ground, and what effect it will work, you shall have all I know to the
uttermost; at least if I remember all.

Now, fixing your fancy on this Mystery, you must pry into every Fallow-field,
Dung hill, and Watercourse in your neighborhood: then compare the quantity of
ground unto the quantity of water you can draw unto it, and if you find water
enough to answer your desire, then in the beginning of your ground, plant your
wear or scluce in height level with the Banks, or exceeding it one foot (or
there aboutes) ore-thwart the River or Brook: and carry your Trench-Royall
(which is your grandmaister-Trench) so far as your ground extendes plimm or
level: that from the mouth of your Wear, or Scluce, to the end of the ditch
or trench, your water may flow back again over your scluce into the River or
brook. In so doing, you have a full command forward and backward (without any
descent) to drown at your pleasure: though your trench royal rise in the end
twenty, or forty foot from the mouth of the scluce.

Having prepared your drowning-course, be very Look well to the leuelling of
the grounds that are to be drowned
careful that all your ground subject to the same (whether Meadow, Pasture, or
Errable) be as plain as any garden-plott. If you leave any forrow, reane, or
slade, vnleuelled, you shall find that forrow, reane, or slade, will receive
the most part of your water idely: which otherwise would disperce over the
whole; and comber you with the care of new plowing it to make it the more
plain: which will hinder you two or three years at the least. Haui^ng made
your wear or scluce, your Drowning-course or Trench, your ground leuelled or
plimmed, the^ follows your attenda^ce: in flood-times see you suffer not your
floud-water by negligence to pass away into the brook, river and sea; but by
your sluice, command it to your grounds; and continue it playing thereon so long
as it appears muddy: and finding the substance decaying (from a fat flood unto
clear water) take up your sluice or floud-gates, and suffer the clear water
to have his course unto the maine brook or river again, until new or
fresh-flouds appear; and still as it rises muddy, employ it on your grounds
during the winter-season. When you have spent the winter in muddy-floods, and
your grounds seasoned by sucking the substance of each fallow, In the beginning
of March clear your grounds from cold clearewater.
and dunghill: be sure, in the beginning of March, to clear your ground of
cold water; and keep it as dry, as a child under the hands of a dainty Nurce;
that the continuance of cold water in the body of your ground in the spring,
breed neither Rush, Boult, nor Spierygrasse: but grass much more profitable,
thick, long, and fine; void of all Moss, Hardheads, Cow-slips, or any weed
what-so-euer. Observe respectively your soil, whether clay, or sand: for,
sandy-grounds will endure ten times more water (being naturally hot) then
the cold clay: yet some washers of grounds, (in their own conceits) will
imagine it is behoouefull to turn the water at all times on their lands; or as
long as they (in their discretion) think good. But so may (with indiscretion)
surfeit a clay-ground with a drunken-dropsie, The best husbands or husband*men
as all the Physicians in the neighborhood, with all their visitations, will
hardly heal in two years space. Having sufficiently sped your clay-ground in
the drowning-time, (I mean Winter) you may (by negligence, or ignorance)
suffer cold water, in the heat of Summer, to cool your ground so much, that
the vital spirits will be decayed: and that moisture having gotten the
vpper-hand, the Sun works, out of that drunken-dropsie ground, the Rush, and
all other ill-pleasing stuff, and unprofitable trash. I said in the Spring,
you must keep your grounds dry. If March follow his kind, and April dry,
ouerflowe it with Cleare-water, that it receive no drought: for, all men know,
if the Spring be dry in May, it is two to one Hay never goes a begging.

Amongst other things, an old Drunkard once warned me, I should not suffer
the roof of my mouth to be dry: yet I never followed his example: I remember
the cup was never from his mouth, and he in the end dyed of a dropsy: so, in
claye-ground, in the heat of Summer, drown it moderately: and, (it being
once sufficiently seasoned in May) you need not drown it until a day, two or
three before you mow. At which time you provide for mowing, if sufficient
showers, have not quallified the drought of your ground; let down your sluice
into your trench-royall, that there-by you may command so much water to serve
your turn as you desire. Which Trench-royall running on the plimme or level,
suffer it to descend, where you mean first to mow, and you shall find this
manner of drowning in the morning of your mowing so profitable and good, that
commonly you gain ten or twelve days advantage in growing: How profitable to
drown a little before mowing.
for, drowning before mowing a day, two, or three, so supples the ground that
it does most sweetly release the root of every particular grass, although the
Sun be never so extreme hot: otherwise, if you drown not before you
mow: you mow one day, you ted an other, you spend one in gathering it into
winde-cockes: and with-all, stand upon the uncertainty of the weather, whether
you dare aduenter to break your cocks or no. Being broken, they must have a
drying time before they can be put into greater cocks; and then opening them
again into the last and greatest, by tedding, gathering, cocking, recocking,
and treble-cocking, your hay continuing above a week on the ground; the
ground being bare, and enduring the heat of the Sun at Mid-summer (in the
hottest time) it does so dry and parch the ground, that if the heavens yield
not more rain then is necessary for a Commonwealth, your later-mates will
prove unprofitable: where drowning before mowing, will make good a second
mowing: and in walking over grounds I will tread as on Velvet, Signs of well
seasoned grounds*
or a Turkey Carpet.

This Drowning before Mowing, puts worms to execution, or forces them to fly
from their habitation: for sure I am that that ground will not be troubled
with them until they raise a new generation; and that cannot well be in those
grounds without great store of heat? which if it happen, to what end serves
your water, but to season the ground again. The Summer may be so extremely
hot as the feruencie thereof may force you to double or trebble drowning; yet
I would wish all those that have not the true understanding and use of the
water (before they put this in execution) to enquire where any such work is;
and haui^ng found the place, to observe the Wear that commands the River, and
to note the length of the trench-royall, and plimme thereof: what stankes,
lists, or trenches be within the contents of the grounds: and, having found
your drowning, and fore-recited trenches, observe what height every stanke or
damme is: and if you can see the floods playing against the damme, your
experience in beholding it goes far beyond mine.

I will not forgett the two-foote-trench, topping your Maine-riuer, with-in
four, or five foot from the Bank, as occasion is offered. The use of which
Trench so near the River, many may wonder at (as many have done) why it should
be drawn so near the maine- river it being but two foot broad and one foot
deep.

I know not how all Rivers and Brooks run elsewhere, but in that which I
labor, the ground is much higher on the River side, then the
maine-flatt-bottome, and, where by sluice I drown some thirty Acars upon a
reasonable level; yet upon the River side the height is such, as my sluice will
do no good, if I suffer the water to descend into the flat bottom, not taking
the advantage in the beginning of my Topping-trench.

A fault to drown some, and to leave some of the same ground vndrowned.
If part of your ground be drowned, and some part forgotten, there is a fault
somewhere; either by ignorance, or negligence, or both: but to help both; I
pray you forgett not to run this trench, topping and brauing your River, that
in the Winter, you drown that with the rest.

In Summer, your command is more absolute, it being sheluing or descending to
your flatt-bottome-ground; you may with a board of two foot broad, and one
foot deep, stay that water, and suffer it to play upon the face of the
ground, half a quarter of an hour, or little more, until it meet with your
flatt bottom.

And thus you may handle the braueing-trenche, by drowning the sheluing ground
every morning in the heat of Summer, before and after mowing; so long as you
find the Sun forceable.

Your flatt-bottom ground, being, in the heat of Summer, drowned, suffer the
water from your sheluing or descending Trenche, but to kiss the hand or soote
of the same: for it being claye, and once drowned, before mowing in the
extreme heat, it will not endure a second drowning without danger: unless
the heat do so extreamlye increase, that one extremity must encounter
another.

So, You must double drown in the summer if there be cause.
you may fall to double drowning (if there be cause) which you shall easilye
find by trying the temper of your ground, thus:

If a riding rod (being somewhat stiff) will enter into the ground two
foot deep or more, it shows it has had moisture sufficient by the former
drownning;

If the rod will not enter in, but by difficulty, or forceable handling, you
may judge it to be ouer-dryed: And in this manner make trial in what state
your ground stands, whether too dry, or sufficiently seasoned.

If to dry, give it watery sustenance to nourish and revive the dying root:
and, having satisfied your ground, suffer your two-foote-trench to have a
continual course of water, Winter and Summer, for these reasons following:
That is to say; In Summer, when you would drown, your trench being full, you
need not stay the letting down of a sluice out of the maine River: for, so
shall you stay the time until your water rise to the highest of your sluice;
and being risen, must have a time to come into your two-foote-trench, to
execute what you would have done: where otherwise, your trench being
continually full, you may (as I said) appoint your servant with a board to stay
or stop the trench; and so from place to place, drown your sheluing or
descending ground from the beginning of your trench, to the end thereof both
day lie and hourly.

This Topping or Brauing-trench; has this excellency with-all, that it
running continually in the trench, Wants will not work in water, nor where it
soakes.
frees your grounds from Moules or Wants: for they will not work in water.

If they desire to fall into the midst of your other Meades, they must
vnder-mine the Trench, swim the Trench, or some way shuffle over.

If they do; see their danger: they being once found to work in the belly of
your Mead, they be subject to death, by your commanding the water from your
two-foote-trench to descend on the rere-ward; the sudden course whereof comes
so fast upon them, and they wanting foot-manshippe to rescue their lives, are
overtaken, to their utter overthrow.

Suffer not one Moule, or Want to live between your two-foote-trench and the
maine River, which is not far distant.

They having no great scope to work, will so undermine from the brink of the
maine River to the brimm of your Trench, that in your drowning-time, in the
heat of Summer, you shall find so many Springs from their workingholes into
ye River, which if you stop not, with great care, The Offiers of the Brauing
Trench.
in finding the places of breach, the most part of your water will run into
the River idely.

To speak of the brauing-trench: Beginning at the Commanding-weare, or Scluce,
it works this effect: if the violence of the flood should be such, as upon a
sudden, your hay at Midsomer should be drowned by ouer-flowing the bank, or
in your After-math-time the like should happen, it is at your choice whether
you will suffer that inconvenience or no: for the Earth taken out of your
two-foote- Trench, being thrown on the one side of the same, raises the
Ground higher then that beyond the River, by two foot at the least: which
forces the Flood altogether, on the other side, and keeps your Hay and
After-math ever in safety.

This Topping or Brauing-Trench must run to the lower part of your Grounds,
as a handmaid to the maine River, to attend your pleasure Winter and Summer.

I would have you suffer some Water to run therein continually: Which
continual running will scowre your Trench, and let all filth from falling
therein: and if it should fall you are driven to often cleansing it.

Being sometimes with Water and sometimes without, the Mole or Want
instantly possesses the same, and works along the Trench an Arrow shoot in
length: And it being so exceeding moist, makes many Holes, clean through into
the maine River, and at your next turning in of the Water will it issue out at
every particular Hole; and your Trench, being but four or five foot from the
River, the Ground being too much moistened, falls or calueth down into the
same.

It Is not sufficient when you have conveyed your Water from your first Sluice
into the Body of your ground or brauing-trench, then to give it liberty to
run a head: for so will it fall into the lowest part; How to govern and lead
the Water from your brauing Trench over your grounds.
but you must govern and lead it, beginning at the highest of the ground, unto
rising places, and so suffer it to descend against some Stanke, or Damme; which
you must raise as occasion shall be offered: As this; if your ground falls so
much that the course of the water offers to run into the maine River again,
before you have done with it: Raise a Stanke a foot, two, three, four, or
five, or so many as may stay it to the height you desire, and force the same
against the Ground unto your lower Grounds; and so continue it playing from
Stanke, to Stanke, from the beginning to the end thereof.

So, shall you be sure by raising of these Stankes or Damms, to stay all the
substance of substantial Waters which is forced by your Wears, or Sluices,
into the body of your ground, there to remain: where if there were no Stanke
or Dammne, the water (running headlong into the lowest part) carries the
substance so mainly forward, that little or nothing at all will be left upon the
face of the ground to nourish the same.

How to make your Stanks or Damms.
Now to furnish you with the present understanding, how to make your Flanks or
Dams; in what place, and how far you would have it drowned; repair into the
lowest part in the beginning of your uppermost ground; where if you desire to
pound it to such a hight; pitch your Level there; which Level (or Instrument)
I will make known more familarly unto you in the Mapp of my Work, (which you
shall find in this book incerted) and command your servant to hold some
staff with a paper bound about, some two inches broad: and look through your
Level from the lowest part of your Ground, unto your desired place. In this
manner your Level will assure you how to cast your ground to an inch.

And when you have truly learned to Leuel, which in one hour I will undertake
to teach you, you may range over the Kingdom as principal suruayors of
Rivers, Water works, be most chargeable to the Ignorant.
Brooks, Fountains, and Springs, and accuse the best wits of the greatest
negligence, in matter of the greatest Commonwealth.

It has been said by some, Water-Workes be chargeable and dangerous. They be
so; for if you adventure to command maine Rivers, as Thames, Seuerne, and the
like: you may judge with what difficulty it will be done. In their beginnings
Breadth and Depth is increased by a number of small Brooks, the Command
thereof goes beyond the estates of the most men: yet there is no River in the
Realm (be it Thames, or Seuern) where there is any descent, but that I will
steal, by Counter-trench (when the muddy flood is leuel with the bank) so much
water as I desire.

If you ask me how broad, Your Trench must be made great or small according
to the quantity of ground you are to drown.
and deep the Trench must be: I would know what quantity of ground you have to
drown if much, your Trench must be the wider and deeper. I need not putt you
in mind to raise a sluice on the mouth of your trench; if you do it not, common
inconvenience will compel you.

You will never drown so often as the flood rises to the height of the bank,
because of your hayand after-math in Summer: Therefore as I said, you will be
compelled for your safety-sake to Sluice your trench.

As your Trench-royall feeds your sheluing-groundes and falls into the
flat-bottome, and rising to the height of your first, second and third stanke
with the rest; take heed the water exceed not the height of any of your stanks
or damms a hayrs-breadth: for the force of the water and violence of the wind
in a furious tempest, will ouer-throw it, as if the Canon played against it.

I have forborne to speak of my Stank-Royall, which is of purpose prepared to
intertaine the Trench-royall: which Trench-royall, in the continuance of his
running, undertakes the safe conduct of three Brooks and some Springes withal
to the Rendez-uous or place of general Consultation, where their employment
shall be; whether against the Stanke-royall, the Maine-stankes, the
Counter-Trench, or the rest. But indeed the Stanke-royall intertaines all
comers, the Trench-royall and her Handmaid Brooks: and forces them seven
foot in height.

The advantage whereof, drowneth sixe-score Acres in three hours, Six-score
Acres may be drowned in three hours.
and twenty Acres in the return back.

In a Counter-trench forty Acres; in a Trauersin-Trench twenty more; in Summer
and Winter-Trenches, twenty; in double and treble Trenches (and the rest)
twenty more.

Take up the Sluice which commands the Stanke-royall, and in one hour, my
Euer-lasting Trench conueyes the Trench-royll and all the handmaid Brooks,
into the maine River: and (for ought I have heard) after I gave it pass, it
had peaceable progres into Seuerne without examination.

I will acquaint you with a manner of drowning which you may very well like off.

If you will handle two or three hundred Acres of Ground you shall daily drown
Winter and Summer for ever, some part sheluing or descending and the rest
Flat-bottome, deuides by Defending-Trenches: For, clear Water will supple
your Sheluing-Ground if it continue thereon six or seven days; But, there is a
discretion to be used; Therefore I advise, as you drown the Sheluing-Ground
with cold and clear Water in the cold of Winter, suffer none to fall into the
Flat-bottome; but, your Muddy-flouds: For you well know, that the water passing
downward, does endure most violent labor in running: and being suddenly
taken away, it does suddenly dry, and none at all remains to infect the
ground.

If it steal into the Flatt-bottome, the coldness of the cleare-water with
the coldness of the ground, in the cold of Winter, wanting the heat of the
Sun to dry it up (it being lodged in so plain and pleasing a place) will
venture life to raise the rush. The Rush will be raised by overmuch moisture.


Now, seeing I have spoken of the excellency of drowning, I will speak som-what
of mine ambition therein.

There was never General of an Army-royall, nor Admiral of an Armado, more
ambitious, then I have been in brauing my Trench-Royall: And wearied with
ouer-walking my self therein, I repaired to my stank-royall; and I being
raised seven foot in height, I was so possessed with the pride of my walk,
that I thought my self fitter to be Governor of a Town of War, then
Commander of a hungry VVater-worke.

But remembering (within the compass of my age) a Great Person stood to be
General of an Army, that never saw the face of the War nor never fought
Combat with an Enemy; A Council of War being called, it was answered, by a
Grand-Captaine, he had neither the Words, nor Art of War: Therefore dangerous
for the States to adventure the Kingdom to try his experience. The rest more
vnder-valued him, Saying he were fitter to be Chauncellor to a Lord-Bishoppe
then General of an Armie-Royall.

Sharp censures made me fall blountly to my works.
These their censures, fortified me in mine old labors: So by little and
little, I forgatt the Ambitious Resolutions of the Honorable Wars, and the
Pleasures of a Park (withal) wherein I yearly killed at least twen-Buckes
and Sores.

The love of my Water-workes, stole my desire from thence, that in the whole
number of twenty years, I cannot say I was at the killing of one Bucke,
although my Parke-pale came within twenty foot of my trench-Royall, having
some years twenty Buckes, killed with a kennell of Hounds, and loving the
sport as much as he that loved it most.

The Master of a Water-worke may well be compared to the general of an
Army, which having beleagred a Town, it behooves him for their safety to
fortify and block all passages and In-rodes, that the Enemies sudden Alarm
annoy them not: So, must the Master of a Water-worke attend every shutt, and
shower that threatens excess (whether in mid day, or mid night) commanding his
Centinell-Seruant to search the sluices, whether they be up or down.

If it happen before mowing, or in your after-math-time, take up the Sluice, and
give it passage into the maine River: for, the sudden ouer-plus, your
Trench-royall, will conuoy into your euerlasting-trench; unless, your desire
be to ouer-flow some parcel of pasture or meade that's ouer-eaten.

I protest it has been more grievous to me in Summer-season, to see a
muddy-floud run idle without command, then to see a lusty wanderer quarter
the country, without being put to work. The several offices of the sluices.
Touching the offices of my number of sluices; the first commands the main-riuer
in the beginning of my Trench-royall. The second, commands the maine River into
my brauing-trench some half mile lower. The third, commands the same River a
mile below, at the lowest part of my ground: So, you see, that within the
running of two miles, I plant three sluices; the maine Silles being forty foot
long. The reason why I planted so many within the length of two miles, was
this: the river being thirty foot broad, and ten-foote deep, my Trench-royall
being but ten-foote broad, and foure-foote deep, it received no more water
then the breadth and depth would give leave.

Not-with-standing the quantity of water my Trench-royall received, I did not
find the want of any in the maine-riuer; which caused me to raise those two
other sluices: grieuing so commodious an Element, so rich and substantial,
should fall into the Bowels of the sea, without profit. I call that a
Trench-royall, what a trench royal is.
where part of the maine-riuer is commanded by sluice into it. I call that a
counter-trench, What a counter trench is.
where part of the river is stolen in by the rising of the flood to the level
of the bank without sluice. What a topping and brauing trench is
My topping or brauing-trench is that which hand-maides the maine-riuer (side
by side) unto the end of the work. The Winter and Summer-trenches, What the
winter and summer trench is.
be those that water the grounds in the Summertime. Having drowned with clear
water a parcel of ground, it being satisfied and forsaken, I furnish the rest
of my Trenches with that water, until a Meade of thirty or fortye Acres be
sufficiently seasoned. You must know, you cannot drown so many Acres, not
having the advantage of these many Trenches and Lists, unless your ground be
all flatt-bottom; having a stout and strong water with-all. My double and
treble-trenches, What double and treble trenches require.
require a parcel of plain ground containing fortye Acres or more. At your
turning-water in, it will hardlye dispeirce over the whole; the weakness
thereof is such in Summer-season if it be not help and assisted with
Summer-lysts, that run the length of the land you labor in. You may raise
the List in this manner; In the midst of the Meade, in place of best
advantage, force a couple of Furrows of each side with your Plowe, encountering
each other; cleanse those Furrows, and place the earth above: by this means
your List falls out to be a foote-path, when both sides of your ground are
drownde, Summer and Winter.

This manner of speaking may seem strange unto you; But, if you did see the
manner of the work, you would say it could not be otherwise expressed.

The trauersing-trench, is, that which receives the water from the
counter-trench; What the trauersing-trenche is.
and the Stanke-royall (running on a whorle, his sluice being taken up) is
received by a Bastard-sluce, which does disperse on both sides the Treneh; and
that is the cause I call it a Trauersing-trench.

What the euerlasting-trench does.
My euerlasting-trench endures more trouble then all the rest: the Trench-royall
running at a floud-time (as a shipp vnder-saile, being Admiral of the rest)
and having determined of all the duties of the several Stankes, Trenches, and
hand-maide brooks, they humble themselves to the Stanke-royall; and prays no
longer continuance there, then they prove profitable to that place* which is
so long as they carry filth in their foreheads, (I mean a muddy flood) and
declining to a clear water, the euerlasting-trenche receives it to his common
course, with as much joy to the Master as may be.

I cannot well give significant names to all those Trenches, which I call
troublesome; therefore I pray I may be forborne to speak of them at this
time. I had almost forgotten to make a true report of the euerlasting-trench:
it is but a bastard-brooke, falling from my Park into the mouth of my
trench-royall, and his course stopped by a Wear or sluice, not inferior to any
in the maine-riuer. This bastard-brooke is commanded by that sluice to attend
the trench-royall to the rendez-uous, or place of employment, drowning
altogether, which descending against the stanke-royall, is forced into his
euer-lasting-course again.

Against another Wear or sluice (comparable to any of the rest what-so ever)
you shall understand why these two maine Wears or sluices be planted upon so
beggarly a brook: Wherefore the Wears or sluices are planted.
the trench-royall crossing the brook so far as the ground extends, must
either have pass in the end (which cannot be without leave of the inhabitant
below) or forced back again over the first Wear, three mile above; which
may be: but the purpose is, the euerlasting-trench shall have an everlasting
continuance, to receive the Surplus of the floud-water for defense of your Hey,
and after-math. The ancient breadth and depth is enlarged: for, that the flood
being drawn into the Trench-royall, must fall into this euerlasting-trench:
and being enlarged, the trench-royall intertaines it without prejudice to any
of the grounds.

My lasting discourse has almost done with my euerlasting-trench. As the
trench-royall commands the euerlasting-trench to the rendezuous or
Consultation-place: so the counter-trench has the like command elsewhere. And
as the euerlasting-trench is sluced to give pass to the trench-royal to the
lowest part, so I place one other Bastard fluce more; which receives the
counter-trench; and many times, both royal and counter-trenches meet against
that sluice; which to his power, does yield as much profit as any in all my
works.

If your grounds, at any time, be so hard frozen, as the hardness thereof is
like to continue, such a snow may happen upon your frozen grounds, What is to
be done in hard Frosts, and great snow?
as may remain thereon so long as the extremity of wether indures: or so long
as you and your cattle will be weary off, which to prevent, let down your
sluices, drown the frozen grounds when the snow begins to fall: so shall you
release the grass being bound, and spend the snow, which threatens your
prejudice, and free your grounds, that all kind of cattle, (Sheep especially)
may have sufficient sustenance therein.

My trench royal, from the beginning to the end, is three miles long; it
runs so precisely on the plimme or level that every fifth year I am driven
to cleanse the channel: such store of muddy-substance is forced by my first
sluice therein. As the River Nilus drownes Aegips from the Abissine Mountains,
enriching the couutrey, to the wonder of the world: so does the muddy* floods
from the upper part of the Golden Valley, (as from a Golden Mountain or
Fountain) improoue my estate beyond belief. It Is not unknown to my
neighborhood my demeasnes at New-court was set and forsaken at forty pound by
year, besides my Park. I set it so my self, and let any man, that has an
upright judgment and equal eyes in his head, view and reuiew it, he will say
it will yield within three years, three hundredth pounds yearly, besides my
Park. Many have said to me, no other man's grounds lie so convenient to drown
as mine at New-court. The Golden Valley is but seven miles in length, and one
mile broad.
I answred them, yes: for, three other livings of mine, afford the like
advantage for drowning. The Vale is but seven mile in length, and not a mile
over any where. Yet there be diverse Gentlemen therein, whose livings might be
bettered, some a hundred, some two hundred pounds yearly: amongst the rest,
there is one that dwells on my right hand: the River deuides our demeasnes, who
might stock his grounds with stankes, trenches, lists, bastard-sluces, and such
inventions as the ground requires; being all flat-bottom: and I truly take it,
he may drown four hundred Acres with less charge tenn times then mine: not
having one Maine-Weare or Sluice to raise: For, those I have planted, serves for
both grounds: but whether it be his ignorance in not understanding, or
negligence in forbearing, I know not; but, I am sure, it is out of his way an
hundred pounds a year.

There is another Gentleman, who dwells on my left hand, makes show of
understanding it; yet are his grounds ouer-howed with the like neglect: but
seeming to excuse it by some unexpected troubles (which indeed he endured) and
that his weighty occasions would not give him leave to undertake, nor suffer
his servants to attend it, he having in the eye of his house, a hundred Acres
of errable land, worth not above three shillings an Acre, which amounts but to
fifteen pound a year. Yet I made him this offer, if he would be pleased to
make it plain, as plain might be, for four years, I would give him
fifteen pound a year, being the true value of his land: and after the end of
the four years, I would take it for one and twenty, yielding him a hundred
pounds a year, the charge wholly mine, in raising sluices; stankes, trenches,
and what else so-euer: A liberal offer refused, which if taken, had benefited
the offerer more then the offered.
so, during the four years, he should receive fifteen pound a year; and
ever after, a hundred pound yearly to him and his heirs for ever.

I did not require any thing until the four years were expired, and then my
demand was but three hundred pound.

The year following, one hundred came in unto him again, the second, an other
hundred, and the third he received another; so in 3. years, he received his
three hundred pound.

He offered me nothing, and he has done nothing; so this is but an accusation
for negligence, setting it forth in as friendly manner as I may. O! if the Lord
of a Manor did but know what an offense it is to plant an vnder-shot-mil upon
a River, where the situation of the soil affords drownings: He were better to
put his wits aworke to make VVindmils in plain ground, if he would consider
what he loses by it.

For example; my right-hand-neighbour having such a Mill as I speak off, worth
some ten pound by year, and four hundred Acres of excellent ground to
handle: he forbeares his Winter and Summer drowning, to give satisfaction to
this vnsatisfiable glutton the Vnder-shot-mil, where, in the trunesse of
husbandry, he should daily drown three hundred Acres for ever.

As the Sun shines ever once a day in Alexandria, by reason whereof the Land
yields sweet increase; so might he say he dwelt daily in the Land of Canaan,
which ever flows with Milk and Honey.

And as the greatness of the Turk obscures the Persian-glory, or as the
Hungarian forces are the only Obstacle, hindering the Turks descending to the
conquest of the Christian Kingdoms; so should his stankes or Damms encounter
the downe-fall of the Muddy floods from the Mountains of great Cadwalleder.

Thus much to encourage my neighbor for the undertaking of Water-workes. The
length of the Trench Royal.


My Trench-royall being three miles long, and running plimm or leuel forward
and backward; I plant diverse Bastard-sluces cross the Trench-royall, for
Winter and Summer drowning.

If any man will be so fantastical as to carry his wife level by water to
her Dairy, or build Barnes and Cattell-houses over the same for ease of his
Oxen, I refer my self to his consideration whether it be not possible; the
Trench royal being ten foot broad, The breadth and depth of the
Trench-royall.
and four foot deep. Likewise if by Boat you will carry Compost, Corn,
Hey, Wood, Stone, Milk, or any other Provision, its referred to your like
consideration. I made two little Ones for the carriage of earth, which I found
to do me such service, as I know two Teames in a day could not counteruaile
any of them.

Their burden being but two load a piece three servants commanded them both,
in; their charging and discharging: their length being twenty foot; the breadth
but three: Had I a Boat with a Keele five or six and thirty foot long, The
good service of a Boat.
and nine foot broad, I would carry seven or eight load of Compost at a time;
Corn in Sheaues would conveniently be carried; but how many load of Hay, at a
time, I can but guess: You must at al times examine how your Trench royal is
stored with muddy-substance; it being furnished by the main River, every
flood, every second, or third year it rises in the bottom 2. foot at the
least; especially for a mile or two coming in at the mouth of the Trench, it
does fill the forepart of the same: and unless you cleanse those parts you
cannot receive so much water by 10. foot broad. and 2-foot deep: the want
whereof you shall find in your lower grounds. As the finest husband-me^ be most
provident and studious to make their profit answer their labor; so let not the
charge of clensing the Trench-royall be grievous unto you: in respect the
recompense shall (much more then the greatest usury) outgo your laying out.

In the year 1601. I was forced to cleanse my trench-royall, being almost
filled to the leuill of the Bank, and for the excellency of the substance
therein contained, all the dung-hils in the country can witness it was their
very quintessence: the quantity thereof may be estimated by the breadth and
depth; and I know five hundred honest Yeomen, Husbandmen, and Laborers would
say, the Substance would ouer-counteruaile the charge being employed for
Wheat, Onyons, Cabiges, Carets, or any other Roots agreeing with the nature of
that Residence of the Trenches.

Which Muddy substance being put on the one side of your Trench-royall, you
may by Boat, carry to your wheat-land, to your Garden, or to better any other
barren ground that yeeldes no profit: For, I will drown Winter and Summer at
my pleasure, a thousand Acres of Meadow.

I will sustain no inconvenience at any time, unless the negligence of my
servants suffer the Sluices to be up when they should be down; or some
envious, lewd, or malicious person, in the nightime loose them down of
purpose to harm me.

No Subject in the Kingdom can certainly say he has the like Grounds,
unless he daily drown as I do. And for these thousand Acres I shall be able
to Mow them twice a year.

If I please: The rush, the Moss, the boult, the hard head, and many other
unprofitable wedes craves mercy at my hands for their life in respect of their
former offenses; with protestation never to trouble the ground again.

I do not see why the cowslip should have more favor then the rest, unless
it be to countenance the May Pole.

I have not done all I can do, I can Graze my mowing Meades, until the first
of May. I would see who can do the like, without the hazard of his Hay that
Summer, unless he follow my example. It may be said by some among
themselves that you (neighbor) and I, In Lumbardy grass grows apparently
twice a day being cut twice a day.
may do the like: But then, that You, and I must live by the Rivers of Leadon,
Dowbanke, Frommey, or in the Land of Lombardy, where grass grows apparently
twice a day.

Those young Gentlemen that have scarce living enough to maintain themselves
in the misery of this Age; should (if they did well) learn to level and
quarter a ground: then sell that little they have; and afterward examine the
Records in the custody of the Clarke of the Statutes; there shall they find
that Clarke to have more Clyents (in my conscience) then any Councellor in the
Kingdom.

And for mine own part (without vainglory be it said) I am as well known
in that Office as a better man.

Thus, by taking pains, following the Ordinaries, and being acquainted with
the Undersheriffs, and Atourneies of every County; those Gentlemen for a quart
of Canauary-Wine, will give you a Kallender of all Yronice.
ye Landlords, that are beforehand with the World: In which if they deal not
injuriously with you, you shall find my name. This done, examine the Rivers,
Brooks, Fountains and Springs in every County, whether they be employed or
no. If they run idle, make your match in the country you best like off; and I
assure you, you shall find more Land to be sold utterly neglected (while the
water runs at wast) then a thousand such young Gentlemen I speak off, will
buy.

I do advise all men that will be Vnder-takers in this Husbandry, to be perfect
in the true Survey of the number of Acres that may be drowned; and that they
make choice (as near as they can) of errable-land: which commonly exceedes not
two or three shillinges an Acre yearly. Old Pasture covered with moss, that
nature has forsaken, and Medow-ground (if there be any) that takes more pride
in the company of the Cowslipp, then the gilt-cupp which carries the garland
from the rest.

And for your comfort, (be this spoken) if in the laying out of five hundred
pound, at the end of four years, you make it not two or three thousand pound,
Nota.
your choice is bad, and luck worse. During those forty years you cannot
receive less then the rate you buy it at; which is twenty years purchase, or
as you can agree: And so from five hundred to a thousand, two, three, or as
much as your estate will stretch too; the more the better.

If you find difficulty in my discourse; any Easter or Michell-masse Term
you shall find me in the house of a true Britain (master Wotton a
Scriuener) in Fleet Street, over against Saint Dunstans Church. And for a
Supper, at John Gents you shall have your Belly-full of Water-workes. For my
Drownings, my name has been so scandalliz'd in open Ordinary, by a Western
Gentleman, who, since the Kings Majesty's coming, is become a Knight of
account, but rash censure deserves little reckoning in mine account: Many men
spoke diversely of my labors for a long time, because the Honorable Courts (as
they thought) had brought me to Beggers-bay: and failing in the true execution
of my works, in not placing a Planke of four inches thick, and twenty inches
broad, under the maine Syll, to prevent the water from undermining the same,
and withal failing to lay my Grounds (by the indiscretion of my Servants)
level or plain, and not understanding of what strength my Stanks should be to
with stand the weight of the Water that plays against them, and what alowance
to give each Stanke in his Foundation; and forbearing the running of my
Trench-Royal to the end of his Course for many years, and not thinking Stankes
to be necessary for the commanding of Grounds disoebeying my desire, and
withal (lately) running Counter-Trenches, which next the Trench-royall, have
place above any; which were not drempt off before; many sluices, and for many
years, were forborne in places most convenient, and much profit lost thereby:
Twenty years practice in these Works.
my speculation having continuance in practice above twenty years.

But were it now to begin again, I would perform it in one: and raise it to
the greatest profit in four: so hard a thing is it for any mortal man to
perfitt any profitable invention, without pains, cost, and continuance of time.

They say now, if Master Vaughan had these and these grounds he would do This
and This. This opinion have I gotten in the country where I dwell.

There is a Shropshire Gentleman (Master Hoord) a famous man, his labors (I
know) have taken trial at Enuies Bar, by ignorant Jurors and unjust Judges
for a work he performed. It was chargeable unto him; the situation thereof
was such as it could not be otherwise handled. I saw it, viewed it, and
examined it; and I know it does much more then counteruaile the charge. But had
I been acquainted with him, in his first beginning, he should not have spent
his time to so small profit: not that he mistook in the handling thereof; but
knowing my own errors, and by costly experience able to instruct him; I found
no want of Art in him, but the want of Winter and Summer-water to serve his
turn.

I would have persuaded him to have forborne that barren vnder-taking, and to
have gotten five or six thousand pound with ten times less labor, in the
choice of a thousand places elsewhere, where he might have drowned daily for
ever.

Muddy-flouds do often happen in Summertime. If the running of them idle be
so unto other men as it is unto me, Muddy floods often happen in Summertime.
let them do as I do; ever have one pasture bare eaten: and as you keep one
special Chamber in your house to entertain a stranger, so, you always have
one Pasture for that muddy-floud, which will pay you after twice twenty in the
hundred. It Is confessed by all in the Golden-Vale, that that little land which
we have would be bettred fifteen hundred pounds a year. If the like were
done through-out England, Note the profit of drownings.
it would profit the kingdom in a year two Millions: which would maintain an
army-royall, to the honor of Great Britain, and be most comfortable to all
honorable Soldiers, Crest-falne for want of war and military employment.

It pleased master Hoord to view the place where my Water-workes were
performed, accompanied with three iuditious and vnderstaning Gentlemen, namely,
Master Brainton, Master Pearl, and Master Wolridge; what their belief was,
I refer it to those who have a desire to be informed.

Any Gentleman or other having performed a work, and brought it to his
absolute perfection; should not sit down by it: but having finished that
Work, and being Master but of one Living, Note this advice.
I would (as I formerly said) advise him to sell it: and at the end of four
years make good account by purchase, to gain six, if not ten for one. I have
a Meade called nine dayes-math: an exellent Meade, and approved for such of all
my neighbors. I sold the herbage thereof diverse years for five pound per
Annum: but within few years, after the floods played upon it, I sold the Hey
for ten pound yearly: and the latter or after-math was richly worth five. I
will graze this Meade until May: yet notwithstanding the Hey will yield me ten
pound, and the after-math five. Now having (I hope) profited the intelligent
Reader, thus far: all the favor I desire at his hands, in lue thereof, is this,
That I may have leave to give new names unto mine old grounds, without being
laughed at in ordinaries by scarce ordinary understanders. Some they must have;
for, those they had by drowning are covered with new earth. And with-all, they
be enlarged above two hundred Acres. I cannot call that the nine-daies-math,
which now is above 30. (unless I should forget my counting-craft) nor that a
Moore which is firm and pleasing ground; nor that the rushy-leasow, which is
reduced now unto a more fruitful and profitable plot, if the rush appear
there again, he forfeits the Fee-simple of his life: so having my grounds
divided into 12. parts, their names (under favor) be altered and now called in
this manner: the Pinck, the Gille-flower, the Carnation, The new names of the
Meades and Pastures.
the Rosemary, ye Mary-gold, the gilt-cup, the Honysuckle, the Daysy, ye
Garland, the Eglentine, the Cowslip and the Primrose. Some do say their Kine
do yield more milk having often change, then those that graze in only one
pasture. I say nothing to it: but, believe those dairy women that affirm it.
This I can say, for any that desire often change, (as the most part would have
fresh and fresh pasture) if they (being curious) will not be coy to handle a
Cow-shore in his kind: then thus; When the Kine be put over to some other
ground, you know their stain or dung by heat of the sun will grow hard: and
within short time, will force a proud and insolent grass; such as the Kine in
their return will not touch.

When you turn out your Kine into fresh feeding; be sure to disperce and
sever those Cow-shares, that the place be, not stained with any polution. They
being dispersed; drown your ground with clear water: or mudd (if a flood
happen) the ground being bare, two Blessings encounter each other, and purify
the place where the Cow-shores were fallen: so, at the next turning in of your
Kine, some fortnight after, they shall find nothing to distemper or offend the
taste: the water does cleanse and clear all annoyance to the beast, and breeds
perfect life in every growing grass. This last Summer 1604. in Trinity term,
being above at London, I came not down till after Mid-Summer: having grazed my
mowing Meades too too long after May. Upon my return, I enquired in what state
my grounds stood, my servants answered they were sufficientlye seasoned;
Eye-pleasers are often liers.
but (in deed) they did (as many) servants do) report the best of the worst,
to excuse their negligence: the Meades were not so sufficiently drowned, as the
necessity thereof required: They being neglected before mowing, not trying
their temper with a riding-rod, (my belief was so great in those greater
Liers) but after mowing, the truth appeared, the quantity of Meade (in one
place) being three score and ten Acres, by reason of the mowing, making, and
carriage, before the ground were free to drown, the extremity of the heat was
so great, that the grass turned yellow; being tainted, as a sheep on a dry
rotte: or, as a man inlye sick, and newly recovered faules into a relaps again.

In this manner my grounds had gotten the greene-sicknesse or a buruing-feauer
(I know not well whether) If in the extreme heat you would drown with
Judgment, you should not drown in the heat of the day: but in the night from
sun to sun. But being forced, I suffered the water to work night and day;
the season of the year falling out to be dry: the sun extremely hot; the
ground hott, dry, and hard: so what between the heat of the sun, and heat
of the ground, the water became lukewarm, and faild to effect that good which
by Nature other-wise it would have done.

And if I be not deceived, the infection of the earth, had poisoned the water:
or made it so sick, as it was not able to endure the ground. As a scudding
shewer of rain, The quality of ground distempered with heat.
does raise upon a dung-hill-poole great bubbles (like an Oxe-eye) by falling
of the drops thereon; or, as water in a pott, by the heat of the fire, does
labor, and show distemper: so, did that water-worke, play, and bubble on the
face of the ground, showing (for a quarter of an hour) nothing but discontent.

The ground being qualified, the grass did not instantly grow (as at other
times, being orderly fedd) the coullour being changed, the grass standing at
the point of death, being in that case as a sick pacient having taken a
purgation, who must have a time of recovery: so did the grass, for diverse
days, show nothing but sorrow, heaviness and all discomfort. It being once
made yellow by the heat of the Sun, and recovered of the Yellow-Iaundies,
although the comfort of the water put life into it; yet, during the season, it
had never his perfect complexion again: the point ever carrying a show of
poisoning; which error (with Gods help) I will never committ hereafter

Let all men drown before they Mow, and after Mowing, your grass will not
be yellow, but as green as a Leeke. You must always keep your grounds in a
true temper; they must never be too wet in the Winter, but when you drown; nor
too dry in the Summer, having water enough. I had almost forgotten this;
before you raise your stankes, be sure to clear your grounds from Moles or
Wantes, Moles are mischievous vermin in or about such waterworks
they be dangerous creatures (like a Usurer that is hardly gotten out of a man's
land, wherein he has gotten footing,) if they have possession in a stanke.

You know when all other grounds be drowned some part of the stanke will be
free; they will not fail to rend and tear your stanke like Rabbets in a sandy
soil. I protest two or three Wants in my stanke-royall, was out of my way
twenty pound a year, for many years. I put a fumbling fellow to attend their
walks, who (not being cunning enough to destroy them) utterly plagued me;
until I happened upon a good worke-man, who has cleared my stankes and my
brauing-trench. And were it not for my brauing-trench and my stankes, I should
never need the use of a Want-killer; because I do so often drown in Wintertime;
which often drowning does force them to forsake the soil.

I would desire no better pastime then the hunting of a Want in a plain
Meade. My brauing-trench being close by the maine River: my trench-royall lying
on the height of the ground: my servant seeing her cast, if near the
trench-royall he commands water into a descending trench; and does force her
on the face of the ground with much submission, praying her Clergy: her
offense being Burglary in breaking my stankes, although she were the first
means that occasioned all these vnder-takings, yet I could not be drawn to
yield her a pardon: had she wrought in any other part of my grounds, I had not
taken it so grievously: but, in spoiling my fundamental parts, with working
clean through my stankes, and forcing them, by the extremity of the water
altogether down, she was incapable of pardon. If he that has an
ouer-shoote-Mill would enter into an account with himself, whether it were
more profitable for him Winter and Summer to drown grounds, or to grind corn,
it would put him to a pussle.

I know many men that have Mills, who for a desire to gain a peck of corn a
day (and many days fails to get any) so that by a true computation, Drowning
more profitable then Mills.
in the whole year, the Mill may be worth some four or five pound: and in
drowning, four or five acres of barren ground, I will raise a far greater
benefitt.

But because he will give reputation unto his demeasnes, or information on the
marriage of his son, that he has such a Mill; he had rather suffer muddy
Floods in the VVinter, and clear Waters in Summer to break their limbs on
his Mill wheels, then exercise his wits (by Drowning (to attain a world of
wealth.

It is groan to a kind of prouerbiall speech, in the Golden-Vaile, that he
that does drown is a good Husband: he that may and will not, is figured out
with the syllable, Fu.

I know, I have as good an Ouer-shot-mill for Water enough as this Kingdom
yeeldes: yet rather then I would grind my own Corn at a floud-time, or in my
drowning times in Summer, I would carry it ten mile off to be ground, though
the Miller told the one half.

Being requested by many Gentlemen of the best quality, to putt these
VVater-workes in Print: I prayed those ingenious Gentlemen, (Sergeant Louell
and master Coulthurst) to speak what they thought concerning the same.

They both (under their hands by way of subscription) said; it would be very
profitable to the Kingdom to be put in execution: being of late a common thing
in Devonshire; but, not in so ample manner.

For drayning of grounds Master Louell is Serieant-Maior of the same;
Drayning of Grounds, cousine-Germain to Drowning.
yet I Will say as the mean Counselor says to the Serieant at Law; under favor
(master Serieant) I Will declare what I did in your Element of Drayning, being
but Cousin-Germaine removed to mine of Drowning.

A Ring of ground (some foure-score Acres) situate stirrope-wise; a Brook in
the vpper-part crossing the same, in the smaller point of his extent, there
running from Adams days in likelihood: the greater quantity of the ground
from the Creation never sound: but stained with the Boult, the Rush, a Quagmire
coherent, with many other Improfitables, never mowed, nor grazed in the driest
days, but knee deep in water. It lay at the gaze for five thousand
six-hundred and six years, and by general opinion it stood in state of
damnation; as if it had been cursed like Mare-mortuum for the sin of Sodom.

When I had divided my sound Grounds from those infected with leprosy;
with as many maister-trenches as were neeedful to conduct my Drayning, Sucking,
Working, and Searching-trenches into the maister-trenches; having but two foot
descent to procure a passage; all this being performed; that spungy bogg
draind, dried and made fit for any use: I drew the Brook which crossed the
upper point of the Ground down into the belly of the bogg, to make privy
search in every particular Trench, what filth fell therein.

Livery and Season taken, Livery and Season taken by the Brook.
Atornement of Tennants, Fealty, with all other Ceremonies that Littelton lays
down to raise Uses, Cusstomes, or Estates of Inheritance, with payment of
pence, and the strongest Fortifications my skill could afford for an
everlasting continuance, and clear keeping of the Drayning, Sucking, Working,
and searching Trenches.

I protest I had almost forgotten this ensuing most necessary Invention. A
necessary Invention for suppling hard Grounds for easiness of Trenching.


I was in the Parish of Peter-Church to run a Trench-royall some mile on the
plimm: The Countrey-people made themselves believe it would cost me a thousand
Marks. Before I ran any part of my Trench: I planted my Sluices cross the
River, at such time as my Sluices were down, the Water did rise to the level
of the Greene-sward: the Sluices being up, the Water suncke unto his ordinary
course again.

So had I the command of the Sluices to rise and sink the Water at my
pleasure.

Having leuelled the Trench: I put eight Laborers to work therein, who,
(during the whole day) wrought but one Perch, which was but six foot broad,
and three foot deep: To whom I said (when I perceived how little they had done
in a day) I see now it is true, as the Country says: Countrymens Conjectures are not always Oraclces.
It will cost me a thousand Marks ere I effect this Work, if it go no better
forward. They said unto me they did their best indeauor: But after they had
taken some half a foot of the green sward (or face of the ground away) they
could not force their spades or spittels one inch deep, the hardness of the
Earth was such: and wished me to give over that vnder-taking.

It was somewhat before Michelmas (the Winter-raine not having suppled or
mollified the ground any whit at al) I commanded them to attend their labor on
the morrow; then did I cause them to run forty pearches in length, six foot
broad, and but half a foot deep; which halfe-foote deep the spades did
easily enter: And so for that day, I ended with them Then they demanded what
employment I would putt them to the next morrow? I bad them good night: and
willed them to be there very early in the morning. After they were gone, I
caused my man, to let down the sluices, and raise the Water to the height
thereof, and Suddenly the Trench flowing, it entered with such puissance as if
it would have dissolved the very Bowels of the Ground. Then early before their
coming my Servant took up the Sluices, A notable sudden effect of Water on
hard ground uneasy to be Trenched.
sunk the Water, and gave it the liberty of the maine River, that they the
next day, easily forced their spades two foot deep and more. And in this
manner, with the water, I suppled the Trench from the beginning to the end, and
saved thereby a hundred pound at least.

Many worthy and expert men have written of the breeding of Cattle, The manner
of breeding Calves.
whose endeavors I much reverence, and refer them to be commended by
Posterity: Yet, will I venture to lay down mine experience in the younger sort,
for the Falling, VVeaning, and Raising of Calves: which (breefly) is this:
Those Calves you mean to breed: a month before they fall, let your Cow or
Kine be well fed with good Hay, that she or they may be the better able to be
delivered of them, and to yield plenty of Milk: Upon their first Caluing,
suffer them not to have too much milk for three or four days: For in
ouer-sucking themselves, they will be so glutted with the plenty and newness
of it, that nature in them will be overcome, and be subject to Gillying or
Scowring, which will hinder them for a long time. When they be five or six
days old, let them suck as much as they can: When they come to be a month
old, provide a Cratch for fine Hay, and a Trough for clean Water, although you
have no meaning that they shall sustain themselves thereby: but to prepare
and acquaint them (in a wanton manner) to learn to eat Hay, How to learn
them to eat Hay and drink Water.
and drink Water. Daily they will be nibling with the Hay and Water as
desirous as some idle persons be of Tobaco and Ale.

When they be eight weeks old take away the Milk of one Teat from your
Calfe in milking your Cow before the Calfe be suffered to suck: the want of
which Teate (for hunger and thirst) will provoke both your Calfe to eat Hay,
and drink Water. Continue him so for four days; then take away, or milk
one other Teate from your Calfe as aforesaid, which is half the Milk; so,
will you force your Calfe to a greater desire of Hay and Water: After this,
take away the milk of another Teate within four days after; and so after that
take away all. Handling the matter in this manner, your Calfe will never
mourn, for want of Milk or loss of Damme, but will cheerfully fall to eating
of Hay and Drinking of water immediately.

Let your Servants be very careful to litter them with clean Straw daily, and
keep them sweet with good Hay: and let them never want clear water. If you
have good scope of House-roome let them run and play their fills: When you
purpose to turn them to grass, What you must do when you purpose to turn
them to Grass.
keep them in the House upon Hay and Water until Mid-may: If you turn them
out (as the most do) in April, you undo them: the nights being cold, the
grounds cold, the grass weak and raw: they never acquainted with the air,
will mislike with your unkind dealing: in token whereof the heir will turn;
and their bellies loose, scowre, or gilly, that they never will be themselves:
because the Sun has not wrought sufficiently with heat to comfort the ground
that should feed and comfort them.

When they have been some month in your best Meads in Mid-may, and after
recovered their strength: put them into some higher Grounds where there is
Grass, water, and shadow enough: Let them rest there until Bartholomew: then
put them over into your After-maths before the time of the year grows cold,
and then it will so puff them with pride yt all the winter following they will
scorn ye malice of the hardness of the Season if they may have their fills of
Hay, and fogg with a Houell or House in the extremest cold days to shelter
them.

The first year being spent, every man knows how to handle them: If you will
have them principal cattle, give them hay enough the second Winter.

But what a Calfe am I to teach Countrymen to breed Calves by Art, when they
(good Husbands) breed them fast enough by Nature; Husbandmen breeds Calves by
Nature.
I therefore bequeath this Doctrine to Gentlemen that can better tell how to
breed a Hound then a Calfe; and refer what else might be spoken, to the
discretion of the experienced.

Thus have I touched what I handle with as much breuity as I could: ommitting
nothing that may give evidence on the behalf of those Perticulers, which will
fall out to be as true in effect as in appearance when ever they are put to
their strictest Trial.

THerefore, now nothing remains more to be said; but to entreat thee (friendly
Reader) to bear with my merry-sorry Style, if therein any where I have not
observed a precise scholler-like Decorum: for Mars his University (wherein
sometime I have been matriculated, and proceeded to some degrees of command,
according to my study and time spent therein) affoords no rules of speaking in
Print, yet Soldiers (in their Element) best speak in Print: and can express
what else lies in the compass of their spacious conceits, like men of Wit,
Art, and Courage; which they that speak altogether by the Book, often fail to
perform. But howsoever, as this Work, now finished, is published for thy
profit, and expressed in such manner as I thought would yield thee most pleasure:
so thou will accept it kindly, and thereby give me cause to be ever studious of
thy benefit.

Principally, though lastly, I am humbly to entreat you (my good Lord of
Pembrooke) to look on my plainness, and wink at my boldness: the first,
proceeding from my Nature, the last, from my Education: Yet, what is here
bluntly expressed, was first of all sharply conceived, with much whetting of
Wit, and no less filing of Invention. But what it is, it is all Yours, as he
is, that will no longer be, then he remains

Your Lordships even beyond his uttermost. Rowland Vaughan.

Those that are desirous to see a Mill sawing Timber, there shall their desires
be fully satisfied, seeing a Mill by a Watercourse, keep a dozen Sawes on
work together. As also by the like stream of water, a dozen Spitts or Broches
turned at once. Which turning, turns all Turn-spit Iacks out of countenance,
though they be never so saucy, and their tongues run on Wheels, yet, this
Water-worke, works them out of all favor with the Cook, that loves to do
much with little labor, whom the Iacks distemper (which often happens) soon
makes hott as a Tossed, because (like a Cricket) he lives ever about Fire.

The Conclusion.
THus runs our Water-workes unto this end,
That all that work by them, by them may play*
For, if they Mossy-grounds by them amend,
For pains and pleasures (then) they will freely pay.
This WORK consists not (like some idle Tracts)
In show alone, or Speculation:
No; this is practical, fair shows in Acts,
To make the poor'st, the richest Nation.
Then, chiefly aimed I not at publick-good,
I would not thus divulge my private skill:
But, bee'ng freeborn, my Natur's like my Blood;
Which would do good to all, and no man ill:
Then, All (I hope) or of that All, the best
Will wish me well: as for the rest, I rest.
Theirs as they give me cause, Rowland Vaughan.

FINIS.
In praise of the Work and Author.
TO praise a work of such a worth as this,
That shows the way t'inrich both earth and man:
Deserves a wit that rare and excellent is,
And all to short, excel in what it can.
The Author, and his work do merit fame;
VVith-out the glory of a Poets name.
Anthony Dauies.




