The old Faith of great Brittaygne / and the new learning of Inglande,
Whereunto is added a simple instruction, concerning the Kings Majesty's
procedinges in the co^munyon. Compyled by R. V.

Nume. xvj. reversed In this ye shall know that the lord has sent me / for
to do all those things which ye see, and that I have not invented them of
mine own heart.

IMPRINTED at London by Anthony Scoloker. Dwelling in the Sauoy rentes
Without Temple-barre.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendu^ solum.

THe Evangelist, Math. 2^ Witnesses, that Christ said: all power is given me
in heaven and earth. Go therefore and teach al nations, Baptisi^g the^ in ye
name of ye father, and of ye son, and of the holyghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I commanded you. Theys words therefore (go
teach all nations) may prove the word of God to have been taught here in this
Realm even in the time of the Apostles and discyples of Christ: for then this
realm was tributory or paid tribute to the Romans, and in estimaiton with
them. And for a farther proof, Eulebius in his Ecclesiastical hystory, the
third book and first chapter / says: the Jews being persecuted with all
euels, the apostles and disciples of our savior departed to go preach by all
parts of the world. And farther the great Chronicle of little brytaygne,
recyteth, that Co^llus, son of Maruis / was king in this realm after his
father. Who in his young age was brought up in Rome. And for so much as he
knew the manners of the Romans, he had them all his life in honor, and paid
them ye^elys tribute. For he saw the whole world trybutours to htem. He had
the princes and the nobylytye of his realm in great reverence, and many times
showed great lyberalytie, in giving them gifts and presents: And also unto
those which lived virtuously: and for this cause was he so beloved of all
folks, that, after his death, they ceased not to weep. He reigned long and
left a son called Lucius which was king after his father. In whose time (as
the same chronicle recyteth) was a great nombre of Chrystyans baptized, which
openly preached the gospel of our savior and Redemer Jesus Christ. Who King
Lucius gladlye heard / and he, being in spyred with ye grace of the
holyghost, had a desire to be chrystened, and for to obtain the same / sent
messengers to Elether / then being Bishop of Rome, for learned men / Who
sent him two Famous men, one called Faganus, and the other Damianus.

Who also at there coming / preached before King Lucius / the whole life and
law of our savior and redemer Jesus Christ. At whose preaching, the King
with his whole household was Chrystened in the year of Christ. 185. And under
y^ faith or belefe of one only god, were edified diverse Temples. And thus we
see ye first faith receued in this Realm to be taught according to the
Gospel. For at that time were few Ceremonies used among the Chrystia^s,
other then were contained in the gospel. And this pure and sincere faith
continued among the Brytaynes in this Realm till the year of Christ. 544. In
which time (as Ranolph of Chister recyteth in the.v. book the. 9 chapter of
Polichronica) Ethelbert was king over kent. To who^ Austen the monk came from
Rome unsent for, then being bishop of Rome Gregory the great. Which Austen at
his coming, raised up a banner of the Cross / and showed a Table that he
brought, whereon was painted a crucyfyx, and song the Popes Letany / and said
mass, which the kig would not receive at the first. But shortly after, Austen
persuaded the king and his people after such a sort / that he received
Austens ware. And Gregory his master / hearing of this, sent Austen more
helpers. and with them, sent books and relics of holy saits: and thus was yt
new lerni^g brought ito this reame of wc we se much yet remaynyng in the church
/ at this present day / all the Britaynes at that time, would in no wise
receive, as apeareth in the same. ix chapter. Whervppon Austen called a counsel
of vij. Britysh bysshoppes, and of the most famous monks of Bangorin wales.
Who, at their coming to the counsel, an Heremite meting with them. demanded
whether they were going? and they answered / to Austens counsel. Then said the
Heremyte to them. When ye come there, if Austen rise and mete with you like a
meke Dysciple of Christ, then receive his doctrine. If not, return again.
Which they did, in that Auste^ showed not him self meke, whereat Auste^ was
displeased and said unto them. Consent to me in three things / if ye will not
agree to the rest. That is keep Easter in dew time, and Christen after the
manner of the church of Rome, and preach Gods word to the Inglysh. But they
would not consent to him. Whervppo^ Auste^ made them answer, saying: he was
warned by inspyracyon, that they which would not receive peace of their
brethern / should of him receive war and wrath. Which he brought to pass.
For he caused Ethelbertus king of Northumberla^d to ^^a.ij. M. L. monks of
Ba^gor, wc lived by the sweat of their brows, having nothing to spend. And y^
syese how this new faith was brought into this realm. 409. years after the
first. And how in the first was preached the whole life and law of our savior
and Redeamer Jesus Christ. And in the last, with blood, was set up a banner, a
crucifix, the popes Letany, and Masses, with books and relykes of holy
saynctes / Auste^ denies not, that the Britaynes kept easter, and Christened,
but it was after the institucion of the apostles, and not after y^ use of the
Romans (which Crucyfyed Chryston good frydaye, and raised hi up on
easterday) y^ Romans used in their christening, oil, cream, salt and
spyttie, as we see at these days. Which usage / in those days / the Brytaynes
would not receive. Foganus and Damianus taught the Brytaynes to build diverse
Temples under y^ faith of one only God. Auste^ taught to buyld churches of
peter and of paul. And sense his successors have taught to build churches of
Austen, Dunstone / Ancelme / Blasy and Thomas becket. So that we may see, that
by these means y^ pure and siynceare truth has been darkened. Full well might
Peter say, there shall be false teachers among you. 2. Petri. 1. Which pryuely
shall bring in dampnable sects, denying ye lord that bought them. I pray you,
Is not the popish priesthod a dampnable sect / which say / they can make
their maker in their masses, and offer him up for a sacrifice, which
preuayleth the quick and dead? Peter might well say / that all such should
bring unto them selves swift dampnaty o^ and that many should follow their
dampnable ways 'by which the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. How say you
(O ye popish bisshops and priests which maynteyn Austens dampnable Ceremonies)
do ye not cause the way of truth, which is ye gospel, to be evil spoken of?
Axe such as conne in dens and corners to say, and hear masses, and take
holybread, and holy water / with such like / and they will speak evil of ye
gospel / saying, it was never merry sense it was preached. Therefore, least ye
brigswyft dampnacion upon you, leave Balaams mark, and confess with
Peterthat ye have denied Christ / and also that with Paul ye have persecuted
Christ / and be no more ashamed to return unto Christ, then was Peter and
Paul. For truly soloug as ye say Mass and lift the bread and wine above
your heads / geuynge the people to understand your mass to be vayllable for
quycke and dead. Ye denyethe lord that bought you, and serve not Christ, but
Antychrist / as witnesses. s. Barnarde in his.xxxiij. sermon upon the
cantycles / saying: they are the ministers of Christ and serve antichryst. They
walk (says he) in the honors of the goods of the Lord, to the which lord,
they do no honor: ^ro^ hence (says he) comes the be wty of the harlot, wc
thou see daily decked like pl^yers. And farther, he being ashamed with the
covetousness and pride which then reigned and yetreygneth among you, says
upon the.ix. psalm me. Almoost all Christians seks their own proffyt, and not
that of Jesus Christ. And have altered the offices of the Ecclesiastical
dignity to vnshamefull gaynes and works of darkness. In these thiges (says
he) is not sought the health of souls / but the voluptuousnes of Riches. And
herefore are you i shaue^, herefor frequent they the churches, celebratyng
mastes and syngyng psalms. Thus ye se how the forefathers abhorred these
things which reygne yet at thysdaye. Therefore let the Mass go again to Rome,
with all Austens trynkets and cleave to the lords supper, in the wc is
declared how that Christ offered his body for us, and shed his blood for
the remyssion of our sins / as heceafter shall be declared, after the mind of
the Ancient doctors: which ye may perceive / is conformable to the
scripturs, where as y^ adversaries have not the do tryne, which is agreeable
with y^ same, but feigned fantasyes and Ancient custumes, which the apostles
abhorred. And therefore Peter bad us remember the words which were told us
before of the holy prophets, and also the commandments of us (says he)
that be apostles of the lord and Savior.ij. Petri. iij. And Christ said Luke
the.x. He that hears you, hereth me and he that despyseth you, despyseth me.
And he that despyseth me, despises him that sent me. Wherefore let us not
despise Christ and his apostles least ye plages which fell upon the Jews for
their ingratitude, fall upon us. Whereof the lord defend us. Amen.

Finis.
A Simple Instruction concerning the Kings majesty's procedinges in the
communion.
Numer. xvi. In this ye shall know that the lord has sent me for to do all
those things which ye see / and that I have not invented them of mine own
heart.

A Simple instruction concerning the Kings majesty's procedinges in the
Communion.
GEntell Reader / It is not unknown what an occasyon of sclaunder diverse have
taken, in that the kings Majesty with his honorable Counsel, has gone about
to alter or take away the abuse of the communion, used in the Mass, both
contrary to Christ's instytucion and the ministracion of the Apostles and
catholyke fathers in the prymatiue Church. And for so much as the, same abuse
of the communion has been many years in estimacion, and counted holy: the
ignorant and unlearned (for lack of Godly instruction) esteem the same abuse
called the Mass, to be the principal point of Chrystianitie, to whom the
alteryng thereof apeareth very strange. But if such parsones, to whom it
apeareth strange, would but ponder and way, how our forefathers have been
robbed, and the commonwealth decayed through the abuse of the Mass / they
should sone perceive the dyfference between the communion and it. And that the
kings majesty and his honorable counsel, does but as they becommaunded by
Gods word. Considering that Saules Kingdom was taken from him for ever / for
that he disobeyed Gods word. And again / calling to remembrance, ye great
and manyfold vyctoryes / wc God gave to such kings and rulers as obeyed his
word, with the dyscommendacyons of the evil, and the commendacions of the
good, as appears in the.vi. last chapters of Ecclesiasticus. Among which /
Ezechias in the. 48. chapter / is commended after this sort. For Ezechias had
done the thing that pleased the lord / and remained sted fastlye in the way
of David his Father. Now Ezechias brake down the brazen serpent / which
Moses / as apeareth Nu mer. 21. Set up for a token. 700. years and odd,
before the coming of Ezechias / the which the priests of the Israelites after
the death of Moses / abused, and gave it a new name / and called it Nehusthan,
eue^ as our popish priests still do abuse the lords supper or communion /
calling it still a new name: Missa or Mass. But what did Ezechias after he
saw the abuse of the brazen serpent? Did he regard man's doctrine, or the
ancient custom / because it had been abused.vij. C. years? No forsooth, he
regarded none of these things. But the scripture / Reg. iiij. the.xviij.
chapter, says he brake down the brazen Serpent which moses had made. For unto
that time, had the children of Isra^ll brenty incense unto it / and called it
Nehusthan. Wherefore dear Reader / marvel not at the Kings Maiestyes
procedynges, so long as he has the scripture for him. And look that thou
advoide and eschew the procedinges of the pope and his sworn soldiers / which
are wholly against God and his word: as are: Wynchesters / Smythes / Perynes and
other like, By whose books thou may playnnelye parceaue them to flee from
the scryptures. Maynteynynge superstycyon and false feigned relygion. Yea, even
the mass Which is a derogation to christ's blood. For Christ left the
Sacrament of his body and blood, in bread and wine to be eaten and dronken in
the remembrance of his death and passion: and not to be looked at, as the
Israelytes did at the brazen serpent. For the serpent was set ^ppe for a token
of Christ's passion, then to come, which the Israelites looked for as
witnesses. S. John in the. 4 chapt. saying: As Moises lift up the serpent in
the wyldernes, even so must the so^ ne of man be lift up / that who soever
believes in him, shall not perysh, but have everlasting life. Thus, even as the
serpent was a figure of Christ's passion, then to come, as witnesses Moses /
Deutere. xviij. saying. And the lord said unto me, they have well spoken, I
will raise them up a prophet from among their brethern, like unto the, and will
put my words in his mouth and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him / and who soever will not harken to my words which he shall
speak in my name, of him will I require it. O ye papists, why will ye not
harken to the words of Christ the great prophet which he spoke of his
communion, in Matthew, Mark and Luke? And also to the ministracio^ of Paul. 1.
Cor. 11. Who says, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
shall show the lords death till he come. Here we se, how in eating and
drinki^g, through faith, is declared un to us, how that Christ offered his
body, and shed his Blood upon the Cross, for the Remyssyon of Sins,
ones for all. Paul says not, as often as the pryest lyfteth the bread and
wine above his shaven crown, for the Papysts to gale at, ye shall show the
lords death till he ^om, but he says, as often as ye eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup / ye shall show the lords death till he come. And this is
also the mind of ye ancient catholyk fathers, to receive it as a memoryall of
his death, and not to eat it thinkyng or believing him to be there ryallye, as
he was borne of the virgin mary.

For. Sayncte Austen in his Book entitled the christian divinity, alleagynge
the first Epistle and the first chapter of Paul to Timot. He is (says he)
immortal, for so much as he can not die. But over all where as the scripture of
the one part and of the other / in the canonical books sets forth the
moving of the soul in God tyther the humayne me^bres / that is to say the
head, the ears, the eyes and other like / they ought not to be understand
carnally, after the storye, as they are understand of the Jews, and diverse
other heretics sauouryng carnally, which esteem God to be corporal and
local. But all things ought spiritually understand and confessed of hi^.

If any believe that in God are humayne Members either mouynge of the Soul:
without doubt, he forgeth ydolles in his heart. Item. s. Bedain his
recolectyon, and also. S. Austen in his sermon made to the people at the
communyon. My brethren (say they) Herefore are these things called
Sacraments / for so much as in them there is one thing seem and an other
understand. That which is seen, is a corporal thing / But that thing which
is understand, has a spyrytuall fruit. The said Austen in his.xxx. treatise
upon. S. John says: The body of Christ is risen from death, and must be in
one place. Also in his book against Adamantum, the xij Chapter says: these
three things: The blood is sprete. This is my body, and the stone was Christ
/ He teaches these things to be spoken as though he spoke by a figure in
Sign and sygnyfiynge and among other things, says these words: I may
expound this commandment to be a token, for the lord doubted not to say,
this is my body, when he gave the sign of his body / Also SAYNCTE Ambrose upon
the first Epistle, the Aleauenth Chappyter to the Corinthians says. In so
much as we are delivered by the death of the lord / having remembrance of the
same in eating and drinking signifies the body and blood which has been
offered for us. Also. S. Ciprianin the second book of his Epistle, the iij.
chapter, says: for so much as in all sacrifices we make me^cio^ of the passion
of Christ. For the lords passion is ye sacrifice that we offer. We ought not
to do otherwise the^ he has done. For the scripture says as often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this chalyce, ye anounce or declare the death of Christ
till he come.

Then as often as we offer the chalyce in the remembrance of the lord and of
his passion: we do yt, which apeareth to have been done of the lord. Good
Reader, here have ye sufficient Aucthours both of the scryptures and also of
the Catholyke doctoures: against the transubstancyon and the abuse of the
mass: which: if God permyt: ye may see no less abused: then was y^ brazen
serpent. for even as the wicked prye stes of the Israelytes senced the brazen
serpent geuyng it a new name calling it Nehu sthan: geuyng the ISRAELYTS to
understand that by it / they received their health. Even so has the pope and
papystes invented the transubstanciation in our kind, giving the Christya^s to
understand that CHRIST is wholly in that kind which is hanged over the alter,
even as he was borne of his Blessed mother the virgyn mary. And therefore do the
papists knele to it, put of their cappes to it, knock their breasts before it /
and their priests sense it. But truly assured I am that the popish pryestes
have even so good scriptures to prove this, as the Israelites had to prove
their Nehusthan. Wherefore let no man murmer against the Kings majesty's
procedinges. For his grace has the scryptures for him / where the adversaries
have none. And that may be well gathered by their seking of insurrections /
and in styrring the scotts and frenchmenagaynst the Kings majesty. This is
no new, but an Aunciynt Practyse of theyrs, as ye may well perceive in Tindals
practyse of prelates. But by Gods help, his grace with his honorable
counsel, in that they go about, to set forth the glory of God, in restoryng y^
communion according to the first insti^ucion set forth by Christ as it apeareth
in the scriptures, not seking te^porall possessions, which the papists, through
their mass / have gotten contrary to the word of God, in much greater
abundaunce then the scriptur permits them. The kings grace I say, in so
doing, shall obtain no less praise for ever, then Ecclesiasticus sets
forth of the foresaid kings, in the latter chapter of his book: And to the
contrary all they that murmer or grudge against his majesty's procedinges,
without doubt God shall confound them, as he did the Ennemies of David /
Ezechias and Josias with many other. I pray you, what a goodly praise sets
Ecclesiasticus forth in his. 44. chapter of Josias, Says he not the
remembrance of Josias is like as when ye apothecary makes many precious
swetesmellyng things together, his remembrance shall be sweet as honey in all
months, and as y^ playing of musyke by y^ wine? he was appointed to turn the
people again and to take away all abhominacions of the ungodly. He derected
his heart unto the lord and in the time of the ungodly he set up the worship
of GOD again. All Kings except David, Ezechias and Josias co^mited
wickedness: for even the kings of Judah also forsook the law of God. Oh God, I
would the papists would remember this saying: and search whether the Chrystian
kings have forsaken the laws of God or not. I dare well write, that they can
not deny, but that they have. Wherefore if such to whom the kings majesty and
his honorable cou^ sell shall commyt the reformatyon of his graces procedynges,
against the abuses of Gods word, do seek the worlds substau^ces under yt
pretense of ye setti^g forth of Gods word / not caring, so they get substance
what comes of Gods word, as partlye has apeared in these our days, both in
the clergy and also in the laytye. It wylbe a slau^ der to our Relygion in
those days as it was even in the Primative church, as appears in the
seventh book, the.xvij. chaptof Eusebius ecclesiastical history, of Paulus
Samosatenus a bishop of Antioch / of whom is said, if we speak of his pride /
it was Intolerable: For he showed him self more like a captain then a
bishop, for so much as in going by the streates, he used a maruelouse pride,
in reading the letters which were sent him: before the people / naming the
answeares to his secretataries which accompanied him / having so great a
nombre of folk which went before him: and a great multitude followi^g him, in
such manner yt all they which saw him abhorred, his pride, and for the same,
blamed our Relygion. Oh. GOD / does not the pride of the bysshopes in these our
days, resemble the same Paul's pride? He that lysteth to read the foresaid
chapter out / shall see much. But thanks be unto the lord, who has given
the same power unto the Kings Majesty in these days / which he gave to
Aurelyan the emperor in those days which was: that he gave power to the
metrapolytane and other faithful bysshopes: to depose the said Paul: and set
an other in his place: which did preach the word of God: and not his own
thinkinge: as Paul did: as appears in the said chapter. Truly / if this
pride be not left both in the Laytie and also in the the Clergyie / God will
plage the world / and that very shortly: for Gods word is not man's
inuencion, but the very will and work of God, as witnesses Peter in his
second Epistle the first Chapter / saying: know first that no prophetie in the
scriptures, is done of any private interpretation. For the prophecy was never
wrought by the will of man / but the holy men of God spoke as they were moved
of the holy ghost. And this trade used the apostles, geuinge credyte to Gods
word both in their teaching and also in their ministracion / as wye nesseth.
saint Peter in his first epistle the fourth chapter saying if any man speak,
let him talk as though he spoke the words of God. If any man minister, let
him do it as of the habily tie which God minystreth unto him. And yt primative
church stood by the scripturs as Eusebius in his iij. book the.x. chapter
witnesses / saying By the which things (says he) it is euydent in what
reverence we use our scriptures, the which of so long time and by so many ages
as is past / was never man that durst add / take away or change any thin ge:
but all men of our relygion have this steadfast faith / and believe the^ to be
reuelacions of God, and stand to this book, and for to defend ye same / if
need require, will willyngly lose their lives. He says not they will make
insurrections and stir the people against their prince, as the papists have
done these. 1200 years / for the maintenance of their feigned tradicions and
ancient custumes: this is the very nature of all those which mainteyne un
written Verityes. But ye nature of gods people is not of this ki^de, but their
nature is, to open ye fautes of prices and of their subjects, wc they set led
contrary to the scriptures / and gently show the plages set forth in the
scripture / for disobeing Gods word, and rather to suffer death, then to seek
the displeasure or destruction of their princes, and rather use paul's trade in
their preaching. 1. Cor. xv. saying I delivered unto you that which I also
received, how ye Christ dyed for our sins according to the scripturs, and yt
he was buried / and that he rose again the.iij. day. Paul says not, I
delivered unto you our ancient fathers custumes / nor yet their say ned and
inverted ceremonies wc had stand so many.C. years. But he says he delivered
yt wc he received, wc was, how yt christ dyed for our sins according to the
scriptures and therefore says paul. Gal. 1. Though we our selves (says he) or
an angel from heaven preach any other gospel to you the^ yt yt have
received, hold hiaccursed. O merciful God, what shall we say to those, wc
mai^teyne the popysh mass and ceremonies in the which is not declared one
Title, How Christ dyed for our sins / according to yt scripturs? For truly
ye chatholyke fathers abhorred the^: even in the primative church. As hereafter
thou may perceive. And first Castus bishop says in his.v. book. He the
which presumes to follow the custume in contempnyng the verity / either he is
enuyous and malycious against his brethern to whom the verytie is opened, or
else he is unthankful to God, by whose inspiration his church is instructed.
Also Ciprian ad Pompeium, against Steue^s Epistle, says. The custume which is
ryse^ with some, ought not to let the verytie to have less place, to rhintent yt
the verity should not vanquish. For custum without verite^ is auncientnes of
error. Wherefore in leanyng, the error, let us follow the verity. Also Austen
in his.iij. book of Baptysme, the.ix. chapter. And are also the words of
Honoratus Attuca, saying: seying Christ is the verity / we ought rather to
follow the verity then the custume. Also Felix Bishop says: let none set the
custume before the verity, for reason and verity will always put forth
custume. Also. s. Ciprian ad Cecilium in his second Book the third Chapter /
says. If ye do that which I commaunce you / from henseforth will I not call
you servants, but friends. Yea / and that Christ ought only to be heard, the
father witnesses from heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son in whom I
delight, hear him. Wherefore if it be so that Christ ought only to be heard, we
ought not to care what thing any before us has esteemed to be good / but those
things which Christ teaches / who was before all other. Neither must we
follow man's custume but the verity of God. For the lord said by Esaias the
prophet. They honor me without cause / and teach the commandments and
doctrine of men. And also in the Gospel, why do ye transgress the
commandments of God, to stablysh your own tradicions? Wherefore (dear
brethern) if any one of our predecessors, through ignorance or symplycitie:
have not observed and kept that which the lord has taught us to do, either by
example or doctrine, it may be reputed to symplicitie, and may be forgeuen the^
through ye indulgence of the lord. But it may not be forgeuen us which now are
instructed of the lord: but it is expedient for us to send letters to our
companions, that the lords gospel and his doctrine be kept over al, and ye we
wtdraw us not from yt wc christ has taught and done. Here ye se how yt
catholic fathers are against man's doctrine and ancient custume / Whose
doctrine is conformable with the apostles doctrine, as peter wrytteth in his
second Epistle the.iij. Chapt. Remember the words which were told before of
the holy Prophets, and also the commandments of us that be ye Apostles of
the Lord and savior. Truly we have not in the scryptures that the Apostles
had any co^maundment to set forth the mass or any such Ceremony as has
been, and as some are yet in the church, for the Apostles had suffered before
any ceremony was receued into the church, as witnesses al ancient Chronicles.
For it was Cix. years after christ's incarnation, when Alexander made the first
holy water. All out the year.cxxix. Telphorus made the lent. About ye year
of.ijc. xiiij. Cepherinus made or ordained a chalyce of glass and made the
first Sacrifyce. About.ijc. lxx. Felix ordained the hallowynge of the aulters
About. ij. clxxxi. Caius ordryned the pryestes shaven ordres. About the year
of iij. c. xiij. Syluester ordained cream and oil to be hallowed of bishops.
About an ^o. iiij. c. xix. sosynus ordained ye halowig of the font on Easter
even, and the paschal taper. About anno.iiij. c. xiij. Mamercus bishop of
Vienna ordained gang weke. About a^no v. c. xxiii. Felix ye.iiij. ordained ye
anealing of yt sick. About the year.v. c iiij. Pelagius ordained mass of
requiem, for ye dead. about an. vi. c. xxij. Benitacius the.v. ordained ye
churchyardes to be sanctuary. About the year of.vij. c. xxxij. Grigory the.iij.
set up Images / causing the people to honor them / contrary to a counsel
holden in Constantinople by Leo the.iiij. Emperor with.iij. c. and.xxx.
bishops. In the which counsel Images were condemned and burned, yea even the
very picture of Christ. About the year.vij. c. iij. Steven the.iij. caused him
self to be born on men's shulders. About the year of.vij. c. lx. Paulus
ordained church halowyng. About the year. M. lxxiij. Gregorye the vij.
ordained that priests should keep no wives nor concubines / and for badde to
eat flesh on the satterdayes. About anno. M. lxxxvij. Urbanus the.ij.
ordained excommunication. About anno. M. c. xcviij. Innocencius the iij
ordained anticular confession / to bring in holy belles holy palm, BEADS and
Ashes with all other rayned fantasies which (as before is said) ye have not in
the testament any such doctrine set forth by Christ nor none of his apostles.
Wherefore doctor smyth and all those which write or preach these vnwry ten
verities to be received by the tradicion of the apostles, do belly Christ and
his apo stles. For the apostles had suffered and we real dead almost.xx. years
before the first ceremony was invented, as ye herein may perceive. Wherefore
Paul foreseing (by the spirit of prophetie) that such false and erroneous
doctrine should com, geuith war ning unto Timo. in the.iiij. chapter of his
first Epistle / saying / The spyrite speaks evidently / that in the latter
days some shall depart from the faith / and shall give head unto spirits of
error and deue lysh doctrine of them which speak false through Ipocrisy, and
have their consciences marked with an whote Iron / forbidding to mary, and
commanding to abstain from Meats which GOD has created to be received
with giving thanks. Yea and Paul to the Gallath. says. as I said before, so
say I now again / if any manne preach unto you any other thing then that ye
have received / hold himaccursed. Wherefore (this saying considered) no man
can gather by Paul's doctrine but that althose ceremonies before recited, were
never received of Paul nor yet of none of the apostles. By the which it
follows that all those which preach these ceremonies to the people are
accursed by Paul: for so much as they were not received when Paul preached
the curse. Therefore let us repent and believe Gods words seeing it has pleased
him to open it unto us, in these our days. For if it had been so ple^ tyfully
opened unto our forefathers: the bishops of Rome and their maynteyners could
never have prevailed against Christen princes as they have done, neither yet
maynteyned their invented ceremonies, against the which the catholyk fathers
wro te: even when they were invented as here in apeareth. For Eusebius wrote
about anno.c. lxix. Origin a about.ii. c. xxv. Cyprian about.ij. c. lix.
Chrisostom about. iiij c. xiij. Jerome about.iiij. c. xxix. Austen a^
about.iilj. c. xxx vij. These men with diverse other have written against their
tradicions / every one in his time / as appears in their works. But ye
citasion why yt scripturs and these catholyke men's works might not take place
/ was for lack of the prynt. For in the primative church, and un to such time
that God had sent the prynt / it was a great thing for a man to write a bible,
yea / as much as a man might to in his whole life. Wherefore for lack of gods
word, the people might nor come to the knowledge of the bishop of Romes
deuelysh inuencion. Yea, and we may be sure in case the scriptures had been as
plentyfull and as leful to every man / in the primative church / as they are
now in these our days / the a^tichristes of Rome and all their ayders should
have had as much to do in the setti^g up of the^ as men have now in the pulling
down of them. For the holy Scriptures were then in few men's hands so that the
Christians had not to stablish the^ selves in Christ, but only by ye preachers.
And after yt yt apostles and sincere pachers, were depar ted to god / the^
began yt Romish bisshops to stablish their earthly kingdom, and to become lords
of yt whole christen relygio^s, as well over yt prices as over their subjects,
as it may apeare by aunciant chronicles. For in yt.x. book ye.vi. chap of
Eusebius works it is me^cioned, how ye in yt counsel of ^ice holde^ by ye
e^perour co^statine yt great, wast decreed that the ancient custumes should be
kept in Alexandria and in the city of Rome: to wit, that the bishop of
Alexandria should have the charge of the churches in Egypt: and he in Rome, of
the churches in Rome and about Rome. Now, this Christen counsel being
kept.iiij. c. years after Christ / could not find the Romish bishop.
Christ's successor / but only over ye churches of Rome and about rome. I pray
you from whence came his authority sense to be called Christ's successoure over
the whole christen congregacio^s? if it had com from Christ, this counsel (no
doubt) would have found it. Truly I can not gather of whom he received it,
onles be received it of that deuell that would have had Christ to fall down
and honor him / as is written Matthew.iiij. but Christ had him avoy de, but I
think Syluester sent for him and received that which Christ refused / and it
may well appear to be from thence. For sense the same pope syluester received
the possessions, which was almost.iiij. c. years after CHRIST, he and his
successors for the most part have ever sense persecuted the true CHRYSTYANES
and that ye may perceive the setting forth of the scryptures in those days was
not for every man / by the reason it was so chargeable. But it was only a
princes work as Chrodoryke bishop of Cirocopolis in the first book of his
story the.xvi. chapter makes mention of an Epistle sent by the forsayde
constantine to Eusehuis, the tenor whereof is this. It has seemed us good to
sygnyfye unto the, that thou prepare L. volumes of the scryptures, and pryneye
pally those the which thou knoweste to be necessary to the institucion,
doctrine and usage which has been accustumed to be given to the churches, and
let them be written in good Parchement and well trined by good worckmen, having
good knowledge in the act of the scryptures. And we also have sent letters to
our general geuernoue of the provinces, to take charge and dylige^ tly to
minister al things necessary / to the restoring of the same volumes, and it to
be thy work and dilygently to enforce thy self that the same volumes may be
shortly ready and appareylled as it apperteyneth. And further by the
aucthorytie of our letters, Sealed by us, sent to the we give the power to take
and use openly.ij. Charets or carts to cause the said volumes dylygently to be
conveyed to the city of constantinople. Gentle reader / here may ye se what
pains and charges it was to this noble Emperor to set forth the scryptures,
in those days. John Caryon says in the. 3. book of his chronicle that this
constantine caused the new Testament to be carried before him for a wytnes of
his says I pray you wherefore did constantine set forth these scryptures.
Truly because y^ wicked Dyoclesyan the. xxxv. Emperor in the.ix. year of his
reygne / which was about the year of Christ. 288. as Cation wrytteth / did as
appears in the seuently book the second chapter of Eusebius story cause this
proclamacyon followyng / to be proclaimed, which was that the churches of the
christyans which might be found should be overthrown to the fondacions and
the books and scryptures burned, and that all those of yt relygyon, wc had any
dignity or office, should be put forth and remain ashamed, and yt those slaves
which perseuered in the christen faith might not obtain liberty, the occasyon
hereof was, that the heretyke Manicheus, had fowen dissension among the
chrystians. O Lord have we not had thy scrypturs brent in curdayes? If we ask
wynchester and London / they will lay, yea: yea, and so say I to: But ye may
believe me, I was very heavy when I heard of it. yea / and as heavy as they
are now sorry that they be printed again. But thanks be to the lord, our
kings maiesteacute; may go farther with hundredth pound in printing, then
constantine might have done with three thousand pound in writing. For the
lack of books caused the bishops of Rome and his ayders to prevail in all
counsels sense the first: Yea and in all the xxiij. scismes past / to rule all
things as they would, and to make what they would, and discalow what they
would. But in this, the xxiiii. scisme or division I trust the byssho pe of
Rome and all his Papists shall be overthrown through yt word of GOD, which by
the prynt is abou^dantly spredde abroad in all Chrystendome. A work which God
never opened to man, sense the world began till the year of Christ. M iiii.
c. lii. which in that year was opened to one called Johannes faustius in the
City of Magunce or menth in Germany.

Wherefore let us give god thanks and rejoice that he has sent us, in these
our days, that science whereby al those that love the light may have the same,
for alytle charges / I mean the word of God who is the Aucthour of light. By
whose light, the kings majesty with his honorable counsel goes about to
overthrow the Popes mastres Missa, the successor of the Israelytes / ne
husthan. Wherefore / let us daily pray to yt lord the Aucthour of the canonical
scryptures / that he will pro sper the Kings majesty with my Lord protector
and his honorable co^sell / in the setting forth of his word: So that through
his help, they may overcome the ennemies of the same his word and of his
graces royalmes and dominions, Amen.

Finis.

