FOUR SEA-SERMONS, PREACHED At the Annual Meeting of the TRINITY COMPANY,
in the PARISH CHURCH of DEPTFORD: BY HENRY VALENTINE VICAR.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for JOHN MARRIOT, and are to be sold at his
Shop in S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet.

MDCXXXV.

PErlegi librum hunc, cui titulus, [Foure Sea-Sermons] in quo nihil reperio,
quo minus cum utilitate publita Imprimatur.

Ex Aedi: Fulham. Sept. 8. 1634.

SA: BAKER. R.P.D. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL The MASTER, WARDENS, and BRETHREN of the Trinity
Company, H. V. wishes Grace here and Glory hereafter.
THese Sermons both in their preaching and printing acknowledge themselves
yours. For your sakes they were first made, and it is not for their own they
are now made common. I was put upon two evils, either to print that which was
bad, or else by transcribing suffer it to be made worse. I have chosen the
less, and God may bring good out of it. Discourses of this nature are few, yet
great need have Seamen of them, debarred for the most part from the sweet
comforts, and many helps which our Church at home affords; He that
considers the one will not condemn these Sermons for Wast: and he that is
sensible of the other will not ask to what purpose are they? Yet though others
should cast dead flies into this ointment, my hope is you will approve it for
bonum opus, and afford it your Patronage. And so I commit it to you, and you to
the protection of him that is able to keep you, God blessed for evermore.

Yours in Christ Henry Valentine.

PSALM. 107.23. They that go down into the Sea in Ships, and do their
business in great waters.


AS the Power of God in the beginning laid the foundation of the world, Nihil
de nobis curare Deum dicunt Epicuraei, Dei providentiam usq, ad Lunam descend
re asserit Aristot. putatque Deum suis contentum esse finibus Ambros. l. 1.
offic. cap. 13.
so his Providence ever since has borne up the pillars of it. Yet the
Epicureans, and Aristotle himself (as S. Ambrose witnesses) chained up God as
it were, and confined Him, and his providence to the circle of the Heavens. And
as Moses was persuaded by his father in Law to Admit into his consideration
none but weighty and important affairs, and to transmit ordinary business to
the deliberation of inferior Magistrates: So these foolishly persuaded
themselves that God would not disquiet, nor trouble himself with the
government and administration of the world, Scilicet his superis labor est, ea
cura quietos sollicitat!

-- sed Te nos facimus Fortuna Deum, coeloque locamus, Juvenal.

Cum turpiter, and flagitiose viverent, ne perpetuo metu suppliciorum
cruciare^uer, hanc sibi consultatienem excogitare volucrunt. Pet. Mart. c. 13.
loc. commun.


which is one of those Res exiguae which the Poet says Jupiter is not at
leisure to look after; but rather that the world, and all the events and
passages in it are committed to Fortune. But whatsoever they pretended, Peter
Martyr says well, that they advanced this opinion that they might sin with
more freedom, and less fear, as the whorish woman took advantage from her
husbands absence, to admit a stranger into her bosom, and to fill her self
with dalliance till the morning.

But as for us we know that God is present in all places, and that the golden
chain of his providence reaches unto the least and lowest of his creatures,
for can God be ashamed to care for that which he was not ashamed to create?
No, he has made the small, Wisd. 6.7.
and the great, and cares for all alike.

The hairs of our heads, Mat. 10.29, 30. Ad culicem and pulicem, Providentia
mundus administratur usque ad folia volatica. August. conf. l. 7. c. 6.
the fowls of the air, the flowers of the field, nay, says S. Augustine, the
Gnat and Flea, and the flying leaves, which are tossed to and fro with the
wind, are all within the compass of it. And David in this Psalm tells us that
the traveller meets it in the wilderness, the Captive in the prison, the sick
man in his bed, and the Seaman in the deep waters, for there is no place
where God is not. Now because I am to speak to you of the Tribe of Zebulun,
who are here met together to offer up your anniversary sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, I will single out the last instance, and God make these Sermons
as profitable to you, as they are fit for you.

The whole frame, and building stands upon four pillars.

1. The Mariners Profession. 2. The danger of that profession. 3. The
deliverance from that danger. 4. The duty after that deliverance.
The Mariners Profession is to go down to the Sea in Ships, and to do
business in great waters. Wherein we will consider these two things:

First, that Mariners, and all other men have a work, and a business to do.

Secondly, that Mariners have a work of their own in Ships, and in the deep
waters, and what that is.

work and business to be done. The Angels of what order soever have a
business assigned them, for they are all ministering spirits, and are sent
abroad for the good of those that shall be heirs of salvation. And the
Scripture describes them with wings, because they do their work, which is
the will of God, with all readiness and alacrity. And therefore we desire in
the Lords prayer, that his will may be done in earth, as it is in Heaven.

Man in Paradise must not be idle, God imployes him, and sets him a work,
which was to dress the garden. And we that are the Sons and Daughters of Adam,
must not eat a morsel of bread, till we have earnd it with the sweat either
of our Brows, or of our Brains. He that will not work let him not eat says
the Apostle: which Law if it was put in execution, I think there would more
die in a week of idleness, then does in a whole year of all other diseases.

It is an old and true saying, Otia dant vitia.
that sloth is the cause of sin, and idleness the fruitful mother of
wickedness, for by doing nothing we learn to do ill. Our Savior couples
them together: Mat. 25.26.
Thou wicked and slothful servant.

And Solomon says that the field, i.e. the soul of the sluggard is all grown
over with thorns, and the face thereof covered with nettles. Prove. 24.31.
Waters that stand still and have no current, putrify and breed venomous
creatures. Bodies that have no exercise grow obstructed with gross humors.
Dead carcasses that have neither sense, nor motion are devoured with crows and
ravens. Certain it is, that when we are most lazy, the devil is most busy,
for he watches his opportunity, and sowes the tares of his Temptations when men
sleep. David tarries at home, and takes a nap upon his bed in the day time,
and then suns himself upon the battlements of the house, when he should have
been in the field fighting the Lords battles, and then he that had triumphed
over his 10000. Philistines is van quished by a naked woman. Semper aliquid
operis facito, ut te diabolus inveniat occupatum; non enim facile capitur a
diabolo qui bono vacat exercitio. Jeron. in epist. ad Rust.
The counsel therefore that S. Ierom gives Rusticus is good, Always (says
he) be doing something, that the devil may not find thee idle, for he cannot
easily prevail against him who is well occupied. So then, as in Jacobs ladder
some Angels ascended, and some descended, but none stood still; let us be
either ascending in the duties of our general callings, hearing, reading,
praying, meditating: or descending in the duties of our particular callings, in
a competent provision of such things as concern our families, and the outward
man; but let us not stand still; Christ cannot endure that, as appears by his
reprehension of those he found in the market place, why stand you here idle all
the day? In a word. God will have no ciphers in his Arithmetique, no truants in
his School, no blankes in his Almanacke, no barren trees in his Orchard, no
loyterers in his Vineyard, my Text charges every man with a work, and
business.

But now the Apostle tells us that there are diversities, and distinctions of
operations, 1 Cor. 12.6.
and so there has been from the beginning. Cain was a tiller of the ground,
but Abel a keeper of sheep. Iubal was a Musician, but Tubal an artificer in
brass and iron. Reuben delighted in his flocks of sheep, and herds of
cattle, but Dan and Ashur applied themselves to the Sea. For as the body could
not stand without a distinction both of members and offices: so neither could a
commonwealth subsist if there was not a difference both of persons, and also of
Professions. (...). 1 These. 4.11.
Hence is that of the Apostle, let every man do his own business, or those
things which properly belong to his own calling. So then, a man must have a
business of his own, the business of the Husbandman is to till the ground,
the business of the soldier is to fight for his country, the business of the
Minister is to instruct the people, and the business of the Mariner is to go
to sea in ships, and what he is to do there I shall now show you, which is the
second part of the text.

Navigation, as the hoysting of sails, the casting and weighing of Anchor,
etc. But yet the business of the Seaman may be reduced to these two heads,
Fishing and Merchandise.

As for fishing, Musculus will have this the business intended in the text,
Muscul. in loc.
and in the old Testament we read of it in many places, Eccles. 9.12. Amos
4.2. Job 41.7.
and of all the instruments that appertain, and belong to it. As of fish nets,
of fish. hooks, of fish-speares. And in the new Testament we find it much
honored by our Savior, who chose but twelve Apostles out of the whole world,
and four of those twelve were of this profession. Simon Peter and Andrew his
brother, and the two sons of Zebedee James and John. And the reason it may be
why he made so many fishermen Apostles, is the proportion and resemblance that
is betwixt these two callings. Revelat. 4.6. Mat. 13.47. Et tu piscis es qui
visera invadisaliena, qui demergis infirmum, qui cedentem persequeris in
profundum. Cave ne dumillum sequeris, ipse incidas in validiorem. Ambr. Hexam.
lib. 5. cap. 5.
The one are Fishermen, and the other fishers of men. This world is the Sea,
and the men that inhabit it are fishes, for the greater devour the less, as
Ahab swallowed down the Vineyard of Naboth and made no bones of it. The
Gospel is the cast net, for as Basil observes well, it has both corks and
leads annexed to it. The corkes are the comfortable promises of mercy that we
despair not: and the leads are those heavy threatenings, and comminations of
judgment that we presume not. The fishermen which cast this net are the
Ministers of the Gospel, with whom it fares for the most part as it did with
Peter, they cast out the net all the day long and catch nothing. Noli O hone
piscis Petri hamum timere, non occidit sed consecrat. Ambr. Hexam. lib. 5. cap.
6.
But O good fish (says S. Ambrose) do not fear the hook of S. Peter, for it
will not kill, but consecrate thee. The other business is that of Merchandise
by exportation of those commodities wherein we abound, and importation of those
necessaries, and conveniences wherein we are defective.

It has pleased the manifold wisdom of God to enrich several countries with
several commodities. Nihilest ex omni part beatum Horat. Non omnis fert omnia
tellus.
Gilead was famous for balm, Sheba for incense and sweet spices, Ophir for
gold and precious stones, Tire for Fur trees and Cedars. Now such is the use
of merchandise, and benefit of navigation, India mittit ebur, molles dant thura
Sabaei, totaque thuriferis Panchaia dives arenis. Virgil.
that by a strange kind of conveiance it carries and transports one country
into another, and like the Be brings that into our own hive, which was sucked
out of the flowers growing in another garden. And these two constitute and
make up the Sea-mans business; as for them that go to sea neither to trade,
nor fish unless it be for the lives, and goods of other men, they are without
the compass of my Text, and consequently not within the compass of Gods
providence, and protection. And now let me clothe and adorn the Seamans
business in some circumstances, and adjuncts which tend both to the
advancement of the work, and the encouragement of such as undertake it.

First it is a lawful, and a warrantable business, and it is no small matter
for a man to be assured that he lives in a warrantable calling. Many
professions there are start up, which are but of yesterday, and we may well
suspect that the pride, wantonness, luxury, and curiosity of these last, and
worst times invented them. But as for this we need not doubt it, Genes. 49.13.
it was the portion which Jacob at his death bequeathed his son Zebulun, and
the blessing which Moses the man of God bestowed afterward upon that Tribe.
The lawfulnes of it will appear if we consider how much the Church and
Commonwealth are indebted to it.

As for the Church the time was when it was folded up in a little room, God
was known no where but in Jury, he had no Tabernacle but at Salem. That nation
like Gideons fleece was moistened and bedewed with the Sermons of the Prophets,
with the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, when all other
nations were dry, that nation like the inhabitants of Goshen had light in their
dwellings, when the Gentiles lay wrapped, and muffled up in more then Egyptian
darkness. But this was but for a time, a prophecy there was that God would
enlarge Iaphet, and persuade him to dwell in the tents of Shem. And there was a
promise too, that in the last days the Law should go forth from Zion, and the
word from Jerusalem, that it might run from the one end of the world unto the
other, so that no Nation should be hid from the heat, or deprived of the
comfort of it. Now then, howsoever Christ and his Gospel might be conveyed to
many Nations of the same Continent without the help of the Sea, or benefit of
shipping; yet we that inhabit the Islands, which God has moated about, and
surrounded with a girdle of waters, had for ever sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. But now let the multitude of the Isles rejoice says David;
let them give glory unto God; Esaias 42.12. Ezekiel. 30.9.
and praise him in the Islands says Esaias. For now that of Ezekiel is
fulfilled, In that day I will send my Messengers unto them in Ships. Who the
messenger was that was first employed and bound for this Island with that rich
and invaluable lading of the Gospel is uncertain. Some say it was the Apostle
S. Paul, that great Doctor of the Gentiles. Theodor. de c^rand. Graecorun^
affect. l. 9.
Others say it was Simon Zelotes, who was crucified and buried here. But most
are of opinion it was that honorable Senator Joseph of Arimathea, Niceph. l.
2. c. 40 Doroth. in Synops
who with twelve others was sent over by S. Philip out of France into Britain,
who dyed here and was buried at Glastonbury. Whosoever it was we are much
bound to Almighty God, that notwithstanding the distance of the place, and
danger of the Sea, he arrived safely with the Gospel, and with that Christ on
whom we believe, in whom we trust, to whom we pray, and by whom we look to be
everlastingly saved.

As for the Commonwealth, Caput underobur and nervi manant in Rempub. Laur.
Med.
shipping is the very nerves, and sinews, the strength and security of a
nation, and our ships are (and so they may well be) called the walls of our
Kingdom. And next to the protection of Almighty God, the wisdom of a gracious
King, and the unanimity of the people, they are the locks of Sampson wherein
our strength consists.

Moreover by this means the want, Dissepti faederae mundi traxit in unum
Thessala pinus. Seneca in Medea.
and indigence of our country is supplied with the wealth and abundance of
another. For God has disposed the parts of the world, as the members of the
body, and has so tied them together in mutual and reciprocal offices, that
no part of the whole universe can say to another, I have no need of thee. As
for this country wherein we live, I may say of it as the Scripture does of the
plain of Jordan, behold it is even as the garden of God, it may as well stand
upon its bottom, and boast an Autarchie, and self sufficiency, as any place
whatsoever, and yet we are beholding to others for their Mineralls, Spices, and
that which is most necessary, their Drugges.

Secondly, the business of the merchant is an honorable business and
employment, Esaias 23.8.
as we read of the merchants of Tire that they were Princes, and her
traffiquers the honorable of the earth. This is that which has advanced the
heads of those three flourishing States in Christendom, Venice, Genoa, and the
Low Countries, who by their strength in shipping, and industry in Navigation,
are arrived at such a degree of honor, and eminency that many envy it, and all
admire it. The time was when this was the peculiar honor, and glorious
prerogative of this nation as Keckerman confesses, Hoc certum est omnibus hodie
gentibus navigandi industria and peritia superiores esse Anglos, and post
Anglos Hollandos. Keckerm.
for (says he) It is certain that the Englishmen are the best seamen, no
nation in the world can compare with them either for art or industry, and next
to them are the Hollanders. But I fear I may say as the daughter of Eli did
when the Arc was taken, where is the glory? or the glory is departed from our
Israel, or if not departed, yet much eclypsed. Such is our sloth and
negligence, such our tenderness and delicacie that we cannot brook the
dangers of the Sea, nor the confinement of a Cabin.

Thirdly, the business of the merchant is a gainefull business. And hence is
it that Solomon compares his good huswife to a Merchants Ship, Prove. 31.14.
which brings in riches from a far country. Such was the riches of Solomon
that all his drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of
the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold, none were of silver; it was not any
thing accounted of in the days of Solomon. And the reason of this wealth is
given in the next verse, 2 Chronicles. 9.20, 21, 22.
For the Kings ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram; every three
years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold and silver, yvorie, and
apes, and peacocks, so that King Solomon passed all the Kings of the earth in
riches, and wisdom. It is said of Tire that by her traffic she had
increased her riches, and through the multitude of her merchandise lived in
such plenty and abundance as if she lived in Eden the garden of God, being
covered with gold and precious stones. I make no question but some of you which
hear me this day, will confess with Jacob, that when you first passed over
Jordan, when you went first to Sea your portion was not great, yet now behold
God has enriched you with the blessings of the deep, and the treasures hid in
the sands; take heed therefore that your hearts be not lifted up, do not
sacrifice to your nets, and ships, as though by them your portion was
plenteous, and your morsels fat, do not kiss your own hands, say not it is
your own wisdom, or understanding, your own art or industry that has gotten
you this wealth, but confess that it is the Lord your God that has given you
power to gather riches, and that it is his blessing that makes rich. And then
there wants but one thing to make up all, and that is when God prospers you
with rich voyages, and safe returns, you have a care to pay him his Custom,
(I exclude not the Kings). for if you steal that you may forfeit all. And Gods
Custom is your charity to his poor members, for whatsoever you do to one of
them, he takes it as done to himself. As you get your wealth by the waters, so
cast your bread upon the waters, upon the weeping cheeks of comfortless
widows, of fatherless children, and their prayers will be the best gale to
waft your souls through the waves of this troublesome world unto your desired
haven the Kingdom of Heaven. Whither he bring us all that has so dearly
purchased it for us, Jesus Christ the righteous: To whom with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and praise, might and Majesty now, and for ever:
Amen.

*

PSALM. 107.24. These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the Deep.


YOu have seen before that the business of the Seaman is warrantable,
honorable, and profitable, and yet there is another adjunct waits upon it,
and that is, that it is a pleasant and delightful business, for they see
those works and wonders of the Lord in the deep, which they could not see upon
dry land. If you put the same question to mariners that our Savior did to the
multitude, Mac. 11.8.
What went you out for to see? The text answers for them, that they see the
works of the Lord, and not his ordinary and every days works, as reeds
shaken with the wind, or men clothed in soft raiment; (for this is too common
to be a wonder,) but they see things that are indeed strange, rare, admirable,
and wonderful.

In which verse there are two things to be considered.

First, the object, or things that may be seen, and they are of two sorts, the
works, and the wonders of the Lord.

Secondly, the subject, or place where they may be seen, and that is the deep
waters.

But I had rather resolve the text into these three conclusions.

First, God is a working God, for here are the works of the Lord.

Secondly, among the works of God some are more wonderful and admirable then
others, for here are the wonders of the Lord.

Thirdly, the Sea is a place wherein we may see both his works and wonders.

For the first, some have been so transcendently presumptuous as to enquire
how God employed himself in that vast space of eternity, and what he did
before he created the world, which is not yet of six thousand years
standing. Quid faciebat Deus antequam faceret coelum and terram? Alta (inquit)
scrutantibus gehennam parabat. Aug. conf. lib. 11. cap. 12.
To them I say as the Angel did to Manoah, Ask not after it for it is secret.
Or as David: Such knowledge is too wonderful for thee: or as he in S.
Augustine, God was making hell to torment such as will pry into the Arc of his
mysterious and reserved secrets.

The first work of God ad extra was the Creation, which consists of many
fair, and noble pieces.

Some were of opinion that God created the Angels, and then the Angels as his
instruments created inferior natures. Job. 38.7.
Indeed the Angels were created first, and are the first fruits of Gods ways,
and they did sing together, and shout for joy when the foundations of the world
were fastened; but they did not lay so much as one stone in that building. It
may be Moses in the history of the Creation makes no mention of the Angels,
least describing the glory and excellency of their natures, we might join
them in Commission with God, and make them his associates, and so rob him of
the glory.

Another error there was, and that amongst the Jews; Putabant Deum post
laborem fabricati mundi usque ad hunc diem quasi dormire. Aug. in c. 5. Joann.
John 7.15.
that God after he had finished the work of the Creation sat down, and ever
since has kept a Sabbath, and made it holy day. But our Savior confutes this,
for says he, My Father works hitherto, governing and conserving what he has
made that they slide not back again into their first nothing. Deus agens
quiescit, quiescens agit. August.
There is no day wherein God does not create new souls which he infuses into
these bodies which are daily conveyed in the womb, there is no day wherein he
does not justify some sinner; Agit animas rationales quotidie creando, impios
justificando, purgatos ab omni reatu in coelis beatificando. Carth. in 5. Ioann.
and to justify a sinner is a greater work then to create one just, there is
no day wherein he does not glorify some Saints who lived in his fear and
dyed in his favor.

Nay, let me tell you that those works which we call our own, are of his
working, witness the Prophet, Thou have wrought all our works in us: Esaias
26.12. Phil. 2.13.
witness the Apostle, It is God that works in us both to will and to do of
his good pleasure. Witness our Savior, Without me ye can do nothing. John
15.
The Apostle therefore uses this correction, Not I but the grace of God that
was in me.

Now as man is the image of his Maker so he should affect conformity and
resemblance to his pattern, and be a worker together with God. The maine work
of a Christian is the work of Salvation; Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling, says the Apostle. A work which if we dispatch not before we
die, we are undone for ever. And therefore our Savior quickens us, John 9.4.
and calls upon us to ply it hard whilst it is day; So long as we are in this
world it is day with us, and we may work; and it is the day of salvation too,
so that we may work out our salvation; 2 Cor. 6.2.
but when we dye it is night with us, (and who knows whether it may not be
this night?) and then we cannot work.

But besides this we have a work to do, and that is the work of our
particular callings. S. Paul would have every man eat his own bread, and his
own it is not till his head, or his hand has wrought for it. Solomon has
appointed a time to every business, but he allows no time for idleness,
Minimam vitae portionem dabat somno, minorem cibo, nullam otio. in vita Ieron.
and Erasmus reports of S. Jerome, that he allowed but little time to sleep,
less to meat, but none to sloth. But of this we have heard more in the former
Sermon.

wonders as well as works.

I confess with the Prophet that God is a wonderful and excellent workman:
Esaias 28.29.
and that all his works are admirable. For they were made of nothing. It is
true in Philosophy that out of nothing can nothing be made; but it is true in
Divinity that out of nothing were all things made that are made. So the Poet.

Nothing but nothing had the Lord Almighty
Whereof, Du Bartas.
wherewith, whereby to make this City.
Again, all the works of the Lord are wonderful if we consider the manner
of their making.

If you ask what tools, what leavers, Quis humeris saxa convexit? quis
congessit impensas? quis laboranti Deo suam operam ministravit? Ambr. in orat.
de fid, resurr.
what engines, what instruments, what laborers God used in so great a work,
Moses tells you he did but say let it be so, and it was so; and David says He
spoke the word and they were made, he commanded and they were created. So that
the creation of the world, was like the building of the Temple, there was no
noise of any tool, or hammer heard in it; but like Jonas his gourd though it
was not planted, nor watered grew up on a sudden, even in the short space of
six days, and this is another wonder. John 2 20. Sex diebus faectus mundus.
Non quod Deus tempore indiguerit ad constitutionem ejus, cui intra momentum
suppetit sacere quae velit: sed quiaea quae fiunt ordinem quaerum Ambr. in ep.
ad Horont. Ista est causa admirationis cum res aut fingularis est, cutrara. Aug
in ep. ad Evod. Perseverantia consisetudinis amisit ad mirationem. Aug. de
Trin. l. 3. c. 2. Quam multa usitata calcantur, quae considerata slupentur.
The Temple of Jerusalem was a stately and magnificent building, yet it was not
built in less time then forty and six years, notwithstanding many hands went
to it; but the whole fabric of heaven and earth was finished in the space of
six days: and he that made it in so few days, could (if he had pleased)
have made it in as few minutes. Thus then are all the works of the Lord
wonderful; yet as the Apostle says of the stars, One star is more
glorious then another: so say I of Gods works, some are more admirable and
wonderful then others, as being either less common, or more curious.

First, that which makes some of them more wonderful then others is, because
they are less frequent and common. The people marvelled at the multiplication
of the loaves, and fishes, and were so affected with the strangeness of the
miracle, that they would have made Christ a King for it: Quid non mirum facit
Deus in ommbus creaturae motibus nisi consuetudine quotidiana viluissent? Aug.
in epist. ad Volusian. Psalm. 19.
yet we wonder not at the increase of harvest, and multiplication of the seed
though in some grounds it brings forth twenty, in some thirty, and in some an
hundred fold. We wonder not at the Sun though it be the beauty and
bridegroom of nature as David calls it: yet we wonder at the faint light of a
Comet because the one we see every day, and the other but seldom.

Secondly, some are more wonderful, and admirable because more curious and
exquisite. In some creatures we have only vestigium, the print of his foot:
but in others imaginem, his image. Some are the works of his fingers, some of
his hand, some of his arm, and the more power or wisdom God has expressed in
their forming, the more wonderful are they in our eyes.

And because I would not lose my self in this field of Zoan, Eunt homines
mirari alta monrium, etc. and relinquunt seipsos, nec mirantur. V. August.
conf. l. 10. cap. 8. In homine principatus est omnium animantium, and summa
quaedam universitatis, and omnis mundanae gratia creaturae. Ambr. Hexam. lib.
6. cap. 10. Mark. 16.15. Cura divini ingemi. Tertul.
this field of wonders; I will determine you to the consideration of your
selves first. S. Augustine taxes such of folly that admired the height of
mountains, the waves of the Sea, the windings of rivers, etc. yet never
wondered at themselves, who are Gods Masterpiece, and the abridgement and
Epitome of the whole creation, for man has being with stones, life with trees,
sense with beasts, and understanding with Angels; and hence is it that he is
called every creature. In the making of other things God did but say let this
or that be so, and so, and it was so; but when he came to make man, all the
persons in the Trinity consult and advise about it, Let us make man after our
likeness. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are glorious creatures, Psalm. 3.3.
yet are they but the works of Gods fingers; Psalm. 119.73.
but man is the work of his hands, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me. I
need say no more but what the Psalmist does, Psalm. 139.14.
I will praise thee for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well, yea I am curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the earth, Compono hic canticum in laudem creatoris nostri,
etc. V. Galen. l. 3. de usu partium.
and the word in the original signifies such art and curiosity as is used in
needleworke, and imbroidery.

And as Man is more wonderful then other creatures, so some parts of man are
more admirable and artificial then others. In ep. ad Volusian. quod sol and
luna in coelo, hoc oculi in homine. Ambr. Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 9.
S. Augustine wonders most at the eye which though it be but a small member,
yet in an instant runs from one side of the heavens to the other. And thus
having a little discovered you to your selves, let me lead you abroad into the
world and see what wonders we can there meet with.

If we climb up into heaven, we shall find it as full of wonders as it is of
stars, for every star is a wonder; being as Astronomers observe (if truly) of
a greater magnitude then the body of the whole earth. If we descend a little
lower, who is able to satisfy these questions? Job. 38.
Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or have thou seen the
treasures of the hail? Has the rain a father? and who has begotten the
drops of dew? out of whose womb comes the ice? and the hoary frost who has
gendred it?

If we go down yet lower, from the air to the earth, Quid enumerem succos
herbarum salubres? quid virgultomem, ac soliorum remedia? etc. V. plura in Amb.
Hex. cap. 8. de dietertio.
we shall find that plants, and trees, and mineralls have wonderful virtues,
nay that the earth it self is a wonder, for it hangs as a ball in the midst of
heaven, and though it have no pillars to uphold it, nor but tresses to
comprehend it, yet it stands fast for ever and shall never be removed. Look
(says Tertullian) upon the buildings of the Be, Imitare si potes apis
aedisicia, formicae stabula, araneae retia, hombycis flamina Tertul. l. 1.
advers. Marcion.
or the lodgings of the Ant, or the webs of the Spider, or the threads of the
silkeworme, and imitate them if thou can. And thus we see the point cleared.

Now our duty is when we see these wonders to break out in an acknowledgement
of God, of his excellencies, and glorious Attributes which are displayed in
these creatures. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom, Rom 11.33.
and knowledge of God! O Lord our Lord how excellent is thy name in all the
earth! Psalm. 8.1.
Among the gods there is none like unto thee O Lord, Psalm. 86.8.10.
neither are there any works like thy works: for thou art great and do
wondrous things, thou art God alone. O that men would therefore praise the Lord
for his goodness, and declare his wonders to the sons of men.

Little children, and ignorant persons when they see a curious picture, gaze
upon it, and please themselves in the beauty of the colors, but they consider
not the art, and skill of that hand which limmed it: so we see the wonders of
God with our eyes, we hear of them with our ears, we taste them with our
mouths, we feel them with our hands, yet our hearts are not affected with
them as they should be; neither do we consider those glorious Attributes of
power, wisdom, goodness, and mercy laid open in them. If we did, the
consideration of his power would make us fear him; the meditation of his
goodness would make us love him; the contemplation of his wisdom would make
us praise him, according to that of the Psalmist, Declare his glory among the
heathen, Psalm. 96.3.4.
and his wonders among all the people, for the Lord is great. and greatly to be
praised, he is to be feared above al gods.

Secondly, if the Lord has made such wonderful and admirable things for us in
this world which is but our cottage, how excellent and admirable are those
things which he has provided, and prepared for us in heaven which is our
palace. If I was the sweetest singer in all Israel, if I had the tongues of
men, and Angels; I should not be able to express the least part of them. S.
Paul spoke with tongues more then all the rest of the Apostles, and the
Barbarians called him Mercury the god of eloquence; yet these things are so
admirable and transcendent, that the strength of his expressions, and the
strains of his eloquence could not reach them. And therefore he tells us not
what they are, but what they are not. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 1
Cor. 2.9.
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. The eye of man sees much, yet the ear
hears of many things which the eye never saw. I never faw Salomons Temple in
its beauty, nor Rome in her glory, nor Christ in the flesh, yet my ear has
heard much of them. But if there be any thing which my ear has not heard, yet
my heart is able to conceive it. I never heard the thunders that were upon
mount Sinai; I never heard Paul in the pulpit, yet I conceive how terrible was
the one, and how powerful was the other. But these things are so high, and
admirable, that I can neither perceive them by the sense, nor conceive them by
the understanding. When the Queen of Sheba came to the Court of Solomon she
was ravished with the wonders she saw there: when we come to heaven the Court
of him that was greater then Solomon, how shall we be ravished to hear the
Hymns and Hallelujahs of Angels, to see the face of God, the body of Christ
our Savior, the beauty of the new Jerusalem, and our vile bodies made like his
glorious body? But who is fit for these things? I leave therefore these wonders
which God has provided for us in Coelo in heaven, and come to those which are
in Salo in the Sea, for this is our third and last part, That the works and
wonders of the Lord may be seen in the Sea, and deep waters.

God who is wonderful in all his works, 3. Part.
is most wonderfully wonderful in the Sea, for it is as full of wonder, as it
is of water. Some restrain my Text too strictly to those wonders which God
showed in the red sea, which was a Causie to the Israelites, but a grave to the
Egyptians. Or to those which he showed in the Sea when the Prophet Jonas was
cast into it, as the sudden calm, and the restitution of his Prophet from the
belly of the whale. But our Prospect will be more fair, and delightful if we
enlarge it in these particulars following.

First the situation of this Element is wonderful. I will not here dispute the
question whether the Water or the Earth be higher; sure I am that the
elevations, and swellings of the Sea are wonderful; and were it not that the
Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, it would break out (as
once it did) into an universal Deluge, and Inundation. Job. 38.8, 9, 10.
But God has shut up the Sea with doors, he has swadled it with darkness, he
has set it bounds, saying, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed. I read of one Canutus sometimes a king of
this Island, that standing by the Thames at a flowing water, commanded the
waves to come no nearer: But the River for all this kept its course, and if the
King had not given ground, would have drowned him: with which (says the story)
he was so much affected, that he hanged up his Crown in Westminster, and
would never after wear it. To command the Elements is his prerogative that
made them. Fear you not me, Ierem. 5.22.
says the Lord? Will ye not tremble at my presence? which has placed the
Sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it,
and though the waves thereof toss themselves, Infirmissimo emnium vilis sabuli
pulvere vis maris etiam in tempestate cohibetur. Ambr. Hexam. c. 2. de die 3.
(...).
yet they cannot prevail; though they roar, they cannot pass over it. And
Hesychius says that the Sea is as afraid of the bank of sand, as we are of
thunder.

Secondly, the Motion of the Sea is as strange and wonderfulles the former. It
is reported of Aristotle that great Secretary of Nature, that not being able to
conceive the reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, he threw himself
into it, using these words, Because I cannot comprehend thee, thou shall
comprehend me. And howsoever this has received many subtle and curious
discussions, yet all confess it a wonder, and secret of Nature. For suppose it
be the natural inclination of this Element, which at the first covered the
face of the Earth, and does as it were labor to recover its ancient
Inheritance; Or suppose the Moon to be the cause of it, as most determine,
(for this Planet has a regencie, and dominion over moist bodies) yet it is a
wonder still. It is as admirable that the Influence of the Moon should cause
such an elevation, and agitation of the waters, as if God had imprinted this
quality in the Element it self. For my part, I shall ever say with the
Psalmist, Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

Thirdly, the Multitude and Variety of creatures that live, Psalm. 104.24, 25
and move in it, is very wonderful. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in
wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches: So is the
great, and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small, and
great beasts. Quicquid nascitur in part naturae ulla, and in mariesse,
praeterquam multa quae nusquam alibi. Not. hist. l. 9. cap. 2.


Pliny is of opinion, that there is no creature upon the earth, but there is
something in the sea that resembles it; and so the Poet elegantly: As many
fishes of so many features, Du Bartas.

That in the waters one may see all creatures, Adverte O home quanto plura in
mari, quam in terris sunt. Amb. Hex. l. 5. c. 2. Genes. 1.11.20.

And all that in this All is to be found
As if the world within the Deepes were drowned.


When God blessed the earth, he said let it bring forth: but when he blessed
the waters he said let them bring forth abundantly. Dag. a Dagah.
And the Hebrew word which signifies a fish, comes of a root which signifies to
increase, and multiply. Now to discourse of the several creatures in the Sea,
would be as hard a task as to count the waves, or number the sands, and
therefore I will follow David, and single out only the Leviathan a creature so
strange, and admirable, that Job says, Job 41.33.
upon the earth there is not his like.

In the history of the Creation it is observable, that God does not mention any
beast, or foul, or fish, but this only. It is said that God created the
fowls of the air, but there is no mention of the Dove, or Eagle. It is said
that he created the beasts of the field, but neither the Horse nor Elephant is
named. Genes. 1.21.
But in the work of the fifth day it is said God created the great Whales.
Great they are indeed, for some have appeared in the waters as if they had
been Islands. Pliny writes, Aequalia momibus corpora habere praedicantur.
Hexam. l. 5. c. 10
that in the Indian sea they are found of three or four acres or furlongs
long. S. Ambrose says they are reported to have bodies as big as mountains.
That they are very great appears by the Scripture, for their jaws are likened
to doors, Job 41.5.6.22.
their Scales to sheilds, and they are said to make the Sea boil like a pot or
caldron. And this fish being of so stupendous a magnitude was named for the
declaration of Gods power, and also of his goodness, who gave us dominion over
it. Magnus parvo, vastus and immensas imbecilli fit praeda. Bas. hom. 10. in
Hexam.
S. Basil speaking of the manner of catching them in his time, wonders that so
vast, and immense a creature, should be taken by so weak a thing as man is. I
come now unto the last yet not the least wonder, and that is the Art of
Navigation, Psalm. 104 26.
for David has joined both these together, There goes the ships, there is that
Leviathan.

Ship be the work of the Canpenter, yet I may truly call it one of Gods
wonders. The first ship that ever I read of was the Arc, and howsoever it was
built by Noah and others, yet the truth is that Noah was but Gods Foreman, God
himself was the Master Ship-wright that drew the mould, and gave directions,
and therefore a ship is, and may well be called (...) a divine thing. (...).
Jam. 3.4.
S. James wonders much at the Helm which being but a small piece of wood is
able to turn, and command the whole vessel. Who does not wonder at the
compass, Acus Magnetica.
and needle? whether the invention of the needle be new, or known unto Solomon
is a great question. But why might he not know the virtue of this stone as well
as of others, especially seeing there was great store of it in Arabia, and in
that part which bordered upon him? And surely if it was not known to Solomon,
he was ignorant of the most polite, and pleasant secret of all Nature. They
that would be satisfied in this may read what Pineda, Pined. de reb. Salom. l.
4. c. 15. Lemnius de occult. naturae mirac. l. 3. c. 4.
and Levinus Lemnius have written of it. To close up all then, when we go to
Sea we must not only intend the advancement of our own profit, but we must
make a spiritual use of the deep waters, we must see, and consider, and
meditate upon these wonders, and those Attributes which are infolded in them,
that so they may strike us with an awful reverence, and imprint upon us a
religious respect to the Divine power. Hexam. cap. 5. de die tertio.
Hence it is that S. Ambrose calls the Sea the incentive of devotion, and
school of piety, for there is nothing in it but does administer to a
spiritual mind matter of pious and heavenly meditation. For example, the ship
wherein you sail, is a remembrancer of the swiftness and shortness of your
days, My days (says Job) are swifter then a Post, they are passed away as
the swift ships. And as in a ship whatsoever a man is doing he still sails on
to the end of his voyage: so whether we eat, or drink, or sleep, or sin,
or whatsoever we do we hasten to the grave, which is the end of all flesh.

As for the Sea it is an emblem of the world, for the world is compared to it,
and the people to the waters. Here as in the Sea we have our calmes of peace,
and our storms of persecution; our faire-weather of prosperity, and health;
and our foule-weather of adversity and sickness. Here some are swallowed up in
the gulf of despair, Aliquid subintrabit. August.
some are split upon the rocks of presumption, and the best men are a little
leakie. For as a ship cannot pass through the waves of the Sea, but some water
will sink through: so the best men passing through the world will taste a
little of the corruptions that are in it, Habemus pro mari mundum, pro navi
ecclesiam, pro velo paeniteutiam, pro gubernaculo cruce^, pro nauta^ Christum,
pro vento Spiritum Sanctum. Chrysostom. Super Math.
but S. Augustine advises us in this case to ply the pump of Repentance, and
then there is no danger of sinking, or perishing everlastingly.

In a word, the world is the Sea, the Church is the ship, our souls are the
passengers, Christ is our Pilet, the word is our compass, Faith is our Helm,
Hope is our anchor, Charity our sails, Perseverance our ballast, the Holy
Ghost our Gale, and Heaven our haven, whither he bring us that has purchased
it for us, Jesus Christ the righteous, To whom with the Father, etc.

PSALM. 107.25. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up
the waves thereof.


WE have done with the Seamans Profession, and now come to those Dangers which
attend, and accompany this profession. For a victualler cannot be without
sin, nor a merchant without danger. Eccles. 26.37.
The dangers are here laid down in their causes; principal and efficient,
Gods commandment: isntrumental and subservient the blowing of the winds, and
the flowing of the waves. This text may be resolved into these three
Conclusions.

First, that the commandment of God reaches, and extends even to senseless,
and inanimate creatures.

Secondly, that the wind is not always still, but sometime stormy: and the
Sea not always calm, but sometimes tempestuous.

Thirdly, that there is no Commotion in the air, nor Concitation in the
waters, but it is the Lords doing. For he commands.

For the first, God is an universal Bishop, all the places, and parishes in
the world, are within his Diocese and Jurisdiction. His title is, Mat. 11.25.
Lord of Heaven and Earth, so that all creatures from an Angel to an Ant, from
a star in the Firmament, to a stone in the Pavement, are within his
Territories and Dominions.

All are thy servants says the Psalmist: Psalm. 119.91.
and it is not omnes, for then it must be restrained to Men and Angels; but
omnia, a word of such latitude, and comprehension that all things visible and
invisible, rational and irrational, animate and inanimate, and in a word, the
Kingdom of all created nature is concluded in it. Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleases that does he in heaven and earth, in the seas and
all deep places. Psalm. 148.8.
And fire and hail, snow and vapors, storms and wind fulfill his word. And
the lightnings say unto him, Job 38, 35.
Here we are.

The creatures beside their natural inclinations have an obedientiall power,
Etiamsi Deus contraria jusserit, hic tamen magna est obedientia. Chrysostom. Hom. in
Psalm. 148.
whence it comes to pass (says Chrysostom) that though God command them
things contrary to their particular natures, yet they obey him.

David asks the question; What ayled thee O Sea that thou fleddest? Psalm.
114.5.
and thou Jordan that thou wast driven back? Had the Sea, or the River a
tongue to speak to us, as well as they have an ear when God speaks to them,
they would tell us that Vox Domini super aquas, Psalm. 29.3.
the voice of the Lord was upon the waters, and so soon as they heard they
were afraid. Or as it is in another Psalm, Psalm. 77.16.
The waters saw thee O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid, the depths
also were troubled. And as the commandment of God divided the waters, and
controuled their course; so it divides the very flames of fire. Psalm. 29.7.
It is the property of fire to shine and to burn, our Savior alludes to it
when he says John Baptist was a shining and a burning light; yet sometime the
fire burns and does not shine, and sometimes it shines and does not burn;
Flamma Dei mandato dulcissemam in se recipiens auram, suavem pueris
respirationem veluti sub umbra quadam tranquillo in statu constitutis praebuit.
Basil. m. in Psalm. 29.
and so the Lord divides the flames of fire. The fire in the furnace of
Babylon shined, for by the light thereof Nebuchadnezzar saw the three children,
and another with them like the Son of God; but as S. Chrysostom says it did
not urere, but irrorare, it did not burn them, but bedew them.

The fire in hell burns, for it is a place of extreme heat, and a drop of
water would be purchased at any rate; yet it shines not for it is a place of
utter darkness. Ipse potest Solis currus inhibere volantes, Ipse velut
scopulos flumina stare jubet.
By which instances we see, that as all things were created by God, so they are
commanded by him, for the Potter has power over his clay, and God over the
works of his own hands.

Mat. 8.27.
Quis est iste? Who is this, whom even the wind, and the Seas obey? Surely
such an one, besides whom there is not such another. Esaias 45.21.


Where is the Monarch that dare set down his foot upon the shore, and in the
word of a King command the Sea to flow thus far, and no further? Xerxes could
not preserve his bridge from the fury of the Hellespont, for which cause he
commanded it should have three hundred stripes. Where is the man that in the
time of drought, can lift up his voice unto the clouds, and wring one drop of
rain out of their bottels? Job 38.34.
Where is he that can bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the
bands of Orion, or bring forth Mazzarath in his season, and guide Arcturus and
his sons? Indeed Joshua the Captain of Israel stayed the Sun in Gibeon, and
the Moon in the valley of Aialon, Non imperavit, sed impetravit.
till he was avenged of his enemies; but not by his command but by his
confidence, not by his power but by his prayer.

fire and it shall consume us as it did Sodom, and her Cities. He can command
the air and it shall spit upon our heads blastings, mildewes, pestilent
defluxions, and destroy us with thunder, lightening, or hailstones as it did
the Amorites. He can command the earth and it shall open her mouth, and
swallow us up quick as it did Corah and his company. He can command the water
to overflow us as it did the old world. Let us therefore sanctify the Lord of
Hosts, Esaias 8.13.
Let him be our fear, and let him be our dread.

clouds and they shall rain Quails and Manna as they did upon the
Israelites. God can command the rock and it shall give thee water. God can
command the Ravens and they shall feed thee. God can command a stone and it
shall become Bread.

Art thou cast upon the bed of sickness? God can command a lump of figs to
recover thee, nay he can rebuke thy disease, and it shall immediately leave
thee.

Art thou at Sea and in danger of drowning? God can rebuke the winds, and
waves. And if he suffer thee to shipwreck, he can prepare a fish to swallow
thee, or a planke of the ship to convey thee to shore, as it fared with Paul
and his company.

senseless, and inanimate creatures upbraid our disobedience, Non mediocris
pudor est, imperie Dei insensibilia elementa parere, and homines non obedire.
Ambr. Hexam. c. 1. de die 3.
and rebellion? It is no small shame, that the very insensible elements should
obey God, and men not obey him, says S. Ambrose. And as it is no small shame,
so no small sin neither. One speaking of the winds and waves when Christ
rebuked them and allayed the Tempest, says that it is to be lamented with
tears of blood, that all creatures should be obedient, and man only
rebellious, who has reason to persuade it, Chemnit. har. Evangel.
religion to regulate it, and the promise of heaven to reward it. Psalm. 148.6.
Heaven and earth have received ordinances, and decrees from God and they do
not pass them. Man only runs snuffing up and down like the wild Ass,
saying, Psalm. 2.3.
Let us break his bands, and cast away his cords from us.

God promises his people in the Prophet that he would take away from them their
hearts of stone, and give them hearts of flesh. Bonaventure.
But one in a strange exaltation of devotion, desires rather to keep his heart
of stone then to change it for an heart of flesh. The Tables of stone received
the impression of the Law, when the hearts of flesh would not. Nay the stones
flew in pieces at the passion of our Savior, when the hearts of flesh relented
not at so sad a spectacle. God has sent us to school to some creatures to
learn the lesson of diligence, Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise. To some
creatures to learn the lesson of thankfulness, Esaias 1.3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib. To some creatures to
learn the lesson of timely and seasonable repentance, The storke in the heaven
knows her appointed time, Jerem. 3.7.
and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the swallow observe the time of their
coming. To some creatures to learn the lesson of obedience, as here to the
winds and waves; For he commands and raises up the stormy winds, which
lift up the waves thereof.

The second conclusion was this. Second part.
The wind is not always still but sometimes stormy; the Sea not always
calm, Quocunque aspici^ nihil est nisi pontus and ether, Fluctibus hic
tumidus, nubibus ille minax. Ovid. I 1. Trist. eleg. 2. Amos 4.13. John 3.8.
but sometimes tempestuous. The wind is one of Gods works for he creates it,
and one of his wonders too, For it blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but do not know whence it comes, nor whither it goes. He
that would know the commodities and conveniences of this creature, let him read
S. Chrysostom, or Seneca in his natural questions, Chrysan Psalm. 135. Sen.
lib. 5. cap. 18.
who tell us that the wind purges the air, divides and disperseth the
clouds, ripens the fruits of the earth, maintains the traffic and commerce
of those nations that are rent one from the other by the deep waters, etc. but
my Text determines me only to storms and tempests.

True is it which Solomon says, God has made every thing beautiful in its
season. Eccles. 3.11.
And even storms and tempests are arguments of Gods power, instruments of his
vengeance, and documents of our lives.

First, they are Arguments of his power, 1 Argumenta divinae potentiae.
and so serve to imprint upon us not an acknowledgement only, but an awe of a
Deity. Coelo tonantem credimus Jovem segnare. Horat. l. 3. Car. ode 5.


When God delivered the Law upon mount Sinai, the mountain burned with fire,
and the air was troubled with such clashing and collision of the clouds, and
with such thunders and lightenings, that the fear of God fell upon the people,
and they promise religiously to observe his statutes, and to keep his
commandments.

When God passed by his Prophet Elijah, a great and a strong wind went before
him, rending the mountains, and breaking the rocks in pieces, and Elijah was
so affected with the apprehension of Gods Majesty that he wrapped his face in
his mantle.

When God talked with his servant Job it was e turbine, out of the whirlewinde,
Job 40.6. et 42.2.
and then Job breaks out into the confession of his own vileness, and Gods
power. I know thou can do every thing. And indeed what cannot he do that
makes a thin exhalation which is of so subtle a substance that no eye can
discern it, to be so vehement and impetuous, that many times it overthrowes
houses, and turns up the Cedars of Libanus by the roots? That tempest in the
prophecy of Jonas produced the same effect in the Mariners, for they were
afraid, and cried every man upon his God, and were justly angry with the
Prophet who was upon his pillow, when he should have been at his prayers. And
I make no question but many of you here present will confess ingenuously, that
the roaring winds, and the raging Seas have made such deep impressions of
fear and terror in you, that you are much the better for it, more humble,
more devout, and your souls faster tied to God by vows, and promises of new
obedience.

Instrumenta divinae vindictae.
storms and tempests in the air and waters, are instruments of divine
vengeance. It is the opinion of Epiphanius that it was a storm that overthrew
the proud tops of Babel and blew that vast building into an heap of confusion.
Sure I am God used this whip to scourge the disobedience of Jonas, for when he
fled from the presence of the Lord, a great wind was sent out after him,
Tanquam fidele mancipium. in hom. de Jona.
which as a faithful servant or pursivant says S. Chrysostom arrested the
runaway Prophet, and returned him back again to his Master. When Iehoshaphat
had joined himself with Ahaziah that wicked King of Israel, his navy which he
had provided was broken in pieces with foul weather, 2 Chronicles. 20.37.
so that it could not go to Tarshish.

How many goodly tall ships which have born the names of Lions, Quamvis Pontica
pinus, sylve fila nobilis, jactes and genus, and nomen inutile. Horat. l. 1.
Car. ode 14.
Bears, Leopards and such terrible creatures, have been swallowed and sucked
up of a tempest, as a straw of a whirlepoole. I cannot but remember that Navy
which was sent to invade us in the year 88. which they christened invincible,
but we in this have played the Anabaptists: and christened it again with
Ludibrium ventorum, the scorn of the winds, Tu nisi ventis debes Ludibrium,
cave, Horat. ib.
a fitter name for it. For the winds and waves conspired so happily together
for our safety and their destruction, that one of their own (and upon him be
the boldness of the phrase) confesses God in that business declared himself
to be a Lutheran. How fitly may that of the Psalmist be applied to our purpose.
Psalm. 8.3.
They took crafty counsel together, and consulted against thy people; come said
they let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of England may be
no more in remembrance; yea let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession. But thou O God did persecute them with thy tempest, and made
them afraid with thy storm; thou filledst their faces with shame, so that they
were confounded, and troubled for ever, and now men may know, that thou whose
name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth.

storms and tempests are the documents and instructions of our lives,
Documenta humanae vitae.
for in their loud accent they read us this Lecture, that we must not always
expect a serenity of peace, Saeculum hoc tibi mare est: habet diuersos fluctus,
undas graves, saevas tempestates Ambr. l. 3. de sacram. cap. 1. Acts 27.13.14.
but sometimes a storm of Persecution: nor always enjoy a calm of content,
but sometimes be exercised with a tempest of Tribulation.

Paul and his company when they first loosed from the Haven had as fair
weather as could blow, but non multo post says the text, not long after, there
arose a te^pestuous wind which tossed them so exceedingly that all hope of being
saved was taken away from them. Job in the morning was the richest man in the
East, yet non multo post not long after a tempest was raised, and the
messengers come in like the waves of the Sea one in the neck of another, and
of all his sheep and oxen he has not so much as a Lamb left to offer for a
sacrifice.

If the air was not sometimes fanned, and ventilated with tempests, it would
corrupt, and become full of unwholesome, and contagious vapors.

If a Christian was not sometime exercised with crosses and afflictions, and
duckt over head and ears in salt water; pride, security, and an immoderate
love of the world would grow upon him. Iron though it be never so bright, yet
if it be not used will rust; Ground be it never so good, yet if it be not
tilled and plowed will be overgrowne with weeds; The body be it never so
lusty, yet if it want exercise will be obstructed with gross and ill humors.
Let a Christian be never so well weighed, and the frame of his soul never so
well molded, yet if the waves and billows of afflictions go not sometimes
over him, he will contract soil and corruption. See how the soul of that wise
King Solomon melted, and thawed into a wanton effeminatenesse, and declination
in religion: and a wise man may spell something out of those words, 1 King. 5.4.
He had no adversary, nor evil occurrent; and therefore God raises up a storm
of war, and stirs up an adversary unto Solomon. 1 King. 11.14.


Again as storms at Sea exercise the abilities, and experience of a Mariner:
so do crosses the graces of a Christian. What tryes the valor of a soldier?
The battle. What tryes the skill of a Pilot? A tempest. What tryes the graces
of a Christian? Adversity. Job you know had lost all but his wife, and his
life; and if his wise was no better then the Translation makes her, it had
been no matter if he had lost her too; now see how he stood to his tacklings,
and how bravely he rid out this storm, The Lord (says he) has given, and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. Yea though the Lord
kill me, yet will I trust in him.

Lastly, a storm makes the weather-beaten Mariner desire nothing so much as
his haven, therefore is it in this Psalm called the desired haven. verse 3.
And surely were not our life inroughed with some tempests and imbittered with
some troubles, we should say as Peter did upon mount Tabor, It is good for us
to be here, and so love our way instead of our country, and never desire to
make that Port of peace, and Haven of all happiness the Kingdom of Heaven.
When David lay under a storm of persecution, his soul breaks out into these
desires, and wishes; Psalm. 55.6.8.
O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I flee away and be at rest: yea I
would hasten my escape from the stormy wind, and tempest.

And so we come to the third and last part of the Text, which is this; There is
no storm in the air, nor tempest in the Sea: no commotion in the one, nor
concitation in the other, Third part.
but it is the Lords doing, for ipse dinit, he commands.

A Christian acknowledges no other Aeolus for the winds, nor Neptune for the
waters, then God. Jonas 1.4.
That great wind which arrested Jonas was of Gods sending, for Dominus
injecit, says the Text, the Lord hurld it upon them.

The blasts of wind are called the breath of his nostrils. Psalm. 18.15.
David tells us there are certain storehouses or treasuries of the wind, (and
well may the wind be compared to treasure, for it brings it in) and the
treasurer or storekeeper is the Lord. He causes the vapors to ascend from the
ends of the earth, Psalm. 135.7.
he makes lightnings for the rain, he brings the wind out of his
treasuries, and dispatches this winged messenger into all quarters.

And as he is the God of the winds, so of the waters too. His way is in the
Sea, and his path in the great waters. Psalm. 77.19.
His mandate is the Mace or Trident, which can allay the waves, or make them
swell to such an height as if they would quench the very lights of heaven.

Object.
But that great Tempest which overthrew the house wherein Jobs children were
feasting was raised by the devil. And travelers affirm that in Lapland and
some other countries a man may buy a wind, and purchase a speedy passage.
Suidas reports that in Corinth there was a family which could allay the winds,
(...). Veutis opii.
for which cause they were much reverenced, and esteemed of Mariners. And if at
any time the air be troubled with extraordinary tompests, the opinion and
speech of people is that some witch or conjurer is stirring.

Answ.
It cannot be denied but the devil who is Prince of the air can do strange
things in that element; And that witches and conjurers who have an interest in
his power, as he has in their souls can do more then ordinary. Yet concerning
the wind that oppressed Jobs children, the text does not say the devil raised
it, but only that it came out of the wilderness. God did raise it, though the
devil made use of it when it was raised. Or if we say that the devil raised
it, then Chrysostom and Origin deny that it was a true wind, but an air like
unto it. Ae^rvento simills v. etiam Pined, in Job 1.
The Sorcerers could not do the same miracles that Moses did, yet they could
do in like manner: So the devils I believe cannot make a wind, yet they can
counterfeit and come very near it. If a man have a fan in his hand he may
ventilate, and agitate the still air into a wind: how much more may the
devils by the greatness of their power, and swiftness of their motion, so
compresse and agitate the air as to throw down houses. And I think the
winds that are bought and sold are no other. What the strength of the air is
when it is compressed, and moved violently we may see in the breath of a
bullet, which sometimes, kills that man it never touches. It is an easy matter
for the devil then if God suffer it, to drive a ship at Sea which way he
pleases, whose motion is more swift, and violent then that of a bullet. And God
suffers much for the trial of our faith, and bringing about the passages of
his secret, but most just providence.

So then, no true wind is raised but by God, for he it is that forms the
mountains, and creates the wind: Amos 4.13.
nor nothing like a wind but by his permission, for he has the devil as a
dog in a chain, and this dog cannot ceaze upon a swine without leave. I dare
say that if the devil could raise a tempest when, and where he pleased, he
would strike the four corners of our Temples, and bury us all in their ruins,
when we meet together to offer up our sacrifice of praise, and prayers to
Almighty God.

Now is it thus that storms and tempests are the Lords doing, and the singer
of God, were not the heathen Philosophers in an error think you that chained
up God in the circle of the heavens and confined him, and his providence to the
Sphere of the Moon, supposing him either too lazy, or too busy to intend
sublunary affairs? The soul informs all the members of the body, the foot,
or finger as well as the head: So God who is the soul of this great body the
world rules and governes every part, and limb of it, how little, or remote
soever. In heaven he is a Glorious God, in earth he is a Gracious God, in the
air he is an angry God, in the Sea he is a terrible God, in hell he is a just
God, so that God is every where, and wheresoever he is, he is God blessed for
evermore. But you of the tribe of Zebulon may hence learn, to whom to direct
your prayers, and address your devotions when storms, and tempests threaten
you with destruction. We must not with the Heathen invocate the star of
Venus, or the two brethren Castor and Pollux, or Aeolus the father of the
winds, as Horace did for his friend Virgil when he sailed to Athens; nor with
the superstitious Papist must we invocate S. Nicholas; but with the disciples
we must go unto Christ and awaken him with our prayers, saying, Master save us
or else we perish, for he it is that raises the storm, and he only it is that
can rebuke it. O Lord God of hosts, Psalm. 89.8, 9.
who is a strong Lord like unto thee? for thou rulest the raging of the Sea,
and when the waves thereof arise thou stillest them. The floods have lifted up
O Lord, Psalm. 93.3, 4.
the floods have lifted up their voice, the floods have lifted up their waves;
But the Lord on high is mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the
mighty waves of the Sea.

And then be not discouraged with those dangers which attend your profession,
since nothing befalls you but what comes by Gods commandment, and providence. I
am not of his opinion that says that God made the Sea only for the beauty of
the element, not for the art of Navigation. True it is that many have been
drowned at Sea, and as true that far more have dyed in their beds. Moses when
he blessed Zabulon, bade him Rejoice in his going out; and that you may do so,
consider that no storm is raised by the malignity of the stars by the
mischief of Fortune, or by the malice of the devil, but by the power and
appointment of a good God.

Look up to the cross in your Flagges, and remember him who was the beloved
Son of his Father, yet David prophesied of him, that all the waves and
billows should go over him, Psalm. 42.7.
not the billows of waters, but of Gods wrath. And remember that the Church
your Mother is mindful of you, and commends the estate of all such as travel
by land, or water to Gods care, custody, providence, and protection. Now that
God which led his people through the red Sea into the land of Canaan, lead you
through the dangers of the deep, and the waves of this world into the land of
rest, the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen.

PSALM. 107.26, 27. They mount up to heaven, they go down again to the depths,
their soul is melted because of trouble. They reele to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end.


WE have already seen the Seamans dangers in their causes, both principal
which is Gods command; and isntrumental, the winds and the waves.

Now when all these meet together at Sea, as they did but lately in the Text,
it must needs be foul weather, and both Ships, and Saylours in great danger.
For what can man do when God has once given the word, or how can a piece of
wood hold out when it is assaulted on all sides with two furious Elements the
wind, and water? The parts of the Text are as the Verses, two.

First, the danger it self in a violent, and contrary motion of elevation, and
depression: for the ship riding upon the back of a vast, and mountainous
billow seems to fail in the clouds; but the treacherous and deceitful
billow sliding from it, throws it into such depths, Vix eminet aequore malus.
that the top mast is hardly discerned.

The second, are the sad consequences, and attendants of this danger, and they
are three.

Exanimation, and Fear. Their soul is melted. Vacillation, and staggering,
illustrated from the simile of a drunken man. Stupefaction and astonishment.
They are at their wits end. And indeed many times they are so, before they be
half way in their voyage.
First of the danger, They mount up to heaven, they go down again to the
depths. The Jews derided the Gospel of S. John because they read in it, that
if every thing that Christ did was written, the world it self could not
contain the Books that should be written. lib. 2. epistol. ep. 99.
But Isidore Pelus. justifies S. John by many expressions of the like nature.

God promised Abraham that he would make his seed as the dust of the earth.
Genesis 13.16.
Yet who sees not says S. Augustine but the grains of dust are incomparably
more numerous then all the sons of men; l. 16. de civit. Dei. c. 21.
yet God speaks not of the whole world, but of such only as should descend
from the loins of Abraham, and such as should be accounted his children as he
was the Father of the faithful.

It is said of the Cities of the Amorites that they were walled up to heaven;
Deuteronomy. 1.28.
but he that would raise a wall so high must lay the foundation as low as the
Center of the earth, and we see in the story of Nimrod that God would not
suffer such bold undertakings. Exodus 3.17.


It is reported of the land of Canaan that it was a land flowing with milk and
honey; and yet I believe there were no such rivers in Paradise. And it is here
said that such sometimes is the violence of the winds, and the elevation of
the waters, that ships are mounted to heaven, and cast down to hell, and David
says no more then what many have said after him.

Tollimur in coelum curvato gurgite, Virg. Aeneid. 3.
and iidem
Subducta ad Manes imos descendimus unda.
We mount to heaven, or dive to hell
As wanton billows sink, or swell.
Me miserum quanti montes volvuntur aquarum! Ovid. l. 1. Trist. eleg. 2.

Iamjam tacturos syder a summa putes:
Quantae diducto subsidunt aequore valles!
Iamjam tacturas Tartara nigraputes.
Wretch that I am such hills of water rise
As seem to touch the heavens, and wash the skies:
And in a trice such gaping gulfes appear,
As if that way to hell a passage were.
Nubila tanguntur velis, and terra carina. Lucan. l.5.

The top-sailes touch the clouds, the keele the sands.
Now these and the like hyperbolicall expressions are not to be understood
precisely according to the sound, but according to the sense; and they intimate
thus much, that the miracles of Christ were very many, that the seed of Abraham
was very numerous, that the walls of the Amorites were very high, that the
fruitfulness of Canaan was very much, and that the dangers of the Sea are very
great; and indeed such a Poetical and superlative expression was the fittest
for this Argument.

The Poet will not be persuaded but he had an heart of oak, Ille robur, and
aes triplex circa pectus erat, etc. Horat. l. 1. Car. ode 3. Aut insanit, aut
mori cupit, aut mendicus est. Alex. in Stob. I nunc and ventis animam commit,
dolato confisus ligne, digitis a morte remotus quatuor, aut septem, si sit
latissima taeda. (...). Nam prope tam lethum, quam prope cernit aquam. Ovid. l.
2. de Ponto. Acts 27.18.
or brass that first adventured to Sea, and trusted himself in a wooden
vessel with that merciless element. And another will not believe but he that
goes to Sea is either a mad man, or a beggar, or desirous to die.

Anacharsis be asked whether the number of the dead, or the living was the
greater; answered that he knew not in what number to reckon mariners, and
having learnt that the thickness of a ship was but four fingers, said, there
was no more distance betwixt them and death. Let a ship be built as strong as
art can possibly make her, let her be laden with gold, silver, and the most
precious commodities, let her carry never so many guns, let her bear the name
of some dreadful and hideous monster, yet the wind plays with it as a toy,
and the waves toss it as a tennis ball, as S. Paul says of the ship wherein
he sailed, that she was exceedingly tossed.

mounted up to heaven on the wings of prayer, that Gods power, and protection
would go along with you, and gone down into the depths of your own hearts by
repentance, and confession of your sins?

S. Ieromes counsel is that we should not stir abroad till we have armed our
selves with prayer, Egredientes de hospitio armet oration. in ep. ad Eustoch.
for Leo in via, there is a Lion in the way, and danger in all places. It may
be some incensed Lamech, or unnatural Cain may meet thee, and kill thee. It
may be some loose tile, or unjoynted piece of timber may fall upon thee, and
brain thee. And if it be thus in the fields, or streets of the City what is it
at Sea, which is as full of danger as it is of water, every wave and puff of
wind threatening destruction; nay though the Sea be never so calm, and the
wind never so still, yet there is but the thickness of a plank betwixt you
and ruin. Pity it is that when men go to Sea they are careful to have their
number of men, their provision of victuals, their tire of guns, and whatsoever
else is necessary for their voyage, yet the one thing that is necessary for the
most part is least regarded. The Church of Rome teaches her disciples to carry
with them to Sea the relic of some Saint, as an antidote and preservative
against all dangers, or to invocate some commentitious Patron; But call upon
me, says God, and there is good reason we should do so, for the Sea is his
and he made it, and he that made it can rule it be the waves thereof never so
unquiet.

S. Paul intending a voyage to Jerusalem, would not enter into the ship till he
had kneeled down upon the shore, and commended himself to Gods protection. The
gravel I confess was but a hard cushion, and it may be the mariners called
upon him to come aboard because the tide was far spent, or the wind ready to
alter, or else they would hoise sails and leave him, yet for all this he will
pray before he will sail; and commit himself to God, before he commit
himself to the deep waters, and go thou and do likewise. And prayer if it
save not thy ship, will save thy soul; if it keep not thy body from the water
(for all things happen alike to all men) it will keep thy soul from the fire
which is the greater deliverance.

Peter discoursing of the dissolution of the world, when the heavens shall be
rouled up like skins of parchment, and the elements melt with fervent heat,
makes this inference; What manner of men ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? And truly when I consider how you are sometimes
mounted up to heaven where God is ready to judge you, and sometimes thrown
down into the depths where hell is ready to swallow you, I cannot but say,
What manner of men ought ye to be?

Doubtless a Seaman that is profane is as prodigious a monster, as a poor man
that is proud, or a rich man that is a liar, or an old man that is wanton, and
the Lord abhorres him as well as any of the other. S. Ambrose calls the Sea the
school of temperance, chastity, and sobriety, Secretiem temperantiae,
exercitium continentiae mundi hujus sobrietas. Hexam. l. 3.
and therefore such as will not be ruled on land we send to Sea, that being
disciplined with the spectacles of Gods power, and the strong apprehensions of
death, and danger they may be reformed; and yet such is the invincible, and
incorrigible wickedness of our hearts, that men come out of a ship as the
beasts out of Noah's Arc, as very beasts and as unclean as when they went
first in; and like the Catadupi continually hearing the falls of Nilus, grow
deaf and hear nothing. And if at any time the extremity of a storm extort
from them a vow of amendment, it is for the most part blown over with the
foul weather, and like Manna melts with the next Sunshine. I remember a merry
story of one who in a tempest vowed he would offer our Lady a wax light as big
as his maine mast if he escaped: and being reproved by one of his fellows for
vowing a thing impossible, peace fool says he, we must speak our Lady fair
now, but if I get to shore one of eight in the pound shall serve her. Much
better did a company of mariners who vowed if they escaped the tempest to build
a Church to S. Heylin.
John di Malvatia whose mortar should be tempered with malmesey, and
accordingly they paid it. Which Church is in Zara or Iudera a City in Dalmatia,
for the possession of which town there have been great wars betwixt the
Hungarians and Venetians. Vow therefore unto the Lord, and pay it, and say as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 66.13.
I will go into thine house with burnt offerings, I will pay thee my vows
which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble.

Thanks be unto God who has delivered me? must not you needs confess with
David, that if the Lord had not helped you, the waters had overwhelmed you, yea
the proud waters had gone over your soul? But because I shall hereafter have
occasion to speak of your duty after your deliverance; which is, to praise the
Lord and declare the wonders which he does for the sons of men, I will here
pass it over.

We have now seen the literal sense of the words, as for allegories and
allusions Expositours are full of them. Musculus in Io.
A ship thus mounted up to heaven, and thrown down to hell is the emblem of
a proud man, who lifting up his heart as high as heaven, meets with a God which
refists the proud, and beats him into the depths again, for he that exalts
himself shall be humbled. Lucifer said in his heart that he would ascend into
heaven, and exalt his throne above the stars of God, that he would ascend
above the height of the clouds, and be like the most high: you hear his
mounting up to heaven: Ascendit Angelus, deseendit diabosus. Aug. Soliloq. c.
28.
but God tells him when he had done so, he should be brought down to hell, to
the sides of the pit, there is his going down into the depths again. Edom
having made his habitation high said in the pride of his heart, who shall bring
me dawne to the ground? one undertakes it that was able to do it, Obediah 3.4.
for though Edom exalt himself as an eagle, and though he set his nest among
the stars, yet thence will I bring him down says the Lord. Luke 10.15.
And so Capernaum which was exalted to heaven, was thrust down to hell, for of
a proud, and populous City there remains but seven or eight fishermens
cottages. Stella. in loc.
Aesope being asked how God was employed, (...). Diog. Laert. l. t. in Chilon.
Dominare tumidus, spiritus altos gere, Sequitior superbos ultor a tergo Deus.
Sen. in Herc.
answered that his business was to humble such as are prond, and to exalt such
as are humble. Arnobius applies this unto S. Peter who when he said he would
die for Christ rather then deny him, and follow him though all forsook him,
seemed in the conceit of his own strength, and ability to be mounted up to
heaven: but when he denied him at the voice of a silly maid he went down
into the depths, nay he went yet lower for he did not only deny him, but
forswear him, yet after all this he went out and wept bitterly, and so as it
follows in the text, his soul was melted in him. And so we come to the sad
consequences and attendants of this danger, the first whereof is expressed in
an elegant metaphor of melting and liquefaction; Their souls are melted in
them because of thetrouble.

trouble, and howsoever in the Hebrew the word be in the singular, yet S.
Jerome renders it in the plural number; In malis.
for indeed many are the troubles that constitute and make up this trouble. Is
not the air troubled with the clashing and collision of the clouds, Esaias 57.20.
and conflicts of the winds being let loose out of their treasuries? Do we
not read of a troubled Sea in the prophet, which being disquieted by its
neighbor element cannot rest? nay does not S. Jude tells us, Jude 13.
that the Sea is so troubled that the waves thereof are mad, and raging? And
now must not the hearts of the mariners, and passengers be troubled with the
apprehension of death, which is the King of fears, Praesentemque viris
intentant omnia mortem. Virg
and of all things in the world the most terrible. when they see it approach in
every billow, and hear it threaten in every blast? The disciples in the storm
thought of nothing but of perishing. S. Paul speaking of the tempest that lay
upon them, says that all hope of being saved was taken away from them; Acts
27.20.
and can you blame flesh and blood if it change countenance, and be troubled in
such a case?

Yet secondly, though we be naturally troubled with the sense, and apprehension
of death, yet some kinds of death there are which trouble us more then others.
And I know not how it comes to pass, but drowning has ever been accounted a
miserable, and inglorious death, as appears by that of the Poet.

Ovid. l. 1. Trist. eleg. 2.
Non let hum timeo: genus est miserabile lethi;
Demite naufragium mors mihi munus erit.
Et non aequoreis piscibus esse cibum.
I fear not death, death is the thing I wish,
And yet I would not drown, and feed the fish.
And the reason hereof it may be was because they thought the soul, Ignava
fortes sata consument viros? Sen. in Agam.
which they supposed to be fire, was extinguished in the waters: or else
because it is a death wherein a man can give no testimony of his valor. Maxim
detestaban urfortes he mortis genus qui cum a rimam igneam est censeret, aquis
illam propsus extingui pu: tabant, and in quo mortis genere non potest quis
suae sortitudinis specimen dare. Farnab. annot. in loc.
Something I confess it is for a man to die in his own country, to kiss his
wife, to bless his children, and to have the honor of a decent burial, which
they cannot have that are cast away at Sea. And hence it was that Aeneas being
tossed with a tempest and in danger of drowning cried out, happy, yea thrice
happy they that dyed in the sight of their friends, and under the walls of
their own city.

Yet thirdly, as some kinds of death are more troublesome then others, Est
aliquid fatoque suo, ferroque cadentem, in solita moriens ponere cor pus humo.
Et mandare suis aliqua, and sperare sepulebrum. Ovid.
so some men are more troubled and affrighted with the apprehension of it then
others are. Death is not very troublesome to a man that has languished a long
time upon the bed of his sickness, afflicted with pains and diseases, for he is
as it were mellowed and prepared for it, and that which other men fear he
wishes; but it must needs be very bitter and terrible to a man that has his
breasts full of milk, and his bones full of marrow, and such is the case of
Seamen who dye before they be sick, and are arrested with the stroke of death
before age or diseases gave them warning to prepare for it. Tabescit.
Consumitur. Dissolvitur. Colliquescit. etc.
And thus we see that a tempest may well be called a trouble, and such a
trouble as may well melt us. Significatur eyanimatio quae^am navigantium prae
metu, et magnitudine periculi. Lorin. in lo.
The word is diversely rendered by Expositours, yet as Lorinus observes well,
still there is signified an exanimation of the mariners, and a pouring or a
running out of their souls like molten metal because of the greatness of
the danger.

A sect of Philosophers there was that divested the soul of all passions,
Stoicorum indelentia.
as inconsistent with the habits of wisdom and virtue. But our Savior says
of himself that his soul was sorrowful: and the Evangelist says of him that
he began to be afraid, and fear and heaviness are passions of the mind, yet
Christ was the wisdom of his Father. S. Paul confesses of himself, and
Barnabas (men whom the Barbarians thought worthy of the names of their gods,
and divine honors) that they were subject to the same passions that others
were. I would not I confess have a man so fearful, Eripiunt subito nubes
coelumque diemque Teucrorum ex oculis: ponto nox incubat atra.
and timorous as to shake with the reed at every wind, for fear does not
become a Christian who is acquainted with the power of God, and may claim a
special interest in his providence; Intonuere poli, et crebris micat ignibus
ether. Virg. Aeneid. 1. Mundum revelli sedibus totum suis, ipsosque rupto
crederes coelo Deos decidere, et atrum rebus induci chaos. Sen. in Agam.
Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra, ingemit.
but when it comes to this pass, that neither sun nor moon appears for
many days, that the air is filled with thunders, and lightnings, that the
deep boyles like a Caldron, that the foundations of the earth crack, as if
every thing would return back to its former Chaos, whose heart would not
fail for fear, and give again though it was an heart of stone at such foul
weather? Virgil tells us that his Aeneas in a tempest grew pale, and his
members chill, and his sides sore with sighing. And Seneca reports as much of
his Agamemnon. And one of the three things whereof the wise Cato repented
himself was, that he went to any place by Sea when he might have gone by
land. Catonom paenituit arcana saeminae credidisse, die^sibi absque fructu
effluxisse, et si quopiam vectus navigio esset, quo pervenire pedestri itinere
potuisset. Noct. Attic. l. 19. c. 1.
Nay the disciples themselves when the ship was covered with waves grew very
fearful, notwithstanding they had Christ aboard with them, a better pledge of
safety then Caesar and all his fortunes. Let me close up this with the story
which Aulus Gellius tells, that sailing from Cassiopeia to Brundusium they had
a Philosopher in their company of the fect of Stoics; and being in danger to
be cast away by a violent storm, I observed (says he) how the Stoic behaved
himself, and though (says the Author) he did not cry out as some did, yet his
countenance changed; Coloris et vultus turbatione non multum a caeteris
differebat.
and his color went and came, so that he seemed to differ but a little from
others. And Musculus has well observed upon this place, that it is fit we
should be affected, and affrighted with these dangers, for otherwise we would
neither pray to God to be delivered, nor praise him when we are delivered. Had
the disciples been insensible of the danger they had not cried out Master save
us: or had the people been insensible of the benefit, they would not have
marvelled, and magnified our Savior with a Quis est iste? Who is this for even
the Sea and winds obey him?

second effect of a tempest is the vacillation, staggering, and trepidation of
their bodies, illustrated by a simile taken from a drunken man, in these words;
They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man.

Solomon compares a drunken man to a mariner, Prove. 23.34.
and David compares a mariner to a drunken man; so that it seems there is a
near resemblance though the one trade in wine, and the other in water.

So near that many times they are the same: for howsoever the Sea be a place
of temperance and sobriety, yet the Seamans farewell and his welcome home are
many times more reeling and giddy then the storm; and I am sure more
dangerous; for the one many times turns a devil into a Saint, but the other
transformes a man into a Beast. A mariner and a drunken man are alike in their
stomachs, both sick and enforced to vomit. They are alike in their eyes, for
both suppose things that are fast and immovable to flit out of their places.
But especially they are alike in their feet, for the feet of both cross and
enterfeire, and fall foul one with the other as if they did not belong to the
same body, and this the text calls reeling, and staggering.

Lucretius reckoning up the effects of drunkenness makes this one, --
praepediuntur crura vacillanti.
the feet and legs cannot perform their office being oppressed with the
burden of a surcharged body. There are certain passages betwixt the head and
the feet, for if the feet dabble in water it strikes up to the head: and if the
head dabble in wine it strikes down to the feet, so that a man may say of the
drunkard as the Prophet did of the corrupt state of the Jews, From the crown
of the head to the sole of the foot there is no right part in him.

Solomon calls our legs the strong men of the house, yet in a storm they
cannot stand their ground, but bow and buckle under us. Men in such a case are
like balls in a Tennis court tossed from one side of the ship unto the other,
and sometimes banded clean over. It may be said of mariners what the Jews said
of Cain, and ( Clemens Alexandr. seems to follow the tradition) that
wheresoever they set their foot the floor trembles under them, and many times
with that violence that they knock their heads one against another.

Now as a ship was the emblem of the Church, and the Sea an emblem of the
world, so is a storm of persecution; and in nothing more then in this, that it
staggers the faith and profession of so many Christians. Some there are that
hear the word of God, and receive it with joy, yet when tribulation or
persecution does arise because of the word, by and by they are offended. And
such are compared to an house built upon the sands which cannot endure the
weather, for when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew
and beat upon it, it fell; and the fall thereof was great. Every sin is lapsus
a slipping, or sliding: some sins are Casus, a falling to the ground, but the
sin of Apostasy and recidivation is Casus magnus a great fall, for the latter
end of that man is worse then the beginning. We read of the children of Ephraim
that they were harnessed and carried bows; Psalm. 78.9.
but when it came to be Tempus pralii, a day of battle they turned their
backs: even so, many there are who seem to stand as fast as mount Zion so long
as the Church is becalmed with peace, and plenty; their profession makes as
great a flourish as a city company upon a training day, so that a man would
think they would fight and die for their faith; but if once it prove soul
weather, and their lands, liberties, or lives be in danger, God bless their
constancy and strengthen their faith, that they do not then begin to think
that the differences of religion are but circumstantiall; and that it is no
wisdom to lose a substance for a circumstance, and that there is a greater
latitude in the way to heaven then before they dreamt of, and thus staggering
with the spirit of giddiness, at last fall, and make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience.

third and last effect is stupefaction and astonishment in these words, 1 These.
5.23.
They are at their wits end. Man is divided by S. Paul into three parts, the
soul, the body, and the spirit. What the impression of a storm is upon the
soul you heard in these words, Their souls are melted in them because of the
trouble; and what upon the body in these, They reele to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man; Now let us see what impression it makes upon the spirit, or
understanding in these words, They are at their wits end, and so I shall be at
my works end.

Some there are that read the place thus, omnis substantia little deverate est;
and then it is not that they are at their wits end, but at their wealths end. I
confess indeed much wealth has been swallowed up by the Sea, and as it is a
Mine to some, so is it a grave to others. Some ships like Noah's Dove go forth
into the waters, and return back again with advantage, as she did with an
olive branch; but some like the crow are sent out, and never return. But the
best reading is omnis sapientia as S. Ierom renders it, all their wit and
wisdom is swallowed up; (...).
or omnis eorum peritia as Tremell: all their skill and experience is at an
end. Or as Apollinarius, They forget the art of navigation, and their skill
fails them. And the like expressions have we in the Poets:

Lucan.
Artis opem vicere metus: nescitque magister
Quam frangat, cui cedat aquae.
May. Nil ratio et usus audet: Ars cessit maelis. Son. in Agam.
Fear conquers art: the master does not know
Which wave to break, which wave to yield unto.
We see then our industry and endeavor, our wit and understanding cannot help
us when God stands in our way as the Angel did in Balaams; but the power and
wisdom of God swallows up the power and wisdom of the creature, as Aarons
rod swallowed up the rods of the Egyptians, or as the cross of Christ
swallowed up the idols of the heathen, or as the joy of the Holy Ghost which is
glorious, and unspeakable, swallows up all other delights, and comforts. So
true is that of the Psalmist, except the Lord build the house they labor in
vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the city the watchman waketh but in
vain. In that storm in the Acts of the Apostles the mariners did what was
possible to save themselves, and the ship, for the text says they undergirded
the ship, and heaved their tackling and lading over board, and cast anchors out
of the stern, yet all was to no purpose. It is said of the mariners in the
Prophet, Jonas 1.13.
that they rowed hard to bring their ship to land, but they could not, because
the Sea wrought and was tempestuous. In the book of Genesis we find a
Parliament and council assembled, Genes. 11.
many laying their heads and wits together to find out a way to secure the^
from the fear of another deluge; at last it is resolved upon to build a Tower
whose tops should reach up to heaven. But what will they do for materials?
Their wit can furnish them thus far, for by burning the earth thoroughly they
bake it into brick, and use flime for mortar, and now they are very busy in
raising of it. But God who resists the proud, looks down from heaven, and
confounds their language, and now they have not so much understanding left
them, as to understand one another speech, and their wit was at an end, before
their building was well begun.

Thus the power of God does as it were play and sport it self in humane
affairs, Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus.
and does whatsoever it pleases in heaven, in earth, and in all places.

And therefore let not the wiseman glory in his wisdom for God can infatuate
it; nor the strong man in his strength for he can infeeble it, nor the rich man
in his wealth for he can impoverish it, nor the mariner in his skill for he can
confound it; but let us in every thing we put our hand unto, implore his
blessing, without the influence, and concurrence whereof all our works,
endeavors, and devices are to no purpose. Help us therefore O God of our
salvation; to whom in the Trinity of persons, and unity of essence be ascribed
all power, praise, might and majesty now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A Prayer to be used by the Mariner before he go to Sea.
OAlmighty and most glorious God who have disposed of the sons of men in those
callings which seem meetest to thy divine Wisdom, and have appointed me to
go down into the Sea in Ships, and assigned me my business in the great
waters: I thy creature, and the work of thine hands do with all humility and
thankfulness embrace the order of thy good providence, who art a God which
do whatsoever pleases thee in heaven, in earth, in the Sea and in all
places. And forasmuch as I am now ready to commit my self unto the waters, I
most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness to pardon and forgive me all my sins:
cast them into the bottomless Sea of thy mercy, drown them in the red Sea of
thy Sons blood as thou did the Egyptians in the waters, lest they cause thee
to vex me with thy storms, and persecute me with thy tempests.

And since the dangers of the Sea are great and many, and a ship is counted but
a vain thing to save a man: O let thy presence and protection go along with
me to save me from the hands of Pirates, from the fury of the winds and waves,
from bondage and captivity amongst infidels who are enemies to the cross of
thy Son, and howsoever it shall please thee to dispose of my body, be
merciful to my soul for thy Names sake.

Keep me also o God of my salvation from the snares, and infections of the
devil who is ready in all places to devour me, make me constant in my
religion, just and true in all my dealings, and give me grace in all places
where I come to demean my self as one that professes the name of Christ, lest
I give occasion to the adversary to speak evil of it.

And because the issue and success of every business depends only upon thy
blessing, bless this voyage to me thy servant; bless it to my soul, let
those wonders wherewith thou have replenished the deep waters affect me with
a due consideration of thy glorious attributes, and imprint upon my soul a
sense of thy power, an acknowledgement of thy wisdom, an awe of thy Majesty,
that so my heart may be filled with thy fear, and my mouth with thy praises.
Bless it also to my outward man, and as my calling has thy warrant so let it
not want thy benediction, that I may be enabled by my substance to honor
thee, and help others.

Finally o God I commend unto thy fatherly goodness this Church, and Kingdom
whereof I am a member; my friends, kindred, and acquaintance: beseeching thee
(if it be thy blessed will) to return me safe unto these comforts. Hear my
prayers for them, and theirs for me, and thy Son Christ Jesus for us all; in
whose most blessed name and words I come unto thee, and call upon thee saying.
O our Father which art in heaven, etc.

A Prayer to be used at Sea.
O Most mighty and most merciful God who have commanded us to call upon thee
in the day of trouble, and have promised to deliver us: I thy servant do in
obedience to thy command, and confidence in thy promise flee to thee for
succor o God most holy, for trouble is at hand and there is none to deliver me.

Behold me now o God in the dangers of the Deep, my life is continually in thy
hand, and I am ready to perish every moment. O thou that did hear the
prayers of thy Prophet from the bottom of the Sea, thou that did awaken at
the cries of thy disciples, thou that leddest thy people through the red Sea,
thou that did save Noah and his family in the Arc from perishing by water,
save and deliver me, my King and my God, rebuke the stormy winds, lock them
up in thy treasuries, and command the proud waves of the Sea to be still, that
I may arrive safe at my desired haven, for the Sea is thine and thou have made,
it and though the floods lift up their voice, yet thou Lord on high art
mightier then the noise of many waters, yea then the mighty waves of the Sea.

I confess o Lord if thou should deal with me after my deservings, thou
might make the Sea my sepulcher, and cover me with the deep waters as thou
did the old world for their security, and Pharaoh and his host for their
obstinacy; I have multiplied my sins above the sands upon the shore, and my
heart is as full of wickedness as the Sea is of water: But spare me O God,
good Lord spare me who have not spared thine own Son to redeem me. Pardon my
sins, blot out my offenses, forgive me my trespasses, and let the light of thy
countenance shine upon me through those precious wounds which thy Son and my
Savior suffered in his body upon the Cross for me.

And now O God I resign, and give up my self wholly unto thy good pleasure,
saying with thy servant David, Here I am do with me whatsoever seems good in
thine eyes. I know thou art a God able alike to save in all places, I know that
the winds and waves obey thee, I believe that the hairs of my head are
numbered, and that the Sea shall give up her dead at the last day, thy will
therefore O God be done in heaven, in earth, in the Sea, and in all places; if
thou have appointed me for life, grant that I may live in thy fear, if thou
have appointed me for death (for my times are in thy hands) grant that I may
die in thy favor: so long as I live guide me with thy grace, and so soon as
I die receive me into thy glory, and all this for Jesus Christ his sake in
whose most blessed name, etc.

A Prayer after our return from Sea.
O Most great, and most gracious God, I have called upon thee in the day of
trouble, and thou have heard me, thou have sent from above and drawn me out of
many waters, thou have delivered me from all my fears, thou have considered my
trouble, and known my soul in adversities, so that the water-flood has not
overflowne me, neither has the Deep swallowed me up: And now what shall I
render unto thee o God of my salvation for all thy benefits toward me? I will
sacrifice unto thee with the voice of Thanksgiving, and pay that that I vowed
when I was in trouble. And here I offer up my soul and body a holy and a
living sacrifice to thee o thou preserver of men, and let it be as that
sacrifice which Noah offered when he came out of the Arc, a sacrifice of a
sweet smelling favor. I confess I am unworthy of the least of thy mercies,
but the more unworthy I am of them, the more thankful I will be for them; and
therefore bless the Lord o my soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy name, bless the Lord o my soul and forget not all his benefits, for he
has redeemed my life from destruction, and satisfied my mouth with good
things. And further I confess to the glory of thy mercy that it was not the
strength of the ship, nor our art and skill that saved us, but thy mighty hand,
and outstretched arm; not unto us therefore, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
all the glory, for who amongst the sons of men can be likened unto thee o
Lord? and amongst the Gods there is none that can do as thou do; thou art
great and do wondrous things, thou art God alone, thou rulest the raging of
the Sea, and when the waves thereof arise thou stillest them.

And now o Lord as thy mercy has preserved me from drowning and shipwreck, so
let it preserve thy servant from the deluge of intemperance, and from making
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; lest having escaped the Sea thy
vengeance suffer me not to live: and grant that I may express my thankfulness
by walking humbly, saithfully; and obediently before thee in the land of the
living, for, for this end thou have delivered me that I might serve thee
without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life: and so
thy blessing shall be still upon me, thy providence still over me, and thou
shall never be weary to do me good.

And lastly, as thou have put an end unto this perilous voyage, and brought me
safe to the comforts of mine own country: So when I shall have run my
course through the waves of this troublesome world, bring me to my heavenly
country the new Jerusalem, and gather my soul into the bosom of Abraham that
place of peace, and haven of true happiness, even for thy dear Sons sake
Jesus Christ the righteous, in whose name and merits, mediation and words I
call upon thee, saying. O our Father which art in heaven, etc.

FINIS.

