A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN LEARNED DISCOURSES, WRITTEN BY THAT FAMOVS MAN OF
MEMORY ZACHARY VRSINE; Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the noble and
flourishing School of NEVSTAD.

For explication of diverse difficult points, laid down by that Author in his
CATECHISM.

Lately put in Print in Latin by the last labor of D. DAVID PARRY: and now
newly translated into English, by I. H. for the benefit and behoof of our
Christian countrymen.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Bible* 1600.

TO THE READER.
COurteous and Christian Reader: at their instant request whom it most
concerned, and of mine own inclination, which shall (I profess) be ever
servile to thy godly desi^es, I did six months since begin (and only begin)
to teach this stranger to speak English (A stranger indeed for language, but
for consent in doctrine our natural countryman, and fellow-citizen in the
heavenly Jerusalem.) This course upon special occasion interrupted, I have now
the second time attempted and perfited, at the importunity of my friend this
^rinter, whose commodity had otherwise been much prejudiced by prevention.

If I have truly expressed the Authors intent, it is as much as I can desire,
or thou expect. Jf I have failed thereof, I hope it is neither ordinarily, nor
groslie; wherefore being unworthy of pardon, much more of praise, I humbly
plead for thy favorable censure. Have is the enemy of circumspection, and
seldom meets a swift and wise resolution. Thou will (I presume) the rather
bear with me, if thou remember but this, that I was compelled to make a three
weeks work of it, in a time when (besides this) I did of duty dispatch more
business, and of necessity endure more grief and heaviness, then in so small
a space did ever before befall me. Some proof hereof may be this, that for
certain hours I was enforced to employ others, whose style (I know) thy
quick re^ish can iudiciously distinguish.

Touching the Author, all I can say is too little, and of that little (least
thou surfette on me, ear thou come to him) take only this little. He was in
his life laborious, religious, and like an Angel amongst men; in his style
princely, pure, and plentiful like a sweeping torrent; in his learning (which
was of all sorts, especially in Divinity) sound, subtle, and profound as the
deep Ocean.

The difficulty and obscurity which must needs be where is great depth,
natural brevity, and necessity of schoole-termes should have been plained
and cleared (as far as my weak understanding could perform) had not the
niggardly shortness of time, and envious occurrent of business, and disquiet
of mind been a bar to my honest intent. Time may minister occasion of
supplying these and all other defectes: In the mean while for mine
encouragement and thine own good, accept these first fruits of my studies in
this kind; and remember to read, not for contention, but instruction. And so I
leave thee to God; whom I desire a^ well to enable thee to the conceaving, as
he did this his servant to the unfolding of the most deep mysteries and subtle
controversies of religion.

A TABLE OF THE SEVEral discourses contained in this book.
1. Two prefaces of D. David Parrie prefixed before the two last parts of the
Catechism in the first Edition. 2 An exhortation of Vrsine to the study of
Christianity. 3. The Antiochian belief touching the incarnation of the Word,
against Paulus Samosatenus: with the catholic faith and belief touching the
vbiquitie of Christ's body. Out of the 4. book of Vigil. against E^tych. 4.
An epistle of Vrsine upon predestination: with some fragments of certain of
his Epistles. 5. Part of an oration upon this question: Whether, and how far
forth Christ died for all: by D. David Parie. 6. A short introduction to the
controversy of the Lords supper, by David Parrie. 7. A breife exposition of
the controversy about the Lords supper: between the Consubstantialists, and
maintainers of the truth: by D. Zachary Vrsine. 8. Positions of D. Zachary
Vrsine, about some principal points of Christian religion. 9. The funeral
oration of D. Frances Iunius, upon the life and death of D. Zachary Vrsine.
A PREFACE TO THE THIRD PART OF (...) his Catechism touching Sacraments.
Wherein is sifted and refuted the slanderous and Satyricall Declamation of
Bellarmine, prefixea before the second Tome of his Disputations, touching the
Sacraments. *
THE third part of the Catechism sets down briefly the true doctrine of
the Sacraments, discovering withal at large the very fountains thereof; not
only clearing to the capacity and conceit of young beginners the chief
controversies of our time, especially of Baptizing of Children,
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, and Excommunication (depending on the
doctrine of the Sacraments) but also diving so far into the depth of them, that
even the diligent and learned sort may therewith all rest satisfied. Many
controversies and contentions of wrangling Sophistes are there of purpose left
undiscussed: for why should a learner be wearied with that, whereupon those
subtle disputants cannot themselves as yet resolve? or why should men be
ouercurious and costly in trimming up a trifle? notwithstanding, by those solid
grounds of doctrine it may easily app^^te, how vain and varying from Gods word
they are, howsoever they vaunt themselves to the view of the simpler sort in
rich seeming robes of reueren^, but pretended Antiquity. For Truth is a
touchstone, serving for the trial both of it self, and also of error.

But we shall hereafter find occasion to tal^^ of these matters in our public
schools more at large. For the presumption of the Jesuits is grown to that
height of impude^cy, that nothing can be so absurdely disputed by their school
men, whereupon they do not think themselves able by their sophistry to set so
fair a varnish, that both learned, and unlearned shall accept it for current
Catholic. And if there be any (as doubtless there are many things) so
gross and false, that they admit no color, then with shameless oaths they
face us down, that they were never written, or so much as once approved by any
of their Catholics. For these (if I be not deceived) are those three impute
Spirits, Apoc. 16. 13
lately spewed out of the mouth of the Dragon, to bewitch the Monarchs of the
world, and vnder-proppe the ruins of Popery.

Here they dispute busily, whether Sacraments be things real, or rational,
or accidentally composed and consisting of things and words? and therefore
Whether they may properly be defined, or no? and if they may, whether the
vulgar definition (that is, A visible sign of invisible grace,) do
indifferently agree unto them all? Coldely indeed and slenderly they teach,
that Sacraments are visible and sensible signs, signifying an holy thing by
way of likeness and proportion: but perversely they deny that unto them is
required the express commandment of God in Scripture; they deny that in them
is any promise of grace and remission of sins, yea or so much as annexed unto
them by the ordinance and appointment of God: in a word, they deny that they
are ordained to stir up, nourish, and confirm our faith. But they maintain,
that they are the causes of grace in us, that they bestow grace upon us, that
they are the instruments of justification, that of themselves they effect
grace, justification, Opus operatum.
and sanctification by the very work done, that is, by the natural power and
virtue of the sacramental action it self thereunto appointed by God; or (as
others will) by the power of God assistant to the things signed, according to
covenant, even without faith or in ward motion of the receiver. And this force
and efficacy they attribute only to sacraments of the New Testament: as for
those of the Old. some there are which leave unto them only the bare and naked
signification of justification; others besides that do also yield the effect
of justification, but only in regard of the work of the worker, Opus
opera^tis.
that is in respect of the devotion and desert of the vser. And here again
some except circumcision, as justifying through the work done; others reckon
it with the rest. And this is that stale stuff of the old school^-men, which
these late iuncketters have now again sumptuously dressed, and dished out to
the world for delicates.

Especially Bellarmine the Arch-sophist of this age does flatter himself in
these follies, Bellarmine a calling disputant.
that he is fully persuaded he can obscure the clear sunneshine. And therefore
insolently and ill-beseeming the duty of so great a disputant, he slaundereth
and taunteth our Doctors (most of them now dead) neither showing nor obiecting
to them falsehood or paralogismes in their proofs, but only with scorn and
disdain giving them the lie, and the lie: which strange manner of disputation
is now taken up for a fashion amongst those railers. But the most worthy
Divines Whitaker, Danaeus, Sibrandus and the rest have now so discovered the
folly of that most insolent man, that even the lesuites themselves are ashamed
of their Galiah, and begin to repent them of his too great liberty used in
disputation. Bellarmines saty^^^all pref^^e to his 2. Tome of of Sacraments
examined and (...).


He has prefixed before his second Tome of disputations which lately he set
forth about the sacraments A Satyricall Declamation or Libelling speech,
wherein he professes that he will play* Stage-part, and represent unto his
Romish auditory a spectacle not unpleasant, concerning the furious contentions
of Heretics. His maine purpose therein is to oppose our Doctors between
themselves each against other, and by his vpstart sophistry to de bar us the
special use of the Sacraments, namely the sea^ing of the promise of grace, and
strengthening of our faith. But how perversely he deals I have here thought
good briefly to declare.

First of all he goes about to show out of Luther, Of the word Sacr^^ment.
Carolostadius, Melancthon, Zwinglius, and Calvin, that the word Sacrament
has been by diverse, and those our wrighters, partly received, partly
rejected. As if the Schoolmen themselves did never doubt or dispute about the
original signification, propriety, and use of a Sacrament? And if at any time
our wrighters have seemed to make question of the word, yet it is a clear
case, that by consent of all it has been hitherto received in our churches*
and retained unto this day without controversy. Wherefore that which he
speaks of Luther and Melancthon is plainly frivolous. The opinion of
Carolostadius (a man gauled by Luther) none in a manner have followed. With
Zwinglius he does manifestly cavil. For he indeed could have wished the word
Sacrament had never been received by the Germans; but why? truly for no
other reason, but because he detesteth the horrible abuse of a Sacrament, in
swearing thereby: a thing (alas!) to familiar with the Germans. As for
Calvin, that he should little allow of the word, and reprehend it, yet not
account it a matter worthy the striving about, it is an impudent devise of the
Jesuits, which without shame he might babble out in his theater at Rome, from
whence Calvines Christian Institution is exiled. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14.
They who with judgment shall read the whole 13. Section whereunto afterward
the Jesuit points, shall see that Calvin does not reprehend the word, but the
subtility of Sophists, who out of the signification of the Latin word do
impugn the confirmation of our faith by Sacraments.

Then coming to the nature of a Sacrament, he brings forth upon the stage
Luther, Zwinglius, and Calvin as it were skirmishing there-about between
themselves: saying, that Luther would have the Sacraments to be only
testimonies ordained by God, for the stirring up of our faith: Zwinglius
certain engadgings of our selves unto God: lastly, Calvin ioining (as it were)
both opinions into one, would have them to be signs of Gods love toward us,
sealing our faith; and testimonies again binding us unto Godliness. And this
is the conflict. But indeed the Jesuit would feign show his auditors a fault
where none is.

The consent of Calvin and Luther in this point is so evident, Of the nature
and force of a Sacrament.
that it needs no proof. That the opinion of me^re tokens and marks of our
binding and profession is by way of cavil fathered on Zwinglius, the Jesuit
himself afterward unwittingly witnesses, where he writes, that the opinion
of Carolostadius and the Anabaptists touching mere tokens of our profession
has been as well by others, as by Zwinglius confuted, and almost quite buried:
And this that he write^h is true. For Zwinglius both elsewhere, and also in his
book wrighten to the Princes of Germany, does plainly enough expound himself
wrighting after this manner: The very signs are so ordained by Christ
himself, that even by their analogy and proportion they prevail very far,
in le^ding us unto the thing present by faith and contemplation. And
afterward more plainly; The Sacraments are not in vain; for they show us
the salvation given by God, thither they ^ourne our thoughts, and continually
EXERCISE OVER FAITH which immediately they promise, and draw us to brotherly
charity. And whilst all this is don, one and the same Spirit works in us,
who inspiringe somtymes without means, somtymes with means, draws whither,
how far, and whom it pleases him. Thus far Zwinglius. Now wh^t could have been spoken more clearly touching the consent between Luther and Calvin, then
that Sacraments were ordained for this end, namely to lead us by similitude
and proportion unto the thing present by faith, to declare unto us our
salvation, to turn our thoughts, to exercise our faith, and to be means and
instruments of the holy Ghost? Is this of Sacraments to make mere tokens and
marks of our Profession and obligation unto Christ, and his church? the
Jesuit does openly wrong our Doctors. Defense of Luthers opinion (...) as
Sacraments confirm^ faith.


Neither does he stay here, but has a farther fling at every of them by
course. He exclaimeth on the opinion of Luther, that sacraments strenghthen our
faith, as so absurd, that nothing possibly could be devised more absurd. And
why, I pray? Because (forsooth) that is the use of miracles: for this is the
sum of all he says.

But absurd is the Jesuit himself, Ideo (...) differe^ren^^^ gener^^am ab vna
specie quia etc.
who therefore remoueth the General Difference from one Kind, because it
agrees with the other; whereas he cannot be ignorant, that General Differences
are commonly and indifferently in all their Kinds. Is not this the general
use of all divine signs, to put men (...) mind of Gods pleasure and
benefits, and to seal unto us the certainety of our faith in his promises?
for therefore does God ^incke those signs with his word, that so he might
provide for our weakness, and confirm unto us his promises. If the Jesuit make
doubt hereof, let him overrun the scripture from the first Sacrament or
immortality in Paradise, unto the last signs of ^he small coming of Christ;
and he shall find they agree all in this, as well universal, as particular;
as well those that were delivered in things natural, as miraculous; as well
ordinary, as extr^ordinary:) But I hope he will not deny that a miracle is a
divine sign and Lombard himself can teach him that a Sacrament is one sort
of divine signs. Lib. 4 ^. 1. How far miracles and Sacraments agree in their
use.
Miracles therefore and sacraments agree in this use, but that miracles are
seals, either of the whole doctrine in general, or of some certain promise;
Sacraments, only and especially of the promise of grace.

Neither makes it to the purpose that he says miracles are of themselves
known, E^s^ ^^ta.
and depend not any way on preaching; and that Sacraments are not understood,
unless they be confirmed by the testimony of the word: (...) speaks (...)
the force of miracles is vain. They may indeed of themselves strike into
(...), but they can no more of them selves teach and confirm that heavenly
doctrine whereof they are seals then can the Sacraments without declaration of
their doctrine. Besides, how follows this? (...) themselves do not seal unto
us the promi^es, as (...) they do not at all seal the^. Suppose miracles have
force and efficacy of themselves; that hinders not but that Sacraments also may
have their force and efficacye by the appointment of God. For both natural,
and miraculous, and also voluntary signs do signify, though in one sort the
flame be signified by smoke, in an other the power of God by miracle, in a
third the promise of grace by sacrament.

After this he scoffs at that comparison (as foolish) wherein our wrighters
lyken the word to Princes Charters o^ Letters Patentes, II That the (...) and
a writ^, a Sacrament and a (...) is not absurd.
and the Sacrament to their seals: maintaining the contrary, that the word
rather should be called the seal of the sacrament, the^ the Sacrament the
seal of the word. And why so? Because (says he) as the seal without the
wrighting has his force, and not the wrighting without the seal; so the word
of God even without sacrament has very great authority, the Sacrament without
the word none at all. But twice ridiculous and foolish is the Jesuit: first
in attributinge force to the seal without the wrighting, and none to the
wrighting without the seal: secondly in making the word a seal, because of
it self it has authority. For (tell me Bellarmine) what force has the Popes
leaden bull? or what does it seal unto you being plucked from his pardon? and
if you deny that the wrightings and charters are acknowledged without their
seals; I answer that this is neither generally, nor of it self true. (...).
Did you never see any bills, handwritings, acquittances, or rescriptes of
Princes ratifyed without their seals? The wrightings even of good men, much
more of Princes, and most especially of God himself, have and deserve
sufficient authority in themselves, as appears in times past how the
wrightings of Emperors were wont to be confirmed rather by marks subscribed,
then by waxen seals. But by accident, that is, by reason of the frail faith
and life of man it is now come to pass, that wrightings though confirmed by
many seals are scarsely sure enough. Now what folly is it in you, of the word
to make a seal, because without any sacrament it is of sufficient authority?
whatsoever is in it self authenticke, will you presently take that for a
seal? A seal is the visible sign of any writting, whose use is not so much
to add authority, as to ascertaine us of the truth. Such a sign is not the
word of God. But it is more fitly compared unto wrightings, because therein God
instructs his Church in his will, and does as it were bequeath unto it
certain goods, or good things. It has in it self authority from God the
author; the sacraments are thereunto added as seals, not (as you suppose) that
from them it might receive authority, but that by them God might strengthen our
feebleness and infirmity. For they are visible pictures, or rather the
promises themselves attired in certain ceremonies, and (as it were) visible
words, Tract. 80. (...) c. 15. and contra (...). 19. cap. ^6.
as Austin pretely terms them; because they picture and present unto our eyes
those benefits which the word sounds unto our ears. But more credit is
given to a thing seen then only heard.

Thirdely he cavilles with Luther in this sort. III Baptism of children does
not di^prooue the stre^gthning of our faith by saments.
If a sacrament were nothing else but an instrument to stir up and nourish
^aith in us; why are infantes, mad men, and men asleep sometimes baptized in
the Church? But why does he not likewise make a question of For they also are
christened amongst Pap^stes.
belles, churches, and altars? let your church (if it will) baptize mad men,
and men asleep: as for infantes of the church of Christ, we answer that they
indeed although wanting the use of reason are notwithstanding baptized, because
of the commandment and promise of God. But (you will say) they do no
believe: ergo baptism confirms not their faith. Deny not what you know not.
They belee^e not as men of age: ergo believe they not at all? if this be true,
why may not this also be as true? they are not reasonable as men of age:
therefore they are not reasonable at all. To them is promised the holy Ghost
workinge faith in us, to them is promised the grace of the couenant^, and the
kingdom of God. And although actually they do not believe, yet why may they
not as well by inclination believe through grace, as by inclination they sin
through nature? As therefore they believe: so baptism is unto them a seal
confirming their faith. But who said a Sacrament was nothing else but an
instrument to stir up, and nourish our faith? there are more uses of a
Sacrament besides this. But admit baptism do not confirm faith in insants;
yet it will confirm them when they are come to age. For the fruit of baptism
is not restrained to one moment; August. li. 4. ca 4. de Bap. Lomb. lib. 4.
did. 4. ca. 7.
witness Austen and Lombard himself. Yet are they to be baptized, that their
adoption and regeneration may be sealed unto the^, and they distinguished from
Infidels: which things, as they are not to be accounted nothing; so truly we
doubt not but that through baptism they are imparted and sealed unto the
infantes of the church, not (as you teach) because of the work don, but in
regard of the Institution and appointment of Christ. Thus therefore the Jesuit
sees how the baptism of Children does not dissemble or take away the
confirmation of faith.

But here masking wholly under a vizard of the Anabaptists, Bellarmines
sophistical dilemma for Anabaptists recorted.
Infants (says he) who while they are in baptizing cry and struggle, either
understand what is doing, or not: if they do not understand, neither do they
believe, and are in vain baptized; and then the Anabaptists prevail: if they
understand, then are they wilful sinners, and sacrilegious, and then again
the Anabaptists prevail. Indeed the stage-man plays his part cunningely.
But what if with an armed dilemma (as he terms it) I should likewise say? The
Jesuit, that writ this, is either a good man, or a cauiller. If a good man,
he should not so have tied, and then we have the better: if a cauiller, he
should not be believed, and then again we have the better. Is not this the
like reason? Either horn and part of the Jesuits dilemma is deceiptfull: and
in the former there is a double fallacy. Fallacia est* a secundum quid, cum sic
colligit.
First from that which is but partly true he concludes as if it were simply
and wholly true; as where he reasons thus, Infants do not understand: ergo
they do not believe; it is true of the acts and use, not of the possibility of
belief. I mean that possibility, not which we have by nature, Est eti^^
paralogismus non causae.
but by grace of that promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,.
Secondly he disputes from that which is no cause as if it were a true cause,
thus, Infants do not actually believe: ergo they ought not to be baptized. For
the cause of baptizing of infants is not the actual understanding or belief
of infants, but the promise pertaining unto them, Act. 12. 38.
as being children of the covenant, and Church, as Peter wittnesseth, Let every
one be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ etc.: because to you and to your
children is the promise made.

In the latter part of his argument is the same sophisme. Infantes when they
are to be baptized cry. struggle, and often use misshapen and distorted motions.
But why? is it because they strive against the sacred action of baptism? no,
but because some other thing grieueth them, as that they endure some passion
paynefull to their tender infancye. But what thinks the Jesuit of those
Infants which were under bloody circumcision? what thinks he of Abraham an
oldeman? of the males of his familye? and of the Sichemites? was there (thinks
he) no struggling? no misshapen or distorted motion? Or why should he rather
term infants sacrilegious, then he does his Vestal Nannes, who in tune of
their confession, penance, and communicating (so lessoned by the E^^ers) do
often let fall many a tender tear? who in sacred actions use more misshapen
motions then the Priest at Mass? nay did the Jesuit himself never weep for
devotion in saying Mass, and so prove himself sacrilegious? Bellarmine^ so
great a Doctor (me think) should be a shamed of so childish trifles. Here what
Austin says of this matter. Whereas infants strive as much as they can by cries
and shrinkings, Epist. 75. ad Dard.
it is not imputed unto them, and all their resistance is accounted nothing
etc. because they know so little what they do, that they are not thought to do
it. the like unto this we may read, in his 23 Epistle, and in his 4. book and
25. Chapter of Baptism against the Donatistes.

In the end he dismisseth Luther with this fru^p. I pray (...) what Gospel,
Apostle, or Prophet did he ever read that Sacraments of the new Testament were
seals of the word of God? was it (belike) in the Gospel of Saint Luther? But
where as he says were seals of the word of God, for were seals of the
promise of grace, it is but a cunning piece of forgery, thereby to make us
seem to repose all the authority of Gods word on the Sacraments, which we
before have refuted. Thus he presumes to pull a dead lion by the beard, whose
very looks, were he living, he durst not abide. But I pray, Sir, tell us first
in what Gospel you read that Sacraments are not seals of the promise of
Grace, nor confirm our faith, but that they bestow grace, that they justify
and sanctify, if they be of the old testament, by virtue of the very actio^ of
the receiver; if of the new, by the work done, eve^ without faith, or any good
intent, or motion of the receivers (whereas contrary-wise the scripture speaks
plainly, that Circumcision profitteth^ them that keep the law, Romans 2. 26.
but to the transgressors thereof it is uncircumcision. Mar. 16. 16.
Those which believe and are baptized shall be saved. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
We must examine our selves, (...) so eat of this holy bread) In what gospel
(I say) read you this? Belyke in some Layolan or Gregorio^ Calendar. Now one
the other side hearken where Luther has read, that sacraments are seals of
the promise of grace. God says of circumcision, Genesis 7. 11.
That it may be a sign of the covenant between me and you. But Paul
interprets this covenant to be grace, Romans 4. 11.
and the righteousness of faith. Exo. 12. 13.
Of the Passover, That blood shall be unto you for for a sign upon those
houses where ye are, that seeing that blood I may pass over you. But this
Passover did signifye the grace of Christ. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Of Baptism, Mat. 28. 28.
Baptize all nations in the name (that is, in the authority, commaundem^nt, and
steed) of the father, Act. 22. 16.
the son, and the holy Ghost. And: Arise, wash away thy sins. And, Baptism
is the washing of new birth. Tit. 3. 5.
Baptism saves us. not that wherewith we wash away the filth of (...), but
that whereby with a good conscience we make request unto God. 1. Pet. 3. 21.
Of the Lords Supper: 1. Cor. 11. 25.
This cup is the new testament in my blood. Also Do this in remembrance of me.
This if you understand you have the thing you sought for, namely where in
scripture Sacraments of both laws are said to be seals of grace. (For why, as
you use to say, should sacraments of the new testament be of worse condition
the^ those of the old?) if you do not understand, you are not worthy to be
called a master in Israel, which know not that Forma^ (...) esse. Basil. lib.
3. contra Eunon.
naturally it belongs unto all sacraments to signify and seal unto the
faithful some promise of grace. Listen farther unto the Fathers of the Church,
as Basil, who confesses plainly what you deny impude^tly: (...), that is, For
baptism is the seal of says. Tertull. li. de poenit.
And Tertullian, speaking of baptism in this sort; August. de cat. rud. cap.
18.
This washing is a seal of our faith: And Austen, who terms the sacraments
certain visible seals of heavenly things. Do you not now blush at your own
question, Where red Luther this?

So dismissing Luther he settes upon Zwinglius, taking upon him to lash (for
sooth) and scourge his opinion That Sacraments are signs of engadging our
selves unto God. But we have already proved that here the Stage-ma^ does but
play the caviller. At the length rouzing himself more terribly against Calvin,
Of (...)
Between Luther (says he) and Calvin this is the difference, that whereas
has ^ake the Sacraments testimonies or scales of Gods promise, Luther will
have that promise to be of present justification, (...)
Calvin of eternal election. And least he should (...) to say an untruth, he
cites a place out of Cal^^n, Antidor. concili^, Sess. 6. ca. 5. as if he should
there say, that infants are baptized, not to the end they might be received
into adoption of the sons of God, but that unto them the promise of life
might be sealed, unto whom before by grace of predestination it pertained.
Cavil
And out of the 7. Session and 8. Canon, as if there he should wright, that
the right end and use of sacraments is this, to ascertaine us of the eternal
ado^tion and grace, whereunto before the foundation of the world we were
predestined, Thus far the Jesuit, but all impudently and without shame.
For Calvin in neither place speaks one ^ote of eternal election, or the
grace of predestination. Only in the former this he says: Insants are for this
reason baptized, because they are heirs of the promise. For unless the
promise of life did before pertain unto the^, that man should profane
baptism, whosoever did but minister it unto them. In the latter these are his
words. Allthough baptism be the hand-wrighting of that mutual obligation
which is between God and us, yet the especial use thereof is, to assure us of
free remission of our sins, and perpetual grace of adoption. But is this to
deny that sacraments are seals of the promise of present justification? Is
this to restrain sacraments only to things past, as namely to the grace of
election? But this is Bellarmines trust and fidelity in citing the words and
sentences of the Fathers and our Doctors. Such are his two whole* volumes of
disputations, namely a rude rabble of false quotatio^s, which if the learned
shall vouchsafe in courtesy to examine, they shall soon see this doubtie
disputant left as as dry as a kexe. But to the purpose. That the sacraments are
seals of our eternal election, although I deny not but that in the lawful
using and worthy receiving of them it is most true yet remember I not, that
Calvin has any where thus written, nay the Vbiquitaries of our days slander
Calvin and Beza as maintainers of a clean contrary error, to wit, that they
utterly deny the sacraments to be seals of our election: which also is
altogether false. But the simple and naked truth of Calvines doctrine is this.
Sacraments profit being used a right, and do exhibit seal and confirm^
grace unto the worthy receiver, not in regard either of the work wrought, or
the deserte of the worker, but in respect of the promise of God instituting or
ordaininge them, as also through the faith of the worthy receiver. And here by
grace he understands even our salvation it self, together with all the
precedent causes, means, and consequentes thereof, such as are, our free
election, remission of sins, regeneration, sanctification, and life eternal:
So that by the name of grace he co^priseth, both grace past and already given,
together with that which is present and to come, but especially that which is
there in the sacrament exhibited and present. For even our election before the
world was, is sealed and and assured unto us by the sacraments, not as it is
from aleternities decreed by God, or as a thing done heretofore and past, but
as the present and constante decree of God revealed in the Gospel concerning
our salvation in Christ, and by the same sacraments everlasting life is
confirmed not as a future good, but as already we have taken possession thereof
by faith.

For confirmation of this truth I could produce an infinite number of
testimonies out of Calvin his Christian institution: but it shall suffice to
refute the Jesuit by the cou^ter-poyson of his Counsels: Can: 7. on the
sacraments Calvin says thus: God in the sacraments does promise grace not only
of election, but also of justification, Can. 4. Sacraments are seals of the
Gospel. And can it be denied but that the Gospel is a promise of actual and
present justification by faith? Can: 8. In baptism God washes us by the
blood of his son, and by his spirit does regenerate us. In the sacrament of
the supper he feeds us with the body and blood of Christ. Can 7. of baptism:
this is a principal part of baptism, that is assures us of free remission of
all our sins: and what is this else but present sustification? and these may
serve to co^vince the Jesuit of a militious sla^der, concerning the seals of
our election, that Calv^^ understands them not only of things past.

But who sees not his absurd collection, that if the Sacraments may go for
seals of our eternal election, that then they shall not be seals of present
justification? Are not election and justification subordinate, and consequents
one of the other? so far are they from abolishing one the other, that the
contrary should rather be infered; they are seals of our eternal election,
therefore of justification and present grace. For justification is so proper,
and natural an affecte of election, that there can be had no certainty of the
latter, without assurance of the former. For they who are justified in Christ,
Ephesians: 1. 4.
are also chosen to him before the foundation of the world. Whom God has
pr^destinated these also has he called, Rom 8. 30.
justified, and glorified. Now then let the Jesuit with open mouth excla^e on
Caluins opinion as false, absurd, dangerous, and impious. And why forsooth
false? Because (says he) Calvin, contrary to that which the Scripture
teaches, restrayneth Sacraments only unto the thing past, namely to the grace
of election. But this cavil is already refuted.

And why absurd? Because (says he) he reaches that by the Sacraments the
promises are sealed unto our consciences, and yet that infantes are lawfully
baptized, which noyther have use of reason nor conscience. But we have already
sufficiently proved, that neither infantes borne in the Church of believing
parents, are altogether void of reason o^ faith, if we respect the promised
grace, although actually they have neither the faith nor reason, which is in
those of riper years: nor that baptising of Children and confirmation of their
faith by Sacraments is therefore to be differred because they do not believe,
seeing of the Sacraments there are other ends and purposes whereunto they are
ordained.

But why pernicious and dangerous. Because he teaches that the children of the
faithful are borne just and holy, and has persuaded many that the sacraments
are not necessary unto the receiving of the grace of Christ. Whence it is come
to pass, that many contemn the said sacraments, and in the mean while the
souls of many infantes never purified by the saving waters of baptism, abide
in perpetual corruption. And is it in deed pernicious to teach, that the
children of the faithful are borne holy, that is, not strangers, but heirs
of the covenant, according to that promise; I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed? That therefore is likewise pernicious which the Apostle teaches;
Romans 11. 16
If the root be holy, the branches also are holy. And the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by her husband, Cor. 7. 14.
else were your children unclean; but now they are holy. And this is the
chief comfort of godly parents, that they know that both branch and root
are sanctified, that is, that they and their children may from their mothers
womb plead privilege in the covenant with God, by virtue of the free promise
made unto them and their seed after them.

But they are by nature the sons of wrath? Who knows not that? Calvin
teaches both that they are the sons of wrath in regard of nature; and sons
of the covenant in respect of grace: according to that of Saint Peter; Act. 3.
25
Ye are the sons of the Prophets and nall election, that then they shall not
be seals of present justification? Are not election and justification
subordinate, and consequents one of the other? so far are they from
abolishing one the other, that the contrary should rather be infered; they are
seals of our eternal election, therefore of justification and present grace.
For justification is so proper, and natural an affecte of election, that there
can be had no certainty of the latter, without assurance of the former. For
they who are justified in Christ, Ephesians: 1. 4.
are also chosen to him before the foundation of the world. Whom God has
prodestinated those also has he called, Romans 8. 30.
justified, and glorified. Now then let the Jesuit with open mouth ex^^a^e on
Caluins opinion as false, absurd, dangerous, and impious. And why forsooth
false? Because (says he) Calvin, contrary to that which the Scripture
teaches, restrayneth Sacraments only unto the thing past, namely to the grace
of election. But this cavil is already refuted.

And why absurd? Because (says he) he teaches that by the Sacraments the
promises are sealed unto our consciences, and yet that infantes are lawfully
baptized, which neither have use of reason nor conscience. But we have already
sufficiently proved, that neither infantes borne in the Church of believing
parents, are altogether void of reason or faith, if we respect the promised
grace, although actually they have neither the faith nor reason, which is in
those of riper years: nor that baptising of Children and confirmation of their
faith by Sacraments is therefore to be differred because they do not believe,
seeing of the Scramentes there are other ends and purposes whereunto they are
ordained.

But why pernicious and dangerous. Because he teaches that the children of the
faithful are borne just and holy, and has persuaded many that the sacraments
are not necessary unto the receiving of the grace of Christ. Whence it is come
to pass, that many contemn the said sacraments, and in the mean while the
souls of many infantes never purified by the saving waters of baptism, abide
in perpetual corruption. And is it in deed pernicious to teach, that the
children of the faithful are borne holy, that is, not strangers, but heirs
of the covenant, according to that promise; I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed? That therefore is likewise pernicious which the Apostle teaches:
Romans 11. 16.
If the root be holy, Cor. 7. 14.
the branches also are holy. And the unbelieving wise is sanctified by her
husband, else were your children unclean; but now they are holy. And this is
the chief comfort of godly parents, that they know that both branch and
root are sanctified, that is, that they and their children may from their
mothers womb plead privilege in the covenant with God, by virtue of the free
promise made unto them and their seed after them.

But they are by nature the sons of wrath? Who knows not that? Calvin
teaches both that they are the sons of wrath in regard of nature; and sons
of the covenant in respect of grace: according to that of Saint Peter; Act. 3.
2^.
Ye are the sons of the Prophets and of the covenant. That is spoken against
the Pelagians denying original sin; this against the sophistes, tying grace
to the sacraments: neither of these is perniciously taught, because either
(...) and according to scripture. Let Calvines Christian institution be
searched, and his Commentary on those words of Saint Paul; we are all by
nature the sennes of wrath. Thence may the Jesuit, and Selneccer, and Hunnius,
and all the rabble of Calvines adversaries learn, that original sin is as
natural unto us as poison to a serpent, and yet nevertheless the children of
the faithful are a seed blessed even from their mothers womb. Or if it like
them better) let them hear and reconcile David confessing of himself, Psalm.
51. 5.
Behold I am borne in sin, and my mother co^ceived me to inquity. And yet
elsewhere he comfortes himself in this manner, psa. 71. 4. 5.
On thee have I depended from the time wherein I was borne, and from my mothers
womb thou art my God: or God himself co^plaining in this sort of man's nature.
Genesis 6.
The thought of man's heart is wicked from his childhood, and yet Jeremy
witnessing, Before I framed thee in thy mothers belly I knew thee; and before
thou came out of her womb I sanctified thee. Thus the Jesuit sees in what
respect Calvin says that infantes are borne holy: namely not simply, and
wholly, but in some sort I shall hardly believe unless the Jesuits show it,
that it is found in Calvin that they are borne just. For in this life it is not
all one to be holy, and to be just.

Now whereas he patcheth this unto the rest, that Calvin has persuaded many,
that the sacraments are not necessary unto the receiving of the grace of
Christ, and that thereupon has followed the contempt of baptism with the
destruction of many souls, this is partly a cavil, and partly a plain
sophisme. A cavil that Calvin should altogether deny the necessity of
sacrament, a sophisme in imputing to his doctrine the contempt of baptism,
which the Jesuit faineth to have ensued thereupon.

Indeed he does not bind God and grace unto the sacraments, nor falsely
places in the^ an absolute necessity, as do these Sophisters. His purpose is
only with Bernard to cond^ne, not the absence, but contempt of sacraments. But
is this to persuade many that sacraments are not necessary. Hear (I pray you)
what himself has written of this matter in his ^^stitution. Now ( says he)
even hereby it appears that their conceit is to be cassiered, who adiudge all
that have not been baptized unto eternal death, etc. The promise of God is
manifest: whosoever believes in the son shall not see death, nor come into
judgment, but is already passed from death into life. Which I would not have so
taken, as if I meant that baptism might be contemned without offense (for I am
so far from excusing this contempt, that I affirm the league and covenant of
God thereby to be violated and broken) thus much it suffiseth to prove, that
it is not so necessary, that we must needs think him damned, who shall be
debarred all means and opportunity of obtaining it. But if we yield to their
devise we must without exception condemn all those whom any chance shall
hinder from baptism, how great so ever be their (...), whereby Christ
himself is possessed. And in his Antidot (...) ( says he) that the use of
those helps of our salva^^^n which Christ has given unto us may be said to be
nec^^^^ry, (...) there is opportunity of receiving (...). Howbe^^ ^he faithful
are always to be admonish^^ that the necessary of a sacrament is none other
the^ (...) whereunto the power of God is not to (...). Indeed there is no good
man whose (...) tremble at that (...), The Sacraments ARE THINGS SVPERFLVOVS,
etc. These are his word* which thoroughly retort and refell the (...).

But children are borne holy, therefore they need not be baptized, whence
en^^^th a contempt of baptism. Nay rather contrariwise because they are borne
holy, that is, sons and heirs of the covenant, they had need be baptized. For
(says Calvin elsewhere) they are not received into the church by baptism for
any other reason, but because before they were borne they did appertai^e unto
the body of Christ. Otherwise the children of Christians ought no more to be
baptized then the children of Turks. Wherefore Peter exhorts the lews to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Wherefore? because (says he) the promise
was made to you and to your children. This therefore is the reason why baptism
is due unto our children and not unto the children of Turks because they from
their mothers wombs are children of the promise, which these are not. Wherefore
the contempt of baptism cannot ensue on that, which unto the godly, is the
chief motive of desiring and ministering baptism: neither need we to fear
least that should turn to the destruction of souls, whereupon is grounded the
especial comfort of parents and children, together with the just desire of
baptism. And if the Jesuit proceed therefore to account the baptism of
children vain, because the infants of the church even from their birth are
reckned in the covenant: let me entreat him to learn of his master Lombard,
that baptism is a sacrament of remission of sins before granted through
faith. But O heavy sentence pronounced by the Master of Sentences, Infantes
dying unbaptized, though in carrying unto baptism are damned! O not only
pernicious, but impious also and cruel divinity of the Jesuits, enthralling
God unto elements, chaining his power with absolute necessity (will he nil he)
unto signs and sacraments, condemning no less bloudily, then impiously unto
hell many thousands of infantes who without any fault of theirs could not be
baptized, yea although they be adjudged by Christ himself unto the kingdom of
heaven. I know the authority of Austine is here pretended, who writ that
infantes dying unbaptized must needs be damned, but to mild and gentle
damnation. And if they so applaud this error of that most holy and learned
Father, why do they not as well mainetaine an other of the same Fathers,
altogether relying on the same (...) that infantes likewise without receiving
the (...) s^pper cannot be saved? Hereunto they force Saint Ambrose, but the
learned not without good cause do rather think that Prosper was the author of
those books wherein this is found then Ambrose. For what Ambrose thought may
appear by his oration of the death of Valentinian; as also how godly is the
judgment of Bernard concerning the godly not baptized: God be merciful unto
me. For I cannot desparre of salvation, for want only of the water of
baptism: I can not accoumpt faith vain, I can not confoud hope or forgo
charity, especially it only impossibility, and not contempt forbid that
water.

Last of all the Jesuit inueigheth against the opinion of Ca^uen as impious.
But why! because (says he) it makes the sacraments false, the minister
sacrilegiouse, Gea himself altar, and as it were pertured. For if a sacrament
be a divine oath and seal, whereby the promise of eternal election is sealed,
then as often as it falls out (which is very often) that the reprobate are
baptized, even so often is comes to pass that the words of the sacrament
are false, and God himself altar in the mouth of the minister. This injurious
untruth is more sharp and shameless then all the rest, whose bull-warkes
notwithstanding, builded forsooth on the seals not of present grace but only
of election already past, we have sufficiently battered. The rest is answered
in a word: that sacraments do promise and seal unto us the grace of God, if
they be in their right use: which is not, when they are received by the
reprobate. This only might suffice to cause the Jesuits cavil to vanish like
smoke before the wind. Howbeit I am content to answer more distinctly.

A sacrament does not become false, though sometimes it be in vain ministered
unto the reprobate making show of faith. For in it self it still remains a
seal of grace, though not unto the^, because they believe not: as the son
howsoever in it self glorious and glistring, yet shines it not unto the
blind, because they see not. For it is a sign, conditional, so offering and
sealing grace unto us, that withal on our parts it requires faith and
conversion: which whosoever bring not with them, it neither bestows nor
seals unto them any thing, neither is it unto them a sacrament, that is, a
seal of grace, through their own fault: for it is no use but an horrible
abuse of a sacrament, to be received of the reprobate without faith. The
scripture every where teaches that nothing can be accounted a sacrament
without the use thereunto appointed by God: Romans 3. 35.
If thou be a transgressor of the law thy on cumcision is made uncircumcision.
And This is not to eat the Lords supper. Cor. 11. 20.
And he which offers an ox, Es. 66. 3.
is as if he offerea a dog. The baptism of Simon. Magus was a true
sacrament, but not unto him, Act. 5. 21.
for his hypocrisy, as Peter witnesses, Thou have no part nor fellowsh p^nth
business, for thy heart is not right. That sop in the Lords supper was a true
sacrament, but poison to Judas, not because in it self it was evil, but
because the evil man did evilly receive that which was good. To conclude, by
Lombard his own confession, baptism is alike holy, whether ministered unto the
good or evil: and therefore alike true. But will you call Peter sacrilegious,
because to Simon Magus a reprobate, but professing the Apostolic faith, he in
Gods name ostered grace, and to his power sealed it by baptism? But this he
did not absolutely, but with condition if he truly believed: as Phillip said
unto the Eunuch, thou may be baptized, if thou believe withal thy heart. If
therefore he did not truly believe he sealed nothing unto him, as rightly faith
your friend Lombard, The visible baptism did nothing profit Simon Magus,
because he wanted the invisible. Moreover he discharged his duty, which was
not to search the secrets of hearts, or sound the unmeasurable gulf of Gods
predestination, but to baptize the professors of faith, whether hypocrites, or
no. For the church judges not of things so secret, but only the hart-searching
God. The like reason serves for all other Ministers, which ought to judge of
those that are to be baptized, not according to Gods predestination, but man's
profession and Christ's commandment. This if they do, themselves are not
sacrilegious, but the reprobate hypocrites who vnreverently and irreligiously
press to the sacraments.

But fie on that his blasphemy, where he says, that if sacraments be
ministered unto reprobate hypocrites yet vnrevealed, then God must lie by the
mouth of the minister. Did God (think thou) lie by Peter's mouth when he
baptized Simon Magus? He setiously and sincerely by his word and sacrament
offers adoption and grace unto al, purposing also to bestow it, but
co^ditionally, if they believe: and commands the^ to believe, and receive by
faith the grace offered. But to infidels and hypocrites he is so far from
promising or sealing any grace of adoption and election when they force
themselves unto the sacrament, that he threatens them with a terrible and
fearful judgment. He therefore is true in offering, howsoever the grace
offered to the unbelievers be of none effect.

But (says the Jesuit) he does not only offer, Art. 2.
but indeed also bestow it, when men are indeed baptized. We grant it. For
this Calvin also confesses in Antidot. Artic. Paris. speaking on this manner.
The godly do all confess that in baptism is offered, Antidot. Council. Sess.
7. in Can. 7.
yea and exhibited or given unto us both remission of our sins, and grace of
the holy spirit. But (says he else where) these good fathers by reason of
their grossenesso do not here observe, that what grace so ever is by
sacraments bestowed on us, must notwithstanding be imputed unto faith; For he
which sondereth faith from the sacrame^rs, does as ^f he severed the soul from
the body! God therefore does indeed give that which he offers, but unto those
that believe. To the unbelieving he neither promises nor performs any thing
as long as they continue in their unbelief: and that through their own
fault; because by infidelity they refused the good offered, and as much as in
them lies, make a mock of God which offers it. This Cavil therefore of the
lesuites is no less impudent and blasphemous against God, then was that of the
Jews, who accused God of perfidiousnesse, unless he would perform the
covenant eve^ to the unbelievers: which the Apostle retorting: shall (says
he) their unbelief make the faith of God vain? Romans 3. 3.
God forbidae. Let God be (...), and every man a liar.

Well then. Let us now return the Jesuits blasphemy upon his head. Both he
and his mailler Lombard teach, that reprobation is nothing else, but that some
there are on whom God will have no mercy. For so does the master of sentences
define it. Suppose the^ that the Jesuit even by the very work wrought either
of baptism or of the mass should bestow the grace of sanctification upon
Simon Magus or the like reprobate, shall not he and the sacrament become now
sacrilegious, in conferring grace on a reprobate, of whom God will have no
mercy? may shall not he make God himself a lier and contrary to himself, in
his name bestowing, or testifying (unless he altogether exclude God out of the
sacraments) that God himself bestows the grace of sanct^fication on a
reprobate, on whom notwithstanding he has for all eternity decreed to bestow
nothing, and on whom God will have no mercy. From this blasphemy how the
Jesuit can acquit himself maintaining his opinion of the work wrought, let
him look to it. But howsoever he acquit himself. he must withal discharge
Calvin of the cavil devised against him.

Let this suffice briefly for answer to the perverse peevishness of this
stage declaiming Jesuit. The rest which he disputes toward the end
pertains nothing to us: well they may prevail upon those against whom they
were written, namely Swenckefield and his brethren Vbiquitaries, common
corrupters of the doctrine of Christ his person, and the sacraments.

A PREFACE TO THE FOVRTH PART OF the Catechism, wherein are desciphered the
pestilent pamphlets of some Divines of this age: and Calvin the most valiant
Champion defendant of Christ his glory is briefly cleared of the slanderous
crime of Arrianisme. *
THe argument of this part, (which is Of man's thankfulness toward God)
enforces me to enter the Common complaint of all the godly against the bruit
blockishnesse and foul in gratitude of the world, which after so many
inestimable benefits heaped by almightye God most abundantly on these our
latter days, has only thus far profited, that unthankful men continually
become worse and worse, as if they had sworn perpetual war against so good a
God, and gracious a benefactor. For how huge a cloud of witnesses of Gods
continual kindness. does enuiron us round about what has been denied unto
this age that men could have wished, thereby to have made this life happy and
blessed? I speak not of blessingee common or general, how many, and how
precious are those we have received in particular? The light of the Gospel and
sincerity of doctrine renewed; the purity of sacraments, the true worship of
God, and reading of holy scripture restored, the discovery of Antichrist, the
chasing of darkness, the flight of supersticion, the ruin of of idolatry, and
the liberty of the church after long servitude restored. These so inestinable
treasures how few of us do worthily regard* and not rather with bestiall
blockishnesse overpasse, or shameless impudency disdain? One said some times
of the Athenians that they knew what was good, but did it not. How much more
may we Christians be ashamed of our selves, who not only do not that which we
know to be good, and know it by the light of the Gospel (not as they did by
the light of nature:) but also do even those things which we know are not
good? The whole world is now possessed with security, profanenes, ambition,
luxurye, envy, contempt of doctrine, abuse of sacraments, surfeit of preaching,
and what not? How many are there of those which withhold the truth in
unrighteousness* of those which profess God in their knowledge but deny him
in their life? of backesliding Apostataes, who either enforced by the
vnsta^ednesse of the^ own conceit, look back to the Aegigptian
flesh-pottes, or beguiled by seducing spirits daily revolt from Christ to
Antichrist, like dogs returning to their yo^ mit? but this ingratitude is
perhaps a fault incident to the common sort.

O then that the greater part of our Prelates would ascend unto these breaches,
and draw a counter-mure and sense before the house of Israel, and not like
subtle foxes secke to fat^e themselves with the spoils, and public
scandales of the church, as Ezechiel complained of the prophets of his time. It
has bin ever a great plague unto the church to make sale of the word of G^d or
wrest it to the affections of men, to the lust and favor of the mighty, to
pride and vain glory, to covetousness and luxury. But much more perniciouse
is that plague which at this day with applause of the multitude consumes the
very bowelles of the church, namely the decay of ecclesiastical judgment:
whereas in the mean time through ambition, avarice, envy, and desire of
attempting any thing, as every one is of face most braze^, of tongue most
inte^perate, so much the rather he affects, and by favor of the multitude
obteineth the most eminent places of dignity in the church. Hence proceed
those unfortunate broils between gouerners of the church, who for the most
part studying strife not quietness, and plotting quarrel upon quarrel,
labor by all means possible that ecclesiastical controverfies (by which they
study to advance themselves to a rich and glorious estate) may never come to
the lawful hearing, debating or quieting. Hence also have proceeded so many
pestilent and pernicious wrightings never spiced with any spirit of mildness
and charity, but seasoned with the unsavory salt of vnulence and malice, and
tainted with the poisoned s^inges of harefull slanders, wherewith (for sooth) at
this day Divinity is thought to be beautified, and our doctrine of holiness
shall be presented unto posterity. This is the head of the mischeife; Two
sorts of slounderous wrightings among Divines.
which that it may the better be conceived I speak of two sorts of wrightings
now published.

The first is merely slanderous, wherein the memory of Christ's faithful
servants deserving passing well of the church (namely Zwinglius Calvin, Bucer,
Martyr, (...), Zanchius, Bizi, Grynaeus, and others as well living, as dead,
who teach that the fleshly feeding on Christ's body with our mouths is
contrary to the truth of the Gospel) is fowly wronged, their fame rent and
razed, their wrightings (whence notwithstanding those foxers after their
preaching ca^ be content in their private studies to borrow most of there skill)
are spightfully taxed, their true sense perverted their words wrongfully
wrested, and lastly themselves proclaimed authors of most damnable heresies.

In this kind next unto Schmi^line that Arch-Vbiquitar^e excelled lately one
Selneccer, and now Hunnius and Heilbrunner; whereof the former has not long
since put in printe twelve chief heads mischievously compiled; the later has
in manner afore-saide lately published fifteen chapters of Calvines errors: the
middlemost being a Questionist burdeneth Calvin with A^^^^sme, ^iting certain
places which by the Fathers were interpreted of Christ, but by him somewhat
otherwise understood. But no ingratitude more spightfull, then to slander them
by whose pains thou haste reaped profitte, and the Church in general so
great a benefit; no presumption more intolerable, then to bite and beat
sellow-servaunts, and to revile the deal and (...) nothing less suitable to
the dignity of a Divine, then to play the sycophant or false accufer.

Let us for examples sake instance in that one place of Genesis the 3.
concerning the seed of the woman that should break the serpents head
which they complain to be horribly corrupred by Calvin, because he
interprets the seeat of the woman not particularly of Christ alone, but
generally of the whole Church and posterity of the woman. But were they not
shameless^ in mangling that interpretation of Calvines which should be wholly
cited, they would s^ne be: shamed of so gross a cavil. For to let pass, that
many ancient Fathers before Calvin, and amongst them Chrysostom does so
interpret that place* First they never date deny, Homil. 17. (...) Genes.
that the seed of the serpent, whereunto the seed of the woman is opposed,
must by right in this place be generally understood. Secondly the untruth of
this cavil is hereby descried, in that they wright that Calvine, should
restrain this enmity to men and external, that is common and visible
serpents: whereas Calvine expresseley adds, that GOD in this place under the
name of the serpent, does especially (...) at Satan, against whom he
thundereth out this judgment. Lastly, that he so interprets the woman's
seed of the Church, that withal especially he includes CHRIST the head of
the Church, his very words do witness which they wickedly dismember, when he
adds. Whereas experience teaches that all the so^^es of Ad^m are farie from
vanquishing the devil; we must therefore needs have recourse unto one
head, that so we may learn to whom especially this victory does
pertan^e. So Paul leads us from the seed of Abraham unto Christ. etc. But
is this to make slay upon the external enmity betwixt men and serpents? to
restrain the victory unto men? to exclude Christ?

All this not withstanding Hunnius proceeds yet father, chardging Calvin with
the shifting of many most evident oracles concerning Christ's protecting and
p^tronaging the blasphemies of the lovnes, furthering that damned heresy of
Arrianis^e, weakening the grounds and arguments of the Church, and disanulling
the authority of aunciente Fathers. These indeed are grievous crimes, whereof
notwithstanding I could casilie clear him, were it not for mispendinge too
much time and talk. But by the two first slanders we may easily judge of all
the rest.

And is it indeed so evident an oracle when Moses says: Bara El^him: that a
verb singular joined with anoune plural must needs signify the unity of the
divine essence, and trinity of persons? This Calvin took for none of the
sufficient rest proofs of so great a matter. But if it be so strong and
evident an argument of the Trinity, wh^ did not you ( Master Hannius) place it
with the (...) in your tracte upon the Trinity? why did you quite over slip it?

The words of Eve, (...)
Genesis 4. Canuhiis^ has Jehovah: Calvin thus translated; I have obtained a man
to the Lord: Hunn^us exclaimeth against him for corrupting a most evide^t
testimony of the God head of the M^suas: (...).
because (in his opinion) Eve ^aith, I have obtained a man he Lord. for a^h in
Hebrew is a perpetual note of the accusative case. But if this be true, why
then did the 70. Interpreters translate it by the Lord? (...) (...).
the Tha^gum before the Lord the ancient Latin, and (...) through the Lord? the
Dutch translation of Luther 45. years since of the Lord? Per Deun. Domini.
do all these play the jews with Calvin? I instance no farther.

Well then: shall Calvin therefore be an heretic, for not simply approving
these and other such like arguments used by the Fathers against heretics?
must he needs therefore be an Arrian and a lew? too hard a slander of so
excellent a servant of God. For what man is there that with greater courage and
learning has maintained against all heretics the reverend mystery of the
sacred Trinity, or Christ's eternal Deity? who has evermore sharply reproved
and repressed those mad dogs Servetus, Gentilis. with their confederates in
villainy, Alciat, B^andrat and the rest?

And if he observed some proofs not plain or pregnant enough used by the
ancient fathers in their conflictes against heretics, what of that? for all
this he has resolutely avouched an hundred other things concerning the
eternal Deity of Christ against all fallacies and forgeries of lews and
heretics: whereof least any should make doubt, I will show just proof by one
or two examples out of his commentaries.

Genesis 1. v. 3. Which alone, says he (meaning the creation of the world by the
word of God) is sufficient to refu^e the blasphemy of Servetus. Here the
foule-mouthed heast does bark. saying that this was the first beginning of the
Word, when God commandea that there should be light. Whereas much better might
be inferred the eternal essence thereof, considering that there we^e upon the
suddame created by the word of God, such things as before were not Where fore
the Apostles proof of Christ's Divinity stands with good reason, that whereas
he is the Word of GOD, by him were all things created.

Exodus 3. v. 2. Proving that Christ was that Angel of the Lord, he wrighteth
after this manner: The anciens Doctors (...) truly think that the eternal
Son of God was so called in respect of his Mediatorship. And shortly after No
marvel therefore if the eternal word of God, being one and the same in
essence and deity with the father, took upon him the name of a^ angel, in
regard of he embassage by him afterward to be undertake. The two oracles of
Esaie in the 7. cha. and ^4. v. touching the fruit of the virgins womb called
Immanuel: and in the 9. cap. and 6. v. concerning a son given unto us, he
does so violently extorte from the Jews, and so strongly prove the^ to be
meant of the only begotten son of God borne of the virgin Marie, that no man
lightly could have done it better. And where Jeremy in his ^3. ca. and 5. v.
speaks of raysinge up a budde or branch unto David, he uses these words:
Here therefore God recall^th them unto the Messiah. And soon after, Without
doubt here the Prophet speaks of Christ. Where also at largely refuteth the
Jews, endeavoring to stream this branch to all the posterity of David. And
after against the same Jews: One and the same redeemer as called as well the
son of David as Jehovah. How is he called the son of David? because he was
to (...) of that live. How then Jehovah? Hence truly is gathered that (...)
there is some thing more excellent the man and he is called Jehovah or the
Lord, because he is the only begotten son of God one altogether with the
father in nature, glory, eternity, and Divinity.

In the 12 ca. and 14. v. of the prophecy of Hose, showing how he is both
Jehovah and also an angel: Christ ( says he) the eternal wisdom of God,
did put on the person of a Mediator before he was clothed with our flesh. He
was therefore even then a Mediator, and in that respect also an angel. Mean
while he was also then Iehouab, who is now God manifested in the flesh. And
afterward Thus is this place worthy the remembrance to witness the Deity of
Christ.

Upon the 4. ca. of Micah, the 3. v. The Prophet M^cah speaks of God
himself, not expressly mentioning Christ, because he was not as yet
manifested in the flesh: how be it we know that this was fulfilled in his
person, that God has governed the world, and subdued unto himself all the
nations of the earth, we therefore avouch Christ to be true God, because he
did not only minister to his father, as Moses or any other of the Prophets;
but was himself also high sovereign of his church. and in the 7. ver. of the
same chap. Though Christ was the true seed of David, yet was he withal
Jehovah likewise, that is God revealed in the flesh.

In the 1. of Zachar. the 19. v. We must remember what I said before: that
this chief a^gell was the mediator and head of the church. But he also is
Jehovah. because we know that Christ is God manifested in the flesh.

Zach. 2. v. 8. Hence we geather that Christ is here pr^figured, who is
himself very Jehovah, but withal the angel and messenger of his father. and
in the 10 ver. We see therefore that the name of Jehovah is fitted unto Christ,
and that there is no difference of nature betwixt the father and the son,
but that they are to be distinguished only in person. As often therefore as
Christ declares his Diui^itie, he takes unto himself the name of Jehovah:
But afterward he showed that in himself he has some thing peculiar and
distinct, namely this, that he is the messenger or Ambassador of his father.

Zach. 3. ver. 3. Now we see that he is termed an Angel, who was of ^n named
Jehovah. For my (...) therefore I make no question but that the name as well of
angel as of ehouah should be referred to the person of Christ, who is the true
and only God.

Zach. 11. ver. 14. This we must hold for a principle, that Christ from the
beginning was the true Jehovah. Because therefore the son of God is of the sa^^
nature with the Father, and also one God together with him, etc. with like
fidelity and perspicuitie does he every where in his commentaries upon the
new Testament, maintain the eternal Deity and Coexistence of our savior
Christ. (...).


Coloss. 2. v. 2. This in the mean time is a memorable place to prove the
Deity of Christ, and his unity of essence or nature with the father. For having
prefaced somewhat touching the knowledge of God, he straight ways applies it
as well to the Son as to the Father. Whence it follows that the Son is
one and the same God with the father. See gentle Reader what he wrighteth upon
those words of the Apostle, God was manifested in the flesh. After many words:
So says he by this one testimony is the true and catholic faith excellently
fenced and fortified against Arrius, Marcion, Neflorius, and Eutyches.

Ioh. 5. v. 20. Although the Arria^s have endeavored to shifte this place, and
some there be even at this day which subscribe unto them: here notwithstanding
we have a notable testimony of the Divinity of Christ.

Act. 7. v 20. So this place yields apparent proof of the eternel Deity of
Christ, and unity of essence with the Father. But in so clear a case what
need more words? A thousand like places are every where obvious in his golden
wrightings, which may yield plentiful matter unto al posterity to stop the
beastly barking of these raging dogs.

But to return to my purpose, if Calvin in this conflict did not make all fi^h
that came to net, but signified that many things approved by ancient Fathers
were now too much exposed to cavil of heretics being otherwise of himself a
most valiant maintainer of Christ's eternal majesty, which preeminence even the
slanderous adversary (to his grief) must of conscience yield unto him: must he
therefore be proclaimed an Arrian, or patron of Arrians? does he deserve to be
so contumeliously distained, as if carried headlong with a violent stream of
vain glorious boasting, he did of set purpose corrupt the plainest oracles of
scripture touching the mystery of the sacred Trinity, and eternal Deity of the
Son and holy Ghost^ or as though he wrested the Christians weapons out of their
hands? or by manifest consent were an open abetter of the Arrinish glosies? No,
no, would to God rather you Vbiquitaries did not so, o^ would at least cease to
spread the infection of your Arrian leprosy throughout the church. He indeed
made choice of some argument before others, not unadvisedly, or to such purpose
as you slanderously imagine, but as himself often profesieth, because he did
wish we would bring nothing but what were sound and substantial.

And good reason: for he found by experience in his conflictes with Servetus,
Gent^^is, and the like monsters, which were arguments of strength and
perspicuity, and which were not; which did powerfully press the adversary, and
which did not* And therefore he saw well that he was to co^bate not with number
but weight of arguments, and by his example taught others how to encounter
heret^ques, who are now grown far more subtle and slippery then heretofore
was either Samosate^^^ himself, or Arrius, or any other of their principal
patriarchs For now the adversary which by these his instruments impugneth the
glory of Christ is grown old and wily. There are now (to use the words of
Cip^ian) almost six thousand years accomplished, De exhort. (...) ad
Fortunarum.
since first the Devil began thus to war against God. He has by this t^^
even by practice of antiquity thoroughly instructed heretics in all sleightes
of attempting, all tr^^kes and devises of undermining. Lastly, seeing the
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the prophets; this worthy and excellent
servant of God did only by wrighting advise, not prescribe unto the church any
interpretations or opinions of his own. Cease therefore (ungrateful
exclaimers) to for^e out against him the pestilent poison of slaundering
tongues in your pulpits, which without him many of you were scarsely able to
mainetaine with credit.

But to let these pass, I come now to the second sore of wrightings which is
both heretical and intolerable, for monstrous paradoxes therein maintained,
plain principles of divinity d^faced. open testimonies of scripture perversely
corrupted, heresies long since condemned lately restored, and imposed upon the
simple vulgar for verities Eva^gelicall. In which kind the most bitter
A^chilochian disputant Huber^us an impudent back iuding Apostata does now Lord
it; whom hatred against the truth truly known, but want only denied and
wilfully impugned does every day more then other so swiftelie sweep away with
a continual current of barking and backbiting, that me^ may justly suspect
him for a fearful example of one given over by God into a reprobate sense. God
of his mercy g^aunt him a better mind if he be not past cure, or at least so
bridle his fury, that he carry not others with him headlong to destruction.

He as an impe of Pelagius, and mouthy sectary of E^icur^us fills all
Germany with horible exclamations, These. 19. 60. 65. 66. 68. 94. 112. 182.
187. 214* 735. 75^ (...)
that all men without exception, as well faithful, as Infideli; already
dawned, as hereafter to be condemned, reprobate, as others, suppose dogs and
hogs, as Christ his sheep; Nero and Heliogabalus, as David and Iosaphat;
Judas, as Peter are by the death of Christ reconciled unto God, sanctified,
justified, their sius pardoned, themselves received into the bosom and savor
of God, Lib. germ. page 94. 98. 99. 106. 10^ etc.
in a word saved (applaud your patro^ and procter, o you dogs, and hogs, which
has opened so wide a gate unto Athe^sme) no man damned for sin, Schmidlin, and
Osiander condemned by this Apostata, for putting out of controversy that with
God there is a certain number of the^ which shall be saved.
but only for unbelief* that in God there is no eternal decree of election and
reprobatio^; that God has not defined a certain ^u^ber of them which shall be
saved; that al me^ ever since the fall of Adam are elect in Christ, that
Election grace and forgiveness of sins is general and common unto all and that
with God there is no special Election, but this special Election is only in
respect of men, as every man privately applies to himself that grace which is
common unto al; that God knew from everlasting who would embrace his grace
offered, and who again would make shipwreck thereof; that to Elect is nothing
else but to invite and win mankind unto himself; Protocol.
that many of the Elect do perish; Mompelg. 503.
that the certeinty of Gods gifts and graces whereof we boast out of Romans 11.
29. where they are said to be without repentance is a vain brag; that our
Election in Christ is founded on a supposition and condition If we believe;
that it relyeth wholly on our faith; that faith is not given us indeed without
the grace of God, howbeit the means by which it is given us are in our own
power, that the unregenerate have an arbitrary ability to run as soon as God
calls them by his word; that they can of them selves perceive and understand
the Lords voice when he cries unto them; that the cause why of many who use
the same means, some believe and persevere; (...) her some believe not, or
believing persevere not, is the right or not right use of the means, and that
this use is in our own power; that the 9. Chapter to the Romans treats not
of Predestination to life or death; that this doctrine of pedestination makes
God a lying God, a cruel God, a God rejoicing in evil, and an unjust God; that
it overthrows the ministry, and leaves no place for wholesome exhortation;
that it breeds security and despair in men: and an hundred other postions
of this kind, wherewith if you confer the ancient pestilent heresies of
Pedagius and Coelestius, they will concur with this doctrine, and meet
therewith as just as germans lipes. For the Pelagians taught the self same as
appears both out of the writings S. Austen, and out of the epistles of
Prosper, and of Hilarie. unto him, touching the relics and remainder of the
Pelagian heresy in France. They taught that in deed all men had sinned in
Adam, The erroneous doctrine of the Pelagians.
and that no man was saved by his own works, but by the grace of God in
regeneration, howbeit the proptiation of Christ's blood is (say they) proposed
unto all without exception, that whosoever will lay hold on faith, and receive
the Sacrament of Baptism may be saved; that God knew before the framing of the
world, who would believe and continue faith full, and that he predestined
them unto his kingdom whom he forsawe to be such, as being freely called by
grace would prove worthy their Election, and depart this life with a laudable
and happy end; and that therefore all men are admonished to believe and live
well, that no man might despair of attaining salvation. They denied that there
was a set number predestinate of God, least the use of exhortation thereby
should be void, and the force and edge of preaching rebated. They avered that
all serious industry in weldoing was clean removed, and all manner of
virtues cancelled, if Gods decree prevent men^ wills; that under the title of
Predestination the Stoics fatal necessity was again set on foot and
established; that the. 9. Chap. to the Romans was was never understood by the
ancient Fathers of the Church of a free Election preventing our will and
merits; That this doctrine thwarteth and crosses the edification of preachers
and teachers; and were it true, yet is it not to be divulged and uttered in
public, because it may minister unto some cause of despair; and the hearts
of ignorant men are by this kind of dispute set on mamme^ing: because the
Catholic faith may be taught and defended without it. Fausius added unto man's
endeavor the help of grace, that for sooth graces and man's endeavor yoaked
together finish (...) works which remain, and God by his word works in us
it will that which we read or hear: but to cons^et, or (...) consent
thereunto is so absolutely our own, that if we^ will the master is to
thwathput in execution; if we (...), we make the working of God to be of no
force or effect with us.

These and such like were the old brain sick sollies of the P^lagians, which
I think no man so far to seek in Christian religion, that he conceiueth not
how this cursed wretch has set them down word for word as it were, and
published for new oracles.

Nevertheles I know his protestation will be, that he has hitherto never
sucked at the noisome sink of Pelagius heresies, but in heart detesteth them.
But Puccius that new vpstart Pelagian as vain and wavering an Apostata as
Huber himself has cleared the case; Puccius, who lately trampling the truth
of the Gospel under his feet, and betaking himself to the Jesuits, has so
openly and shamfully set a broach again and defended the Pelagian errors,
that very shame and conscience with-helde the Jesuits of Prage from publishing
in printe that monstrous book of his. He together with his Haber our Apostata
mainteineth all the former positions, and yet himself would not seem, no nor
endure the name of a Pelagian. Howbeit in most matters he is more apparent to
be such a one. For that which this our Apostata oftentimes feighneth he will
do, and yet for very conscience dares no where perform, he takes on him to
define predestination on this manner. Predestination is an order, foreseen and
proposed by God unto himself, wherein he has decreed from all eternity, what
should befall every, particular person, which he has created partakers of
Christ their Savior, and heirs of an everlasting heritage, leaving to every
one free w^ll in this life to fall, or not to fall from him, as he shall make
choice unto himself when he (...) possessed of the use of reason. For h^^ will
was that (...) many as forsook not their ^reat^^ should be saved but they who
persisted steadfast in their faith and allegia^ce unto him, and manfully
resisted the adversaries should be his approved and chosen, and not only be
saved, to reign also with Christ in his kingdom:, and in life eternal.
Again who for a time started aside and fell fr^^ him, should be reformed and
purged by temporary punishments: but they who make one utter defect, and
^^^a^ely resist the secret working of his spirit, should become reprobates and
inflexible. Thus far Pucciu^* He farther maintains that as Christ is the
Creator, so is he the Redeemer also of all men, and every particular man: that
all are borne in the state of salvation and grace; and by Consequent are
blessed, if they procure not the^r own destr^ction through infidelity, and
unbelief; that E^^^tion and Grace are general, that Faith is a gift of God
general, and common unto all (...), nay tha^ it is natural; and that al men
have a pronenesse unto pretty; that the difference of good and evil (...) on
earth arises from the good or evil use of the knowledge of God; that Reason in
deciding controversies of Religion is sovereigne Emperesse; (...) that this
doctrine well agrees with that doctrine of the Apostle Romans 9. 10. 11. only it
is repugna^ to S. Auste^s disputations, and certain Council and Schoolmen,
who are wholly grounded on the opinion of S. Austen. He beseeches the Ies^^
(...) and amongst them especially Bellarmine, that the cleave and stick not
overmuch unto the definitions and interpretations of Austen and the Schoolmen;
and that they no longer debar and defeat the world of this his notable course
of interpreting and understanding the Scriptures, etc.

Now I demand of this our Apostata and his purple Prelate of Tubinge, whether
they here de^ery Pucc^^^ as a Pelagian or no? I know well they will answer
that this is a dunghill of Pelagian draffe and filth. He are therefore yet a
little farther this your vpstart gloser Puccius. He has prefixed before the
33. chapter of his book this argument: I will show how the Divines of
Witte^^erge Luthers successorsioin^ (...) opinion with us: but Beza and the
rest of Calvnes accomplices persist in their headstrong wilfulness, and corrupt
diverse textes of Scripture. Afterward he breaks out into your praises, and
applaudeth your good proceedings in Christian doctrine on this manner. Whilst I
was comp^ling this tract I happened ^n the answer of Th. Beza Calvines
successor to the Acts of the Conference held in Mountpelier published at
Tubinge; which Answer was printed at Geneva in the year of our Lord 1588;
wherein I saw how desperately the Calvinists contend with Lutheran Divines
both about other opinions, and expressly in this touching Predestination; I
perceived how miserably they mutinize within themselves, who stray and wander
without the (...) and limits of the Church and succession of the Apostles.
Howbeit the zeal of truth wherewith I was inflamed caused me to re^oice,
whereas I saw that the Divines of Wittenberge had laid aside a great part of
Luthers tyrannous cruelty, and barbarous absurdity (...) this point. And that
THEY CONSENT WITH US IN THE SVBSTANCE OF THE THING IT SELF although they
stagger and err in the interpretatu^ of the Scriptures, and Sacraments. This
Pucc^us reports of our good neighbor Divines (...) Wittenberge. Out upon
this doleful and lamen^table consent! out upon this shameful ^oint co^spiracy!

Here they will call heaven and earth to wi^nesse, that this pertains not
unto the^, that the^ desire is to have their opinions refuted by us: (...) not
long since that currish A postata wished for (...) Champion on whom he might
fasten his holden (...) and purchase to himself a name by his glorio^
conflict. But let him know that no man is^ mad as to enter combat with a
self condemn desperate person. In vain he provokes me^ name,
notwithstanding, in the mean space, know that I have not been retchles^e in
defen^ of the truth, and arming my hearers against the his doctrine, whilst I
have at home ripped his ruderabble of detestable opinions. And in the^ Treatise
of the Universality of Redemption that fa^mous personage D. JAMES KIM^DONCE
the worthy Governor of our Vn^versit^, whom in honor I here name, has
employed himself, debating the maine question, resolving it very iudiciously
in his public L^ctures. Concerning the rest it were impertine^ to chew a dry
Colewott, and harp daily on one string.

Augustine long since, and Alipius his companion, as Hierome testifies in his
Epistle dated unto them, has taken much pains and travel in confuting the
heresy of the Pelagians, and has written thirty whole books distinguished by
diverse titles, besides certain Epistles in which of purpose he beats down
this Pelagian outrage. Prosper reports of above three hundred who wrote
against that heresy. Augustine himself witnesses that it was condemned in
five several Councels in Afric. There is a notable tracte of Fulgentius his
first book unto Monimus extant touching the twofolde predestination of GOD,
the one of the good unto glory; the other of the evil unto punishmente.
Maxentius also has certain short Theses directed against these Pelegianst
and that golden book of Luther of MAN'S SLAVISH WILL against that halfe-Pelagian
declamation of Erasmus is every where common and obvious. Lastly, there are
diverse sound disputations of BRENTIVS, HESHVSIVS, SCHNEPFFIVS, and especially
HEREBRAND touching this matter. And does the cursed Apostata look then that
some one of us should stop his blasphemous mou^h? Let him over-read these,
and refute them: or if he be not able so to do, henceforth let him surcease
his profaning Gods truth.

The truth of Scripture shall stand invincible against this barking dog, and
the very gates of hell it self; which teaches of redemption by Christ. oh. 3.
36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes
not the Son, shall not see life but the wrath of God abides o (...) abides,
it abides on him. Epes. 1. 3.
Of Predestination and grace, He has chosen us in Christ before the
fou^dations of the world. Who^ he^ has Predestined, Romans 8. 30.
the^ also he called. Yet the children were borne it was said, Romans 9. 11. 12.
13. 18.
The older shall serve the younger* As it is written, I have Loved Jacob, and
have hated Esau. Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, (...) whom he will he
hardens. The Election has obtained it, Romans 11. 7.
and the rest have been hardened. Of faith, al Men have not Faith. 2 Thest. 3.
2
Unto You it is give^ for Christ, that not only yea should Believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake. Phil. 1. 29.
It is God which work^ bin you both the (...) and the deed. Act. 13. 48.
And as Many is were Ordained unto eternal life Believed. Of Perseverance. The
foundation o God remains Sure, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who (...) his. Ioh. 10. 28.
I give unto my sheep etern^^ life ( Eternal says Christ, not for three
days) and they shall Never Perish, neith^ shall any man pluck the^ (...) of
mine hand. I have prayed for thee that thy Faith Fail Not. Luc. 22. 32.
False Prophets shall show great signs and wonder^ so that, Mat. 24. 24.
if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect. I give thee thanks O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, Mat. 11. 25. 26.
because thou have hid these things from the (...) and men of vnd^rstanding,
and have opened them unto babes. It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure
was such. Let them, who carry themselves as (...) as heaven, learn first to
adore and bow the knees of their hearts at these and such like mysteries of
Gods truth, ere they peise them after the light fantasies of their own brain.

Here I had purposed to have declared in brief what a variable inconstant
Proteus they imagine God to be: what a new stamp of Diuinitis they have
coined: what principles of religion they in ringe, what scriptures they
scoffingly shift and shake of. But I have not the leisure of performing thus
much; yet can I not but briefly insert one example at least amongst many of
the desperate boldness of this impudent man.

Whereas Luke says of the Antioclnans Paul's hearers, Act. 13. 48.
And they Believed, As Many as were Ordained unto eternal life, he manifestly
sets down who they were, and why they believed the Gospel: to wit, They
who were predestinate and ordained by God in Christ before the foundation of
the world unto faith, repentance, and life eternal. Herein there is a joint
consent of all the true professou^es of Christian religion. Chrysostom says,
Homil. 30. in Act.
They believed who were before Ordained, that is, before Appointed by God.

But hear what this new Prophet says; They believed (says he) who were
ordained unto eternal life, that is, as many as followed and traced the order
prescribed by God, and were to be saved by him: or, as embraced Gods
ordination, ^b^ied him, swarued not from this his ordination, is others, were
preserved unto life eternal. Who ever saw a more shameless man? Let him show
us in scripture that which he vaun^eth of his order: let him prove unto us,
that to be ordained: Ordinem, sequi.
unto life eternal is equiuale^t and al one with that, to follow Gods
prescribed order. First therefore Luther himself vnmasketh his impudent face
in his mother-tounge Translation Ephesians. 1. And Romans 8. Whom he knew before
those he predestinate; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9.
he means God. And in an other place: God has not appointed us unto wrath
but to obtain^ salvation etc. Fifthly they were ordained unto life eternal as
unto their end. Now the ordination of man unto his end issues from God Paccius
himself says that this order which man ensues as prescribed by God is to
believe the Gospel, and so to be saved. But if so, then through this forgerie
the sense of this place shall be on this manner: As many as were ordained
believed, that is forsooth, as many as believed, beeleeued. Then which
iteration nothing can be devised more absurd and foolish. To conclude, let us
grant and wink at the gloss, and let him tell us why (according to this
opinion) some were ordained, that is, some followed Gods order and good
motions, other some followed it not. For this they did either of themselves, or
through the assistance of Gods special grace: If of themselves; then hence
forth let him not deny the name of a Pelagian: If of God; then remains there
yet an other question, to wit, why God gave grace unto some, and not unto other
some; and escape he cannot, but that he must either tie grace unto man's will,
as did Pelagius; or confess Gods special ordination, which is the truth we
labor for.

AN ORATION OF D. ZACHARY VRSINE, exhorting to the study of Christianity:
pronounced by him in the ELIZABETH School when he began his Lectures upon
PHILIP MELANCTHON his grounds of Divinity entitled Eramen Theologicum. *
SInce by advise of your regents and overseers in study, I have been wished to
deliver unto you some short sum of Christianity, I must acknowledge my
weakness far unable to support a burden of such weight. For this is a
doctrine ever past understanding not only of the most wise and sharpe-sighted
of this world (unless instructed by the voice of the Church and power of the
holy Spirit) but for a great part unknown even to the Angels themselves,
until it pleased the son of God to reveal it out of the deep wisdom of
his eternal father, which if all the wits and tongues of men and angels should
strain themselves to unfold and grace with curiosity of style and depth of
invention, they could never be able to speak any thing correspondent to the
dignity and deserte of so divine a subject. Being therefore to my self guilty
of mine own defects, I had rather leave this labor to some other, who might
more worthily attempt, and more happily perform it then my self: but
considering again the place and person I sustain, I have thought it my duty
to do you al service in furthering your salvation, and to show obedience to God
inviting me to these religious labors, and promising (which is the chiefest
thing) his gracious assistance, which who so enioieth need not despair of any
thing, for it pleases God to show his mighty power in weak and abject
instruments, according to that of the Psalmist, Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger. Psalm. 8. 3. The word which he uses
signifies a child which begins to speak and understand. But it is a thing
usual to attribute the name of children, not unto those only which are so in
years, but unto those also which are such in understanding or doing ought
besides. They also which are infants in years, are sufficient witnesses of Gods
goodness and providence. The manifest tokens of Gods presence in miraculous
propagation, preservation, and sustaining of mankind do sufficiently refell and
^efute Di^^^s and Ath^sts of al sorts, both such as deny at all that there is
any God, and such as do not acknowledge him to be such a God as he professes
himself to be. But Christ in 21. of Mat. 16. v. draws this place to a
confession, in which sense it agrees to us al, even as many as think or
speak ought of God. For we are infantes in understanding and utterance of all
heavenly things. We learn in this life some small rudiments of them, as truly
and religiously says the Emperor Gratian in his confession to Ambrose: We
speak of God so much, not as we ought, but as we can. Yea even the Prophets
and Apostles confess as much of them selves. As 1 Cor. 13. 9. We know
imperfectly and we prophecy imperfectly. But when that which is perfect shall
come, then that which is imperfect shall be abolished. And in the ^2 ver. Now
we see through a glass darkely, But then shall we see face to face.

But though both those rudiments which we learn be feawe, and the word of
preachinge be plained to our capacity, wherein God himself speaks to us as
unto infants, and suffers us to speak like infantes of himself, yet will
God so exact of us in this life skill in this doctrine of himself, that
otherwise he gives us no hope of an other life, and these rudiments (how
simple so ever) do so far exceed all human wisdom, that betwixt the one
and the other is no comparison. For these principles or grounds are a wisdom
unknown to reason, necessary and sufficient to everlasting salvation. Let us,
therefore not only acknowledge our infancy, but also show our selves willing
to be reckned in the number of sucklings and infants. For as the child grows
not that is not sustained with the mothers milk or other convenient
norishment: so neither must we refuse the milk of Gods word, whereby we are
norished and sustained unto eternal life, least we be put besides all hope of
our perfection. This is that spiritual infancy, Mat. 21.
pleasing God as Christ witnesses when he rebukes the Pharisees which were
offended at the children singing in the temple Hosanna to the son of David.
These are those infantes, in whose words it pleases him to be powerful, by
whose mouth, as the psalm adds, he perfiteth his strength, or (as they
translate it who consider the original) he stablisheth his kingdom. But he
speaks of that strength or kingdom which is seen in this life: The kingdom
of Christ.
which is for the son of God to appoint and vphould his ministry, to gather
his dispersed church, to quicken the faithful believers by the preaching of
the Gospel, to sanctify them by the holy spirit unto eternal life, to
protect his church in this life against the kingdom of Satan, after this life
to raise up the faithful unto life eternal, that in the^ his Deity may
reign openly, not by ministry.

What the foundation of this kingdom is Saint Paul teaches, 1. Cor. 3. 11.
saying, Other foundation can no man lay then that which is said, which is Jesus
Christ. The foundation is Christ, first in his person, for that he bears,
keeps and comprehends all the members and parts of this kingdom, united
and ingraffed in him, as does the foundation al other parts of the building,
or as does the vine all the branches: ^ then to the doctrine of himself, that
is of his person and office. For as good laws are the strength and sinews of
kingdoms politic; so this kingdom is composed, confirmed and ordered by
this doctrine delivered of Christ. And as the house cannot stand without the
foundation, so except we know who Christ is, and what he has performed for
our sakes, al religion besides is but vain, forged, none at all.

This foundation is laid by the mouth of suckelings and b^bes which believe,
and being ^^red up by the holy Ghost do learn and embrace the doctrine which
they hea^e and so grow into Christ, in whom they be ingraffed.

In this weighty work God vouchsafes to use our infancy for an instrument, to
the advanceme^t of his glory (whilst the weightines of the work, and
weakness of the instruments do plainly show, that all this is done not by
our strength; but by the power and might of the almighty God:) and also to
abate the pride of his enemies, whilst their might and power is surpassed by
our weakness, and our show of wisdom does in the end show that nothing is
more foolish then their wisdom, as it is said; your strength shall be in
silence and hope. For the son of God destroieth the works of the Devil,
delivering those that believe from his tyranny, pardoning and putting away
their sins, beginning in them righteousness and life eternal, defending his
church, accusing and discovering the malice of his enemies, repressing and
punishing the^ both now, and in the final delivery of his church from all
evils. And all this (manger the gates of hell) he does partly bring to pass
and partly testify by the unworthy and simple mouths of me^; as it is said 2.
Cor. 10. v. 4 The weapons of our wa^far^ are not carnal, but mighty through God
to cast down boldes, casting down the imaginations, and eve^e high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ, And having ready the vengance against all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

As therefore the baseness of the vessel does not prejudice the
preciousenesse of the merchandise therein contained: so neither must you
disdain the meanness and infancy of him that delivers this doctrine unto
you, as derogatinge ought from the weight of those reasons, which shall be
alleged to persuade you to the seriouse study of Christian religion.
Catechizing is necessary.
But purposing forthwith to recite some of them, I find my self so plunged in
the depth thereof, that I can hardely resolve where to begin. Yet because I
must of necessity handle some of them, let that be the first which should be
the rule of all our actions and studies, 1 For Gods commandment.
namely the will of GOD revealed in his word. For we now confer together
which are fellow-citizens of the church. Knowing for certain that the books
of the Prophets and Apostles are sure interpreters of Gods will and purpose. In
them are precepts every where delivered and repeated, commanding without
exception to search and know the doctrine therein contained. This is that
precept of the sabbath delivered in the ten commandments, this is that
whereof our savior said in the 10 of Luc. 42. v. that one thing was
necessary. This is that wisdom whose knowledge he says is eternal life: this
David comme^deth, as in many other places, so in the first psalm, where he
lays down as it were a breife thereof. But this our heavenly father,
merciful to mankind, and careful for our salvation thought not sufficient;
he added therefore a peculiar charge of proposing a su^me of this doctrine unto
all, especially the younger sort, and this* is that which we term
Catechizinge. As Deuter. 4. 9. Thou shall (says he) teach thy sons. And
Deuter. 6. and 11. Lay up these words in your hearts and in your minds, and
hang them for a sign in your hands, and place your eyes thereon. Teach thy
children to meditate in them, when thou sit in thine house, and wa^kest in
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou rizest up. Thou shall wright
them upon the posts and doors of thine house, that thy days and thy childrens
days may be multiplied in the land. Here we see parents and those which are
^nsteed of parents are commanded to teach, and provide that there be teaching:
the younger sort to learn; both sorts daily to inculcate, repeat, and meditate
upon this doctrine. Now whereas he will that this doctrine should be delivered
to our children, and always placed before our eyes, it is plain that he
requires brevity and perspicuitie, that is a catechism or short sum of
Christianity, with an exposition neither tediouse nor difficult. So Paul 2.
Tim. 1. v. 13. Keep the true pattern of wholesome words, which thou have heard
of me in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. Here together with the
definition of our Catechism, we have the exercise and practice thereof
commanded.

This true pattern whereof the Apostle speaks does signify true sentences of
each part of this doctrine. True pattern of wholesome words.
briefly and orderly comprised, and as it were presented to our view: with a
form of teaching and speaking that is proper, plain, and suitable to the
wrightinges of the Prophets and Apostles. Whereupon he names them wholesome
words delivered by himself in faith, What a catechism is.
or concerning faith and love which is in Christ, that is in the acknowledging
of Christ: as every where he reduces all piety and religion to faith and
charity. The Catchisme therefore is a su^me of the doctrine of faith and love
in Christ, delivered by the Prophets and apostles. Or A sum of Christianity,
breifely, orderly, and plainly comprised. For we must not devise a doctrine of
our own, but of necessity refer our selves (as it is said Esai the 8. v.
20.) to the law and to the testimony. But hereunto also must be added an
exposition, to unfold truly the parts and method, and to interpret plainly
the words and phrase.

This reason alone might be sufficient to stir up me^ not propha^ely minded,
2. Our salvation.
to the study of this heavenly doctrine. God converteth and saves such as are
of age and understanding by knowledge of this doctrine as the chief instrument
of his word
For to such the will and commandment of GOD is sufficient though there were no
other reason besides. But since it has pleased our merciful God to yield unto
our weakness some reasons why he has given us this commandment, it behooves us
to consider of them with all reverence. Now God teaches us that we must
therefore learn this doctrine, because by knowledge thereof, and no other
means, he purposes to convert and save all those, who through age are able to
understand, and amongst the^ such as shall be heirs of eternal life. It is a
confident and strange saying of Saint Paul Romans 1. 16. The gospel is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. And 1. Cor. 1. 18. For
the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness: but to us
which are saved it is the power of God. And in the same chapter the 21. v. It
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

But this opinion as it is delivered and confirmed by many and weighty
testimonies of the holy Spirit: Of the efficacy and power of the holy spirit
by the ministry; against the Swencke-feldians.
so it is very forcibly impugned by the Devil. For the Father of lies seeing
that this paradox of the foolish preaching of the cross did not a little
possess the minds of men, took occasion to incite brainsicke heads to say
that this our teaching was in no wise a mean to convert souls, but that God
without means did imparte and communicate himself to us, and that we did but
make an idol of our own words, and here they power out wonderful words,
seeming in show very glorious. But harken (I pray you) and consider upon what
grounds they stand. God (say they) needs not at all this voice of ours,
either ministry, reading, or meditation, to convert men: therefore he uses no
such mean, neither is the learning thereof necessary to salvation. Now therefore
(I speak to you which are children) is there any amongst you of so shallow and
childish conceit which will not skorne him that shall reason in this sort? God
by his omnipotency can easily bring to pass, that a man without books, or
teachers, or study may become learned (as the Apostles and others in the
primitive church did speak with tongues which they never learned) he can make
the earth fruitful without labor of the husbandman, he can sustain man's
nature without meat, as he did Moses and Christ forty days: and therefore it
is a labor unnecessary, (not a means to compass what we wish and expect)
either for scholars to busy themselves about books and study, and to go to
their instructors and schools, or for husband men to manure their ground, or
for any of us to spend our life in susteining our life. Do you see upon what
rocks of blindness and distraction the Devil does drive these unhappy men,
who having never learned the grounds of godliness or good arts, nor loving the
labor and toil of learning, would notwithstanding seem what they are not,
desiring to extol themselves against the knowledge of God, not doubting to
subject the eternal wisdom to their vile censures? for they show them selves as
well witles, as shameless, in alleging examples either of such as by miracle
were converted, as Paul, or endewed with gifts extaordinarie, as the Apostles
in the Pe^tecost: or of many hearing the Gospel and not believing, or lastly
in (...) such places of scripture as pre^ch unto us the power and office of the
holy Ghost. We know (God be thanked) and confess, the God can without help
either of teachers or learners co^verte whom he will, and that the end and use
of miracles is this, to show that the order of nature (wherein he is powerful)
was by him before created, and is still by him most freely preserved. We know
further, that the conuertinge of souls is the gift of God above, so that
look how much greater and more miraculouse a work it is to restore man being
lost unto salvation, then to create him of nothing, so much more impudency and
madness is it rather to attribute our redemption then our creation to the
force and efficacy of man's words. This also we know, that it pleased God by
foolish preaching to save those that believe, why it has so pleased him,
although he need not make us accoumpt, yet is he content to yield us some
reasons ever of this his purpose, though he propose not the like reasons to the
godly and ungodly. Causes why the ministry was ordained.
To the ungodly he yields this reason, because his justice in co^demning
their malice, which resist the word reueald, should be more manifest in sight
of the whole church, their consciences also bearing witness. But we may also
consider other causes, which make for our instruction and comfort. Whereas the
voice of the ministry and all our conceit of God is veiled with darkness,
wherein we now behold God, and know his pleasure, hence he admonishes us of
the greatenesse of our fall, whereby it is come to pass that now we enjoy not
the presence of God, dealing with us as it were a far of and by interpreters,
stirring us up to aspire unto that heavenly school wherein God will be seen
of us face to face, and shall be al in all. Besides God in this life will have
the searching, meditation, and confession of this doctrine touching himself
and his will, not to be concealed in the minds of men, but to be openly
sounded and celebrated, and therefore on his authority he has bound us to a
necessity of knowing it, promising thereby to restore us to salvation.
Furthermore, being willing to have us fellow laborers in the most excellent of
his divine works, wherein could he better show his love to us miserable
creatures, except in giving his only begotten son a ransom for our sins?
we therefore affirm, the reading, hearing, and knowing of this doctrine, to
be a necessary instrument of our salvation; not in respect of GOD, but in
regard of our selves: not because GOD could not otherwise have converted us
(as the builder cannot build an house without his tools) but because he would
not otherwise do it. True faith is indeed the gift and work of none but GOD
only, yet so that it is wrought in us by the holy Ghost through the hearing of
Gods word. Paul's planteth, Apollos waters, but God gives increase. And when
Paul terms the gospel preached by him the power of God unto salvation to as
many as believe; and Ephesians. 4. v. 11. He gave some to be Apostles and
Prophets, and some Evangelists and some pastors and teachers, for the gathering
together of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edification
of the body of Christ; can any more gloriouse word be spoken concerning the
office of teaching? let not us therefore presume to be wiser the^ God, let not
us forsake things ordinary to follow things extraordinary, neither let us
so much esteem the pride and reprobate coniumacie of such as contemn the
voice of the Gospel, that we less regard and reverence the force and fruit of
Gods ordinance in his instruments of mercy; as neither the sloth and perverse
peeuishnes of some scholars, being baries to profit and all good proceedings,
can persuade others, that instruction and study are things unnecessary to the
attaining and increase of learning and virtue: but let us rather with all
submission and thankefulnes embrace this sweetest comfort, whereby we are
assured that our labors please God, and are not vndertake^ by us in vain:
according to those sayings Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy ^read upon the waters, for
after long time thou shall find it again. 1. Cor. 15. 58. Your labor is not
in vain in the Lord. Mat. 18. 20. Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my ^ame, I am in the midst of the^. Were not these promises well
known unto us, and certain in themselves, in this so great fury of Satan and
misery of mankind, our best teachers and most careful furtherers of the
public salvation were in condition most unhappy, and could not maintain this
place without great difficulty. I truly for mine own part knowing my self to
be of no reckoning, feel my self so surprised with sorrow, that for grief I
should nether be able to abide this place, nor give passage to my speech, did
not I certainly know, that eve^ in this company there are some, whose hearts
receive and approve true and wholesome doctrine, and are by the holy Spirit
inflamed with desire of acknowledging and worshipping God aright, and are
living temples of God, such as shall hereafter glorify him with the Angels in
heaven. Neither do I so speak this as if I did expect that all men should have
like knowledge of this doctrine, and equal gifts of the holy Ghost without
difference (for Saint Paul wills us in the 12. to the Romans to be wise
according to that measure of faith which God has given to every man) but it is
necessary that al which look to be saved should hold the same foundation, that
is, they must know and believe what Christ is, and what he has performed for
every of us, as it is said by John the 17. cap. and 3. v. This is life
everlasting, to know that thou art the only true god, and who^ thou have sent
Jesus Christ. Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes in the senne has eternal life. By
these and other such like sentences we understand, that it is a true saying,
which Dionysi^^ (falsely surnamed Areop^gita, but indeed supposed to be of
Corinth) does attribute to the Apostle S. B^rtolme, The gospel is short and
long. The shortness thereof is manifest, excelling therein the law of Moses,
and this ought and may be rooted in every of our hearts and minds, which is the
reason why a brief of the gospel is so often delivered and repeated by the
Prophets and Apostles. But the wisdom of the gospel will far more hardly be
sounded and searched through all eternity then that of the law. But knowing for
certainty that we must in this mortality begin our eternal life (for we shall be
clothed upon our clothing if we be not found naked) the nature of true
conversion is, never to suffer those which are converted unto God to rest in
their race, but kindles in them a perpetual desire of of proceeding.
Therefore is that commandment given in the 2 of Peter 3. 18. Increase in
grace and knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. and Ephesians. 2. 19. Now
therefore ye are no more strangers, but Citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God. And ar built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the
building coupled together grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. And Marc.
9. 24. He prays, Lord I believe, but help thou mine unbelief. And Luc. 17*
5. his disciples pray, Lord increase our faith. The godly are said and
commanded to go forward, and do also pray themselves that they may go
forward. They are not therefore of that sort of men which have no desire to go
forward. Yet must not such be discouraged, who finding in themselves less
light and vigor do with true grief of heart acknowledge and bewail their
weakness and curruption. For thus says the eternal father of his son Esaias. 42.
3. A bruized reed shall he not break. and the smoking flax shall he not
quench. And the son of his father M. 18* 14. It is not my fathers will that any
one of these little ones should perish. and himself of himself, Ioh. 6. 37. All that the father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes to me I cast
not away. Wheresoever is unfeigned godliness, that comes from God, and is by
him furthered, and there unto are linked by the indissoluble band of Gods
truth all the blessings of the gospel which are eternal and without
repentance. For did not the certainety of our faith and salvation depend upon
the free mercy of God alone, whereby he receaveth into favor all such as
believe, and not upon degrees of our renewing and ame^dment, our comfort (God
knows) were built but on a weak foundation. Three trials of a Christian man.
Hence may be gathered three trials of a Christian man, first the embracing of
this foundation, secondly a desire of going forward (which two include every of
us under the universal promise of eternal salvation) thirdly this comfort,
that for difference or inequ^lity of gifts and degrees we shall not be c^st of
and suffered to perish, which comfort must be opposed to the grief conce^ved
upon our own unworthiness. These (...) can never be separated has Saint
Paul's comprised in 1. Corinthians. 3. ca. 11. v. saying, Other foundation can no
man lay then that which is laid, that is Jesus Christ. And if any man build on
this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay or stubble, Every
man's work shall be made manifest; but he shall be safe himself, nevertheless
yet as it were by the fire. By this therefore, which has hitherto been
spoken, it is manifest, that Gods commandment, and each man's particular
salvation exhorts and binds al me^, and amongst them the younger sort
(which are a great part and seminary of the church) to learn aslone as their
years will permit, this foundation of Christian doctrine: which most gravely
and severely admonishes all such of this part of their duty, who take upon
them the charge of instructing youth.

For both teachers and learners are all debtors of diligent and serious care of
preserving piety and religion; The preservation and propagatio^ of pure and
sincere religion to prosterity.
debtors, not unto our selves only, but to as many as are ours and belong any
way unto us, yea and to all succeeding posterity. For we see by daily
experience how easily in small process of time manifold defacings and
corruptions and at length final and utter abolishment overtaketh that religion
and doctrine, the sum whereof is not breifely and perspicuously set down,
known in public, daily repeated, and beaten as it were into men's
understandings. Neither are we ignorant of the common proverb how the caske or
barrel reteineth still the savor and smell which it first received be it
good, or ill. Whereas then for the most part the evil we learn takes such
deep root in us, and cleaves so fast unto us; and youth not being daily
instructed and trained up unto piety threatens a barbarous contempt of God,
and profaning of religion to ensue in time to come; again whereas scarcely by
the greatest endeavor, and continual care of governors we are won to any
good, no man of discretion and judgment but will grant that it is wisdom and
our duty to attempt betimes so weighty and difficult a matter.

The institution therefore of Catechism is not only necessary for preserving
pure and sincere doctrine with us and our posterity after us, 4 The capacity of
youth, and ^uder sort.
but in regard of youth to who^ (as has already bin proved) it is to be
imparted, because it is framed fit for their capacity. For if it be well said of
other arts wherein this age is to be informed, In all thy precepts use such
brevity, that intellige^t wits may sone conceive, and faithfully preserve them
in memory: how much more is shortness and plainness to be affected and
practiced in this heavenly wisdom so strange unto man's understanding?
especially whereas the testimonies of holy Scripture ratify and confirm our
experience herein, Heb. 5. 13. 14.
saying; Every one that uses milk is inexperte in the word of righteousness:
he is a babe. But strong meat belongs to them that are of age. Therefore
both the Apostle Paul thus intimates and signifies unto us his manner of
teaching, 1. Cor. 3. 2. 3.
I gave you milk to drink, and not meat; for ye were not yet able to bear
it, The continual custom of the church.
neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal: and since the first
preaching of the gospel in the church some notable argument or subject of
doctrine short and pithy, plain and easy has been extant and derived unto
posterity. Insomuch as certain compendious sums delivered by Gods own mouth
seem to be of equal growth, and continuance with mankind both of the law,
as; If thou continue righteous, thou shall be accepted: and also of the Gospel
as, The seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent. So not long
after the promise and the covenant was repeated unto Abraham. Finally in
process of time certain brief Articles were published abroad in the Apostles
writings, the form and manner of confession of Christ and Christian Religion
being proportionably applied to that which GOD had revealed in every age.
Further that this our custom of teaching, which we call Catechism, was
practiced both in the Primitive Church, and in the Apostles days, Paul
witnesses Romans 2. verse 18. where he terms the Jews, instructed in
the law from then childehoode and Galat. 6. 6. where he says, let him that is
taught in the word make him that has taught him, partaker of all his
goods. Luke also in his 1. Chapter. verse 4. That thou might acknowledge the
certainetie of those things whereof thou have been instructed. For as much
then as these testimonies are such as deserve to be preferred before all
others, whereas the Authors of them immediately followed the Apostles times, I
therefore insta^ce in no one example, supposing it to be generally known out
of the common histories. I rather add this, that if the primitive Chruch being
yet in her infancy, did with so great co^tancy observe and retain this custom
and form of instruction established, as we see, not by the counsel and advice
of man, but the deep wisdom and providence of God; how much more ought we in
this doting age of the world, in which the church is ready to give up the
ghost, and the light thereof being extinguished, loathsome darkness more and
more ready to overshadow the whole world; how much more ought we, 6. The
heresies and dangers of the last times.
I say, add unto the small measure of our diligence in maintaining and
adva^cing the doctrine of the church, rather the^ detract any the smallest
portion thereof. For this is that age of which it is spoken Mat. 24. v. 23.
Then if any shall say unto you; Mat. 24. 23.
Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that,
if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect. And Paul at large
discourses, 1. Tim. 4 and 2. Tim. 3. and Peter also in his 2. Ep. 23. c. of
the iniquity and danger of these last troublesome time; by the illusio^s of the
Devil wrought by the hands of those false prophets his supposts and proctors.
Now these predictio^s of the miseries which are to befall these later days are
written and revealed unto us not only for our co^lolatio^ and co^firmatio^ in
the truth and faith of Christ: but to be a spur unto us that we continue (...),
and careful to provide such weapon and furniture as is requisite to the beating
down and razing to the ground the bulwarks of all errors. For thus begins
Christ this doleful prophecy, Take heed that ^o man deceive you. Mat. 24. 4.
Let us therefore think it necessary not only for them to whom is, or here
after may be committed the charge of preaching and teaching in the Church, but
for every particular man also which desires to be saved, to have a true
concerte and opinion of every point of Christian Religion grounded and deep
rooted in his heart; to be fenced and fortified as strongly, as by all means
he may, against sects and heresies: and that they who have received commission
of governing and teaching in the Church ought with great pain and travel
either themselves teach and instruct, or take care that they who are committed
to their cure and charge be taught and instructed in all these; unless they had
rather as unfaith full and careless stewards and dispensers of the word give
an account of the destruction of their flock. Wherein the entire good affection
of your parents is worthy high commendation, in that they have taken especial
order for your daily instruction in the principles of religion not at home only
in their private houses, and Churches; but abroad also in public and free
schools. For they well perceive what ignorance then ensued, and how wide a
gate was then set open unto the Devil to intrappe all men in these grounds of
doctrine, when first the custom of the primitive church in teaching, and
requiring again the points of Catechism at the hands of the Catechumeni
began to be slacked, and in the end finally decayed, and in place thereof the
vain and childish spectacle of Popish confirmation succeeded: They well
foresee, that as great mischaunces, or greater then these are like to betide
us, unless God in mercy look on us, and in time visit us. Then which danger
as nothing can fall out more dreadful and lamentable to the godly; so the godly
and religious can invent no greater joy and comfort unto themselves, then to be
able assuredly to promise unto themselves, that their children and childrens
children shall long time after their decease enjoy that blessed light of the
truth which shines among us. Wherefore if we be not utterly bereft of all
humane affections, and wax not cruel against those who love us rather then
themselves; let us endeavor by all means not to frustrate through our
retchlesnes this their good hope conceived, 7 The reward of the embracing of
the Gospel, and the punishment of the contempt thereof.
and annihilate their earnest hearty desires: but let us together with them
present our selves thankful unto God, who purposing to gather unto himself
out of this sco^be of the world an everlasting church, by causing the Sun of
this Gospel to retire back and shine in our hea^tes, has so chased away the
clouds and darkness of the kingdom of Antichrist, that no man, unless wilfully
shutting his eyes and stopping his ears he resist Gods truth disclosed unto
him, cannot but perceive, and clearly see the devil unmasked of those visardes
of deceit and error, wherein he vau^ted himself, and blinded the world. Which
if we shall perform, Christ the son of God shall continue unto us al his
benefits in former times, and heap daily new blessings on us according to his
promise; To him which Has, that is, to him which has a desire of proceeding,
i^ shall be given: But if we do otherwise, the pains which are threatened in
the contrary doom shall overtake us, From him which has not shall be taken away
even that he has. The Scriptures themselves and the histories of all times cry
and thunder out in our ears Gods jealousy in not being able to endure the
contempt of his Gospel revealed, Esaias complains, Es. 5. 24. 26.
They have cast of the law of the Lord of hosts, and conte^ned the word of the
Holy One of Israel Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled against his
people, and he has stretched out his hand upon them, Amos. 8. 11. 12.
and has smitten them. And Amos threatens: Behold the dates come, says the
Lord God, that I will send a fam^^s in the land, not a famine of bread nor a
thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. And they shall wander
from sea to sea, and from the North even unto the East shall they run to and
fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Behold we see the
Israelitish nation, which God had enriched with so honorable titles and
privileges, and made famous and glorious over all the kingdoms of the earth
for the many strange eventes, and wonderful miracles showed amongst them;
behold we set this (...) nation now grown base and co^temptible trodden under
foot of the very out casts of the earth, and in the very midday and
noone-light of their prophecies so besti^lly and blockis^ly blind that the
consideration of this their example is able to move and stir up evil men, I say
not unto laughter or indignation, but rather to st^^ke into their hearts a
dreadful horror of the like judgment. Now that the contempt and neglect of
sound doctrine touching God and our salvation is the cause of so great
mischiefs and miseries we have for testimony the voice of the prophets and of
Christ himself, Ioh. 5. 43.
Ioh. 3. 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another
shall come in his own name, The persecution in England in Q. Mary's days.
him will ye receive. I omit the rehearsal of other examples; that one of the
late most flowrishing and happy kingdom of England I will touch in a word, not
only because the example is exceedinge lamentable, but because also there is
none so very a child in all this Auditory in whose time it chanced not. For
of late years that kingdom and Country of England being endowed and
beautified with the profession of the Gospel in the happy Reign of King
Edward the VI. the Churches and schools of learning being nobly ^ounded,
honorably enriched, and religiously ordered; the king himself, though but 16.
years of age, yet so far above the hope of his years endued with such
singular piety, ^dmirable learning, and all Princely virtues that in all that
glorious kingdom nothing might seem more glorious then the king and
governor himself, that kingdom of late years was inferior in perfect
happiness to no nation of the earth. But ^o on the sudden through the
untimely decease of that most noble Edward a Prince of so great hope, the
Popish tyrannical dominion reentered this kingdom, and took full possession
thereof, wasting and spoiling with imprisonments, banishments, fire and sword
the most famous churches of that Realm, taking some of the best renowned for
learning and integrity of life without all respect either of age, sex, or
dignity* and torturing them with fiery flames; and other punishments of like
barbarous cruelty: and scattering and dispersing others toward all parts and
corners of the earth: It is now the fifth year since this scourge and these
calamities have leine heavy on this land and oppressed the same, I rather
acknowledge and bewail our own offenses, then take on me to censure the
defaulte^ of others. Howbeit the report of English exiles is yet (...) in mine
ears, wherein they much complained of and bewailed the ingratitude, security
and loathing of the Gospel, which had overtun their whole country. And do we
then seem to regard our good estate we enjoy more the^ they? I would we did.
When Pilate had mingled the blood of the Galileans which he slew with the
sacrifices, Luc. 13. 3.
Unless ye repent, says Christ, ye shall all perish* The tumultes and down
falls of Empires and kingdoms wherewith the church is shaken are open
conversant before our eyes, and threate^ and menace us some bitter scourge. The
Turkish cut throtes gape on us ready to d^v^ur us striving by mai^e force to
take Christ from among us and by ^n^rusion to seat their profane Mahome^^
st^ede of Christ in our churches; of whom report goes that they daily
withdrawing Chritian youth unto their b^asphemou^ filthy, Paganism^, and
sheading and su^king the b^oud of our a^^es and kinsfolk, threaten and attempt
farther irruptions and invasions on our bo^ders. That execrable sincke the
Court of Rome curses and banneth us, crying out Away with us that we may be
rooted out from of the earth; heresies d^ily bud and blossom both, within and
without the Church, and the erroures and corruptions of truth crept into the
Church are beyond all number. And verily now is that time when unless the Lord
reserve a ^eede unto us naught remains but that we should become as Sodom and
Gomorrah. O then let us not be so iron hearted, let us not be so bitter enemies
of our own souls, that we regard not these Gods merciful visitations, and
threatenings of more sharper judgments to ensue. O let us seek the Lord while
he may be found: let every one take ca^e of his own salvation, and bear in
mind whatsoever things concern the same, so that if the frame of nature
should on a sudden be dissolved we may be ready cheerfully to meet the Lord
in the air* this coming in glory.

These things which I have hitherto spoken concern all in general, 8
Church-doctrine especi^^^y ough^t to be known unto scholars.
but more particularly us that profess the studies of learning. For it is the
common consent of all that ever either founded, or governed schools, or ever
were conversant in them, or would that others should frequent them, that they
who are here brought up should become not only more learned but better
ma^nered also then other men. Which truth being so evident, they describe a
school to be A company appointed by GOD, of such as teach and learn sciences
meet and necessary for mankind both touching God and other good things, that
the knowledge of God amongst men be not clean abolished, that the Church be
continued and preserved, that many may be made hears of life eternal, that
discipline be maintained, and that men may enioie other honest commodities
issuing out of the arts.

We therefore shoot wide and miss much of the m^^ke we ai^e at, unless we
hold it for certain and true, that our earnest and diligent endeavor in these
schools and nu^ce^es of Christ, and Christianity must be employed not so much
for this end that we may be the more fraught with humane and divine learning,
but rather that being beautified and adorned with all laudable behavior
toward men and holiness to the Lord, may be found acceptable in the sight of
God and men. And it is a truth apparent in the Church, that all the
exhortations unto civil virtues without the doctrine of piety is naught else
but an estraying and swar^ing from God, true godliness, perfect justice, and
assured salvation. For the holy Ghost has pronounced this sentence; that
whatsoever we do not with intent thereby to glorify GOD, whatsoever we do
not in the name of CHRIST, whatsoever is not of faith, it is all, even
altog^ther sin. Wherefore were the doctrine of the Church secluded from our
schools, we should not only not be able to teach or learn any thing that
belongs to true and entire virtue, such as GOD requires of us; But that
small portion and remainder we have should make us of evil men worse and more
impious, and that indeed not by the increase thereof so much, as by the
decrease and defect of those spiritual and supernatural qualities, without
which nothing is holy, nothing wholesome unto us. And here although the consent
of men wise and judicious may satisfy us, yet let GODS precepts prevail more
with us, Ioh. 5. ^^.
which command us research the Scriptures, 1. Tim. 4. ^3.
to give attendance to reading, to divide the word aright etc. Now whereas no
man can without school learning and exercise either himself perceive and
discern aright, or expound and impart unto others in any good order and
perspicuity, who is so purblinde that he sees not the near affinity wherewith
the study of Religion and piety is linked with school* learning? Let us
therefore esteem that to be the exercise of greatest weight and moment in
schools, which is a work of greatest importance in the world, and with out
long and continual schole-exercise cannot be performed by us, I mean the
understanding and expou^ding of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles. And
whereas we have opportunity offered us of searching out and sitting the truth
of doctrine in greater measure then other Countries and people; of a truth if
we fail to use the same we give the world occasion to suspect our cold
zeal in Religion, and our punishments for this our negligence and ignorance
shall be the greater For God has given unto scholars especially the charge and
care of preserving and advauncing this his truth not for our own sakes only,
but for the good of others also. For other men with good reason expect
instruction in the Scriptures, and the interpretation of the word at their
mouths, who for their learning are able to understand diverse tongues, and
search the course of doctrine.

Whereas then ^eligion and Christianity is to be taught in schools, that
children may well conceive* it Catechism is especially necessary. For neither
can this age learn any thing except it be taught (...) brief* neither ca^
either the teachers, or the learners handle aright and in good order the parts
of any science, whereof both of them have not digested in mind some rude
sum. Both these are the cause why so often in Scriptures we read short
briefes of Religion repeated; as Repent, and believe the Gospel. He which
believes, and is baptized shall be saved. Fight a good fight, keep the faith,
and a good conscience etc. Col. 3. 16.
And whereas it is said Col. 3* 16. Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously,
and in all wisdom, the Apostles meaning is, that we must use explications and
interpretations such as are suitable with the sentences and doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. Philip Melancthons examen.
Neither is Catechism any other the^ a summary declaration of such sentences
of Scripture. Now whereas this little examen we intend to propose unto you is
such, and the Author thereof has faithfully and with great dexterity comprised
the chief grounds of Christianity in proper and plain terms; and it seems
that it would be very beneficial that in other churches there should the like
form of Catechism be extant, prepare your selves to the speedy learning
thereof, and suppose that these our simple writings are the swaddling clouts
wherein Christ as it were swathed will be found of us. You see how many urgent
causes they are which they commend unto you, which they earnestly exhort you to
embrace, which I beseech you to carry in mind and memory as they have bin set
down unto you: The commandment of God, your own salvation, your duty which
you owe to posterity, the good example of a reformed church, your manner of
life, your age or years* your friends desires, and hopes the imminent dangerous
times, the rewards and punishments we are to look for at Gods hands. But as
our admonitions and exhortations are necessary, so without the secret motion
and working of the holy spirit we know they little avail. Let us therefore
turn our selves and look toward God, and give him hearty thanks for this his
inestimable benefit, that it was his good pleasure to bring us into the world
in this sunshine of the gospel, and let us beg and crave to be taught and
governed by him.

OF THE INCARNATION OF THE WORD. A confession made by the fathers of the Church
of Antioch against Paulus Samosatenus.
Taken out of the Acts of the first Ephes^e Coun^^l^. WE confess that our
Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of his Father before all worlds, but in the latter
times conceived by the holy Ghost of the virgin Mary according to the flesh, is
but one person, of the godhead and humane flesh subsisting Perfect God, and
perfect man: perfect God even with the flesh, but not according to the flesh;
perfect man even with the godhead, but not according to the Godhead. Wholly to
be worsh^pped, even with the flesh but not according to the flesh: wholly
worshipping, even with the god^ead but not according to the godhead. (...), even
with the body, but not according to the body. Wholly formed, or endued with
shape and fashion, even with the divinity or godhead, but not according to the
Divinity or godhead. Wholly coessenciall, that is of o^e and the self same
nature together with God, even with the body, but not according to the body:
as likewise he is not coessential to men according to his godhead, but being in
his godhead he is coesse^tial to us according to the (...). For when we say
that he is consubstantial, or of the same nature together with the father
according to the spirit, we say not that he is con^ubstantial with men
according to the same spirit. And contrariewise when we prea^h that after the
flesh he is co^substantial to men, we do not preach that according to the flesh
he is coessential with god, for like as he is not coesse^tial with us after the
spirit (for so he is coessential with God) even so is he not according to the
flesh coessential to God, but consubstantial with us. But (...) pronounce these
things to be different and (...) between themselves, not to divide that o^e
undivided person, but to show a distinction between nature and properties of
the word and the flesh, which can never be confounded: so we profess and
reverence that unity, which causes this indivisible union and composition.

Vigilius in his 4. book against E^^tyches. If the word and flesh be of one
nature, how comes it to pass, Therefore contrariwise, if the flesh be found
every where, how comes it that the nature of the flesh and word which is every
where is not one?
that the word being every where, the flesh also is not found every where?
for what time it was here on earth, it was not then in heaven: and now because
it is in heaven, even therefore it is not in earth: so sure we are that it is
not in earth, that even according to the flesh we verily expect that Christ
shall come from heaven, whom according to the word we believe to be with us
always here on earth. Wherefore (as your selves confess) either the word
together with the flesh is contained in some place, or else the flesh together
with the word is in every place, for one nature is not in it self capable of
contrarieties. But these two differ very far, to be contained in some place,
and to be in every place: and because the word is every where, and the flesh is
not every where, it appears that one and the same Christ consists of both
natures, and is in every place by nature of the godhead, and contained in some
one place according to the nature of his humanity. So that the same Christ was
both created and without beginning, subject to death, and yet immortal, the one
by nature of the word as he is God, the other by nature of the flesh, as the
same God is also man. Being therefore both the son of God and man, he has a
beginning, was created, and is comprehended in some place by nature of his
flesh, being otherwise before all beginning uncreated, and without limitation
of place, according to the nature of his godhead. He is inferior to the Angels
in respect of his flesh, but equal to the Father as touching his Deity: dead
sometimes in his ma^hood, ever-living in his godhead. This is the catholic
faith and confession, which the Apostles delivered, martyrs confirmed, and the
faithful to this day have retained. W^^rfore impiously, as tainted with the
p^^enous heresy of E^^yches you presume to tax Leo, whiles by the different
actions of one Lord Ch^^st he proves the verity of both natures in him: so
that what he wrought for demonstration of the (...) of two natures, you pervert
as if it were a proo^e of two persons.

OF PREDESTINATION.
A letter of Vrsinus to his friend, briefly containing a full and learned
discourse of predestination, with wholesome advise for the weaker sort to
follow.
HItherto I have not had leisure to peruse your discourse of predestination.
Neither have I now; but I steal so much time from other my affairs which I
defer, that I may at length satisfy your request, which in my opinion is not
so necessary, if it would please you to read D. Beza and P. Matyr on this
question whereunto I think you were before directed by me. Hereby also I would
give you to understand, that hitherto I have rather wanted ability then will
to gratify you. Of you let me entreat this courtesy, that you do not by
disputation trouble others, who either will not hear ought besides that which
they have before conceived, or can not readilye understand those things
whereof they never thought before, and have in their infancy learned false in
steed of true principles and foundations. And were I not fully persuaded that
in this question you would frame your self to Christian wisdom and patient
for bearance of the weaker sort, I would not answer one word to your
demand.

The doctrine of predestinat^^^, The doctrine of Predestination is not
difficult.
is not in my judgment (as you wright) the most difficult point in all
Christianity, if we read holy scripture without prejudice or affection, and
with serious purpose, not to reform God after our phansies, but to learn of
him, and to yield all glory unto him and none to our selves. For by these
means that is now become easy to me which before seemed very difficult,
whilst I depended on the authority of men, who never understood themselves,
nor could resolve me. There is no one common place of Divinity, whereof more is
wrighten by the prophets and apostles, then this very place of Providence,
Election, and free will: in so much th^^ I can not but marvel learned
Christians (...) so doubt thereof.

Do you as I have don, who for this only reason, that I might gather, weigh,
and confer^e whatsoever ^ contained as well in sermons as examples of holy
scripture to this purpose, have diligently perused the whole bible, even from
the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, Which after I had don, I
did partly perc^iue, and p^rte^y detest that skumme of disputation, and foggie
fume of fallacy and soph^strie, labou^ing (but to no purpose) to eclipse the
gloriouse sunneshine of this doctrine. You may at your better leisure do this
in Italy, where you shall have no exercise of religion besides reading the
bible, and priu^te prayer. Which liberty some very good ^en heretofore have
wanted, who otherwise had never ben so entangled. But eve^ be are this in ^inde
whereof before I warned you. If for the present every thing be not plain and
easy to you, be not therefore troubled, but by leisure diligently meditate with
your self calling upon God, and houlding that foundation, which amongst the
godly is without co^trouers^e: remembering always that not your self, but God
is author of your salvation, and of all besides whatsoever you are, have, or
d^e, be it great or little. So shall you be sure not to err with any danger of
conscience and salvation, although you be not able to conceive and unfold
whatsoever you desire. Knowledge puffs up, but charity edifieth.

First you must put a difference between providence and predestination, a^
between the whole and the part. I Difference between providence and
predestination.
For Providence is the eternal, immutable, and most excellent counsel or
decree of God, whereby all things have their event te^ding to the glory of the
creator, and salvation of the elect. Predestination is the eternal purpose of
God, of beginning and perfiting the salvation of the elect, and forsaking or
utter casting of the reprobate to eternal punishment: Wherefore it contains
Election and Reprobation as parts of it self.

Secondly, II Distinction between good and evil offense.
distinguish betwixt Providence of good and evil of offense (for the evil of
punishmente has a reference to good, namely to justice, and in that respect is
found in God:) God does provide that is in his providence, purpose, and will
perform in purposed time, order, and manner: and in this respect he is said
to be the cause, efficient, and author of things. These things are not only
done according to providence, but also by the providence of God. As for evil
or sin, that he foreseeth from eternity, that is, he decrees or is willing
to permit it, or not to hinder others from doing it: but him self i^ in no
wise an agent, either in them or by them. Wherefore himself is not the cause of
evil, but in justice excellency and depth of wisdom he suffers others to
be the causes thereof* So that these things are done according to Gods
providence, but not by it because God did not decree to do, but to suffer
others to do them. now to permit or suffer, is nothing else but not to hinder
sin in any action, or not to cause men to be conformable to the law of God
and nature. What it is to (...) or suffer.
And in this sense God does tolerate or suffer si^, when he does not either
lighten our minds with his holy spirit and knowledge of his will, or turn our
hearts to make this the principal end of our actions, that we do the known
will of God, and by this our obedience honor him. Which two things except it
please God to work in us, what ere we do, how good, just, and holy so ever,
it is but sin and corruption in the sight of God.

Thirdly, make a distinction between God and his creatures, III The difference
bet^^^ne the (...) and (...) second (...).
or second causes, especially ^n matters concerning the government of the
world. First the creatures are bound one to further the safety, and hinder
the destruction of an other whersoever they can; because God has so commanded
all, and themselves may deserve it one of an And being converted thy self,
remember to confirm thy brethren. God is bound to none, as not to create them
of nothing, so neither to preser^e them, either in their being, or in that
good, innocent, and happy being wherein they were created Because whatsoever
good we all enjoy we have it from him, neither can he receive any good,
fellcitie, and commodity of any man, because of his infinite and most absolute
all-sufficiencie in himself. (...) 11.
Who has given unto him first, that he should be recompensed? (...) 20. 15.
Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own as pleases me* Secondly Gods
justice requires, that being himself the chiefest good and author, and end of
all things, he should refer all to his own glory, and (if need were) rather
suffer all the creatures of the world to perish, then any part of his glory
should be left unsatisfied. As for the creatures, they owe both themselves and
all they have, not to themselves, nor to others, but to God. Therefore Paul
desired even to be accursed from Christ, if by the salvation and conversion of
his brethren he might advance the glory of Christ. Romans 9. 3.
Thirdely God may therefore most justly permit and Fourthly God is the first
cause and author Fiftely * I am God and am not changed.) All creatures are
mutable, some of their own nature, which work only by uncertainty: (...)
the unstable action of elements, matter, and motion of creatures: or by
uncertainty or contingency, and yet freely to, as the wills of angels an^
(...) are in deed of their own immutable, and therefore necessary agents in
that which they do, yet are as easy to be altered by God as the rest: so the
motion of the son is naturally such as we see: yet God at his pleasure can
either stop or interrupt the course thereof. Sixthly, God alone is simply and
absolutely free, that is, of himself moving all things, in himself moved and
depending of none, having in himself the reason, and cause of al his purposes,
with greatest power and authority of disposing al things otherwise from
eternity, if so he had been pleased, imposing necessity or contingence and
uncertainty upon al things, himself not tied to such conditions by any thing.
Ephesians. 1. 9. According to his good pleasure which he had purposed in himself.
But the liberty of reasonable creatures is not absolute, that is, depending of
no other; for although they move themselves by some internal cause,
understanding offering some object, and will of his own accord without
constraint chosing or refusing it, yet are they overruled by an other agent,
namely God, who both offers objects of what nature and quality, howsoever and
to who^soeuer it pleases him, and also to them and by them affects, moves,
inclines, and boweth the wills of whomsoever, whenever, and how far soever he
will himself. That man's conceit of God is too contumelious which puts no
difference between the liberty which is in God and his creatures. Wherefore
Gods providence and working in all things, does not destroy but uphold and
increase the liberty of our wills. For the more God mooveth or forsakes them.
the more violently, and consequently with more freedom and fervencie of desire
they are carried eith^r to good or evil. Wherefore the^ indeed we shall with
greatest freedom will that which is good when God shall so be all in all, that
we can will or wish nothing but what is good, which shall be (with the favor
and grace of God) in the life to come.

Fourthly, IV. The difference of effects in respect of.
we must distinguish the manner of effects or things done. For the same effect
proceeding from diverse causes, may in respect of the^ be diversely taken. For
as it proceeds from a good cause so it is good, as from an evil so evil, as
from a cause contingent and mutable, or necessary and immutable, so may it be
accounted contingent and mutable, or necessary and immutable. Wherefore in
respect of God, in who^ we have our being, life, and motion, all things which
were made are good, as well bad as good, considering that God is absolutely and
immutably good, and therefore can neither will or do any thing but what is
good, and agreeable to his nature, and the law wherein he has revealed unto
us his nature and ius^ice. In respect of creatures, all good things as they
are good, are by God vpheld in their goodness, al evil things as they are
evil, degenera^e from that goodness wherein they were cre^ted (God suffering and
forsaking them) and are not thereunto restored by God. So in respect of the
liberty and freedom of God al things are done cont^^gently and by
uncertainty, yea even those things which seem to depend most necessarily on
second causes, as the motion of the heavens: but in respect of Gods immutable
decree all events are necessary, as when the soldiers crucifying Christ did
not break his bones, but pierced his side with a spear, which in respect of
second causes were merely contingent.

Fifthly we make distinction of sins, V Difference of sins.
whereof some in themselves and in their own nature are sins, namely such
things as are forbidden by God, not are by special law or exception commanded,
as the robbing of the Egyptians, the offering of Isaac: others by occasion or
accident, namely such things as are either commanded or allowed by God, but
perverted by the creature, and not performed in such sort as they were
commanded, as are the sacrifices, prayers, and almsdeeds of wicked men and
hypocrites. Whether of these two sorts of sin a man commit, either that which
is sin in it self, or the other which is sin by accide^t and occasion,
certain it is, that through his own fault and imperfection he commits it.
But that which God intends in these actions of men is ever good and just.

Lastly, we must distinguish the necessity of co^straint and immutability; VI
Two sorts of necessity
for it were too gross to confound them. For the former moves violently and
by external cause, the latter naturally, some internal cause in the agent
moving and being moved, as by nature it is apt. These things when I perceived,
GOD opening my eyes, I did not reckon one ^ote of those foolish fables;
Testimoni^s out of the New Testament.
that GOD was made the cause of sin: that contingence or casualitie and
liberty were taken away And all this I learned out of infinite places of
scriptures: as Genesis 20. Therefore have I kept thee that thou should not
sin against me, nor did I suffer thee to touch her. Genesis 45. GOD sent me
before you for your safety. And again, I was not sent hither by your purpose
but by the will of God, who has made me as it were a father unto Pharaoh. Genesis
50. Fear not, can we resist Gods will? You thought evil against me, but God
turned it to good, that he might exalte me, as you now see, and preserve
many people. Exodus 4. 7. 10. 11. 14. I vvilt harden the heart of Pharaoh and
of his servauntes, and I will show my wonders in the land of Egypt And in the
9. chap. Therefore have I placed thee in the kingdom, that I might show my
power in thee, and my name might be declared in all the world. Exodus 12. God
gave his people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent jewels
unto them, and they robbed the Egyptians. Exodus 21. If a man has not laid
wait for him whom he has slain, but God has given him into his hands:
which he speaks of murder done by misfortune or chance. Exodus 22. Every man
slay his brother, his friend, and his neighbor. They which did this are
commended, who without this commandment had done very evil: yet had not God
so commanded them, but upon some other occasion provoked their minds thereunto,
he might as justly have punished those isolaters by sinning instrument^, as he
did by these just executers of his judgment because they were not governed by
^ecret providence, but by the manifest and open will of God Exodus 33. I will
show mercy to whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
will have compassion, Number. ^3 God is not as man that he should be, or as the
son of man that he should be changed. Has he therefore said, and shall be not
do it? (...) he spoken and shall it not be fulfilled? I am sent to (...), I
cannot forbid^e a blessing. Deuteronomy. 5. O that there were (...) such an heart to
fear me, and ever to keep all (...) commandments, that ^t might go well with
them and with their children for ever. By these and the like p^aces God shows
what he likes, wherein he is delighted, and what ple^seth him. ^ut by Exodus
33. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: and the like, he shows what
he will effect or bring to pass amongst men and in whom. Deuteronomy. 13. If a Prophet
shall say, let us go and fo^low strange Gods, tho^ (...) to his vo^ce, because
the Lord ^empteth you, that it may appear whether you love him or no. And in
the same place, Let the Prophet he slain, because he has spoken to turn you
from the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 29. And God gave you not an understanding heart,
even vntil^ this day Ios. 11. (...) pleased God to harden then he (...), that
they should fight against Israel and be overthrowen, and should not find
mercy but perish* as God had commanded Moses. Judge 2 and 3. God forsook the
nations which he commanded to be rooted out. 1. Sam. 2 They did not ha^ken to
the voice of their father, because God would slay them. And in the same book
the 10. cap.. Part of the house went with him, whose hearts God had touched.
And again 10. The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil
spirit of the Lord or from the Lord did vex him. 2. of Sam. 12. Behold I
will st^rre up evil against thee from thine own house, and I will take thy
wives before thy face, and give them to thy neighbor, and thy son shall be
with thy wifes openly. For thou did it secretlye, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and in the sight of the sun. and ca. 17. The counsel of
Achitophel is overthrown by the Lords countenance. and ca. 24. The wrath of
the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David to say unto Ioab. and
1. Chron. 21. Satan rose up against Israel, and provoked David to number the
people. 2. Sam. ^2. And. 2. Chron. 10. Rehoboam suffered not the people to be
at rest, for it was Gods will. And ^. Chron. 11. This is don by my will* 1.
Kings. 22. God gave the sp^rite of lying. 2 Chronicles. 36. God stirred up the
heart of Cy^^^. Esd^. 6 God had turned the kings heart unto them Job. 1. The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away. Job. 12. He brings
counsailers to a foolish end. Job. 14. Th^^ have appointed the bounds thereof
which cannot be passed. Psalm. 105. He turned their hearts to hate his people.
Psa. 115. He has do^ what soever he would. Ps. 16. The Lord has made al
things for his own sake, (...) even the wicked for the day of evil ver. ^3.
The (...) is cast into the lap but the whol^ d^sposition hereof is of the Lord
ca. 2^. The heart of the king is in the (...) hand, he turns it as rivers of
waters whether (...) Ecclesiastes the seventh. Consider the works of the
Lord, that none can amend him whom he has desposed. Wisdom 8. W^sdome reaches
from one end to an other, she has a sposed all things mightily and orderly.
Read the 12. and 19. Chapters of the same book and S^rac. 17. They cannot make
their hearts of s^onie to become fleshly. Esai. 10. O A^shur the rod of my
wra^h etc. in his hand is mine indignation. I will send him to a dissembling
nation, that shall take the (...) of them. Read the whole place, which alone
suffices to refell that objection of the cause of sin. Like places are ^ound
in the 13 cap. And Esa. 14 The Lord of hosts has decreed, and who can al^er
it? Esa. 43. Every one that calls on the name of the Lord, him have I
created for my glory* him have I fashioned, him have I made. And in the same
place, I will bring it to pass, and who shall withstand it. Esa. 45. I am the
Lord making peace and creating evil. And 46. Cap. My determination shall stand
etc: I have spoken and I will bring it to pass, I have proposed and will do
it. Ierem. 13. If the Ethiopian can change his skin, or the leoparde his
spots, you also will be able to do well, having learned to do ill. Ierem* 30.
God has opened his treasury, and brought forth vessels of his wrath.
Lament. 3. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, and the Lord
commands (...)? Does not evil and good proceed out of the mouth of the
(...) high: Ezech. 12. I will speak a word and bring it to pass. Ezech. 14
When a Prophet has cried and spoken ought amiss, I the Lord have deceaved
that Prophet. Ezec. 18 I will not the death of him that dies. Much like that
Deu. 5. O that there were to them etc. As above has been said. Ezech. 20. I
gave them commandments which were not good. Eze. 29. Nebuchadnezer my servant
caused his army to serve a great servitude against Cyrus. Ezech. 36. And I
will give you a new heart, and put a new spirit in the midst of you: and I
will take away this stony heart from your flesh. Compare the 17 of Sirach and
Ier. 13. and Ezech. 58 I will lead thee about, and put a bridle in thy mouth,
and bring thee forth. At that day shall many things come to thy mind, and
thou shall think evil thoughts, and shall say, I will go up to the land
etc. Compare this with Esai. 10. Dan. 4 He works according to his will, both
in the armies of heaven and also in the habitations of the earth; and there is
none can stain his hand, or say unto him, whi^^ have thou done this? Amos. 3.
There is no evil in the city which the Lord has not done: which is spoken of
the evil of punishment, though often times it fall out by accident, that there
be also an evil of offense, which God suffers to concur, Micah. 4. Many
nations are gathered together, but they know not the thoughts of the Lord.

Mat. 7. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, Out of the New testament.
and in the same chapter they which are built upon a rock shall not fall. Read
Melancthons commentary upon that place Luc. 10. One sparrow falls not to the
ground. Math. 11. I thank thee (father) for that thou haste hidden these
things from the wise Mat. 13. To you it is given to know, but unto others it
is not given. Mat. 16. and every where in the Evangelists, That Christ ought to
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things. Mat. 18. It is necessary that
offenses should come. Mat 20. Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own
what I will? Many are called, but few be chosen. Mat. 24. All things must
come to pass. And in the same place, It is not possible that the elect should
^rre, finally; Ioh. 6. Whatsoever my father has given me shall come unto me,
and him that comes to me I vvil not cast forth. And No man can come unto me
except the father draw him. And This is the will of my father, that of al
whatsoever he has given me I should loose nothing. Ioh. 10. Other sheep also
I have, which I must bring unto my flock. And My sheep no man takes out of
my hand. Ioh. 11. Caiphas when he was high Priest did prophecy. Ioh. 12.
Therefore they could not believe, because he had blinded their eyes. Ioh. 13.
I know them who^ I have chosen. Ioh. 14. Which spirit the world cannot
receive. Ioh. 15. You have not chosen me, but I you. Act. 1. The prophecies
concerning Judas ought to have been fulfilled Act. 2. Him have ye taken by
the hands of the wicked, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain. Act. 3. Through ignorance
ye did it, but God so fulfilled the things which he had foretold. Act. 4.
They came together to do whatsoever thy hand and counsel had before decreed
to be done. Act. 13. They believed, as many as were ordained to eternal life.
Act. 17. He gives life and motion unto all things. And In him we live, move,
and have our being. Romans 1. God delivered them over to a reprobrate mind Rom 8
All things work for the good of those that love God Romans He has mercy on
whom he will, and hardens whom he will. Read Pa^^s whole disputation. Romans
11. Election prevailed: the rest are hardened. And The graces of God are without
repentance. 1. Cor. 4. What have thou that thou have not received. Ephesians. 1. He
has chosen us in himself before the creation of the world, that we may be
(...) And Predestined according to his purpose, who does (...) the counsel
of his own will Read the chapter it self Phil. 1. It is God which works in
us both to will and to perform, of his mere good will. 2. These. 2. H^e c^t
strong errors amongst them Pervse the plac. 2. Tim* 2 The foundation of the
Lord stands sure 1 Ioh. 2. They went out from amongst us, but were not of
us. 1. Ioh. 4. Herein appears his love, in that he loved us first. Revel. 17.
God will put into their hearts to do his will. But I have al^eadged too many
places, purposing to touch only a f^w, for you may of your self find out
infinite such l^ke places of scriptu^e.

Hereunto may be added certain arguments, which no man shall ever be able to
ref^^^.

Gods omnipotency suffers nothing to b^e done which he does not either
simply or ^^son sort will. Arguments (...).
For look what simply he will not, that

His infinite wisdom does not suffer^^ (...)

Whilst he wills the end (which is (...) means leading to these ends: at
the least in some respect, but not as they are sins.





providence universal over all things particular.

As much may be said for Gods eternal and immutable Election. A^ioms of eternal
and immutable Election.


There can be no good at al in any thing, which









Christ's intercession for the elect is ever sure.

These (amongst a great many others) content me, Answer to objections.
and perhaps you. Now therefore after all this let us hear what it is that you
object.

First (say you) this doctrine carries men away Election does not lead us from
the revealed to the hidden will of God.
from the word to impressions or persuasions wroughte by faith, before credit
or belief be given to the word heard. What is this? If you have at any time
seen this wrighten in our doctrine, why do you not produce or note the
places? If you think it a consequent thereupon, why do you not frame your
argument, and draw your consequence? what kind of Logique is this, or of whom
did you learn it, to rail deadly and damnably against innocents, without any
show of proof? but if you ca^ neither show where we have wrighten it, nor by
good and apparent consequence force our doctrine to it (as out of doubt you
cannot) why then do you so shamefully slander us? we never so much as thought
of any such matter. Nay, all that we have hitherto taught is quit contrary They
which persuade you and others such things of us, they lie as wickedly and as
impude^tly as the devil. Away then with these monstrous forgeries. It is (good
Sir) the express word of God, that they which with an earnest and thankful
mind in true repentance embrace the benefit of Christ offered in the Gospel,
should certainly persuade themselves that they are in favor with God through
Christ, and m^st assured heirs of (...) life, and that not for works either
don by themselves or fore seen by God, that by the meet and free mercy of
God, whereby he has vouchsafed from all eternity to make choice of them before
others, which except he had don, they had surely perished in the blindness and
impiety with others. We make the word of God the mayor of our syllogism;
the testimony of conscience, that we believe and repent, the minor: in this
manner: He that believes in the son has eternal life, But I believe in the
son: hence we draw this conclusion, which was in question Ergo I have
eternal life. Now I pray tell me; is this to lead you from the word, or to
judge of the grace of God and our salvation otherwise then out of the word?
Truly if your self will judge otherwise, you shall perish everlastingely.

You add farther, Answer to the instaunce of Paul.
that we wrest and corrupt the text of Paul, and search too curiously into
the secrets of God. And yet you neither do, nor can aleadge any example; but in
steed of proofs you pester us with a fe^w scurrile declamatorie terms. Romans
11. 33.
If we did move such questions, why God has rather chosen one man then
another, Peter then Iu^as, to eternal life? whether others be also elected?
What is the number of the elect? etc. Then had you (...) son to revile us. For
these are that unsearchable depth whereof Paul speaks, and the knowledge of
them is no way necessary to our salvation. (...) the chief cause of our
salvation is Gods free election, that this election is sure and immurable, that
it is made known unto us by such effects as we find in our selves, na^ely
stirred up by faith, repentance, and hearing the word of God, these are things
whereof God would not have us ignorant, but has in his word a thousand times
repeated, for his glory and out comfort. Wherefore your acclamations concern us
nothing, howsoever you please your self in them.

Secondly: you cannot abstain from the stale and dry dros^e of the Manichees
and Stoickes, for want of better weapons to offend us. We for our parts detest
that dotage of the Stoickes touching necessity inhaerent in things themselves,
Dotage of the Stoickes and Manichees falsely objected.
which should bind and subject to it self God and all things besides.
Contrariwise we maintain that God is the most free and chief ruler of al
things, which does al things according to his good pleasure, whose hand no man
can withdraw, which is eternal, immutable, ever the same. Why do you under
the name of fatal laws deride his most excellent, wise, free, and immutable
decree? A man might well laugh at the folly of these toys, but for that
blasphemous impiety which you add, that no Christian can endure to laugh at,
but rather be vehemently therewithal offended. Do you think it absurd, that
al things which are and ever shall be, were before the fall known unto God, and
by him decreed? Then belike you laugh at Paul, saying that before the
foundation of the world grace was given us in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4.
and at Saint James saying, 2. Tim. ^. 9.
that Gods (...) are known unto him from the beginning* Act. 15. 18.
that is fromal eternity. But is it possible that you having ben so long
conversant in Philosophy and Divinity, should in your fancy frame unto us a
mutable God* Truly if you speak seriousely, I except against your wisdom,
if you jest friendly, I must prejudice your modesty. Do you think that God was
mutable, in threatening, but sp^ring the Ninevites? He had determined to spare
them, as well before as after his threats. But (you will say) why then did he
threaten them? for this very cause, that by threatening he might convert, and
having converted, might save them. Therefore God was not diverse, or altered
his purpose^ for even when he threatened the^, he understood this condition,
except they repented* and this repe^ta^ce he did before all eternity purpose
by threatening to work in their minds.

Besides, you object unto us a greivouse crime, in saying we overthrow and
take away Disciplie^, prayer, magistrates, and laws. Not to fast (I pray) for
breaking your shinnes. If whatsoever God has decreed shall com to pass, as
without doubt immutablie, and necessarily it must, discipline (say you) prayer,
magistrates, and laws are to no purpose* it were true, if he had decreed
without the^ that his decrees should come to pass. But if by these means he
would save some, restrain others, and make a third sort inexcusable, and
has therefore commanded to use them, that by this commandment he might the
rather move us to make use of the^, and by this means attain the good he
has decreed unto us, then who a^ you that presume to be a reformer of gods
counsels, and mutter that he has decreed, ordained and commanded things vain
and to no purpurpose? God has decreed to make da^e to morrow; will you
therefore conclude that the sun rises in vain? Because God every year
brings corn from out the earth, will you therefore conclude that the benefit
of heaven and husbandry might be taken away? what school ever taught you from
admitting the first cause to conclude a remove of second causes? when God
decreed the end, he likewise ordained and decreed means unto that end, and gave
us charge to use the^: if we use the^, it is at his pleasure; if not, by his
judgment and our fault it is at our own peril.

Your objection of Manichae in blasphemy touches not us but S. Paul, one
unspotted with that heresy. All are created good by one good God, by his most
just permissio^ they fell corrupting and turning away themselves from God. Out
of this perished heap he elected and reprobated from all eternity whom he
would. Manes acknowledges none of all this. It is therefore a damnable
slander to say that GOD did reprobate any, contrary to those sayings, GOD
will not the death any, but that all men should be saved. He would not that
any should perish, but all be saved in respect of his goodness and l^ue
toward his creatures (which will not suffer him to rejoice in the destruction
of his handy-vvoorke) as may appear by commanding, calling, and inviting to
repentance: although the force and efficacy hereof prevail not in all. For in
his word he has often said, that he reioiceth in no ma^s death, as it is
death, destruction, and torment, but calls and inviteth all men unto
himself, though not all after one sort. But that he would effect or bring to
pass that all without exception should obey and be saved, he not only said it
no where, but in many places expressly said the contrary. So that the Scripture
is not contrary to it self, teaching that God reioiceth in the salvation of
all, and yet has left some to reprobation.

Thirdly, Enthusiasmes or Revelations falsely objected.
I think that distrusting the weight of your arguments, you meant to carry it
away with multitude, and did therefore use the same argument both in first and
also in the third place: unless perhaps you will rather have it an
amplification taken from the name of Enthusiastes, that you may not be thought
to have omitted this ornament. But go to, what agreement between us and them?
you say, that neglecting the word, we expect ravishments of the mind from the
body; but in which of our wrighters have you heard or red any such thing? this
is spoken of us with as little modesty, as that before, when you said we
departed from the revealed will of God. We say that God does work in us faith,
and our conversion; but by his word after his ordinary manner of working,
where unto he has bound us, reserving to himself liberty of working
extraordinarily when soever he will, as also of moving by his word, who^, when,
and how far it pleases him.

As inconsideratly you add (and I know not whether against your conscience,
The will of man is not ^^le.
having bin so long an auditor of our profession) that according to our
doctrine the will of a man does nothing. In both arguments again you dispute
from admitting the first cause to the excluding of the second. The will of man
is an agent, but being before moved, acted, inclined, softened and renewed by
God through his word: I mean not forced, as a stone, or a block, but alured
and invited by some object offered to the mind. The will of Paul was Gods
work, in that he would do those things which the Lord would. It was Gods
judgment and the Jews offense, that they would not be gathered to geather by
Christ. It is in vain that grace goes before, unless it do effect the
accompanying of our will. What say you then of like manner of working? why
rather harke^ you not to that doctor of the church which says It is God which
works in us both to will and perform. Phil. 22.
I will now tell you a great matter, but very true. We can in no wise
maintain the purity of the article of free and certain justification,
against that sort of merit which the Papists term meritum co^grui, except
that impious devise of Gods general grace, leaving the acceptaunce, use, or
refusal of it self in our own power, be condemned, and the eternal and
immutable love of God toward his elect be freed from obscurity and sophismes.

Fourthlie, you would seem to do a thing ordinary extraordinarily, God is
not the cause of sin.
placing the strength of your arguments in the maine battle, filling your
forward and re^^-vvard with pioners and base hang bies, contrary to that
custom which you know to be observed and commanded by Rhetoricians in their
schools. Your chief argument is this, which you set forth to the utmost. If
God have decreed to give over some to blindness, sin, and death* then God by
this means is made the cause of sin. But this is easily answered. First here
again I find your want of common ingenuity, whereas you say that these are the
words of many of our wrighters, that God does effectually work sin in the
reprobate. You talk of many, but do (and I am persuaded cannot) produce one.
For we from our hearts detest this opinion, as infinite testimonies of our
writers will easily prove.

But you will say it follows upon our doctrine. For he which decreed to suffer
men to fin, is the author of sin. See what an argument you have made, which
(if it be turned the other way) is enough to confute you in your own conceit.
For he which permits sin, not being bound to hinder any man from sinning,
having besides authority and right to punish with forsaking and casting of to
eternal torments, he is neither author nor favourer, but sufferer and judge of
sin. But in this sort GOD permits sin: therefore God is not any way
the author of sin. If you proceed and urge; but that privation or
withdravving of grace which he inflicteth instead of a punishmente, is sin;
you commit a fallacy of accident. For the punishment of it self, as it is
inflicted by God, is most just; by accident, as being plucked by men on their
own heads by the first sin of Adam, and the rest ensuing, so it is sin.
Your argument had carried more color, if from Gods providence you had
concluded this effecting of sin: although in deed it had been but the same
fallacy For God did most effectualie and vehemently will the crucifying of his
son by them, who afterward executed it: yet did he not will, but suffer
their murder (which he afterward horriblye punished) to concur with his
most just, most holy, and (beyond all others) most admirable and glorious
work, which by them he performed. He would the wars of Nabuchadnezar,
but hated his wickedness. His will it was that Absolon should war
against his Father David, and defile his vviues, but these things in respect
of GODS will, were most just punishments upon David, but as Absolon did
them, only to usurp the kingdom and oppress his Father, not having therein
any commandment of God to follovv, so they were treason, and incest. This
wickedness of Absolo^ by accident concurreth with Gods judgment, which he
executes by him. As much you shall prevail if you say that God is the^ made
the author of sin, when as men forlorn and forsaken by him cannot choose but
sin. For you accuse the scripture, and God himself, often saying as much as
this, but without danger of such blasphemy. Because mankind of their own free
will did in Paradise pull on themselves this necessity

Fifth, (...) no doc^^^ne of r^^son but of the gospel.
you tell us this is a doctrine of the law. What then? is it therefore false?
is not the law as true as the Gospel? furthermore, you say it is drawn from
reason it self. You had need be more eagle-sighted in Plato and Aristotle his
books, then I and all men besides have bin, which could never find it there.
But in a word, know that it is learned out of the hidden mysteries of the
gospel. Do you think that Paul's intent was in the 9. 10. 11. and 12. to the
Romans, and 1. to the Ethesians to preach the Law? I do not think you
believe it. And what does nearer concern the very m^rrow of the Gospel, then
the eternal, free, and immutable love of God toward his elect, which Christ
s^ith was the cause why he^ gave his only begotten son for us, much more saved
us everlastinglie, being once engraffed into him through faith, and finished in
us the work which he had begun? I know not what may concern the gospel if
these things do not. It may suffice again to admonish you (as before) of
main^taining the purity of our article of justification. But those words of
yours, ( O bow that exclamation troubled me, TO WHOM DOES GOD OWE ANY THINGS)
filled (...) partly with admiration, partly with indignation and grief. I was
out of pat^ence when I read the^. Surely either you have bin little conversant
in reading holy scriptures, or to much possessed with affection and prejudice,
when you so sawcily condemn the words of scripture. Is it not the exclamation
of Paul, Romans 11. 35. Who has first given unto the Lord, that he may
recompense him? Truly nothing more comfort me, then this unspeakable love of
God toward me, that oweing no more to me then to Judas or Cain, yet for all
that, of an enemy he has made me a son, by the death of his only begotten.
For that which you aleadg of Gods binding himself unto us by promise, is
nothing at all to the purpose. What then (I pray) will you pretend, before the
applying of this promise? To whom does this promise bind God, but unto him that
embraces it by faith? But who embraces or receives it besides those, on who^
God vouchsafes to bestow this benefit? he obliges himself to as many as
believe, and this very obligation proceeds of his free goodness. But where
(^el me) where in scripture do you read, that God binds himself by any
promise to give faith and repentance unto all? this you will never be able to
show us. Leave then to be troubled with the words of Christ proceeding from a
most inward feeling of piety and true humility before God, neither dream that
by them Papisticall doubts are confirmed, whereas rather in deed without them
the certainety of faith cannot consist.

Sixtlie: they should long since have been ashamed promises. The promises are
v^iuersall unto those that believe.
For themselves are faulty in that which they object unto us. You answer the
argument, and yet use it. If this universal promise did partaine to all men,
what a confusion of impiety and absurdity would follow? But if it must be
restained unto those that believe (as indeed it must) we also maintain this
universal truth and comfort, having learned out of Gods word, that all and
they alone which believe be heirs of eternal life, and so received into
favor by God, that they shall for ever all continue thenn, and not one perish,
according to those scriptures: No man shall take away my she^pe from me: Of
that which my father has given me I will not loose etc: Ioh 10. 28. and. 6. 39.
That, if it were possible, the very elect should be seduced. Whom he has
chosen, Man. 24.
them he has called, justified, and glorified. This is the conclusion of
Christian faith and consolation, 24 Romans 8. 30.
and this article is placed in the end of the creed, that we might believe
eternal life, and with the Apostle sing^ that triumphant song, who shall
separate the elect, etc. They on the other side do openly and greeuousely wrong
the majesty of God, whilst they imagine his love to be mutable as the love of
man: as for the goldy, them they deprive of their comfort, they weaken,
disgrace, and vilify the force, use, and comfort of universal promises,
whilst they feine, that some truly believing may finally fall aware and
perish: that they which are new in favor with God were not so from all
eternity, nor shall be everlastingly: which being most absurd, it follows
necessarily, that because they will not be certain of Gods future and eternal
grace, therefore they can not be certain of the grace present. The scripture
teaches, that as many as believe are to be sa^ed: they oppose the
contradictory, that some which believe are not to be saved. Where is now your
comfort, by which you may include your self in the universal fall? These are
those secret sleights of the^ devil, which must be observed and avoided.

Augustines exposition upon Paul's Epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim 2. 4.
of al sorts of men, God will have all men saved.
fitteth that place properly as may appear by the drift and words of Saint
Paul. But to the co^te^tious I use to yield thus far, that it is spoken of al
particular men, according to the effect toward all, and vocation, but not
according to efficacy. As for our wrighters, none of them would endure, much
less desire that an indefinite might be substituted in place of an universal.

Your coockow song of contradictory wills, is In God are not contradictorie^
wills.
For there is no contradiction in this; God will that al which believe should
be saved, and that none which believe not should be saved. Again, you do ill
to confound the commandment pertaining to all men (that all should come unto
Christ) with the promise: for Christ will ease, not al men, but al which come
unto him. And therefore as the excludes none, no not the reprobate, and such as
perish, from the commandment: so likewise he excludes from the promise none
which come unto him, that is, which believe in him.

At odious is your exprobation of respect of persons. God is no respecter of
persons.
That may be committed when a thing is given of debt or duty, Romans 10. 12.
not when it is given of free mercy, as God gives. He is rich to all, yet not
giving the same gifts and benefits to all, because in his most spacious
palace he will have variety of furniture. But whereas the Apostle in this
place speaks principally of eternal riches, you spightfully omit what he
adds: Calling upon him.

Will you know upon what ground we acknowledge two sorts of election? Two, nay
three sorts of election in scripture
I will show you three sorts in scripture. First God chose the people of
Israel to be his church. Secondly Christ chose the twelve Apostles, to spread
the Gospel abroad in the world, thirdly he chose not al of either of these to
eternal life, because amongst the Israelits many were called, but feaw chosen,
amonst the Apostles one was a Devil. But he knew whom he had chosen, I mean to
eternal life, and not only to the Apostleship, whereunto also he chose Judas.
So there are three sorts of vocation or calling: first to the visible church,
Three sorts of vocation.
whereof it is said many are called: secondly to the church of Saints, which
calling is internal and effectual, which Paul names according unto his
purpose, vz. of saving those

The will of God, Voluntas signi and be^^ placi^i.
named will of revelation and good-pleasure the Schoolmen have well
distinguished, not as contrary, or two wills but one will, and that partly
manifested and partly co^cealed, partly proving and partly efficient, which are
things agreeable to the nature of God.

Eighthly you conclude with a gross and pestilent The doctrins of pers^uerance
does not m^ke v^presumptuous, but believe eternal life.
that the doctrine of final perseueran^e makes men presumptuous, but do you
call it presumption to believe eternal life? You deal too contumeliously with
the holy spirit and too heinous is this ingratitude for so great a benefi^
which God through Christ in this life bestowed on us, namely the certainty of
our salvation, purchased for us by Christ, which is the sum and foundation of
our comfort and religion. For what comfort were it to know, Col 3. 3.
that indeed Christ did ones purchase salvation for us, 1. Pet. 1. 5.
but every moment it is a thousand ways subject to be lost? we must therefore
know, that our life is with Christ in God, and there as safely kept, as is the
life of Christ himself reigning in heaven. This is a thousand times said in
scripture. Read Melancthon upon the 7. ca. of Mat. in the place above cited.
Read the 5. and 8. chapt. to the Romans I see you do not put difference between
security of the spirit and of the flesh, and that you stagger even in the
very grounds of Christianity, if in heart you maintain this tedious opinions.
If it be so, I am very sorry for you, and do exhort you to read the
scriptures diligently. The elect may loose the spirit of God, out not wholly no^
finally.


That also is a mere cavil, that we should say, the elect cannot forgo the
holy spirit. Nay they often loose many gi^es of the same spirit, but recover
them again by repentance. For they do not quite revolt from God, and become
professed enemies of the truth, that is, they sin not against the holy Ghost,
nor so fall, that finally they persevere in their errors against the
foundation, and in their sins against conscience. Neither does this comfort
make men secure, because it concerns them only, which have a purpose to
beware of falling, abhor nothing more then offending God. there is therefore a
manifest contradiction in that devilish scoff of the wicked, which say, If I
be elected, I will do what pleases me, because it shall not hurt me. For God
will have us be sure that we are elected, but this we can not do without faith
and repentance. All things work for the best, true, unto them that love God:
There is no condemnation to them which walk according to the spirit^. These
two joined together exclude security, and stir us up to cheerfulness and
alacrity to run our race, according to the commandment, make your election
certain. On the other side they sleep securely in their sins, which dream
that it is in their own hands to take and lay aside repentance whenever and
as often as they list, and play with GOD at their pleasure. But (say you) I
would feign shifte of this trial, whereunto the certainetie of salvation
does call. That is it the Devil would have.

Those sayings, Matthew the two and twentieth and tenth, He which continues
to the end etc? Revelations the second and tenth, To him, that overcommeth I
will give a crown etc. Do not derogate from the certainty of salvation, but
are exhortations whereby God vpholdeth us in that certainetie, stirring up in us
a desire of godliness, and hatred of sin.

The like slander it is, when you say that we teach men to judge of election
a priore or by the cause. Either maliciously they dissemble our opinion, or
else they understand neither themselves nor us. We judge by the effect, that
is by faith and repentance, of the cause, that is of election. But to judge
thus is to judge a posteriors, that is by the effect. That we ought not to
determine of any before the end of his life whether he shall be saved or no;
if you mean it of others you say well, if of our selves, or of every man's
own conscience and certainetie in himself, it is a detestable, wicked,
devilish, and blasphemous sayings, overthrowinge the whole foundation, and
grou^dworke of salvation. He that taught you this, taught you a doctrine of
devils, though he were an angel from heaven. But I will tell you an other
lesson, except you be certain before the end of this life whether you shall be
heir of eternal life, you shall never so be after this life. For faith in
this ve^^e certainetie, which is the beginning of eternal life, this all must
have in this life, which look for that other life. If you have thought on the
nature and definition of hope, that it is a sure and certain expectation of
eternal life, you should have found no such thing there. My heart does stand on
end to think of your blasphemy. I would not for an hundred thousand worlds be
so separated from Christ, as to be uncertain whether I were his or not. These
are heathenish blasphemes, the very entrance of hell. Wherefore you do well to
confirm it with testimonies of the heathen: for these things refarre wide of
the word of God. Why do you so co^rupt the words of scripture, wresting them
from a ^onne. like to a servile fear? what mystere, what blindness is it for
a man to boast of universal promises, and not to sifte himself, and try
whether he be of their number, of whom the promises speak* This is in deed to
bring in amongst men carnal security, and a shadow of faith, which in the
confl^ct drives us headlong into desperation. I do not th^nke Luther and
Melancthon taught any man so to babble and foam out these universal promises.
But the carrier calls for my letters, and I have to my great pains spent the
whole night in wrighting these lines. Farewell. Let me entreat you to provoke
me no more with such disputations.

Farewell heartily, this 2 of september 1573.
OF THE CAUSE OF SIN Part of a letter of Vrsinus to his friend, concerning
the cause of sin.
ONe terrible bug-beare they have, of the cause of sin, all the rest is
foolish, and not worthy the aunswearing. But even that also is a childish
fallacy of accident. For by accident, that is, through defect, fault, and
error of the will of the Devil or man, sin comes to be that work, which God
by will (most just and most agreeable to his nature and the Law) will have done,
permitting in the mean time the sins of the creature, that is, not so
correcting and directing it, that it may do justly together with God doing
justly: or else while he does not enlighten it with the knowledge of his will,
or does not so turn it by his spirit, that it may do that which it does, for
obedience sake to the revealed will of God. So that God ever does well, both by
those that are good, and also by those that are evil. But the creature does
well together with God, in that goodness wherein it is created, preserved, or
thereunto again restored by God. The good therefore which it does is the work
of God, which himself does will and effect; the evil which it does is from it
self. Now this evil is not done, but permitted by God, whiles he does not
cause the will of the creature to become good, and to do good together with
God doing good. For the same work in respect of diverse causes is both good
and evil, mutable and immutable, contingent and free, as the causes themselves
are diverse which concu^^e in producing thereof. He which sees not this, sees
nothing. But if I can I will one day answer you in feawe words. For whether
I can or no, and when I can I do not yet know, besides that it is tedious to
me to handle these stale sophismes. Learn in secret, and when your thoughts
are at leisure, meditate on this: that every man may trouble a true, but God
alone can quiet it. If you would not cry rostmeat, you might have fared much
better.

March. 10. An. 1573.
THAT PROVIDENCE DOES NOT DEROGATE FROM PRAYER.
Part of an other letter to the same friend; wherein is debated this question,
Whether the doctrine of Providence do derogate from prayer.
THe godly exercise of prayer well agrees with the doctrine of Providence; and
is confirmed and established thereby. For whosoever beggeth at Gods hands with
an upright heart things necessary to salvation, the same is verily persuaded,
that he forth with receives them. The contrary opinion shakes and rooteth up
our faith and confidence in God, and suffers us not steadfastly to believe the
last Article of the Creed. But prayer when it sueth for things on which
salvation depends not, patiently and humbly submits it self unto Gods
will, not desiring to obtain any other thing then that which GOD in his secret
counsel has decreed best, and most profitable for us. Nothing more slacketh
our obedience in this point; nothing more disturbeth our comfort and quiet of
mind herein, then that errant co^tingency whereby the Academicks and Epicures
bear the world In hand that the events of things are not governed and
determined by Gods divine counsel. Recall to mind that distinction of things
to be prayed for, often taught, and daily repeated unto children by our
countryman Philip Melancthon, and this whole controversy of prayer shall be
cleared and put out of doubt. Herevvith meets our opinion, but the contrary
opinion swarveth wholly from it; so that truth well suteth with truth, but
falshoode agrees neither with truth, nor falshoode. The sum of all is; you
must ground your confidence on God, and crave all good things of him, and be
thankful unto him for the same no otherwise the^ as if all things proceeded
from him without any your endeavor; and yet must you perform your duty with
as great diligence and industry, as if you were able to procure and gain all
things of your self, and by your self without him Whosoever directs not
the whole doctrine and disputation of Providence and Election unto this end, he
waxes vain in his curiosity, and intangleth himself in many snares, which
himself lays for him self. On whomsoever God has decreed to heap his
blessings, to them he has appointed the spirit of prayer. If then he has
given thee a desire to pray, assure thy self this gift is not in vain, but
thou shall always be heard according to Gods own promise. This is the
Consequent thou ought to deduce and gather on good ground and infallible
conclusion out of that precedent benefit. See thou the^ the contrary of this
thy fear? For nothing less impeacheth, nothing more confirms the desire,
custom, and consolation of prayer then the doctrine of Providence. I much
marvel that you yet still dream of the ghostes and spirits of particular
men. How often have you heard and read the contrary to be true, howsoever
the miserable Sophists of our time groping in the thick darkness of their
Academicall blockishnesse cavil hereat. For without the doctrine of Election
and certainety of salvation the universality of promised grace which
appertains to all the faithful, and to them alone, can neither stand or be
mainetained, nor applied to the comfort and use of the godly. How often has
it been reiterated unto you, that you must judge of Election a posteriors from
the subsequent signs and effects it causes. For you must repute and judge your
self elected by that measur of faith which is required in the elect. Yea this
is true and lively faith, for a man to believe that he is elect unto eternal
life for Christ's sake. Search then and sift thine own conscience whether there
be found in thee faith, repentance, and and unfeigned desire of the grace and
favor of God: and then pronounce thy self one of Gods elect, al curious
disputatio^s set apart. I protest before God that I^ see not by what mea^s I
could have stood steadfast in many my private greeuances, had I not held this
one comfort impregnable. No man shall take my sheep out of my hands etc. What
are all other comfortes if this be not at hand with us, Ioh. 10.
that all things, good and evil befall us not casually, but by the eternal
decree and purpose of God work for our salvation. 9. Iun. 1575.

A PREFACE OF AN ORATION pronounced on Easter eve^ by a certain student of
Divinity in the famous University of Heidelberge touching this question.
To whom the benefit of the Death and Resurrection of Christ appertains: and
how Christ died for all men.
COncerning the story and benefit of our Lords Resurrection I suppose I have
hitherto sufficiently treated: You may refer this discourse (...) to the
fifte question on that Article of the Creed He died.
It follows that I proceed unto the last point proposed, I mean, to whom
this benefit appertains. Wherefore directing our course as it were by the
loadstar of scripture we pronounce by virtue and authority thereof that so
precious and inestimable a benefit belongs unto all the faithful, and to
them alone; and we exclude the wicked and unbelievers, as long as they remain
such, from having any interest therein. For all the faithful, and they alone
have a taste of the sweetness of those fruits (suppose, The fruits of Christ's
Resurrection belong to all the faithful and to them alone.
free justification before God, a quickening from the death of sin and of the
body, and lastly immortal life and glory) these heavenly blessings, I say,
all the faithful and they alone partake and enjoy; because they all, and they
alone apply the^ unto themselves through faith. For these are they who hear
Christ's words, who believe, and have eternal life, Ioh. 3. 36. and 5. 24.
and come not into condemnation. These are they who are justified by faith, are
reconciled unto God, Romans 5. 1.
and have peace with him through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
These are they who being regenerate by the holy Ghost are raised with Christ
unto newenes of life, Act. 15. 9.
whose hearts are purified by faith, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
Finally these are they which sleep in Jesus whom one day God will bring with
him having raised them from the dead, 1. Cor. 10. 5
that they may enjoy for ever the glory of his heavenly kingdom. Now the
wicked being utterly void and destitute of faith which justifies, how should
they, I pray you, partake in any of these blessings, Heb. 11. 6.
with whom God is not pleased, (for without faith it is impossible to please
God) who belong not unto Christ, neither are heirs of the kingdom, who
neither have title nor right In Christ Jesus, nor To Christ Jesus (as the
lawiers use to speak) how should Christ appertain unto them? How should the
benefits be exte^ded unto them? Nay rather all these are by the mouth of the
son of God himself far removed and debarred these tteasures, and are
adjudged unto eternal maledictio^ and everlasting death. For thus says he in
the Gospel; Ioh. 3. 18. 36
He that believes not, is condemned already, Romans 8. 9.
and the wrath of God abides on him. And Paul testifies If any man has not
the spirit of Christ, the sa^e is not his; which place of the apostle I suppose
to be very pertine^t to this present purpose. For if the unfaithful belong not
unto Christ, neither are they of Christ; it may sou^dly be argued, and well
concluded by the logicia^s rule of Relatiues that Christ with his benefits
pertains not unto them: and as they are not Christ's: so neither is Christ
theirs. For how, I pray, should Christ pertain unto the^, whom one day at the
last judgment he shall pronounce before all the world aliants and strangers
from him, his benefits, and his kingdom: of who^ he shall testify that he
never knew them: lastly, whom he shall cast, as being the cursed workers of
iniquity, into hell fire.

Yea but, Chriist died for all men.
say you, Christ died for the sins of all* Therefore he rose again for the
justification of all. The answer hereunto is two-folde, either of which is All
that believe.
First, as often as the Gospel extends the fruit of Christ's merits and
benefits unto all, it must be understood (as says Saint Ambrose) of the whole
number of the faithful and elect. For this is the usual and common voice
found every where throughout the whole course of the gospel: He which
believes shall be saved, and comes not into judgment. He which believes
not, shall be damned, and is judged already, and the wrath of God abides on
him. Wherefore the Gospel dispossesseth all unbelievers of Christ's benefits,
not only by a flat exclusion, but also by positive virtue of that condition of
faith and repentance, by which he promises expressly or covertlie his benefits
unto me^, and which it appears is never found in the reprobate, that is, such
as do persist, and will still persist in their impiety. Christ therefore is thus
said to be dead for all: that is, for all the faithful and elect; for whom
alone he also prayed, and in whom alone he finds the end and fruit of his
death. But to extend the benefits of Christ's death unto infidels, and
reprobates, Ioh. 17. 9.
for whom he never prayed, whom he never knew, or took for his own, Mat. 7.
23.
and on whom the wrath of God abides for ever; Ioh. 3. 36.
what else is this but against his express commandment to give holy things
unto dogs, Mat. 7. 6.
and cast pearls before swine. This answer may be strongly maintained by the
authority of holy scripture, and testimonies of sound fathers For the
unbelievers. only in respect of the sufficiency of the price which he paid.
Howbeit there is an other answer no less true, wherewith we may satisfy the
most contentious wranglers; that Christ died for all men absolutely and without
exception to wit, if you respect the sufficiency of the merit, and the price
which he paid. It is out of all doubt and controversy that the death of the
Son of God is of such weight and worth that it may serve to purge and cleanse
the sins not of one world only, but thousands of worlds; if at least all m^^
would apprehend by faith this salve of sin. But the question concerns the
efficacy and participation it self of the fruits which we mainely deny to be
common to the believing, and vnbel^^^ing, or to be generally promised or given
in the (...); and we hold it no sound doctrine to (...) in this respect Christ
died alike for all (...) and reprobate.

But here some men possessed with an (...), as if the Church had not other
controve^^^ (...) enough, spew out on us their stinking (...) open mouth,
taking it grievously, that (...) not those heavenly treasures and jewels
equally to the godly, and ungodly; to the faithful, and unfaithful; to the
elect, and reprobate; to Christ's members, and the Devils vassals; to the
sheep, and to the swine. They make loud out cries on us for denying that
Christ died for all. They say this our assertion is tainted with a more odious
blasphemy then any of the Saracens, Turks, and Pagans; and that by it
Christian Religion is clean overthrown.

It is not my purpose to encounter with these monsters of men, only I must
needs touch the sla^der they fasten on us. For what slander is there, if this
be none. When we distinguish the worth of the merue from the efficacy and
participating of the benefits, and restrain according to Scripture and the
judgment of the soundest Fathers this participation to the whole number of the
faithful alone gathered from amongst the Jews and Gentiles; do we then deny
that Christ died for all?

But that the truth of this controversy may the more appear, Why we must
distinguish between sufficienc^ and the efficacy of Christ's satisfaction.
and these busy heads, if it be possible, may by some satisfaction on our part
be set at rest, let us in brief set down the force of our maine reasons
whereon we ground this our distinction.

And first the holy Scripture it self teaches us plainly this kind of
distinction, and forces us thereunto For you shall find it in scripture
sometimes absolutely spoken that Christ tasted of death for all men: Heb. 29.
that he gave himself a ransom for all men: 1. Tim. 2. 6.
that he is the reco^ciliatio^ for the sins of the whole world. 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
Again you shall read that Christ prayed, Ioh. 17* 9.
not nor sanctified himself, Ioh. 10. 15.
that is, offered up himself for the world, Mat 20. 28.
but for the elect which were given him: Isai. 53. 11.
That he laid down his life for his sheep. that he gave his life for the
ransom of many: Mat. 26. 28.
that by his knowledge: he justifies many: Romans 8. 9.
that he shed his blood for many: that the world cannot receive the holy
spirit, because it sees him not, neither knows him: and because it has not
the spirit, therefore it is not CHRIST'S. These places carry some show of
contrariety, were it not that the former are understood by us of the
sufficiency of satisfaction, and the latter of the efficacy and working virtue
thereof.

Furthermore other places occure which seem to impart unto the wicked the
benefit of redemption; 2. Pet. 2. 1.
as when Peter says that they deny even the Lord which has bought them* 2.
Pet. 1. 9.
that they were purged from their old sins. And Paul also says, that they
were sanctified with the blood of the Testament: Heb. 10. 29.
al which the Scripture else where enforces us to interpret either of the vain
glorying of Hypocrites of their redemption and sanctification: or else to
understand the^ no otherwise then of the extent and sufficiency of Christ's
satisfaction: whereas it simply excludes the unfaithful and unrepentant from
the benefit of Redemption, and constantly avereth that they are yet held
captives in the snares of Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
that they are overswayed by him and carried headlong to work wickedness; that
the wrath of God abide. hon them (he says, is abides, not it returns, as if
it had at any time relinquished them) lastly that Christ never knew them much
less redeemed them.

Now if I were purposed to produce the opinions of Fathers, The Authority of
Fathers and Schoolmen.
and the sounder Schoole-me^ who thus interpret the Scripture with us, I should
lead you into a large field of discourse. Notwithstanding it is not unfitting
my purpose to cite at the least some few of them for confirmation.

Let us here Cyrill thus reco^ciling those words of Christ, Cyrill. in Ioh li.
11. cap. 19.
I pray not for the world with that saying of John. He is a propitiation for
the sins of the whole world. John ( says he) seems to dissent from us
Savior. For our Savior here refuses to pray for the world; but John
affirms that he is the propitiation and reconciliation not for our sins
only, but for the sins of the whole world: But the blessed Evangelist S.
John because he was a Jew, least the Lord should seem to be an advocate with
his father for the Jews only, and not for other nations, which as soon as
they were called obeyed, of necessirie added for the whole world. But the Lord
Jesus separating you from them which are none of his, says, I pray for them a
love who keep my sayings, and have taken my yoke. For whose mediator and high
Priest he is, he does for good cause imparte unto them alone the benefit of
his mediation. Hitherto Cyrill.

Let us hear Prosper also in this answer to Vicentius objections clearly
distinguishing on this manner. Look August. Tom. 7.
As far forth ( says he in his answer to the first objection) as you respect
the greatness and power of the price, Or as you respect the our whole cause of
mankind, so the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole world: but they
who pass the time of their life here without faith and without the Sacrament
of regeneration, they have no part in this redemption. Whereas then in regard of
the one whole cause of mankind truly undertaken by our Lord Jesus Christ all
are well said to be redeemed, and yet all are not freed from captivity;
without doubt the appropriation of redemption is theirs out of whom the prince
of this world is cast and dislodged: and are now no longer ^ims of the
devil, but members of Christ: whose death was not so communicated unto all
mankind, that it should effect the Redemption of these who were not to be
regenerated and renewed in the spirit: but so, as that, that which was by one
example performed in behalf of all, might by the Sacrament be confirmed in
some particulars. For the potion of immortality being a confect of our
infirmity and Gods truth, is of force in it self to profit all, but if it be
not dr^nke it salueth not.

The same Prosper making answer to the dema^ds of the Fre^ch-me^ in plain
terms allows of this phrase, Cap. 9.
Christ died for the faithful alone, Ioh. 11. 51. 52.
which these men condemn as smelling of Turcisme: his words are these; Whereas
then our savior is rightly said. To have been crucified for the redemption of
the whole world in regard of the true and real taking unto him man's nature,
and in regard of the common loss we sustained in the person of the first man
Adam: yet he may well be said to be crucified only for those to whom his
death was availeable. For the evangelist says that Jesus should die for the
nation, and not for the nation only, but that he should also gather together
in one the children of God which were scattered Thus far Prosper.

Gregory says; On Ezech. lib. 1. hom. cap 2. Inn. li. 2. ca. 21. Mist. mys.
The author of life gave himself over unto death for the life of the Elect.
Innocentius. 3. who lived a bont the 1200 year of our Lord thus writes; The
blood of Christ was shed FOR THE PREDESTINATE ALONE as touching the efficacy
thereof. For the shedding of the righteous blood for the unrighteous was of so
rich a price, that if the whole world would believe in their Redeemer, the
snares of the Devil should take bold of none.

Bernard says; Sermon. 10. de 9. verse. in Psalm. 91.
Christ according to the fulness of time indeed died for the wicked, but
according to Gods decree of Predestination for his brethren and friends.

Thomas on the 5. of the Apoc. writteh on this manner. Of the rede^ptio^
purchased by the passion of Christ we may speak in a double sense and
signification, either respecting the sufficiency thereof; and so his passion
redeemed all, because as concerning himself he delivered al For his passion is
sufficient to serve and redeem al, yea if there were a thousand worlds as
says Anselme in his 2. book and 14. Chapter Cur Deus homo etc: or else we
speak thereof respecting the efficacy, and in this sense he redeemed not all by
his passion, because all cleave not fast unto the Redeemer, and therefore feel
not nor perceive the virtue of redemption.

The same author again saleth; Sermon. de verit. may. 26 Quaest. 7.
The merit of Christ as concerning the sufficiency thereof equally belongs
unto all, but not concerning the efficacy which happens partly by reason of
free will, and partly by reason of Gods election, by whom the effects and
fruits of Christ's merits are mercifully bestowed on some; and by the just
judgment of God are withheld from other some.

Lambard in his third book Distinct. 22. ca. Christ offered himself up to God
the Trinity for alme^ as touching the sufficie^cie of the price paid: but for
the elect alone, as touching the efficacy; because he wrought salvation only
for the Predestinate. What should I say more, where as these present proofs
declare sufficiently that this interpretation of holy Scripture is not vpstart
or profane, but of ancient received in the Church, and grounded on evident
truth. One only place of Peter Galatine a Monk indeed, but yet a learned
Divine and skillful in the Hebrew I intend to allege, that these clamorous
punies and novices in divinity may better see how that whatsoever is either
unknown unto them, or stands not with their monstrous inventions is not
presently newfangled and heathenish. Thus therefore he well and truly
commenteth on these words of Esaias, Isai. 53. 11.
My righteous servant shall justify many etc. Although the passion of Christ
ought to be sufficient to wash away the sins of all men, De Br^anis Catholic^
verit. li. 8. cap. 14.
yet it washed not them all away, but their sins only who should believe in
him, and repent. For this cause he says, And himself bare the sins of many.

Now omitting authorities let us bring forth the reasons* which this vpstart
Pelagian progeny by their profane and absurd opinion does especially oppose
against us.

They labor tooth and nail to prove that Christ died for all: why no man
denies it. For this is the voice of Scripture. The Vbiquitarie Pelagian
opinion touching the restoring of all into favor and grace with God by the
death of Christ, be they reprobates, or dogs, and swine.
They add hereunto, that he died for all, and every particular man. We deny
not simply this their assertion, although we find not where the scripture
speaks on this manner. They farther urge that he died for all and evr^e
particular, both elect and reprobate for Cain and David, for Judas and Peter,
for them which shall be damned in like sort as for them which shall be saved,
without all respect either of their faith or infidelity. This is a hard
saying. They run on still, and say he died for all and every of these not
only in respect of the sufficiency of his sacrifice and satisfaction, but also
in regard of the efficacy of the same. What means this new devise I pray?
That forsooth Christ by his death and bloudsheading has truly and effectually
delivered from death, purged from si^, sanctified, reconciled unto God, and
restored unto his grace and favor by his death and bloudsheading all and
every single man, yea even those who are not saved, but have been eversince
Caine, and are at this day, and shall be hereafter damned. This is their
abominable sottish opinion, on which they build an other as false and foolish,
that forsooth, All the wicked as many as heretofore perished, or at this day
perish, or hereafter shall perish; they neither perish^d, ne perish, nor shall
perish, for their sins (whereas they are washed away by the blood of Christ
Iosus) but for unbelief alone. They who are not utterly ignorant of this
controversy and question will easily grant that we here coin nothing of our
own, nor speak any thing with intent to slander and reproach them: But oh how
horrible a sound is this in Christian ears?

These quaint and gay Procters of wicked imps mainetaine that all ungodly and
filthy dogs before and after the death of Christ, The falsehood and impiety of
the foresaid opinion.
are received into the grace and favor of God. We say first that this is a
false and dive^lish opinion; because it impugneth scripture, which every where
makes open proclamation that the wicked and ungodly as long as they remain
destitute of faith and repentance, are not in the grace and favor of God, but
are, and continually remain the children of wrath and eternal malediction:
neither are they delivered from sin and death, but are held captives and
ensnared by the devil, already condemned, and plagued with the heavy wrath of
God.

Secondly, The absurdity thereof.
we affirm that this their forgerie is most absurd and vain; because it
shamefully overthrows both it self, and maine principles of the Christian
faith. For let us but propose unto our selves this Thefis or assertion; All me^
without exception faithful and unfaithful, before and after the death of
Christ are truly and undoubtedly received into grace and favor with God by
the blood of Christ; what, trow ye, will be the is^ue ensuing hereupon? verily
a huge heap of absurdities.

First original sin with the guilt thereof shall by this their position be
utterly taken away; and it will prove in their opinion ^n open falshoode to say
that all men are borne the children of wrath, because in their judgment all are
borne in the favor and grace of God. But herein the Scripture jointly
pronounces on our side that we al are by nature the children of wrath.

Secondly all the children of Turks, Saracens* Canibals who at excluded from
the covenant and Church of God, shall heerby be borne in the grace and favor
of God: and by force of Consequence there shall be salvation without the
Covenant of God, and without his Church. O those savage and cruel monsters of
our age, who shame not to seat the infantes of Turks and Infidels borne
without the church in the bosom and favor of God: nor dread to pluck
unmercifully the poor infants of Christians dieng before Baptism out of the
bosom of God, and plung them headlong into hell fire. For who knows not
that they so fondly bind the salvation of infants to the Sacrament of Baptism,
that they expressly deprive them of everlasting happiness, and violently hale
them out of Gods grace and favor who die before Baptism, unless they have been assoiled by the prayers either of their parents or freindes But if it be
true that by baptism they are again received into the favor of God, how
then w^l this peremptory disputer maintain that long since all mankind was
accepted into the same.

Thirdly, therefore this their strange conceit bruseth and quasheth in pieces
an other opinion of theirs concerning the infantes of the faith ^^ll borne out
of grace, assailed by the Devil before Baptism; and damned.

Fourthly all the wicked which before the death of Christ fell into hell fire,
and were again reconciled unto God by the death of christ, and restored into
his grace and favor* how (if this your (...) goes for truth) how then, I say,
fell they thence, who were received into it being dead, whereas they could no
more offend through incredulity? wherefore those ungodly persons shall either
continue in Gods favor, and be saved without faith, or shall, contrary to your
position, be cast headlong again from thence without your crime of incredulity.

Fiftlie, Incredulity either shall go for no sin; or if it be a sin, then
all sins shall not be purged by the death of Christ: or if all be cleansed,
at least the sin of incredulity shall be of more force and virtue then the
death of Christ. But to say either of these were erroneous and impious: For
incredulity not only is it self a sin, but the mother and nurce also of al
other offenses: and cleaves fast together with other sins even to the
regenerate: howbeit it is purged and forgive^ to the^ by the blood of Christ.

Sixthly, it is a shameful and gross he to affirm that the wicked are damned
not for their ungodly sins, but for their incredulity. As if it were not
registered and recorded in Scripture, 1. Cor. 6. 10
Thieves, covetous persons, drunkards and such like shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. As if Christ in his final judgment shall not say unto the^,
depart into hell fire, etc And as if forsooth incredulity were not the chief
of sins. Nay we argue the clea^e contrary, that they are condemned for sin,
because they are condemned for incredulity. For tell me what sin is more
grievous and he^ous then incredulity. Here our Apostata sporteth and toreth
over childishly. Incredulity, says he, is not now considered as it is in it
self a sin: but only as it refuses the means of salvation. For what is it,
Sir, to refuse the mea^es of salvation? Is not this a contempt of God? Is it
not a most detestable sin and offense? verily incredulity is therefore a
sin, because it refuses salvation with the means thereof.

Seventhly this their monstrous opinion bears the wicked in hand that
howsoever the truth of the Church doctrine touching original sin, and the
guilt of the wicked stand immovable, yet it is at no time inherent in them,
nor can truly be attributed unto them. For let us take a Turkish infant, or
some barbarous ancient person, who never heard one syllable of the death of
Christ, and therefore cannot be said to have despised it through incredulity;
now let these disputers tell us at what time they will account these to stand in
the grace and favor of God, to be reconciled unto him, justified, and
sanctified, whether in their mothers womb, or soon after their birth,
whether in their childhood, or in their youth, whether in their perfect age,
or in their old years: lastly, whether in their life time, or after death.
Nay let them tell us if ever they are admitted into favor, how they fall from
it, whereas neither any sin, nor actual incredulity is able to deiect the^
thence. For the latter of these is not incident unto them: and the former are
satisfied for by Christ. Whatsoever they here answer, the effect of all will
prove that either they will auere that some please God without faith: or that
some are cast out of Gods sight and favor without actual incredulity; both
which are false and impious, and mutually destroy one the other.

Lastly, what ca^ be spoken more blasphemous, then that God has accepted into
favor and lovingly fostereth and cherishes all the unfaithful and wicked, such
as were Cain, Saul, Judas, Herod, Caligula, and to conclude in a word al sort
of malefactors, and filthy swine? what comfort can there be more co^te^ptible,
then that thou art redeemed by Christ's death, reduced into amity and friendship
with him; whereas many thousands of those, which have bin in like sort restored,
notwithstanding perish everlastingly. My very heart quaketh and trembles to
prosecute these monsters any farther. Who is there then that thinks not this
so false an opion, impious, absurd, and blasphemous to be far remooved and
banished quite out of the precincts and bounds of the Church.

Here me thinks I here them cry themselves even hoarse again; The promises of
the Gospel are universal: they pertain unto All, they pertain unto Al. We
therefore first demand of them this question, what manner of Consequence this
is to say, The promises are universal; therefore reprobates and filthy dogs
and hogs are restored unto the favor and grace of God. Why is not the contrary
rather inferred* The promises of the Gospel have all of them a condition of
faith and repentance annexed with them; therefore they pertain not at all to
dogs and hogs. Then again, as often as they urge us with their. All, All: so
often will we reply unto them our Believing, Believing. For the promises indeed
are universal, but in regard of the repentant, and such as believe the
Gospel. And here we appeal before the whole world to the very letter of the
promise: Come unto me all says Christ, Mat. 11. 28.
but he adds, which labor and are laiden: that is, faint and sink under the
burden of your sins, which falls out in those which are repentant. And
again, elsewhere in another place: So God loved the world that he gave his
only begotten son that every one which believes should not perish, Ioh. 3.
16.
but have life everlasting. Romans 3. 22.
And Paul says; The righteousness of God by the faith of Christ Jesus unto all
and upon all that believe. Gal. 3. 22.
And in another Epistle; The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to the^ that believe.
Ioh. 3. 36.
And Christ again teaches how that he which believes on the son has
everlasting life. And Peter also, Act. 10. 43.
All the Prophets witness that through his name all that believe in him shall
receive remission of sins. The like reason is to be yielded of all other
promises of the Gospel. For they have a condition of faith and repentance
either expressed or understood and cannot without blasphemy be understood of
any other then of the whole number of the faithful.

They except against this our doctrine: that by this means the promises are
made to be particular. Let the Author of the books De Vocat. Gent. of the
calling of the Gentiles (whether this Autthor be Ambrose, Lib. 1. ca. 3.
whose title the books do bear, or Prosper as it is supposed by some) answer
for us, The people of God says he, A special university of the faithful and
elect.
have their fullness, and although a great number of me^ neglect or cast from
them the grace of their Savior; yet there is a certain special university of
the elect, and foreknowne of God, severed and discerned from the generality of
all, to this intent that a whole world might seems to be saved out of a whole
world: and all men might seem to be redeemed from out of all men. Wherefore
the promises the Gospel remain Universal to the faithful, howsoever they
appertain not unto dogs and swine. The Mayor also of this practical
Syllogism remains Universal; The promises pertain to all that believe. But
I believe. Therefore they appertain unto me.
Again, Christ died and prayed for all that believe. But I believe. Therefore
he prayed, and died for me.


Now they are cold comforters who teach afflicted consciences to reason on
this manner; Christ died for all men. But I am a man. Therefore Christ died for
me.


Against the s^^under of pure particulars.
For why, may not a Turk, dog, or hog wallowing in the mire conclude on
this manner. O notable comforters, and proclaimers of the grace of God. The
strength and very sinews of Christian comfort is, not to be a man, but to be
in graffed in Christ by faith.

Farther they object out of the Apostle, that Al men are quickened and made
alive in Christ, 1. Cor. 15. ^2.
even as all die in Adam. Where if they absolutely define that all are quickened
in Christ, the Scripture and experience shall ^^fute and put them to silence.
This i^ it the^ which the Apostle says, that Christ bestows grace on all
that are his: as Adam communicated and shared death with all that are his. And
the one indeed, ^eaning Christ, through grace which is a work of more moment;
the other, meaning Adam, by natural propagation which is a thing more easy.
And that this is the scope and sense of S. Paul the words which follow next
in order plainly prove. For when he had said that all are quickened in
Christ, he forthwith add^th: But every man in his own order: Ibid. 23.
The first fruits is Christ; the^ they that are of Christ, that is to say, they
which believe, who also were given him by his Father, and for who^ he earnestly
prayed unto his Father. And S. Augustine interprets this place not altogether
unlike unto us, whereas he says, that it was therefore said that all are
quickened in Christ, (...) because all, who (...) Adam, are the members of
Christ: but because as no man in the natural body death but in Ada^: so no man
is quickened in the spiritual body, but by Christ.

Neither is there any more place left for this cavil, that by this (...) Adam
is made stronger then Christ, if he draw headlonge with himself into
destruction and the pit and gulf of death more then Christ saves and freeth
from the very mouth of hell: For the power of each party is not to be measured
and esteemed according to the number of them which die and are quickened; but
rather according to the manner whereby destruction and quickening is purchased
or effected, and also by the greatness of the benefits either lost or regained.
To hurt is a matter of ease, but to heal a work of much pain and travel as
says the proverb. You may sooner and with much more ease destroy whole
hundreths, the^ preserve and save one; you may in shorter time cast a number
from of the bridge into the stream, then deliver one only from the peril and
danger of drowning: In like manner it was a work of more ease to destroy all
mankind: then to restore one man out of that general ruin and destruction.
That the Devil was able to do, and Adam also was able to do it; this none
but Christ could perform. Wild beasts, and calamities have power to hurt,
and murder man: but it is in the power of no creature to repair man's loss of
salvation and life eternal; but this was reserved to the power of GOD alone
creator of all things, wherefore the death of Christ had been of greater
force then the sin of Adam, yea though it had restored but one only man unto
life. And certain it is and an undoubted truth, that the blessings recovered
by Christ, so far surpass those whose loss we sustained by Adam, as heavenly
things, and things eternal excel earthly and corruptible things. For Adam as
the Apostle witnesses is of the earth, earthly: but Christ is heave^lie* Adam
is a living soul, but Christ is spiritual: Adam cast us out of an earthly
paradise, but Christ has p^^ced us in an heavenly Paradise, and has given us
everlasting happiness.

Thus (...) have thought it meet and convenient to proceed (...) setting
down the (...) of Christ's death and resurrection, which all appears came to
them all, and them alone who stick fast unto Christ by faith; and in making
answer to the cavils and slanders of Heretics, etc.

A SHORT INTRODVCTION TO the Controversy of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
unfolding the substance of the chiefest questions co^troversed or not
controuersed therein b^tweene the professors of the Gospel.
Compiled and written by D. David Parry.
Four general Premises.
1 LEt our young Divines carry in memory that the questions touching the
Ceremonies and rites of the Supper are to be distinguished from the doctrine,
which is the promise of the Gospel annexed unto the outward and visible rites.

2 Let them also learn to put a difference between the questions
co^troversed, and not controuersed, as well concerning the rites, as concerning
the doctrine.

3 Let them know that the questione controversed about the rites and
ceremonies are not so principal, nor of such circumstance, as the other which
concern the doctrine; and that for the most part they may, and ought to be
decided in equity according to the circumstances of (...), place, and person:
yet with this caveat, that all be done for edification.

4 Let them know moreover, that the maine question* touching the doctrine of
the Lords Supper not controversed hitherto by any are three: and again on the
other side the questions controversed are also three; whereunto all the rest may
easily be refered. Touching both these I will very briefly instruct the
younger sort.

The three questions touching the Lords Supper not called into doubt or
controversy are these.
I. What the Supper of the Lord is?
All the professors of the Gospel agree in this point, that the Supper of the
Lord is a Sacrament of the new Testament, instituted and ordained by Christ,
wherein together with the taking of bread and wine the true body and blood of
Christ is received, and the communion or participation of Christ with all his
blessings and benefits is sealed up in the hearts of the faithful believers.

II. What are the ends or uses of the supper instituted by Christ.
Herein also all the professors of the Gospel agree in one, that this
receiving of the Sacrament confirms our faith of the promises of grace both
because this (...) the general and common use of all Sacraments whatsoever;
and also because Christ himself has said of this Sacrament, Luc. 22. 19. 20.
Do this is remembrance of me. And, This cup is the new Covenant in my
blood.

III. What is given and received i^ the Lords Supper.
In this also there is a mutual consent of all; that the bread and wine are
given and received visibly and corporally by the hand and month of the minister
and communicants: but the body and blood of our Lord with all the benefits of
his passion are invisible and spiritually given and received by them both.

In all these, I say, there is a joint agreement between al divines which
profess the Gospel: as for vain brablers, whose brawles and iaries may not
be the measure whereby to judge of the consent, or controverses of the churches
professing the Gospel, they neither agree in these, nor in any other.

The three questions called into doubt or controversy are these.
The first question.
What is the union of the Sign signifying or the Thing signified in the Lords
supper: whether it be Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation, or only a
mystical reference or relation of the one to the other.

To this question we make an answer consonant to the Catholic faith in three
several propositions, the two of which are Negative, and third Affirmative.

1 Proposition.
The Sig^es and the Things are not united by Transubstantion, that is, by such
a charge as in which the substance of ^he Sign are transformed into the
substance of the Things, the accidents only remaining.

The reasons of the first proposition.
1 The first reason is because as Ireneus says there are two things which
have a Sacramentary proportion in the Eucharist, which the Accidents of bread
and wine, and the substance of the body and blood of Christ can by no means
have.

2 The second reason is deduced out of the words of Christ who said. This is
my body, not, let this be, or, be made my body.

3 The third reason is because the bread is termed bread both before the action
of Consec^^tion, in the action, and after the action.

4 The fourth reason is because the sounder Fathers retain the name of bread
in the Lords Supper; and when they speak by way of Hype^b^le of cha^ging of
the bread, The change of the things in the Sacraments ^^s the cause of the
change of the na^es
they will be understood to speak Sacramentally As Theodore^ Diolog. 1.
witnesses saying; it was the will of Christ that they who use the Sacraments
should not bend and set their minds on the nature of the things which are
seen, b^t should believe that which was made through grace by alteration of
the names. Here in the same diologue he teaches that we must understand a
sacramental change in these words; Christ honored the visible signs with
the title and name of his body and blood, NOT BY CHANGING THE NAME, but by
adding grace to the nature.

The second proposition.
II. The Signs and things signified are not united by Consubstantiation, that
is, by a real Existence of two bodies in the same place, or, by the close
conveiance of one within the other, such as we see is of the corn in a sack,
of (...) in a man's purse, of an Infant in his cradell, or of (...) in a
roundler. For this is a likelihood of things united in substance.

The Reasons of the second proposition.
1 The first reason is, because the words of Christ, This is my body do
signify unto us, not where Christ's body is, neither what it is IN, WITH* or
UNDER the bread: but what the bread it self is* and ought to be unto the godly
in this use.

2 The second Reason is, because the body of Christ is a true isntrumental,
finite, and visible body; after his ascension no longer present on the earth or
every where, but co^versant and remaining in heaven, even until his last
coming.

3 The third Reason is, because the sounder Fathers do teach that the body and
blood of Christ is in the bread and wine, not as in a cave orden, but as in a
mystery, and by a mystery. Chrysostom opers imperfecto Math. Homil 11. says
In holied and sanctified vessels is contained not the true body of Christ, but
the mystery of Christ's body.

The third proposition.
III. The Signs and Things have their coherence in the Lords Supper by a
Sacramental union. Now this union is of like quality with that union which is
common to the whole kind of Sacraments; otherwise it should not be a
sacramental union, but by a title of distinction should be termed, The union
in the Lords Supper. But in all the other Sacraments their is an union of
Relation and respect, to wit. A mystical signification of the Thing signed by
the Sign, a sealing, exhibiting, and receiving thereof after a lawful use,
which is not without the faith and repentance of the^ which approach unto it to
use it.

The reason^ of the third proposition.
1 The first is drawn from the nature of the whole kind, in this sort; There
is such an union in all Sacraments; Therefore in the Supper also.


The Antecedent or former proposition of this argument is manifest out of the
definition and principal end of the Sacraments.

2 The second is framed on this manner; The bread is the body of Christ either
in the truth of the thing ( as Augustine according to Prospers opinion
speaks) or in a mystery signifying it. But it is not the body of Christ
essentially and (...) the truth of the thing* because there is no
Transubstantiation. Therefore it is the body of Christ in a mystery so
signifying.


3 The third reason is, because all the arguments by which the sacramental
speech in the words of the Supper is proved are hitherunto belonging. For a
sacramental union requires sacramental phrases and terms.

4 The fourth is, because we have the testimonies of the Fathers, that the
bread is a sign, figure and sacrament of the body of Christ no longer absent,
but present; and yet present not in the outward and visible elements of bread
and wine, but in the word joined with them; present, I say, not to the mouth,
but to the heart; not locally and in place, but mystically, and spiritually.

The objection of Papists for their Transubstantiation drawn out of the words
of the Supper.

This which Christ gave, Object.
and the Priest consecrateth is the body of Christ; Therefore it is not bread.
The argument holds from the rule of things different; as if a man should
say, This is a man, therefore it is not an Ox.

We deny that this argument is framed, as you say, Auns.
from the inducing of one special by the removing of the contrary of the same
kind: because it is rather a faulty process in argumentation from the
inducing of a sacrame^tal respect which is but an Accident, to the displacing
and denial of the subject and substance; such as this is, if I should say,
This man is a Father; Therefore he is not a man. For so they argue, This bread
is the body of Christ therefore it is not bread. There is therefore in this
argument a Fallacy of Accident no less absurd the if you should thus
conclude* This thing is a table* therefore it is not wood. For although the
body of Christ be not the form or Accident of bread^ yet the Relation and
respect which the bread has by virtue of the promise unto the body of Christ
is the form of a Sacrament: Whence it is a weak kind of reasoning to say; A
dove is the holy Ghost; therefore it is no longer a dove Circumcision is the
covenant of God; therefore it is no longer Circumcision. The cupp is the New
Testament; therefore it is no longer a cup.

The answer to all the testimonies of the Fathers which the Papists allege
for the change of the signs is common; that they are all to he understood of
the Sacramental not of an essential and real mutat on, which is apparent out
of the consent of foundest Fathers in this point of the sacrament.

II. The second question.
How both the signs, and the heavenly things signified are exhibited or
received in the Lords Supper.
This question is in controversy between us both with the Papists and the
Vbiquitaries, because both of them are of opinion that the things being present
in their signs, or under the shows of the signs are covertly and
miraculously carried up and down in the hands of the ministers, handled by
them, and put into the mouths of the Communicants. We contrariwise teach, that
the things with their signs are both together exhibited and received with
their signs in the lawful use of the Supper, but in a diverse manner. For the
signs are handled by the Ministers, and taken by the mouth of the
Communicants: But the things themselves are given by Christ our high Priest,
and received by faith. This point may in like sort with the former be expressed
in three propositio^s; two negative, and one affirmative.

1. The first proposition.
The things signified, that is, the body and blood of Christ, are neither
handled, nor reached out by the hand of the Ministers to be received
corporally in the signs.

The Reasons of this first proposition.
1 The first reason is collected negatiuelie from the whole kind of
Sacraments, thus, In no Sacrament the Ministers handle or bestow things
spirituallie signified. Therefore neither in the Lords Supper do they handle
the thing spiritually signified.


The Antecedent is proved both by an induction or instance in every Sacrament,
which is evident by the adversaries own confession; and also the proportion
between the Sacrament, and the word. Marc. 1. I am the voice crying etc. Ioh.
1. I baptize with water; he which comes after me shall baptize with the holy
Ghost, and with fire. 1. Cor. 3. 7. Neither he that waters, nor he that
planteth is any thing, but God which gives the increase. Therefore it holds
alike also in the Sacraments, which are the visible word.

2 The second reason is this.

The things signified are not corporally, IN, WITH, or UNDER the signs, as
has been showed. Therefore they are not handled, or distributed by the hand
of the Minister.


3 The third reason proceeds thus, The things signified in the Supper are
spiritual, which coupled with their signs are offered in the promise of
grace. But the promise of grace is not handled with hands etc.


4 The fourth reason is the testimonies of Fathers; as Chrysostom. Sermon de
Euch. (...). Think not when ye come to these mysteries, that ye receive the
Lords body at the hands of a man, that is to say the Minister; with many other
such like places.

II. The second proposition.
The things signified I mean, the body and blood of the Lord are not received
WITH, IN, and UNDER the bread and wine by the mouth of the body.

Reasons of the second proposition.
1 The first is, because they are not bodily present with, in, and under the
signs as has been showed quest. ^ propos 2.

2 The second i^ because they pass into the belly which is the receptacle
appointed for bodily meats 1. Cor. 6. 13. For all which enters in at the
mouth, goes down into the belly Mat. 13.

3. The third is because the promise, wherein the things are offered, is not
received by the mouth.

III The third proposition.
The things signified, suppose, The lords body and blood are received
spritually by faith.

1 The first reason is derived from the condition of the whole kind; because
in Sacraments the things signified are received by faith: by which alone as we
are justified; so we receive all the benefits of the new Testament.

2 The second is, because the promise of grace is not apprehended but by faith.
Now the communion of the body and blood of Christ is the promise of grace. See
Vrsin. Volum. 1. Page 103.

The argument of a certain famous Disputant framed in defense of the eatinge
Christ's body with our mouth.
Ob. To whatsoever instrument the eating of one thing in the Lords Supper
appertains, to the same the eating of the other ought to appertain. But the
eating of one body, that is the bread, in the Lords Supper appertains to the
mouth. Therefore the eating of the other, which is Christ's body, appertains
to the same.
Ans. 1 The Mayor is true in such meats as are naturally conioined, of
contain one the other, of the which sort is a a Pie. Now the bread and the
body of Christ are not so joined together. In these then it is false.

The Mayor thus he proves; Whosoever includes in the same word of eating both
bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ affirms also that they are
both received with the same instrument. But Christ includes both bread and
wine, and his body and blood in one and the same word of eating. Therefore
CHRIST affirms that they are both received with the same instrument of eating.


Ans. 1. The proof of the Mayor fails, because an universal affirmative
should be concluded in Barbara.

2 The Mayor beggeth that which is in controversy and is denied. The
falsenesse thereof appears John the third, where CHRIST includes in the same
word of birth the spirit and the flesh: and yet it follows not that they
both are borne after the same manner, or by the same instrument.

3 The Minor also is false. For this word of eating is referred to the hollyed
bread, not to the body, but by way of consequence. For it properly pertains
unto that, which the Lord took in his hands and brake, which was bread, and
not his body. This reason is worthy the marking for that according to the
Papists and such as simply mainetaine Consubstantiation the body of CHRIST
is not there before the words of consecration (as they call them) are
pronounced, but begins to be there in the very last instante of the
pronouncing of these words, This is my body. But according to the
Vbiquitaries, which are as it were chymicall consubstantiators, it is there
indeed, as in any other bread, but it is not yet edible until after
consecration. CHRIST then commanded not to eat that with our mouth in the
bread, which as yet was not in the bread, or as yet was not edible.

Then again he proves the Mayor of his former syllogism.

A word having but one signification is to be taken but in one. But eating both
of the bread and of the body of Christ has but one signification, viz. with
the mouth. It is then to be taken in one signification of both.


Ans. 1. Here again fails the proof of the Mayor, being an universal
affirmative, which should have bin concluded in Barbara.

2 The Minor is a begging of that which is in controversy.

The third question.
Unto whom these things are offered, and of wh^^ they are received.
Heereunto is there made answer in two Propositions, both being affirmative.

1. Proposition.
The things signified are received by the faithful alo^e 1 Reason. Because only
they that believe receive the promises by faith.

2 Reason. Because they alone that believe have the spirit of Christ, from the
which his life-giuing flesh cannot be separated.

3 Reason. Because in them only that believe, Christ remains, and they in
Christ Ephesians. 3 17.

4 Reason. Because they alone that believe receive and have life. Ioh 3 and 6.

2. Proposition.
The ungodly coming without faith receive the signs without the things
themselves.

Look the reasons as they are set down in the Church page 58^.

Look the objections for the eating of the vngod^y, Ibid. page 5^2.

A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF the whole controversy concerning the Lords supper
between the Consubstantials, and the true believers.
The chief points of this explication.
1 What errors the Consubstantials impute unto us.

2 The arguments of the Consubstantials against our doctrine of the supper.

3 The shifts of the Consubstantials including some of our objections.

4 Arguments against the presence and corporal eating of the body of Christ,
IN, WITH, and UNDER bread.

5 The arguments whereby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is refelled, and the
truth of sound doctrine confirmed.

The errors which the Consubstantials falsely impute unto us with their
refutation.
Ob. IN the doctrine of of the Lords Supper there are (say the
Consubstantials) two extremes to be avoided: for both every virtue, and every
truth stands between two extremes. The one is of the Papists, the other of
the Sacramentaries: and on each side it seems to be fourfould. The errors of
the Papists are. 1 Transsubstantiation. 2 The worship of bread. 3. The
sacrifice of the mass. 4. A maiming of the sacrament Ans. They set down
indeed the errors of the Papists, but they cannot refute them: because their
opinion agrees more with the opinion of the Papists, then ours does.

For first, The Consubstantials retain the errors of the Transubstantials.
although they teach not Transubstantiation, yet they teach Consubstantiation,
whereof there is nothing delivered in the word of God.

2 Whereas they teach the bodily presence of Christ, it must needs be that
they also worship Christ in the bread, whom they suppose to be bodily present
in, under, with, and to the bread; which is a thing no less idolatrous, then
if they worshipped the bread. For wheresoever Christ is, whether in a visible
or invisible manner, there he is to be worshipped.

3 They establish the sacrifice of the Mass, because, as it has bin already
said, whilst they are bound to worship Christ in the bread, they are enforced
to ask of God forgiveness of their sins for that Christ's sake, whom they
bear in their hands; which is naught else but the Popish oblation of Christ.

4 They of force admit the mangling or abridging one part of the Sacrament. For
they retain the foundation, on which the Papists build this error. For
whereas they hold a corporal presence of Christ in, with, under or to the bread,
they must necessarily either withholde the cup from the Communicantes,
because, in their doctrine and opinion, the blood of CHRIST is in his body: or
else they must separate CHRIST'S blood from his body; then which nothing can be
more absurd.

We offend not, as they charge us, in the defect, but keep the mean. The
true catholic opinion keeping a just mean between the (...) of the (...)
and Consubstantials offending in the excess; and the (...) offending in the
defect.
For we teach the spiritual presence and participation; that is to say, that
all the faithful which eat and drink the bread and wine are truly made
partakers of Christ himself, and al his benefits, and so made one with him,
that they become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones. But there, as it
has been already demonstrated, offend as do the Papists in the excess.

Yea but, say they, these are the errors of the Sacramentaries, to say that

Object. 1. The Sacraments are only bare signs and tokens.

Ans. We teach no such doctrine: but we teach that the Things signified are
exhibited and received together with the Signs, although not corporally, yet
in such manner as fitteth Sacraments.

Object 2. CHRIST is present only according to his working.

Ans. Neither is this our doctrine, but we teach that Christ is present and
united unto us by the holy Ghost, howsoever his body be far removed and
absent from us; in like sort as he is wholly co^uersant with us by his
ministry, although it be otherwise in respect of his other nature.

Object. 3. In the Sacrament is only an imaginary, figurative, and spiritual
body of CHRIST, not an essential body.

Aunsw. Touching the imaginary body objected we never made mention thereof,
but our whole doctrine is concerning the true flesh of CHRIST, which is
present with us, yea though he remain still in heaven. Father we say, that
we receive the bread and the body, but both in their proper manner. Ob. 4. The
true body of Christ which hung on the cross, and the true blood which was shed
for us is distributed; but spiritually: that, it is received of them only which
are worthy Co^municants; and the unworthy receive nothing but the bare signs
to their judgment, and conde^^ation* Ans. This objection is indeed the very
doctrine we preach, and therefore we grant the whole, as being consonant and
agreeable with the word of God, the nature of the Sacraments, the Analogy of
faith and the communion of the faithful with Christ.

II. The arguments whereby the Consubstantials labor to (...) ^hrow our
doctrine touching the Lords Supper, together with their Confutation and
Answers.
Arg. 1. The words of Christ's institution are plain and evident, THIS is my
body, THIS is my blood.

Auns. The words they cite are swords to cut their own throats. For they say
that (...) under, or with the bread, Christ's body is reallie received; whereas
Christ says, that the bread it self is his body. Therefore they do the Church
a double wrong. One, in that they thrust on her their own words instead of
Christ's. Another, in that they think her so blind that she cannot see the
diversity of these two sayings. The bread is in the body; and, The bread is
the body Moreover they make Christ a lier. For they deny that the bread is his
body, and say, that his body is in the bread. Let them look what answer they
will make unto Christ in the last day of judgment concerning this despightfull
and reproachful blasphemy. The Papists themselves rather retain Christ's words
then our Consubstantials. For they teach that the bread is so the body of
Christ, that for sooth it is changed into the body of Christ. But these men
keep not the word, but follow, as they say the sense and meaning. Wherefore
we must search diligently whether of us ^s in the truth. Our doctrine shall be
proved in the end.

Repl. In the same place this exposition is added which is given for you, and
which is shed for you.

Ans 1. Thu^ to argue is to beg that which is in controversy. For they take
this as granted, that the bread to properly termed the body, which remains
yet to be proved.

Ans. 2. We answer by retorting the argument, thus That which we properly
call the body of Christ was given for us:

But the bread was not given for us.

Ergo, etc.

Auns. 3. As the bread is the body broken; so the breaking of the bread is the
breaking of the body:

But the breaking of the bread is improperly and mystically the breaking of
the body of Christ. For the breaking of the body is the crucifying there of.

Therefore the bread broken is in a mystical sense the body broken.

Arg. 2. The second argument is drawn from the author Christ himself, which
is true.

Ans. This argument takes that for a ground which is in controversy: for they
must prove that Christ said his body was in, under, or with the bread. Nay one
may speak figuratively, and yet plainly to. Reply. 1. He is omnipotent. Ergo
he can be every where, yea even in the bread.

Ans. 1. Though he could make two contradictories at once true, yet he will not.

2. God cannot do things contradictorie, because he is truth. But to will
things contradictorie is the part of a lier. We do not therefore deny the truth
and omnipotency of God, but their lies; nay we defend it, saying that God does
what he speaks. But they oppugn it, by teachinge that in God are contrary
wills.

Repl. 2. Christ's body has many prerogatives whereby it differs from our
bodies, as namely, that it was born of a virgin, walked on the sea, was at one
time in the grave, in bell, and in paradise, passed through doors shut.

Auns. These examples are partly improper or unlike, partly false. Unlike

1 Because they may also be incident to treatures: as walking on the water to
Peter, passinge through shut doors to spirits.

2. Because they employ a contradiction, for when he is said to be borne of a
virgin, he is not at the same time said not to be borne of a Virgin. But at
once to be finite and infinite implies acontradiction. False

1 For he passed not through closed doors, whereas they might yield and give
back to him.

2 For neither did he pass through the door of the sepulcher, whereas that is
said to have been opened by the Angel:

3 For neither was Christ's body at one and the same instante in many places,
Augustine. ad Dardan. epist. 57. Read the place.
which they seem to have taken from Augustine, But he said, that his body was
in the grave, his soul in hell, his Deity every where.

Arg. 2. The third argument is taken from the circumstance of time, thus No man
Speaking seriously speaks figuratively, Christ appointing his last Supper
spoke seriously: Ergo he speak was figuratiuelie.


Ans. 1. I deny the mayor: for else it would follow, that no man speaking
figuratively should speak seriously, which is most false. For God in all the
sacraments, though he speak figuratiuelie, yet he speaks seriouselie, I have
earnestely desired (says Christ) to eat this passover with you. I am the
vine, you are the branches. Let this cup pass from me. If it be thus in the
green wood, what shall become of the (...) He alleged the 22 ps. All this
though he speak figuratiuelie, yet did he also speak the^ seriously.

Ans. 2. To the mayor I answer, that no man the^ uses resting or obscure
sigures. But this is a plain figure, because common: and his disciples speak
this to him, where will thou that we make ready the passover for thee? It is
usual in all sacraments. It is forcible, because it expresses the likelihood
between the sign and the thing signified, with the certainetie of their
conjunction in lawful use.

Ans. We may thus (...). Because Christ spoke seriously, therefore he used a
figure, lively expressing the thing.

Repl. Christ said; his cup is the new Testament. Now In testaments we use to
spe^ke properly. Christ here ordained a Sacrament. Ergo etc.


Ans. I deny the Mayor. and retort it: because when he would institute the
Sacrament, he spoke figuratively, calling his supper a testament, which is to
be understood figuratively.

1 Because otherwise there should be two covenants, one proper, the other the
Lords supper.

2 Because otherwise all should be excluded from the covenant of God, which
could not come to the Lords supper, and all that received it should be in the
covenant.

2. Repl. IN MY BLOOD. Therefore the real blood of Christ is in the supper and
is dru^ke by our mouth. Auns. We answer by retortio^, because the new
Testament was made by the blood of Christ that was shed upon the Cross, and
which i^ applied unto us by faith, not received through the mouth. For else they
should be excluded which cannot come to this Sacrament.

3. Repl. There is an Emphasis in this word New. That which in the Old
Testament was done figuratively, is in the New done really.

1. Auns. If they add, Christ body is eaten therefore with the boddy mouth
there is more in their conclusion, then is contained in their Proposition
because there was no figure in the old Testament, which signified the bodily
eating of Christ.

2. Auns. We answer again* thus by retortion, The body of Christ is eaten no
otherwise in the new Testament then in the Old. But in the Old it was eaten
only spiritually. Therefore it is so eaten also in the New.


Repl. 3. The New testament differs from the Old; because in the Old there
are types and figures, but in the New the body it self. Heb. 9. Cor. 2.

Ans. 1. This difference of the Old and New Testament, That in the Old Christ
is not eaten bodily, in the New he is, no where expressed in the Scripture. In
these sayings of the Apostle which they cite, A body signifies that the
shadows of the Old Testament are fulfilled by Christ; because A body is there
opposed to those shadows. Again because he calls it The body of Christ,
which phrase shows that these types are fulfiled by Christ.

Ans. 2. Again we answer by concession or grant of as much as they conclude*
Although we have Christ exhibited in the New Testament, and he be borne man;
yet hence it therefore follows not that his body is in the bread, but only
that it is in the New Testament.

Arg. 4. From the consent of the Evangelists, end of Paul. Matthew (as
Theophilact counts) wrote his (...) the 8.) ^are after the ascension: Mark
in the 10 Luke the 15. Paul the 20. and they al use the san'^ words.

A speech often uttered in the same words is not figurative: Such an one is
that speech of the Lords Supper, Therefore it is not figurative.


Ans. 1. We deny the Mayor, because when any figure is clear, manifest, and
Emphatical, as this is, it is retained.

Ans. 2. The Eva^gelists do also repeat the words of Christ, which he spoke
figuratively. That same though figurative is often repeated, Thou shall baptize
with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Ioh. 1. Mat. 3.

Ans. 3. Besides it is a fallacy from mis;taking of the Cause; because a speech
is not therefore repeated because it is figurative or proper, but that it may
be the better rooted in the hearts.

Ans 4. Again we deny the Mainor, 1. Because Mathewe and Mark say This is the
blood of the New Testament* Luke says, This cup is the New Testament in my
blood. 2. Mathewe and Mark, say This is my body: Luke and Paul add, which is
delivered for you. 3. Luke says, which is delivered for you: Paul, which is
broken for you. 4. Paul says, The bread is the communion of the body of
Christ. For although in this place he treats not of purpose of the Supper,
yet he exhorts thereunto.

Repl. 1. The meaning notwithstanding is one and the sa^^*

Ans. We seek not now after the meaning^ of the words, but whether the
words are the very self same.

Repl. 2. There is (...) mention at all made of any figure. Where there is no
mention made of any figure, there is no figure.

Here there is no mention made of any figure. Therefore here is no figure.
Ans. 1. We deny the Mayor, because that were fond, and men should seem to
boast of their skill, if they should say they had used some excellent figure.
The scripture also speaks often figuratively; and yet it adds not that it
spoke figuratively.

Auns. 2. We deny the Mayor, because they make mention of a figure, whilst
they expound it; which is manifest by the nature of the Subject and Predicat.
The body was borne of the virgin, was crucified, etc. Bread is made of meal.

Auns. 3. He commands that this should be done in remembrance of him;
therefore the bread is termed his body as a memorial.

Auns. 4. Mathewe and Mark say, This is the blood of the New Testament: Paul
and Luke, This is the New Testament in my blood, Now the New Testament is an
obligation of God, for the receiving into favor of such as believe, and
repent: and of them, for the exhibiting of faith, and obedience unto him.

Auns. 5. Paul says that, The bread is the communion of the body of Christ,
which is no bodily eating. 1. The faithful are thereby one body in Christ. 2. He
compares it with the communion of the altar in the old Testament, which was
not corporal. 3. It can be attributed to the faithful alone, and not to the
ungodly.

4 John expounds this communion by remission of sins. If we walk in the
light, we have fellowshipe with him, and the blood of Jesus Christ the son of
God cle^eth us from all sin.

Repl. 3. Nay Paul uses three words which are three demonstrations.

1. COMMUNION.

Ans. But this Communion is an union with Christ, and an enjoying of all his
benefits by faith. To this belongs the similitude of the Body and the
Members; of the Vine, and the Branches; which has no reference to any
corporal eating. This communion both was and is common to all the godly from
the beginning of the world, to the end thereof. But they could not eat it
bodily: That we may grow in him, of whom the whole body is coupled. He that
cleaves to the Lord, is one spirit with him. And we are all baptized by one
Spirit into one body. But this we know that we dwell in him and he in us,
in that he has given us of his Spirit. This union then is that communion
which is by the holy Ghost, and therefore spiritual. For bread cannot be this
communion but only by a figurative speech called Metonymie.

2 GVILTY OF THE BODY.

He that is guilty of the body of Christ eats it. They that receive
veworthily are guilty of the body of Christ. Therefore they eat it
corporally. For spiritually they can not: for if they should so care, they were
not guilty.
Ans. I do deny the Mayor. For he is guilty of the body of Christ who by his
sins crucifieth it, and despises the benefit of Christ. Now unto this gu^lte
there is no need of any bodily eating; but not to receive Christ by faith
when he is offered unto us. So the injury offered unto the Arc is said to be
offered unto the Lord.

3 Nor discerning the body of the Lord. They that discern not the body of
the Lord eat it* The guilty discern it not: Therefore they eat it.


Ans. We grant if the Mayor be taken sacrame^tally, viz. of that bread which is
named Christ's body, it is true: if properly, it is false. For not to discern^
is not to yield honor thereunto due, to contemn him, and not to receives
thing signified. So Heb. 10. ver. 29 they are said to tread under feet the
Son of God, and to account the blood of the covenant an unholy thing, which
contemn him.

Arg. 5. Drawn from the testimonies of the Fathers and godly antiquity in
the vncorrupt Church.

Ans. The sayings of the Fathers are to be taken Sacrament allie, or of the
spiritual Communion. They say often that the body and blood of our Lord is
given unto us with the bread and wine. If the^ they allow of Corporal
presence they allow also of the Papists Concomitancie, or the separation of
the bloods from the body.

1. Augustine says: Thou receiuest that in the bread, which hang on the
Cross; that in the cup, which wa^shed from Christ his side.

Ans. In the bread as in a sign, that is, together with the Sign thou
receivest the thing signified. When we receive the bread we are sure that we
have Christ.

2 Cyrillon John says: By a natural participatio^, (...) spiritually, but
also corporally: not only according to the spirit, but also according to the
flesh: corporally, and essentiallie.

Auns. Cyrill speaks not of the manner of eating, but of the thing eaten: he
shows that we are made partakers not only of the spirit, but also of the
humane nature of Christ. Now he means the spiritual communion.

1 Upon it he cites the places of Ioh 6. 54. and 1. Cor. 6. 15. where there is
no mention made of any corporal eating.

2 He speaks of the presence of Christ not in the bread, but in us.

3 He proves this abiding of Christ by the use of the supper, not by the
corporal eating of it.

4 He so describes it, as that he faith it shall endure in the life eternal.

5 He speaks of that Communion which is proper to the Saints; now that is
spiritual. For else it should also happen to the wicked.

III. The Shifts of the Consubstantials in eluding some (not al, for there are
more objected against th^^^) of ^ur objections.
1 We do not mean (say they) a natural and (...) eating.

Ans. We object not this against them, but only we ask, whether Christ be
eaten bodily, either after a gross or sub^^e manner. How so ever they
answer, there is too much idolatry in their opinion. For Christ refuting the
Capernaites distinguishes not the eating of himself into a gross and subtle
manner, but he simply says that his body cannot be taken with a bodily mouth.
For he says that he shall ascend, and that the words which he speaks are
spirit and life.

Ob. 2. We mainetaine not the vbiquitie. For thereof is not one word mentioned.

Ans. Here is to be noted the disagreement of ou^ adversaries about Vbiquitie.
Neither is there one word mentioned to this purpose, that the body of Christ is
at once in many places. For it is a properly belonging only to his divine
nature, to be (...) once in many places. Moreover upon this opinion of theirs
follows the Vbiquitie, for he which at once is all in diverse places, must
needs be infinite, and therefore necessarily every where.

Ob 3. We do not destroy the article of Christ's ascension.

Aunsw. But they stumble at it. For whilst they avouch, that as often as the
Lords Supper is celebrated. CHRIST is eaten corporally, they must needs say
that he remains invisibly upon earth, (whereas indeed he is said to have
left the world, to have ascended from* an inferior to a superior place, there
to remain in heaven until he come to judgment.) or that he descends from
heaven, as often as the Lords supper is celebrated. This is already refuted.
How then is he in the bread?

Object 4. We take not away the doctrine of the proprieties of his humane
nature.

Ans. Yes quite away. For they will have his humane nature to be such, as is
neither seen, felt, nor circumscribed.

Repl. But Christ laid a side these infirmities, and reserved his natural
proprieties.

Ans. Nay these are his natural proprieties, which being taken away the truth
of his humane nature is also taken away. Augustine: take away the space and
dimension of bodies, and they will be no where.

Object. 5. We do not abolish the doctrine of communicating proprieties.

Aunsw. Yes they do. For they apply the properties of the divine nature
(which are attributed to the whole person in co^crete) unto both natures: I
will be with you unto the end of the world: this they take as spoken of both
natures. Which is as much as if saying Christ was circumcised, I should thus
understand it, Christ was circumcised both in his godhead, and also in the
flesh.

Repli. This only we add, that those articles concern not this place.

Ans. By this reason all sects might shift of all testimonies of scripture.
But by their leave they concern this place for two reasons.

1 Because.

They are wrighten of the body of Christ.

But the body of Christ concerns the Lords supper:

Ergo these articles also concern this place.

For they teach us how Christ's body is to be eaten.

2. Because no one article of faith is contrary to an other, but every one is
a rule by which we must interpret an other: so the doctrine of justification
pertains to this, because in the Lords Supper must no other righteousenesse
be sought, then by the blood of Christ.

Object. We must not set down the manner how.

Ans. Here is a double error. 1. When they say we must not define or set down
the manner, and so they contradict scripture, which defines it, and teaches
us that it is spiritual, and that the union with Christ is made in faith by
the holy Ghost. 2. Themselves set down the manner, as appears manyfestely by
their wrightings.

Object. 7. It is true that Durandus says: We hear the words, perceive the
motion, believe the presence, and know not the manner.

Ans 2. This neither helps you, nor hurts us, because Durandus was a Papist.

Aunsw. We may grant this saying, so it be rightly understood. We hear
the word this is my body, not that in the bread we do with our mouths
feed on the body of Christ. We perceive the motion, that is, that the bread
enters into our mouth, not the body of Christ We know not the manner, that is
perfectly, namely how the holy Ghost is every where all in Christ, and in all
the god he, and how he does unite us in Christ. We believe the presence, but
such a presence as is the eating* and as is the union of the members and the
head.

Ob. 8. This (...), that the body and blood of Christ is given unto (...),
cruelie, substantiallie, and (...).

Ans. We grant that we eat the true body of (...) then the whole disputation
is to no purpose. 1 Because they coufesse that we are made partakers of the
true body of Christ, and that we (...) of the manner* which also we grant. 2
Because the reasons o^ refutations which they bring are or no moment.

4 ARGVMENTS, WHEREBY IT IS proved, that the body of Christ is present neither
IN nor UNDER, nor TO the bread of the Lords supper, nor is corporally eaten IN
it, UNDER it, WITH it, etc.
1. BEcause he took on him very nature of man. Besides, we cannot eat him
otherwise then did his disciples in the first supper.

2 He did truly ascend from earth into heaven.

3 Such is the eating of him, as is his abode with us,

4 All the godly of the Old and new Testament have the same abode with Christ.

5 Christ alone can offer himself to his Father. Now in the use of the Lords
supper we must needs crave of God remission of sins. If therefore he be
present with the bread, we must desire this of him, and so we offer bread. In
the new testament it is not lawful to direct our prayers to any one certain
place.

6 Those good gifts which are promised only to the godly, are spiritual. To
these and others above cited, may be added the consent of Fathers, as Ambrose,
Athanasius, Augustine, Basil, Ba^e, Bertra^s, Chrysostom, Clemens
Alexandr^^^, the Nicene Counsel, Cyprian, Cyrill, Dionysius, Gelasius*
Gregory the Great, Gregory Naz^^zen, He s^chius, Hierom, Hilarie, Irenaeus,
Justin, Leo, Macarius, Orig^n, Procoplus, Gaza, Tertullian, Theodoret, etc?

5. Arguments whereby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is refe^^ed, and the
truth of the right doctrine confirmed.
Arg. The Marcion^^es and Manichees fained that Christ had no true and solid
humane body, but only an imaginary or seeming body, so that he did only
seem to have flesh and bones, whereas indeed he had none. And that the very
incarnation, and al motions and operations of Christ did only appear in show,
whereas indeed there was no such thing.

But this opinion of Vbiquitie, and real communication of proprieties, revoketh
from hell that phantastique dotage of Marcion and Manes.

Wherefore this also, as the Man^chea^ heresy, is to be condemned and banished
from Gods Church, unto the very deepest pit of hell.

The Minor is thus proved, The Vbiquitaries believe and teach, that all
properties of the Deity were at the instant of conception, really transfused
from the Deity of the Word, into the humane nature assumed by Christ. Hence
follow these absurdities.

1 Christ shall not be truly borne of the Virgin, if according to the nature
of his humanity, he were truly and essentiallie without his mothers womb
before he were borne, and after his birth were according to his humane nature
as truly and substantiallie in his mothers womb as before.

2 In his humane nature Christ was not truly weak and subject to passions, if
then also he were partaker of divine majesty and omnipotency.

3 He was not truly dead, if in the very instant of death both in soul and
body he were essentially every where present with his Deity. For his soul
everie-where-present with his everie-where-present body could not reallie be
separated by distance of place, and therefore his body could not die but
imaginarily.

4 He did not truly ascend into heaven, but we must say it was only an
imaginary and phantastique show, if in body he were there substa^tially
before he ascended thither, and after he ascended, nevertheles he remain in
the earth, nay in the very bodies of the faithful, by substantial presence of
the same body, as truly as before, if these things did indeed so fall out, it
will follow that the same body of Christ was at once weak and yet omnipotent,
base and glorious, able to suffer and unable, dead and living, limited and
unlimited, which to say were blasphemy.

To avoid these prodigious and impious absurdities, they tell us, that

Ob. Christ in respect of his body was in deed limited, weak, passible, and
mortal in the time of his humiliation: because he did empty himself, and
would not before his resurrection show forth that majesty which he imparted
to his body.

Ans. They do ill to interpret this emptying of concealing all his glory and
majesty for the time wherein he took our nature upon him: whereas indeed it
is to be understood of the divine nature of the word, as it vouchsafed to take
upon it the shape of a servant, that is, the Mass of our nature, and would
become man. Besides, it would follow that Christ did even then show forth the
power and majesty communicated to his flesh, when he was truly subject to
infirmity, and circumscribed by his body: as which weeping he raized Lazarus,
and being taken by the Jews, healed Malchus which was wounded by Peter. But
what is it to fetch back the Marcionites from hell, or in the greatest mystery
of religion to speak blasphemy, if this be not?

Argum. 2 This is the blasphemy of Samos^te^^^, Airtus, and the late
Antitrinitaries* that the man Christ is not properly and naturally God, but
only by accidental participation of the Divine proprieties, majesty, honor,
power, and virtue. In like manner conceive the Vbiquitaries of the deity of
the man Christ, de^ining the personal union, by this only communicating of
proprieties, whereby the flesh of Christ is made omnipotent and present in every
place. So that the same man is, and is called God, not because properly and
naturally he is so, but because from God there is given unto him infinite
power, majesty, glory, and all gifts of the holy Ghost without measure. But
this accidental bestowing of the deity and all properties thereof, did not
make Christ properly and naturally God* but only by divine grace, or God
improperly so called; because he is not the natural deity of the word, but a
certain participation thereof with force and efficacy. But therefore was it
objected by true Christians against the Arrians that they overthrew the true
and eternal Deity of Christ, because they did not accoumpt him God by nature
but only by participation of dignity and majesty through grace. Seeing
therefore the Vbiquitaries only of equaling our Immanuel to God by
participation of proprieties, do take away his trewand eternal deity, we do
with good reason condemn and detest this doctrine of theirs as blasphemo^ie
and heretical. This their own words and sentences do witness, as Brentius
in Recognie. Page 20. Jacob. Andr. These. 20. disputation. Tunigeus. Item. These.
25 and 26. Et Apolog. Ingolstad. 26. Where it is gathered, that the opinion of
the Vbiquitaries of the deity of the man Christ, is all one with that of the
Arrians and Antitrinitaries, that is, that by all these he is accou^pted not
God by nature, but only by grace of participation, a new, temporary, created,
and adoptiue God. Which if it be true, Christ shall not be (...), God and man,
but (...), a Divine man; such as also he is accounted by the Vbiquitaries, who
(at witnesses Seruetus in his first book De Trimitate) say that God may
communicate unto man the fullness of his Deity, and give unto him his
Divinity, majesty, power, and glory. Which blasphemy, being the same both,
we utterly hate and detest. Argum. 3. N^storius taught that God (which is the
word) was united unto man only by participation of equality in majesty,
honor, power, virtue, and operation. And that the difference of the words
dwelling in man assumed by it, and in other saints, consists in nothing but
in the very gifts and graces bestowed on man by God. This also the
Vbiquitaries teach; because they say there is no difference between the
dwelling of the Deity in Peter and Christ, except such as is taken from
communicating the gifts and properties of the Deity: maintaining that in this
respect the manhood as^umed by Christ is God, because the Word does nothing
without it, but al things by it. And this is nothing else but to make the man
Christ to be God only by accident. Wherefore the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is
al one with that of the Nestorians.

Tertullianus. (...)* de Trin. page 610. If Christ be o^lie ^^an, how is he
present wheresoever he is called upon? whereas to be present every where, is
not the nature of man but of God? By this sentence is^ felled the Vbiquitie of
the humane nature in Christ.

Obie* But the union of the divine and humane nature in Christ is inseparable:

Therefore wheresoever his divine nature is, there also is his humane nature.

Ans. It is true that the union is inseparable, for the word never forsakes
the nature once assumed. But the word is not so in the humane nature as a
soul encloased in our bodies. For wheresoever are our bodies, there also
needs must be our souls, and the soul once without the body, is not present
with it. But the word is not so in the man Christ, but is so inseperably and
personally in the humane nature, that withal it is without the humane nature
in all parts of the world by ^e^letion or filling every place, and in the
godly and Angels by special presence. For the personal union of two natures
overthrows not the general action of the presence of his majesty; nor
hinders the special action: because the word is effectual in the faithful
and regene^ate.

RVLES AND AXIO MES OF CERTAIN CHIEF POINTS of Christianity.
Proposed by Vrsmus to be disputed on publicly, partly in the University of
Heidelberg, and partly in Collegio Sapientia.
OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHVRCH.
1 THe doctrine of the church, or Christian religion, is a doctrine of Gods law
and the Gospel of Christ, perfect and incorrupt, as it is delivered in the
books of the Prophets and Apostles, by which alone God leads men to eternal
life.

2. The whole doctrine of Christianity is contained in these two parts, the
law, and the Gospel.

3. The foundation of Christian religion is the Decalogue or ten
commandments, and the articles of our faith rightly understood.

4. Which is all one, if we say the foundation is the doctrine of Gods nature
and will.

5. Paul also means the same 1. Cor. 3. When that the foundation is Christ.

6. The church must needs know difference between the doctrine delivered unto
it by God, and that which is delivered to it by religion of other nations*

7 The first difference is, that the gospel of Christ is only known in the
church; other sects are altogether ignorant thereof. All heretics mainetaine
errors either touching the son of Christ, or concerning his office.

8 The second, that the church retains the whole doctrine of Gods law, other
sects are ignorant of the first table of the law, and in the second observe
only some part, touching external discipline.

9 The third, that the church learneth the knowledge and worship of God, out of
his whole word, and out of that alone, neither taking ought from it, nor adding
to it: as for other religions, they do not only cast away the greater part of
Gods truth, but also unto the final portion of law, which they retain, add
idolatry, granting and approving many things repugnante to the second table
of the decalogue.

10 Even the trewest philosophy must be discerned from the doctrine of the
church: for true philosophy comprizeth only that part of this doctrine which
the second table commands* as for the whole and entire love of our neighbor,
of that it teaches us nothing, and framing to it self an idol insteede of the
true God, erreth much from the true worship of the true God.

2 OF HOLY SCIPTVRE.
1. The sum of holy scripture is contained in the decalogue and creed.

2. Which is also manifest, because it is all contained in the law and the
Gospel.

3. For what soever is there in contained, either it concerns the nature, or
will, or works of God, or the sin of devils and men?

4. The will of God consists in precepts, threats, and promises.

5. The works of God are either his benefits, as the creation, preservation,
and gouerninge of al things, the collecting and vphoulding his church by the
mediation of his son: o^ his judgments, as the punnishments of offenders.

6. Of all these we are taught, either in the law, or in the Gospel, or in
both.

7. The same is plain by the division of the whole scripture into the new and
old Testament or covenant.

8. For this word covenant does signify that in scripture we are taught that
GOD promises or performs unto men either before or since the manifestation
of Christ in the flesh, and what he requires again of them, and for what
cause.

9. Which also the scripture intends, professing to teach Christ.

10. For whatsoever is therein delivered, either it pertayneth to the true
knowledge of Christ's person, or his office.

11. The differences between the doctrine delivered in scripture and the
religions of other sects, are these. First in the doctrine of the true church
is taught the whole Gospel of Christ, but other religions either know it not
at all, or to their own errors join some part thereof, whose use they
neither know nor conceive.

12. Secondly: in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is delivered the
whole law of God, and that rightely understood: other religions cut of the
chief points thereof, namely the true knowledge and worship of God, or the
first table of the commandments, and the internal and spiritual obedience
of the second table, retaininge only a part thereof, namely the precepts of
Disciplines, or external and civil duties toward men.

13. But though even they also do boast and glory of the true God and his
worship, yet do they err from him for 3 causes. First because natural
testimonies are not sufficient to the knowledge of the true God. Secondly,
because unto the^ men join many errors of their own. Thir^ly because for want
of the light of Gods word, they understand not even those things which in
word they truly profess, but corrupt them with an evil interpretation.

14. Either they command only so much touching aff^ections and inclinations
disagreeing with the second table as may serve to bridle them, which is but a
part of this doctrine, or they do accuse and condemn all, or else they do
not so much accuse and condemn them as does the doctrine of the church.

15. Other sects admit and approve some things against the external obedience
of the second table, God by his just judgment giving them over into a reprobate
sense.

16 We pronounce the doctrine of holy scripture to be true, not for the
authority of the church, but because we know it was delivered unto us by God.

17* That it is from God, we know by testimony of the holy Ghost in the hearts
of the godly: by our deliverance from sin and death, whereof this only
religion does assure us: by the purity and integrity of the law, which is
found only in the church: by the prophecies and the fulfilling thereof: by
miracles proper only to the church: by the antiquity of this and late vpstarte
newness of others: by the consent and agreement of every part in this
doctrine, and the disagreement in others: by the hatred of Satan and all the
wicked against this doctrine: by the miraculouse preservation and defense
thereof against the Devil and the world: by the punnishmentes inflicted upon
the enemies thereof: by the constancy of martyrs and confessors who had sure
comfort even in death by their holy life, by whom it was delivered and spread
abroad.

18. No opinion of God or his will and worship must be received, which is not
set down in scripture: and we must so fa^ give credit to other doctors of the
church, as they confirm their doctrine out of the prophets and apostles*

19. This is not only proved by testimony of holy scripture, whereby we are
commanded in cases of religion to depend on it alone; but also by the nature
and definition of faith and the worship of God, both which must needs be
grounded on Gods word: also by the perfection of this prophetical and
apostolical doctrine; and by the diverse callings of Prophets, apostles, and
other doctors and teachers of the church.

3. OF THE CERTAINETIE AND AVTHORITIE OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE.
1. It is certain that only this doctrine of religion, which is contained in
the books of the prophets and apostles, is delivered by God himself, and does
not only nor principally rely upon the authority of the church, but most
especially upon the testimony of God and the scripture it self.

2. The first and principal argument whereby this authority of holy scripture
is established amongst us, is the witness of Gods holy spirit in the hearts of
the faithful.

3. This witness as it is peculiar to the godly, so it only causes us in true
faith to embrace the doctrine of the prophets and apostles: all the rest may be
understood even of them which are not regenerate, and do indeed convince or
forcibly persuade us of the truth of this doctrine, but except we have also
this witness of the spirit, they can never move our minds to embrace and
give credit to them.

4. The second argument is, because this doctrine only shows men the causes
of evil, and deliuerrance from sin and death, agreeing with the perfect
justice and goodness of God, and also satisfying our consciences.

5 The third, because only the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles retains
Gods law entire and pure; but all other Religions frame unto themselves Gods,
and their worship, without any authority from God, and approve many things
contrary to the law naturally known unto us.

6 The fourth, because history and experience does witness, that the eve^t
has answered those predictions which have been here and there set down in
scripture.

7 The fifth, is, the miracles added to this doctrine.

8 The sixth, antiquity, because this religion vva^ the first, and has
continued the same, from the beginning of the world until this day.

9 The seventh, the consent and agreement of all parts of this doctrine
between themselves, which is not in other religions.

10 The eighth, is the hatred of Satan and all the wicked against this doctrine.

11 The ninth, is Gods preservation and defense of this doctrine against all
his enemies.

12 The tenth, the punishment of such enemies as persecute or corrupt this
doctrine.

13 The eleventh, the constancy of Martyrs and confessors. Tertullian. The
blood of Martyrs is the seed of the church. The Martyrs of the church differ
from others^ in multitude, 2 in alacrity and cheerfulness in undergoing
dangers and death it self, 3 the defenders of wicked doctrine suffer when they
are convicted of errors, but the godly are by tyrannical force carried away
to punishment.

14 The twelfth, their holiness of life by whom it was delivered and spread
abroad, far exceeding the virtues of heathen men, and such as followed other
religions.

15 Seeing therefore this only doctrine of religion is true and Divine, no
opinion can bind our consciences to belief or obedience, which is not
established by testimonies of holy scripture rightly understood: but no opinion
disagreeing therewithal is to be so much as received.

OF GOD AND THE TRVE KNOWledge of him.
1 MAn being destitute of the true knowledge of God, is most unhappy.

2 It is no true knowledge of God, which agreeeth not with Gods own opening of
himself, nor is joined with true love and fear of God.

3 Of this opening and knowledge of God in ma^kinde there are 3 degrees, 1 By
Gods works shining in nature: 2 by the word of God delivered to the church: 3
by the grace of the holy spirit lightning the minds of the regenerate through
consideration of the works and word of God.

4 For that there is a God, these testimonies compel all reasonable men though
ignorant of the doctrine of the church to confess. 1 The most wise order of
things in nature: 2 The excellency of the mind of man: the knowledge of
natural principles, and amongst them of this, that there is a God: 4 The
fears of conscience in the wicked: 5 The punishments of sin in this life: 6
The instituting and preservation of Civil order: 7 The virtues and singular
motions in heroike minds: 8 The significations of future things: 9 The
destinating and appointment of all things unto certain ends: 10 The order of
causes not proceeding to infinity.

5 That there is but one true God, besides the testimonies of Gods word, these
also prove. 1 The revealing of one true God only: 2 The most high and excellent
majesty, perfection, and omnipotency of the true God. 3 Because more then one
would be either idle or superfluo^.

6 Lastly, they who do not oppose themselves against reason, confess that God
is a nature spiritual, intelligent, eternal, diverse from al other things,
inco^prehensible, in it self most perfect, immutable, of infinite power,
wisdom, and goodness, just, chaste, true, merciful, bountiful, most free,
angry for sin, governing the world.

7 But without the light of Gods word men neither understand these things which
they confess of God, neither know any of those things, which the voice of
heavenly doctrine, that is, the scripture, adds to this knowledge of God, as
of the eternal father and son and holy Ghost, of the creation of things,
sending his son, gathering his dispersed church, universal judgment, and
eternal life.

8 Wherefore the testimonies of God in nature are to be considered, but
whosoever seek GOD without the doctrine of the church, they substitute an idol
in steed of the true God.

9 Moreover the true knowledge of God is not to be learned out of the very word
of God, without the special grace of the holy Spirit.

10 And in the end, all the knowledge of God which me^ have in this life, is
but slender, and begun, nor shall be perfited, but in the celestial eternity.

11 The eternal Father, Three persons of one God.
Son, and holy Ghost are three persons

12 Indeed distinct one from an other.

13 Equal in all essential or natural properties of the Deity.

14 And of one essence or nature.

15 By the divine essence church understands that which the eternal father,
What is meant by essence.
son, and holy Ghost, (every of them being absolutely considered in himself,
What a person is
or his own nature) are, and are called. But by this word person they mean
that which every of the three is, and is called, being considered as he is
compared with the other, or respectively, or according to the manner of their
exillence.

16 That the son is a divine subsistence or person, The Son (...) person of
the (...), or a subsistence.
it is prooved, because 1 He is named the proper and only begotten Son of
GOD, that is, his natural Son: 2 He is said in scripture to have taken
upon him the nature of man, and before that to have been the son of GOD. 3
He is called the word which by John is described to be a person subsistent and
by Solomon wisdom subsistent. 4 He is the mediator between God and man, who
must needs have been from all eternity. 5 He is named an Angel even before
his incarnation. 6 Lastly, he is described to be CHRIST borne of the virgin,
natural and true God and the son of God.

17 That the holy Ghost also is a subsistence or person subsisting it is
plain 1. Because he appeared in a visible form: The holy Ghost a person.
2. Because in scripture he is called God, 3. Because in his name we are
baptized. 4. Because to him are attributed things proper to a person.

18 But that these persons are distinct one from an other, That these persons
are distinguished.
hereby it is manifest, 1. Because the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are also
called for reference and respect which they have one to an other: and, 2.
Because the scripture says that the Son and holy Ghost are not one with the
Father, nor the holy Ghost with the Son: 3. Because they are said to be more
then one; and because properties are attributed to one, which agree not to an
other.

19 The equality of godhead in these three persons is proved by express
testimonies of scripture, That the persons be equal.
by their personal proprieties, because not some part, but the whole divine
essence is communicated to the Son by the Father, and to the holy Ghost by
the Father and the Son: 2. By such attributes or proprieties as are common to
the divine nature: 3. By the works of GOD; and by equality of honor due unto
them.

20 That they are consubstantiall it is certain, That the persons are
consubsta^tiall.
1 Because they are Jehovah which is one; 2 Because they are in scripture
described as the true GOD, which is only one: 3. Because there is one spirit
of the Father and of the Son: 4. Because the Father communicates to the
Son and the holy Ghost, and the Son to the holy Ghost, not an other, but
his own proper essence, and that whole and vndevided.

21 The differences of these persons in the Deity are either internal, Two
sorts of differences in the persons.
from those operations which they exercise one toward an other: or external,
from those operations which they exercise toward the creatures.

22 The internal differences are, Internal.
that the Father is the first person of the Deity, neither borne nor proceeding
from any other, but being of it self, which from all eternity begat the
son, and from whom the holy Ghost proceeds: the Son is the second person of
the Deity, begotten from all eternity of the Father, and from whom the holy
Ghost proceeds: the holy Ghost is the third person of the Deity proceeding
from all eternity from the Father and the son.

23 These works which the Deity exercises toward the creatures, External.
although they be common to the three persons, yet the order which the three
divine persons observe in performing them make their difference external: as
that the Father does all things of himself, by the Son and holy Ghost; the
Son and holy Ghost not of themselves; but the So^ of the father by the holy
ghost; and the holy GHOST of the father and the Son by himself.

24 And hence it is that some benefits are properly said to be gifts of the
holy ghost, nor because the father has no part in them, but because he
bestows them upon us by the son or the holy ghost, as when the son is called
the wisdom, the word, counselor, angel, apostle, image of the Father, power
of the father, uniting unto him the humane nature, and therefore incarnate, and
man, and mediator, intercessor, priest, redeemer, iustifier, shepherd, head,
and king of his church. Sitting at the right hand of his father, judge of quick
and dead etc. Also that the holy ghost is called a sanctifier, that is a person
immediately lightning us, regenerating, uniting us to God, comforting and
confirming us.

OF THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
1 THe order in nature, the mind of man, the knowledge of principles, civil
discipline, final causes, the finite orderly chain of causes, do show that it
was created by some principal creating spirit.

2 Yet because of the knowledge of God now obs^ured in men by sin, for the
continual change of corruption and generation, for the absurdity of imagining
the creator to be idle, and for loss of the history of the creation and
original of the world, there is no truth and certainety to be found concerning
the creation of the world, but in the doctrine of the church.

3 Therefore the sacred scripture teaches us that al things began to be, and
to have bin created by the only true God, the eternal father, son and holy
Ghost, according to the eternal purpose and pleasure of this true and eternal
God.

4 But this eternal father created all things of nothing by his son and the
holy Ghost, most freely, without any alteration or change of himself, or any
labor: so that all was very good.

5 The end of the creation of the world was chiefly the glory of God: other
ends subordinate unto this are the manifestation and contemplation of Gods
wisdom, power, and goodness in his works; his providence, or preservation,
and perpetual governing of all things, especially the goodness and bounty
of God toward his church: and to conclude, that al other things might seru^ for
the life and safety of man.

6. OF THE SAME.
1 Whatsoever is, is either the creator, or his creature.

2 All other things which have begun to be besides this one, only, eternal,
and true God manifested in his church, were created by the one true God.

3. In that beginning of time wherein it pleased God to have it so:

4. And that of the eternal father by the son and holy Ghost.

5. By the most free purpose and decree of Gods will.

6. With out any motion, change, or labor of the creator,

7. And that of nothing.

8. And so that al things were most excellent in their kind.

9. Not that the creator might thereby be made better or more perfect.

10. But that in the creation he might impart his goodness and joy to
reasonable creatures.

11. And afterward preseruinge, ruling, and sustaining by his providence al
things which he had created, he might for ever be beneficial unto them,
especially to his church.

12. And that being willing that other creatures should serve especially for
man's use and saftie,

13. He might declare unto them his wisdom, goodness, power, and joy.

14. And being known by his works, ^ee might for ever be praised by
reaso^able creatures, for his wisdom, bounty, power, and joy.

7. OF THE ANGELS.
1 IT is certain that there are angels both good and bad.

2. But both good and bad angels are spirits, that is, incorporall
substances, not subject to sense, living, intelligent, excellent in strength
and wisdom.

3. Finite in nature and proprieties.

4. Created by God of nothing, then when other things were created.

5. In true holiness, justice, and blessedness.

6. Wherein the good Angels are by the singular grace of the creator confirmed,

7. That they may agnize and praise him for ever.

8. And be Gods ministers to finish the salvation of the elect, and repress
and punish the evil.

9. But the evil angels by their proper and free will, and by their own
fault fell from God, and are made enemies of God, and the good angels and
mankind.

10. And therefore through hatred against God they force men to sin, and
practice their destruction.

11. And these are immutable evil, cast of from God into eternal punishment.

12. But God suffered them to fall, and saves them being fallen, that he may
show his anger and justice in their punishments, and by them may punish,
chastize, and exercise the elect.

9 OF GODS PROVIDENCE.
1. Not only the doctrine of the prophets and apostles, but also the
testimonies of God shininge in nature do prove, that the world is preserved
and governed by Gods providence. As the order which is seen in the principal
parts of nature: the mind or soul governing the actions of men with her
providence: the law of nature given to men that it might be unto them a rule
of their life: rewards and punishments: conscience; the ordering of politic
affairs: heroic motions and virtues: the fore-tellinges of future eventes:
the ends whereunto things are ordained: and lastely the very nature of the
most omnipote^t, wise, just, and excellent God.

2. Gods providence is the eternal counsel of God, most free and immutable,
most wise and just, according to which God brings to pass all good in all
his creatures, and suffers sin to be committed: and directs all both good
and evil to his glory and the saluarion of the elect.

3. This purpose or counsel in God is not only a knowledge or science in God,
but also the forcible decree and will of God, whereby he has determined from
all eternity both what he himself will do, and what he will have become of
his works; and whatsoever he has decreed, he also effects in fit time and
order.

4. Good things are the substaunces of al things, the properties and faculties
given unto the^ by God al motions, mutatio^s, actions, and events of al things,
as they are natural motions, or obedience to Gods will, or benefits and
blessings of God, or punnishments of the evil.

5. That all these things are done by the powerful will of God, That all
things are done by the ^^^^table providence of God.
as many most evident testimonies of scripture, so also these reasons do
confirm. 1 Because of Gods omnipotency nothing can be done in the world
which God simply will not have done. And therefore what soever is done, God must
needs either simply or in some sort be willing that it should be done. 2
Because a most wise governor, such as God is, suffers nothing of all that is
in his power, to come to pass besides his will and purpose. 3 Because he which
is willing the ends of things should come to pass, is also willing either
simply or in sort, that all things and events by which we compass those
ends should come to pass. 4 Because Gods purposes and decrees depend not on
the actions of second causes. 5 Because the immutable fore knowledge of God
cannot be grounded but on an immutable cause, that is, gods will and decree. 6
Because God is the first cause of al natural good things, amongst which also
are reckned the motions of each thing.

6 Whereas evil is of two sorts, one of offense, the other of punishment, and
that which is a punishment is an execution of justice, and therefore good, it
ought likewise to be referred unto Gods will, as the principal cause thereof.

7 But the evil of offense or sin, Evil of punishment and offense.
as it is a motion, or trial, or exercise, or chastisement of the godly, or a
punishment of the evil, so it is from Gods providence effectiuely, that is, so
that God is the author of it: but as it is sin, not effectiuely, but
permissiuely.

8. Now this permission is not a ceasinge of Gods providence and working in the
actions of evil men, whereby it may come to pass that those actions may seem
not to depend of any other cause then of the creatures which a^^ ^gents: but a
withdrawing of his heavenly grace, whereby God executinge the decree of his will
by reasonable creatures, either does not reveal unto the creature his will,
which will have that action done, or else boweth not the will of the creature
to obey this divine will in that action. Which so standing, the creature
sins necessarily in deed, but with all voluntarily, and freely, and by
Gods most just judgment, whiles God by it brings to pass the just and good
work of his will and providence.

9. God therefore will have those actions and motions (which the Devils and men
by sinning do effect) to come to pass, as they are motions and executions of
Gods just judgment: but as they are sins he neither wills, nor appoueth, nor
effects them: though he forbid, hate, and horiblie punnish them, yet
notwithstanding in Devils and men ^e suffers them to concur with his just
actions, whilst for very good reasons and most just causes, he does not
effect in them by his spirit the performance of these actions justly, that is,
according to the prescript of Gods will.

10 Neither is God therefore the author of confusion, which is in the actions of
the evil, for what they will and do inordinatlie, that is, against the
commandment of God, that God will have done in excellent and most wise order.
Lastly, even sins themselves as they are sins, be done by Gods providence,
though not effecting, yet permitting, and prescribing them bounds, and
directing the^ whither it pleases him.

11 Neither is God by this doctrine made the author of sin, because the sin of
the sinful creature does by accident concur with the good and just work of
God, which he in his own counsel determines, and by the sinful creature
executes. And therefore in respect of Gods will those actions are just and
right, which in respect of the wicked by whom they be done are sins.

12. And these things are manifest: first by the universal nature, causes and
effects being such of themselves, and naturally or by accide^t. For when the
same effect has many causes, some good and some badde, that same effect in
respect of good causes is good, in regard of bad causes is bad: and good causes
of themselves and naturally are the causes of good effects, but by accide^t of
evil effects or sins: which is found in the effect by some other evil or
sinful cause: and co^trarywise, evil causes are of themselves the causes of
evil, but by accide^t they may be causes of that good whith is found in the
effect.

13. Secondly the truth of these matters appears by the immutable nature of
God the fountain and author of all good. For Gods wokes are equaly good,
whether he effect the^ by evil or good instruments, neither are they battered
by good, or made worse by evil instruments, seeing their justice and goodness
depends not on the nature of the instruments, but of God which makes use of
the instruments: but on the other side the creatures can neither be nor
continue good, nor do any thing that is good, except God make them good,
uphold the^ in goodness, and so governing the^ that they may work that which is
good with God who by the^ works that good which he will.

14 Yet hereby we do not attribute unto God contrary wills. Contrary wills are
not in God.
For God will and will not the same actions in diverse respects. He will as they
are conformable to his most just judgment and order: and he will not, but
rather hates and detesteth, yet permits them to be done, as they are
contrary to his order and law, against which they are committed by the wicked.

15 Neither does the necessity of consequence, which happens to the events by
the immutable decree of Gods providence, take away that continge^ce or
casuality which they have from the mutable nature of second causes, or from the
power and liberty of God, whereby he so decreed from al eternity; if we
distinguish rightly between both, as that there is a respect between causes
working immutablie or mutablie. For thereby every man may see, that the same
effect proceeding from ^auses partly mutable and partly immutable, may well be
called co^tinge^t in respect of mutable causes, and necessary in respect of
causes immutable.

16 Neither does this immutable providence of God derogate ought from the use
of teaching and our desire of well-doing, Providence takes no^ away the use of
means.
as if these things were in vain or to no purpose: for admitting a first cause
it is not necessary to deny the second causes; nor the first, admitting the
second. And God has promised to save us, not without, but by these means, and
has for this reason commanded us to use the^, expecting the good success of
them from him.

17 But when God in scripture is denied to will the actions of Devils or sinful
men, that is to be understood as they are sins, or to that end whereunto they
are done by devils and me^: not as they are actions, or done unto that end
which God in the order of providence respects. For actions are distinguished
by their ends.

18 The church thus persuaded her self and teaching others of Gods providence,
does utterly condemn and detest the furies and madness of Epicures and
Academiques, with the devises of all others, which will have gods providence
either to be none at al, or not to exte^d unto all things in the world, or else
to be only a certain kind of fore-knowledg in God not any decree and execution.

19 As much it condemns the blasphemies and errors of the Manichees,
Stoickes, Libertines and others, which make GOD the author of sin, or take
from him his liberty whereby from all eternity he made his decrees, or else
abolish the operations and use, or differences of second causes, working either
necessarily, or contingently, or voluntarily and freely.

20 This doctrine is to be retained in the Church for Gods glory, The use of
this doctrine of providence.
that so it may appear that God is the governor of all things, yet not the
author of sin, but the most free and excellent effector and giver of all good
things. It is also so necessary for our instruction and comfort, that we may
become thankful unto God, as being the well spring of all goodness: and
patiently suffer evils, as happening unto us by his will, persuading our selves
that all things shall serve for our salvation: that acknowledging God to be the
author of punishments we might amend, and not despair of Gods help, though
we be left destitute by second causes: that we trust not in our selves, but in
fear of God ask all good things of him: that we may know that God takes
especial care of his church: that we judge not rashly of the works and counsels
of God: that we contemn not others, because God of his free bou^ty has
bestowed better gifts upon us: that in all things we follow the will and
order prescribed unto us by God.

10 OF SIN.
1 ONly the doctrine of the church shows entirely the nature, causes, and
effects of sin.

2 Sin is whatsoever disagreeth with the law of God; that is, any defect, or
inclination, or actio^ against the law of God, offending God, and making the
offender guilty of temporal punishment and eternal, except remission be
granted for our meadiator the son of God.

3 Every sin is either actual or original. Did*


4 Original sin is the guilt of all mankind for the fall of our first
parents, and a privation of the knowledge and will of God in our minds, and of
our inclination to obey God in will and heart, with an inclination in both to
resist the law of God, following the fall of our first parents, and derived
from them to al posterity so corrupting our whole nature, that for this
corruption we are all guilty of Gods everlasting wrath, and can do nothing
acceptable to God, except remission be granted for the son of God our
mediator, and renewing of nature by the holy spirit.

5 Actual sin is every action in mind, will, or heart, or in external
parts and members erring from God, or a leaving of those things undone, which
the law of God commands to be done.

6 Every sin is either reigning or not reigning in us; Distinct. 2.
which some call mortal or venial.

7 Sin reigning is that, against which the sinner does not resist by the
grace of the holy spirit, renewing him to eternal life, therefore he is
endaungered to eternal death, except he repent and obtain remission by Christ.

8 Sin not reigning is that against which the sinner does resist by grace of
the holy spirit renewing him unto eternal life, and therefore he is not
eudangered to eternal death, because he repents and obteineth remission by
Christ.

9 Every sin in its own nature is mortal, Distinct. 3.
that is, deserves eternal death, but it is made venial, that is, it does not
bring eternal death in the regenerate, by reason of grace for Christ's sake.

10. Every sin is either against conscience, Distinct. 4.
or not against conscience.

11. Sin against conscience is, when he which knows the will of God, of
set purpose does against it.

12. Sin not against conscience is that which is committed by one either not
knowing the will of god, or else is acknowledged by the sinner to be a sin, and
is bewailled, yet cannot perfectly be avoided in this life, as original sin,
and many sins of ignorance and infirmity.

13. Every sin is either unpardonable and against the holy Ghost, Distinct. 5.
or pardonable and not against the holy Ghost.

14 Sin unpardonable, or against the holy Ghost is an oppugning or casting away
of Gods truth of set purpose, after the mind by testimony of the holy Ghost is
instructed and confirmed in the truth, which sin they that commit, are punished
by God with blindness, so that they never repent, and consequently never obtain
pardon.

15. Sins pardo^able or not against the holy Ghost, are al other sins, whereof
some repent and some do not.

16. All that are elected by God unto eternal life are so vpheald by him, that
they never sin against the holy Ghost.

17. There do abide some relics of sin in all the regenerate, as long as
they are in this life, first original sin, secondly many actual sins of
ignorance, omission, and infirmity, which notwithstanding they acknowledge,
and bewail, and resist them: and therefore they retain a good conscience, and
remission of sins: thirdly some run often times into errors crossing the
very grounds, or into sins against conscience, for which they loose their good
conscience, and consolation, and gifts of the holy Ghost, and should be damned,
if they did persevere therein to their lives end: they perish not in them
because they repent in this life.

18. There is a threefold difference whereby sinners regenerate differ from the
wicked: The difference between sinners regenerate and not regenerate.
first a perpetual purpose which God has to save them: secondely certain and
sure repentance at the last: thirdely some beginning of faith and co^versio^
ever in their sins, which at some times is greater, and of more force, and so
wrastleth against sin, that they slip not into errors against the grounds, nor
into sins against conscience: at other times lesser and more feeble, and is for
a time overcome by temptations, yet prevails so far; that they never quite
revol^ from God, which were once truly converted. And therefore sin in the
regenerat, is either to be termed only not raining, or else if errors against
the fou^datio^ or sins against conscience may be called raining sins, as some
term the^, this reign of sin must needs be diligently distinguished in
those that be regenerated, and those that be not, as that God is in deed
grievously angry even with the regenerate when they sin, yet ever with a
purpose of ame^ding and saving them, and that in them all ways remains some
sparkle of faith and conversion, and some hatred of sin which is an enemy
there unto, so that they do not simply without any resistance give over
themselves unto sin, and delight therein, as do the wicked which sin without
any resistance, and with all their hearts.

19 Every sin is either a sin of it self and in its own nature, Distinct.
6.
or else by accident.

20 Sins of themselves or in their own kind and nature, are all such as are
forbidden by the law of God.

21 Sins by accident are such actions of men not regenerate, as are indeed
commanded by God, yet displease him, for many defects and sins co^curring in
the wicked: or actions indifferent which are done with scandal.

22 God is the cause of no sin; The cause of sin.
but the will of devils and men, of their own accord turning themselves from
God, is the efficient cause of al sins: the efficient cause of original
sin in men, is the fall of our first parents: but original sin is the
precedent cause of all actual sins, which followed upon the first fall.

23 The effects of sin are punishments temporal and eternal: The effects ^f
sin.
and because God punishes sins with sins, therefore sins following are
effects of sins precedent.

24 But although all sins deserve eternal damnation, yet all sins are not
equal: but as there are degrees of punishments, so also there are degrees of
sins in Gods judgment.

11 OF FREE WILL.
1 Freedom of will in God and reasonable creatures, is a faculty of choosing or
refusing that which reason persuades to be chosen or refused, of their own
proper motion, without any constraint.

2 And that is called free, which is endued with that faculty; the word
arbitrium signifies the will it self, but such a will as follows or refuses
the judgment of the mind in choosing: and therefore comprehe^deth both
faculties, that is to say of understanding and will.

3 Free Will therefore is a faculty or power of willing or nilling, choosing or
refusing without constraint, of its own proper motion or aptness to either of
both which the understanding tells is to be chosen or refused.

4 Two things therefore there are, which are common to that free will which is in
God, and that which is in reasonable creatures: the first, that they do al
things with deliberation and counsel, or by help of the understanding, showing
the object: the second, that the will of its own accord and natural force
without constraint, wills or nilleth that which the mind has conceaved.

5 But the differences between that freedom which is in God, and that which
is in the creatures are three: the first is in the understanding, because God
from al eternity does most perfectly understand and behold all things, neither
can be ever be ignorant of any thing, or any way err in judgment: the second
is in the will, because Gods will is ruled, bowed, or depends of no other
cause the^ of it self: but the wills of Angels and men, are in such sort the
causes of their own actions and motions, that nevertheless by the secret
counsel of God, and his power and efficacy ever and everywhere present, they
are moved to the choice or refusal of objects, either immediately by God, or
by instruments and means sometimes good, sometimes bad, such as it best
pleases God to use: and it is impossible for them to do any thing without the
eternal and immutable counsel of God. The third is both in the
understanding, and also in the will* because God as he knows all things
immutably, so also he has decreed from everlasting, and wills immutably all
things which are done as they are good, and permits them as they are sins:
but as in creatures the knowledge and judgment of things is mutable, so also is
their will.

6 This liberty in me^ is lost by sin, but begins to be renewed in ou^
regeneration, and shall be perfectly restored in the life eternal. So that the
4. diverse estates of me^ which are distinguished in time, do make 4. degrees
thereof.

7 The first degree of liberty was in our nature before the fall, 4. States of
men.
wherein our will was fit to perform her whole obedience to Gods law, yet not
so confirmed, but that being tempted by the devil with some show of good, it
might fall from that obedience by its own proper motion.

8 Yet because the creatures per^isting in obedience cannot be but by
confirmation from God, man's will did yield unto temptation in deed willingly,
but withal necessarily, and being fallen into sin, lost that liberty unto
God, which it had to make choice of evil or good, and being turned from
retained only liberty or freedom to evil.

9 Therefore the second degree of liberty is least of al, which is nature
decayed but not as yet regenerat, wherein though there be a will fit to perform
the external discipline of the law, yet because it cannot so much as begin the
internal and spiritual obedience, without which al external works, eve^ the
best in show are sin, and condemned by God, the will leaves not to choose
freely, but yet it ca^ choose nothing but sin, because of inherent corruption
and turning away from God.

10 The third is in man renewed but not as yet glorified, in whom the will uses
her liberty and freedom, partly to well doing, and partly to evil doing. For
because it is regenerate by the holy Ghost, it is again inclined to obey God,
but because this regeneration is not yet perfect, there remain yet some evil
inclinatio^s: wherefore it begi^neth indeed spiritual obedience pleasing god,
but cannot perfect it in this life; but then and so far it does well, and
persevereth in that which is good, when and as far as it is guided and governed
by the holy Ghost.

11. The fourth degree is the chiefest and most perfect in the life eternal,
or after our glorification, wherein our will shall be able to use her liberty
only to that which is good, and not to choose that which is evil, because of
our perfect knowledge and fervent love of God, and through inclination to
righteousenesse and hatred of sin, and perpetual direction of the holy Ghost.

12. This doctrine of free will must needs be retained in the church, that so
the chiefest and most perfect liberty and immutabilitie, effectinge all good
in us, may be attributed only to God, as the first cause: all excuse may be
taken from sinners; and to the end that being trewly humbled before God by
knowledge of our misery and corruption, we may of him alone crave the
preservation and perfiting of our salvation, and being co^victed by testimonies
from God himself, may the rather be moved to faith and obedience to his word.

12. OF FAITH.
1. This word faith taken in his largest signification, does implie a certain
and sure knowledge, by proof of such witnesses, as are thought unlikely to
deceive.

2. In the doctrine of the church there are four sorts of faith mentioned, an
historical, a temporary, a miraculous, and a justifying faith.

3. Historical faith is a knowledge persuaded of the truth of such things as
are set down by the Prophets and Apostles.

4. Temporary faith is a knowledge of the doctrine of the church, together with
joy conceived upon knowledge of the truth, or other true or seeming good
things, without applying the promise of grace to him that believes, and
therefore without true conversion or final perseverance.

5. Miraculous faith, or a faith, whereby miracles are wrought, is a sure
knowledge by special revelation of Gods will, of working some miracle at his
request or prediction, by whom it is to be wrought.

6. Justifying faith is that knowledge whereby a man does strongly persuade
himself of the truth of all Gods word revealed unto him, assuring himself
that the promise of Gods grace through Christ pertains unto him, and in
confidence of this favor of God toward him, overcommeth all sorrow and
fear.

7. For this confidence of justifying faith is a motion of our will and heart,
composed of joy in the certainty of Gods present grace toward us, and hope of
future deliverance from all evil.

8. There is therefore no faith but that which is grounded on the revealed will
of God.

9 The holy Ghost works all faith is us, either by the voice of heavenly
doctrine, or by immediate revelation.

10. But whereas it is the will of God, ordinarily to kindle, cherish, and
confirm faith in us by the doctrine of the church: all are bound to hearken
and meditate thereon.

11. Many hypocrites in the church have hade temporary faith: historical
faith and faith of miracles is common to the good and evil: justifying faith
is in this life given only to all these that are elected to eternal life.

12. Justifying faith does always comprehend in it historical faith: but is
not always joined with faith of miracles: as also faith of miracles has ever
historical or temporary faith joined with it, but not always justifying
faith.

13. Faith even in the most godly sort of men is imperfect in this life, and
feeble: yet whosoever feels in his heart a serious purpose to believe, and
wrestling with doubt, he may and must surely persuade himself, that he has
true faith.

14. Trewfaith once kindled in the heart though in some sort it often faint
and be obscured, yet it is never wholly extinguished.

15. But after this life it is changed into a more full and certain knowledge
of God and heavenly things, namely a present feellinge and experience of
happiness with God, which knowledge the scripture names a knowledge by
seeinge face to face.

16. Faith which is only historical causes desparation, and heaviness of
Gods judgment, though accidentally.

17 Temporary faith causes a certain joy, but not pacifying our consciences,
because not proceeding of a true cause; and works in us confession, and some
show of good works, but only for a time.

18 Faith of miracles obtains those miracles, whereof it is, from God.

19 We obtain righteousness before God, and participation of Christ and all
his benefits, only by that faith which applies to every particular man the
promises of grace.

20 True conversion and beginning of new obedience according to all the
commandments as it cannot go before this faith, so it cannot but accompany
it.

OF THE OFFICE AND PERSON OF Christ the only Mediator.
Disputed by D. Zach. Vrsine in the University of Heidelberge for his degree
of Doctorship, an. 1562.
The Proeme.
WHereas God has not only appointed in his church a ministry of his word,
and comanded and approved this vocation to the office of teaching, which is
practiced in the church; but also has co^me^ded this most high and dangerous
function of all others that are performed by men, to those which have both the
knowledge of heavenly doctrine, and also indifferent ability to deliver the
same, and by innocence of life give unto the hearers examples, of that which
they teach: and does by the mouth of S. Paul pronounce them guilty of others
offense, which place or consent to them that place in this order men unfit,
that is, such as by life or evil doctrine give offense to the church. 2 Timothy
5. Lay not thy hands rashly one any, and be not partaker of others offenses:
these things I say being so, it is without doubt necessary, that such as in
churches or schools shall undertake part of this labor of teaching, be
first heard by such as can judge of the truth of doctrine, and willingly submit
themselves to the trial and censure of men. I therefore, although in
confidence of mine own worthiness I may so little presume to present my self
to this public view of learned men and young students, that I bring neither
learning, nor experience, nor judgment, nor any thing at all to plead in my
behalf for the patient presence and attention of the learned, besides great
trembling, and earnest entreatie of Gods assistance and your favor: yet seeing
they who have been some times co^uersant in schools should not draw back from
trial; and seeing it is a part of ingenuity and faithful dealing, not to
conceal eue^ a man's own weakness: I have thought it fit both for discharg of
my duty and my further learning, not peremptorily to withstand their command,
whose pleasure it is that I should come into this place.

But because the custom and purpose of these disputations is to determine upon
some principal points of Christianity, I have determined at this time to
repeat and discuss that argument of scripture, which is touching the office
and person of one only mediator between God and man, eve^ Christ Jesus our
Lord: both because it compriseth a short ground and sum of Christianity; as
also because ever our foreign and hom-bread contentions do most concern this
point. I purpose therefore after my manner to recite as breifely and plainly as
I can, the sense and meaning of some propositions, together which reasons and
testimonies taken out of holy scripture.

1. Position
After man by sin was separated from God, the most absolute and perfect a
justice of God, would not suffer him to be reconciled unto God, except some b
very man, borne of that mankind which had sinned, yet himself free c from al
spot of sin, had endured sufficient punishment for man's sins, and performed
the full obedience of Gods law.

a. Genesis 2. 17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death
Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be he that continues not in all the words of this law
to do them, Mat. 5. 26. Thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid
the utmost farthinge. Romans 8* 3. God sending his own son condemned sin in
the flesh, that we etc.

b. Romans 5. 12. 15. As by one man sin entered into the world, etc. Cor. 15.
21. For since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead.
1. Tim. 25. Heb. 2. 14. 15. 16. Aug. de ver^ relig. That nature was to be
assumed which was to be delivered.

c. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He made him which knew no sin for us etc. Heb. 7. 26. For
such an high Priest it became us to have, which is holy, innocent, undefiled
etc.

II. But the merit of no person which was not God, could be equal to the sin
of all mankind, much less greater then it d. Act. 20. 28. God has purchased
his church with his own blood. Romans 18. 3. When it was impossible to the law
in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, God etc.

III. Such a person also as had been only a creature, could not have been able
to endure the weight of Gods anger against the sins of mankind, and to deliver
himself out of it.

e. Psalm. 30. Lord of thou mark what is do^e amiss, who shall be able to
endure it? Deuteronomy. 4. 24. The Lord thy God is a consuming fire.

IV. Moreover it stood him upon by his desert and intercession to obtain, and
by his power to restore unto us that righteousenesse and life which we had
lost, and to free us from sin and death, and to defend and save us until we
were perfectly restored. f.

f. 1. Cor. 15. 21. By man came the resurrection of the dead. Ioh. 10. 28. I
give unto my sheep eternal life* Ioh. 6. 39. and 15. 26. Mat. 11. 27. Ephesians. 4,
8. 9. 1^. Heb. 7. 26. 1. Cor 15. 22. 23.

V* Lastly it is necessary that all which should be saved, being engraffed
into the body of this mediator, should be borne and carried by him for ever. g.

g. Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ by faith may dwell in our hearts. Io. 15. 4. Abide
in me, and I^n you. As the bra^ch cannot bear fruit in it self except it
abide in the vine: so neither can you except ye abide in me. Romans 8. 9. He that
has not the spirit of Christ is none of his.

VI. For these causes therefore in the mediator Christ is the divine nature,
which is the second person of the deity, and is called the word, and the only
^begotte^ son of the eternal father, one God with the father and the holy
Ghost, co^substa^tial and equal to the father in all things. h.

h. Ioh. 1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. Romans 9. 5. Which is God above all, to be praised for ever. Phil.
2. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal to God.
etc. Cor. 2. 9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. 1.
Tim. 5. 16. God was manifested in the flesh. Heb. 1. 8. But unto the son he
said* thy seat, o God, endures for ever. 1. Ioh. 5. 20. And we are in him that
is true, that is in his son Jesus Christ: this same is very God and eternal
life.

VII. There is also in him i an humane nature, true and whole, consisting of a
soul and a body, formed by nature of the holy Ghost of the substance of the
virgin Mary his mother, and from the very insta^te of co^ceptio^ perfectly
sanctified together with the soul.

1. Genesis 3. The seed of the woman. Genesis 1^. The seed of Abraham. Man. 1. the
son of Abraham and David Romans 1. Of the seed of David according to the flesh.
Luc. 1. The fruit of Mary's womb. Heb. 2. Partaker of flesh and blood: he
took unto him the seed of Abraham. Mar. 26. My soul is heavy even to the
death.

VIII. But this person of the Deity alone, which is called the word, did so
as^ume unto it self the nature of man, that both these natures from the time
of conception and after do inseparably remain one person, and the mass of the
humane nature is carried and supported by the deity. k.

k. Ioh. 1. The word was made flesh. Col. 2. In him dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead corporally Heb. 2. He took unto him the seed of Abraham. Act.
20. God purchased unto himself the church by his own blood.

IX. Neither yet by this union is one nature changed into an other, but both do
still retain their distinct properties, whereby the creating nature is
distinguished from the creature. l.

l. Romans 1. He was made of the seed of David according to the flesh. 1. Pet.
3. Mortified the flesh, quickened in the spirit. 1. Pet. 4. He took on him the
shape of a sl^ue.

X. Hence is it that names signifying the office of Christ are as well and
truly attributed to both natures severallie, as to the whole person: but the
proprieties agreeing only to one nature, cannot be truly said of the other
nature by it self, but may well be attributed to the whole person, by that
form of speech, which they call a communicating of proprieties. m.

m. Leo ad Flavian. cap. 4. See Damas^en de fide orthodox^. lib. 3. cap. 4.

XI. Therefore all Christ is every where, although his humane nature, since
his ascension until the da^e of the last judgment, be no where but in heaven.
n.

n. Math. 28. 6. He is risen, he is not here, Mat. 26. 11. Me y^e have not
always with you. Ioh. 16. 28. I leave the world and go unto my father. Act. 3.
21. Whom the heavens must contain, until the time of restoring of all things.

XII. And the godly in what place of heaven of earth so ever they abide, are
united to the humane nature assumed by the son of God, as members to their
head, the same holy spirit dwelling in Christ by unity of essence with the
word, and in the godly by grace. o.

o. 1. Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body. Ephesians. 4. 4.
There is one body and one spirit. 1. Ioh. 4. 13. By this we know that we abide
in him and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. Romans 8. 11. If
the spirit of him who has raised etc: dwell in you etc. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 19.
As of dry meal one lump cannot be made, nor one bread: so neither could we
which are many, be made one in Christ Jesus, without that water which is from
heaven.

A THANKS GIVING AFTER HIS DISPVTATION.
OVt of question there is no wise man which can choose but think well and
honorably of scholastical exercises, if he understand the weighty causes for
which they are performed: namely that the doctrine of God and other things
whose knowledge the life of man especially needs, may be publicly taught and
unfolded, the consent of many good men in the truth may be showed and
maintained, and true opinions may be illustrated and confirmed in the minds of
learners. It is a worthy ancient saying recited by Plato, Neither gold not
diamond so glistereth to the eye, as the consent between good men in opinion.
But much more lovely and acceptable to the good and virtuous in the quiet
conferences of good and well meaning men is the use of that thing whereof this
is spoken. For therefore does God preserve schools and churches, because he
would have the doctrine of himself and his will, to be publicly professed.
And that it is most true that conference has brought forth arts and sciences,
the examples of many men show, who are not destitute of wit, but because they
have none to teach them besides themselves, they are not only deceived in many
things, but also s^eldom escape self-pleasing arrogance, and other faults which
follow neglect of conference. For which causes their good intent deserves
commendation, which endeavor to encourage or grace these meetings, with their
discourse, or presence, or pains, or authority, or approbation.

First therefore we give thanks unto the eternal God our father, and his
son our Lord Jesus Christ, for preserving and maintaining schools and other
places of entertainment and releife, and would have the pure light of the
Gospel to shine both in others and also in this our society, cherishing and
furthering it with the studies of the best arts. Also I thank our Honorable
Chancellor and other right worshipful and reverend men, also the learned
masters and studious young men, who have partly by their advise instructed
me, partly by their presence graced my exercise, and declared their good will
toward it. I beseech God that he would vouchsafe to increase and continue unto
all and every of us those benefittes which hitherto he has bestowed on us to
the aduanceme^t of his glory, and the salvation of us and many others besides,
through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen.

A THANKS GIVINGE AFTER HIS DEGREE TAKEN.
THe greatest benefits that God has bestowed, and such as are far to be
prefered before all others of this life, are these, that he gathers and
reserueth to himself an everlasting Church, making us citizens thereof: that
he gives peace to small states which are retiringe and restinge places of
the Church: that he has placed over them governors serving him in true
religion, cherishinge the church and all good learning: that he vpholdeth
schools; and gives unto them fit teachers, and inflameth the minds of some
men with desire of learning the truth and delivering it to posterity, but
especially that he sends amongst us the light of the gospel, clensing and
refining it from idols, freeing us from Antichristian darkness, ordaining
strength out of the mouths of infantes and sucklings, at whose voice alone the
very gates of hell, though terrible in themselves, do tremble and fall to
everlasting ruin. It is out of question that al these benefits do not happen
unto us by chance, or ma^s wisdom, but are given and continued to us by the
singular providence and bounty of God, as may appear partly by their greatness
and excellency, and partly by this, that amongst so great furies of the
world and the devil, and so great weakness and infirmity of themselves, they
could not otherwise be retained.

First therefore we give eternal thanks unto almighty GOD, for vouchsafing
to bestow upon us so great benefits. Secondly we give them also their due
commendations, who by their godliness and virtue desire to preserve these
benefits to mankind. Wherefore with all reverence and duty we thank the
most mighty Prince Elector our gracious Lord, Frederick the third.
for encouraging and gracing this school and all good arts with exceeding
love and courtesy. Also we thank all other the noble and virtuous gentlemen,
especially our worthy Chancellor. Lastly, we thank the Right worshipful
and learned Doctors and Masters, our reverende and very good Patrons, and all
the rest of the learned and honest sort, who gracing this my public
proceeding with their presence, have wit^essed their good will toward us and
our studies, and would have our calling commended to God in their public
prayers: And I heartily beseech GOD, that he would vouchsafe the increase and
continuance of these his great benefits which he has bestowed upon v^, and
would grant us all grace to use them to his glory, and the good of his
Church, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, Amen.

XIV.
OF MAN'S CONVERSION.
I.
NO man shall ever enjoy eternal happiness in the life to come, Repentance
necessary.
which does not repent in this life and turn away from his sins unto God.

II.
True repentance or conversion is a change or renewing of man wrought by the
holy GHOST, What repentance is.
whereby man upon tiue acknowledgement of GOD and his will (revealed in the
Law and the Gospel) and his own corruption, does seriouslye fear GODS anger
and judgment against sin: and is sorry that by his sins he has
heretofore and does still offend God: and yet obeying the commandment of faith
in Christ and amendment of life, rests secure upon the mercy of God, Come
unto me all ye etc.
and his promise of grace by confidence in our mediator Christ: through whom,
because he is persuaded that God is pleased, he submits himself unto him,
as a son to a loving father: and for this his receiving him into favor
studieth to show himself thankful unto God for ever. Hear ye him, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 21. If so be ye have heard him and have been taught by him as the
truth is in Jesus, That is that ye cast of concerning the conversation in
times past the old man, which is corrupt through deceivable lusts. And be
renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the
washing of the nevve birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. Romans 7. 18. I
know that in me, that is in my flesh, there dwells no goodness, etc.: to
the end of the chapter. Isay 5. 16. vvash and be clean.

III.
This repentance consists of two parts, which the scripture calls
mortifying of the old man, and quickening or raising again of the new man.
Romans 6. 6. Our old man is crucified with him. Galathians the second and
nineteenth. By the law I am dead to the law, that I may live to GOD: I am
crucified with Christ, etc. Coloss. 3. 12. Buried with him through baptism, in
whom ye are also raised up together, through the faith of the operation of
God, etc. Coloss. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your earthly members, etc.

IV.
The old man or vnrenued is he which is ignorant or doubtful of God, and is
subject and yields to evil desires. But the new or renewed man is he which
knowing GOD aright, serves him in true righteousness and holiness. Ephesians. 4.
24.

V.
The mortifying of the old man is upon knowledge of our own corruption, and
Gods anger lying heavy on us therefore, to fear and sorrow for our offenses to
God, and therefore heartily to hate and avoid all sin.

VI.
But the quickening of the new man is upon knowledge of Gods mercy toward us
in Christ, to rejoice and quiet our selves in God, and to have a fervent desire
to obey God in all his commandments. Romans 7. 22. I am delighted with the law
of God in my inward man.

VII.
This renewing in infantes which are sanctified by the spirit of GOD, Renewing
of infantes.
is only a beginning, that is a receiving of new qualities and inclinations:
and therefore may more fitly be called regeneration or new birth then
repentance. But in men of riper years it concerns motions and good actions,
in the mind, will, and heart. Luke the first and fifteenth* He shall be
filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb. Mat. 19. To such belongs
the kingdom of heaven.

VIII.
Nether yet is it perfited in those of riper years before the end of this
life: Imperfect renewing.
and therefore they which are converted, have in them part of the new, and part
as yet of the old man: until such time as together with the life they lay
aside all the oldnes or corruption of nature. Roman. 7. 23. I see another law
in my members. 1. Ioh 1. 10. If we say we have n^ sin we lie or deceive our
selves.

IX
Therefore the whole life of the godly is and must be a certain continual
repentance and conversion, Conversion must be all our life.
wherein they must strongly persist and proceed, fighting against the flesh and
the devil unto the end of their life 1. Cor. 9. 24. So run that ye may
abtaine. Phil. 3. 13. Brethren I count not my self that I have attained to it.
Revel. 22. 11. He which is holy, let him be more holy.

X
The victory in this combat is not doubtful. Conversion truly begone is not
ex^inguished.
For in them in whom true conversio^ is once begone (although sometimes they
fall grievously by human infirmity, and the relics of the old man or
sin, which in this life they bear about them:) it is never so extinguished,
but that they again struggle up from their fall and are at length saved. Math.
7. 24 They that are built on the rock do not fall. Phil. 1. 6. He which has
begone in you a good work will finish it. 1. Ioh. 2. 19. If they had been of us
they had remained with us. 1. Ioh. 3. 9 He which is borne of God sins not,
but his seed remains in him.

XI.
But for all this it is not lawful for any man from this will of God to take
occasion of sinning the more freely, THE certainty of perseueri^g breeds
not carnal security.
or deferring and casting of the time of his repentance. For that promise of
the present and eternal grace of God pertains to such as live in true
repentance and fear of God, not in carnal security. For all such as live
securely are in danger to be forsaken and hardened by the just judgment of God,
and dying without repentance, to perish everlastingly, but because of the
uncertain continuance of this life, and especially because of Gods anger
against such as with security and against conscience abuse his mercy. Mat. 24.
28. If the evil servant shall say, my Lord delaieth his coming, etc. And v.
24. Watch, because ye kow not the day and the hour etc. Romans 2. 4. Or
despisest thou the riches of his bou^tie and patience? etc.

XII
The principal efficient cause of our conversion is the holy Ghost, Causes of
conversion.
neither is any man converted but by his special favor. But he effects it
in me^ of ripe years, especially by knowledge of Gods word and faith there
unto given: which is in all that repent and in them alone: so that neither
faith is without conversion, nor conversion without faith. Psalm. 51. 12. Create
in me o God a clean heart. And v. 13. I will teach the wicked thy ways. Ier.
3. 18. (...) me (...) Lord and I shall be converted: because after thou did
co^vert me I repented. 1. Cor. 4. 15. I have begotten you through the gospel.
Act. 15. 9. By faith the heart is cleansed. Heb 4. ^. The word they hard
profited them not, because it was mixed with faith in them that heard it. James
2. 17. Faith without works is dead. Romans 14. 23. That which is not of faith is
sin.

XIII.
As therefore unto faith: Diverse me^nes of conversio^.
so also to the effecting, exercising, and furtherance of repentance in men,
God uses many means, or external helping causes: as the good examples of
others: the punishments of the wicked, the rewards of the godly, especially
crosses and chastisements. Mat. 5. 16. Let your light etc. Romans 11. 11. By
their destruction came salvation to the Gentiles, to provoke them to emulation.
Also ver 21. If God spared not the natural branches, beware least he spare
not thee also. Psalm. 58. 12. And men shall say verily there is fruit for the
righteous; doubt less there is a God that judges the earth. Ps. 119. 71. It
is good for me that I have been in trouble that I may learn thy statutes. 1.
Cor. 11. 37. When we are chastised, we are instructed by the Lord.

XIV.
The proper and perpetual effects of true repentance are, Effects of
repentance.
confession of our own unworthiness and of Gods mercy, and all good works. But
things indifferent, as fasting, laying aside our comely and costly attire etc.
are helps and signs of repentance, not always or necessarily, but such as may
be used at the discretion and convenient occasions of the godly. But eternal
life and other Gods good gifts and benefits, are not effects or deserved
rewards, but consequents and free requitals of repentance; as also of faith
and good works Ps. 51. Against thee only have I sinned; Dan. 9. 7. To thee O
Lord belongs righteousness, but unto us confusion. Mat. 3. 9. Bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance 1. Tim. 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits little.
Luc. 17. 10. When ye have done all, say, we are unprofitable servants.

XV. As therefore all the elect are in this life co^verted, The reprobate never
truly repent.
so none of the reprobate do truly repent: but the more they are vexed with an
evil conscience, and feeling or fear of punishment, so much the more falling
into despair they storm against God and his judgments, turn themselves away
from God, sin the more grievously, and blaspheme openly: or some time for fear
of punishment, or desire of glory or other commodities of this life, they
forsake their errors, embrace and profess the truth, abstain from external
offenses, and make a show of holiness, being indeed hypocrites, without
faith, love or fear of God, and therefore in the end fall quite away. Examples
are frequent, of Caine, Esa^, Judas, Saul Ahab, Esaie the fifty and seventh and
one and twentieth. There is no peace with the wicked. Matthew. 21. 44. and Hebre.
66. They which have once bin lightened and after fall, are not any more renewed
by repentance, and 2. Pet. 2. 20. For if they after they have escaped from the
filthiness of the world, by the knowledge of our Lord, etc. are yet enta^gled
again therein and overcome, their latter end is worse with them then the
beginn^ng.

XVI.
The Papists opinion touching repentance i^ impious, that contrition may be
and is sufficient for our sins, and that it is a merit of remission of sins:
that confession or reckning up al ^ man's sins to the Minister is necessary:
that the works or rites commanded not by God, but by the Ministers, are
necessary, and satisfactions for the eternal punishments, or those of
purgatory, due to our sins. Psalm. 90. 11. Who has known the greatness of
thine anger^ Tit. 3. 5 He has saved us, not by those just works which we have
done, but of his mercy by the w^shing etc. Psalm. 19. 13. Who can understand
his faults? cleanse me from my secret faults. Esa. 29. 13. Math. 15. 8. In
vain they worship me with traditions of men.

XV. OF THE LAW OF GOD.
1 A Law in general is a sentence commanding that which is honest, and binding
the reasonable nature to obedience, with a promise of reward if that obedience
be performed, and threatening of punishment, if it be violated.

2 Of laws some are divine, some humane.

3 Humane laws are either civil or ecclesiastical.

4 The principal differences between divine and humane laws are these: that
divine laws do partly concern Angels and men, partly all, and partly some men:
humane laws concern only some men. Secondly divine laws, besides external
actions, do also require the internal qualities and motions: humane laws
command only certain external actions. Thirdly, divine laws propose not
only corporal and temporal, but also spiritual and eternal punishments and
rewards^ humane laws promise and threaten rewards and punishments only
corporal and temporal. Fourthly, obedience to divine laws is the end of
humane laws: humane must serve to the observatio^ of divine laws. Fifthly, of
divine laws some are eternal, and some mutable; all humane laws are mutable.
Lastly, divine laws can be abrogated by none but God; humane laws for probable
causes many be changed and abrogated by men.

XVI. OF THE PARTS OF GODS LAW.
1 THere are in holy scripture found 3. parts of Gods law. That is to say,
Mora^, Ceremonial, and Judicial.

2 The moral law, whose sum is contained in the ten commandments, is a
doctrine agreeing with the eternal and immutable wisdom and rule of justice
in God, discerning good and evil, naturally known, and bread in reasonable
creatures, in the creation, and many times after repeated and declared by the
mouth of God, teaching us that there is a God, and what manner of God he is,
binding all reasonable creatures to perfect obedience and conformity external
and internal to that rule, promising the favor of God and life eternal to all
that perform perfect obedience, and denouncing the anger of God and eternal
punishment, to all that are not perfectly conformable thereunto, unless there
be granted remission of sins and reconciliation through the son of God our
mediator.

3 The law of nature before the fall was altogether the same with the moral law
of god: but the knowledge of God being after the fall obscured in man's mind,
the law of nature is now become only a part of the decalogue or ten
commandments, being obscure and maimed especially in the knowledge and worship
of God, for which cause also God repeated and declared again in his church the
whole body of his law.

4 Ceremonial laws are certain precepts of ceremonies, that is, of actions,
and external solemn gestures, or such as must be performed in the public
service of God, with observation of the selfsame circumstances, ordained either
to signify future things, or for orders sake.

5 Judicial laws concern the external defense of discipline, according to
both tables of the decal^gue, or concerning civil government amongst the Jews,
that is, touching the order and duties of magistrates; judgments, punishments,
contracts, and differences of being Lord or owner of ought.

6 This distinction of divine laws, must be observed, both because of the
difference of these laws, which being neglected their right force and meaning
cannot well be understood, and also that we may well judge and instruct others
in the abrogation and use of the law.

7 These are the differences between the law moral, and ceremonial and
judicial laws. First, moral commandments or precepts are naturally known:
ceremonial and judicial are not.

8 Secondly, moral laws bind al reasonable creatures, ceremonial and judicial
were only prescribed to the Jews.

9 Thirdly, moral laws are ever in force, ceremonial and judicial are not.

10 Fourthly, moral laws command external and internal obedience, ceremonial
and judicial command only obedience external, which notwithstanding must be
joined with internal moral obedience.

11 Fifthly, moral laws are general, not limited with certain circumstaunces,
ceremonial and judicial are special, that is, determined by certain
circumstances.

12 Sixthly, ceremonial and judicial laws are types foreshewing some thing;
moral laws are not types but signified by types.

13 Seventhly, moral laws are a principal worship of God, or the end of
other laws; ceremonial and judicial owe service to the moral, that by them
these may the better be observed.

14 Eighthlie, laws ceremonial yield to the moral; but moral laws yield
not to the ceremonial.

XVII. OF THE USE AND ABROGATING OF GODS LAW.
1 THe ceremonial and judicial laws of Moses in respect of obedience due to
them, are abrogated by the coming of the Messiah.

2 The moral law is abrogated in respect of the curse, not in respect of
obedience due to it.

3 Uses of the ceremonial and judicial laws of Moses, partly were, and partly
are these. First a schooling or leading us unto Christ, that is, a signifying,
or shadowing of spiritual and heavenly things in the kingdom of Christ.

4 Secondly, a distinction of Gods people from other nations.

5 Thirdly, an execution or putting in practice the law moral, which requires
a limitatio^ of many circumstances, both in church and co^mo^weale.

6 Fourthly, ^ testifi^ng of our obedience toward God.

7 Fifthly, the sealing of Gods covenant by ceremonies, which were sacramental
signs.

8 Sixthly* a preservation of the Mosaicall policy, til Christ's coming, by
judicial laws, which were the sinews and form of the common weal.

9 Lastly, a confirmation of the new testament, by comparing the fulfilling of
all things with the types.

10 The moral law, in time of our innocence, had other uses, then now it
has, as, a perfect conforming of the life of man to GODS will, a good
conscience, and sure confidence in Gods love and favor.

11 In this our corrupt nature these uses it has* first a maintaining of
discipline within and without the church.

12 Secondly, an acknowledgement of our sins, which two uses pertain unto
all men, and are that p^dagogie or schooling of the law, whereby we are led unto
Christ.

13 Thirdly, an information to the true worship of God, which use is peculiar
to the renewed or regetate.

14 And these are the principal uses; besides which there are also some others
as namely, a testimony that there is a God, and what manner of God he is.

15 A note of the church, which is distinguished by integrity and purity of the
law from all other sects.

16 A testimony of that excellency of man's nature which was before the fall,
and which is restored unto us by Christ.

17 A testimony of eternal life, wherein the law shall be fulfilled, seeing in
this life it is not fulfilled, and God made it not that it should never
attain its proper and principal end.

OF THE EXPOSITION AND DIVIsion of the Decalogue.
1 THe Decalogue or ten commandments, co^taining a sum of the whole law of
God, are to be understood according to that exposition, which has been
delivered by Moses, the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles.

2 The law of god requires perfect obedience both* inward and outward, in the
mind, will, heart, and actions, that is, in our words, deeds, and external
gestures.

3 Our obedience to all the other commandments must be referred unto the first,
because the love and glory of God must be the impulsive and final cause of al
our obedience.

4 The interpretation of every law must be gathered from the end for which it
was made.

5 For diverse ends one and the same work may be commanded or contained in
diverse co^mandeme^ts.

6 Precepts affirmative and commanding do include also the negative and
prohibition: and contrarily.

7 Some principal kind of thing being commanded or prohibited, other kinds also
which are near and like unto that are universally commanded or prohibited.

8 Where the effect is commanded or forbidden, there likewise we must
understand that the cause is also commanded or prohibited.

9 With the relatiues their correlatiues also are comanded, because the on
cannot be without the other

10 There are two tables of the decalogue, the first co^priseth in 4.
co^ma^dements certain duties to be performed immediately toward God: the
second teaches in 6 co^mandeme^ts what duties must be performed toward our
neighbor immediately, but toward God mediatly, that is toward our neighbor
for the commandment and glory of God.

11 The precepts of the second table yield place unto the precepts of the first.

12 That is the truer divisio^ of the decalogue, which reckneth the second
commandment of images, the tenth of concupiscence.

OF THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
1 The first table gives precepts of duties toward God; the second of duties
toward our neighbor, but so that the former immediately, the latter is mediatly
referred to God.

2 Whereas the first commandment charge us to have for god only the true god
manifested in the church, it does especially co^prise the internal worship of
God, which consists in mind, will, and heart.

3 The principal parts or points of this worship are these: true knowledge of
God, faith, hope, and love of God, fear of God, humility before God, and
patience.

4 God may in some sort be known of the creatures, namely as far forth as it
pleases him to reveal himself to every man.

5 There be two sorts of knowledge of God, one simply and absolutely perfect,
whereby God only knows himself, that is, the eternal father, son, and holy
Ghost know themselves, and one an other, and understand wholly and most
perfectly their whole infinite essence and manner of being (for none but an
infinite understanding ca^ perfectly know that which is infinite) the other in
the creaturs, whereby angels and men do indeed understand the whole and entire
nature and majesty of god as being most simple, but not wholly; that is, they
understand it only so far as he reveals it unto them.

6. That knowledge of God, which is in the creatures, if it be compared with
that, whereby God understands and knows himself, is to be accoumpted
imperfect, but if we respect degrees thereof, some of it is perfect, some
imperfect, not simply but in comparison, that is, in respect of the inferior
or superior degree.

7. That is perfect, whereby the blessed angels and men in heaven know God by
excellent vision or beholding of mind, as much as is sufficient for
co^formitie of the reasonable creature with God. Imperfect is that, whereby men
know God in this life less then they might, and therefore by Gods
commandment ought, by benefit of their creation.

8. Imperfect knowledge is of two sorts, Christian or theological, and
philosophical, Christian knowledge is that which is learned out of the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles: Philosophical is that which is gathered from
principles naturally known, and the beholding of Gods works in nature.

9. Christian knowledge is of two sorts, Spiritual or true, lively, powerful
and saving: and Literal. The spiritual is a knowledge of God and his will,
kindled in our minds by the holy Ghost according to the word, and by the
word, causinge in our will and heart an inclnation and study to know, believe
and practice more and more those things, which God in his ^^rd commands us
to know, believe, and do. The (...) is a knowledge of God either retained from
the creation, or afterward wrought in our minds by the holy Ghost through
the word of God, which is not accompanied with a man's desire of conforming
himself thereunto.

10. Both spiritual and literal knowledge is either immediate, which by
instinct of the holy Ghost without ordinary means, or mediate, which is
wrought of the holy Ghost by hearing, reading, and meditating on the scripture.

11. The ordinary means of knowinge God, and that which is presci^bed unto us
by God, is by study and meditation of the scriptures, and therefore we must by
this means labor to come to the knowledge of God, and therefore not desire
and expect from God some extraordinary and immediate enlightening, except of
his own accord he offer it unto us, and confirm it by sure and certain
testimonies.

12. But although God has declared in his word how far in this life he would
be known of us, yet natural testimonies of God are not superfluous, because
they condemn the impiety of the reprobate, and confirm the salvation of the
elect, and are therefore every where alleged by God in scripture, and must be
considered by us.

13. But withal, this we must be persuaded of them, that they are indeed
true, and agree^ble with Gods word, but ye^ they are not sufficient to the
true knowledge of God.

14. Besides, although natural testimonies do not teach any thing false of
God, yet men without the light of Gods word conceive out of them nothing but
false opinions concerning God, both because those testimonies do not show so
much as is delivered in the word, as also because men by reason of their
native blindness and corruption, do mistake, misinterpret, and many ways
corrupt even these very testimonies, which by natural judgment might be
vnder-stoode.

15. And therefore in the first commandment is forbid de and condemned all
ignorance of such things as God has proposed unto us for to know of him, in
his word, and in his works, as well of creation as redemption of the church:
also all errors of such as imagine either that there is no God, as the
Epicures, or many Gods, as the heathen, the Manichees, the worshipers of
angels, dead men, other creatures, the witches, the superstitious, those that
put confidence in creatures, or those which imagine a God diverse from him
which has manifested himself in the church, as philosophers, Jews,
Mahometa^s, Sabellia^s, Arria^s, Samosate^s, P^cumatomachians, and the like,
which do not acknowledge that God which is the father eternal, with his son
and holy spirit coeternal.

XX. OF THE SIX FIRST COMMAVNDEMENTS.
IN the first precept is commanded the immediate internal worship of God,
whereof the principal parts are, true knowledge of God, faith, hope, love of
God, fear of God, etc. as in the the 3 and 10 section of the title going next
before, besides all this, herein is forbidden contemp of God, unbelief,
doubtfulnesse and distrust in God, temporary faith, apostasy, carnal
security, tempting of God, desperation, doubt of deliverance from sin and
eternal life, hatred of God, inordinate love of our selves and the creatures,
servile fear, pride, vainglorious hypocrisy, impatience, rashness.

2. The second precept is a rule of our whole worship of God, that we worship
not God with any kind of worship, besides that wherewith he commanded
himself to be worshipped: wherefore it commands the true and forbids all the fained and false worship of God, especially idols and images made to
represent and worship God: also negligence of magistrates, whereby images or
other instruments, which either do or may easily serve to idolatry, are
tolerated in places subject to their authority, much more the worship of the^;
also hypocricie and profaneness.

3. The third precept requires that external worship which every man ought
to perform, that is, the furtherance of the true doctriue touching God,
lawful swearinge, zeal for Gods glory: if forbids omitting, wearines, and
corrupting the doctrine concerning God, neglect of his glory, blasphemy,
denial or dissemblinge the truth, unseasonable confession, abuse of liberty in
things indifferent, scandals in life and members, neglect of prayer, prayer
made after an evil manner, or not the true God, or not lawfully: ingratitude,
denial, neglect and abuse of Gods benefits; refusal of necessary ot^es
pe^urie, idolatrous, unlawful, rash swearinge, inconstancy of lightness in
defense of Gods* glory, and erringe zeal.

4. The fourth precept contains that external worship of God, which is
public in his church, or the preservation and use of the ministry, that is,
public preaching and study of religion, administration and use of the
sacraments: public prayer: honor and obedience dew to the ministry, that
is, a mainteining of the ministry and spiritual sabbath, which is,
obedience to this doctrine. It forbids neglect of the duty of teaching,
corrupting and maiming of doctrine, neglect of exhortation to use the
sacraments and their lawful administration: contempt of doctrine, and
curiosity in searching things not necessary: contempt and profanation of
sacraments: neglect of public prayer* hypocritical presence at them, such
recital of the^ as is unprofitable to the church; with drawing others from the
ministry: abolishing the ministry, calling there unto men unworthy, errors
about the use of the ministry, contempt of ministers, disobedience to the
ministry, ingratitude or hard dealing against the ministers, neglect of
schools and scholars.

5. The fifte precept commands civil orde^, or mutual duties of men
between superiors and inferiors; whereof some are peculiar to p^rents, as
nourishing, defenc, instruction, and domestical education of their children:
to teachers, as scholastical discipline and instruction: to magistrates, as
commanding the discipline of the whole decalogue, and putting the precepts
thereof in execution, by defending the innocent, punnishing offenders, ordeining
and executing politic laws in commonweals: of masters, as to command
their families that which is just, to give rewards, and govern by domisticall
discipline: of such as are honorable for age or authority, as to direct others
both by examples and advise: inferiors, as honor, that is reverence, love,
obedience, gratefulness, mildness toward superiors. Other some are common to
all men, as universal justice, and justice particular distributive, diligence,
love of parents, gravity, modesty, gentleness. Ther-fore it condemns, in
parents neglect or looseness of education, neglect of defense, or foolish
zeal for children: In parents and teachers, neglect of instruction,
corrupting, too much indulgence or favor, too much cruelty. In magistrates,
sloth and tirannie: in masters granting too much liberty, unjust commaundes:
defrauding men of their dew hyre or reward, too much roughness: in men of
authority foolish counsel, light and evil manners, neglect of younger sort or
others whom they may help or correct: in inferiors defect of reverence, love,
obedience, gratification, mildness, or excess, when more of these is
attributed unto them then the law of God does permit. But in all omitting of
duty, disobedience, eye-service, error or respect of persons in distributing
offices, honors, or rewards, sloth, busy curiosity, want of love to parents,
unjust indulgence toward children, ingratitude, unjust gratification,
lightness, pride, immodesty, arrogancy, show of modesty, too much rigor and
severity, too much gentleness.

6 The sixth precept provideth for the safety of our own and others life and
body: and therefore commands particular justice, hurting no man gentleness,
mildness, quietness, co^mutatiue justice in punishments, fortitude, humanity,
mercy, friendship. It forbids unjust harming the life or body of our selves
or others, too much pity, wrath, unjust anger, desire of revenge, strife,
cruelty, respect of persons, turbulency, unjust gratificatio^ for quietness
sake, cavil upon too strict law, private revenge, fearfulness, inhumanity,
hatred of our neighbor, inordinate love of our selves, reioicing in other men's
harms, want of pity in men's miseries, lightness or inconstancy in
contracting or dissolving friendship, cousenage.

OF THINGS INDIFFERENT.
1. OF human actions some are in their own nature good or evil, some
indifferent.

2 Of their own nature good are such as be expressly commanded by God, which
we must needs do, according to the intent of the law rightly understood.

3. Evil in their own kind are such as are expressly forbidden in Gods law.

4. Indifferent are such as are neither commanded nor exhibited by God.

5. These may either be done or omitted with sin, or without sin.

6. They are sins when they are either done by the unregenerate, or of the
regenerate, but with scandal and offense of themselves or others.

7. They are no sins when they are done of the regenerate without scandal.

8. They are necessary to be done when they cannot be omitted without scandal.

9. Therefore of themselves they are lawful and good, but yet indifferent and
arbitrarie: by accident they may be evil and unlawful, or necessary.

XXII. OF MAN'S JUSTIFICATION BEFORE GOD.
1. That righteousenesse whereby we are justified before God, is the fulfilling
of Gods law.

2. Legal justice is the fulfilling of the law, performed by him, which is
named just.

3. Evangelical justice is the punnishment of our sins, which Christ endured
for us, freely imputed by God to them that believe.

4. Since the fall of man no man besides Christ alone in this life is justified
before God by the righteousenesse of the law.

5. We are justified only by faith in Christ.

6 And yet the righteousness of the law must in this life be begun in all that
will be saved.

XXIV. OF THE SACRAMENTS.
Publicly disputed at Heidelberg the 23. of August. Anno. 1567.
1 GOd from the beginning did join unto his promise of Grace certain signs
or rites, which are in the church usually called sacraments.

The proof recited by the respondent before disputation, after the ancient
custom of the university.

From Adam there have been sacrifices, which God ordained because they pleased
him. Circumcision was commanded unto Abraham. By Moses the sorts and rites of
sacrifices were increased, and other ceremonies added, which endured unto
Christ; who ordained and substituted in their steed, baptism and the
mystical supper of the Lord.

2 The sacraments are signs of the eternal covenant between God and the
faithful, that is, they are rites commanded unto the church by God, and added
to the promise of grace, that by them as by visible and assured testimonies God
may signify unto us and witness, that according to the promise of the
gospel, he does communicate Christ and al his benefits to them which use
these signs in a lively faith, that so he may confirm unto them a confidence
and assurance of this promise, and the church by these visible marks may be
distinguished from al other sects, and publicly profess her faith and
gratefulnes toward God, continue and increase the memory of Christ's benefits,
and be bound and provoked to mutual love and charity under one head, Christ
Jesus.

The proof. This definition is expreslie set down, Genesis 17. 11. Exodus 20. 10.
and 31. 14. Ezech. 20. 12. Ye shall keep my sabbaths, etc. That rites were
commanded unto the church by God, it appears by induction: also the rites are
added unto the promise as visible signs thereof. Because the rites of all
sacramens do not only signify our duties toward God, but especially and
principally Gods benefits toward us: as circumcision signifies remission and
mortifying of sin. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Col. 2. 2. 11. sacrifices and the Passover,
the killing and eating of Christ, 1. Cor. 5. 7. Ioh. 1. 19. Heb. 8. 9. 10.
Neither do we only signify so much by confessing and solemnizing them; but
primarilie and principally God signifies so much unto us, testifying and
confirming by ceremonies of the sacraments. For the ministers as well in
administration of sacraments as preaching the word, represent the person and
office of God toward his church. Matthew the eighteenth, and twenty nine.
Teach and baptize all nations. Ioh. 1. 33. He that sent me to baptize. John 3.
22. and 4. 2. Jesus is said to baptize, when not himself, but his disciples in
his name did baptize. So of the sign of inauguration to the kingdom 1. Sam.
10. 1. The Lord has anointed thee, when yet Samul was sent to anoint Saul.

The sacraments therefore do strengthen our faith, because the scripture
witnesses that they are signs of the mutual and eternal covenant betwixt God
and the faithful: because by them God signifies unto us the bestowing of such
benefits as are promised in the Gospel, and we must as well believe God
signifying unto us his will by signs as by words; Sacraments confirm our
faith.
because in their lawful use they have annexed unto them a promise of grace,
not only as they are sacrifices, and show our obedience, but also as they are
signs of grace delivered unto us by God: as: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved. It shall be an acceptable sacrifice to make atonement
for him. Mar. 16. 16.
Lastely, because the scripture, to confirm the receiving or depriving of the
things signified, Leuit. 1. 4.
alleges the receauinge or depriving of the signs, as Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51. 9.
Thou shall sprinckle me with hysop and I shall be cleansed. Deuteronomy. 3. 6.
The L. shall circu^cise thine heart and: Al we which are baptized into his
death. Romans 6. 3.
The bread which we break, 1. Cor 10. 16.
is it not the communion of Christ's body?

Hereupon are annexed other final causes; The ends of sacraments in respect of
us.
They distinguish the church from other sects; this appears by effect and by
testimonies, as, A stranger shall not eat therefore. What the^ avails
circumcision? very much. Exo. 12. 45.
For unto them were committed the words of God Ye gentiles, which in times
past were called the uncircumcision, Romans 3. 1.
because in that time ye were without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 11.
strangers from the covenant and common wealth of Israel, Genesis 17.
having no hope of the promise, and without God in the world. They are a
confession and public thanksgiving for Christ's benefits. It shall be a
sign of the covenant between me and you; and it shall be my covenante in
your flesh. As often as ye shall eat this bread, show ye the Lords death.
1. Cor. 11. 26.
They continue the memory of Gods benefits. This day shall be unto you for a
remembrance. Exodus 12. 14.
It shall be asigne unto thee upon thine hand, Exodus 13. 9.
and a remembrance between thine eyes. Luc. 22. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me. They are a band of charity: for because they
which use them are in league with God, they are also in league between
themselves. Epe. 4. 5.
One Lord, one faith, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
one baptism etc. We being many are one bread, one body. For we are all
partakers of one bread.

3. Rites and ceremonies not commanded by God to be signs of the promise, are
not sacraments.

The proof. The signs can confirm nothing but by his consent and promise,
from whom the thing promised and signified is expected. Therefore no creature
ca^ ordain and institute testimonies of Gods will.

4. Two things are to be considered in all Sacraments. 1. Visible, earthly, and
corporal signs, which are rites or ceremonies, and visible or corporal things,
which God exhibiteth or offers unto us by his ministers, and we receive
corporally, that is, by the parts and senses of our body: ^ the things
signified, which are invisible, heavenly, and spiritual, that is Christ
himself and all his benefits, which are through faith communicated unto us by
God spiritually, that is by power and virtue of the holy Ghost.

The proof. The distinction is manifest, by an induction. Also the receiving
of the signs is corporal and external: but the things signified are

5. The signs or elements are not to be changed in nature or substance, but
only in respect of their use.

The proof. This is clear by induction and sense. I baptize you with water.
The bread which we break is the communion of Christ's body. Here bread and
water are named in the use.

6 The conjunction of the signs and the thing signified is not physical, that
is natural and real, but relative, that is to say, this conjunction is a
divine ordinance, whereby things invisible and spiritual are represented by
things visible and corporal, as it were by certain visible words, and are
in the right use offered and received together with the signs.

The proof. Such is the co^nexion of all signs with the things signified,
that they represent the things signified, and confirm the receiving of them,
for they are as it were testifying pleadges and seals, although they be not in
the same place with the signs. The reason is, because to make something a sign
of an other thing, is not to include or tie the same thing to the sign; but
to order the sign to signify the things, whether it be in the same place with
the sign, or in some other. Also the nature of the things signified by
sacraments does not admit this. For some of them are spiritual substances, as
the holy Ghost: some accidents, not in the sacramental signs and elements,
but in the hearts of men, as the gifts of the holy Ghost: some are divine
actions, as remission of sins, some are corporal, and locally in one only
place, not wheresoever the sacraments are used: as the flesh and blood of
Christ.

The names and proprieties of the things signified are attributed to the
signs, and contrary the names and proprieties of the signs to the things,
because of the similitude and likeness between both, or for signification of
the things by the signs, or for the joined offeringe and receauinge of the
things togeaher with the signs in the lawful use of the sacraments.

The proof. The scripture speaks this of sacraments: Genesis 17. 10. Act. 7. 8.
Circumcision is the league or covenant. Exodus 12. 11. the eatinge of the lamb
is the Passover. Exodus 31. 7. the sabbath is the eternal covenant. Exodus 24.
8. The blood of the sacrifice is the blood of the covenant. And Levit. 17. 5.
The atonement of our souls. Heb. 9. 5. Over the arc was a cover shadowing
the mercie-seat. Ephesians. 2. 26. The baptism of water is the washinge that
cleanses us from sin, Mat. 26. 26. 28. the bread and wine is the body and blood
of Christ. And 1. Cor. 10. 16. It is called the communion of the body and blood
of Christ. And so expounds it self, Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 12. Circumcision is
a sign of the covenant. Exodus 12. 27. The paschall lamb^ was a sign of the
passover. Exodus 31. 14. The sabbath a perpetual sign of grace and
sanctification. Heb. 9. 24. Ceremonies are similitudes and types of true
things. Marc. 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Luc.
22. 21. The bread of the Lords supper is commanded to be eaten in remembrance
of Christ.

8 The lawful use of sacraments is, when such as are converted observe those
rites which God has commanded, for such ends as God ordained the sacraments.

The proof. That only is the lawful use which agrees with Gods
institution: but the institution comprehends these circumstances of persons,
rites, and ends: therefore these once broken, the fignes are presently
abused. Esa. Ier. 7. Psalm. 50.

9 In this use the things signified are always taken together with the signs.

The proof. For thus much the rites do signify, and the promise annexed to
the rites does contain: as Mar. 16. He which shall believe and be baptized,
shall be saved: but God is true, speaking to us as well by signs as by
words. Therefore the signs are not in vain^ though the things be taken in one
sort, the signs in an other.

10 But without the use appointed by God, which is not without conversion,
neither the ceremonies have the nature of a sacrament, nor gods benefits
thereby signified are received with the signs.

The proof. The signs of the covenant confirm nothing to them which keep
not the covenant, or substitute others in their places, or refer them to an
other end: but sacraments are signs of the covenant, whereby God binds
himself to grant us freely remission of sins, and eternal life for Christ:
ergo they confirm not them in the grace of God which are without faith and
repentance, or use other rites, or to other purpose then God has appointed.
Besides, it is superstitious and idolatrous to attribute the ^est^fying of Gods
grace either to an external work without promise, or to a work devised by
men. Wherefore this abuse of sacraments has not the grace of God annexed unto
it, or confirms any man therein; as it is said, Romans 2. 25. Circu^cisio^
avails if thou keep the law, but if thou be a tra^sgressor of the law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision.

11 The Godly receive these signs to their salvation, the wicked to their
condemnation: but only the godly can receive the things signified, to their
salvation.

The proof. Us says Peter, vz. which believe, amongst whom he reckneth
himself, baptism saves, not the washing away of the filth of the flesh, but
the request of a good conscience unto God. And Paul 1. Corinthians. 10. 16. the
bread which we break is the communion of Christ's body. And whereas the
Sacraments are an external instrument, whereby the holy Ghost cherishes and
preserves our faith, is follows that as the preaching of the word, so they
also further the salvation of the faithful. But contrariwise the wicked, by
abuse of sacraments, co^te^pt of and his benefits which are offered them in
the word and sacraments, and confession of that doctrine, which with a true
faith they do not embrace, heap unto themselves the anger of God and fearful
punnishment, according to these sayings: He that offers an ox is as if he
killed a man, he which offers a ram is as if he slew a dog. etc. Esa. 66.
3. He which eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, not making any difference of the Lords body: for this cause many
amongst you are weak and sick, and many are fallen a sleep. 1. Cor. 11. 27.
But the things signified, because they are received only by faith, and are
either the true causes of salvation, or salvation it self, namely Christ and
his benefittes; they neither can be received by the wicked, nor of any but unto
salvation; as Christ says, Ioh. 6.

12. But in the elect, after they are converted, the fruits of a sacrament
(though unworthily received) do in the end follow.

The proof. The promise, and the signs of that promise, which has a
condition of faith annexed unto it, are ratified and take effect, whenever
the condition is performed; but such (...) the promise which is signified and
confirmed by the sacraments: therefore if there be faith beleeuinge the promise
and signs, whether in the use or after, the things promised and signified are
then received. Eze. 16. 59.
I might deal with thee as thou have done; when thou did despise the oath
in breakinge the covenant, Nevertheles I will remember my covenant made with
thee in the days of thy youth, and will confirm unto thee an everlasting
covenant.

13. Of sacraments, some are once only to be received, some oftentimes; some
are to be ministered only to those of ripe years, others even to infants also,
according as they are ordained for once making a covenant with all those that
are converted, and which are to be received into the church; as circumcision
and baptism: or instituted to renew the covenant and preserve the unity and
fellowship of the church, after our fall and conflict against temptation: as
the arc, the paschal lamb, with other sacrifices, and the Lords supper.

The proof. The iterating or renewing of baptism is no where commanded; the
reason is manifested: because those sacraments are instituted to be an
initiating, or solemn receiving into the church which is ever firm to him that
repents or persevereth. But the iteratio^ of the use of other sacraments is
commanded: as in sacrafices, in the Paschal lamb, in worshipping before the
arc, in sanctifying and clensing it is apparent: Also of the Lords supper it
is said, As often as ye do this, ye shall show the Lords death. The reason
is, because they are testimonies, that the covenant begun in circumcision and
baptism is ratified and firm to him that repents. And this often exercising
of our faith is necessary.

14. The things common to the sacraments of the new and old testament are
those, which are before set down in the definition of a sacrament. The
differences between both are these, that the sacraments of the old testament
did prefigure Christ which was then to (...) the sacraments of the new
testament represent unto us Christ with all his benefits, being already come:
the old were others, and more rites, as circumcision, sacrifices, washings,
the Pascall lamb, the sabbath, worshipping before the arc etc: the new are
likewise others, and only two, baptism, and the supper of the Lord: the old
were obscure; the new are more plain and easy: the old were commanded to
Abraham's posterity and their households: the new to the whole church culled and
collected out of Jews and Gentiles.

The proof. That one definition serves for the sacraments of both new and old
testament, we have already proved before. That there is a difference in the
number and form of rites, appears by an induction. For in the new testament
it is plain there are but two; because no other ceremonies having a promise of
grace annexed are commanded by Christ. That sacraments of the old testament
show Christ to come, of the new already come, it is manifest by their
interpretation delivered in scripture, whereof we spoke in their definition.
They differ in plainness, because in the new testament are fewer, NOTE.
Abraham had a more excellent faith then any in the new testament: not for
plains but for stedfastnes.
and those signifying things already fulfilled, in the old there are more
rites, and those shaddowing future things, all whose circumstaunces were not
yet known. Lastly, by induction it appears, that the old were commanded
only to Abraham and his posterity, and their servauntes: the new to all even
as many as will be members of the church: as Genesis the seventeenth. Every
man child of eight days old amongst you shall be circumcised in your
generations* as well he that is borne in thine house, as he that is bought
with money of any stranger which is not thy seed. Exodus 12. No stranger shall
eat thereof. Math. 8. Teach all nations baptising them, etc.

15 Both Sacraments and preching of the gospel are Gods word, which he
exercises toward his church by the Ministers, because they teach, offer,
and promise unto us the same communion of Christ and his benefits, and are
external instruments of the holy Ghost, whereby he moves our hearts to believe,
and therefore makes us partakers of faith in respect of Christ and his
benefits. Neither yet is the working of the holy Ghost tied unto these
sacraments; nor do they at al profit but rather hurt such as with faith do not
apply them to themselves, as the very words and rites do signify.

The proof. That the Ministers do all in GODS name in administration of
sacraments, and that by the sacraments God does signify, that is, teach,
offer, and promise unto us the communion of Christ, we showed before in our
second proof. Whereupon follows this other conclusion, that the holy ghost
thereby moves our hearts to belief. For because sacraments are a visible
promise, they have the same authority to confirm faith in us, as has a
promise made by word. Whence also follows a third co^clusio^. For that which
serves to kindle and stir up faith in us, the same also serves to the
receiving of the communion of Christ: because we have this communion through
faith. The bread is the communion of Christ body. Baptism saves us, etc.
And yet the holy Ghost does not always by them confirm our faith: because
neither by the word does it always kindle faith in us; as the examples of
Simon Magus and infinite others do show. That the use of sacraments without
faith is hurtful, is already prooved in the eleventh proposition.

16 The word and the sacraments differ, because the word signifies gods will
toward us by speech, the sacraments, by gesture: by the word faith is begun
and confirmed, by the sacraments only faith begun is confirmed: the word even
without the sacraments does teach and confirm, which the sacraments do not
without the word: without the knowledge of the word they that are of ripe years
cannot be saved; but without the use of sacraments (if it be not by contempt)
men may be both renewed and saved: the word is to be preached to the unbelieving
and wicked, the church must admit to the sacraments only such as God will have
us account members of the church.

The proof. Sacraments without the word going before do neither teach, nor
confirm our faith: because their signification is not understood but by
preaching or expounding them by the word: neither can a sign confirm any
thing but what is before promised. This may be proved by example of the Jews,
who either did or die observe those ceremonies, abolishing or not understanding
the promise of grace and of Christ's benefits.

Men of years cannot be saved, except they have knowledge of the word,
either by teaching after the ordinary way, or by revelation after an
extraordinary way. Because He that believes not in the son is already
judged. Ioh 3. 18. Faith is by hearing, hearing by the word of God. Romans 10.
17. But without sacraments they may be saved; because though by some
necessary occasion they be hindered from them, yet may they believe, as the
thief on the cross: or if they be infants, they may be sanctified according
to the measure of their years, as John in the womb of his mother, and many
other infants which died before the day of their circumcision.

The word also must be preached to the wicked, because it is ordained for their
conversion.

The sacraments must be administered unto the^, which are to be acknowledged
for members of the church: because they are instituted only for the use of the
church. Act. 8. 17. If thou beleevest thou may be baptized.

17 This is common to Sacraments and sacrificer, that they are works commanded
of God to be done by us in faith: but yet a sacrament and a sacrifice do
differ, because by a sacrament God does signify and witness his benefits
which he performs unto us: but by sacrifice we perform and offer our
obedience unto God.

The proof. That sacraments are works commanded of God to be done by us in
faith, we have showed in the 1. 2. 3. and 10. proposition. Both are mentioned
Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a greater sacrifice then Caine etc.
That Sacraments are signs of Gods will toward us, it is prooved in the second
propos.

18 And therefore the same ceremony may have the nature of a sacrament and of
a sacrifice; because thereby God giving unto us visible signs, testifies his
blessings and benefits toward us; and we by receiving them do likewise
testify our duty toward him.

The proof. This is manifest by the Pascal lamb and other sacrifices; also by
the sabbath: which were an obedience commanded by God, whereby the godly did
worship him, and show themselves grateful to him: and withal were signs of
Gods benefits which they received by the Messiah. So baptism is a profession
of Christianisme, and a sign whereby Christ witnesses that we are washed in
his blood. The Lords supper is a thanksgiving for the death of Christ, and an
admonition, that we are quickened for and by his death, are made his members,
and shall as bide in him for ever.

AN ANSWER TO SOME ARGVMENTS against the Sacraments.
Certain objections against the aforesaid propositi^ns of Sacraments, with
short answeares of Vrsinus thereunto, taken in a public disputation. Anno.
1567.
1 Objection against that part of the second proposition; Sacraments are
signs of the eternal covenant.

The signs of an eternal covenant are eternal; But these signs are not
eternal: Ergo neither is the covenant eternal.
The proof of the maier denied is; In relatiues one being taken away, the
other also is taken away. Answer to the rule, whereby the mayor is prooved,
by distinguishinge. In relatiues having but one only correlatiue, as a father,
a sons one being taken away, the other also is taken away: but this rule
houldeth not where are more correlatiues then one; as to this covenant of God
are correlatiues not only the signs, but they also with who^ this covenant
is made, who shall endure for ever, etc: But these signs are correlatiues to
the covenant, not simply as it is a covenant, but as it is a covenant
confirmed by signs.

Note, that in the second part of this proposition, between God and the
faithful, are included also the posterity of the faithful, as the part in
the whole, though actually they do not yet believe, as infantes. Therefore the
definition is not more stricte or particular then the things defined.

Object. 2. against that part of the second proposition; And so confirms in
the^ the confidence of this promise.

That which is given to such as have no faith, cannot confirm faith, because
there is none to be confirmed.

Baptism is given to infantes which have no faith:

Ergo baptism does not confirm faith. And so consequently al sacraments do
not confirm the co^fide^ce of this promise.

Ans. 1 to the mayor by a distinction. It cannot confirm faith in them at that
instant when it is given the^, and they have no faith yet may it confirm faith
in the^, when they are of ripe years, and do believe and have faith.

Auns, 1 The minor also is very doubtful, whether infantes, especially of
the renewed and regenerate, be destitute of faith: seeinge that unto them al
^^ertaine these promises: I will be thy God and the God of thy seed. To such
belongs the kingdom of God etc.

3. Objection against the sixte proposition.

The truth of signs being once exhibited and fulfilled, the signs themselves
do cease;

But in the new testament the truth of the signs is exhibited and fullfilled.

Ergo the signs of the new testament are ceased.

Auns. We grant all, if you by signs understand such signs, as signify
future things, and things hereafter to be fulfilled, such as were the signs of
the old testament: but we deny the mayor, if by signs you understand such as
seal unto us things already performed, such kind of signs are the
sacraments of the new testament. Object. 4. Against that part of the tenth
proposition, which is not without conversion.

The Papists sacraments are celebrated without regeneration;

Yet are they sacraments.

Ergo sacraments may be celebrated without conversion

Auns. The minor may be denied in respect of such as are not converted. For to
such, sacraments are no sacraments, that is, signs of grace: especially
seeinge they turn them into mere idols. But they become sacraments unto them,
that is, signs of grace: when they are converted: and if they never be
converted, they likewise never become sacraments to them.

Repl. Enforceing an absurdity.

They who corrupt the words and form of the institution of any sacrament (as
baptism) do also overthrowe the nature and substance of the same.

The Papists do the former.

Ergo they do also the l^tter: And therefore their baptism is not baptism;
and so by consequent we which were baptized in time of Poporie, must be
rebaptized.

Auns. To the mayor. They overthrowe the substance of baptism; true, to
themselves and such as approve them, and be not converted; but not to them
that acknowledginge their errors are converted, and adiorne themselves to the
church of Christ.

Object. 5. Against that part of the eleventh; The godly receive the signs
to their salvation.

That only can be received by the godly to their salvation, which brings with
it salvation, or is a cause thereof;

But the things signified do bring alone salvation, and are the causes thereof:

Ergo the things signified only, (and not the signs) are received by the
godly to their salvation.

Auns. To the mayor by distinction. That only which brings with it salvation
can be received unto salvation; true, to cause or bestow salvation but that
also which brings not salvation, that is, which is neither the efficient, nor
form, nor material cause of saeluation, may be received unto salvation, that
is to confirm salvation. I exp^^^de my self thus. Both the things and the
signs are received unto salvation: but the signs in one sort, the things in
an other. For the things are a cause of salvation, and part thereof: but the
signs have in themselves no such quickening force, but only confirm our
salvation as they are joined with the things.

Object. 6. Against the twelfth proposition.

That which brings with it condemnation, brings no fruits;

The unworthy use and receiving of sacraments brings condemnation, as it is
proved in the eleventh proposition:

Ergo it brings no fruits.

Auns. We grant all, before the conversion, not after; for then the unworthy
use and receiving is made worthy.

Repl. Condemnation does not follow conversion;

The fruit of unworthy receiving the sacraments is condemnation:

Ergo fruits follow not conversion.

Auns. It is true of comdemnation. But here we speak of the fruits of a
sacrament unworthily received, which before the conversion for unworthy
receauinge was condemnation; but after the conversion is changed into our good
and salvation etc.

Objection. 7. Against that part of the thirteenth Some sacraments are used
only once.

That which makes to the confirmation of our faith must be often used;

All Sacraments make to the confirmation of our faith:

Ergo all sacraments are to be often used.

And so by consequent we should be often baptized.

Auns. to the mayor, which is true, if God have appointed that they should be
often used. But he will not have the sacraments of our receauinge into the
church, and our regeneration to be ^terated: because by them he does once
only begette us, and enter league with us, as by circumcision and baptism;
but by the other he does often confirm the league or covenant which he does
enter with us, as by the Pascall lamb, and the Lords supper.

Objections. Against the second difference of the word and sacrament in the
sixteenth proposition.

They which are to be admitted to the more worthy, should not be forbidden the
less worthy;

The wicked are to be admitted to the hearing of the word, which is more
worthy the^ the sacraments, as is proved 1. Cor. 1. 17. God sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel:

Therefore the wicked are not to be forbidden the sacraments.

Auns. We deny the mayor if you take it universally; because it is neither
every where nor always true.

Repl. That should not be forbidden whereof may follow fruit;

Of receiving the Lords supper even by the wicked may follow fruit:

Ergo the wicked are not to be forbid the Lords supper.

Auns. to the mayor. He should not be forbidden if God forbad him not; but the
church has received this commandment of God, That it must not do evil that
good may come of it.

9. Objection against that part of the same proposition. The word must be
preached even to the unbelieving.

Christ forbids us to cast pea^les to swine and dogs;

Therefore the wicked must not be admitted to the hearing of the word preached.

Ans. To the antecedent: by dogs and swine are not meant simply he wicked, but
such enemies as mecke and persecute the doctrine: barking and impugning it like
dogs, and treading it under foot like swine. Against such this argument were
of force.

XXIV. OF BAPTISM.
1. Baptism is a sacrament of the new testament, whereby Christ witnesses to
the faithful being baptized with water in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy Ghost, that all their sins are forgiven them, the holy
Ghost given unto them, and themselves ingrassed into the church and body of
Christ: and they again profess that they receive these benefittes of God, and
therefore ever after will and must live to him, and serve him. And this same
baptism was begun by John Baptist, and continued by the Apostles; this only
was the difference, that he baptized men into Christ which should suffer and
rize again, but these into Christ which had suffered, and was rize^.

2. The first end of Gods institution of baptism is, that God herby might
signify and witness, that by the blood and spirit of Christl^^^ does cleanse
those that are baptized from their sins, and engraffeth them into the body
of Christ, and makes them partakers of all his benefits.

3. The second is that baptism may be a solemn receauinge or enroulinge of
men into the visible church of Christ, and a distinction thereof from al other
sects.

4. The third, that it may be a public and solemn profession of our faith in
Christ, and of bindinge our selves to faith in him, and obedience toward him.

5. The fourth, that it may be an admonition of our plunging into afflictions,
and our risinge and deliverance out of them.

6. Baptism has by Gods commandment and the promise of grace a certain
power to seal and witness, annexed by Christ unto these rites rightly used.
For Christ by the hand of his ministers bapt^zeth us, as by their mouth he
speaks to us.

7. There is therefore in baptism a 2 fold water one external, visible, and
earthly, which is the eleme^tary water: the other internal, uisible, and
heavenly which is the blood and spirit of Christ: there is also a twofold
washing, the on external, visible, and signifying na^ely the sprinckling or
pouring on of water, which is corporal, that is received by our bodily parts
and (...) the other internal, invisible, and signified, namely remission of our
sins by Christ's blood shed for us, and our regeneration by his spirit, and our
bei^^ (...) grafted into his body which is spiritual, that is, is received in
spirit, and by faith. Lastly, there is a two fold minister of baptism one
external of external baptism, which is the minister of the church, baptising
us in water with his hand: the other internal of internal baptism, which is
Christ himself, baptising us with his blood and spirit.

8 Neither is the water turned into the blood or spirit of Christ, neither is
the blood of Christ present in the water or in the same place with the water,
neither are the bodies of such as are baptized sprinkled invisibly therewithal,
neither is the holy Ghost in substance or virtue more in this water then
elsewhere; but in the lawful use of baptism he works in their hearts which
are baptized, and spiritually does wash and sprinkle them with the blood of
Christ, and uses this external sign as an instrument, and as a visible word
and promise, to uphold and stir up the faith of such as are baptized.

9 Therefore when baptism is said to be the washing of regeneration, or to save
us, or to wash away our sins; it is meant; that external baptism is a sign
of the internal baptism, that is, of regeneration; salvation, and spiritual
washing and that this internal washing is joined with the external, whenever
baptism is lawfully used.

10 Yet is sin an baptism so abolished, that we are freed from the guilte of
GODS anger and eternal punishment, and regeneration is begun in us by the
holy Ghost, and the relics of sin remain in us to the end of this life.

11 But all and only the renewed, or the regenerate baptized to those ends for
which baptism was instituted by Christ, do lawfully receive baptism.

12 The church lawfully ministers baptism to all and only those, whom it
ought to reckon in the number of such as be renewed, and members of Christ.

13 Whereas also infants of Christians are of the church, whereinto Christ
would have all that pertain to him be received and registered by baptism, and
therefore baptism is now in steed of circumcision, whereby justification and
regeneration, and receiving into the church, were sealed by and for Christ as
yet to come, as in baptism by and for the same Christ already come, as well to
infantes as to those of riper years pertaining to the seed of Abraham: and
whereas no man can forbid water, that they should not be baptized which have
received the holy Ghost clensing and purifying their hearts, truly those
infantes must needs be baptized which either are borne in the church, or
together with their parents come over to the church.

14 As the promise of the gospel, so baptism also received unworthily, that
is before conversion, is firm and procures salvation to such as repent, and
the use thereof, before unlawful is now made unto them lawful.

15 Neither does the wickedness of the Minister make the baptism vain and of
no force, if it be done into the faith and promise of Christ: and therefore the
church ought not to rebaptise eve^ those that have bin baptized by heretics,
but to inform them in the true doctrine of Christ and baptism.

16 And as the covenant once begun with God remains perpetually steadfast to
such as repent, even after their sins from that time committed; so also
baptism once received, confirms those that repent in remission of sins for
all their life, and therefore ought neither to be ^terated, nor deferred to the
end of life, as if on that condition only it did cleanse us from our sins, if
we committed no more after we were once baptized.

17 But all that are baptized with water, whether infantes or aged, are not
made partakers of the grace of Christ. For Gods eternal election and calling to
the kingdom of Christ is free.

18 Neither are all excluded from the grace of Christ which are not baptized
with water. For not the want but contempt of baptism excludes from the
convenant made by God with the faithful and their children.

19 And whereas the administration of Sacraments is a part of the
ecclesiastical ministry, they which are not called thereunto and especially
women, must not presume to take unto themselves authority of baptising.

OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
Disputed in the Coll. of Wisdom the 2. of May, Ann. 1575.
1 ONe of the Sacraments of the new testament is called the Lords supper, not
because it must needs be solemnised only in the evening or at supper time, but
because it was instituted by Christ in the last supper that he made with his
disciples before his death. The Lords table it is called, because therein the
Lord feeds us. The sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, because
therein are these things communicated unto us. The Eucharist, because therein
are solemn thanks given unto Christ for his death and benefits toward us.
Synaxis or assemb^^ because it must be celebrated in assemblies and meetings of
the church. It is also amongst ancient wrighters named a sacrifice, because it
is a representation of that propitiatory sacrifice which Christ performed on
the cross, with an Eucharisticall sacrifice or sacrifice of tha^ksgiuing
therefore.

2 The Lords supper is a sacrament of the new testament wherein by
commandment of Christ the bread and wine is in company of the faithful
distributed and received in remembrance of Christ, The defnition or nature.
that is, that Christ may witness unto us, that he feeds us unto etern^ll
life, with his body and blood given and shed for us: and we render unto him
solemn thanks for these benefits.

3 The first and principal end and use of the Lords supper is that Christ may
thereby witness unto us The ends.
that by this witnessing he may cherish and increase in us our faith, and by
consequent this spiritual feeding The second is Christ, with a public and
solemn profession of them, and our Christ. The third is a distinction of
fourth, that it may be a bond of mutual charity amongst Christians: seeing
they are all made members of one fite, that it may be a bond and occasion of
frequent assemblies of the church, seeing Christ would have one bread, and one
cup to be distributed amongst many.

4 Hence has the Lords supper that first use, which is, How the Lords supper
confirms our faith.
a confirmation of our faith in CHRIST, because CHRIST himself by the hand of
his Ministers reaches and deals unto us this bread and cup in remembrance
of himself, that is, that by this token and sign, as by a visible word, he
may admonish us, that he died for us, and that he is unto us the meat of
eternal life, whilst he makes us his members, and because he annexeth a
promise unto this rite, that he will feed with his own body and blood such
as eat this bread in remembrance of him: when he said, This is my body: and
because the holy Ghost by this visible testimony moves our minds and hearts
with more certainety to believe the promise of the gospel.

5 There is then in the Lords supper a twofold kind of food and drink: one
external, visible, and earthly, namely the bread and wine: the other
internal, invisible and heavenly, namely the body and blood of Christ: there
is also a twofolde eating and receiving, the one external, visible, and
signifying, which is the corporal receiving of bread and wine, that is such a
receiving as is performed by the hands, mouth, and corporal senses; the
other internal, invisible, and signified, which is the fruition of the death
of Christ, and a spiritual engraffing us into the body of Christ; that is,
such an eating as is not performed with the hands and mouth of the body, but
by spirit and faith. Lastly, there is a twofold minister of this food and cup;
one external of the external food and cup, which is the minister of the
church delivering to us with his hand the bread and wine; the other an internal
minister of the internal food and cup, which is Christ himself feeding us with
his own body and blood.

6 The signs and elements serving for co^firmatio^ of our faith, The signs of
the Lords supper.
are not the body and blood of Christ, but the bread and wine: for the body and
blood of Christ are received that we may live for ever, but the bread and wine
are received, that we may be confirmed in the certainty of that celestial
food, and more and more enjoy it.

7 Neither is the bread changed into the body and the wine into the blood of
Christ, The manner of Christ's presence in the Lords supper.
neither are the bread and wine abolished, that so the body and blood of
Christ may succeed in their places, neither is the very body of Christ
substantially present in the bread, or under the bread, or where the bread is:
but in the lawful use of the LORDS supper the holy Ghost uses this sign and
Sacrament as an instrumente to stir up faith in us; whereby he dwells in
us more and more, and ingraffeth us into Christ, making us become just for him,
and by him to gain everlasting life.

8 But when Christ says: This, that is this bread, is my body: Sacramental
speech.
and this cup is my blood, it is a sacramental or metonymicall kind of speech,
whereby is attributed to the sign the name of the thing signified, that is, we
are taught that the bread is the Sacrament or sign of Christ's body that is,
does represent and witness that Christ's body was offered for us on the cross,
and given to us for food of eternal life, and is therefore an instrument of
the holy Ghost to continue and increase this food in us, as Paul says, The
bread is the communion of Christ's body, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
that is, that thing whereby we are made partakers of Christ's body: and else
where: We have al dr^nke of one drink into one spirit. 1. Cor. 12. 18.
The same is meant when it is said that the bread is called the body of Christ
by similitude which is between the thing signified and the sign, namely
because the body of Christ nourishes our spiritual life, as the bread the
corporal life: and because of the sure connection of receiving the thing and
the sign, in the lawful use of a sacrament. And this is that sacramental
union of the bread, and the body of Christ, which is expressed by the
sacramental speech: Sacramental union.
not that local conjunction, which by some is devised.

9 As therefore there is one body of Christ, A twofolde feeding on the body of
Christ.
properly so called, and an other sacramental, which is the bread in the
Eucharist or Lords supper: so also the feeding on Christ's body is of two
sorts; the first sacramental, which is an external and corporal receiving of
the sign, namely the bread and wine; the second real, or spiritual, which is
the receiving of the body of Christ: Ioh. 6.
and it is to believe in Christ, and by faith dwelling in us by his spirit, to
be engraffed into his body, as members joined to the head, and branches to the
vine, and so to be made partakers of the life and death of Christ. Whereby it
appears that they which teach thus are falsely accused, as if in the Lords
supper they did admit nothing besides the bare and naked signs, or
participation of the death of Christ, or his benefits, or the holy Ghost alone,
excluding the true, real, and spiritual communion of the body it self of
Christ.

10 The lawful use of the Lords supper is, The lawful use.
when the faithful observe this rite instituted by Christ, in remembrance of
him: that is to stir up their faith and thankfulness.

11 As in this use the body of Christ is eaten sacramentally and really; How
the wicked ear.
so without this use, as by infidels and hypocrites it is indeed eaten
Sacramentallie, but not reallie: that is, the sacramental signs, as bread and
wine, are indeed received, but not the things themselves signified by the
signs, namely the body and blood of Christ.

12. The doctrine of the Lords supper is grounded upon many and those very
forcible arguments. The co^^^^mation.
All places of scripture, which mention the Lords supper, do confirm it. And
Christ does not call any Paul says that it is a communion of the body and
blood of Christ, because all the faithful are one body in Christ, which can
have no fellowshippe with the Christ is wrought by Christ's body into the bodies
of men: and therefore all the purer antiquity of the church with very great
and open consent professed the same doctrine.

13 The Lords supper differs from baptism, 1 In rite and manner of
signifying, because the washing Differences of baptism and of the Lords supper.
by the blood and spirit of Christ, and society of the afflictions and
glorification of Christ. But the distribution of bread and wine, signifies
the death of Christ imputed unto us for remission of sins, and that we
being now ingraffed into Christ are become his members. 2 In special use, By
the persons to whom they must be ministered. Baptism is due to all which are
to be accounted for members of the church, whether aged or infantes: the Lords
supper to them only which can understand and celebrate the benefits of
Christ, and examine themselves. 4 In often use. Baptism must only once be
received, must be ministered before, the Lords supper never but after baptism.

14 They come worthily to the Lords table which examine themselves, Who may not
come to the Lords supper.
that is, which are endued with true faith and repentance. Which who so do not
find in themselves, they must neither presume to approach without them, least
they eat and drink judgment to themselves, nor defer repentance whereby
they may approach, least they pull upon themselves hardness of heart and
eternal punishments.

15 The church ought to admit to the Lords supper all that profess that they
embrace the foundation of Christian doctrine, Who may be admitted.
and purpose to obey it: and to prohibit all such as being admonished by the
church and convicted of their errors, will not for all that desist from their
errors, blasphemies, or manifest sins against conscience.

16 The Pope has done wickedly in taking the breaking of bread from amongst
the rites of the the Lords supper, as also in barring the people the use of the
cup. He has also done wickedly in adding so many ceremonies, never commanded
by the Apostles. He has fowly transformed the Lords supper into a theatricall
mass, that is, into a foolish imitation of Iudaical traditions, and stage-like
gestures. But most impious and idolatrous are those devises, to persuade that
the mass is a propitiatory sacrifice, wherein by the Mass Priests Christ
himself is offered up to his father for the quick and dead: and by virtue of
consecration is substantially present, and so abides as long as the bread and
wine remain vncorrupt: and bestows the grace of God and other benefits on
them for whom he is offered, and by whom he is eaten with the bodily mouth,
without any good motion of their own: and also that he is to be adored and
worshipped, as he is included and borne about under those two kinds, namely
bread and wine. For these damnable and abominable idols it is very necessary
that the mass be banished from the Christian church.

A FUNERAL ORATION OF D. FRANCES JVNIVS, Professor of Divinity in the famous
School of Neustade; upon the death of D. ZACHARY VRSINE, a most worthy man and
vigilant Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the said School of Neustade.
WE have lately lost (noble and worthy auditors) the most faithful servaunt of
God Zachary Vrsine, a reverende witness of our Lord Jesus Christ, a right
virtuous man, my sweet fellow-professor, and one most beneficial to Gods
church: of this man are we deprived, and this our orphan-schoole left destitute
of her parent. The greatness of which loss if I would amplify, I should
but give occasion of more heaviness to your minds, that are already in this
case too tenderly affected, and fail exceedingly of that excellency of
discourse, which in so excellent a subject may justly be expected. For though
feign I would, and could heartily wish that I might speak much to this purpose,
yet I neither think it fit, considering I should but minister fuel to the
fire of your affection; nor account my self able, as well for diverse defects
which I feel in my self of wit, learning, exercise, and continuance of
conversing with that man of happy memory, whereby I am much disabled; as also
because if I were furnished with gifts of utterance (which in my self I
acknowledge to be very slender) yet now the weight of this work, the
scantnesse of time, and vehemency of my grief have debarred me all use and
practice of them. Wherefore I would indeed have persuaded some others of our
college to take some pains in this matter thereby to ease mine own study and
sorrow; but they excused themselves with the public grief and their own
most affectionate heaviness. And must we then needs neglect the commendation
of that sacred soul, if in this public calamity of the Church and our
school, we give our selves wholly to mourning and lamentation? But that
perhaps will seem an undutiful nicenes and te^dernes to such as know not the
veheme^cie of our grief. Besides (to use the words of S. Amb.) though it do
but increase our grief to wright of that which grieveth us, yet because
commonly we content our selves with the remembrance of him whose loss we
lament, for th^^ in wrighting a whilst that our minds by meditation are wholly
fixed on him, we imagine him to live in our discourse; it is a thing that
must be done, except we will be thought to have buried in silence the memory
of a pledge so well deserving, and to have vouchsafed him no honor, or else to
have avoided all inciteme^ts to grief, where as for the most part, to greiue is
the especial comfort of such as are greiued. Shall we then differ this
commendation any longer? no truly; but rather let us stir up your minds to
maintain his memory both now and to al posterity hereafter: for (as
Nazianzen says) good men ought to be especially remembered, and they whose
memory is godly and p^offitable. But stay then: am I the boldest of this
company of professors? not so. But perhaps I am the most officious and
forward to show my duty? truly neither am I so greed^e of the glory of this
actio^ that I could find in my heart to snatch it from others by prevention.
How then? am I belyke the most unwise of all others? truly I do not arrogate
to my self any great wisdom, only I hope this my duty shall be without
off^ces and with thought hereof I am much comforted. But what moved me above
others to take upon me the penninge and pronouncing of this oration? Because of
duty one of us must needs have done it; and that which was a duty in all,
grief excused in other, and might as well have done in me, had not very
necessity not only required, but also even exacted it at my hands. For
first I owe as much to the memory of that just man my good fellow-professor,
as others do, namely an honorable remembrance of him. Moreover I owe so much
duty and more to this our School, which may justly callenge my diligence, as
well in this as in other causes. Lastelie I shall hereby provide both for the
public good, and also for mine own credit: for otherwise who would not be
ready to object against me that saying of Sophocles?

Alas! how soon thanklesse posterity
Leaves to retain a dead freindes memory?
But these learned and judicial men hereprese^t, may in the common heaviness
make this benefit, that they persuade themselves they may shift of the burden
of this exercise without prejudice of their credit: as for me, the necessity
of my place enforces either to provide some other who will and may better
discharg it then my self, or else to submit my self to the hazard of your
censures. The weight of my other affairs do overmuch distract me, the
conscience of mine own weakness does amaze me, the worth and greatness of the
thing it self deters me. All this notwithstanding, the authority of this
school prevails over mine affairs, good ensample and public pattern of
the church forces my conscience, and necessity it self does thrust me
forward setting aside respect of the worth and majesty of this subject, to
say some thing thereof in this assembly. Trusting therefore to your courtesy
and indifferency (worshipful and worthy auditors) first I desire and
entreat you to hear favorably this my oration, no way matching (I confess)
that matchless man's deserts, or your expectation, or mine own duty, but
only fitting my poor mediocritie: then that you would vouchsafe lovingly to
excuse me (plucking only some few fruits from that most rare and sacred
tree (if I neither flourish out this picture with those curious colors, nor
furnish out this table with those diverse and daine^i^ dishes which that rich
store house might afforde, but rather supply what mine ignorance has omitted,
and pardon both for shortness of time and vehemency of grief, whatsoever I
shall happen to speak unadvisedly. For in that man I purpose not to speak of
that we admired whilst it was present, and now want being absent (for I
neither know nor can reckon al) nor of many such things as I know, and have
much thought of (for even that also were almost infinite, and would seem
incredible to many) but I intend in few words to lay down a brief of those
virtues and good gifts which heretofore we have all seen, and whose loss
we now lament, and to shaddowe out unto you the damage redounding to us all by
the untimely death of that man of fame, that by this fi^e we may be inflamed
to strong faith and serious repentance, and more and more frame our selves to
imitation of this worthy witness and valiant champion of CHRIST JESUS.

Zachary Vrsine was borne at Pres^aw of honest parentage by descent, in the
year of our Lord, 1536. He was naturally for constitution of body strong;
but more strong of mind and courage, especially after there had been joined
to the goodness of his nature, arts, and sciences, and other most excellent
and heavenly gifts and qualities. But touching the gifts of his body we shall
not need to speak much, considering that some of them are indifferently
common to all men, others besides men, are also incident unto beasts. For
although in themselves they be commodious, and such as every man may well wish
to further him in laudable attemptes, yet they make nothing to the true glory
and commendation of those in whom they are found: wherefore I am resolved to
give unto him his deserved commendation, not as he was man, but a most absolute
Divine. But touching the virtues of his mind, which by consent of al good men
deserve of themselves to be desired, and possess the perpetual fruit of true
glory, what shall I say? whence should I begin, or when should I end, if I
should endeavor to speak all that might be said of this most holy and choice
vessel, ordained to the glory of his maker? I should sooner want time then
matter in so just a cause. Now then I see well what I have to do. I must
prescribe unto my self certain limits and bounds, beyond which (would I
never so feign) I may nor stray: that so, both I may promise to my self the
things whereof I mean to speak, and you before hand may conceive what you are
like to hear.

First the^ I give you to understand, that this our dear Vrsine was a man
absolutely furnished with many and those exceeding great and singular gifts
of wit and understanding. Also this I say, that with these most singular,
exquisite, and incredible gifts of wit was joined a most stricte course of
life, respecting the public good of the Church. Lastly, I tell you, that his
godly death is unto us a most sure argument both of his eleganeie of vvitte and
strictness of life. Within these bounds I do of purpose empale my self,
that so you remembering this may the more easily recall to memory all the rest,
and with authority call me homewardes, if I offer to wander beyond these
listes.

Concerning that wit whereof we spoke, I am verily persuaded that this worthy
man was most abundantly stored with many and those very heavenly gifts
thereof: which I desire may be spoken without offense, and taken without envy
of any man. For vvaying with my self that strength of wit which is natural,
I see not what was wanting in him that might be found in any man: but when I
think of those virtues whereby our wits and minds are adorned and strengthened
to the studies of humanity and religion, then me think I remember how by the
finger of God almost all were heaped upon this one man. And that this which I
speak is true, al men can witness who but once conuersing with him have had
experience of his singular virtues, witness his familiar acquaintance,
witness his friends, witness innumerable multitudes of those which have used
his advise, witness many great and principal men, which have preferred him
before al men to be the oracle of their counsels, and the censurer of their
wrightings: witness innumerable peoples, nations, churches, and lastly
books of his, by whose variety of learning CHRIST'S people has already a
long time been fed and recreated, albeit they like modest children, obeying
the modest will of their natural Father, dissemble and conceal his name.
Which being so, what need I any farther blazon the worth of so incomparable
a wit? For if I consider with my self his natural wisdom joined unto this
wit, behold immediately there are presented to my view whole troops of
conferences, Letters, Lectures, Sermons, wrightings, books, being as it were
whole shoppes and storehouses of his wisdom. If at any time I bethink my
self of his invention, what could a man conceive of sharper edge? (as the
Poe^t said) more forward and swift? more diligent and industrious, then was
that force, wherewith it pleased almighty GOD to endue this vessel of
holiness? If I respect that magnanimity and quickness of conceit whereby
all human things he conceaved and skorned, what man on the earth did more
easily, and in the twinkling of an eye, (as we use to say) overpasse all
those things, which to those celestial spirits seem vile and base, then he
did? If tenacite of memory which is the continual companion of good wits, I
find in this man a memory immortally good. But after this fruitful and happy
wit was once manured and husbanded by ingenuous arts and sciences, then
indeed began he to advance the singularity of his nature unto a perfection
far exceedinge all others. For he truly was so skilled in all arts and
sciences, that he might worthily be thought possessed with that famous circle
of sciences, so much commended by ancient philosophers. He was as well seen
as any man in the art of pure, plain, elegant, and true speech. He had so
diligently and artificially used each part of philosophy, that you should not
take him to have been a scholar to philosophy, but rather philosophy to
have bin a scholar to him. He was most skilful in the Mathematiques, he knew
exquisitly all that pertained to Natural philosophy, and was so excellently
cunning in Moral and politic affairs, that he might worthily be accoumpted
a singular miracle of the world.

Moreover (to the intent that learning this, we may proceed yet farther)
how many and great men did he to his great cost visit, that he might
thoroughly inform himself in the knowledge of these things, and perfect
himself by diligent imitation. For he visited, heard, and swallowed not
only with eyes and ears, but also with insatiable thirst of mind those
most clear and eminent lights of all Europe, which then shined in
Wittemberge, Leipsich, Paris, and Zurich, gathered from them all the sweet
honey of learning, whose combs are now extant, delicious and wholesome to us
for this school, to Germany his dear country, and to the whole church of
God, which is the common mother of us all, but bitter and pernicious to all
wicked men and heretics. What should I hear speak of exercise, wherein this
great servant of God and minister of the church did so greatly delight, that
with too severe and strict meditation and exercise, whereunto he was wholly
addicted, he neglected all care of his bodily health. And this he did then
especially, when he had satisfied his mind with the knowledge of human
arts, least perhaps that might befall him which often befall unskillful
fencers, who a long time flourish and beat the air without once touching
the body, and after much pains taken to no purpose, when they come indeed to
the sharp, are soon over come in fight: for it is indeed a great matter and
ever commendable to excel all others in natural gifts and strength of wit,
but greater, to grace that solid natural juice of wit with the florishinge
pleasinge color of human arts, but greatest, and that which exceeds all
the rest is, when both juice and color are steeped and purified in the sacred
fou^taines of this divine and heavenly doctrine: not that our minds might any
more be colored as in times past with pure purple, but that every one in the
spirit of his mind may be renewed after the image of his creator. And if any
man in our memory, without doubt this valiant champion of Christ has
performed, labored, and carefully perfited it. For first he perceived, and
very wisely, that those dainty ornaments of humanity ought to be hand-maides
unto the word of God and holy scripture. Then this he laid down for a ground,
that he was not at his own, but others disposing. Also he understood that as
many as addicte themselves to the service of God, obtain of him salvation, but
such as withdraw themselves from under his hand, do fail thereof. But then
(good Lord!) how fervent a study did the meditation of these things breed in
the sanctified soul of this Christian champion? what fear? what desire? what
zeal? Hence spro^g his faith in Christ, his hope, and (that which is the bond
of all perfection) his charity: all heavenly virtues, which when once they
were rooted in him by God the father, they could never be rooted out, or
corrupted by any temptation, violent fraud, prosperity, or adversity. What
shall we farther say, if all this was not enough, but that the innocent man
must daily punnish himself? for he did severely chastize his body to bring it
to subjection unto Christ. It is incredible how careful and religious he was
not to be wiser the^ in sobriety was fit for him: he did ever captivate unto
Christ that natural wisdom wherein he excelled; he never durst determine any
thing but out of the plain and known word of God, he would avouch nothing
but what he had received by most sure faith of the holy Ghost; lastely he was
always of this mind, that nothing was to be altered from the common received
customs and opinions, except the irresistable verity of Gods word did both
command and force. But that he might with more certainty compass all these
things, he was exactelie skilled in the tongues, a most necessary instrument
amongst others for a true divine: and these he had always ready, and used
them wheresoever was need with passinge dexterity and wisdom. A man for
judgment most profu^d, for providence wise, cunning to devise, quick to
invent, laborious to search, sharp to discuss, ready to perceive, in
deliueringe a truth most faithful, in refellinge a falshoode most powerful,
far from uanitie, diligent in all he undertook, armed at all points with the
complete harness of a true Divine, a strong repeller of falshoode, and an
invincible fortress of defense for verity. This man (worthy audience) by
profession a divine, indeed a champion of Christ, have we lost, we have (I
say) lost by the will of God this earnest maintainer of Gods truth, this
victorious adversary of Satan; this faithful touchstone and rebuke of the
frauds and sophismes which he uses to plot and devise, this valorous
vanquisher and destroyer of heresies we have seen taken from among us: and we
all lament this most heavy plague and grievous wound inflicted on us and the
whole church of Christ. But whether do I wa^der? Do you not now perceive
(noble and excellent auditors) that by degrees I am fallen to the second point
whereof I purposed to speak? For hitherto I have given you to understand that
this our Doctor was a rare man for excellency of wit, learning, trust, and
skill in matters of religion, the learned among divines, and most divine
among the learned. Now it follows necessarily that I speak somewhat of that
second part which I proposed, that so to this theorie and knowledge I may
join his virtuous life and practice.

The manner hereof was this: he was an other just Zachary before God, and
labored with all his might to join innocence of life to those excellent
gifts of wit bestowed on him by nature, art, ane the heavenly grace of God:
I call you to witness that have conuersed with the man openly and familiarlie.
Whatsoever he had of nature, did he not (after he had faithfully bettered it
by liberal arts, and profited it by grace infused from heaven) employ it
wholly to the study and duty of piety, charity, and humanity? Some
perchance will think it incredible, some enuiouselie spoken; yet I must
needs say it. I think this age has bred very few, whose studious part and
dutiful mind might be compared with this man's heart and mind. Which I speak
not because I would flatter him: for why should I flatter the dead? nor that
I yield too much to our freindship and familiarity, for it was a grief to me
that I was almost always absent from so worthy a man; and now to be cut of
from all hope of acquaintance with him which I have so much wished, this is
that which grieueth me most of all. I speak the truth, and that which in
conscience I think; I have observed in this man so much diligence of study,
and so much gratiousnes of courtesy and fair behavior, as can very hardly be
matched, must less bettered by any man. And how might this be known? beeaus in
piety, charity, and courtesy he satisfied al other men, but never could
satisfy himself. But who, I pray, is there that can witness thus much? nay who
is there that cannot witness it, if he have but heard the name of Vrsinus? heard
it, say I? nay I call the^ to witness which know not so much as his name.
There have been many in our memory, which have most greedily gathered the
most sweet and wholesome fruit of his labors, as from a tree unknown, and
have together with us thirsted after the water poured from his river and
bowels by Christ. It were to long to confirm these things by examples,
testimonies, and arguments: and perhaps to some of you unprofitable, to
others teadious. But out of many I will make choice only of some feaw, and from
his plentiful panterie and storhouse, furnish you out a frugal and thriftie
ba^quet. His first rudime^ts of religion he had learned of a child; which is a
great matter. In process of time he increased and furthered the^ most
abou^da^tly: which is more. But the greatst matter and most memorable of all the
rest, is that when he was aged (if a man of years may be termed aged, at which
years it pleased God to take away and extinuish that light, shining to the
testimony of that true light) but being, I say, aged, he as much confirmed
that his study of godliness and religion, as when he did most.

Lastly, at all times (that I may, if it be possible, conclude al in a word)
without measure or end he was so carried away with desire of godliness and
reverence of his maker, and did so bury himself therein, that from the
principles of wisdom proceeding every day very much forvvard, he in the end
attained that perfection, wherewith the most righteous God has now crowned him.
And though himself procured and used no other sufficient witnesses of these
his most holy endeavors (which God very well knew and approved) besides that
great searcher of hearts, God, and our Lord Jesus Christ whom he served in
spirit: yet am I able to allege two most evident proofs thereof, namely his
faithful prayers, and sacred meditations. But then (will some man say) did this
Vrsinus, who^ you commend, use to call witnesses about him when he went to
prayer? did he offer himself to the view and hearing of others as if he had
been on a theater and not in his closet? no truly. That most simple man, one
far from al show of this human vanity and affection of vain glory, thought
it always sufficient to be seen in secret by his father* which sees in
secret, was very wary in being seen of others, confirmed himself by
Christian prayer, did not vaunt himself by pharisaicall boasting. Do I then
guess and speak by conjecture? nor so, but avouch it upon certain knowledge.
For such indeed was this man of God, most careful of the truth, the church,
the afflicted brethren, and al me^, wholly bent to faithful prayer, whereby
like another Iosue conversing night and day in the light of heavenly things,
he did with fervent prayer save and defend the people of his charge, and with
the sword of Gods word chased and put to flight the enemies of the faith. But
what should I speak of his meditations? We found (o dear Vrsine) that thou
did truly observe, what Demosthenes had before in word and deed approved,
That easy things were hard to be conceived by the negligent, and hard
things easy to the diligent. So certain was it that thou thoughtest nothing
unworthy thy meditation. For what easy thing did escape him? What difficult
thing was there whereunto he did not attain? Whatsoever the eternal spirit of
God delivered in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, all that he believed
faithfully, searched diligently, and attained by med^^ating thereon
miraculously. For those he accoumpted the worthiest pains, which were bestowed
in those divine studies. As often as I think on the great, laborious, and
peremptory desire of meditation which was in this man, (and I cannot but
think of it very much and often) I still call to mind that elega^t sentence
of Ba^^^us the Great, seeing the truth is hard to find, we must every where
seek after it. For if the conceiving, as of arts, so also of true (...) and
religion, be made great by that continual increase which by little and
little is gathered together, there is not that thing so mean and simple, which
they that enter into that kind of know ledge may or ought to despise. But what
think you of this, that there was nothing delivered by those great men and
principal philosophers which this my busy fellow professor did not by
meditation attain, were it never so crabbed, deep, and obscure? was he not
well seen in the moral wrightings of Aristotle and other wrighters? was not
natural philosophy plain, open, and easy unto him? did he not absolutely
conceive the drift and nature of Aristotle's Organon? the subtlety of which
work some fly, as despairing of the understanding thereof, others with rash
judgment co^de^ne it, as the fatal and pernicious Scylla or Charybdis of
youth: the subtlety and commodity of which work Vrsine sharply and
speedily perceived, and presented it as it were in a table to be perceived and
perused by others. What should I here speak of the Mathematiques, whose
foundations are commonly grounded on serious meditation of mind, whose
principles are contained in axioms or petitions as they call the^? Their
difficult precepts were not unknown to Vrsinus, who by serious meditation,
not fleeting and slender insight, thoroughly perused the^ all. Well then, let us
now see what witnesses we can produce for this matter. After I have used his
own testimony, I will then think of others. Vrsine himself in the whole race of
these his too short days, is a most substantial witness of his own
meditatio^s, and al those virtues which before I have recited. For what duties
of piety, or Christian charity, or common courtesy did he omit? his religious
duty toward God, God himself did see, acknowledge and seal, and has now at the
last rewarded. But because the best way to know the tree is by the fruit, let
me (with your patience) a little turn your thoughts to the fruits of his
godliness and religion. Truly I think that in holy scripture they are the
greatest fruits of godliness, which concern the advanceme^t of Gods glory. And
when was this sacred soul at al wanting hereunto? when did it not endevor and
labor vehemently to give light every day more the^ other to the truth, and
therewith to lighte^ others with who^ it did co^verse, that so it might dispel
the foggy clouds of error? But those duties of piety are most nearly linked
unto charity, which concern both edifying of the church, and the salvation of
our neighbors. Wherefore now I will speak jointly of both sorts of duties, and
demo^strate how painful this courageous soldier of Christ did labor by his
speech, his wrightings, and his whole mind, that he might not in the least
manner trip or wa^der from his duty. As therefore the duties of piety and charity
ar between themselves agreeable, and united: so also they lived, increased, and
altogether sho^e forth of this man when he lived. For if we respect the
exercises he undertook in regard of these duties, good Lord, how great was
his faith? his diligence? his fasting? his watching? for not only the fruits
ensuing heereon can witness thus much unto us, but also that macerating and
pullinge down his body, that taminge of his flesh, that outward man worn
and spent with sore passed labors, so that he died an untimely death. I
would to God (my dear Vrsine) thou have not so weekned thy self with
unmeasurable (...), that thou might longer time have (...) us, (...)
school, and Gods church For thou did so far respect god, that thou did
no way respect thy self. Alas, alas, dear Vrsine the light of Germany,
the pillar of the church, the father of this our school, and the immortal
glory of this cou^tie Palatine, I would thou could have been persuaded, to
have taken thy-selfe a little from thy-selfe, and respited thy-selfe a little
from thy continual cares, that so we, this school, and the whole church
might a little longer have enjoyed thee? when I in times past admonished thee
somewhat to this purpose thou made me answer, that bodily exercise did
little profit: where unto I replied that it was profitable, and that by
intercourse it was to be joined with the exercise of the mind, and that it
was elegantly proved by Chrysostom to the people of Antioch: all this I tried
with him, but to no purpose. But what mean I? the Lords will has been done,
it is better to be silent, then to reply. Who then is there which can show,
that the duty of this worthy and laborious man was ever wanting either in
speech or wrightinge, as long as he was any way able to show it? for mine own
part I know not whether the remembrance of his invincible pains, which he
incessantly used in perfourmance of these duties, did more greiue me, or the
conceit of that fruit, whith without care of him self he dealte unto all
posterity does delight me: although time may were away grief, but this
fruit shall continue beyond all time. If I respect private conference, thy
mind was an wholesome and well sured treasure: if thy public speeches, it
was the oracle of God, at least for that measure that may be found in
mortality: if both together, that thy divine disposinge and dispensinge of
the mysteries of God, does not the brightenesse thereof dazel and blind the
eyes of my mind and understanding? Thou man of God, thou well furnished
Divine with all the holy complete armoure of divinity, thou excellent
amongst all divines, when did thou at any time cease from preaching and
professing of the truth? when did thou co^ceale those mysteries which were
stored up in thy armoury, that is, in thy mind? when were thou at any time
idle? it is strange that I will tell you, yet very certainly true, there never
came in my presence idle word out of his mouth: all things did strea^e from him
so exquisit, levelled, weighed, and premeditated. What should I speak of his
public discourses? his excellent sermons first preached by him at Heidelberg
were in admiration with all men; the variety and multiplicity of learning,
which he used in his lectures did refine, adorn, better and make fruitful the
wits of many, which now in all parts of the Christian world plant, sovv, and
water the garden and field of God, which build up the house of the living God,
and lastly which by their labors of imitatio^ do represent this their
faithful master, as it were reviued by them and recalled from death. Nay his
ordinary table which he used in the house of wisdom, was so spread with
variety of flowers and sweet fruits of that more sacred sort of philosophy,
so stored with provision new and old, that it might well seem, not a table of
vulgar philosophy, but a sa^ctuarie of celestial wisdo^e. There the voice of
scripture resounded, which is the only messenger and interpreter of vvisdome,
there were her foster-children, honesty and modesty, and (to use the words of
Eustathius in Macrobius) with sobriety, godliness. There was variety of
history, natural and moral; there sat by all the sciences, and one after an
other interposing did by intercourse breath lovely and lively freshnes into the
whole assembly. If any man will reckon these among his discourses, he may for
me; but I know these were full and just lectures, adorned with notes of al
sciences, and beautified with admirable graces. And these ar the great virtues
of his discourses. But who will not marvel that al these virtues should daily
be polished and adorned by wrighting, that most excellent and ready maker and
master of eloque^t discourse? For this mirror of me^ took pleasure to feed the
fluencie not only of his tongue, but also of his wit by wrighting: which is a
thing that Tullie co^ma^deth and co^me^deth to as many as desire to excel in
speaki^g and teaching. Therefore al his lectures, co^me^taties, observatio^s,
and notes were wrighte^: so that from his own writings he had continual
helps, both for his own memory, and also for others direction. But amongst
all these writings I marvel at nothing more, the^ that he could steal so much
vaca^t time from the^, as to answer to many and those very weighty questions.
He opened the understanding of things, and freely gave counsel to such as
requested his advise, and the^ was he most dutiful, when he was supposed to
think of nothing less the^ duty. This the learned and unlearned, the poor
and rich, neighbors and strangers, friends and enemies ca^ very well witness:
none of al which ca^ justly complain, that he was either not regarded of him,
or not satisfied by him. He endeavored so courteously, ge^tlie and faithfully to
do good to all, that he might win al, and join the^ to his L. Christ. But
some man will say these are private matters: where are those public proofs of
his piety and charity? these things are so openly witnessed and proved, that
they are indeed cleerer the^ the clear sunshine at noonday. For those
elega^t wrightings heretofore we have seen at Heidelberg, came most out of
this store house: and those which here, I say here 5. years since were spread
amongst us, were al wrighte^ by the same hand; and that hand which here he
guided by his skill, God has now possessed there with undoubted rest. Tell me
(thou vpstarte Eutyches) what did thou ever feel more heavy then this hand,
except the hand of God, which does vex, persecute, excruciate, torment, and
pursue them? What Belleraphon did more strongly beat down thy Chimaera? what
Hercules thy Hydra? Who did ever more courageously confound that thy Cerberian
monster of Vbiquitie? But that I may not long dwell on a matter vulgar and
trivial, thou Sarmatian Arius shall not escape the hand of this heroike
cha^pion, though issuing from us. This same is he that has provided, filed,
polished, sharpened and fitted unto us armor, prepared for the destruction of
thy impious opinion: of whose force I have thought good to fore-warne thee,
that thou may now at length begin to look back to God and revere^tly fear
the eternal son of the eternal God which is, was, and shall be one together with
the father for ever and ever: which if thou will not do, understand then that
there is denounced from this man eviction of thy blasphemy, and from God, thy
downfall, ruin, and destruction. What trust the^, what diligence shall we
think was in this sweet and sacred soul, who suffered no hour, no moment of
the day to pass without some profit? The proofs of piety and charity
consist especially in these 2. causes; first in maintaining true doctrine,
secondly in assailing and suppressing that which is false. Who the^ is there
that can addict himself more religiously, learnedlie, fitly, presselie,
vehemently, faithfully, diligently and stoutly to true and sound doctrine
then he has done? To speak somewhat of his courtesy, what greater favor could
he do, then that whereof before I spoke, which was his diligence in unfolding
questions, and giving advise? Which in this man was ever so elaborate, that he
cleared all doubts most evidently, discovered all sophismes most subtly,
readily, and with passing dexterity and agility, not with the words of humane
wisdom, but by the power of the holy spirit. Why the^ should any here
object, that he was a man of churlish and surly disposition? In deed as they
which are paineful in their studies are somewhat surly to such idle and
slouthful children as delight more in childish sportes then manly studies: so
they that are most diligent are somewhat way ward to men of vanity. For to my
self and other good men that knew him, no man was more courteous and affable.
And if at any time he made it a religion to stir from any matter which he
busily intended, I likewise made it as great a religion to call him away from
it: because I would presuppose, that either he was very busy or not very well.
In my occasions of business (says Tullie) I am very doubtful, when having
begun any thing I am called to some other matter: neither can I so easily
conioine things interrupted, as finish them once purposed. Touching health
there is none so foolish but (if he do not believe me) may learn as much by
nature and experience. Wherefore he is but a drone, that will be troublesome to
a busy be; and he too uncivil, foolish, and importune, which takes such
harmeful diligence for a duty. Of this sort there are many so foolish, and
injurious to good men, that they scarce account them men, unless they will
every way be as foolish as themselves. What shall I here show that, I often
see very great men complain of this matter, that they are suddenly called
away from those studies that are sacred, weighty, and required of their
place, and compelled against their wills to spend most of their time in
trifles, and idle discourses, and so almost to nothing, to their own great
grief, and the public damage of the church. How often, and how grievously
do Nazianzen, Austin, and Ambrose confess that they have taken these
withdrawings and callings away from their studies? They truly deal more
wisely, so they be not over stricte, which imitate that same Basilius the
Great, and Chrysostom, For they so closely betook themselves to their
function, that they prevented all such withdrawings, as are wont, either rashly
or without respect of duty to be imposed upon learned men. They saw well that
if you admit these importune saluters at the first, they will afterward
challenge it as a right to be troblesome to good men, and by their example
provoke other men to the same importunity: but that you should provide for
best, if at the first you took some care, and prevented these discourteous
courtesies In this sort therefore did this good soul do service to God, and the
church, or else tender his own health. Thou rather art churlish (o thou
importune man whosoever thou art!) which discourteously desire that, which
Vrsinus of courtesy might and of duty ought to deny. It is folly not to excuse
him that is busied in affairs of the church; but not pardon him that tendereth
the health of his own body is in humanity: and both contrary to the law of
charity. Although (to come to the last part of my speech) this our dear
brother was not so hindered, but that when he was unable to lift his hands,
his tongue stambering, and his jaws almost closed up, almost panting and
gaspinge for breath did yet attend to these studies and duties. For when his
strength failed, and the juice and bold in his body was decayed, how often did
he think of this our School? How often did he complain that he was idle
amidst that painful buisinesse of his infirmity and sickness? How
reasonably did he persist in those wrightings he had undertaken, until that
soul which could be conquered and tamed by no afflictions, began to fleet
and fly out of his broken, conquered, and tamed corpse? o blessed is that
faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing?
happy is that man, whose God is the Lord?

And that this man of famous memory, our beloved friend, is now in that hill
of Sion, in the city of the living God, in the heavenly Jerusalem, amongst
myriads of Angels, in the company and church of those first* begotten which
are gathered into a heavenly army, with the judge of al flesh, with God and the
spirit of the just that are now perfited, with the mediator of the New
testament Jesus Christ, and the sprinkling of the blood of our salvation, both
those arguments which before I used, namely those heavenly gifts of wir, faith,
hope, study of piety, charity, humanity, and all other duties and courtesies
do evidently confirm, as also that most happy end which he made does
certainly demonstrate. For, not to speak of this, that his soul long since
lived unto God, and was dead unto this wretched and miserable world, (for so I
speak holilie with Christ's Apostle of an holy thing) when mention was made
unto him of faith, hope, charity, resurrection, life, glory, and eternal
happiness, Lord how did he assent, applaude, and sweetly smile at it! how
did he cast up his eyes to our Redeemer! to whom as he had long before
commended himself, so also he did at length surrender his soul most
peaceably, and so was wafted out of the deep sea of this world, into a most
pleasant harbor of salvation and rest, even the bosom and embracings of our
heavenly father. Who is there here (I beseech you) amongst us, that will not
religiously cry out for joy, and wish together with me! O let my soul die
the death of the just, and let my end be like unto his. For he truly saw, he
saw by lively faith heaven open unto him, and Christ the Prince and perfiter
of our faith sitting at the right hand of majesty in the heavens, incomparable
glory provided for him, the whole company of that heavenly church welcomming
him, lastly all making to salvation, since he did so quietly yield up his soul
vuto God the Creator and Father of spirits, that so he might live with him
eternally. This then is that soul (noble and worthy auditors) this is that
sanctified soul and acceptable to God, which to our great loss is of late
days taken from us: although (as sometimes Cyprian and Ambrose said) we have
not lost it, but sent it before, purposing our selves in good time to follow.
We have not lost but repaied him, as Epictetus warns us. For he which gave
him has required and received him back again. Why then do we mourn for him
whom we have not lost? We lament that so sweet and fit an instrument of Gods
glory is received back from us: we lament this foreshewing of evil hanging
over us, and now ready to befall us: we lament the present ouer-flowing of
wickedness, injustice, and al perfidious dealing, which commonly prevails so
much the more, as it perceives these means of protection and salvation to be
taken from us. For have we not reason to lament the loss of that instrument,
of whom it is sin to conceal any thing that may worthily be spoken in
commendation? I know right well (noble auditors) that many here present are
able to speak more to this purpose then I either have done or can do. For that
daily familiarity which you had with our Vrsine, has enriched you with store
of matter, and variety of learning with eloquence. But seeing of duty and
deserte I have yielded you the first place in this matter, and you have
vouchsafed me the second; you will also (I hope) willingly pardon me, for
substituting in my room a Divine to speak of a Divine, and attribute unto
this man that which himself spoke sometimes of Athanasius the stout
mainetainer of the truth, and Antagonist of errors. He was the Lords faithful
laborer, a man of God, the reconciler of men, the trompet of truth, the pillar
of the church, Gods true champion, constant in the faith of Christ, most fit
for defense against poisenous heresies: who though he were peaceable and
moderate in all things, yet could he never patiently endure, that for
quietness sake God should be betrayed but was a vehement warrier and an
invincible Herioicke spirit in this case: commending some, moderately
chastising others; correcting some men's coldness, bridling others heat:
providing for some that they fall not, laboring that others which were fallen
might be raised again; simple of manners, diverse in discharge of many duties;
wise of talk, wiser in understanding; wherefore he so lived, was so
instructed, and so instructed others, that as his life and manners might be a
list and limit to upright dischardge of the like duty: so also his opinions
may be examples as it were authenticke laws of faith and religion. All this I
may well speak in commendation of this our Divine, which the same Divine spoke
sometimes in co^mendatio^ of Athanasius. And would God have taken from us and
the church such an instrument, except he had bin angry for our sins? did not
God condemn the wickedness of the world, when he took Enoch unto himself?
was not all Israel on fire after Elisaeus was dead? was not Judah miserably
persecuted and put to the worst after the death of Josias? have not we read
that Count Stilico said destruction attended on Italy when so worthy a man as
Ambrose was dead? was not Afric, Germany, and la^d sorely vexed, after they
had lost Auste^, Luther, and Bucer? And I am of opinion that God does but
reveal unto us some great and present anger of his, and fore-shew some severe
judgment against this ungrateful generation, by the death of other famous
men, and of this choice instrument by name. But what if God not by word only
but also indeed have often stirred up our vnrepe^tant hearts to a profitable
meditation and terror of these things? We truly have read, seen, and
observed how great and manifold signs and tokens God uses to show both in
heaven and earth, before he takes away those sacred lights from amongst
mankind: How vehemently he does as it were clothe heaven and earth with
mourning and lamentation, how fearfully he threatens to set all on fire. All
which he does to no other end but by many testimonies of his anger to call us
to repentance, and may give us to understand that he chooses rather to
disburden his anger upon al things then to strike mankind: and in the end when
he is so near, that for often offending his patience he is ready to direct
the arrows of his anger against our very heads; that then he may show that
those good men in whom he takes most delight, are delivered from danger of
this general fire and fearful diluge of destruction. Wherefore (noble
audience) this is the thing for which we mourn and sorrow, this is that
wherewith we are moved and so neerelye touched: and and truly we show our
selves iron and flintie hearted, if we should nor be broken with these heavy and
feuere tokens and forerunners of Gods punishments, and submit our selves by
obedience under the hand of the almighty. I see also an other thing to be
much bewailed and lamented. But what is that? Why this, that if judgment do
not immediately ensue on these threats, the world grows insolent upon the death
of such men, invaideth the truth by open and secret practizes, raizeth up
heresies, hardens it self in all mischief, and encourages it self to see
those men taken away whith are adversaries to his opinions, and spoileth and
wastes the church, being last destitute of her vigilant and faithful
pastors, doctors, and guardians. These fearful dangers, these sore
discommodities, these shamfull mischeiues, do bear, rack, and kill, the
hearts of all good men: the fear of these things (that I may say somewhat
concerning my self) does not so much enforce me to bewail the loss of this
my sweet dear and mere fellow-professor, that powerful teacher and blessed
soul, as the leauinge of us all destitut of such a one, and the presaging of
of those evils, which I beseech God of his mercy to turn away from us.

And thus (worthy and learned auditors) you have seen shadowed by my pencil
the life of our dear VRSINE, whose memory shall be blessed for ever. I know
we must not long either lament him, or pity his memory. If by my words I
have again renewed any ma^s heaviness, let him together with me call to
mind how much good we reaped by him in his life time. What good soever we
received of him, we did not therefore receive it that we should envy his good.
Let us rather every of us look to this, that as he was good to all, so we
also may in such sort follow spiritual good things, that by them we also may
become good. He gave himself painfully to good studies, let us also do the
like. He frankelie dealte unto all men that rich treasure, which he had by his
study stored, and God by his heavenly grace had infused; let us also
followinge his example bestow use and fruitio^ of those good gifts which by
Gods grace are grounded in us, on our fellow-seruants: let us further piety,
charity, courtesy, quietness, and the common good; and let us in the sight of
God, and in this school, as in a most choice theater bring up studious youth
both for life and learning to the same end, and strengthen both our selves
and others in the faith of Christ. And thou beloved youth, thou svveete
assembly, which could have wished that thine instructor to have lived
longer for thine own sake, for our sake, for this school, for the church,
and the whole world; bemoane no longer his absence, whom thou reioycest to
have hade present with thee sometimes by example of life, and whom yet thou
make use of in those his ever-memorable wrightings. Endeavor rather to stir
up more Vrsines about thee. He has one heir of his body, who, we hope will
also be heir of his virtues. But the way is open to you all to be partakers
of his inheritance. Go to, now you are well grown, enter then, and set foot
in possession of this inheritance. You want neither wit, nor helps of study,
not yet the way; one thing only remains, that ye want not will, and be
not wanting to your selves. Apply then diligently your will and your selves to
these studies; apply your selves very faithfully and painfully to all duties
of piety, charity and humanity; toil and labor herein, and be unto us
another VRSINE every man in his place. And though every one of you cannot bring
to the building of this tabernacle the gold, silver, and jewels of VRSINE, yet
despair not presently; iron, brass, wood, Goats hair, and stones are also
acceptable unto God. You that cannot be Captains, or in the first rank; be
not therefore discouraged: there is also need of some to be in the second,
third, fourth, tenth, and twentieth rank: and Christ witnesses, that even
such also have an order and place in his Fathers house. It shall be no disgrace
to be even a doore-keeper in the house of the living God. For of this even
David, (a man after Gods own heart) was not ashamed; neither be you now
ashamed, neither shall it ever repent you, to descend into these listes, to
enter into these studies, to attend these duties, or to follow these examples.
They shall (says Fabius) carry themselves far higher, which endeavor to
come to the top, then such as before despairing of coming so high as they
would, do straight set up their rest about the bottom. But what of that?
neither I my self which now speak to you am any thing near this noble
pattern, (I speak only of my self, as for the gifts of my fellow
professors, I admire, and in duty reverence them) neither can you attain
thereunto by your own industry. But alas that VRSINE, that man of
remembrance of God (for so his name does signify in Hebrew) is taken from us:
now there remains to us only the remembrance of so excellent a man. What then
shall we do? That Iah, that strong God, who remembering his servant Zachary,
advanced him to so high a top of faith godliness, and learning, Christ that
prophet and our only king, is very present with us, both by his external
majesty, and also by communicating unto us the holy Ghost. Let us repair to
this teacher, advise with this master, and follow this guide: let us in
confidence of his grace and assistance constantly go through with those
studies and duties whereunto we are c^lled. Let not the impiety of heretics
boast it self, nor the adversaries heart swell and wax insolent or proud,
because the rod of him that chastised them is broken: for there shall sooner
come a viper out of the root of the serpent, and the fruit thereof shall sooner
become a flying dragon (as Esaie in times past did prophecy) then we shall be
forsaken of our God, and exposed to the raging violence of the furious, or
foolish dreams of the mad sort of men, wherewith (alas?) the church often
times is to much afflicted.

Omnipotent eternal God, merciful father of onr Lord Jesus Christ, whose
good will and pleasure it has been to inform youth with the wholesome
doctrine both of that thy servant, and also of others whom thou have appointed
to govern this school, and to seal every of our minds with the spirit of
thy promise and truth: now from our hearts we acknowledge that by taking from
amongst us this thy servant thou art not alittle offended with us, and that
worthily. We confess it (o God!) and accuse and condemn our selves and our
sins, for which it pleased thee both the last year to send thy sword of
pestilence amongst us, and also this last followinge to extinguish that
bright-shininge light, which thou have placed in the emine^t candle-sticke of
this famous school. We beseech thee (o GOD and father of mercies) not to
suffer thy wrath to proceed any farther against this poor floocke, neither
call us and our sins to accoumpt, least thy wrath kindle more against us, and
so we perish from this way. But rather (because here thou have placed thy
standard, and have given thy word and promise that they shall be blessed which
retire themselves unto thee; govern us (o Lord) by thy spirit, that we may
kiss thy beloved son, and look for all salvation from him. Destroy the
plottes and purposes of Satan, preserve thy people, give unto this church, this
school, and this whole country good and faithful pastors, Doctors, and
ministers: Defend those whom thou have given, and bless them aboudantly with
all manner of blessings, keep the commons and students in just duty,
holiness, charity, and peaceablenesse; Lastly we humbly beseech thee as being
our omnipotent and gracious Father, to finish and perfect in us al things, which
shall any way perteine to the glory of thy holy name, the common edifying of
this people, and our own souls health, in Christ Jesus our Lord, who lives
and rayneth with thee in the unity of the spirit, one God eternal, for ever
and ever. Amen,

He slept sweetly in Christ at Ne^stade the sixth day of March, as six of the
clock in the evening, in the year of our Lord, 1583. after he had leued 48.
years, 6 months, 22 hours, and was buried the 8. of March, in the quiet of
the Church.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page liu.

`93. 15. never neither 95 marg. evil offense, evil of offense. 98. 1 own
immutable, own nature immutable. 98. marg. in respect of, in respect of their
causes whereon they depend. 105. 17. stain, restrain. 110. 2. that by, but by.
113. 27, any, of any. 126. 3. my heart, my hair. 16. 12. mystery, misery. 132
1. A PREFACE, A PART. 201. 8. Tunigeus, Tubingens. 204. 21. When, When he
says. 205. 4. son of Christ, person of Christ. 206. 19. that God, what God.
219. 24. immutable immutably. 222. 14. this divine, his divine. 233. 13. from,
from God. 242. 3. him which, him to be finne for us which. 254. 4. mixed not
mixed 265. 7 which by instinct, which is wrought by etc. 268. 1 or not the, or
not to the. 274. 21. not eat therefore, not eat thereof. 293. 24. visible,
invisible.


