AN EPISTEL OF Much learni^g, sent by saint Huldericus, Bisshoppe of Augusta,
called Augsburgh, unto Nicolas Bishop of Rome, the first of that name:
against the unmarried Chastity of Pryestes.

UNTO NICOLAS his lord and father, and most vygylaunt Prouisor of the holy
Church of Rome, Huldericus by name only a Bishop, owes Love as his son
or child, and fear as his servant.
Where as I have chanced of late days to find your decrees, sent over unto
me, made upon the co^tynencye of Clerks or Priests, to be far aalyenate
from dyscretion: a certain fear truly with sorrow did vex me: fear,
because of that, where it is said that the sentence of a Pastor is to be dredde
ande feared, whether it be Just or unjust. Truly I feared the weak and feeble
hearers of ye scryptur, ye which scant whear a Just cause is, do obey yt
Sentence of it, and much mor ye unjust they tread under foot, least those
should bli^de the^ selves by a Precepte of their own free will, through the
onerous and importable transgress or vsurpi^g of their Pastor. And sorrow,
truly and pytye it was unto me, whiles I doubted how the members should be
ware of them selves, their head being taken in so grievous a syckenes. For
what can be more weighty, or what more worthy then the pitye or compassyon of
the whole Church? Ande theryn you the Bishop of the highest seat (unto
whom apparteyneth the examynatyon of the whole Church) to straie never so
litell out of the way, from the holy Discretion? Ande truly you have gone
not a little out of the way. when that you wylled the Clerckes or Priests
(whom you ought to move to contynencye of wedlock) to be compelled unto the
same by a certain Imperious violence. Why is not this (think you) justly by
the common Judgment of all wise men a violence, when contrary to the
institution of the Gospel, and against the decree of ye Holy Ghost, any Man is
compelled to execute pryuate decrees? Where therefore many holy exemples are of
the Old ande New Testament (as you know) that teach Dyscretion. Let it not
be (I pray you) grievous unto your Fatherhod, a few of the^, amongst many,
to be graffed and intermixed i^ this litell book. The Lord of truth in the
old law has appointed unto a Pryest wedlock, the which is not read where
afterward he has forbidden the same: But he says in the Gospel. Math. xix.
There are some gelded parsons that have chastysed them selves for the Kingdom
of heaven: But all men understand not this saying, let him take it that may
take it. Wherefore the Apostell says. i. Corin. vii. I have no precept of the
Lord for vyrgynes, but I give them my counsel. Whereby thou do consider
according to the former saying of the Lord, that all can not take this
counsel. But thou see many flaterers of the said counsel, that are willing
to please men and not God, to commytt manny grievous things under their color
of contynencye, to use vnlaufullie the Fathers wives, and not to abhor from
the embrasyng of the male kind, and of Beasts. Least therefore the estate of
the whole congregatyon may chance to be to much weakened, by the calling
about of this infyrmytye, growing even unto a very plage: Because of
fornycatyon (said he) let every man have his own wife. The which these
ypocrytes feign to parteyne specialie unto lay men. The which albeyt that they
be constytuted in never so holy an order, yet doubt they not in deed to abuse
other men's wives. And (the which we see not without tears) all men rage in
the abouenamed mischeues. Truly those have not understand the scriptures a
right, out of whose pappes (because they have pressed the^ to hard) they have
dro^ken blood in the stead of milk. For that saynige of the Apostell, let
every manne have his own wife, does truly except no man, saving the
professor of contynencie (or him that has prescribed in the lord to contynewe
in his vyrgynytye. The which thing (most reuere^de Father) does become your
mighty power, that where any shall be, yt shall make unto you by hand or by mouth,
any vow of chastity, and afterward will forsake it, to bind ye same of
duty to execute the same vow, or to depose the same out of all orders by
your Canonycall auctoritye: ande that you may be able, manly to fulfill the
same, you shall have me and all other men of my calli^ge to be unto you dilyge^t
ayders. But to the intent that you may know that soch as know of no soche
vow, are not to be compelled: hear the Apostell speaking unto Tymothe:
saying, It becomes a Bisshoppe to be irreprehensible, the husband of one
wife. And because that no man should return the same sentence to the Church
alone, he added unto it. He truly yt can not gouuerne his own house, how
shall the same give diligence unto the Church of God? Likewise he says, let
Deacons be husbands of one wife, the which can well gouuerne their chylderen
and houses. And verily I know, that you are sufficyently taught, by the holy
decrees, of the holy Bisshoppe Syluester: that ye wife is blessed by the
Priest. Unto these ande soch like sentences of the Scripture, the writer of the
rule of Priests or Clerks, accordi^ge, not whithout cause, says, a pryeste
ought to be chaste, or at the least fettered with the bond of one Matrymonye.
Of the which things, he does truly gather, yt a Bishop and deacon, are noted
to be worthy blame, if they be divided in many women. Ande if they refuse one,
under pretense of religion: Here the canonical sentence does condemn both
Bishop and deacon, without difference of degrees. A Bishop or Pryest ought
not to cast of his proper wife, under the pretense of relygyon: for if he so
do, he ought to be excommunycate, and if he continue to be deposed. Saint
Augustine also, a man not Ignorant of holy dyscretyon, says: There is none
so grievous an euel but it is to be admytted to eschew ye worse. We read also
in the second book of Trypartita historya Canon dyscuc. xvi. Capitulo Si
quis. that when ye counsel of Nyce, would have establysshede ye selue same
decrees, that Bysshoppes, Pryestes and deacons, after their first consecratyon
should utterly abstain from their proper wives, or should put of their degree.

Paphnutius rising in the midst of them, (one of those martyrs which Maximus
ye Emperor) (their right eyes being plucked out, and their lift legs cut
of) did condemn, spoke against it: confessyng marriage to be honorable, and
affyrmi^g chastity to be the living with a man's proper wife. And persuaded the
counsel, that they should make no soche laws, affyrming ye cause to be
grievous, ande might be unto the^ or unto their wives an occasyon of
fornication. And this did Paphnutius express (albeyt he was unmarried) And the
counsel praised his opinion or sentence, and decreed nothing of that part,
but left that in every man's will, and of no necessytye. There are sum that
take. S. Gregory to be an help unto their sect. At whose temeritie I laughe,
ande do lament their Ignorance, for why? They are Ignorant that the decree
of this so perilous a^ heresye, made by. S. Gregory was afterward with worthy
fruit of repentance, purged by the same: for upon a certain day when he had
cast his net into his po^de or stewe for fish, and saw above syx thousand
infauntes heads to be drawn up, he (taken with inward repentance) lamented,
and confessyng the decree that was made by him self, for absteynynge from
matrymonye to be a cause of so great a murder: purged the same (as I have
said) with the fruits of worthy repentance. And his own decree utterly
condemned, he said that saying of the Apostell. Better it is to Mary, thereto
burn. Adding for his own part, Better it is to Mary then to give an
occasyon of death. This chance, peradventure if they had read with me (I
think) they would not have Judged so rashlye: at the least fearing the
precept of GOD. Judge ye not, that you be not Judged and of that Paul says,
What art thou that thou doeste Judge an other man's servant? Unto his Lord
he stands or falls: and truly he shall stand, the Lord is myghtie or able
to ordeyne or dyspose him. Let therefore your holiness cease to conde^pne those,
whom you ought only to admonish or counsel: least by a private precept
(which God forbydde) you be found contrary as well unto ye new Testament, as
unto the old. For as. S. Augustine says unto Donatus, this only do we fear
in your Justice, Least not for the consideration of Christyan lenity or
gentelnes: But for the greatness of the myschefe it self, you suppose it mete
to be restrained: ye which thing, for Christ's sake, we desire you hertelye not
to do: for why? Sins are to be suppressed, yt those may remain, that may
be repe^tau^t. And ye saying of. S. Augustyne, we will you also to remember,
where he says: Let nothing be done for the desire to do harm: and all things
with Charytie to give Consell, let nothing be done cruellye, nothing
vngentlie. Also of ye same I do exhort you in the fear of Christ, all you
that have not Temporal things, covet not to have the^. Ande all you that
have them, presume not in them. I say not, if you have them that you are
conde^pned: but if you presume in them, you are conde^pned. If you seem unto
your selves for soche things to be me^ne of great authority. If for your
exellent unity, you forgett the commune condycion of mankind. The which cup
of discretion truly, ye may draw out of that Apostolyke fountain. Art
thou unloosed from a wife, will not to seek for a wife. Art thou bound unto a
wife, will not to seek to be unloosed. Where afterward it follows. Those that
have wives ought to be as though they had none. Ande those that use the woorld,
as though they used it not. Also he speaks of the wyddowe: Let her mary Whom
she will, only in the LORD. For truly to mary in the Lord, is to attempt
nothing in the making of the Marriage, that the Lord does forbydde. Hiremye
also says: Trust you not in Words of lyinge: Saying, the Temple of the
LORD, the Temple of the Lord, ye Temple of the LOGDE is, the which thing,
Hierome expoundynge, says: The same also may agree unto these Virgynes, ye
crake of their Virginytye, with an vnshamfaste countenance, they set forth
their Chastity, when their Conscience means an other thing. And they forgett
the Diffinition of the Apostell of a Virgin: That she ought to be Holy in Body
and Spirit. What proffyteth ye chastnes of the Body, when the mind is
oppressed with whoredom? And if she have not other Virtues, that the Words of
the Prophet does descrybe? The which truly because we see you partly to
have, and because it is not unknown unto us, that your Dyscretion (albeyt in
this it be negligent) in other Institutions of your life, the same is
preserved. We dispayr not, but that you will sone correct ye evil fault of
this intent. And therefore we do not taunte this your negligence (albeit it be
very grievous) with so great a gravity, as we may do. And (al though truly unto ye
terms yt are used) a bishop should appear to be greter yen a priest: yet
suppose we not, Augustyne to be less then Hierome. And a correccion or a
check is not to be refused or disdained of eueri i^feryoure, specially wheare
as he that is checked, is found to travail against the troth, ande to
please men. Nor yet we ought to take the Dysputacions of every Parson (as S.
Augustyne says to Bonifacius) although they be never so CATHOLYKE, ande well
praised men. As we do the Canonical Scryptures: Albeit, it be not laufull
(saving ye Honor that is due unto the^) to dysproue ande refuse any thing in
their writing: If perchance we find that they Judge othere wise then the
truth is: The which by the healpe of GOD, is either parceyued by other, or by
us. And truly what can be more contrary unto the Verytye, the^ this? When
the Verity itself speaking of the contynenye, not of one man, but playnelye
of all (except ye nombre of soche as are professed to continency) says: He
that can take it, take yt, the which thing these men (whereof no Man
knows) being Provoked or prycked to it, may chance to say, he that ca^
take it, let him be stryken with a curse. What truly can be done by me^ more
Foolyhe? What can be more bound unto the curse of GOD? Than where as some, that
is to say: Either Bysshoppes or DEACONS, are ronni^g so headlonge into the
Lusts of the Body: That they can neither abhor Adulterye, nor inceste from
the most Shamefulle Embracing of the male kind (the moore shame) and yet
they say, ye chaste Marriage of Pryestes stynke unto them: and will not desire
the Pryestes as fellow servants to absteyne from soche things, by the
compassyon of right Justice, or at the least monysh them to be contynent: but
command them, as though they were servants, ande compel them to abstain.
Unto the which so foolysh ande shameful suggestyons of soche Imperie (I will
not say counsel) they add, it is more honestye to be intrycate secretlye
with many women, then openly in the face of men and in conscience to be bound
with one. Ande what truly would they not say? if they were of him ande in him
that says, woo be unto you Pharyseys, the which do all things for men. Ande
by the Psalmyst, because they please men, they are confounded: for as much
as the Lord has despised them. These be the men which should first persuade us,
that in his sight (unto whom all things are naked and open) we ought to be a
shamed to be sinners, rather then in the sight of men, to appear to be
without spotte. Albeit therefore that soche through ye deserts of their
noughtynes, deserve counsel of no pity. we notwithstanding remembri^g our
humanity, do minister unto them, the counsel of Gods Authority, yt never
wants pity, from ye bowelles of Charytie. For truly this we say: O ye
ypocrit, cast out first a block out of thi^ own eye, and the^ shall you see,
to cast out a moate out of thy brothers eye. And we desire them also to note,
ye thing that the Lord says of the co^mone woman. Look which of you is
without sin, let him cast first the stone upon her. As who would say, if
the law does command it? If Moises do command it? I command it also. But
I require mete or competent mynysters of the law. Note well what you add:
ande mark well (I pray you) what you are: for if thou look well upon thy
self (as scripture says) thou wylt never sclaunder any man. It is also
sygnyfyed unto us, of certei^, of those, the which swell with so much pride in
their own conceyte, that they presume to pyll the flock of the lord, (for
whom Gods shepheardes doubt not to mynyster or give their souls) with
strypes without reason. Whose sentence. S. Gregory lamenting, says: What shall
become of the sheep, when the Shepheardes are made wolves? But who is sooner
overcome, the^ he that rages? Who shall Judge the persecuter, but he that does
minister pacyentlie his back to the whippes? Truly it wear well done, that
it might be heard, for what fruit the Church of GOD should suffer so great a
sclaunder, and the clergy so great a despyte of the Bysshoppes, and of their
infidelles. And verelie I doubt not, to call those infidelles, of whom the
Apostell Paul says unto Timothe, yt in the latter days, some shall go away
from the faith, geui^g care unto the spyrytes of error, and unto the doctrine
of Deuelles, speaking lies in ypocrysye, having a fyred conscience, forbyddyng
to marry. This truly if it be thoroughly and dyligently seen, is the ha^dfull
of all their cockell, and the content of all their madness, that whiles clerks
or Pryestes, (being overcome with a Pharisaycall furour) are compelled to
forsake the laufull company of one woman, fornycatours, adulterers and the
shameful mynisters of other Prauities, are made like with the^. These be they
that do bring into the Church (like the blind that leads the blind) this
heresye, that the saying of the Psalmyst may be fulfilled: Where like one for
knowing of their error, he curses the^ after this sort. Let their eyes be
di^med or bleared that they see not, and their back always bowed down. For
as much therefore as no man (O Apostolyke Father) that knows you, is so
Ignorant, but if you had foreseen, by the clearenes of your substancyall
dyscretion, so great a plage to be like to grow, through the sentence of your
decree: you would never have consented unto so evil suggestyons of any manner
of parso^s. Wherefore by the fydelytye of pure due subjection, we counsel you:
that now at the least you lay watch, to put away so great a sclaunder
from the Church of God. And by your learning (as you know how) to pluck up
by the roots out of the heard of God: the doctrine of ye Phariseys: Least
the only dearling of the lord (if she use any longer untrue husbands)
pluck away the holy nation, the pryncelye pryesthoade by a deuorse, that can
not be recovered again, from her dear spouse: that is to say CHRIST. For as
much as no man without chastytye (not only in the flower of vyrgynytye, but
also in the knot of Matrymony) can see the Lord, the which lives and
reygneth, with God the father, and the holyghoost world without end Amen.


