THE Golden-groue, moralized in three Books: A work very necessary for all
such, as would know how to govern themselves, their houses, or their country.

Made by W. Vaughan, Master of Arts, and student in the Civil Law.

Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill. 1600.

Ad fratrem de Insignibus suis Epigramma.
AMhigo, cur bicolor nostrae Leo stirpis alu^nus!
Bestia cur, frater, (...) tua est!
Number quia purpurei nostrum sit stemma reatus
Expers, suspiciens candida, nigra premens?
Number quia conueniant, Insignia dissona, in vnum
Tam genus Austrinu^, quam Boreale genus?
Vel quia Caucaseo similem de monte Leonem
Prostrarit dextro vis proauitae Jove?
Forte Molorchaeus leo talis ab Hercule cesus;
Talis natus erat Maenaliisque plagis.
Sed qui sit nostrum, seu qua ratione colorent
Part priore album, posteriore nigrum:
Causa latet, Let he mysteria tanta colorum
Abluit, haec centum noscere lustra vetant.
Macte Leone tamen, frater charissime, macte
(Stemmate Kiffini) Thermodoonte tuo.
To the Right worshipful, my loving brother, Sir John Vaughan of Goldengroue,
Knight.
CAto of Vtica (as Plutarch writes) being demanded whom he loved best,
answered, his brother then the other still continuing to ask him, and who
next, he likewise answered, his brother. And so again the third time, he
answered, his brother. Thrice in like sort was I asked, and yet vnask'd, asked
of my self, though vnask'd of others, whether to one or three I would dedicate
this my threefold book. To this my self unto my self made answer: to who^
more fitly should I dedicate my first book treating of Virtue, then to my
virtuous brother? to whom my second of a Family, then to my familiar brother?
to who^ my third of Ciuility, then to my civil brother? The consideration of
which points (dear brother) moved me to present unto you alone, and not to
three this Grove of mine, co^formed as nere as I could, like unto that golden
grove of the ancient Hesperides. Wherein I could be said to imitate, the
Philosopher Athenodorus, who parted with his elder brother Zeno all his goods,
and gave unto him the one half, for what is more agreeable to nature, the^ that
one brother should to his power reciprocally aid another? and what more
prodigious, the^ that one brother should be a wolf unto another? this plainly
and wisely was specified by the Greek poet Euripides, who said: questionless
he that loves not his brother, loves neither him, that begat him, nor her,
that hare. And again confirmed by Antigone in Sophocles: I must (quoth she)
love my brother better then my son, by reason that hereafter I may very well
have more sons, but, my father and mother being both dead, never more
brethren. Standing, I say, upon these terms, and hammering in my mind on the
anuill of our mutual love, I thought it part of my duty to impart unto you the
just half of my substance, nay, in a manner all my substance, desiring you
withal, that, eue^ as a skilful Geometricia^ at the games of Olympus by the
bigness of Hercules foot gessed of the stature of his whole body: so by the
outward view of this my triple treatise, you will measure the willingness of
mine inward mind. As for barking sycophants and envious caitifes, to whose
controlling check the very best of all scholars have been subject, I pass not
for them, namely, let them make tennis balls of my books, yea, and bandy them
quite away, if they can* Only this is my wish at this present, that you, most
loving brother, will diligently peruse the^ over, and shelter the^ under the
veil of your favorable censure. Almighty God (that I may now end) give you
your hearts Christian contentment, while as a Pilgrim you remain in this
earthly grove, and make your mind pliable and ready for the contemplation of
that golden and everlasting Grove prepared for the Godly in the world to come.
From Jesus College in Oxford.

Your loving brother, William Vaughan.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, my two years silence since the edition of my last Latin poems
argues me in thy censure, either to have ouerslept my self with Epimenides,
or to have played the micher amongst the obscure Antipodes. Which inconveniences
(I confess) the worlds ingratitude, being a great discouragement, and the
burden of my profession, a necessary employment, made me with diligent care to
attend another Cynosure, by which the course of my studies might be directed.
In consideration whereof fearing some patent of concealment I break forth at
length, and am come to plead mine own tenure in a more familiar language. And
this I do, as well because every one may perfectly know my meaning, as that I
might crave pardon of mine auditory, if either I go awrie, or chance to trip,
no man goes so upright, but he may by some casualty or other kiss the ground.
It is a good horse, that never stu^bleth. Err I may in writing, but it is thy
part (courteous Reader) to brook mine errors with patience.

As for the subject of my discourse, it resembles the herb Muscouy, in that
as it being joined to other flowers doubleth the sweetness of the^: so these
fruits of mine being now grown to a Grove, will augment each other savor to
the sence-pleasing comfort of the reader. If any man delight to have himself
shine with a glorious show of virtue, I have given him the tops of moral
behauior; if to have his house and family well beautified; I have yielded him
diverse branches for that purpose; if to have his country flourish, I have
sent him the deep-grounded stem of policy. And if the greatest Gardener of
the best manured Eden had vouchsafed me the settes of Diuiner worth, such as
bloomed in the holy and golden groves of his Prophets, I would have offered up a
sweet smelling sacrifice of the purest choice; but since that glorious Paradise
for the first man's offense has been shut up from any entrance, I thought good
to present thee with such fruits, as this earth affoords, a three leau'd bud,
not only of incomparable sweetness to him, that has it, but also of infinite
admiration to him, that beholds it.

In conclusion, whereas in these books I make often mention of my Comentaries
upon Persius, thou shalt-vndersta^d, that I have had the^ ready together with a
most easy Paraphrase in English and Latin to be printed above a tweluemoneth
ago, but for certain respects, I caused the^ to be closed in a case of delay
and reiourneied, till I find better leisure to put the^ forth. For even thus
and thus must we take opportunity for ye publishing of our labors, howsoever
they may chance to please the curious sort but so and so. If I could promise
my self kind and gracious accepta^ce, I would promise our age the like
Commentaries upon a Satyrist of the like vain, even the learned Iuuenal,
thereby to stir up other men, -- quos aequus amauit
Iuppiter, aut ardens euexit ad aethera virtus
to give light to his gloomie and hidden excellency. In the mean time view
over this Golden-groue seriously, and, if thou reapest, any good thereby,
glorify the great Lord of Hierarchies, who for thy sake gave me grace to
frame it. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord W. V.

CARMEN EMBLEmaticum in aureum G. Vaughanni saltum.
AVreum long nemus hoc amoenos
Vincit hortos Hesperidum nitore:
Aureos fructus par^unt quotannis
Arbores: coelo radios ab alto
Hic habent frondes. Locus hic amoenus,
Quo Deum Musae recolunt sub vmbris,
Quo canune laetae volucres sub vmbris,
Quo nouum lumen rutilat sub vmbris:
Non vepres, spinae, tribuli, inyricae
Hic vigent, Musis locus est dicatus.
Aureas plantas alit hic sacrato
Rore Vaug hannus, pretatis hortus
Crescite plantis: pretatis Author
Seruet has plantas, precor, a malorum fulmine tutas.
Johannes Williams, S. Theologiae Doctor, and publicus: professor in Academia
Oxoniensi.

In eundem.
OMnia si nobis tria sint Vaughanne, vel vnum,
Omnia tunc liber hic trinus and vnus habet.
Ethicae and vrbanae lex iuncta domestica legi,
Trina quidem, numeris sed quoque tota suis.
Promis Vlissaeatua scripta (...) art,
Dum mores hominum publica iura canis.
Digna igitur multa and civilly laud refulget
Tum quia (...) canit, tum quia Musa (...).
Gulielmus Osbern Procurator Academiae Oxoniensis.

In eundem.
EThica scribenti suggessit Cynthius: anno^
Ingenio magna est vrbs quoque digna tuo?
Dumque domos coleres mayor, sanctosque penates,
Publica sollicitat Res super illa rapi.
Quid magis? aeternu^ celebris nisi sca^dis Olympun.
Materies arti cessit, and aequa seges.
Prima legate populus, legate altera publicus alti.
Hospitii Dominus; tertia Regis erunt.
Tu been diuiso libros dum diuidis orbi,
Hos orbi sapiens, te dabis ipse Deo
Henricus Pricius S. Theologiae Bachalaureus, and Collegii sancti Iohannis
Socius.

In eundem.
MAgnanimu^ vere fratrem sic imbuis art,
Vt curare (...), seque, domumque queat.
Quid maius magno possis concedere fratri,
Quam quo prudenter seque suosque regat?
Griffinus Powel.

In eundem.
NOn omnes arbusta iuuant, humilesque myricae
Docta cothurnati Musa Maronis ait:
Ignoscas mihi, culte Maro, pars altera vera est
Carminis, and pars est altera falsa tui.
Displiceant vtcunque rubi, sterilesque myricae,
Quique fouet tribulos falce domandus ager:
Laeta tame^ me arbusta iuuant dumetaque laeta,
Aurea sunt; and sunt aurea, amice, tua.
Saluete O priscum redeuntia tempora in aurum,
Inque dies aetas mollior inque dies.
Vepribus assueti mutasse cubilia Patres
Dicuntur, nitidas atque habitasse casas.
Conuerso in melius saeclorum gratulor orbi,
Ecce tibi in medio moenia sunt nemore.
Non hoc Thraeicius Getica cu^ vest sacerdos
Natusue Amphion de Jove finxit opus.
Ille meus condebat opus, qui prestat vtrique,
Ille casas cultas fecit, and ille nemus.
Qui vere and ex animo tuusest, Johannes Budden.

In eundem, ad Authorem.
EThica ciuilem docet instructissima vitam,
Musaque ciuilis Regna domosque docet.
Sit tibi cum libro fatum par, surgit in altum
Ex paruo, in summos tu quoque surge locos.
Desere priuatam (placeat tibi publica) Musa^
Exemplu^ hoc magni gra^de Maronis habes.
Ille boues and oues gracili modulatus auena,
Serior hinc annis arma virumque canit.
Tu simili scribens vena, moresque domosque
Instruis; extremam principis aula tenet.
Nicholaus Langford, Art. Magister.

In eundem.
PActoli rutilasue Tagi quid quaeris arenas?
Vaughanni plures dat tibi saltus opes.
India quid fuluum caput exeris? India sordes.
Haec superat siluas aurea silua tuas.
Quid vetus ostentat bifronte^ fabula Ianum?
Geryonem triplicem quidue poeta suum?
Respuit hic Iani titulum, vult esse triformis.
Odit Geryones, excolit hic animos.
Mores compescit, dispescit, vt Orpheus; aedes
Instruit; and plebem iure iugoque tenet.
Thomas Came, Art. Magister.

In eundem.
CVm tria, forma, modus, situs, omnia sidera librent:
Iusque triplex, triplex Gratia, parca triplex:
Cum sophiae triplex sit pars; partusque triformis
Matris Opis; Sty gi itela trisulca Dei:
Quis vetet hunc Lucum triplice^ te dicere? libras
Sidera, ius tribuis, fata Charinque refers.
Auro deducis Sophiam (Vaughanne:) Iehouae
Regna, maris fines, Daemonis arma canis.
Gabriel Powel.

To Master Vaughan the Author of the Golden-groue.
WHile thou in sacred studies do bestow
Thy watchful hours these thanklesse times among,
From learnings root three virtuous branches grow,
Charming the powers of every Muses song
To leave their two-topt hill, and for a space
In thy fresh Grove their mutual selves embrace.
Thy Golden-groue, thy euer-blooming spring,
Thy virtues nurserie, thy wits dear brood,
Where like the Graces dancing in a ring strove,
Three sciences inuit the public good.
Needs must the Grove, where these fair virtues
Be thought a precious and a golden Grove.
The moral Nymph with deep discretion goes,
The Oeconomick with a careful eye;
The Politic the state of kingdoms knows;
Treating of Nations, counsels, majesty.
The several places of their best renown,
And objects are the heart, ye house, the crown.
Now let the heart estraunged at the last,
(If any such the Golden-groue inherit)
Behold the seat where Equity is placed
With due regard of an impartial spirit.
And so prefer an honest Ethicke praise,
Before he come to Politic essays.
Then let this house for Occonomicks worth
Deserve the title, which it long has borne.
No drossie excrement from gold comes forth;
Then golden as it is, O let it scorn,
That any dregs or blemishes be found
To spring from out that Grove, and fruitful ground.
Let Policy defend the lawful right,
Since Countries perish by the hand of wrong.
Vaughan, the world in censure is upright,
Esteeming thee amongst the learned throng.
If any stony friend unjustly deal,
It Is no true Diamond in golden seal.
Thy work shall live, so shall thy Brothers fame,
But much the more, if he regard thy pain,
And gratify thy Muse, that makes his name
The note of all eternity to gain.
Three ages Nestor lived; now (as they be)
The Muses give thy Legend three times three.
Thomas Storer, Master of Arts.

In commendation of the Golden-groue, and the Author thereof.
WHo so do wish Philosophy displaid,
Garnishd in colors of most perfect hiew,
Refined again, that lately was decaid,
And this again laid out to all men's view,
Which in disgrace erst bad the world adieu,
(So things suppres'd, and trodden low to ground,
With great applause do to the stars abound.)
Let such draw near and view this Golden-groue,
Whereof the roots are, virtues of the mind:
The trunks and stalks, that grow these roots above,
Joint virtues are to private rule assigned:
The boughs, the public sway of kingly kind.
Virtue the root, Rule private is the stem,
The branches are, the golden Diadem.
All which are done by learned Vaughans pen,
Thereby deserving well eternal fame,
Who took great pains to benefit all men,
That would with singleness peruse the same;
Thus has he got himself a golden name.
And thus we see this stately Golden-groue,
Whereof the motive was, his Brothers love.
Samuel Powel, Master of Arts.

To the Author.
THy self a tendrer of that Golden-groue,
To which thou send'st this golden Grove of thine,
How truly that so called was do prove:
How truly this: it needs no proof of mine.
It is no gilt, it is a golden book,
Fit for that gemme thy Brother on to look.
The gold whereof, as pure as ever shone,
(Let Envy speak, she can it not deny)
Fears not to touch the learneds Lydian stone.
Who buys this Gold, too dear it cannot buy;
It is refined in furnace of thy brain,
In fire then to try it, were but in vain.
Some say Prometheus man of clay did make,
But beastlike passions put into his heart:
Vaughan, believe them not, for they mistake,
To make men was not his, but is thine Art.
Thou have effected what he never began,
Thou have made manners: manners make the man.
Gold-gutted Crassus, were he now alive,
Might here find gold to find an host of men:
Rich-finger'd Midas might here learn to thrive,
Not by his own rich touch, but by thy pen;
Which Chimick-like (I hope) will turn to gold
Our iron times, and make them as of old.
John Raulinson, Master of Arts.

In praise of the Golden-groue, moralized by master Vaughan.
AMid the vale of Iedas bushie grove,
Before a bribed Judge (such was their fate)
A Trinity of Goddesses once strove:
Gold caused their strife (the cause of all debate.)
Now a new Judge their quarrel has acquitted,
Attoning this late-iarring Trinarie,
And, since in groves and gold they first delighted,
Has built a Golden-groue for this fair three.
Where Pallas first unfolds virtuous sawes,
Which Venus does convey to families.
Then Juno tempreth both with rightful laws,
And those themselves with heavenly policies,
So these, whom Gold and groves first set at strife,
This Golden-groue combines in blessed life.
Charles Fitz-Geffrey.

In commendation of this Golden-groue.
SOme write of th'isle of the Hesperides,
Where golden fruit in greatest plenty grew;
A pretty fiction, and no doubt did please
The Author self, although it were not true.
If by our days we measure those of old,
(For now men love if but to dream of gold)
No more a fiction, now no more a toy;
Vaughan has made that true, which they but faign'd;
By Vaughans Art it is that we enjoy
That, which but only they in show obtained,
A Golden-groue, a harbor of delight,
Against the storms of Fortunes weaker might.
What gracious gift can Sophia now bestow,
On Vaughan worthy his industrious pain,
Unless of boughs, which in his Grove do grow,
With golden wreaths she crown his learned brain.
Fortune cannot reward desert of wit,
But honor, only she does nourish it.
Thomas Michelborne*

The Arguments of the Chapters that are contained in these Books.
The first Book.
The first part.
OF Gods nature. Chap. 1. The knowledge of God. chap. 2. Atheists. chap. 3.
The second part.
Of Man. chap. 4. The soul. chap. 5. That a man has but one soul. chap. 6.
The immortality of the soul. chap. 7.
The third part.
Of Virtue. chap. 8. Vice. chap. 9. That a man must not delay to become
virtuous. chap. 10. Remedies against vice. chap. 11. Justice. chap. 12.
Injustice. chap. 13. Whether it be lawful for one to kill himself. chap. 14.
That we should not patiently endure all injuries. chap. 15.
The fourth part.
Of truth, chap. 16. Lies. chap. 17. Swearing. chap. 18. Perjury. chap. 19.
Cursers and blasphemers. chap. 20. Deceit. chap. 21. Whether a man be bound to
perform that, which he has sworn to his enemy, either willingly, or by
constraint. chap. 22. Heretic, and schismatikes. chap. 23. Jesuits. chap. 24.
The fifth part.
Of Magnanimity. chap. 25. Ambition. chap. 26 Remedies against ambition. chap.
27 Of Fortitude. chap. 28 Foolehardinesse. chap. 29 Fear and pusillanimitie.
chap. 30
The sixth part.
Of Temperance, and Co^tinence. chapter 31 Intemperance, and Incontinence. chapter 32
Lechery. chap. 33 Gluttony, and Drunkenness. chap. 34 The discommodities of
drunke^nes. c. 35 Remedies against Intemperance, Gluttony, and Drunkenness.
chap. 36. Stupiditie or dulnes. chap. 37.
The seventh part.
Of magnificence. chap. 38 Liberality. chap. 39. Prodigality. chap. 40 The
properties of a covetous man. chap. 41. Remedies against covetousness. chap. 43.
A dehortation from covetousness. chap. 43. Whether the covetous man be worse
then the prodigal. chap. 44.
The eight part.
Of clemency and courtesy. chap. 45. Modesty and bashfulnesse. chap. 46.
Affability. chap. 47. Indulgence. chap. 48. Pride. chap. 49. Scurrilitie, or
scoffing. chap. 50. Whether stage plays ought to be suffered in a
commonwealth. chap. 51. Of cruelty. chap. 52.
The ninth part.
Of Patience. chap. 53. Anger. chap. 54. Remedies against anger. 55. Remedies
against adversity, and loss of worldly goods.
The tenth part.
Of friendship. chap. 57. How a man should know his friend. chap. 58.
Flattery. chap. 59. Ingratitude, with a remedy against it. chap. 60. Hatred,
and the punishment thereof. chapter 61 Envy. chap. 62. Calumniation and slander.
chap. 63.
The eleventh part.
Of Art, and whether Art be better then Nature. chap. 64. Science, or
knowledge. chap. 65. Understanding. chap. 66. Prudence. chap. 67. Sapience, or
wisdom. chap. 68. The ignorance of our times. chap. 69.
The second Book.
The first part.
OF a family, and the division thereof. chap. 1. That there be four kinds of
matrimony. chap. 2. The causes why matrimony was instituted. chap. 3. How
excellent a thing matrimony is. chapter 4 After what manner the ancients solemnized
matrimony. chap. 5. Of matrimony in England at this day solemnized. chap. 6.
The duties of the husband toward his wife. chap. 7. The duties of the wife
toward her husband. chap. 8. Of Diuorcement, and whether the innocent party,
after a diuorceme^t made, can marie again during the other parties life? chap.
9. Of Jealousy. chap. 10.
The second part.
The duties of parents toward their children. chap. 11. The duties of children
toward their parents. chap. 12. Of Brotherly love, and whether a man should
prefer his friend before his brother? chap. 13. Of disobedient sons. chap.
14.
The third part.
The duties of masters toward their servant. chap. 15. Of the Sabbath day,
and whether masters may set their servant at work on the sabbath day? chap.
16. The duties of servants toward their masters. chap. 17.
The fourth part.
Of Acquisitiue faculty. chap. 18. Of money, the chiefest part of the
Acquisitiue faculty. chap. 19. Of Bawdes, and whether they ought to be
suffered? chap. 20. Of usurers. chap. 21. Of the particulars, wherein usury is
committed. chap. 22. Whether it be lawful for an householder to ingrosse corn
in the market, to the intent he may sell the same another time at a deerer
price? chapter 23.
The fifth part.
Of Hospitality. chap. 24. Wherein good hospitality consists. chap. 25. Why
housekeeping now-adaies is decayed. chap. 26. Of Alms, and the forgetfulness
thereof in these days. chap. 27. Circumstaunces to be observed in giving of
alms. chap. 28. Of Fasting, and that an householder should observe fasting
days. chap. 29. Of the true fast. chap. 30.
The third Book.
The first part.
Of a commonwealth. chap. 1. The division of a commonwealth. chapter 2. Of a
monarchy. chap. 3. That hereditarie succession is better election. chap. 4. The
duties of a Prince. chap. 5. Of the name of Emperor. chap. 6. Of the name of a
King. chap. 7. Of a Gynaecracie, or wome^s reign. chapter 8 Of Tyrants. chap. 9.
Whether subjects may rise against their sovereign, being a Tyrant or an
Hereticque? chap. 10. Of an Aristocracie. chap. 11. Of a Democracie. chap. 12.
The second part.
The members of a Commonwealth. chap. 13 Of Noblemen. chap. 14. The properties
of a Gentleman. cha. 15. That Gentlemen must not greatly respect what the
common people speak of them. chap. 16. Of Knights of honor. chap. 17. Of
Citizens. chap. 18. Whether outlandish men ought to be admitted into a city?
chap. 19. Of Merchants. chap. 20. Of Artificers. chap. 21. Of Yeomen; and their
oppression. chapter 22.
The third part.
Of Counsel. chap. 23. Of Counselors. chap. 24. Of Parliaments. chap. 25. Of
Judgments. chap. 26. Of Judges, and their duty. chap. 26. Of Bribes, and going
to law. chap. 27. Of Magistrates. chap. 29. Of the great cares and troubles of
Magistrates. chap. 30. Whether magistrates may receive presents sent unto them?
chap. 31.
The fourth part.
Of the education of Gentlemen. chapter 32. The causes, why so few Gentlemen
nowadayes be virtuously disposed. chap. 33. Whether youths ought to be
corrected? chap. 34. Of scholemasters, and their duties. cha. 35 That
scholemaisters should have large stipendes allowed them. chap. 36. Whether it
be better for parents to keep their sons at home with a private
scholemaister, or to send the^ abroad to the public schole? chap: 37. Of
Tutoures in the university, and how to discern a good Tutour. chap. 38.
The fifth part.
Of Grammar. chap. 39. Of Logic. chap. 40. Of Rhetoric, and the abuse thereof
in these days. chap. 41. Of Poetry, and the excellency thereof. chap. 42. Of
Philosophy. chap. 43. Of the Art magic. chap. 44. Of Physic. chap. 45. Of
Law. chap. 46. Of the common law of England. chap. 48. Whether alteration of
laws be good in a commonwealth? chap. 48. Of Divinity. chap. 49. Whether two
religions may be tolerated in one kingdom? chap. 50. Of simonie, one of the
chiefest overthrows of religion. chap. 51.
The sixth part.
Of the alteration of a commonwealth. chap. 52. The effects of all the Cometes,
and chiefest Eclipses, which have happened in this last age. chap. 53. The causes
of sedition, and civil broiles. chap. 54. Of Treason. chap. 55. Of Idleness.
chap. 56. Of Dice-play. chap. 57. Of superfluity in apparel, another cause of
the alteration of a commonwealth. chap. 58.
The seventh part.
Of the co^seruation of a commonwealth. chap. 59. Of Taxes, and subsidies.
chap. 60. Remedies against sedition, and privy conspiracies. chap. 61. The
felicity of a Commonwealth. chap. 62
The eight part.
Of war. chap. 63 Whether it be lawful for Christians to make war. chap.
64 What wars be most lawful. chap. 65. That before we begin wars,
preparation is to be made of sufficient necessaries thereto belonging. chap.
66. The duties of a General. chap. 67. Of the choice of soldiers. chap. 68.
Whether the stranger, or the home borne subject is to be preferred? chap. 69.
How the enemy is to be vanquished. chap. 70. The conclusion, of Peace.
The first Book of the Golden-groue moralized.
The first part.
Of Gods nature. Chap. I.
FOrasmuch as all the endeuoures of humane actions do proceed from God, Pind.
in Pythiis.
and, Ps. 127.
except he build the house, and uphold men's enterprises, their labor is but
lost, that build: I hold it a requisite point of my duty, that in these moral
discourses, and politic traditions, I begin principally of his Majesty,
and search out some essential property flowing from his Divine and
incomprehensible form.

For the accomplishing of which, and of all the rest which I write, assist me,
Senec. in Hercule furente.
O thou great Governor of heaven, and judge of the world, with thy sacred
power: grant, Boet. l. 3. de consolatione philosop. m^tr. 9.
I beseech thee, that my mind may ascend up into the straight and noble seat
of virtue, where I may find the fountain of goodness, and reveal the same
being found unto thine almost lost and astraied sheep.

Gods supernatural nature (I confess) being every way infinite cannot possibly
be contained by any limited creature. Arist. li. 1. ^osterior. analiticor. and
li. 3. Physic. and Casus lib. 3 Comment. Physic. cap. 7.
Things subject and familiar to sense are comprehended in the mind by an
imaginary resemblance of them: but as for things infinite and not subject to
sense (of which nature God is) how shall I be able to imprint their likeness in
my feeble and shallow brain? 1. ^oh. 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time, Cic. lib. 1. de natura Deorum.
yet we know him by his miraculous works. To come nearer his description, I
find that God is a most pure, essential, and active form, without mixture of
matter and form, or distinction of parts, every where alike, and the very
same. And again, God is uncreate, perpetual, that is, he ever was, and ever
will be, Arist. l. 1. Physic. Lucr. lib. 1. de reru^ natura, Persius satyr. 3.
and B^et. lib. 5. de consolat. philosop.
he was not made of nothing, for nothing, according to the Philosophers saying,
is made of nothing.

The Gentiles, albeit wanting the light to understand perfect truth, were yet
all of them for the most part amazed at the excellent glory and power of God.
Pythagoras said, that God was a lively mind, that pierced into al things, of
whom al living creatures received their being. Thales esteemed him to be an
understanding, that created all things of the element of water. Chrysippus
called him a natural faculty endued with Divine reason.

Thus we see, that there is engraven in the hearts of men a certain feeling of
Gods nature, which ca^ never be rooted out. And although swinish Atheists do
laugh at that, which I have written touching the Godhead, Calu lib. 1. Instit.
cap. 2.
yet that is but a laughter from the teeth outward, because inwardly the worm
of conscience gnaweth them much more sharply then all hot searing irons.

Finally, to leave the Gentiles opinions, I judge it not amiss, if we
satisfy our selves to believe, that God is almighty, his might unsearchable,
and his power admirable. And as Arist. li. 2. de Anima.
the soul is wholly both in the whole body, and also in every member of it:
Casus li. 8. Co^m. Phys. ca. 10.
so God is wholly both in the world, and likewise wholly in every part of the
same.

Of the knowledge of God. Chapt. 2.
DIagoras and Theodorus were not ashamed to dispute against the Deity. Neither
(as I hear) do some of our brazen-faced Caualeers cease to blaspheme God by
denying most impude^tly his everlasting essence. O foolish men! when they see a
fair house, they immediately presuppose some one or other to have built it. So
in like manner when they behold one another, will not they sometimes eue^ by
natural discourse ask, who made them? The heathen Orator says, that Cic. li.
1 Tuscul.
there is no nation so savage, no people so se^celes, which will not confess
that there is some God: and even they that are Libertines, Epicures, and in
other points of their lives differing little from brute beasts, do reserve
some seed of religion: Also, Iam. 2. 19.
the very Devils believe, that there is a God, and do tremble, as says the
Apostle. Yea, Calu. li. 1. Instit. cap. 2.
the very obstinacy of the wicked is a substanciall witness that the Deity is
known, which with their furious striving yet ca^ never wind themselves out of
the ^eare of God. But what need I dally thus with doltish Atheists? let them
read the holy scripture, and they shall find five general means, whereby God
is made manifest unto man.

The first, are the framed things, wherein God did first reveal himself, for
Psalm. 19
the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his ha^dy
work. The second is the spark of nature, whereby all men as it were by
natural instinct obtain the infallible admonition of the truth. The third way
whereby God is made known, is the verbal will, which successively from time
to time in some country or other has been holden up by worldly blessings,
apparitions, ceremonies, prophesies, and last of all by the presence of the
Messiah himself. The fourth is the holy Ghost, who opens our misty eyes,
whereby we embrace the true and Apostolical doctrine. The fifth means, whereby
God is known, are his miracles, at the sight of which the very Atheists
themselves being affrighted must exclaim with Julian the Apostata: Nazian. in
Julian. Orat. 2.
O God, O Galilaan, thou have overcome our unbelief.

Of Atheists. Chap. 3.
OF Atheists there are two sorts: the inward, and the outward. The inward
Atheist is he, that slyly carries the countenance of a sheep, and yet is no
sheep, but a sheep-biter. He swaloweth up aduowsons, hospitals, and other men's
goods under pretense of simplicity. He raises rents, incloseth commons, and
enhaunceth the price of corn. With his wool or wealth he uses to snarle and
deceive honest-minded men, whom at length he notwithstanding having Scripture
in his mouth snatcheth at most greedily, and clappeth in irons. This kind of
Atheist I will decipher hereafter.

The outward Atheist on the other side openly professes nature to be his God.
And even as the spider infecteth with poison the fragrantst liquours he
suckes; so the outward Atheist most wickedly extracteth common places out of
the secrets of nature, and turning them to his own use, he blasphemeth God,
whom he never knew.

Is there any rain without a clowd? any apples without trees? any portraiture
without a painter? any kingdom without rulers? can the heavens move without a
mouer? say, thou viper, (for a better name thou deseruest not) will thou not
believe that, which thou beholdest with thine eyes? wherefore, I pray thee, was
the world framed? was it not for man? what idiot, when he passes through a
village, though half ruinous, will not presently suppose, that it was
contrived by some or other? Much rather, O sensual beast, should thou
imagine, that a quickening maker, eue^ God, has created not only thee, but all
the world besides.

If no reason will persuade thee, yet, me thinks, the extraordinary
punishments of God, which always, such Atheists, as thou art, have felt,
should be of force, to recall thee from thy most damnable opinion. It is
written of Diagoras one of the first authors of this sect, that being fled
from Athens, and his books burnt by universal consent, he was slain by
certain men, whom the Athenians had hired for that intent. Pliny the elder,
one likewise of the same stamp, while he was ouercurious in searching ye
causes of nature, was choakt near to the mountain Vesuuius with smoke, and
with the smell of brimstone issuing out of the same. Pope Leo the tenth, who
often said, that Moses, Christ, and Mahomet were three of the greatest
dissemblers, was by the just judgment of God suddenly strooken dead with an
extreme laughter. Likewise, an Italian Captain of late days in the low
countries, leading his company to skirmish with the enemy, thus encouraged
them: Sirs, quoth he, remember the former glory of our nation, and fight
valiantly: as for your sins, if you die, you shall understand, there is no
God. Which when he had said, he fought, and was the first man that was slain.
Not inferior to these was one Christopher Marlow by profession a play-maker,
who, as it is reported, about 7. years a-goe wrote a book against the
Trinity: but see the effects of Gods justice; it so happened, that at Detford, a
little village about three miles distant from London, as he meant to stab with
his poniard one named Ingram, that had invited him thither to a feast, and was
then playing at tables, he quickly perceiving it, so avoided the thrust, that
withal drawing out his dagger for his defense, he stabd this Marlow into the
eye, in such sort, that his brains coming out at the daggers point, he
shortly after dyed. Thus did God, the true executioner of divine justice,
work the end of impious Atheists.

Furthermore, some of our worldlings may worthily be ranged in the forefront
of this hellish route. They, I say, that belch out this accursed theoreme of
Machiauel, Machia. in prin^cipe.
namely, that the heathenish religion made men courageous, whereas our religion
makes men fearful. O foolish sots^ is the fear and love of God become the
cause of your foolish fear? Nay, rather it is your consciences, that bring
fear into your hearts. The more wicked ye be, the more you fear. Me thinks,
that albeit ye had no demo^stration of God, yet this ought to satisfy you,
which proceeds of a natural fear. For whosoever fears, shows necessarily,
that there is some supreme power which is able to terrify and hurt him. As
contrariwise, he that is assured, that nothing can appall or diminish his
valor, is altogether free from fear.

The second part.
Of Man. Chap. 4.
ABdala one of the wise men of Arabia, being on a time demanded, what was the
most wonderful thing in the world? answered, Man. Hermes Trismegistius termed
man the great miracle. Others called him the little world. Likewise, the wisest
Philosophers agreed, that man's body is composed of the four elements, and of
all their qualities. For the flesh agrees fitly with the earth: his vital
spirits with the air and the fire: and his humors with the water. The sense
of touching consents with the earth. The sense of seeing with the fire: that
of smelling with the air and fire: that of tasting with the water: and that of
hearing with the air. Yea, there is no part in the whole body of man wherein
one of the elements does not interpose his virtue, albeit one of the^ is
always predominant over the rest. And most certain it is, Ce. 1. 27
that Man is a creature made of God after his own Image, well disposed by
nature, composed of body and soul. In this sort man had his beginning and
being of the great and eternal builder of the world; of whom likewise he was
created so noble for three reasons. The first, that by this means man knowing
how God has placed him above all other living creatures, he might be induced
daily to love and honor him, as is meet. And therefore did the Lord place the
eyes in man's body to behold his wonderful works. And for this cause also did
he fasten ears to man's head, that he should understand and keep his
commandments. The second, to the end, that acknowledging the noble place and
race from whence he came, he might fear to stain his name and fame with
dishonest and unlawful deeds. The third, that he, not being ignorant of his
own excellency, should extol himself in God, and in him, and through him
he should judge himself worthy of heavenly felicity.

What should I rippe up the good discipline of living, the laws, customs, arts
and sciences by man inverted, to furnish life with the three sorts of good,
namely, honest, pleasant, and profitable? According to which, there be also
three sorts of companies; one for honesty, as the learned and virtuous;
another for pleasure, as, young folks, and married men; a third for profit, as
Merchants. Wherefore by good reason man holds the sovereignty, and chiefest
room in this world.

Of the soul. Chap. 5.
THe infusion of the soul into the body by God the Creator, is a most
admirable thing: seeing that the soul, which is invisible, is comprehended
within the body being palpable: that which is light and of celestial fire,
within that, which is earthy, cold and corruptible: that which is free, within
that which is base and bound. This alone is the instrument, that can bring us
to the understanding of God and our selves. This is speculatiue and active at
one and the same instant. This is she, that for her beauty has the four
cardinal virtues; and for her actions, reason, judgment, will, and memory.
Briefly, this is she, about whom the wisest of the world have occupied their
curious and fine wits.

Pythagoras affirmed, that the soul was a number moving it self. Plato said,
that the soul was a portion taken from the substance of celestial fire. The
prince of the Peripatetickes writes, Arist. li; 2. de anima. ca. 1.
that the soul is the motion or act of a natural body, that may have life. Our
Divines define the soul after this manner. The soul of man is a spirit, that
gives life and light to the body, whereunto it is knit, and which is capable
of the knowledge of God, to love him, as being fit to be united unto him
through love, to everlasting happiness.

That a man has but one soul. Chap. 6.
EVen as in every body there is but one essential kind of nature, whereby it
proceeds to be that, which it is: so in every living creatures body there is
but one soul, by the which it lives. In the scripture we neuerread, that one
man had mo souls the^ one. Genesis 2. 7
Adam being created by God, Genesis 46. 26.
was a living soul. All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, and out of
his loins (beside his sons wives) were in all threescore and six souls,
that is, threescore and six persons. Also the sons of Joseph, Ibid. 27.
which were borne him in Egypt, were two souls. Steven being stoned by the
Jews, called on God, and said, Act. 7. 39.
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Saint Paul raising Eutichu^ from death, said,
his life is in him. Our savior Christ likewise complained unto his Disciples,
saying, Mar. 14. 34.
My soul is very heavy, even unto the death. Hereby we may note, that one
man has but one soul.

How greatly therefore are those Philosophers deceived, who affirm, that one
man has three distinct souls, to wit, reasonable, sensitive, and vegetative?
whereof these two last are in a bruit beast, as well as in a man: and the
vegetative in plants, in beasts, and in man. This opinion of plurality of
souls seemed so damnable unto the ancient fathers, that Augustine, Damascenus,
and the fourth Council of Constantinople proclaimed them to be excommunicated,
which would hold one man to have many souls. Briefly, to leave this error, I
think, Arist: li. 2. anim. cap. 3
it falls out with the soul, as it does with figures: for even as the trigon
is in the tetragon, and this tetragon in the pentagon: so likewise the
vegetative power is in the sensitive, and this sensitive is in the reasonable
soul.

Objection.
We see young infants having vegetative, and sensitive souls, and not
possessing the reasonable soul, before they come to years of discretion.
Arist. li. 2. de Generatione animal. cap. 3.
Moreover, it is well known, that a man lives first the life of plants, then
of beasts, and last of all of man: therefore a man has three souls, distinct
as well by succession of time, as in essence, and formal property.

Answer.
I grant, that the faculties of man's soul are by their operations
successively known, as the vegetative power is known more plainly in the
beginning: then the sensitive: and last of all the reasonable soul. But from
thence to conclude, that infants have no reasonable soul, I deem it mere
madness. For the whole soul is infused within them in the beginning, but by
the sacred power of God it is not made as then manifest, until they attain to
elder years. Touching your proof (that a man lives the life of plants; then
the life of beasts; and last, of a reasonable man) I answer, that it is meant
of the vital powers; and not of the soul: and so I yield, that a man at first
exercises the powers vegetative, and sensitive, and then he has the benefit
of the reasonable soul.

Of the immortaltiie of the soul. chap. 7.
ATheists, and the hoggish sect of the Epicures; who would feign stay in their
bodily senses, as beasts do, deride the holy scriptures, saying, that it is not
known what becomes of their souls afthe death of their bodies, or to what coast
they travel, by reason that none returned at any time back from thence to
certify them. This is their childish reason. Which truly in my judgment
spru^g up of their negligence, in not ferreting out the end of the soul. For
to what end else was the soul created, but that knowing God her Creator, and
worshipping him for that great benefit, she might stand in awe and love of
him, and at length attain to everlasting life, which is appointed for her end?
Al other living creatures God made for man's use; but man he created to the end,
that the light of his wisdom might shine in him, and that he might
participate with him his goodness. Admit therefore, that man's soul were
corruptible: what difference then, I pray thee, would there be between a man
and a brute beast? nay then consequently it must follow, that man was created
without cause.

Wherefore did God create man of stature straight, and erected toward the
aspect of heaven, the original place of his true pedigree, but that he should
persuade himself that he is of a heavenly nature? surely Calu. lib. 1. Instit.
cap. 15.
the conscience, which discerning between good and evil, answers the
judgment of God, is an undoubted sign of an immortal soul. For how could a
motion without essence come to the judgment seat of God, and throw it self
into fear by finding her own guiltiness? Further, if the soul were mortal,
what reward is left to the just? what punishment to the wicked? Also, if this
were true, the wicked have that, which they most desire, and the just that,
which they most abhor. But shall punishment be inflicted on the just,
whereas it ought to be executed on the wicked? Many reasons I could allege,
but of all others this is most forcible, which God has given us in the
resurrection of his son our savior Jesus Christ, whereby his soul was
united again to his body, and taken up into heaven in the sight of his
Disciples. Likewise we read that* God said to Moses: Exo. ca. 3* ver. 6
I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, wherhence our savior Christ
concluded, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, do live yet after their death,
seeing that * God is the God of the living, Matthew. ca. 22. verse 32 Persius
satyr. 3.
and not of the dead. Now to be brief, I may fitly compare these Epicurian
hogs unto drunkards, who so long being drunk, until they have by sleep,
sufficiently alayed the furious force of the wine which they drunk, know not
whether they have any wit or conscience, any soul or sense.

Objection.
Men, as Pliny writes, Plinius lib. 7. ca. ^5.
breathe no otherwise then beasts do, for we see nothing of the soul of
either of them: therefore the soul as well of men as of beasts, being nothing
else but a breath, is mortal.

Answer.
Pliny seeing smoke come out of the mountain Vesuuius, judged that there was
fire within, although he beheld it not: also he knew by his nose that there
was brimstone issuing out of the same, albeit he saw it not: how chances it
then, that when by his senses he perceived somewhat more in men, then in
beasts, he was not brought thereby to believe, that consequently there must be
somewhat within, which causes men to differ from bruit beasts? Furthermore,
men discourse learnedly of all natural things, they are endued with reason,
and their speech follows reason, which are such things, as have a resemblance
of Gods spirit shining in them: but beasts have not in them this apprehension,
for that they are produced out of the power of that matter, whereof they are
ingendered. Finally, the soul of man is bred in the body by God, above all
the matter of the same.

The third part.
Of Virtue, Chap. 8.
Whosoever means to sow a godly field with corn, Boethius lib. 3. de
consolat. philoso. metr. 1.
must first rid the same field of thorns and shrubs, and cut away the fernes
with his sith, that the new corn may grow with full cares: so likewise, O
mortal man, thou having been all the days of thy life, as it were in a
golden dream, awake at last, and withdraw thy self from that fond delight,
that virtue which is surer and better then all Arts, may the sooner enter into
thy mind. Be not like unto a child, who seeing a babble wherewith he plaieth,
taken out of his hand, powtingly throws away that which he has in his other
hand, although it be far better then the former. Al worldly things, be they
never so glorious, do fade away, yea, and worldlings themselves are so soon
suffocated and choked with every small moth, that they are ready to stumble
at every straw, and to become daunted at every trifling cause. But
contrariwise, they which are bedewed with the sweet drops of Virtue, will
never be ouerturned, either with worldly guiles, or with the loss of life and
blood.

Virtue is always permanent: she is quiet in most stormy times, and shines in
the dark: being driven from her seat, she nevertheless remains in her
country, she gives continual light, and never becomes spotted with any
filth. Every thing that is achieved by her means, is good and sovereign.
For her love, Anacharsis the Philosopher left his kingdom of Scythia to his
younger brother, and went into Athens to find her there. This also moved the
Emperor Maximili^ the 2. in the year of our Lord 1574. to answer a Dutchman
that craved his Letters Patents to make him a nobleman: It is in my power,
quoth he, to make thee rich, but Virtue must make thee noble. Happy therefore is
he that wooeth her, and thrice happy is he that is contracted to her: for even
as the prowess and valor of a horse makes him apt and fit for his rider to
attend courageously the onset of the enemy: so virtue strengthens her owner
against co^cupisce^ce, and restores him ready to abide any bru^ts of variable
fortune Moreover, (a) Piccolom grad. 4 de virtu. moral.
virtue is said to be three manner of ways in man, either infused by God, or
planted by nature, or gotten by pains and industry. Virtue is infused by God,
when we call her either faith, hope, or charity: (b) Arist. lib 1. Rhetor.
she is by nature, when we term her nobil^ti^: She is said to be gotten
through pains and industry, when we name her either moral, as justice,
truth, magnanimity, fortitude, temperaunce, magnificence, liberality,
clemency, modesty, affability, friendship, and patience; or intellectual,
as Art, science, understanding, prudence, and wisdom, al which together with
their extremes and subordinate qualities I will decipher hereafter.

Wherefore, to be brief, let us embrace virtue, so precious and manifold a
palm tree, which the more it is pulled down, the more it returns upward;
let us, I say follow her, who has this singular property in al-her actions,
Plutar. in vita Periclis.
namely, that c she makes the man that knows her, so to affect her, that
forthwith he likes all her actions, and desires to imitate them that are
virtuously disposed.

Of Vice. Chap. 9.
EVen as a virtue is the beauty of the inward man, August. Epist. 35
and the way to attain unto an happy life: so vice is the sickness thereof, and
fights against nature. (d) Propert. lib. 2.
All things that are borne have vices, as it were sown in their minds. Horat.
li. 1. ser.
He is best, that is least troubled with them. For we see, that neither fire
nor fear does carry a man away so violently as vices. They only have been
the vndooers of all co^monwealths, and as soon as they once have entered into
the mind, they will never forsake it, until they ouerwhelme it with all kinds of
sin, f Senec. li. de tranquil. any.
hurt it with their griping, and overthrow al things, which are next unto them:
unhappy man is he, that is vexed with them: far better it were for him not
to live at al, or else living, g Mar. 9.
to be thrown into the sea with a millstone about his neck. Although a man be
fast laden with irons, yet his captivity is nothing to him yt is environed
with vices. He then, that will be mighty, must subdue his cruel affections,
and not yoke himself to the foul liberty of vicious motion.

In su^me, h Iere. 25.
turn again every man from his evil way, and from his wicked imaginations. i
Iam. 4.
Submit your selves to God, and resist the Devil: and he will fly from you:
draw nigh unto God, 1. P^. 5
and he will draw nigh unto you. Cleanse your hearts, you sinners, and purge
your hearts, you wavering minded.

That a man must not delay to become virtuous. chap. 10.
THere be many of our worldlings, which seek to shroud their vices under this
cloak, that they mean to amend al in time, Persius Satyr. 5.
and this time is driven from day to day, Resolution li. 1. par. 2. cap. 5.
until God, in whose hands the moments of time are, does shut them out of all
time, and does send them to pains eternal without time. Little do they
think, that their vices are by wicked custom fortified, and as it were with a
beetle, more strongly rammed into their hearts and midriffes. It is an usual
proverb, that whatsoever is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh: so
likewise, a wound being for a time deferred, becomes infectious and past
cure. Why then, O mortal men, do ye build on such a weak foundation? why
do ye not at this instant without any further procrastinations, prostrate
your selves before the most highest, ere the dark night of death steal upon
you, and Iere. 13
ere ye stumble at that foul black hillock? Oh, imitate not those foolish
virgins, Mat. 25
who because they gave not good attendaunce, were shut out of doors by the
bridegroom. We see by common experience, that if a man deliver a reasonable
petition unto an earthly King, he may perhaps attend a year or two, before he
be fully satisfied. What then shall ye expect of the heavenly King, whom ye
have a thousand times most wilfully displeased? Is it possible for you, after
you have obstinatly resisted him all the days of your lives, to sue unto him
at the period of your years, and to obtain remission? No, no, it is not
presumptuous delay, that works unfeigned repentance. You must begin Psa.
95. and Heb. 3
to day, if you will hear his voice, and speed of your suites. God will not be
limited and restrained according to your wills. Eccle. 5.
His wrath will come upon you at the sudden, and Psa. 48
you shall be thrust into hell like sheep. Like as the Poets say of Titius, so
shall you, being as it were food unto death, confume in hell, and yet revive
again, so that still ye may be ever dying. Then shall ye cry unto the
mountains, and say, Luke 23. and Apoc. 6.
O you mountains fall upon us, and you hills cover us. Then shall you repent
to your pain, but your repentance shall not at all avail you. If an
husbandman for laziness defer to sow in the winter, he is like in summer to
starve or beg. Sow therefore, O ye that are Christians, while you have time
to sow, Joel. 2.
even this day convert unto the Lord, and ye shall reap perpetual happiness
for your reward. Repentance that is done at the last day, most commonly is
done upon fear of future torments. Besides, Iere. 13.
the Ethiopian can as soon change his black skin, as you do well, having
learned all the days of your lives to do evil.

My self have known a young Gentleman, that sometime having been disobedient
to his parents, and also misdemeaned himself diverse other ways besides, was
urged to repentance by some of his well willers. To whom he answered: that
now this was his full intent, and by the grace of God (quoth he) as soon as I
come home to my Father (he being as then about forty miles off) I will utterly
renounce my former manner of living, and will become a new man. But see the
inevitable will of God. He was scarce seven miles on his way homeward, when as
it was his woeful chance to encounter with some of his enemies, and by them to
be slain.

For which cause, I say, cut off all delays, least in a matter of such
importance, ye be suddenly surprised. Ye have not two souls, that ye may
adventure one* Romans 13.
The night is past, and the day is come; the day of the Lord is come, Apoc. 22
as a snare on all them, that dwell upon the face of the earth, in which 2. Pet.
3
the heavens must pass away with a noise and the elements must melt with heat,
and the earth with the works therein must be burnt up. 1. Pet. 4
Be ye therefore sober and watchful in prayer: for Mat. 24
in the hour that ye think not, will the Son of Man surely come to judge the
world.

Remedies against vice. Chap. 11.
THe root of vice is the original corruption, wherewith mankind has been
overwhelmed ever since the fall of Adam. Which corruption in process of time
being grown by continual custom into a sinful habit, becomes damnable
three manner of ways. First, by thoughts; next by words, as, swearing, lies;
lastly, by deeds, as murder, adultery.

Now for the curing of this Hydralike malady, six things are to be observed.
First, we must often consider, that the acts of virtues themselves cannot be of
any value with God, except we continually exercise our selves therein. For the
longer we delay, Resol. li. 1. part. 2 cap. 5.
the more is the kingdom and power of the Devil established and confirmed in
us. Secondly, we must once or twice a day at least call to remembrance our
vices, and with a contrite heart ask God forgiveness. Thirdly, we must weigh
with our selves, how that we are wandering pilgrims in this world, and like
unto them, that upon their iourneys abide not in those Innes, where they are
well lodged, but after their bait do depart homeward, uttering these words of
the Prophet: * Woe is me, Ps. 120.
that I remain in Mesech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar. The fourth remedy
against vice is, that we think on the manifold miseries of this life, and on
the end thereof. The fifth, we must oftentimes repeat that fearful saying of
the Apostle: * If the just shall scarce be saved, 1. Pet. 4.
where shall the wicked man and sinner appear? The sixth, we must muse upon the
day of judgment, at which time Gal. 6.
every one must bear his own burden, and sinners must 1. Pet. 4.
give an account of every idle word. Resolut. li. 1. part. 1. cap. 5. ex
A^selmo.
about them shall be their Judge offended with them for their wickedness:
beneath them hell open: and the cruel furnace ready boiling to receive them:
on the right hand shall be their sins accusing the^: on the left hand the
Devils ready to execute Gods eternal sentence upon them: within them their
consciences gnawing them: without them all damned souls bewayling: on every
side the world burning.

Of Justice. Chap. 12.
Justice is a thing belonging to policy, Arist. li. 1. Polit. cap. 2.
since the order of a civil society is the law, and judgment is nothing else,
but the decision of that, which is just. This virtue, as the Divine Philosopher
writes, Plato li. 4. de Republ.
is the chiefest gift, which God gave unto men. For if she were not amongst us,
what would our commonwealth be, but a receptacle for thieves? From whence Plin.
lib. 2. nature. histor.
the sect of Democritus concluded, that there were 2. things, which rule ye
whole world, namely, Reward and Punishment.

Some say, that Justice is more resple^dent then the Sun, for he lighteneth
the world only by day, whereas she shines both night and day: the sun
illuminateth the eyes of the body, Justice the eyes of the mind: the Sun
molesteth us by his continual presence, but of Justice we shall never be weary,
whereupon othersome affirm, that Piccolomi. grad. 5. de virtut. moral. ex
Nigidio. Figulo.
she is placed in the Zodiake between the signs of Leo and Libra, whereby
her equality and courage are understood. To come nearer our own time, let us
commune with our selves, and forethinke, what should become of us, if there
were no gallows for murderers and heinous offenders, no whips for rogues, nor
fines and amercements for affraies and such like crimes. Surely, we should not
live together. The wild Karnes and Red-shanks of Ireland would not be more
savage the^ us.

Wherefore, O ye, which are seated in the throne of Justice, respect not your
own private commodities: 2. Chron. 19.
for you execute not the judgments of man; but of God, and he will be with you
in the cause and judgment. Lay before your eyes the example of that zealous
Judge, who feared not to commit the Prince of Wales (afterward king H. the
fifth) for his assault into the prison of the Kings be^ch. For which act of
Justice, that noble Prince, when he came to the crown, yielded him great
thanks, and during his wars in France, left the said Judge his substitute
over this whole Realm. To be brief, wash your hands clean from bribes, and
administer justice unto all men without any kind of affection, vaine-pitie, or
favor, lest that, they prying into your lives, in stead of honor, you be
bra^ded in the forehead with the perpetual note of infamy.

Of Injustice. Chap. 13.
Injustice is a kind of injury, used by such as be in authority, over the
weaker sort, Aristot. lib. 5. Ethic. ca. 1
who also assume unto themselves, more then law or right permits them. This
vice of all others is most repugnant to man's nature, because that Plato in
Gorgia.
a man, as long as he benefiteth, and executes justice, is like unto God, but
practizing injustice, he separateth himself far enough from God. Woe
therefore be unto you, landlords, who forgetting your selves, and your duty
toward God, do flay and vex your tenants and inferiors with extraordinary
imposts, with asking of beneuolences, letherwits, and such like. Woe be unto
you, heirs and elder brethren, who make dish-cloutes and no reckoning of your
younger brethren, but suffer them to be idle and forlorn, which destroys
them both body and soul: woe, I say, be unto you, that extort, and Ezec. 22.
like ravening woolues do rob and take prays to shed blood, and to destroy
souls for your own covetous gain, so that you are Iuuenal. satyr. 10
not content to be infected with one heinous offense, but moreover you raise up
sundry mischiefs, and molest your already distressed brethren with many and
iniust taxations. For the which, God will proceed in judgment against you,
Ezech. 22.
he will power out his indignation upon you, and consume you with the fire of
his wrath: your own ways will he render upon your heads. Then in conclusion
shall you perceive, how that Seneca Epist. 98
no wickedness escapes scotfree, by reason that the punishment of one
consists in another.

Whether it be lawful for a man to kill himself. Chap. 14.
NOthing is more damnable, nothing more ungodly, then for a man to slay
himself. For if an homicide be damned for killing another: so in like manner
he that kills himself is guilty of murder, because he kills a member of
the commonwealth. Yea, this is a greater sin. For we live here in this world
altogether according to Gods prescriptio^. Genesis 1.
We are created of God after his own image: and shall we endamaging our
selves, wrong our Creator? No, if we do, our own consciences will accuse us as
murderers and traitors before the tribunal seat of GOD. It is reason that
he, which sent us into the world for the setting forth of his glory, should
call us out of the world to yield an account of our bayliwike, Sydn. li. 4
Arcad.
he has appointed us Captains of our bodily fortes, which without treason to
that majesty are never to be delivered over, till they be redemau^ded. Besides,
despair cannot bear the title of valor, by reason it proceeds of an abject
and weak mind. Now therefore if we be valiant, let us make our valor manifest
unto Gods and our countries enemies, that if we die in such attempts, the
Almighty may canonize us holy martyrs, and crown us with eternal glory in
his blessed kingdom.

Objection.
Nature granted no longer unto Cato a patent of his life, for Pompey and his
Accomplices were overthrown, and if he himself had been taken captive by Caesar,
he had lost his honor and life: therefore it was lawful for him to effect
that, which, if he had not, another would.

Answer.
Nature gave Cato a life not voluntarily to lose, but to sustain and nourish.
Besides, nature and violence are opposite. Cas. lib. 3 specul. moral. cap. 7.
In brief, it had been better for him to have been tormented in Phalaris
brazen bull, then desperately to kill himself.

That we should not patiently endure all injuries. Chap. 15.
MAny, as the Anabaptists, doubt, whether it be lawful or no for one
Christian to sue or strike another, grou^ding their opinion upon Matthew. cap. 6.
Epistol. ad Romans cap. 12. and Epistol. ad Cor. ca. 6
the authority of the Scripture. Yet, this schismatic doubt in my judgment
might quickly be blotted out, if they knew what injury meant, for a man may
have injury offered either to his person, to his goods, or to his credit. Now
concerning our person and goods, it is certain, that virtue permits us to
repel violence with violence, or else embracing patience, to remitte all to the
Magistrates, in whose hands the sword of Justice remains. As for the
reprehension of the Corinthians, I answer, that they were rebuked for going to
law under those magistrates, which were not Christians, and * in that they
brought the Gospel in slander among the unbelievers. Calvin. li. 4. Instit.
cap. 20.
In like sort I think it meeter for us Protestants to endure all injuries
whatsoever, then to commence suites one against another under any Popish or
heretical Judge. But on the contrary, if the Magistrate be of our religion,
what other order by the law of GOD and man is prescribed, then to sue unto
him, and to crave satisfaction for the injury which is done unto us? Cic. act.
5. in Verrem.
Every reproach has a certain sting, which wise and good men can hardly
tolerate. Moreover, it is holden for a principle, that Arist. li. 2. Rheto.
no man is vilified and despised in his own conceit. And therefore he cannot
choose, but for reasonable causes go to law, and so have the pleas handled,
that he may live afterward in more security: for experience shows unto us,
how that those iniuried persons, which most are silent, as confessing
themselves overcome by their stronger, do abide continual molestations, and
live in intolerable thraldom.

Touching the last way, whereby injury is offered unto our credit, my sentence
is, that it can never be impaired in an honest man, by reason that virtue,
which shines with undefiled honors, will ever patronize and protect it. What
avails it then, that a man go to law for such a trifle, and have his
adversary punished, namely, L. lex Cornel. 10. ff. de iniur.
noted with infamy? Believe me, it is better for you, O contentious witals, to
end such cauillations of your wronged credit at home, then to travel to
London, and there to feed the ravening Lawyers with the sweat of your brows.
Pursue not therefore one another with unappeasable stiffness, but rather end
your doubts at home under an indifferent arbitratour without rancour or malice.

The fourth part.
Of Truth. Chap. 16.
Truth is that infallible virtue, which reuealeth the creation of the world,
the power of God, his blessing for the godly, and vengeance for the wicked.
This is she, which rightly may be termed the ce^ter, wherein all things repose
themselves, the map, whereby we sail, and the balm whereby we are healed.
This is she, Ovid. Epist. 19.
whom God respects more then all sacrifices. To be short, this is she, which
Cicero orat. in Vatin.
has so great power, that no engine, wit, or art can subdue: and although she
has no attorney to defend her cause, yet notwithstanding she is defended by
her self. According to our belief in God, Truth is named faith: in agreements
between man and man. Truth is called promise: of servants toward their
masters she is termed loyalty. But in what estimation she is in these accursed
times, I tremble to speak thereof. For many there be, that outface and deny
their own superscriptions: and unless an honest man bring with him multitude
of witnesses to testify the truth, he is like to be defrauded of his due. O
how far do we degenerate from the ancients! They were wont in times past to
lend money upon a man's naked and bare promise, and likewise to pass their
conueyances and state of lands in few lines: whereas now on the contrary a
dozen skins of parchment will scant serve their turn; for what do they else but
hammer quirckes and crochets, and invent twenty apish tricks to circumuent one
another? Promooting petifoggers are the mouers of all these fallacies. They are
the caterpillars, which exclude truth, and would make her a wandering
vagabound. Beware of them, O ye which are honestly bent. Through their
illusions Silius Ital. li. 2.
break not the league of amity, neither prefer ye kingdoms before truth.
Take away this virtue, and our commonwealth is become a piracy. The loss of
wealth is nothing to the loss of truth. For which cause, the Philosopher
doubted not to affirm, that Aristot. lib. 1. Ethic. ca. 6.
wise me^ ought to contradict themselves for verities sake, yea, and to engage
their credit for her conservation. Think upon this, O Lawyers, and consider
with your selves, how Eurip. in Phoen.
the speech of Truth is simple, and needs not sundry explications and
cauillations.

Of Lies. Chap. 17.
OF lies there be three sorts: The first I call an officious lie, which is
used, when otherwise an heinous offense cannot be eschued, as we read in the
book of Kings, 1. Sam. 9
where * Michol Saul's daughter saved her husband David by the same means. The
second kind of lies is named jesting, which men use at table, not of any
premeditatio^ or malice, but rather for to delight the company. Howbeit among
Christians it is not much laudable. The third kind of lies is named hurtful or
odious, which extends to the harming of one or other. This sort of lying is
most detestable in the sight of God and man.

Furthermore, a lie is a base vice, and worthy to be cont^ned of all mortal
men, and especially of those, that are wise, for Arist. li. 1. Sophis.
elenchor. cap. 1.
the duties of a wise man are two, whereof the one is not to lie in any thing,
which he knows: the other, to make a lier manifest to the face of the world.
And even as we debar wise men: so we most of all dissuade youths from lying;
for if they be suffered and borne withal to coin lies, they will at last become
altogether past grace, and by use will be inueterated in falsehood, Wherefore they
must be quickly restrained, and severely chastised, when they lie. Hereupon
some hold, Cic. li. 3. offic. and Greg. lib. 8. Moral.
that * those youths are as it were naturally evil, which take a delight in
telling of lies. Othersome say, that Homer. lib. 9. Odyss.
they differ not from deadly enemies. But howsoever, in my judgment, they
ought to be speedily looked unto, and then the rather, Plautus in Mercat^r.
when they begin once to tell lies to their own parents, which is a most
intolerable fact.

Of Swearing. Chap. 18.
WE must not swear at all, Maetth. cap. 5. and Extra. de iureiurand. c. 26.
neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God: nor yet by the earth, for it
is his footstool: Neither must we swear by our heads, because we cannot
make one hair white or black. But our communication must be yea, yea, and
nay, nay, and whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. Howbeit
notwithstanding, there be very few here in England, that are not in a manner
fully resolved to regard swearing as a virtue. He is a Gull or a Puritan,
quoth they, that will not swear: nay, rather they should say, he is a member
of the devil that delights in swearing. Augustine. lib. contra. mendac.
Hearken what an holy father says: Swear not at al, lest that by swearing you
come to the facility of swearing, from thence to custom, and from custom you
fall into perjury. Neither can your feeble excuses suffice, in saying that you
swear not, by God, by Gods blood, by Gods wounds, but rather you swear by
Gog, by Gogs bud, by Gogs zwoonce. O foolish hypocrites! do you think
although you delude us, that you can dally with him, who notes and hears
every word which you speak? no, no: it will not go for payment at the
fearful day of judgment. In swearing thus, you heap hot coals of fire upon
your heads, and offend as bad, by attributing that honor unto counterfeit
creatures, which is due unto the creator, who only is to be named, and that
after a good sort, in all your words and deeds. Take heed least that God
execute upon you such a fearful judgment, as he of late days executed on a
young man in Lincolneshire. This young man, as is by master Perkins, master
Stubs, and others credibly reported, was an abominable swearer, and his usual
oath was, By Gods blood. God willing his repentance, corrected him often times
with sickness, that he might be converted. But he utterly rejected all
corrections. Then God seeing that nothing could reclaim him from swearing,
inflicted on him a most grievous disease, of which he languished a long time.
At last his friends perceiving him to be near his death, caused his passing
bell to be rung. Whereupon this swearer hearing the bell toll, rose up in his
bed, saying, Gods blood, he shall not have me yet. But lo, the just judgment
of the Lord. At those words the blood gushed out at every joint of his body,
and never ceased, til all the blood in his body was run out, and thus died this
bloody swearer, whose example, I pray God, may sink into ye hearts of our
swaggering Caualeers, who at each other word use to lash out most detestable
oaths.

Now to conclude this chapter, August. in tract. de decollat. Ioha^. Bap.
whosoever provoke any man to swear a grievous oath, and knows that he
swears falsely, is worse then a murderer, because that a murderer kills
but the body, whereas he kills the soul, yea, and which is more, he kills
two souls, namely, his whom he provoked to swear, and his own soul.

Objection.
It is good to have the name of God in our mouths, therefore it is lawful to
swear.

Answer.
Swearing is tvvofold Godly, when we be called by the officers of necessity to
depose the truth in any doubtful or litigious matter, Epist. ad Hebr. ca. 6.
and l. 3. C. de rebus credit. Extra. de probati. c. 2.
or else in a private case, between party and party, to end strife and
debate: and this is tolerable, when all other lawful proofs are known to be
wanting. Ungodly, when we swear upon every light occasion, and in our daily
talk, and this is reproved.


Of perjury or forswearing. Chap. 19.
AN oath has three associats, to wit, truth, judgment, and justice: whereof
if any be found lacking, it is no longer to be termed an oath, but rather
perjury, which undoubtedly is a most abominable sin: for thereby we have no
respect either unto his presence, who is every where, or reverence unto his
commandment, which expressly insinuates, Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 5.
that * we take not his name in vain, for he will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his name in vain, and so trecherously abuses his sacred majesty.

The heathen themselves detested this vice, and thereupon In Iliad fera per tot.
Homer reprehended the Trojans for their periure. Diodor. sic. lib. 2.
The Egyptians punished periurers by death. Yea, many hold it for a maxim,
that oaths are to be observed sacredly toward our foes, and that not without
good reason, seeing Ex leg. 12. tabu.
perjury by the will of God is destruction, and by man's own confession,
infamy; Nouel. 82. c. 11 1. l. 2 C. de rebus cred. and iureiur. l. si duo fin.
ff. de condit. institut. vbi and poena^ politica^ ponit Vlpianus and Cuiacius
8. obseru.
which is likewise soundly confirmed by our civil Lawyers.

Sundry examples I might allege to this purpose, but for brevity sake I will
at this time content my self with one only. In the year of our Lord 1576.
Anne Aueries widow, forswearing her self for a little money, that should have
been paid for six pound of tow, at a shop in Woodstreete of London, fell
immediately down speechless, casting up at her mouth the same matter, which by
course of nature should have been avoided downwards, till she died. Thus did
God reward perjury.

In conclusion, Isidor.
He that forsweareth himself, Isidor. lib. 3. de summo bone.
is subject unto two persons: first unto the Judge, whom he deceives by his
lying, and then unto the innocent party, whom he endangereth by his perjury.
Those which would know more of this vice, I refer to the reading of my
Commentaries, In satyr. 5. Persii.
where I have already sifted it.

Of Cursers and Blasphemers. Chap. 20.
Leuit. 24.
Whosoever curses his God, shall bear the pain of his own sin, and the
blasphemer of the Lords name shall die the death. The whole congregation of
the people shall stone him, whether he be a citizen or a stranger. This bitter
co^minatio^ the Lord raineth down upon such as curse and blaspheme. Who then
will presume to contradict and dispute against it? If a subject blaspheme or
speak evil of his prince, presently he is had by the back, and condemned to
die? What then shall be done with him, that banneth and teareth in pieces the
name of God, who is the King of Kings? Is he not worthy of greater punishment,
namely, to suffer both in body and soul? Cano^. 10 cause. 24. q. 3. ex Hiero^.
in Epist. ad Tit.
Michael the Archangell durst not curse the devil, albeit he was worthy of all the curses in the world how therefore is it lawful for us to curse? The Turks
at this day dare not transgress herein, for fear of Gods punishment. Many of
ye papists account it an intolerable sin to blaspheme. O what a condemnation
will this be unto us? I fear me, that many of them having as it were but a
glimpse of the Gospel of Christ, will go before us Protestants into the
everlasting Paradise. We know in our consciences, that cursers and blasphemers
are heinous offenders in the sight of God. Howbe it nevertheless, we live
careless and obstinate, as being either dazeled like unto owls at the
eminent light of the Gospel, or else bewitched and charmed by the empoysoned
guiles of this world, and the Prince of this world. Our usual speeches in our
anger are these: The Devil take him, Vengeance light upon him, A pox on thee,
A plague on thee. Al which horrible curses have already fallen on some of our
pates, and that within these 7. years. The plague first ouerspread it self
through London the Metropolitan City of this Realm, and from thence it crept
into every shire in particular. The pox likewise has not been absent, which
many parents to their great grief can testify. As for the other two, the
devil and vengeance, the gallows being burdened with traitors, murderers,
and felons, may give sufficient evidence against us.

Now concerning blasphemy, the followers thereof have not altogether escaped
scotfree, as appeared by Duke Ioyeus, who about eight year since, felt the
smart of his impious deserts. This Duke, one of the cheifest of the leaguers in
France, being overcome by the French Kings forces that now reigns, and
despairing of any good success, vomited forth these words: Farewell my great
Cannons: I renounce God, and will run this day a high fortune. With that he
galloped amain, and plunged himself, horse and all into the river Tar, where
presently he was swallowed up. Thus did God work the end of this blasphemous
Duke. And I pray God they may so still be rewarded that blaspheme him, which
causes the foundations of the earth to tremble, in any Realm or nation in the
world whatsoever. What shall I write of the Franciscan Friars, who
blasphemously compare their Friar Frauncis unto Christ, saying, that Christ did
not any thing, but Frauncis did the same? yea; Francis did more then Christ,
for his nails drove away temptations. O childish comparison! Of this
blasphemous route is Bellarmine, that Archpapist, as by these his words it
appears. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Mona. cap. 13. Leuit. 24. and. vlt. in Nou. 77.
Clarus.. blasphema, lib. 5. Jason. l. 3.. iurare. number. 11. de iniur. and Zasius
Consil. 19 number. 37. lib. 1.
If we, quoth he, cannot by any means keep the law of God, then God is more
unjust, and more cruel then any tyrant. The punishment of cursers and
blasphemers were diverse. Sometimes they were punished by death. Sometimes *
their tongues were cut or bored through. And at other times their punishments
were arbittarie according to the number of their offenses. Likewise king Jews
of France hearing the Lord of lenuile, one of his Barons, blaspheme God, caused
him to be apprehended, and his lips to be slit with an hot iron. For which
notable act of justice, he afterward deserved the name of a Saint.

Let us therefore consider of these both ordinary, and extraordinary
punishments, and employ our whole studies to admonish those miscreants, who do
nothing else but ban and blaspheme God, yea, and otherwhiles their own selves.

Of Deceit. Chap. 21.
SVch is the corrupt nature of this age, that men convert that into deceit,
which God gave them for good reason, whereby it falls out, that Terent. in
Andr.
one deceit brings in another, and consequently, cosenages are heaped upon
cosenages. Herehence it comes to pass, that so many in these days are
conicatched. For how can it otherwise be, as long as they listen unto
flatterers, and despise wise men, when they tell them of their follies?

Wherefore beware of smoothing dissemblers, O ye that are gently disposed, and
suffer your selves to be lift out of the gulf of ignorance, and to be
powdered with truth, which erst like sots ye have abandoned. Ari. lib. 4.
Metaphysic.
None ever have been deceived, but in that whereof they are ignorant, or else
in that which is obscure. And if they be deceived, Demost. 1. Olynth
it is prodigious, if they be deceived of good men. Finally, An. lib 2. Elench
sophistic.
they that perceive not deceits, shall oftentimes be deceived of themselves.

Whether a man be bound to perform that, which he has sworn to his enemy,
either willingly, or by constraint. Chap. 22.
SO excellent a thing is the name of faith, that the use thereof has not only
purchased credit among friends, but also renown amongst enemies, which
foundation being laid, I constantly auerre, if a man has sworn unto his
enemy, that he is perjured, if he perform not his oath. Now Hotoma^. lib.
illustr. quaestion. cap. 17.
under the name of Enemy, I comprehend six sorts of people. First, there be
foreign enemies, such as the Spaniards be unto us at this instant, who by an
universal consent, do wage war against us, and these are properly to be
termed enemies. Secondly, Rebels, of which number we account the Earl of
Tyrone, and the wild Irish, who have traitorously revolted from her Majesty's
jurisdiction, are to be called enemies. Thirdly, we name Pirates, rouers and
thieves. Fourthly, we name adversaries, amongst who^ civil discords happens,
enemies. Fifthly, banished persons, outlawes, and condemned men, have the title
of enemies. In which rank, I place Robin Hood, little John, and their outlawde
train, who spoylde the kings subjects. Lastly, Fugitives, and runnagate
servants, making war with their masters, deserve the name of enemies. In the
beadroll of these enemies, flatterers, conicatchers, slanderers, and
Promooters, disturbers of the public rest may be added.

Now to the question, whether we ought to keep touch with all these sorts of
enemies? It seems unfeignedly, that we should, as shall more manifestly
appear by these reasons. Leuit. 19
First, * oaths by the testimonies of the scriptures, Deuteronomy. 5.
are to be observed. Joshua. 9.
Secondly, * evil is not to be committed, 2. Sa^. 21
that goodness may ensue. Perjury is evil, Matthew. 5.
therefore not to be committed, Romans 3.
that goodness may ensue: no, not although a man should lose his life for it.
Thirdly, of two evils, the least is to be chosen: but perjury is a greater
evil then loss of goods and lands, yea, and which is more, it is greater then
loss of life: therefore it is better to lose life and living, then to burden
our consciences with the abominable sin of perjury. Ambros. lib. 1. Offic.
c. 29.
Fourthly, there cannot be honesty nor quietness amongst us, if we break our
oaths. Sixthly, it is no point of lively magnanimity to engage our faith,
unless we were willing to perform it: for Psalm. 15.
who shall dwell in Gods tabernacle? who shall rest upon his holy hill? even he
that sets not by himself. It is rather the property of folly, for that a
fool will swear any thing for his own safeguard: whereas a man of discretion
will consider well, and weigh his speech as it were by the ounce, before he
pawn it. Seventhly, whatsoever a man swears, and may perform with the favor
of God, and without sin, that same, albeit compelled, is to be observed, for
the name of God is of greater estimation, then al te^porall commodities: such
is the promise which a man swears unto thieves, because now and then for our
amendment GOD permits temptations: therefore a man having sworn unto
thieves or pirates by compulsion, may not profane his oath. Likewise
Machiauell is worthy of many stripes, who counseled his Prince to put on the
foxes skin, when his other shifts did fail, and to follow that young man's
example, who said: Hippo^^^us apud ^uripidem.
I swore an oath by tongue, but I bear a mind unsworn.

Objection.
An Obligation whereby a man is bound, may be made void by the authority of
a Magistrate. Also it is a rule in law: A compelled oath is no oath: therefore
a man compelled to swear, may choose whether he will keep his oath or no.

Answer.
There be two sorts of obligations. The first, whereby a man is bound by
writing unto another man, and this kind of obligation may be made frustrate
by the Judges. The second, whereby a man is bound either unto his friends or
enemies, and this only belongs to GOD, who by them is called to record.
Moreover, although this obligation by oath may be made void by the public
law, yet notwithstanding, it remains steadfast in the private law of a man's
conscience.


Of Heretics and Schismatiques. Chap. 23.
THey are to be accounted heretics, which contumatiously defend erroneous
opinions in the church of Christ, and will not by any exhortations be
converted to the truth. Such were the Arrians, that held three degrees in the
Trinity. Such were the Menandrians, Manichaeans, Carpocratians, Cerinthians,
Valentinians, Somosatenians, Nouatians, Ebionites, Noetians, Macedonians,
Douatists, Tertullianists, Pelagians, Nestorians, Novel. 109 praefation..
Haereticos Wese^bec. in C. de Haeretic. and Clarus lib. 5.. haeres. number. 13 and
14.
and others, ^ which by Justinian the Emperor were afterward condemned, their
goods confiscated, and themselves either banished or put to death.

Innumerable examples concerning heretics are extant: but I will content my
self at this time with the rehearsal only of two of the^, the memory whereof,
is as yet rife amongst many of us. In the year of our Lord 1561. and the
third year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in London one William
Ieffery, that impudently affirmed John Moore a companion of his, to be Jesus
Christ, and would not revoke his foolish belief, until he was whipped from
Southwarke to Bedlem, where the said Moore meeting with him, was whipped
likewise, until they both confessed that Christ was in heaven, and themselves
but sinful and wicked heretics. In like manner, about ten years ago, I my
self being then a scholar at Westminster, Henry Arthingto^, and Edmond
Coppinger, two gentlemen, bewitched by one William Hackets dissimulations,
concluded him to be the Messiah, and thereupon ran into Cheapside,
proclaiming the said Hacket to be Christ. For which heretical or rather
Devilish device they were apprehended and imprisoned: and in the end Hacket was
hanged on a gallows placed up in Cheapside; Arthington was kept in prison upon
hope of repentance; and Coppinger died for sorrow the next day in Bridewell.

Thus we see that truth, although for a time it be darkened by a cloud, yet at
last it preuailes and gettes the victory: and the Heretics themselves are by
Gods special judgments confounded, and their courageous opinions in a moment
abated. Neither will it be long, ere that the Romish Bishop, the son of
Belial shall see Psalm. 2.
his power bruised with a rod of iron, and broken in pieces like a potters
vessel: yea, himself 2. These. 2.
shall be consumed with the spirit of Gods mouth, and be abolished with the
brightness of his coming.

Of Jesuits. Chap. 24.
Ignatius a maimed soldier, not for any feruency or zeal, that he bare unto a
new austerity of life, but feeling himself weak any longer to souldierize and
follow the wars, communicated with diverse persons, and among the rest with
one Pasquier Brouet, a man altogether unlettered and ignorant of Divinity.
These two together with their enchaunted co^plices, to apply their title unto
their zeal, named themselves devout persons of the society of Jesus. And
thereupon presented themselves unto Pope Paul the 3. about the year of our Lord
1540. This Pope permitted them to be called Jesuits, but with this
cou^termaund, that they should not surpass the number of threescore persons.
Thus for a time they satisfied themselves. But within a while after, they
obtained greater privileges of Pope Paul the fourth: which made their
troublesome order like ill weeds to multiply a-pace, and attempt many horrible
things: yea, even most wicked treason against the lives of high potentates and
Princes, as against our sovereign Queen, against the French king, and diverse
others. In Portingal and India they termed themselves Apostles; but in the
year 1562. sundry of them were drowned by the just judgment of GOD. Who is so
simple, but he understands, that they in naming themselves Jesuits do go
about to degrade the ancient Christians, and blaspheme against GOD? rather
they should call themselves Ignatians, and not bring in newfound orders. This
the Sorbonistes of Paris knew very well, when they doubted not about six years
ago to exhibit a bill in the Parliament against them. What shall I write, how
they give themselves altogether to be Machiauellians, and ungodly Politicians,
how they hoord up wealth, how they possess Earledoms and Lordships in Italy
and Spain? and yet for all this, they presume to entitle themselves of the
society of Jesus. O wretched caitifes! O hellish heretiques^ the time will
come, when this outrageous profession of yours shall be extinguished by the
Sunshine of the true and Apostolical doctrine, as the Sorcerers rod was
eaten up by Aarons rod in the presence of Pharao.

The fifth part.
Of Magnanimity. Chap. 25.
MAgnanimity is a virtue, Arist. lib. 4. Ethic. cap. 3.
that consists in atchieuing of great exploits: and is touched chiefly upon
eight occasions. First, a magnanimous man is he, that will never be induced to
enterprise any dishonest point against any man, no not against his utter enemy.
Secondly, he will choose the mean rather then the extreme. Thirdly, he will
tell his mind plainly without dissimulation. Fourthly, he will not respect
what the common people speak of him, nor will he measure his actions
according to their applauses. Fifthly, a magnanimous man, Osorius li. 3.
Christian. nobilit.
though he should see all the world eagerly bent to fight, and though he
should see every thing round about him set on fire, and almost consumed, yet he
notwithstanding through an assured confidence will remain constant. Sixthly, a
magnanimous man will withdraw his mind from worldly affairs, and lift it up to
the contemplation of great matters, Psalm. 1.
and in Gods law will he exercise himself day and night. Seventhly, a
magnanimous man will scorn vices, and forget injuries. Eighthly, he will speak
nothing but wise and premeditated words, according to that old saying: A
barking dog will never prove good biter, and the deepest rivers run with least
noise.

The ancient Christians of the primitive Church were right examples of this
virtue Magnanimity, as they, who had all the properties thereof imprinted in
the^. They, I say, who cheerfully gave themselves to be massacred and
tormented. Like unto these were our late English martyrs in Queen Mary's
days, who gladly in defense of the true religion yielded themselves to fire
and faggot. For the undoubted belief of triumph in heaven both diminished and
took away the corporal grief, and replenished the mind with cheerfulness
and joy. They knew man's life to be but a bubble on the face of the earth. They
considered with themselves our miserable estate; for as soon as we are borne,
we seem to flourish for a small moment, but straightway we die, and there is
little memorial left behind. They knew Magnanimity to be the ornament of all the
virtues. Briefly, they persuaded themselves to see their savior Christ in
heaven, and evermore to dwell with him. These, these be the duties of
magnanimous men, which whosoever do covet to embrace, shall at last attain to
everlasting happiness.

Objection.
All scornful men are wicked: Arist. lib. 4. Ethic. ca. 3.
magnanimous men are scornful: therefore they are wicked.

Answer.
There be two sorts of scornful men, That scorn men's persons, and they are
wicked. That scorn vices, and they are good: after which manner magnanimous or
greatminded men do scorn insolent men and dastardes by reason of their pride
and cowardice.


Of Ambition. Chap. 26.
IN ambition there be five mischiefs. The first is, that causes a man neither
to abide a superior nor an equal. The second, an ambitious man by attributing
honor unto himself, goes about to defraud God of his due. The 3. plague in
ambition is, that it considers not what has chanced to such, as exercised
it. Bembus li. 2. Venet. hist.
Lodowicke Sforcia uncle to John Galeaze Duke of Millan whom he poisoned, was
one of the most ambitious men in the world; but yet for all his Italian tricks
Gnicciardin. li. 4. Histor.
he was at last in the year 1510. taken captive by the French King, and put in
prison, where he continued till he died. Cardinal Wolsey likewise here in
England may serve for a pattern of ambition, who being preferred by King Henry
the eight her majesty's Father, would notwithstanding have exalted himself
above the King, for which his intolerable ambition his goods were co^fiscated,
and himself apprehended. The fourth mischief in ambition is, that he hunteth
after false and deceitful glory, and Persius Satyr. 1.
thinks it a fair thing to be pointed at with the finger, and to be talked
of: This is he. The fifth, an ambitious man waigheth not his own frayelty and
weakness.

Remedies against ambition. Chap. 27.
THe forward horse is not holden back without foaming and showing his fury. The
stream that runs, is not stayed contrary to the course thereof without
making a noise: and the ambitious man is not reclaimed from his aspiring
thoughts without good and wholesome admonitions; I will nevertheless, as well
as I can, endeavor to cure him of his cankered malady.

First, let the ambitious man consider whereof he is made, namely, of dust and
ashes. Secondly, he must diligently go to hear Sermons, and read the holy
Bible. Thirdly, he must think upon the wavering actions of fortune, how she
takes from one that, which she tra^sferreth on another, and how she respects
not the equity of causes, nor y^ merits of persons, but makes her fancy the
measure of her affections. Fourthly, let the ambitious have a regard whether
he be commended of wise men or of flatt^rers. Fifthly, let him compare his own
deeds with those of the holy men's in times past. Sixthly, he must not enquire
what the common people say of him. Seventhly, let him take heed by other men's
harms, and muse upon the case of those men, who desiring to eat some fruit,
regarded not the height of the tree, whereon they grew, but labored to climb
up to the top, and so fell down headlong by reason of the weakness of the
boughs.

Of Fortitude. Chap. 28.
THe means to discern a valiant man be eight. The first, if he be not
astonished in adversity, nor proud in prosperity, but leading both the one and
the other within the square of Mediocrity. Secondly, he is a valiant man, that
is mild and courteous of nature. Thirdly, if Eurip. in Rhes.
he scorns privily to overcome his adversary. Fourthly, if he contemn to
fight in a bad quarrel, for Ambr. li. 1. Offi.
fortitude without equity is the fuel of iniquity. Fifthly, if he Virg. li.
6. Aeneid.
give not place to miseries, but goes the more courageously against them.
Sixthly, he is a valiant man, that sorroweth to die an inglorious death.
Seventhly, that fears shame. As Aristot. lib. 3. Ethic. ca. 8
Hector did, when his friends counseled him not to go out of the city.
Eighthly, he is a valiant man, that will fight stoutly in his Countries
defense, and not fear to die. Such a one was Captain Homer. lib. 22. Iliad.
Diagio of Millan, Machiauel. li. 4 Histor. Florent.
who in the year of our Lord 1400. being environed with fire and enemies, not
finding any means to defend his charge, or escape honestly with life, threw
over the wall of the place, where he was enclosed, and where no fire as yet
burned, certain clothes and straw, and upon the same his two children, and
said to his enemies, Take you here those goods which Fortune gave me, but my
goods of mind wherein my glory consists neither will I give them, nor can you
take them from me. The enemies saved the poor children, and offered him
ladders to conueigh himself down safe. But he refusing all succors, chose
rather to die in the fire, then receive life from the enemies of his country.
What shall I speak of sir Philip Sydney, sir Richard Greeneuil, and sundry
others of our own countrymen, who of late years not unlike to those of
ancient times so highly commended, willingly and valiauntly lost their lives,
rather then they would trust to the mercy of the Spaniards? Plutarch. in vita
Cleomen.
In brief, * commonly they, that are most affrayd to offend the law, are in
the field most stout against their enemies, and will shun no peril to win
fame and honest reputation.

Of Foole-hardinesse. Chapt. 29.
FOole-hardinesse is the excess of fortitude, used for the most part of
Caualeers and tosse-pots. For seldom is it seen, that they at any time have
fought in just causes, or have observed the circumstances belonging to true
Fortitude.

Their properties rather are to flaunt like Peacockes, to play the
Braggadochians, and to trust most impudently in the hugeness of their lims,
and in their drunken gates. Such are many of our young Gentlemen, who by their
wise parents are sent so timely to learn wise fashio^s at London. Such are
they, I say, who carry beehiues and commonwealths in their pates, who iet now
and then in the streets with bushes of feathers on their Cockescombed sconces,
and go attired in Babilonian rayments. But the higher they exalt themselves,
the greater will be their fall. In the forefront of these madde-cappes may the
Duke of Guise appear, who in the year 1588. one day before he was slain, as
he sat at dinner, found a little scrowle of paper under his trencher, wherein
was written that he should look unto himself, and that his death was
prepared. But he in the same paper rashly with his own hand wrote these
words: They dare not, and so threw it under the table.

By whose example let men take heed how they persist in any thing rashly, for
although the Poets say, that Virg. lib. 4. Aenei. and Ovid. lib. 10. Metam.
Fortune helps an audacious man, yet notwithstanding that help is quickly
ouercast and Quintil. Declamation. 1.
broken by the woeful calamities of the body. Wherefore we must deem it
expedient to resist and turn back fool hardiness rather late then never.

Objection.
An audacious Braggadochian being knocked runs away: therefore there is no
difference betwixt a foolehardy man and a coward.

Answer.
Two things are to be respected in a foolehardy Braggadochian. 1 Madhardinesse
or rashness, which leads him into danger. 2 Weakness of nature not agreeable to
his mind: and this is the cause, why he trusts sometimes unto his heels,
rather the^ his hands.


Of fear and Pusillanimity. Cha. 30.
EVen as the foole-hardy Caualeer trauerseth up and down like a Lion: so a
fearful man is a pusillanimous meacocke: he fears his own shadow by the
way as he trauelleth, and judges each bush to be a rouer. When he is among
Gentlemen, he holds his head down like a dunce, and suddenly sneaketh away
like an vrcheon. He is either by nature melancholic, or by use a niggard or a
tenderling, such a one was that Gentleman of Portingall, who craved of king
Sebastian in the year 1572. a protection against some, who had sworn his
death. The king gave it him. Shortly after he came again unto the king, and
complained unto him of the great fear he was daily in, notwithstanding his
protection. Whereunto the king wisely answered: from fear I cannot protect
you. Far more fearful then this Portingall was that young Gentleman of
Patauine, who of late years being in prison upon some accusation, heard by one
of his friends, that of certainty he should be executed the next day following.
Which news so terrified and changed him, that in one only night he became
white and grai-headed, whereas before there was no appearance thereof. The
cause of this so wonderful an alteration was fear, which grounded upon a
false opinion of mischief seized on his heart, and consumed it like a pestilent
canker according to that saying: Arist. li. 2. Physic.
A sudden alteration has no great beginning. And again, Vegetius lib. 3. de
remilit.
Usual things are seldom feared. For being long expected, how can they choose
but fall out lightly? To conclude, it is Terent. in Eunuch.
the first and sudden fear, that bereaueth the mind of advise, but often
consideration of it breeds confidence, and quite expels all manner of fear.

The sixth part.
Of Temperance and Continence. Chapt. 30.
ALl virtues do make a Commonwealth happy and peaceable: but temperance alone
is the sustayner of civil quietness, for it takes care that the realm be
not corrupted with riot and wanton delights, whereby diverse states have been
cast away. This is that virtue which hinders dishonest actions, which
restrayneth pleasures within certain bounds, and which makes men to differ
from brute beasts. Moreover, this is that Homer. lib. 10. Odyss.
herb, which Mercury gave to Ulysses, least he should taste of the enchauntres
cup, and so with his felows be tra^sform'd into a hog. and this is that virtue,
which great men ought specially to embrace, that by their example the common
sort might become temperate. For Aristot. lib. 1. Ethic. ca. 5.
this is the reason why so many now-adayes live riotously like beasts, namely,
because they see noblemen and magistrates, that govern the commonwealth, to
lead their lives wantonly, as Sardanapalus did. Therefore let noblemen be
temperate, and spend less in shows and apparel, that they may keep better
hospitality then they do, and benefit the poor. Let them, I say, imitate
those famous wights, who voluntarily resigned up their large portions in this
world, that they might live the more contentedly. A murath the second, Emperor
of the Turks, after he had gotten infinite victories, became a Monk of the
straightest sect amongst the^ in the year of our Lord 1449. Charles the 5.
Emperor of Germany gave up his Empire into the hands of the Princes Electours,
and withdrew himself in the year 1557. into a monastery. The like of late did
the tyrant his son king Philip of Spain. What shall I say of Daniel, and his
three companions Ananias, Azarias, and Misael? did they not choose to sustain
themselves with pulse, when as they f might have had a portion of the kings
meat? Daniel. 1.
seeing therefore by these examples we perceive, how great the force of
Temperance is over the greedy affections of the mind, let us devoutly love
her, and through her love, observe a mean in our pleasures and sorrows.

Of Intemperance, and Incontinence. Chap. 31.
INtemperaunce is an ouerflowing in pleasures, desperately constraining all
reason, in such sort, that nothing is able to stay him from the execution of
his lusts. For that cause there is a difference between it and incontinence,
namely, that an incontinent man knows full, that the sin which he commits
is sin, and had intended not to follow it, but being ouermastered by his Lordly
perturbations, he yields in a manner against his will thereunto: whereas the
intemperate man sins of purpose, esteeming it a goodly thing, and never
repents him once of his wickedness. Wherehe^ce I conclude, that an intemperate
man is incurable, and far worse then the incontinent: for the incontinent man
being persuaded with wholesome counselles, will be sorry for his offense, and
will strive to overcome his passions. But to make both, as well the intemperate
man, as the incontinent hateful unto us: Let us call to mind, how they do
nothing else, but think on their present prouender and rutting. Also, we must
consider, how that intemperance is that goggle-eyed Venus, which hinders
honest learning, which metamorphozeth a man into a beast, and which
transformeth simple wretches into tosse-potted asses: wherefore I wish all men
of what quality soever they be, to take heed of this vice, least they either
be accounted beasts, or alive be reckoned among the number of the dead.

Of Lechery. Chap. 33.
Lechery is a short pleasure, bringing in long pain, that is, it expels
virtue, shorteneth life, and makes the soul guilty of abominable sin. This
vice I fear me, is too rife here in England, for how many Vrsulaes have we
like that princely Vrsula, who with eleven thousand Virgins more in her
company being taken by the Painime fleet, as they were sailing into little
Britain, for the defense of their chastities, were al of them most
tyrannically martyred? In steed of Vrsulaes, I doubt, we have curtezans, and
whorish droyes, who with their brayed drugs, periwigs, vardingals, false
bodies, trunk sleeves, spanish white, pomatoes, oils, powders, and other
glozing fooleries too long to be recounted, do disguise their first natural
shape, only sophistically to seem fair unto the outward view of tame and
indiscreet woodcocks. Yet notwithstanding, let a man behold them at night
or in the morning, and he shall find them more ugly and loathsome then before:
and I cannot so well liken them, as to Millers wives, because they look as
though they were beaten about their faces with a bag of meal. But what
enfueth after all these artificial inventions? the vengeance of God. Esaias 3.
Insteede of sweet savor, there shall be stink, insteede of a girdle, a
rent, insteede of dressing the hair, baldness, insteede of a stomacher, a
girding of sack cloth, and burning, insteede of beauty. What shall I do the^,
asks the honest man? how shall I discern a chaste woman from a baudie trull,
a diligent huswife, from an idle droane? Gellius lib. 1. ca. 11. St^baeus
sermon. 65. and Bruson. lib. 7 cap. 22.
(a) If she be fair, she is most commonly a common queen: if she be foul,
then is she odious: What shall I do? This thou shall do, O honest man,
Martial. lib. 8. Epigram. ad Priscum.
(b) Choose thee not a wife above thine estate, nor under, lest the one be too
haughty, or the other displease thee: rather hearken unto a witty virgin,
borne of virtuous and witty parents, correspondent unto thee both in birth and
degree, and no doubt but with thy good admonitions thou shall have her
tractable. No woman is so flintie, but fair words and good usage will in time
cause her to relent, and love thee as she should, above all others: in fine,
respect not dowry, for

* If she be good, Plautus in Aulular.
she is endowred well.

Of Gluttony and Drunkenness. Chap. 34
OF Gluttony there be four kinds. The first happens, when a man causes his
meat to be made ready before due and ordinary time for pleasure, and not
for necessity. The second, when a man curiously hunteth after diversities and
dainty meat. The third, when he eats more then suffices nature. The last,
when we eat our meat too greedily and hungrily, like unto dogs.

Now to come to drunkenness, I find that there be three sorts thereof. The
first, when we being very thirsty, not knowing the force of the drink, do
unwittingly drink our selves drunk: and this can be no sin. The second,
when we understand that the drink is immoderate, and for all that, we respect
not our weak nature, which unawares becomes cup-shot; and this is a kind of
sin. The third, when we obstinately do persevere in drinking, and this
certainly, is a grievous and intolerable sin.

The discommodities of drunkenness. Chap. 35.
THe discommodities of drunkenness are many: Prou. 20. and 23. Joel. 2.
first, (c) it displeases God: secondly, it is indecent and filthy: for does
not a drunken man's eyes look red, bloody, Luke. 16.
and staring? does not his tongue falter? does not his breath stink? is not
his nose fiery and wormeaten? are not his wits dead, according to that: When
the ale is in, wit is out? does not his body shiuer? Horatius lib. 1.
Epistol.
In brief, What does not drunkenness signify? it discloseth secrets, it
makes the unarmed man to thrust himself into the wars, and causes the
careful mind to become quite void of care. The third discommoditie of
drunkenness is, that it shorteneth life, defaceth beauty, and corrupts the
whole world. For how can it otherwise be, when GOD blesses not the meat
and drink within our bodies? Fourthly, drunkenness i^ the cause of the loss
of time. Esaias. 5.
Fifthly, Hell gapeth and opens her mouth wide, that the multitude and wealth
of them that delight therein, may go down into it. For proof whereof, I will
declare one notable example, taken out of the Anatomy of Abuses. About twenty
years since, there dwelt eight men, Citizens and Citizens Sons of Swaden a
City of Germany, who upon a Sunday morning, agreed to go into a Tavern,
and coming to the house of one Antonie Hage, an honest man, and zealouslie
given, they called for wine. The good man told them that they should have
none, before Sermon time was past, and persuaded them to go hear the word
preached. But they (save one Adam Giebens, who advised them to hear the Sermon
for fear of GODS wrath) denied, saying, that they loathed that kind of
exercise. The good Oast neither giving them any Wine himself, nor permitting
any other, went to the Sermon. Who being gone, they fell to cursing, and wishing
that he might break his neck before he returned: whereupon the devil
appeared unto them in the shape of a young man, bringing in his hand a flagon of
wine, and drunk unto them, saying: Good fellows, be merry, for you shall
have wine enough, and I hope you will pay me well. Then they inconsiderately
answered, that they would pay him, or else they would gage their necks, yea,
their bodies and souls, rather the^ to fail. Thus they continued swilling and
bibbing so long, till they could scant see one another. At the last, the Devil
their tapster told them, that they must needs pay their shot: whereat their
hearts waxed cold. But he comforting them, said: Be of good cheer, for now
must you drink boiling lead, pitch; and brimstone with me in the pit of hell
for evermore. Hereupon he made their eyes appear like fire, and in breadth as
broad as a sawcer: and ere they could call for grace and mercy, the devil
prevented them, and brake their necks asunder. The other Adam Giebens, who
counseled them before to hear Gods word, having some sparks of faith within
him, was preserved from death, by the great mercy of God.

After this sort God punished drunkenness, to the terror of all such as
delight therein. God grant that men hereafter may beware, how they play the
drunkards. For doubtless, although he bears with our quaffers here in
England, yet notwithstanding, he has prepared heavy punishments for them in
the world to come.

Remedies against intemperance, gluttony, and drunkenness. Chap. 36.
THe first remedy against intemperance, gluttony, and drunkenness, is the
word of God: for Matthew. 4
(e) it is written, Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. The second, they must consider the fasting
and poverty of Christ, for when he said, I thirst, that is, I thirst after
man's salvation, Ioha^. 19
they gave him Vinegar to drink. The third remedy is, that they weigh with
themselves the evil, which proceeds from their vices, and the torments of
the rich glutton in hell. The fourth, let them think on the eternal
pleasures of the other world, and Matt. 5.
hunger and thirst after righteousness. The fifth, let them follow Socrates
advice, Plut. de curiosit. et Xenop. lib. 1. de dict. and fact. Socrat.
Who admonished men to take heed from eating and drinking those things, which
would move them not being hungry, nor thirsty: and also from prying into
Gentlewomens beauties, lest, as the Poets feign, Cupid the blind God of love,
do perchance shoot and hit them. This reason Elian. li. 3. vari. hist. c. 30
Clitomachus knew very well, who if he heard but one talking of love matters,
would immediately depart away. Lastly, let them avoid idleness; for Ovid. li.
1. de remed. amo.
Idleness being taken away, the force of lechery decays.

Of stupiditie or dullness. Chap. 37.
STupiditie is a voluntary and too great a suppression of lawful pleasures.
This vice Arist. li. 3. Ethic. cap. 11.
is seldom found amongst men: for where shall we see any so dull, that has
no taste of pleasures? All other living creatures can judge and discern of the
meat which they eat: but dull men have not half so much judgment or
discretion. Therefore without doubt, they that have lost their feeling, are no
more to be called living men, but blocks, or stocks, or rather brute beasts
deprived of sense. There be some men I confess, very bluntish and dull, yet
notwithstanding, I dare not say, that they are in such sort infected by reason
of this vice, the defect of Temperance; but more likely they are so, because of
their unwholesome and bad complections, or else because of some sickness or
other. And thus much of the nature of Stupiditie.

Objection.
Stupiditie is a mean to obtain virtue, for it is a bridling of lust:
therefore it is no vice.

Answer.
Stupiditie is a bridling of lust, but confusedly, without wit or reason.

The seventh part.
Of Magnificence. Chap. 38.
Arist. li. 4. Ethic. cap. 2.
THe like difference as is between God and man, between a temple and a
sepulcher, such is betwixt magnifice^ce and liberality: for Ibid.
magnificence is a virtue, that consists in sumptuous and great expenses:
whereas liberality is co^uersa^t in small things, so y^ the one is peculiar to
Noblemen, and the other to common Gentlemen. But in this age it is quite
abandoned. They were wont in times past, to patronize and find poor scholars
at the University: But now, I pray you, who is so noble-minded? who so
virtuous? They were wont to build Colleges: but now they are ready to pull
them down; and which is more, if any intendes but to build a free-schoole or
an hospital (which is as seldom seen as a black swanne) we account him, as
they say, one of God Almighties fools. The Gentlemen of the Innes of Court,
quoth y^ rich chuffes, wear so much on their backs, as would serve for the
building of free-schooles. Our sons at the University spend yearly in
batles, decrements, and books, as much at would suffice for the repayring of
bridges, highways, and such like. Those preachers please our minds best,
which preach faith, and no good works. This cheap religion we like; a strong
barn, Neighbor, is worth fifteen of their freeschooles. But alas, how can
the poor sheep do well, when their sheepheardes be cold in charity? when
these non residents care not how their flocks thrive? when the Leuits of Jesus
Christ have always this worldly theoreme in their mouths: He ought to be
begd for a fool, that gathers not for his wife and children? O politic
worldlings! O Machiauellians! The Papists, that in a manner build their whole
devotion upon good works, shall rise against you at the day of Judgment: yea,
the Infidels themselves, who dedicate their substance unto Idols, shall
testify against you. What says your Nazianzene? Nazia^. in oration, de cura
paupe.
A man has nothing so divine as magnificence, and distribution of goods. What
says Strabo? Strab. lib. 10.
Me^ the^ principally do imitate God, when they benefit. Wherefore, O mortal
men, both spiritual and temporal, do good while you may, time passes away,
live mindful of death. After which you must yield account to the almighty
Judge, how you have consumed your lives and goods. In a word, help to advance
and prefer scholars, for Martial. lib. 1. Epigr.
If there be a Mecenas, and furtherers of learning, we shall quickly find
Virgils and Horaces to eternize your names and magnificence; whereas on the
contrary, Tacitus lib. 11. Annal.
if magnificence and hire of pains be taken away, learning must of necessity
fall to ruin.

Of Liberality. Chap. 39.
Liberality is a virtue placed between prodigality and avarice, Arist. li. 4.
Ethic. cap. 1.
Conversant most commonly in giving, and sometimes in receiving; whereby not
only the participation of gifts and money are meant, but also the
communication of good counsels and duties are understood. All they which
exercise this virtue, do purchase unto themselves love and good will, which be
of great moment, either to live quietly, or to rule without trouble: Hor. li,
2. Od. 2 and Mart. lib. 8. Epigram.
Their fame shall never fall from the earth, and they themselves shall be
highly favored of the highest landlord. For Oui. lib. 5. Fastor.
oftentimes when God means to send his thunderbolts against the wicked, he
stays his hand by reason of their sacrifices and alms.

Now to come to the anatomizing of liberality, I put down eight
circumstances, whereby a Gentleman may become liberal, and so uphold his
reputation. The first law of liberality is, to distribute unto them, who are
most worthy: Otherwise, he is like a blind man, when he knows not to who^
he gives: namely, he must observe the order of nature, in preferring his
brethren before his cosens, and his cosens before strangers, and Macr lib. 2.
saturnal.
in rewarding of wise men, before sycopha^ts and pickthanks. The second
circumstance is, that a man give not more, then his ability will afford, but
rather he must cut out his coat in proportion according to his cloth: because
Plinius iuni. lib. 7. Epist.
repentance follows hasty liberality. The third, he must not give to the^,
which have enough already. The fourth, he must not, after he has bestowed his
gifts, cast and hitte men in the teeth with them, or by his prating, cause the
remembrance of his gifts to perish. The fifth rule of liberality, a man must
not hurt one, that he may be liberal to another, for they that do this, are
neither to be accounted beneficall nor liberal, but pernicious. The sixth, he
must give willingly without requesting, for nothing is more dear then that,
which is bought by prayers. Hitherto appertains the Apostles saying: 2. Cor.
9.
As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, nor of
necessity: for GOD loves a cheerful Giver. The seventh, let him respect
the place, where he gives, that is, whether in an honest house, or in an
infamous. The last law of liberality is, that it be without shipwreck or
loss of the giuers good name.

But why do I decipher that, which now a days men have utterly abandoned?
Where in England, nay, where in the world, can I point with my finger, and say:
There is a liberal man? Alas, al men are become misers, there are none that
are liberal, no, not one. O ungrateful wretcheslis not God your Landlord, and
does not he suffer you to enjoy his lands without in comes or fines? Only
this is his condition, that ye use the poor well, and cherish the needy: why
then are ye covetous, why do ye not perform his condition, and be
liberal? It behooues you rather to lay up riches in heaven, and not to
believe, that this fickle and doting world, is a perpetual paradise, and
that the drossie excrements thereof, are hallowed. Communicate therefore your
goods one unto another, for treasure remains prepared for the godly in
heaven. Let not the hellish usurer have dominion over you: he is Plutus (as the
Poets faigne) the God of your riches. Beware of his fawnings, take heed of his
motives and illusions; he comes disguised in the form of an Angel of
light, persuading you by sophistry, that liberality is a vice, that golden
ducats are demie Gods. But what follows after all these fallacies? death,
and the vengeance of the highest. To be short, as many as are well disposed to
be liberal, let them give in their lives time, whilst they have space to give.
It is foolishness for any man to defer his liberality till after his death:
for executors will part stakes; and besides, alms at that time, will do the
giuers no good.

Of Prodigality. Chap. 40.
Arist. lib. 4. Ethic.
Prodigality is a foolish and indiscreet wasting and lauishing of goods: for
the which poverty and late repentance do ensue. The rare follower of this
vice cares not for circumstances, but spends his money upon such things,
whereof he leaves little remembrance or none at all behind him: he never
thinks on the variable blasts of fortune: but ignominiously co^sumeth his
patrimony in a baudy or infamous house, and if there were given him as much
money Boethius lib. 2. de Consolat. Philosop. metr. 2.
as the sea turns up sand, when it is tossed with the raging winds: yet for
all that a prodigal man will devour al, and at last will be forced to pill and
poll his poor tena^ts, supplying his wa^ts ambitiously by unlawful means.

Into the listes of this vice many of our English Caualeers and soldiers do
enter, who bestow all that they have on gorgeous raiments and in visiting of
queanes: Whereas rather they should consider with themselves, Pers. satyr. 3.
what they are, how they mean to live hereafter, of what vocation they are,
and what profit they may reap by saving their money. It becomes them not to
follow crows abroad through thick and thin: but to respect, whither they
go. It becomes the^, I say, not to imitate Bedlems, who journey still that
way, where the staff falls. God has appointed every man to be of some
calling or other. To conclude, they deceive themselves in thinking, that
prodigality does ingraffe in the^ a kind of liberality: for Tacitus lib. 1.
Histor.
many know how to spend, but not, how to give.

The properties of a covetous man. Chapt. 40.
THe properties of a covetous man are infinite, but principally these: First a
covetous man is an Infidel, for he loves not his brethren, and 1. Ioh. 4.
he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. Secondly, he is a
thief, for the goods that he possesses, are none of his own, but Gods. Man
is only constituted as a steward, and must one day to his perpetual
destruction, yield an account thereof. Further, it is known, that Arist. li.
1. Politi.
theft, and sundry other vices spring chiefly from covetousness. Thirdly, a
covetous man is a slave, for he attends and wayteth on his money. Fourthly,
he is in continual fear and suspicion, least thieves rob him of his
treasure, least his ewes have no good yeaning, least the floods carry away his
milles, and least there happen a wette year.

Fifthly, Iuuenal. Satyr. 14
a covetous man is always vexed and agrieued in mind, for if his wife asks
for two shillinges to buy silk, six pence for spice or salt; then he frets
and fumes, yelles and bannes, swearing that she seeks his utter undoing.
Sixthly, he has most commonly three keys or more to his chest, and which is
worse, threescore in his heart to keep them from spending. Lastly, a covetous
man offends against the second commandment, for he worships Idols, in
reposing so much confidence in his money.

Remedies against covetousness. Chap. 42.
ALbeit that Seneca in Hercu. O^te,
nature is little enough to satisfy a niggards mind, because he is
insatiable: yet notwithstanding, I will endeavor to bring him into the right
way: first, let him think upon the Amo. 6.
fearful alarums, Esaias 5.
which God by his Prophets sounded against all covetous men. Luke 6.
Secondly, let him consider the poverty of Christ. Iud. 2.
Thirdly, let him weigh with himself, how nature is content with a little, as
for example, 1. Reg. 19.
Elias was glad to eat bread and water: Dan. 1.
Daniel satisfied himself with pulse: Luke. 3.
Saint John Baptist lived on locusts and wild honey. Fourthly, let the
covetous man keep good company, and follow them that are virtuously disposed.
Fifthly, let him think on the everlasting riches of the other world. Sixthly,
let him consider of his end and death. Lastly, let the covetous man examine
himself, and muse upon the unhappy lives and punishments, of such as have
been covetous.

Calipha the Sultan of Egypt, having filled a Tower with gold and precious
stones, and being in war with Allan the king of Tartarie, was at last taken
captive by him, and famished in that tower, wherein his treasure lay. More
strange is that, which is reported of an Archbishop of Mogunce, who in the
year of our Lord 1518. foreseeing that corn would the next year be sold at
an extreme rate, gathered together great store, and whorded the same up in
certain garners, which he had built for the same purpose; not with a godly
intent to bring down the price, but rather to enhaunce it for his own private
commodity. But behold the judgments of God; his servants the next year
ouerturning this whorded corn, found clean contrary to their expectations
snakes, adders, and vermin so thick crept in, that it was impossible to save
ought thereof. The like, as I heard, happened about a dozen years ago unto a
wicked niggard here in England. Also, to mine own remembrance, there was one
in the year 1589. that sent four bushels of wheat (every one consisting of
two bushels and a half of Winchester measure) into the market, and was offered
22. shillings for every bushel, which he refused, hoping to get 2. shillings
more on the next market day. But see the reward of covetousness: wheat was the^
sold for 16. shillings, and within 2. markets after for a noble, in so much that
that man, which refused to take 22. shillings for every bushel, was now glad
to have a noble for the same. Likewise a certain knight of Oxfordshire punished
very justly (but ouerseuerely) the covetousness of a priest, that denied the
service of his office in the burying of a dead body, because his widow had not
wherewith to pay him ye costs of the funeral. For the Knight himself going to
the burial, caused the minister to be bound to ye corpse, and so to be cast
both into one grave. Which done, he rode straightway to the Court, and with
some intercession begd his pardon of Q. Mary. The like fact I heard was put in
practice by John Maria Duke of Millan above an 100. years since. What shall I
speak of the covetousness of one Peter Vnticaro a Spaniard? who with certain
other Christians, to the number of 263. having been a long time withholden
captives in Alexandria by the great Turk, at length in the year of our Lord
1577. conspired together for their delivery, and by good luck killed the
Gailer, and then entering into his chamber, found a chest, wherein were great
store of double ducats, which this Peter Vnticaro, and two more opening,
stuffed themselves so full as they could therewith, between their shirts and
their skin* which the other Christians would not once touch, but said, that it
was their liberty, which they sought for, to the honor of God, and not to make
a mart of the infidels wicked treasure. Yet did these words sink nothing into
their stomachs. But within a while after, in a skirmish with the warder of ye
prison, P. Vnticaro and the other 2. that were armed with ye ducats, were
slain, as not able to weild themselves, being so pestered with the weight and
uneasy carriage of the ducats.

Now to end these remedies and fearful punishments executed on covetous
persons, I hold, that 1. Tim. 6.
covetousness is the root of all evil, and the cheifest cause why God is
offended with us: to which also by his Prophet he pronounces woe, saying, Esaias.
5.
Woe be unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field.

A dehortation from covetousness. Chap. 43.
Having heard so many remedies and fearful examples, awake ye covetous men,
and seek to be rich in God, and not in the frail riches of this world, which
consume away like rust, before you have any fruition of them. Distribute your
goods unto the needy, and purchase no more then serves your necessity: ye
know not whether your lands and goods shall be taken from you by the Turks,
Spaniardes, suretiships, fire, subsidies in the time of war, or any other
disco^modities. In the year 1588. diverse rich Farmers and niggardes hearing
that the Spanish navy was coming to invade this realm, and fearing thereby
the loss of all their grain and money which they had by the sea side,
tra^sported as much as they might into safer places: even so, ye that be rich,
being advertised of the wavering case of this world, see ye transport so much
of your wealth, as possibly you may, into the house and purses of the poor:
commit, I say, the custody of your substance to Christ himself, who in the
day of Judgment will redeliuer the same unto you with a glorious interest, and
with a crown of gladness. Remember the words of Christ: ^ O fools, this
night shall your souls be taken from you, Luke 12.
then whose shall those things be, which ye have prepared? Even theirs, who
will make havoc of them, and never thank you once. Forget not what he
commands you in another place. Matthew. 10.
Possess not gold nor silver, for Mar. 10
it is hard for them that have riches, to enter into the kingdom of God: and
Ibid.
It is easier for a Cammell to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into heaven. Wherefore, O ye rich, be not like to a dog lying in
the hay, which when he cannot eat himself, he will not with his barking,
suffer the poor horses to eat thereof. Oh resemble not cammels, who though
they go laden with treasure, yet they eat nothing but hay. In fine, repent
and turn to God, for he is merciful, and would not your destruction: Give
alms, Luc. 12.
and make you bags which wax not old, and a treasure which can never fail
in heaven, where no thief comes, neither moth corrupts.

Whether the covetous man be worse then the prodigal. Chap. 44.
Covetousness is one of the desires beside nature, Arist. lib. 1. Physic.
and therefore more detestable tha^ prodigality, which for the most part,
issues from a generous spirit, and has some tokens of grace and repentance:
whereas contrariwise, covetousness springs in such, as are of base and
dunghilled thoughts, which hardly may be lift up from the earth, and is so
bred and inueterated in the bone, that it will never be rooted out. In a word,
the prodigal man does good unto many, by his lavish gifts, and by wise
counsels may be brought to the square of liberality; but the covetous man
benefiteth none; and (as I said before) is incurable, and as it were sick of a
dropsy, by reason of a daily habit, which he has taken in coveting.

Objection.
He that hurts himself, is worse then he that hurts another; but such is
the prodigal man: therefore he is worse then the covetous man.

Answer.
The covetous man hurts himself, and others worse, by keeping that in his
chest, which might credit himself, and relieve the needy: whereas on the
contrary, the prodigal man purchases friends and good will by his spending,
and otherwhiles helps others in their distresses.

The eight part.
Of Clemency and Courtesy. Chap. 45.
NOt only reason consents, but also experience confirms, that of who^
clemency is abandoned, in him al other virtues are abolished: for what makes
a man seem a God? does not clemency? surely, there is nothing that draws
nearer unto Divinity then it. The consideration whereof, procured by the
contemplation of the notable frame of man; provoke us to be zealous, and
earnest to do our neighbor good, as not ignorant, how that the pure grace and
mercy of God, do shine in every just and honest man. Wherefore, let Princes,
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, who know what virtue is, consider in how vast a sea
of inconveniences they wade connually for all their superficial ports. Let
them, I say, weigh with themselves, that they be but men; and if for a
momentarie while they frown, and scorn to look on their inferiors: what,
will not the mighty Jehovah, who notes all men's hearts and gestures, contemn
the^ likewise: yea, yea, he will also strike them with most horrible darts of
vengeance: therefore, for fear of the same, let men behave themselves
courteously, and imitate those famous wights, who by their courtesies have
merited perpetual honor.

King Henry the second of France, having in the year of our Lord 1554.
licensed the Duke of Montmorency Constable to chastise the rebellion of
Bordeaux, afterward gave out a general absolution, and forgave every man. The
like courtesy did the Duke of Guise, albeit he was a most bloody tyrant, show
unto the Prince of Condie his prisoner, in that he spoke reverently unto him,
used him kindly, and permitted him to lie with him in one bed, which most men
did not suppose that he would have done: for it is manifest, how hateful in
civil broils, the head of either faction is, so as if the one happen into the
others hand, his usage most commonly is ungentle, and his life in ieopardie.

Now by these and such like examples, let us, who are reformed Christians,
follow the traces of Gentlemen, and not like unto heathenish Canniballes, or
Irish karnes, persecute one another with capital enmity. Finally, let us
again, and again ponder the words of our Savior Christ, who taught us to
be courteous, and to Mat. 18
forgive our brethren not only seven times, but also seventy times seven.

Of Modesty and Bashfulnes. Chap. 46.
HE that is impudent and never blusheth, is accounted lost, and ought to be
banished from all virtuous company: But on a sudden, Terent. in Adel.
I saw him blush, therefore all is well. O noble modesty! O honorable
affection of the mind! which deseruest to have Temples and altars dedicated
unto thee, as to a divine Goddess: for what beautifieth the virtues? Modesty:
what bridleth and tameth the furious passions of the mind? Modesty. In young
men she is the badge of innocence, and greatly to be commended: but Ari. lib.
4. Ethic. cap. vlt. and Plautus in Amphyt.
in old men she is utterly dispraised; the reason is, because shame fastness
being once departed from a man, is irreuocable, and knows not how to
return. But now alas, in this old and spotted age of the world, youths, by
reason of their parents fond indulgence, have exceeded the limits of modesty,
and are become so brazen-faced, that they will not stick to outface and deny
that which is most evident: they are I say, become so impudent and base minded,
that they will neither acknowledge any reverence to their elders, nor suffer
themselves to be advised by their equalles, nor as yet look mildly on their
inferiors. Nevertheless, shamefastenesse in despite of al her adversaries,
shall be acceptable among wise men, and guide their hearts, as she did in times
past. In the mean time, let men think well of her, and note, whether she
graceth young men; and then according to the effect, let them choose, whether
they receive her or no,

Of Affability. Chap. 47.
Affability is either a witty use of speech; or a delightful recreation of
the mind; or an amiable show of countenance. It is a witty use of speech, when
a man moves mirth, either by the quick changing of some sentence, or else by
a counterfeit, extrauagant, and doubtful speech, as for example, a Gentleman on
a time said unto a Gentlewoman, How now Gentlewoman, what, al alone? she
eftsoone wittily answered: Not alone, sir, but accompanied with many honorable
thoughts. In like sort, a merry Recorder of London, mistaking the name of one
Pepper, called him Piper: whereunto the party excepting, said, Sir, you
mistake, my name is Pepper, not Piper: the Recorder answered: what difference
is there between piper in Latin, and pepper in English? There is, replied the
other, as much difference between them, as is between a pipe and a Recorder.

Affability is a delightful recreation of the mind, when we laugh moderately
at those things, which wisely and chiefly touch some fond behavior of some
one body, or when we tickle some vice or other: as if a man should talk of a
privy thief in this wise; I have one at home among all others, to whom there
is no door shut in all my house, nor chest locked: Meaning, that he is a
picklocke and a privy thief. Howbeit, he might have spoken these words of an
honest servant.

Affability is an amiable show of countenance, as when some great personage
resaluteth the people cheerfully, and succoureth every one according to his
power. Whereby, as another 2. Sa^. 15
Absalon, he steals the hearts of the people. Then they speak all, as it
were in a diapazon: who can choose but with all his heart love this noble minded
Gentleman, in whom all the sparks of as well royal, as real virtues do
appear? But on the contrary, if a Noble man, that is proud and haughty of
countenance, should pass by them without any semblaunce of gentleness, they
will thus descant of him: This man by his stately stalking, and portly gate
over looks Powles steeple: he is as proud as Lucifer, his pride will one day
have a fall. Thus they read of him, be he never so high of degree: they care
not who hears the^: their tounges are their own.

In respect whereof, I wish all Gentlemen to behave themselves affably, and
courteously toward their inferiors. For whereby else is a Gentleman discerned,
save by his gentle conditions? let them therefore look better and pry into
themselves, and earnestly charge some of their most faithful followers, to
admonish them of their ouersights at convenient seasons.

Of Indulgence. Chap. 48.
INdulgence is a fond, vain, and foolish love, used most commonly of parents
toward their children. There is no vice so abhorred of wise men as this; For
they find by experience, that mo youths have been cast away through their
parents indulgence, then either through violent or natural death. Yea, I have
heard sundry Gentlemen, when they came to years of discretion, grievously
exclaim, and bitterly complain of their parents fondness, saying: We would
to God that our parents had heretofore kept us in awe and severity; for now
lacking that instruction, which we ought to have, we feel the smart thereof.
Undoubtedly God will one day demand an account of them, and examine them,
wherefore they respected not better their own bowels. Shall he bless them
with children, and they through blind indulgence neglect their education?
Truly, it is a miserable case. In times past parents were wont to place their
sons with wise governors, requesting them not in any case to let them have
their own wills. But now adays it falls out clean contrary. For parents in
these times when they hire a scholemaster, will first hearken after his gentle
usage, and then they will question with him touching the small salary, which
they must pay him for his industry, so that forsooth now and then to be
mindful of this vice Indulgence, they accept of a sow-gelder, or some pety
Grammatist, that will not stick in a foole-hardy mood to break Priscians
pate. With such a one they covenant, namely, that he must spare the rod, or
else their children will be spild. Within a while after as soon as their
indulgent Master has taught them to decline Stultus, Stulta, Stultum, as an
adjective of three terminations, they bring them out of hand into the
University, and there diligently do enquire after a mild Tutour, with whom
their tender sons might familiarly and fellowlike co^uerse. And what then?
Mary, before a tweluemoneths end, they send for them home again in all post
haste to visit their mammes, who thought each day of their sons absence to
be a whole month. There they be made sucklings during the next twelve
month. Well, now it is high time to suffer their ready da^dlings to see
newfangled fashions at the Innes of Court. Where being arrived, they suite
themselves unto all sorts of company, but for the most part unto shriuers,
Caualeers, and mad-cappes, insomuch at the last, it will be their friends hard
hap, to hear that their sweet sons are either pend up in Newgate for
their good deeds, or have cracked a rope at Tiburn. This is the effect of
Indulgence. This is their false conclusion, proceeding of their false
premises. Now you must understand, that if the parents had not thus cockered
and (...) their sons in their childhood, (...) caused them to be severely
looked unto, they would not in the flower of their age have come to such a
miserable end.

In the Chronicle of the Switzers, mention is made of a certain offendour,
whom upon his arraignement his own father was compelled to execute, that so by
the indulgent author of his life he might come to his death. Hither likewise
may I refer that common story of a certain woman in Flaunders, who living
about threescore years ago, did so much pamper two of her sons, that she
would never suffer them to lack money; yea, she would privily defraud her
husband to minister unto them. But at last she was justly punished in them
both, for they fell from dicing and rioting to stealing, and for the same one
of them was executed by the halter, and the other by the sword, she her self
being present at their woeful ends, whereof her conscience showed her, that her
Indulgence was the only cause.

This ought to be a lively glass to all parents to provide for their childrens
bringing up, and to purge them betimes of their wild and wicked humors, least
afterward they prove incurable, and of little sprigs they become hard withered
branches. In brief, O parents, correct your children, while they be young;
pluck up their weeds, while they begin, lest growing among the good seed
they hinder their growth; and permit them not so rathe, of prentises to become
enfranchised freemen. In so doing, you may be assured, that they will easily be
brought to study the knowledge of heavenly wisdom, and to embrace ciuility,
the only butte and mark, whereat the godly and virtuous do level, especially
for Gods glory, for their own commodity, and for the goodness that thereby
ensues unto the commonwealth in general.

Of Pride. Chap. 49.
PRide is a bubbling or puffing of the mind, derived from the opinion of some
notable thing in us, more the^ is in others. But Eccl. 10.
why is earth and ashes proud! seeing that when a man dies, he is the heir
of serpents, beasts, and worms? Who knows not, that GOD closely pursues
proud men? who doubts, that Luke 1.
he thu^dreth, and scatters them in the imaginations of their hearts, that he
puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble and meek?
In so much that Eccl. 10
he which is to day a king, to morrow is dead, Wherefore, O wight, whosoever
thou art that read this book, lay aside thy Peacocks plumes, and look once
upon thy feet, upon the earth, I mean, wherehence thou came. Eze. 28
though thou think in thine heart, that thou art equal with GOD, yet thou
art but a man, and that a sinful man. In sum, wish not lordly authority unto
thy self, for he that seeks authority, must forethinke how he comes by
it, and coming well by it, how he ought to live in it, and living well in it,
he must forecast how to rule it, and ruling discreetly, he must oftentimes
remember his own frailty.

Of Scurrility of Scoffing. Chapt. 50.
EVen as I greatly commend affability and pleasant iestes: so I utterly mislike
and condemn knavery in jesting. For toungs were not given unto men to scoff
and taunt, but rather to serve God, and to instruct one another. And as a little
fire may consume whole villages: so in like manner the tongue, which is a kind
of fire, yea, a world of calamity, polluteth the whole body, if it be not
refrained. For which cause, though there be some merry and conceited wit in a
jest: yet we must beware, that we rashly bestow it not on them, whom we
afterward would not for any thing offend. Therefore the respect of time, and
consideration of the person is necessary in lesting. For we must not give dry
floutes at meals, least we be accounted Aleknights: we must not taunt
choleric men, least they take it in ill part: we must not deride simple
fellows, because they are rather to be pitied: nor yet wicked persons, for it
behooves to have them rather punished, then laughed to scorn.

Whether Stageplayes ought to be suffered in a Commonwealth? Chapt. 51.
STageplaies fraught altogether with scurrilities and knauish pastimes, are
intolerable in a well governed commonwealth. And chiefly for six reasons.
First, Tertull. lib. de speculo.
all Stageplayes were dedicated unto Bacchus the drunken God of the Heathen,
and therefore damnable. Secondly, Council. 30. Carthag and Synod. Laodic. cap.
54.
they were forbidden by Christian parliaments. Thirdly, men spend their
flourishing time ingloriously and without credit, in co^templating of plays.
All other things being spent may be recovered again, but time is like unto the
latter wheel of a coach, that follows after the former, and yet can never
attain equally unto it. Fourthly, Ephesians. 5.
no foolish and idle talking, nor jesting should be once named amongst us.
Fifthly, stageplaies are nothing else, but pompes and shows, in which there is a
declining from our belief. For what is the promise of Christians at their
Baptism? namely, to renounce the Devil and all his works, pompes, and
vanities. Sixthly, Saluian. lib. 6. de Gubern. Dei.
Stageplayes are the very mockery of the word of God, and the toys of our
life. For while we be at the stage, we are ravished with the love thereof,
according to the wise man's words: It is a pastime for a fool to do wickedly;
Prou. 10. 23.
and so in laughing at filthy things, we sin.

Of Cruelty. Chap. 52.
THere be two sorts of cruelty: whereof the one is nothing else, then Sen.
lib. 2, de Clementia cap. 4.
a fierceness of the mind in inflicting of punishments. The other is a
certain madness, together with a delight in cruelty, of which brood I account
the^ to be, who are cruel without cause. The causes, that procure cruelty, be
three. The first is covetousness, for (as the ancient Latin Orator
records) Rutilius Lupus li. 2. de figur. sent.
madness is the father of cruelty, and covetousness is the mother thereof.
The second is violence naturally ingraffed. The third cause of cruelty is
ambition, which sows in it a hope and desire of clyming higher.

Now to beautify our subject with examples, I bring forth first of all Galeace
Sfortia Duke of Millan, who being wonderful wroth with a poor man, that by
chance had taken a hare, which he in hunting before had lost, compelled him to
eat the same raw, skin, and all: Further, the Spaniards of all nations under
the cope of heaven be most cruel, as appeared by their monstrous and horrible
cruelties exercised upon the miserable Indians, whom they, in stead of alluring
by fair means to the knowledge of the Gospel, made some to be devoured of
dogs, and others to be cast down headlong from steep hills. Moreover, many
of our own cou^trymen have been eyewitness of their barbarous tyrannies. In
the year of our Lord 1588. they brought with them hitherward gagges and such
like torments to inflict upon us, if by Gods merciful providence they had not
been speedily prevented and miraculously confounded; and I pray God all they
may be so served, that intend cruelly to usurp and incroche upon other men's
rights. Neither with silence can I ouerskip the cruelties of Cardinal Albert,
Archduke of Austria, and deputy of the low countries on the King of Spaines
behalf. This Cardinal, about four years since, having taken Caleis in
France, spared not man, woman, nor child: But Tigerlike caused them all to be
butchered. Likewise about a year and a half a-goe, the said Cardinal
departing from the low countries, with intent to be married unto the king of
Spaines sister, that now is, left Frauncis Mendoza, Admiral of Aragon, his
substitute to wage war in the low countries. But what cruelties this Mendoza
together with his ragged ^out has committed within this twelue-moneth, the
whole world reports; and especially they of Cleue land, his own confederats
to their utter undoing, can bear witness of the Spanish cruelty.

God of his goodness preserve our realm of England from their ravening
claws, and abate their pride which already begins to rise, and to assail
the reformed Church of Christ.

The ninth part.
Of Patience. Chap. 53.
PAtience is a virtue, that is exercised in tolerating mildly of injurious
words, of loss of goods, or of blows. But alas we shall now-adaies sooner
find them, that will do away themselves, rather then they will bear any thing
patiently; the reason of this their impatie^ce is, because they know not the
effects of patience, which are these following, namely, first, to hope well,
and then if any thing happen besides their expectations, to bear the same
patie^tly. Secondly, Aristot. lib. 1. de anim.
not to be moved without a cause. Thirdly, not to give place to any trouble.
Fourthly, not to envy them, which manage, although simply, matters of estate.
Fifthly, a patient man must spare him, that has offended him being his weaker,
and must spare himself, if his stronger has iniuried him. For what skilleth
it, whether fortune always displeases thee? can not thou contemn her
frowns, and accompany God the author of all things without murmuring?
Consider with thy self, how God tempts some good men with adversity, lest
that long prosperity should puff up their minds with pride, and how he
suffers others to be molested with pensiveness and damages, that thereby
they might confirm the virtues of their minds. Perhaps thou complainest of
sickness, or of sturdy servant. Admit thou art so vexed, yet
notwithstanding remember, that Eurip. in Orest.
there is no passion so great, no calamity so grievous, whose weight man's
nature fails to sustain. Follow the example of Casimire Duke of Polonia, who
playing at dice with a certain Nobleman of his realm, chanced to win a
great sum of money, and thereupon would needs give over. But the Nobleman,
whose money he chiefly won, was there at so fiercely moved, that he stroke
his Duke, and by the benefit of the night escaped away scotfree. Nevertheless,
the next day following he was apprehended and brought before the Duke, every
man believing, that he should lose his head. Yea, many of the Barons persuaded
the Duke to put him to death. Whereunto his grace answered in this wise:
Truly, I know no cause, why I should punish him, seeing that, whatsoever he
did, was done in rage: my self rather am worthy of blame, for that I used
such unseemly gaming; we must give losers leave to chafe.

But to return to my matter, percase thou art poor: suppose thou be; can
thou not by study ouerwhelme this grief? nature is with a little satisfied. I
am banished, thou say, and by envious flatterers brought into disdain among
my chiefest friends. What? will thou therefore torment thy body and mind, and
deface the workmanship of God? no* For these misfortunes are not peculiar to
thee alone, but common either early or late unto all mortal creatures. Let the
freedom of thy banishment comfort thee, as that, which is far to be
preferred before domestical servitude. In fine, forget not to think upon
those famous wights, who chanced to be buried in a foreign soil.

Of Anger. Chap. 54.
ALthough I have written of this furious vice In Comment. in Sat. 5. Persi.
else where: yet notwithstanding, I will adventure once again to express the
same in a more familiar tongue; and to make it appear the more easy, I hold
anger to be dangerous for nine reasons. First, it is contrary to Gods spirit,
for where by it we are borne anew and of wild wolves made tame sheep: so
contrariwise Anger corrupts us, and of sheep reduces us to be wolves.
Secondly, Anger permits not a man to follow good and wholesome counsels, nor
to consider of that, which he has to do. Thirdly, Anger is accompanied with
ambition, and causes a man to slay himself, as for example, Sophoc. in Aiac^,
and Ovid. lib. 13. Metam.
Ajax seeing that the Grecians had preferred Ulysses before him, and had
bestowed upon him the armor of Achilles as a recompense of his wisdom, fell
mad, and in his madness killed himself. Fourthly, Anger makes a man to
reveal secrets like to a drunkard. Fifthly, Anger diffigureth a man, for it
causes him to stammer and hack in his speech, to wax red, to look pale; yea,
it causes his blood to boil, as if there were a torche put under: his eyes
sparkle, he biteth his lips, he beats the board with his fist, he stampeth
against the ground, and flingeth, and ouerturneth all things, that are next
about him. Sixthly, Anger thirsts greatly after revenge. Seventhly, Homer.
lib. 7. Iliad.
Anger disturbeth all things, and is the cause of all evil. Eighthly, Anger
destroieth all the virtues. Lastly, Ennius apud Cicer^ne^ li. 4. Tusculan.
Anger is the beginning of madness.

Remedies against Anger. Chap. 55.
EVen as they that fear to be besieged, do beforehand prepare victuals to
avoid famine, and also bulwarks, and warlike engines to repel the enemy, and
defend themselves: so in like manner they, that see themselves naturally
disposed to anger, ought to premeditate, and find out beforehand certain
medicines for the same; with which being made mild, they may resist anger, or
at least so temper themselves, that they may not be afflicted. In consideration
whereof, I will set down ten kinds of salues. The first is, that the
angry man Ephesians. 4.
let not the sun go down upon his wrath: nor delay it, for fear lest
delayed anger breed hatred. The second remedy, the angry man must have a
lowly and humble spirit, and Senec. in Thebaid.
addict his mind to piety, and to the reading of the scriptures. The third, he
must not be too credulous, curious, nor superfluous in any thing. The fourth,
he must persuade himself, how that every man is by nature, dull, weak, and
frail, and therefore hard for his servants to please him. The fifth salve
against anger is, that the angry man read the treatises of Philosophers
concerning patience, and gather some flowers thereof into a breuiarie. The
sixth, he must when some have offended him, repeat over some tract or other,
before he be thoroughly angry. The seventh, let the angry man bethink with
himself, touching the ill-favored countenance of such, whom he saw angry; and
when he himself is angry, he must take a looking-glass in his hand, and
therein behold the fashion of his face, and whether it be altered or no. The
eight, the angry patient must eschew such meats as engender choler, and eat
the contrary: and, if yet he amend not, he must repair to the Physician,
and either purge that choleric humor, or else use Phlebotomie. The ninth,
let him muse upon the passion of our Savior Christ. The tenth and last salve
is, that he weigh with himself the uncertainty of this life, and consider of
the joys of heaven, and of the torments of hell.

Remedies against adversity, and loss of worldly goods. Chap. 56.
WHen I consider with my self the instabilitie of this fickle world, and
behold the adversity, which sundry honest men sustain, I am pricked in
conscience, and enforced to impart those few medicines which I know, unto the
view of the world. Act. 3.
Gold and silver have I none, yet such as I have, that give I unto you. My
first remedy is, that the afflicted person have recourse to God, and heartily
beseech his Majesty to forgive him all his sins. The second, the distressed
patient must believe, that all adversities whatsoever, tend to some scope or
other, namely, for our misdemeanors toward GOD, or for our trial: and for
this cause it is expedient, that he rejoice and be glad, that God has such a
respect unto him, in chastizing him in this world. The third remedy is, that
he persuade himself to be free, and his own man: whereas others live in
subjection to their devilish pelf, and are toyled with legions of troubles.
Boethius lib. 1. de Consolatione philosophiae. metr. 4.
This the patient Philosopher confirms: Whosoever (quoth he) cares and
fears the loss of worldly things, or wishes for temporal goods, is not his
own man, nor at liberty. The fourth salve for adversity is, that the patient
man read over the scripture diligently, and there behold, as in a clear
glass, the adversity and poverty of Christ and his disciples. The fifth
remedy in such a case is, to Cominaus li. 5 cap. 5.
Confer with some familiar friend: for that eases the mind, and by talking
thus in counsel with a faithful friend, the spirits recover their former
virtue and strength. The sixth, that he either read himself, or hear some
other reading the Treatises of moral Philosophy, namely, Seneca the
Philosopher, Plutarch, Boethius, and Petrarch. The seventh, that he Plautus in
Asin.
resolve himself to be constant, stout, and patie^t, for it is a fond thing to
seek the avoiding of that, which cannot by any means be avoided. The eight
medicine is, that he premeditate with himself, after what manner he might bear
his adversity, that is, whether it be better to dwell in his own country, or
in a foreign land: and whether he should apply himself to this or that
occupation: The ninth reason is to remember, that Lucretius li. 3. de rerum
natura.
man's mind is more vehemently stirred up to religion in adversity, rather
the^ in prosperity. The tenth and last is, to busy himself with labors, and
to exercise his body daily, that thereby he may the sooner forget his woonted
griefs. There be some, that give three natural purgations or remedies for
sorrow, to wit, weeping, sighing, fasting. But these in my judgment are very
hurtful, for they impair the force of the body, and deface the handie-worke of
God.

The tenth part.
Of friendship. Chap. 57.
FRiendship ought to be had in regard among mortal men, chiefly for seven
reasons: First, because Eurip. in Helen.
there is a certain desire of friends, to know the miseries of their friends.
Secondly, friendship ought to be respected for the friendly similitude, which
is between God and good men. Thirdly, because Cic. in Laelio, and Manilius.
lib. 2. Astron.
there is nothing more agreeable to nature, and more convenient, as well to
prosperity, as to adversity, then it. Fourthly, for that one friend will
help another in doubtful matters. Fifthly, Horatius lib. 1. satyr. 4.
A friend will defend a friend in his absence. Sixthly, friendship is
prayse-worthie among men, because it is regarded among birds, and also, among
things which are without life: as for example, there is friendship between
the Peacocke and the Dove: between the Chough and the Heron: Vines love the
Elm tree: the myrtle likewise is a friend to the Olive: and if the Almond
grow alone, it proves altogether unfruitful. Let us pry into mineralles,
and we shall see friendship betwixt the loadstone and the iron, and between
the Emerald and gold: If we consider of heavenly bodies, we shall find,
that Mercury, Luna, Sol, and Jupiter, are friends to Saturn, and that Mars
and Venus are his enemies. All the Planets saving Mars and Saturn, are
friends to Jupiter. Finally, among friends al things are common, for Arist.
lib. 4. Ethic.
A friend is a second self.

How a man should know his friend. Chap. 58.
MAny there be, that meeting by chance either in traveling, or at ordinaries,
do believe, that from that instant a sure league of friendship is established
between them, which in good truth can never be so, by reason that in the time
of trial there is no more effect of such friends, then between the Crow and
the Kite, of whom (as the Fable goes) when it happened to the one to be bare
of plumes, and would needs borrow some, the other answered, that he had no
more then was sufficient for him.

Of this rank was King Richard the second of this Realm, who in the year of
our Lord 1398. created Henry Bolling brook Earl of Darby, Duke of Hereford,
and four other Earls, at that time made he Dukes, and parted lands among
them, thereby thinking to have gotten firm friends. But boughtfriendes are
seldom sure, as being like unto Arabian ^auens, who so long as they are full,
do make a pleasant noise, but being empty, they yield a fearful cry. So
in like manner it chanced to this King Richard, as being shortly after deposed
by the Duke of Hereford (afterward King Henry the fourth) whom, as I say de
before, he had friendly advanced to that honor.

Wherefore a man that would be circumspect, and know his friend, must
principally know these positions. First, let him consider, whether his
friend be ambitious: because that Cicero in oration. pro Milon.
Ambition is fearful, and for the least cross of fortune, will forsake true
friendship. Secondly, whether his friend be covetous, for that Salust. in
coniurat. Catil.
Covetousness sells friendship, faith, and honesty. Thirdly, let him
prove his friend aforehand in matters of importance, for if he then go
forward with a ready affection, he may be assured of him against the next
time: but if he once stagger, or seem cold that way, he knows what he
has to do.

Of Flattery. Chap. 59.
Flattery is hardly discerned from friendship, by reason that in every
motion of the mind, it is glozingly intermingled with it, but in their deeds
they are mere adversaries, for flattery dissenteth from it in all virtuous
actions. This a wife man will soon epsy, and that especially by these tokens.
First, a flatterer is accustomed to praise a man before his face, and yields
his consent with him in all matters, as well bad as good. Secondly, a Iuuen.
Satyr. 3.
flatterer is wont to commend the deformity of his friend, when he is
present, and to admire his stammering voice. Thirdly, A Flatterer, when a man
has need of him, turns his back. Fourthly, a flatterer will take upon him
at first to contradict a man, and by little and little he will yield as
vanquished, and will shake hands with him: these be the properties of a
Flatterer, of whom let every honest man beware; for (as the Poet says) Oui.
lib. 2. Eleg.
Wicked poison lurketh under the sweetest honey. And it is better to fall among
a company of crows, then to come among Flatterers, because they will not
pecke a man till he be dead, whereas Flatterers will not spare to devour a
man being alive.

Objection.
A flatterer will smoothe and consent with you in all things, therefore he is
not vicious.

Answer.
A flatterer is either An Ape by imitation, for he will soothe a man so long
till he has gotten somewhat by him. A shadow by deceit, for he quickly
passes. A Basiliske by stinging, for with his very sight he wounds a man.


Of Ingratitude, with a remedy against it. Chap. 60.
BEcause ingratitude is the greatest token of all vices, and because the earth
brings forth nothing worse then an ungrateful man: I will anatomize both
the vice, and the lover thereof: First, in respect of our unthankfulness
toward GOD, and next, in consideration of so many ungrateful wretches, that
live in these accursed days.

Our first Parents having received unspeakable benefits at the hands of GOD,
as being created by him after his own likeness, and then constituted as
Monarchs over all other living creatures, showed themselves ungrateful for the
same, by eating of the forbidden Apple. Whose examples we imitating, do
persist, or rather surpass them in ingratitude, as, in forgetting GODS
exceeding love, when he spared not his only begotten son, but gave him even
to shameful death for our salvation.

Moreover, we are unthankful unto him for his singular care and favor, which
he exhibited in opening our stone-blinde eyes, and in lifting us out of the
dark pit of errors, wherein our forefathers by the illusions of the fiende,
and of his member the Pope, were enthralled, and in a manner sunk.

We are unthankful toward men, when we deface with forgetfulness the good
turns which we have received of our friends. This abominable kind of usage
is at this instant too much practiced by our own countrymen and Neighbors:
for it so comes to pass, that the greater the benefits are, the greater most
oftentimes is the ingratitude: and I know not who among the rest be more
unthankful, then children toward their Parents, and Scholars toward their
teachers, who in steed of thanks, do recompense them with disobedience,
lies, curses, slanders, and what not? O detestable sin! not the fowls of
the air, who altogether are ignorant of reason, have ever exercised the same.
We read, that Aelianus lib. 13. variar. histor.
A young man falling by chance among thieves, and crying out, was saved by a
Dragon, who by him being nourished, straightway knew his voice, and came to
help him. It is said of the Storke, that so often as she has young ones,
she casts one out of her nest into the chimney, for a guerdon and reward
unto him, that suffered her to lodge there. Oh, I would, that all they which
delight in the contrary, had been subject to the Persian King, for doubtless
then they would repent them of their ingratitude, when they should see their
necks in the halter. The Persians knew, that Xenoph li. 1. paed. Cyr.
the man, which of benefits received proved unthankful, was not worthy to
live.

Let men therefore beware, whom they accept into their favor and houses, for
it may be, their ghestes will become as grateful unto them, as the Adder,
whom the husband man, finding almost dead in the snow, brought home and
cherished. Aesop. in Fabu.
Which Adder being thus entertained, within a while after in lieu of his
fostering, infected all the whole house with his poison.

Now touching a preservative against this vice of ingratitude, mine opinion is,
that men have a good respect how they bestow their benefits, Co^minae. li. 2.
ca. 3
Seeing it is impossible for a wise man to be unmindful of a good turn: and
if they confer their gifts upon fools, they are worse then mad, because
they shall perceive in the end, that a fools acquaintance will stand them in
no stead.

Of hatred, and the punishment thereof. Chap. 61
IT is strange nowe-a-dayes to see, how one man is a woolfe to another, and how
their whole imaginations are set on naught else, save on destruction and blood.
Although they speak gently, and utter the words of the holy Prophets, yet
Persius Satyr. 5.
in their mustie minds they repose the Foxes subtilties, and hating their
brethren, are 1. Cor. 13.
as sounding brass and tinkling Cimballes. For which cause, let not beasts
excel us, who are wont to converse with all other of the same kind, and do
right kindly love together.

Let us not, I say, be at variance amongst our selves, and suffer the Devil
to have his tryumphant will, by provoking us to further mischief, and like
promooters, to lay trappes for our enemies. To fall out for every straw, and
to revenge every injury, is as if one member of the body should rebel
against another: and to say the truth, do we not daily see, how these kinds
of contentious men are ouermet withal, and overthrown in their own
inventions? Albeit they flourish for a while, yet notwithstanding, at last they
have their deserts: for GOD, when he strikes, strikes home, and to the quick.
For manifestation whereof, I will propose certain late examples, and which have
chanced within this last age.

In the year of our Lord 1503. Ceasar Borgias determining to poison a
Cardinal, and others, invited them to supper, and for that purpose, sent
before a flaggon of wine that was infected with poison, by a servant, that knew
nothing of the matter, commanding that no man should touch them: but such is
the judgment of God, who in the execution of justice, raises one tyrant to
kill another, and breaks the brands of fire upon the head of him that first
kindled it: Pope Alexander the sixth, Caesar Borgias his father, coming by
adventure in somewhat before Supper, and overcome with the exceeding drought of
the weather, called for drink: and because his own provision was not as the^
brought from the palace, he that had the infected wine in charge, thinking it
to be recommended to his keeping for wine most excellent, gave the Pope to
drink of the same wine, which Caesar Borgias his bastard son had sent: who
likewise arriving, while his father was drinking, drunk also of the same wine;
being but just, that they both should taste of the same cup, which they had
prepared for others.

In the year of our Lord 1563. the Duke of Guise purposing to sack the City
of Orleans, wrote unto the Queen Mother, that within four and twenty hours
after he would send her word of the taking of Orleans, wherein he would not
spare any man, woman or child whatsoever: and that after he had kept his
Shrouetide therein, he would in such sort spoil and destroy the town, that
the memory thereof should be extinct for ever. But man purposes, and God
disposes: for the same day, as the Duke about evening returned from the camp
to the Castle, where he lodged, minding to execute that, which he had written
unto the Queen, a young man named John Poltrot, having long time before
intended to give the stroke, stayed for him in the way, as he returned to his
lodging, and discharged his pistol laden with three bullets at him, whereof
the Duke presently after died.

In like manner the Duke his son, having occasioned that bloody massacre at
Paris in the year 1572. and purposing in the year 1588. utterly to root the
Protestants out of the realm, was himself slain through the commandment of
the French king his sovereign, whom he a little before most traitorously had
iniuried.

By these and such like examples, let us take heed, how we entrap one another;
yea, let us beware, how we curse and lay in wait for our chiefest enemies.
Vengeance is Gods, and he will reward. Briefly, let us embrace love, and
friendly agree together in Christ Jesus. For 1. Cor. 13.
love deferreth wrath: it is bountiful: love enuieth not: love does not boast
it self: it is not puffed up: it rejoices not in iniquity, but in the truth:
it suffers all things: it believes all things: it hops all things: it
endures al things.

Of Envy. Chap. 62.
NOt without reason are vices named brutish, for they be all borrowed from
brute beasts. Niggardize we have from the hedgehog: pride from the lion: anger
from the wolf: gluttony from the bear: sluggishnesse from the ass: and envy
from the dog. All which save envy may sophistically be justified: as for
example, niggardize is shadowed under the number and care of wife and children,
and otherwhiles under the veil of poverty. Pride pleads, that familiarity
breeds contempt, and that she must obey the importunity of the times. Anger
alleges the ingratitude of men, the indignity of injuries, the disparagement
and shame, that may follow by too much patience. Gluttony shows, that he
has a strong constitution of body, a good stomach to his meat, and therefore
hang sorrow and kill care. Sluggishnesse declares, that labor and study
consume the vital spirits, that he, which sleeps well, thinks no harm, and
he that thinks no harm, pleases God. Thus every vice for the most part can
shroud it self under some cloak or other. But, Envy, where is thy excuse?
Truly, thou have nothing to say for thy self. Only thou meanest to escape
away scotfree, because thou art concealed in man's heart, as being like unto a
tree, which in outward appearaunce seems to be most beautiful, and is full
of fair blossoms, but inwardly is rotten, worme-eaten, and withered. Now
a-daies thy subjects bear all the sway, they put men by the ears, they are
the Petifoggers, they the politicians, and who but they? Alas, Plaut. in
Bacchid.
there is no man, that enuieth not another man's prosperity. What then shall we
further expect? nothing, but the coming of the great Judge. We see all things
fulfilled; we see the father envious against the son, the son against the
father; to be short, we see one brother envious against another. Now is that
golden prophecy of the Greek Orator come to pass: to wit, Demost. Oration.
1. contra Aristo.
When equity and the common good are ouerturned by envy, then must we think
that all things are turned topsy turuy.

Examples as well domestical as foreign be infinite concerning envy: howbeit
at this time I will rehearse but one, and that a foreign one. In the year of
our Lord 1596. the Duke of Medina, seeing that our English fleet had burnt the
Spanish navy, and had taken the town of Cales, and doubting that the other
navy, which he had at S. Lucas would either be compelled to yield, or pay
ransom, was so envious of our happy success, that he caused it immediately to
be set on fire, so that to spare a reasonable redemption, he rashly lost twelve
millions of gold, which (as it is credibly reported) the navy valued.

Amongst other sins, which the Turks account deadly, this of Envy is not held
to be the least. For (say they) no man whatsoever shall ever come to the joys
of Paradise, although in all other things he be never so dutiful to please
God, except he be first thoroughly cleansed from this sin of Envy. Repent
therefore, thou sensual and envious man, and ask God forgiveness from the very
bottom of thy heart. Repent, I say, and God will heal thy Virgil. in poemat.
de liuor. Plura de his in Co^mentar. meis in Satyr. 6. Persii vide.
wound, which Chirons hand can never do: no nor Phoebus, nor Aesculapius,
Phoebus his dear son; no nor all the world besides.

Of Calumniation and slander. Chapt. 63.
EVen as they, which lay siedge unto cities, do not invade their enemies; where
they see the walls strong and massy, but where they perceive there is small
resistance, and where they see the place easy to be scaled: so they, that
pretend to backbite and slander others, do note what is most pliable and weak
in the hearers mind, that thereto they may conueigh their artillery, and bring
in their weapons, which are falsehood, craft, and perjury. This done, they
tickle the hearers ears, and rub them as it were with a pen: so that most
commonly the accusers are believed, and they, that are accused, are not called
to give answer. But in my judgment they, that lend their ears to these
curre-dogs barking, are no less to be reproved, then the barkers themselves,
because they wink at such imperfections, and will not exchange stripe for
stripe, I mean, because they will not punish and correct such slaunderers. Of
this brood I reckon many of our rascal trencherknights, who not only wind
themselves in by subtle devices, but also set their tongues to sale for a
morsel fo pasty-crust, and take a delight to sow dissension betwixt man and
wife, and betwixt brother and brother.

Examples I need not produce, for our pillories bear evident witness of their
slanderous dealings. Leave therefore to accuse your brethren, to snap honest
men by the shinnes, and to rail and scoff at them, that will not in any case
intermeddle with you. Be like unto new borne babes, and covet the milk of
love, that so you may not be guilty of that sentence, which the holy Ghost
pronounced, namely, that 1. Ioh. 3
whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer.

The eleventh part. Of the Intellectual virtues.
Of Art; and whether Art be better then Nature? Chap. 64.
THis name of Art has four significations. First, it is taken for the
universal perfection of Art, which we comprehend in GOD. So we say, that
Plato lib. 10. de Legib.
the world, and all that therein is, were made by Gods art. Secondly, the name
of Art is put for the similitude and shadow of that, which shines in beasts,
birds, flies, and such like. In this sense it is said, that the spider showed
unto us the art of spinning. The Be taught us to conform things in order. The
fish learned us the Art of swimming. Thirdly, the name of Art is extended to
the general habit of the mind, as far forth as we do any thing by it, that is
separated from nature. So Grammar, Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic, Logic,
Geometry, and Astronomy are called Arts. Likewise in this sense Prudence is
named the art of composing man's actions: Science the Art of discerning the
truth. Fourthly, the name of Art is taken for that true form of Art, which is
distinguished from the other habites of the mind, as far forth as it is
defined an habit of the mind joined with true reason, apt to effect. In this
signification I term it here an intellectual virtue. Herehence arises that
doubtful question, to wit, whether Art be better then nature? To this I
answer negatiuely, persuaded specially by these three reasons. The first,
Arist. li. 7. Metaphysic. text. 4.
the essence of a thing is better then the accident of a thing: Nature is an
essence, and Art an accident, therefore nature is better then Art. The second,
nature works inwardly, and alters the inward habit of the mind, but Art
only effects outwardly, and changes the outward form: therefore Art is not
better then nature. Finally, nature is joined with God, according to that
common sentence, God and nature do make nothing in vain: but Art is joined
with man, and by reason of man's weakness is subject to innumerable errors:
therefore nature is far better then Art.

Objection.
That which is later in birth, is first in excellency and perfection: Art is in
birth later then nature: therefore it is more excellent in perfection.

Answer.
Your rule only holds in corruptible things, namely, while that which is
first stays for the next which follows. But when the essence is compared
with the accident (as now it is) the essence is far more excellent, and by a
consequence nature is better then Art, and your sentence false.

Of Science or knowledge. Chap. 65.
THe name of Science is taken four manner of ways. The first, it is used for
every certain knowledge of a thing. So we say that the snow is white, the
crow black, the fire hot. The second, the name of Science is taken for every
true habit of the mind separated from the knowledge of the senses; in which
signification Hippocrates proved Physic to be a science. The third, it is used
more properly for every habit gotten by demonstration, separated from the habit
of actio^: in this sense supernatural philosophy is named the chiefest science.
The fourth, the name of science is taken more strictly for a habit gotten by
demonstration separated from wisdom; in which last signification Natural
philosophy, and the Mathematickes are called Sciences, and supernatural
Philosophy is termed humane Divinity.

The benefits, that come by this intellectual virtue, are three. First, it
aswageth man's mind being rude and barbarous, and makes it capable of true
reason. Secondly, science setleth a man's mind in constancy and discretion, that
he may spend his life to the welfare and good estate of his country. Thirdly,
it causes a man to end his days honorably, with an undoubted belief of
everlasting life.

Of Understanding. Chap. 66.
Understanding is an habit of the mind, whereby as with an eye we behold the
principles as well of practice as of conte^plation. I say with an eye, because
that the same, which the sight is in the body, understanding is within the
soul. This virtue is the reward of faith, Manil. (...). 4. (...). and ^lotin.
li. de anim. and idaeis, cap. 6.
the spirit of God, yt sun that gives glorious light unto all the world. In
a word, this virtue Calvin. lib. 1. Institut. ca. 15.
is as it were the guide and gouernesse of the soul. And yet all me^ are not
endued therewith, for now and then it happens, that we know more then we
understand. And except we pray ferue^tly unto God, we cannot with all our
pains and worldly labors attain unto it. Our eyes are blinded, and must be
opened. Christ, I mean, must breathe on us, that we may receive the holy
Ghost. The consideration of this moved Anaxagoras the Philosopher to affirm,
that Cic. Academic. quaestion. lib. 2.
understanding was the cause of the world, and of all order. This likewise
moved the Prince of Philosophers to Aristot. lib. 1. de animal. cap. 4.
prove the immortality of the soul by understanding. To be brief, by the help
of this virtue the soul sees God, and examineth the first causes of nature
and universal forms.

Of Prudence. Chap. 67.
ALl the authority and majesty of a Prince consists in the opinion of
prudence; for even as the sick man obeys the wise Physician, and the
passenger hearkeneth unto the skillful pilot: so in like manner subjects are
obedient unto their prudent Prince, and will gladly follow whatsoever he
prescribes unto them. O peerless paragon! O noble Prudence! thou Eccle. 1.
rairest down knowledge and understanding, and bring to honor, the^, that
possess thee. Thou defendest our commonwealth from the Spanish yoke. Sophocl.
in Antigon.
Thou hold the supremacy in felicity, and sauest us from adversity. Take
away this Jewel, and our lives will be filled with folly, wickedness, and
barbarism. This politicia^s do very well know; for how is it possible, that a
commonwealth should be well ruled, unless the governors thereof do perfectly
and prudently understand the number of soldiers, the love of the leaguers, the
situation of the country, and the nature of the inhabitaunts? King Henry the
seventh therefore her Majesty's Graundfather deserves great commendations, in
that he kept a private book for that purpose, and therein registered the force
of his realm, and the treasure, which yearly his officers received into the
Excheker. As concerning the nature of people, I find that windy places do make
men savage, and inconstant, and that in calm countries they become civil and
courteous. Also, we see, that they, which dwell near the sea, and far from
London, are for the most part more fierce and hardy, then those, which live in
the midst of England. Moreover, it behooves a prudent man to consider, that
some kind of people be angry by nature, some be impudent, some fearful, and
othersome be given to newfangled fashions, to drunkenesse, and lechery. In like
manner, Smith. li. 2. Reipub. Anglican. cap. 26.
the nature of Englishmen is to be courageous, to neglect death, to abide no
torment, and therefore Ibid.
in no place shall you see malefactors go more constantly, more assuredly, and
with less lamentation to their death, then in England. The nature of Welshmen
is kind, haughty, and prodigal of life and blood. The Irish are accounted rude
and courageous: which doubtless proceeds of their countries cold climate: for,
as the Philosopher says, Arist. in Probl.
they that live in the North, and in a cold country are commonly called
treacherous. To end this chapter of prudence, I think it expedient, that a
prudent man yield unto the necessity of the time, and take heed, that ancient
laws and customs be not altered, because Bodin. lib. 2. de Repub. cap. 3.
they are the fou^dations of a commonwealth, whereof if any be changed, the
whole building must consequently fall to wrack and destruction.

Of Sapience or Wisdom. Chap. 68.
Wisdom among the ancient heathen was no other thing, but a certain kind of
prudence to manage and handle great causes and matters of policy, Plutarc. in
Them. vita.
which profession beginning in Solon, did continue, and was taken up from man
to man as a sect of Philosophy. But wisdom among Christians has obtained a
higher title, to wit, a knowledge to expound the word of GOD concerning our
salvation redeemed through his Son Jesus Christ. This is that Divine virtue,
which was ordained from everlasting, before any thing was made: Prou. 3.
before the earth, the seas, the hills, and the rivers were, she was conceived
and brought forth. When GOD prepared the heavens, she was present: when he
environed the sea with her banks, and laid the foundations of the earth, she
was with him, making all things: and she delights to be with the children of
men. The Chymistes write, that one dragme of their power of proiection will
turn a thousand dragmes of any metal into gold. What then shall the least
grain of the celestial powder of wisdom be able to effect? Verily, it will
lift whole millio^s of souls out o^ Satan's net, and will transport them up
into the highest sphere: where for ever residen^, they shall enjoy
unspeakable pleasures. For this cause the Emperor Charles the fourth went on
a time to a college in Prage, to hear Divinity disputations there, and
remained standing above four hours. And when his Courtiers, to whom that
kind of exercise seemed irksome, told him, that his supper was ready, he
answered, that the hearing of those disputations was more pleasant unto him,
then all the suppers in the world. What greater testimonies of favor toward
wisdom can we wish, the^ those of the Princes of England, who frankly and
freely granted such large charters and privileges unto the 2. Universities of
this Realm? Surely I should be too ungrateful, if I do not remember in this
place Elizabeth our gracious Sovereign, who so spares neither care nor means
to prefer scholars, that she meriteth the name of the Nurse of Wisdom.
Next, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that now is, deserves to be had in
remembrance, in that he daily purges the Church of spots and Schisms, and
aduaunceth all students, every man according to his deserts. Likewise, Sir
Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper so tendereth and fostereth the professors of true
wisdom, that he is worthily named the Reuiuer and restorer of wisdom: yea,
I have heard it sundry times blazed, that England never had the like zealous
patron of scholars. There be also other furtherers of wisdom, whom I leave
to name, by reason that our books, which continually are published, do
royalize and eternize their heroical names. God continue them in their noble
minds.

To finish this discourse, I advise al me^ both high and low, which have an
entrance in them toward God, to countenance the followers of wisdom, and
to strike an everlasting league of amity with them. As for worldly wisdom, I
wish them not so pretiously to esteem it, as they do: for what else are the
wise men of this world, save gay politicians, Machiauellians, and niggards,
falsely under the color of wisemen, purloyning the poor, and preparing their
own selves to be* scourged of the Devil, and to be scorched in the fiery
flames of hell?

Of the Ignorance of our times. Chap. 69.
Boethius lib. 3. de Consolatione philosophiae. metr. 8.
ALas, what ignorance leads wretches astray, and brings them into a wrong
way clean contrary from happiness and knowledge? The Egyptians accounted it
a most grievous calamity, to endure the Exo. 10
Darkness which God sent them by Moses but three days. How much more ought
we to be afraid, when we remain all our lives time in the night of
Ignorance? Many there be, that wish our Colleges to be utterly suppressed,
and our schools of learning to be made barnes or wooll-houses, which were
even to wish us peasaunts and witals like themselves. But God forbid, that any
such ignorant wishes should be fulfilled. Sooner Ovid. li. 1. Trist. Eleg. 7.
shall the earth bring forth stars, and the heavens be eared with plowes:
then that barbarism and ignorance should in such sort ouerflow us. Take the
Sun out of the firmament, and the light from the sky: what else would the
world seem, save a massy Chaos, or a rude and confused lump? In like manner,
if learning be extinguished, would not we become dizarts or cuckoes? Nay, to
seek the decay and abolishing of learning, is to prepare a way for Atheism,
and consequently, to put a mart or market for the devil. O foolish Libertines,
and besotted with too much pleasure! You know, how to prize a fat bullock,
how to buy this tenement or that tenement of lands, and having bought it, you
know how to marle it, trim it, and stock it; you know right well how to
defray your money, to defraud your brethren of that, which God has allotted
unto them. To be short, you know how to wink at injustice, to receive
bribes, to fawn, and otherwhiles to pawn your credit for your private
commodities: yea, and which is worse, you know holes, crochets, and quiddities,
whereby you may (as you think) redeem, or indeed infringe your pawned
credit. And yet notwithstanding for all this, you make your selves so blind,
that you list not to know, where perfect goodness lies hidden.

Wherefore in fine repent, (a) Prou. 2.
Cause your ears to hearken unto wisdom, and incline your hearts to
understanding: for if you call after knowledge, and cry for understanding, if
you seek her as silver, and search for her as treasures, then shall you
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND Book of the Golden-groue moralized.
The first Plant.
Of a family, and the division thereof. Chap. 1.
BEcause every Commonwealth is composed of families, Arist. lib. 1. Polit.
and the parts of a Family be those, whereof it is immediately compacted: I
will first declare, what a Family is, and then lay down the division thereof. A
Family is a communion and fellowship of life between the husband and the
wife, the parents and children, and between the master and the servant. Now
touching the division of a family, I find, that it is divided into four
parts, whereof the first is matrimonial, that is, of man and wife, the second
is fatherly, to wit, of parents and children: the third part is masterly:
namely, of masters and servants: the fourth is, the acquisitiue, or getting
faculty. All which parts of a family, I mean, God willing, to decipher.

There be four kinds of matrimony. Chap. 2.
VEry children know, that there be four kinds of Matrimony: namely, that of
honor, of love, of toil, and of grief. The matrimony of honor is said to be
tripartite. The first is metaphysical, and supernatural, whereby God and man's
nature do mystically meet together. The effect whereof, was in the incarnation
of our Savior Christ. The second degree of the matrimony of honor is, when
God and the soul are combined, even by grace and glory. The third is, when
God and his Church meet together, and are united in one mystical body.

The matrimony of love is, when an honest man and an honest woman are linked
together by God, for the propagation of mankind.

The matrimony of toil, and that which is most common in this last rotten
world, is, when men choose wives not by the ears, that is, for their good
report; but by the fingers, to wit, for their large dowries; not in hope of
issue, but in regard of their outward beauty, which fades away like the
lillies of the field.

The matrimony of grief is nothing else, but the conjunction of the wicked
and the reprobate: this kind of matrimony was of late veeres put in ure and
use, by the sect of the Family of love.

The causes why Matrimony was instituted. Chap. 3.
GOd having finished the workma^ship of the world, created of every sex two,
male and female, and last of al he made man after his own image, giving him for
a copartner, a woman formed of the man's own rib, who^ coupling together in
matrimony, he blessed, saying: Increase, multiply, and replenish the earth.

The causes why he instituted matrimony, be five; the first, for the lawful
generation of children in his fear, even in the time of innocence, before man
had sinned. The second, for the avoiding of unclean fornication. The third
cause, for the mutual and reciprocal consolation and succor, which the one
might minister unto the other in distresses. The fourth, to be a token or type
of the Ecclesiastical marriage between Christ and us. The fifth cause of the
institution of Matrimony is, that adversaries might be reconciled by means of
it, and made perpetual friends.

How excellent a thing Matrimony is. Chap. 4.
AMong all the societies of this life, there is none so natural, as that
between man and wife. For (as we see) all other societies are accused of free
will and election: but matrimony proceeds not only of election and free
will: but also of necessity. The excellency of it appears by four reasons.
First, matrimony is ancient, as is manifest by the time and place, where it
was instituted, and Arist. li^ 3. Topic. cap. 1.
Every good is so much the more excellent, by how much the more ancient it
is. Secondly, matrimony was sanctified by GOD, and graced by his son our
redeemer Jesus Christ his presence, John 2.
at Cana a City in Galilee, where he wrought his first miracle in his
humanity by turning water into wine. Thirdly, Heb. 13.
marriage, as Saint Paul writes, is honorable among all: and every
honorable thing is more eligible then that, which is not honorable. Fourthly,
matrimony is excellent, because two are better then one. Fifthly, matrimony is
notable, because it carries with it a show of gravity, and has greater
privileges: as in Florence at this day, he that is father of five children,
straightway upon the birth of the fifth, is exempted from all impostes,
subsidies, and lones. Also, here in England, a married man is not so soon
pressed into the wars as singlemen or batchelers. In a word, nothing within
the round circle of this world is comparable to matrimony. What a wonderful
marriage is between the Sun and the earth? the Sun is the male, and with
his vegetative heat, quickneth and nourishes all earthly things: the earth is
the female, and conceiueth trees and Plants.

If we behold metals, we shall find that gold and silver are married (I mean
not in a niggards chest) for if a leaf of gold be put to a leaf of silver,
they will be so united, that they can never be severed. What more shall I add
to this induction? Arist. li. 1. Politicor.
He that shunneth marriage, and auoydeth society, is to be esteemed a wicked
wretch (as the Pope is) or more then a man, as he whom Homer reprehendeth,
saying: that he was tribelesse, lawless, and houselesse.

After what manner the ancients solemnized Matrimony. Chap. 5.
THe rites of matrimony were diverse* according to the diversities of Nations.
The Grecians accustomed to burn before the door of the new married the
axletree of that coach, wherein she was brought to her husbands house, letting
her to understand, that she was ever after to dwell there.

Among the Romans L. si a sponsa. C. de d^nat. ante nuptias.
The future couple sent certain pledges one to another, which most commonly
they themselves afterward being present, would confirm with a religious
kiss. And when the marriage day was come, the bride was bound to have a chaplet
of flowers or herbs upon her head, and to wear a girdle of sheeps wool
about her middle, fastened with a true-loues knot, the which her husband and
must loose. Herehence rose the Proverb: He has undone her virgins girdle:
that is, of a maid he has made her a woman. It is reported of some, that the
wife, as soon as she was come to her husbands house, presented to her husband
fire in one hand, and water in the other: which gave to understand, that as
these two elements were most necessary of al others for conservation of man's
life: so there could no society be nearer linked together, then that of the
husband and wife.

The ancient Frenchmen had a ceremony, that, when they would marry, the
bridegroom should pare his nails, and send the^ unto his new wife: which
done, they lived together afterward as man and wife.

In Scotland the custom was, that the lord of the soil should lie with the
bride before her husband. But because this order was not dece^t nor tolerable
among Christians, King Malcolme, the third of that name in the year of our
Lord 1095. abolished that wicked custom, and enacted, that every bride
thencefoorth, should pay to the Lord for ransom of her maidenhead, five
shillings.

Marriages among the Gentlemen of Venice, were for the most part concluded upon
by a third person, the bride being never permitted so much as to see her new
husband, nor he her, till their nuptial dowry was fully treated of and
agreed; which being finished, they were married with great pomp and solemnity.

Concerning the ancient order of marriages in Turkey, they held it an indecent
thing, for the bride to be brought home to her future husband with musical
instruments, but they thought it meet, that the married couple should present
themselves before God, with all humility and reverence: and after that these
ceremonies were ended, they were led to their bedchamber, which was provided
for them in a very secret and dark place: the next morning at the dawning of
the day, the husband (by Mahomets law) is bound to ask his wife, whether she
can read or no. If she cannot, then must he learn her to read. In like sort,
if she can read, and her husband not, then must she teach and instruct him.
This was the old manner of marriages among the Turks. Howbeit, at this day, they
are grown to such excess of voluptuousness, that they rather resemble beasts
then men.

Of Matrimony in England, at this day solemnized. Chap. 6.
Matrimony in England is accounted finished, after that it is solemnized in
presence of the minister, and two lawful witnesses. Superstitious ceremonies
there are none. Only the Priest is bound openly in the Church to ask the
banes: to wit, whether any man can allege a reason, wherefore they that are
about to be married, may not lawfully come together. Which being done, and no
exception made, they then are joined in the holy linkes of matrimony. Also, in
some shieres, when the marriage day approaches, the parents of the betrothed
couple, do certain days before the wedding, write letters, to inuit all
their friends to the marriage, whom they desire to have present. Afterward,
the marriage day being come, ye invited ghests do assemble together, and at the
very instant of the marriage, do cast their presents, (which they bestow upon
the new married folks) into a basin, dish, or cup, which stands upon the
Table in the Church, ready prepared for that purpose. But this custom is
only put in use amongst them, which stand in need.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that if the wife be an Inheritrix and landed,
she is to let her husband enjoy it during his life and hers: the which
afterward descends to her eldest son, or in defect of sons, it is equally
parted between her daughters. Howbeit, nevertheless, if she die barren
without children, the husband loses all: because lands ever (by the common
law of England) follow the succession. But if she once had a child by him,
which was heard to cry, the courtesy of our country is such, that y^ husband
possesses the said lands during his life. If the wife have only moueables, as
money, plate, cattle, and such like, all belong to her husband.

To knit up this discourse, Smith. lib. 3. de Republic. Anglic. cap. 8.
If the husband have any lands, either by inheritance descended, or purchased
and bought, and chance to die before his wife, she shall have the vsufruit of
one third part of his lands during her life, as her dowry, whether he has
child by her or no.

The duties of the husband toward his wife. Chap. 7.
THe duties of a husband toward his wife are 7. The first, that he 1. Pet. 3
give honor to his wife, as the weaker vessel, for she is partaker of the
grace of life. The second, he must patiently brook the hastiness of his
wife, for there is nothing in the world more spiteful then a woman, if she be
hardly dealt withal, or egged to indignation. Hence is the proverb: Anger thy
dog, and he will bite thee. The third duty, Casus lib. 1. Thesaur. Oecono.
cap. 4.
The husband in any case must not have carnal copulation with any other but
his own wife, for that is very unjust, by reason it dissolueth the girdle of
faith and chastity, and is the next way to cause her to hate him: a woman is
jealous, and naturally suspicious, and since her husband breaks with her, she
will not stick to break with him, and privily borrow a nights lodging with
her neighbor. The fourth duty, the husband must not injury his wife by word
or deed, for a woman is a feeble creature, and not endued with such a noble
courage as the man; she is sooner pricked to the heart, or moved to passions,
then man: and again, he, that iniurieth his wife, does as if he should spit
into the air, and the same spittle return back upon his own self. The
fifth, the husband in disputations with his wife, must sometimes confess
himself vanquished by her. The sixth, the husband must provide for his wife,
and for her housekeeping, according to his ability. The seventh, the husband
must suffer his wife to be merrily disposed before him, otherwise (a woman's
nature is such) she will by stealth find out some secret place or other to
tattle in, and to disport her self. The eight and cheifest duty is, that the
husband have a special regard not to make two beds, for so he may take away
all causes of displeasure: also, if either of them chance to jar, by this
means they may be soon pacified.

The duties of the wife toward her husband. Chap. 8.
But what shall the woman do? shall she do what seems good in her own eyes?
no: for S. Peter speaks unto wives in this wise: 1. Pet. 3
Let wives be subject to their husbands: which is as much to say, as they must
not contradict them in any point, but rather endeavor to please them by all
means. The second duty, the wife must not forsake her husband in adversity, or
deride him, as Jobs wife did, when she bad him Job 2.
curse God and die, but she ought to comfort and cherish him, as a part of her
own body. The third, she must esteem the manners of her husband to be the
legal rules of her life. The fourth, she must not be too sumptuous and
superfluous in her attire, as, decked with frizled hair, embrodery, precious
stones, gaudy raiments, and gold put about, for they are the forerunners of
adultery: 1. Pet. 3
But let her have the inward man in her heart, which consists in the
incorruption of a mecke and quiet spirit, that is before God a thing much set
by. For even after this manner in time past did the holy women, which trusted in
God, attire themselves, and were subject to their husbands. The fifth, she must
not be jealous, or mistrust her husbands absence. The sixth duty of a wife is
carefully to ouersee her household, and to bring up her children and servant
in the fear of God. The seventh, she must not discover her husbands
imperfections and faults to any, for by disclosing them, either she makes her
self a jesting stock, or else she ministers occasion for knaves to tempt her to
villainy. The eight duty of a wife is, that she gibe not, nor flout her husband,
but bear with him as long as she may.

Of Diuorcement. Whether the innocent party, after a diuorcement made, can
marie again during the other parties life. Chap. 9.
MAny me^ now a-daies forgetting the plighted troth of man and wife are so
deuoid of judgment and vnderstandding, that they make no conscience to prove
them separated, Matthew. 19.
whom God has joined together. Yea, some proceed further, saying, that a man
having taken his wife in adultery, may not only put her away, but also marry
another, notwithstanding the first being alive. Which last opinion of theirs,
because it seems somewhat probable, I will, as well as I ca^, discuss. S.
Paul says, that the Lord commands the wife 1. Cor. 7
not to depart from her husband: but and if she do, then be wills her to
remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband. In which words might be
made a doubt, whether the Apostle meant the guiltless or guilty party.
Howbeit, I find a defensive answer, namely, that he meant the guiltless
wife, for this commandment (let not the wife depart from her husband)
implies not this sense, to wit, let not the wife be constrained as guilty to
depart from her husband, but rather, let not the wife being guiltless be
author of diuorcement, and so by order of law depart from her guilty husband.

Further, if it were lawful for the guiltles to marie again during the other
parties life, there would be made a way for infinite diuorcements; yea, and the
commonwealth would be endaungered by reason of often dissentions, cauillations,
and innouations: whereas otherwise, me^ knowing, that either they must live
singly, or be reconciled, seldom or never should we see diuorcements.

To knit up this doubtful and litigious question, I resolve on this, namely,
that we being Christians should consider that the spiritual marriage, which is
betwixt Christ and his Church, is now and then polluted by us with spiritual
fornication, and that notwithstanding all this, it pleases his Divine majesty
to be at a new atonement with us, and to comfort us after this manner: Ierem. 3
Return, O ye disobedient children, and I will heal your rebellions. For
even Iere. 20.
as a woman has rebelled against her husband: so have ye rebelled against me.
In like sort it behooves us to forgive one another, and to imitate our savior
Christ, who mercifully pardoned the woman, whom the Scribes and Pharisees took
in adultery, saying unto her: Ioh. 8.
Go, and finne no more. To be short, we ought to think how troublesome
second marriages are like to be, both for the childrens sake, and also for the
guilty party, who being out of all hope of reconciliation, will fall to
despair, and to greater vices, and perhaps never afterward will become
reformed.

Of Jealousy. Chap. 10.
Jealousy is a malady of the mind, engendered of love, which will not admit a
corriuall or copartner in the thing beloved. To this passion the wild ass is
most subject: for in a whole herd of females there is but one male, and he is
so jealous, that he will not permit any other to come amongst them: and when
the female happens to have a male colt, the sire with his teeth will bite off
his stones, as fearing he would cover his damme. Among men, the Italians be
most jealous, for they, if their wives do but once commune, albeit openly with
men, do presently suspect them of adultery. The Germans of all nations are
less jealous, although their women be very fair. Pope Pius the second,
otherwise called Aeneas Siluius in the year of our Lord 1461. being at the
bathes in Germany, wondered much at the boldness of the Dutchwomen, who would
eue^ with men step naked into the bathes; whereupon he was wont to say, that
the Germans were far wiser then the Italians. Our women here in England,
Smith. lib. 3. de Republ. Anglic. cap. 8.
although they be in the power of their husbands, yet they be not so
straightly kept as in mew, and with a guard, as they be in Italy and Spain, but
have almost as much liberty as in France, or in Germany, and they have for the
most part all the charge of the house and household, which is the natural
occupation and part of a wife. In sum, there is no nation under the cope of
heaven less jealous then ours, who tender their wives so kindly and
charitably, that Smith. lib. 3. de Republ. Anglic. cap. 8.
at their deaths they make them either sole or chief executrices of their last
wills and testime^ts, and have for the most part the government of the
children and their portions.

The second Plant.
The duty of Parents toward their children. Chap. 11.
PArents must have a careful eye to their children, because thereupon
principally depends the glory of their house. And that their duties toward
them may the more manifestly appear, I will set down what they ought to do.
First of all, Parents must teach their children to pray unto God, to rehearse
the Creed, and the ten Commau^dements, and to catechize them in the chiefest
points of faith. Secondly, they must beware, that they come not among such
fellows as swear, curse, and such like, and to that end they must place
discreet tutours over them. Thirdly, parents must break them from their
wills, and correct them sharply, when they offend (yet not in their anger) for
Prouer. 23.
in smitting with the rod, they shall deliver their souls from hell. Fourthly,
parents must not permit their children to wear gorgeous attires or newfangled
dresses, but rather declare unto them the vanity thereof. Fifthly, parents must
procure them wise and learned teachers, when they are fit to go to schole.
Sixthly, parents must not mar their children by marying them, during their
minorities, neither cause them against their wills to be assured. Seventhly,
parents must see, that their children live in unity, peace, and concord; for
if debate and discord be pernicious among al men, how much rather between
brethren? Lastly, parents must ordinarily use equality among their children so
near as they may, and not show more affection to one then to another, least
thereby they provoke the^ to anger and desperation.

Of the duty of childr^^ ^^wards their parents. Chapt. 12.
THe first duty of children toward their parents is, they Coloss. c. 3. and l.
1. ff. de obsequi. parent. and patron. praesta^d.
obey them in all things, for that is well pleasing unto the Lord. Also, they
must remember, that the earthly father is the true representer of God the
universal father, and therefore Pythag. in aureis carmin.
next after God to be had in reverence. The second duty of children toward
their parents is, that they endeavor by all means possible to assuage their
parents anger. Thirdly, l. ff. de agnosce^d. and alend. liber.. 1. and 2. and
l. 1. C. de alend. liber.
children must help their parents in their old age, and supply their wantes
with all necessary complements.

Of Brotherly love. Whether a man should prefer his friend before his
brother? Chap. 13.
NOthing is more acceptable unto the Lord, the^ that brethren should love one
another. The which undoubtedly by his sovereign majesty is engraven at our
birth, for we see the first occasion of this amity to be bred even from our
nativity. Therefore it is the duty of a brother not to be angry or discover
the faults of his brother. Further, it is the part of a brother to love his
brother above all other, for he may daily get many of this friendly mould, and
more, if these fail: but it is no more likely to get a new brother, then to
get an eye, which is drawn out, or an hand, which is chopped off. Hence springs
that question, whether a man should prefer his friend before his brother? To
this I answer negatiuely, that he should not; and especially for these two
reasons. First, we are bound to follow nature, if she leads us not astray,
(for who so ever follows nature, follows God, by whom she is directed)
therefore we are bound to love our brethren above our friends, seeing that by
nature we are chained with our brethren, and whatsoever we bestow on them, we
bestow on our selves. Whereunto sounds that saying of the Poet: Hesiod. apud
Plutarch. de fratern. amore.
Take heed, that thou make not thy friend equal with thy brother. Secondly,
the love of brethren is better then the love of friends, for it includes in it
more then the other; as for example, when friends be at variaunce, we see
nothing left betwixt them; but if brethren chance to disagree, the knot
notwithstanding of brotherhood in despite of them remains steadfast: moreover,
a man being forsaken of all his parasitical friends, is nevertheless of his
brother, as it were by a natural instinct received and comforted.

To be brief, I exhort all brethren to assist one another with mutual love,
and not to believe any whispering makebates, whose only drift is to shift for
themselves, and to oppose not only friend against friend, but also for their
own private good to put brother against brother. This exhortation of mine if
brethren will embrace, let them assure themselves, that they shall enjoy the
felicity of the celestial Paradise, which is already prepared for them.

Of disobedient Sons. Chap. 14.
THe very Turks themselves according to the second commandment contained in
their Alcoran, do require such dutiful obedience of children toward their
parents, that they expressly forbid any, upon pain of death, to gainsay them
either in word or deed. Besides, it is an article of their belief, that God
will never forgive them, who are accursed of their parents. Yea, they assure
themselves, that no sorrow, nor penitent contrition of mind is ever able to
wash or do away the foul burden of the parents curse. Likewise, the Cause. 6.
q. 1. Can. 17.
Popish Canonists do condemn the^ as infamous, which rebel against their
parents. What then shall we do, that are reformed Christians? shall we suffer
the son to abuse the father, to commence suit against him, and approbriously
to endamage him? no. God forbid. We will rather L. si filius tuus. C. de patri.
potest.
lead him to the magistrate, who shall impose on him, what punishment soever
the father demands. We will Deuter. 21.
stone him to death for his unnatural disobedience. But suppose he were left
unpunished, would he not (think you) be cut off as an unprofitable member by
the just judgment of God? would not his days be shortened? Yea, yea; he shall
not only die in this world, but also his body in the world to come shall always
be tormented in hot scalding lead, and his soul for ever shall endure the
horrible pains of hell.

We read in our English Chronicles, that the son of Henry the second, king of
this land, by the instigation of the French King took arms against his own
natural father, betwixt whom diverse mighty battles being fought, the victory
always inclined to the father, so that the disobedient and rebellious son
was enforced to desire peace, which the father mercifully granted, and forgave
him his offense. Howbeit notwithstanding, God the aue^ger of such abominable
factes punished him for his disobedience, by causing him to die 6. years
before his father. A meet punishment (no doubt) for him, seeing that he could
not tarry till after his fathers death. Further, we hear, that there was of
late days a certain man, that dwelt in a village near to Cambray, who in a
great fury threw his own mother out of his house three times in one day, and
the third time told her in anger, that he had rather see his house on fire,
then that she should abide there one day longer. But mark the end; It fortuned
that on the very same day according to his speech, his house was strangely
fired, and quite consumed to ashes. An evident sign assuredly of Gods
displeasure. The examples whereof I would to God might serve for a warning to
all children, if not to mollify, yet at least to terrify the^ from dealing
crookedly and peruersly with their parents, Exo. 20 Leuit. 11 Deuteronomy. 5.
whom God himself commanded to honor, and left here in this world as semblable
images of himself.

The third Plant.
Of the duty of masters toward their servant. Chap. 15.
THe duty of Masters toward their servant I comprise in six points. First, I
counsel masters not to keep any servant in their houses, that are given to
swearing, gaming, whoring, drinking, or to any such notorious crimes. Secondly,
I exhort masters to have a special care, that their servant be catechized
and taught in the word of GOD. Thirdly, they must not make them labor on the
Sabbath day. Fourthly, they must see that their servant lie not abroad in the
nights. Fifthly, masters must gravely correct their servants according to the
quality of their faults, least being let alone, they wax bold, and so fall
into worse courses. Lastly, masters must look, that their servant receive
their wages or hires at due times.

Of the Sabbath day. Whether a master ought to set his servant at work on
the Sabbath day? Chap. 16.
Extr. de feriis. C. 1.
THe Sabbath both in the old and new testament is sanctified and hallowed; and
L. 3. C. de feriis.
in it magistrates, townsmen, and all men o^ what quality soever they be, must
surceas^ from working, chiefly for four reasons First, that they might
remember the creation of the world, for Exodus 20.
in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and all, that therein is, and
rested the seventh day. Secondly, that they might assemble together, and
gratefully thank his divine majesty for his daily blessing powered down upon
them. Thirdly, that they might recreat, refresh, and repose themselves, to
the end they might labor the next week more aptly. Fourthly, the Sabbath is to
be observed, by reason it is the seventh day; which number contains great and
hidden mysteries. The sky is governed by seven Planets. The reuolutio^ of time
is accomplished in seven days, which we call weeks. Genesis 7.
God commanded Noah to take into his arc clean beasts and foul by seuens.
Genesis 41
Pharaoh dreamed that he saw seven fat kine and seven lean. 2. Sam. 21.
David delivered seven of Saul's sons to the Gibeonites to be hanged. Zach. 3.
Christ being termed the first stone of God has seven eyes. 1. Reg. 19.
Seven thousand men did God reserve, that never bowed their knees to Baal.
Zach. 4
Zachariah in a vision saw a candlestick of gold, with a bowl upon the top of
it, and seven lamps therein, and seven pipes to the lamps. Job 1.
Job had seven sons. Tob. 12
Seven Angels go forth before God. Neither were 2. Machab. 7.
the seven brethren whom Antiochus put to death, void of a mystery. Apo. 1.
S. John in the Revelation saw seven golden Candlestickes, and in the midst
of them the Son of man having in his right hand seven stars. Moreover,
Ibid. 8.
he saw the opening of the seventh seal, and the seven Angels, which stood
before the Lord, to whom were given seven trumpets. Ibid. 17
The Antichrist is prophesied to sit upon a scarlet colored beast, which hath^
seven heads. By which, as all true Christians be persuaded, the Pope and his
Cardinals attired in Scarlet, and his seven hilled city of Rome are meant. What
more shall I write of the worthiness of this seue^fold number? man's life goes
by seuens, named climactericall years, which In Ciceron. de somnio Scipionis.
Macrobius has well observed. Since therefore it has pleased God so to esteem
of this number, let us Christians honor the same, as fearing the scourage of
the commander.

It was ordained by a good and godly act made in ye parliament of Scotland in
the year of our Lord 1512. being the one and twentieth year of the reign of
James the fourth, that no markets, nor fayres should be holden on the Sabbath
day. Which act King James the sixth, that now is, by the consent of his three
estates, ratified and approved in the Parliament holden in the year 1579.
co^demning the breakers of the Sabbath to forfeit all their moueables to the
use of the poor within that parish, where they dwelt. It was likewise there
enacted, that no handiwork should be used on yt Sabbath, nor any gaming,
playing, passing to Tauernes, nor wilful remaining from prayer and Sermons,
should be in any case exercised under the penalties following: to wit, of
every man for his laboring, as often as he was taken in the fact, ten
shillings: and of every person for gaming, playing, passing to Tauernes, and
wilful remaining from prayer and Sermons on the sunday, twenty shillings to
be presently paid, and employed to the relief of the poor in their parish.
I could wish, that some speedy good order were taken here in England, for the
breakers of the Sabbath. For many now a-dayes, having been idle all the week
before, do of set contumacie labor that day in despite of the Lord and his
Sabbath. Some from morning to evening do nothing else but play at dice or
tables, swearing and staring at the least cross of fortune. Others again be
delighted with reading of pa^phlets, louebooks, ballads, and such like, never
once so devout as to name God, unless shamefully abusing him. Oh how often do
they use on that day unseemly speeches? the very Turks, I fear me, go beyond
them in devotion. For they duly on their festiual days resort to their
Churches, never once gazing or looking aside as long as service lasts. The
service being ended, they go home each man to his house, inuiting, and humbly
beseeching the priests to bear them company: with who^ they question touching
divine matters, not by carping, nicking, and nipping, but with pure simplicity
and fervent care; whereas many of us Christians contrariwise, do openly profane
not only holidaies, but also the Lords day, and yet they term themselves
Christians. Christians, O cou^terfeit Christians, and worse the^ Painims. Me
thinks, if nothing else could move you, yet the daily myraculous punishments
inflicted on such profane persons as you be, should be a terrible warning
for you.

At Kinstat a town in France, dwelled a certain covetous woman, about forty
years ago, who was so eager in gathering together worldly pelf, that she
would neither frequent the church to hear the word of God on sunday her self,
nor yet permit any of her family to do it, but always toyled about pilling and
drying of flax, neither would she be dissuaded by her neighbors from such
an unseasonable work. One sunday as she was thus busied, fire seemed to fall
down among the flax without doing any hurt. The next sunday it took fire
indeed, but was soon quenched. For all this, she continued forward in her
work even the third Sunday, when the flax again taking fire, could not be
extinguished, till it had burnt her, and two of her children to death; for
though they were recovered out of the fire alive, yet ye next day they all 3.
died, and that which was most to be wondered at, a young infant in the Cradle,
was taken out of the midst of the flame, without any hurt. Thus God punishes
the breakers of ye sabbath. Famous is that example, which chanced near London
in the year of our Lord 1583. on the thirteenth day of January, being Sunday,
at Paris garden, where there met together (as they were wont) an infinite
number of people, to see the bearebaiting, without any regard of that high day.
But in the midst of their sports, all the scaffolds and galleries suddenly
fell down, in such wise, that two hundred persons were crushed well nigh to
death, besides eight that were killed forthwith.

In the year of our Lord 1589. I being as then but a boy, do remember, that an
Alewife making no exception of days, would needs brue upon Saint Marks day:
but lo, the maruailous work of God, whiles she was thus laboring, the top of
the chimney took fire, and before it could be quenched, her house was quite
burnt. Surely, a gentle warning to them that violate and profane forbidden
days.

Notwithstanding, I am not so straight laced, that I would not have any labor
done on Sundays and holy days. For I confess, Mac^h. li. 1. ca. 4
It is lawful to fight in our countries defense on any day: De consecrat.
distinct. 3 Cano^. 12 in fin.
It is lawful to enter into the bath: and it is lawful for Phisicians and
Apothecaries to temper and prepare medicines for the sick, and for cooks to
dress meat for our sustenance. It is lawful for us to take pains to hinder
our peculiar damages, for Mat. 12.
What man is there that has a sheep, and if it fall on a Sabbath day into a
pit, does not lift it out? In like manner, it is lawful to work, when there is
an inundation or deluge of waters, and also upon urgent necessity, to take up
a draught of fish, which for that day being let alone, would have been cast
away. More yet would I write, if I feared not to be termed a gagling sophister,
as having already discussed this question in my Commentaries upon Persius. In
Sat. 5
I will therefore proceed to the next.

Of the duties of servants toward their Masters. Chap. 17.
THe first duty of servants toward their masters is, that they be subject
unto them (e) and please them in all things, Titus 2.
not answering again, nor replying, although otherwhiles they know better what
is to be done, then their masters. The second is, that they be honest and
faithful unto their masters, and not (as many now a-dayes do) flatter and
cologue with them, thereby thinking to get some booty. The third duty of
servants is, that they seek their masters profit more the^ their own. The
fourth, that they reveal not to others their masters secret affairs. The
fifth, that they defend their masters, even to the hazarding and losing of their
lives. The famous effect whereof, appeared in that courageous servant of
Maurice, Duke of Saxony; who of late years, seeing his master suddenly
assaulted by certain Turks that lay in ambush, and cast from his horse,
covered him with his own body, and valiantly repelled the enemy, until
certain horsemen came and saved the Prince, but died himself a little while
after, being hurt and wounded in every place of his body. Finally, to fill up
this discourse, servants must diligently and honestly guard their masters, and
their masters goods: for Pro. 27.
They that keep the fig tree, shall enjoy the fruit thereof: and they that
wait upon their Masters, shall come to honor.

The fourth Plant.
Of the Acquisitiue faculty. Chap. 18.
NOw having sufficiently disputed of the chiefest parts of a family, I come to
the last part, that is, to the acquisitiue or possessorie faculty, whereof I
find two kinds; the one natural, the other artificial. The natural
consists in breeding of cattle, in manuring of the ground, in hauking,
hunting, fishing, and in spoils and pillages both by sea and land. The
artificial way of getting, lies in exchanging, either ware for ware, as, of
cloth for silks, of wool for grain: or else of wares for money. And again,
those acquisitiue Arts be disallowed, which are loathed of men, as the trade
of Brokers, huxters, toll-gatherers, bauds, usurers, and ingraters. Of which
three last, after my next discourie of money, I will, God willing, entreat.

Of money, the chiefest part of the Acquisitiue faculty. Chap. 19.
MOney (as Pliny writes) was coined by King Seruius of Rome, Plin. lib. 33.
c. 3.
with the Image of a sheep and an ox. Others say, that it was first inverted
at the siege of Troy. But I find that money was many years current before the
wars of Troy. Genesis 23.
Abraham bought a field of Ephron the Hethite for four hundred silver sicles
of money current among Marcha^ts; Which is of our money, three and thirty
pound, six shillings and eight pence. Howbeit, there is no use of coined money
in sundry countries at this instant. In ye country of Belul the Ethiopian
word, in English is Precious, and not Presbiter or Prester, as heretofore it
has been mistaken in print.
Precious John, salt goes for money. The Indians of Peru never made any
account of money, before the Spaniards robbed them of their gold. Besides,
within these two hundred years, money was very scant here in England: for
King Edward the fourth, in the civil wars betwixt him and Henry the sixth,
being on a time pursued by the Earl of Warwick, who then was turned to the
contrary side, bought a ship in the year of our Lord 1461. for eight score
nobles, to sail into Ireland: which price in those times was esteemed
wonderful dear. Also, in the year 1514. money coined of leather was rise in
this Realm. Of which kind of money my self have seen of late, above ten
bushels in an old castle in Wales, stamped, as far as I remember, with the
Duke of Lancasters Image. For in those days, certain Dukes were licensed to
coin money. So likewise we read, that county Palatines, as Chester, Durham,
and Ely, could then give pardons concerning the pleas of the crown, and send
writs in their own names. In the Kingdom of Cathay, money is yet neither of
gold nor silver, nor of any other metal, but only of the bark of mulberie
trees, which is cut as well into sundry small, as great round pieces, whereon
they engraue the names of their country, rating them, as we do ours,
according to their greatness and smalnesse. It is petie treason among them to
employ any other money.

Sir Thomas Moore reports, that his feigned Vtopians did make chamber-pots,
and other vessels, that serve for most vile uses, of gold and silver.
Moreover, he says, that they made great chains, fetters, and gives, wherein
they tied their bondmen, of the very same metals: and whosoever among them for
any offense was infamous, by his ears hung rings of gold, about his neck was
a chain of gold. Thus by all means possible, they procured to have gold and
silver among them in reproach and infamy. And if we Christians examine our
selves somewhat more near, we shall find, that money is one of the chiefest
causes why so many felonies, murders and treasons be committed, and why the
cry of the poor is so often come before the Lord. For this cause Plato the
Divine Philosopher says, that Plato li. 5. in leg.
In a commonwealth well governed, there should not any money be used, because
it marreth good manners, and makes the mind of a man covetous and in satiable.

Of Bawdes. Whether they ought to be suffered. Chap. 20.
ALthough I have touched this infamous question in another Book of mine, In
commentar. in Sat. 5. Pers.
yet notwithstanding I judge it not amiss, if I repaint the same with more
brevity, in a more familiar tongue. The first that instituted the filthy
order of stews, was Venus, who because she alone would not seem to be a
whore, (as having lain with Mars, Vulca^, Mercury, Anchises, and sundry
others) appointed in Cypres, that women should prostitute themselves for money
to all comers. Which custom was renewed by the Popes, who built most stately
houses for whores, and ordained, that they for the same should pay yearly
great sums of money. There be some men living, that know how Pope Paul the
third had above forty thousand courtizans, that paid him an infinite tribute.
The report goes, that Pope Clement the 8. that now is, receives of every
baudy house in Rome yearly, a Iull, that is, twenty thousand ducats.

These Panders are to whorehunters, as brokers to thieves. They entice young
lasses with gaudy garments, and deceitful promises, to serve every man's turn
for gain: which done, they teach these virgins their schoole-lessons, namely,
to bring in swaggrers to outsweare a man of his money, to feign themselves with
child, made of a cushion (for co^cealme^t whereof, the bawds must be well
bribed,) to caper in men's arms til they have guld the^ of their purses, to
counterfeit tears with an onio^, yea, and to use fine glozing speeches: as,
Sir, you mistake your mark, I am none of your wanton Gilles, you abuse my
credit, my mistress calls me. And immediately after, perceiving the lusty wooer to
have money in his purse, she begins by degrees to listen, saying: Many men will
promise much, but perform little, they bear us in hand, until they have got
their pleasures of us, and then away they go, but you lo^ke like an honest man.
After this, the bawdes seeing their wenches deformed, they give the^ drugges to
raise their colors, and to seem fairer. This is the bawdes acquisitiue
faculty, whereby they live. Some bawds have a dozen damsels, some less, yet
of every man they take largely, as 20. shillings a week, or ten pound a
month. It is said, that long Meg of Westminster kept always 20. Courtizans in
her house, who^ by their pictures she sold to all comers. But I return to the
extirpation thereof.

We read, that Socrat. li. 5. hist. Ecclesia. cap. 8.
Theodosius the great, in the year of our Lord 392. utterly chased al stews
out of his Empire. For which notable act, his name eue^ at this day is greatly
honored. No less praise deserves Henry the eight of famous memory, for
abolishing and putting down of the stews in London, which then were
innumerable. Therein he imitated the good K. Josias, 2. Reg. 23.
who brake down the houses of the Sodomites, that were in the house of the
Lord. Finally, no man is ignorant, that the pestilent disease of the French
pockes was sent as a punishment to stews.

Of Usurers. Chap. 21.
Couarruuias li. 3. varia. resolution. cap. 1.
HE that receives any thing over and above the capital sum that was lent,
is an usurer. For which respect I compare him to an aspet for even as he that
is stu^g with an Aspe, falls asleep, as it were with delight, but dies ere
he awakes: so an usurer takes great pleasure in his interest at the first, but
at length he is so ouercloyed with money, that he can never enjoy any rest: the
cause is his conscience, which like a multitude of furies vexes his heart, and
fortelles him of his everlasting damnation. Hence it is, that the Romans
inflicted as great punishment on an usurer, as on a thief: and not without
cause, for he that kills a man, riddeth him out of his torments at once,
whereas an usurer is long in punishing and undoing his creditour, causing him
by little and little to pine away. Also, an usurer by undoing of one, undoes
many, namely, the wife and whole household.

More Gentlemen here in England have Usurers, Banquers, and Merchants driven to
despair, then either wars or sickness. For when a young Punie comes unto
them, desiring to be credited for money or apparel, then one of them
counterfeiting themselves forsooth to be coy like women, will burst forth into
these terms: The world is hard, and we are all mortal, we may not venture
our goods, God knows how we earne our living: wherefore make us assurance,
and you shall have ten pounds (worth in silks and veluets.) Well, this
passes on current, assurance is given with a witness. A little after, if the
Gentleman has not wherewithal to pay as well the interest, as the principal
agreed upon, whenever this reprobate cut-throate demands it, then
presently as round as a ball, he commenceth his statute-marchant against him,
and for ten pounds profit, which was scarce worth five pound in money, he
recouereth by relapse ten pound a year.

O intolerable wickedness! O devilish haberdashers! and worse then those
ungodly tenants, who seeing their Landlords heir coming, said one to
another: Mat. 21. Mar. 12.
This is the heir, come, let us kill him, and we shall have his Inheritance:
Dare thou, O wretched cormorant, hope to be saved, and expect to be
partaker of the heavenly blessings? Art thou a Christian, and wilt suffer thy
brother in Christ thus to miscarie through thy entanglements and exactio^s? No,
no: thou art a member of Satan, thou art in the gall of bitterness, Act. 8.
and in the bond of iniquity.

Objection.
The laws of England do permit usury, to wit, two shillings in the pound,
therefore an usurer is not wicked.

Answer.
It is one thing to permit usury, and another to allow thereof. By our
positive laws is meant, that those men, who cared not, how much they extorted
out of poor men's hands for the loan of their money, should be empaled and
limited within certain meeres and bounds, lest they ouerflowed reason So that
the laws do but mitigate the penalties, and if it were possible, they would
restrain men from it.

Of the particulars wherein Usury is committed. Chap. 22.
A Man commits usury six manner of ways. First, Panorm. in cap. Co^suluit.
de vsuris*
whosoever lends corn unto his neighbor, with promise, that at the
redeliuery thereof, he should give him somewhat more, is an usurer. As for
example, if he lend to a man five bushels of corn at May, under condition that
he give him six bushels at Bartholmewtide. Secondly, he that forestalleth and
intercepteth corn in the market, and that not for any want, but to sell it
again dearer then he bought it, thereby to enrich himself with the
impouerishing of many. Thirdly L. 1. and 2 C. de pignorat. action.
he commits usury, that for the loan of his money receives a greater gage,
then the money valueth, and claims the same as forfeit, the money being not
repayed him at the prefixed time. Fourthly, he is an usurer, that lends his
money upon condition, that the other buy his necessaries at his shop, or grind
at his mill. Fifthly, he is an usurer, that keeps false balances, and that
sells bad and musty things for good and new. Finally, he that incloseth
commons, and turns tillage into pastures, is an usurer.

Whether it be lawful for an householder to ingrate and ingrosse corn in the
market, to the intent he may sell the same another time at a dearer price?
Chap. 23.
Whosoever he be, that forestalleth corn in the market, and tra^sporteth it
home into his garners, there keeping it, until a dearer time fall out, without
doubt commits usury. For every man ought to sell as he bought, and doing
otherwise he is an usurer, and must make restitution of the overplus. Panorm.
in cap. ad nostra^ de empt. and vend. and Couarruui. li. 2 variar. resolut.
cap. 3.
The which if he deny, he is eftsoone deprived of all power to make his last
will and testament. Besides, there be statute punishments ordained for the
repressing of this filthy lucre: as, forfeits to the Clerks of the market, and
fines^to be paid to the Prince, if the foresaid party be taken in the manner. In
sum, Iam. 5.
his cankred gold and silver (which he has thus received of the poor buyers)
and the rust of them shall be a witness against him at the fearful day of
judgment, and shall eat up his flesh as it were fire.

The fifth Plant.
Of Hospitality. Chap. 24.
HOspitality is the chiefest point of humanity, which an householder ca^ show,
not only unto his friends, but also unto strangers and wayfaring men. For
which cause Chryso. Hom. 44 sup. Genesis
he that keeps a good house, and entertaineth strangers, is said to receive
Christ himself. Which likewise another holy father confirms, saying: August.
lib. co^tra haeres.
We must tender hospitality without discretion, lest that the person, whom we
exclude and shut out of doors, be God himself. This Abraham knew very well,
when he accustomed to sit in his tent door of purpose to call in travelers,
and to relieve them. Among whom Genesis 18
he entertained on a time three Angels. This also was not unknown to Lot, when
as he used to harbor ghestes, and Genesis 19
compel Angels being under the shape of pilgrims to come into his house. We
read, that the harlot Rahab, for her hospitality Iosu. 6.
was saved with all her household from death at the winning of Jericho.
Wherefore, O ye that be rich, see that* ye keep good hospitality, and
relieve the impotent and distressed. To conclude, if we consider more narrowly
and pierce more deeply with a sharp eye into the benefits of hospitality,
though no other cause could persuade us, yet Luc. 14 Romans 12 1. Tim 3 Tit. 1.
Heb. 13. 2. Pet. 4
the momuments of the new testament might exhort us thereunto.

Wherein good hospitality consists. Chap. 25.
THey are greatly deceived, who think, that hospitality does consist in
slibber-sauces, in spiced meats, or in diversities. For these are naught else,
save fooleries, and fond wasting of goods, whereby the flesh is provoked to
lechery, and becomes altogether inflamed, massy, and diseased. Further,
experience teaches, that none are more subject to sicknesses, then they, that
gurmaundize and feed on sundry kinds of dishes. The reason is, because that
those diversities, which they eat, be repugnant and contrary the one to the
other, and breed putrefaction and corrupt humors within their bodies. Whereas
contrariwise they, that live on one sort of meat and hardly, do look fair,
lusty, and well complexioned, and most commonly attain unto very old age. Good
hospitality therefore cons^steth not in gluttonous diversities, but rather in
one kind of meat, in clothing the naked, and in giving alms unto the poor.

Why houskeeping now-adaies is decayed. Chap. 26.
THe causes, why hospitality is nowadaies brought to so low a sail, are five.
The first is ambition, which moves Gentlemen, that are of large revenues, to
wear gorgeous attires, to traile a costly port after them, to caualiere it
abroad, and giving up house-keping at home, to take a chamber in London, where
they consume their time in viewing of stage plays, in carousing of healths,
and (perhaps) in visiting of courtizans. The second is hatred, which pricketh
Gentlemen to fall out with their neighbors, and to enrich the lawiers by
commencing of suites and controversies. The third is covetousness, which
persuades landlords to hoord up substance for the Devil, to enhaunce incomes,
to raise rents (for fear least yeomen keep better hospitality then
themselves,) and to convert tillage into pastures. In consideration of which
abominable abuse, it was most prudently enacted in the last Parliament, that
all lands, which were converted into sheep pastures, or to the fatting or
grazing of cattle, (the same having been tillage lands) should be before the
first of May in the year of our Lord 1599. last past, restored to tillage by
the possessours thereof, and so should continue for ever. It was further
enacted in the said Parliament, that every person offending against the
premises aforesaid, should forfeit for every acre not restored the sum of
twenty shillings yearly, as long as the offense continued. The fourth reason,
why hospitality is carried to so low an ebb proceeds of building; for sooner
shall we see a Gentleman build a stately house, then give alms, and cherish
the needy. The fifth and last cause of the decay of hospitality is gluttony,
which enduceth men to prepare artificial cookeries and diverse sorts of meat:
whereas one large and wholesome mess of meat could peradventure counteruaile,
yea, and go beyond all their iunkets, and dainty delicacies.

Of Alms, and the forgetfulness thereof in these days. Chap. 27.
THe poor, being an inferior family in Gods church, are recommended by him to
our charge, namely, that we should relieve them in their distress, and
consider, that whatsoever we do unto them, we do unto Christ himself, who for
our sakes left a glorious habitation, and became poor. Besides, we must
remember to give alms unto the poor in respect of that holy man's saying:
Psalm. 34
The poor cries, and the Lord hears him, yea, and delivers him out of all
his troubles, Alas, let us ponder with our selves, wherefore did the Lord
give unto many of us such great abundance of wealth in this life above our
brethren, if it were not to use them well, and to furnish the needy. The
simplest idiot of us al does very well know, that wealth was not given us to
hoord up, no nor to consume the same in superfluous vanities. Why then do we
keep our clothes in our presses, our money in our coffers? Why do we misspend
our goods in gaudy rayments, in caualiering shows, in feeding of hounds, in
banqueting, in reuelling, and in a thousand trumperies besides? oh why do we
not weigh in our minds, that whatsoever we spend more then we need, is none
of ours, but the poores; and to detain from them, is to pill and poll, yea,
and perforce to spoil them. What shall we say, when God will demand an
account of our stewardships? Doubtless, except we do out of hand repent, and
give alms, we shall be cast as a pray unto the Devil, and with him be
tormented in hell for evermore. O fearful doom! The misbeleeuing Turks are
wont secretly to send their servant abroad, and purposely to hearke^ amongst
their neighbors, which of them has most need of victuals, money, and
apparel. Yea, and more then that, in their Musaph or Alcoran they have these
words: If men knew, how heavenly a thing it were to distribute alms, they
would not spare their own flesh, but would even tear the same, and slice it
into carbonadoes, to give it unto the poor. The Papists, that are overwhelmed
in superstition and idolatry, do hope (although sacrilegiously) to be saved by
their almes-giuing. Oh what a shameful thing will this be against us at the
dreadful day of judgment? Verily, I fear me, it will be easier for them,
then for us, to enter into the kingdom of heaven, if speedily we amend not,
and be bou^tiful unto the poor, For Prou. 21
whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, Mat. 18.
shall also cry himself, and not be heard. Where now-adayes shall we find the
woman of Sarepta to entertain Elias? where are Abraham and Lot, to feast the
holy Angels? If Eliza were now living, surely he should want his hostess the
Sunamite. Nay, which is more, if Christ himself were here, he should neither
find Martha to welcome him, no nor Mary to power any sweet ointments upon his
head. The members of Christ Prou. 18
make supplication, and pray meekely: but the rich gives a rough answer.
Lazarus beggeth still without doors, and yet for all his begging cannot come
by the crumbes of the rich man's table.

Wherefore extend your bounty unto the poor, O ye that be rich, according to
the proportion of your wealth, and as your good conscience shall lead you, so
give. Remember that your days be short upon earth, and that you have but a
small time to live. Distrust not Gods promise, who said, that Luke 21
whatsoever is given to the poor, is lent to himself, and look, what you lay
out, shall be paid you again.

Objection.
A man, that has a great charge of children, cannot well give alms unto the
poor: therefore he may be excused.

Answer.
Mark what Christ says: Mat. 20
He that loves his father and mother above me, is not worthy of me. 1. Ioh. 3
The love of God is not with them, who will not benefit the poor. The widow of
Sarepta preferred not her son before Elias in the time of famine; neither was
that lost, which she bestowed on Elias. In a word, no man must despair of
Gods reward. Ps. 36.
I have been young, (quoth the Prophet David) and now am old; and yet saw I
never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread publicly with
utter shame and discredit.

Circumstaunces to be observed in giving of alms. Chap. 28.
HOwbeit for all this, I am not so indulgent and fond, that I would have men to
distribute alms without exception, and without due regard of circumstaunces.
For herein five things are to be respected: whereof the first is, that they
give their alms for the Lords sake, and that voluntarily, of their own proper
motion. The second, that they argue with them touching their religion, before
they give them any thing, to the end, they may understand, whether they be true
Protestants, or froward Papists, or Atheists. The third, that they dispute with
the^ concerning their conversation. The 4. that they give their alms unto
religious men, and to them that be old, blind, lame, or crazed and sick of
body. The fifth and circumsta^ce to be noted, and followed in distributing of
alms, is, that men give them not for a bravery, and vainglory, to be praised
and extolled of the world, but rather of pure zeal and devotion, not expecting
any recompense again.

Of Fasting. That an householder should observe fasting days. Chap. 39.
Cas. in Append. thesaur. Oecon.
EVen as learned and wise Physicians, in every flux of the belly occasioned of
surfeit and repletion, do for the most part prescribe an exquisite diet, and
also a purgation, to wit, of Rheubarb or such like, to the end that not only
the superfluous substance of the belly may be drawn out, but also that nature
may be strengthened by the secret property and virtue of the Medicine: so
expert and wise householders ought in time of famine specially to have regard,
that they lay down a limited order of fasting unto their families, whereby
they may not only purge the rebellious humors of the flesh, but likewise in
after-clappes sustain themselves the better from poverty and dearth. Oh, what
is it for a man to spare two meals in a week, and bestow the estimate upon
the poor? Alas, it is not much out of their way.

We read that the Jews, so often as they would pacify or ask any benefit of
GOD, used most commonly to fast. By fasting Exo. 24
Moses saw God. 3. Reg. 19. and Tertulli. de ieiun. aduersus Psychi. and Cypr.
de ieiunio and te^tationib. Christi.
Elias after his fasting was entertained of God. Jonas 3.
The Ninevites fasted with repentance, and were pardoned. By fasting Dan. 3.
Daniel revealed Nabuchodonozors dream.

But if these examples can work no charity in the adamant and steely hearts of
our English Rookes: yet civil policy, me thinks, and her Majesty's
commandment might prevail so much with them, that they observe Frydaies,
Saturdayes, Lent, and Ember days (so near as they may) as fasting days, both
for the preservation of meats ordained for their own sustenaunce, and for the
safeguard of their consciences, and for the supplying of their neighbors wants.

Objection.
Good meats do nourish blood, and do revive as well the vital as the animal
spirits. As for fish, figs, and such like, they be slimy, windy, and make a
man to be ill complexioned. And again fasting is more dangerous, for it
weakneth and enfeebleth the whole body: therefore a man ought not to observe
fasts.

Answer.
All the commodities, which you bring on the behalf of meats are nothing in
comparison of the good, that spring of fasting, for by it men become capable of
visions, and of the word of God; by it many sicknesses are alayed. Whereas on
the contrary, by flesh the body is enflamed, and tormented with hot burning
agues, and with innumerable maladies besides. So that the commodities of
fasting do far exceed and downewaigh the disco^modities thereof. Yet
notwithstanding, I verily believe, that old persons, and choleric folks may
be licensed to eat flesh. In like manner women with child, scholars, and they,
that by study and care have annoyed their spirits, might be authorized from
fasting. In brief, I am persuaded, that Hieron. ad Laet.
fasting is hurtful for them, which have not attained to their perfect growth
and strength.

Of the true fast. Chap. 30.
Nevertheless, I am of this mind, that those men observe not the true fast,
which hypocritically forgo a meal or two, of purpose, colourably to hunt for
worldly praise, and to be accounted religious in the sight of man: but they
rather are the true and allowed fasters, that strongly lean to the everliving
God, that shun as the horror of hell al earthly vanities, and that mortify
the filthy appetites of the flesh. Albeit the other (I confess) is a
coadiutour to that thing, and avails much for that purpose.

Whosoever therefore is willing to fast uprightly, and according to the
ordinance of GOD, must fast with all the members of his body. First, he must
fast with his eyes, and not pry too much into the pompeous shows, and dazeling
beauty of this world, lest at the sight thereof, as of a Cockatrice, he be
wounded to death both of body and soul. Next, he must fast with his ears,
that is, he must not consent to the alluring speeches of Seminary Priests,
heretics, flatterers, slau^derers, and such like, lest Sirenlike they entice
him into their snares. Thirdly, he must fast with his tongue, and beware of
blasphemies, lies, and ungodly communications.

Fourthly, he must fast with his mouth, that is, he must take heed that he eat
and drink no more, then suffices nature, and that he abstain from meats at
convenient seasons, whereby as with a wing he may fly into heaven. Fifthly, he
must fast with his heart, and refrain from sinful and idle thoughts. Sixthly,
he must fast with his feet, and bridle them from being too swift to shead
blood, or from trudging to London for process against his brethren.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD book of the Golden-groue moralized.
The first Plant.
Of a Commonwealth. Chap. 1.
A Commonwealth is a society of free me^, united together by a general
consent, to the end to live well and orderly, not only in regard of justice,
but also of commodity, and for the preservation of themselves, as well in
peace, as in war. The which is a thing natural, both in respect of parts, to
wit, a shire, a parish, and a family, whereof a Commonwealth is the
accomplishment: and of men naturally disposed to live in society.

Nevertheless, there have been many societies, which were not Commonwealths,
but certain base habitations in villages, where the weaker yielded service to
the stronger. Also, the Arabians at this day, wander up and down, ignorant of
living, and do carry about with them their wooden habitations, which they
draw upon charrets, seeking for prays and spoils from the river Euphrates,
along unto the sea Atlantique. But to these and such like, well may I apply
that saying of the Philosopher, namely, that Arist. li. 1. Politic cap. 2.
he, which cannot abide to live in company, is either a beast, that is, a
monstrous wicked man, or a God, that is, a man surpassing the ordinary sort of
virtuous men in perfection.

The examination whereof, caused all that were free and liberally borne, to be
inclined unto society, and to defend the Commonwealth with all their powers:
yea, and Accursius ad l. 7. C. de Procurat.
thereunto to bear a greater affection, then to their parents. Although our
families be destroyed, yet the Commonwealth standing, we may in time flourish
again: but if the Commonwealth be destroyed, both we and our families must
likewise come to utter destruction. Let this serve for a watchword to our
English Fugitives, who unnaturally have abandoned their native country, and
now being become Seminary Priests and unclean spirits, like unto them Apo.
16.
that in the Revelation, issued as frogs out of the Dragons mouth, do by all
shameful acts, and false counsels, suborne their countrymen to conspiracies
against their Prince and Commonwealth.

The division of a Commonwealth. Chap. 2.
IT was a great controversy among politicians, about the division of a
Commonwealth; for some would allow but of two sorts: some contrary appointed
four, and others five. Li. 6. de militari. Roman. discipline.
Polybius accounted seven. Li. 2. de Repub. cap. 1.
Bodinus, whose judgment is most of all applauded, approoueth only those
three special kinds of a Commonwealth, which Li. 4. Policit.
Aristotle has mentioned. The first, a Monarchy, where the government of the
whole Commonwealth, is in one man's hand. This kind regarding the weal
public, more then the weal private, is named the sovereign authority, as in
England, France, Spain, Denmark, Polonia, and Swethland. The second, an
Aristocracie, where the smaller number, and those of the best sort do bear
rule; as the Senate of Rome in times past, and the Gentlemen of Venice at this
present day. The third kind of a Commonwealth is called a Democracie, where
the regiment of a Commonwealth consists in the power of al, or else, of the
greater part of the people: as in ancient times at Athens, and now at this
present, the Cantons of Switzerland.

Of a Monarchy. Chap. 3.
AMong all creatures, as well having life, as without life, one always has
preeminence above the rest of his kind. Arist. li. 1. Mete^rolog.
This inferior world obeys the superior, and is ruled by it, as we see by
a certain virtuous influence associated with light heat, and (named by some,
the quintessence of the world) which issues down from the celestial essence,
and spreads it self through the lump of this huge body, to nourish all
things under the Moon. In like manner, we see the sun the principal minister
of this celestial virtue, as a monarch among the Planets, illuminating all the
world with his glistering beams. We see the Moon as an Empress, predominant
over al moist things. We see the fire bearing the sovereignty over the other
elements. In musical concents consisting of soundes, we see the treble as it
were comma^ding the base. Among reasonable creatures man only is the chief.
Among beasts, the Lion. Among birds, the Eagle. Among fishes, the Whale. Among
metals, gold. Among grains, wheat. Among aromaticall spices, balm. Among
drink, wine. And to conclude, have not the Bees one only King? Is not unity
the first of numbers, and when we have cast our accounts, do not we return the
same to one total sum? Thus by natural discourses we see, that a monarchy
of all other regiments, is the most excellent. Isocrat. in oration. ad Nico.
If we search ancient Fables, we shall find that the gods were ruled by
Jupiter. What blind Bayard therefore will deny, that Arist. li. 12. metaphys.
all superior and inferior things are much better ordered by the arbitrament
of one, then by the advice of many?

Moreover, there be four forcible reasons, which prove that a Monarchy ought
to be preferred before all other sorts of governments. First, Justin. ex lib.
1. Trog. Pomp.
from the beginning of countries and nations, the government was in the hands
of Kings, who were not extolled to that high degree of majesty by Ambition,
but for their modesty, which was known to all men. Likewise, that which is
ancient and first* Ari. li. 3 Topicor. cap. 1.
is more noble then that which is newfangled and later. Secondly, the image of
a monarchy is found in private families. For the authority of a father over
his children, may be resembled to a royal government, because the Children
are the fathers charge: he alone must provide for them, and their offenses are
by him chastised. With which concurreth that common speech: Every man is a King
in his own house. Thirdly, a Monarchy has continued above a thousand years;
whereas the longest Aristocracie and Democracie, have not lasted above six
hundred years.

Our Kingdom of Britain retained a Monarchy, from the time that Brutus
first inhabited it, until Cadwalader, who was the last king of the British
blood; which was above fourteen hundred years. Then in the year of our
Lord 574. the Kingdom was divided among seven of the Nobles, who still
continued civil war one upon the other, until Ecbert in the year 800.
reduced the seven provinces into one whole Kingdom. Since which time there
ruled Princes as Monarchs, until now this year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred. Whereby we find, that our Monarchy has already lasted full eight
hundred years. Scotland likewise has endured in a Monarchy, from the year
of our Lord eight hundred and twenty, Dungall then reigning, until this
present year. Fourthly, a Monarch carries a greater majesty, whereby he
seems gracious and amiable in the sight of his subjects, and dreadful to his
enemies. To conclude, let us consent, that Plato. lib. 1. de. leg.
a Monarchy is the most excellent regiment of all others, as that which
draws nearest to Gods will, who is the Monarch of all Monarchs, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Objection.
It is better to be subject unto God alone, then unto man: for he foreseeth al
things to come, Math. 10.
and without his providence one sparrow shall not fall on the ground. And
seeing that he is so careful for these small things, will not he, think you,
care for Ibidem.
man, that is of more value then many sparrowes? Furthermore, we are
Christians, 1. Pet. 2.
chosen of God, and precious as lively stones, and also made a spiritual
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus
Christ, Math. cap. vlt.
with whom the presence of his spirit will always be, until the end of the
world. Therefore injury is done unto him, if we allow of any other Monarch,
but only him.

Answer.
EVen as it has pleased God of his divine providence to ordain the sun,
Moon, and elements, as Emperors over this inferior world: so in like manner,
he working by such means and instruments, Exo. 3. Deuteronomy. 31.
constituted Moses, Iosuah, and others, judges over his people, by whom as his
instruments, he brought to pass his sacred will, and delivered the Israelites
from Egypt, where they were enthralled. And although he defendes us with an
outstretched arm, and has illuminated us with the light of his Gospel, yet
notwithstanding, he has appointed Princes, as his vicegerents and instruments
here on earth, to see his word plan^ed, heresies rooted out, and offenders by
political laws executed.

Monarchs therefore must be obeyed, r as the ministers of God, to take
vengeance on the wicked. Romans 13. Ibid.
There is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Wherefore, Exodus 23.
Let no man speak evil of the ruler of the Commonwealth.

That hereditarie succession is better then Election. Chap. 4.
Lipsius lib. 2. Politicor. cap. 4.
MAny affect the place of a monarch, not to any good end (they being not good
themselves) whom nevertheless the custom or law of Nations has restrained
by a double bridle of election and succession. The latter is that, when
majesty comes of descent, and one Prince is borne of another. The other,
when as birthright being set aside, they are chosen by consent of voices.

Succession without doubt is the better, as by reasons shall appear. First, it
is meet that the son possess the Kingdom for the Fathers sake. Secondly,
the son is brought up to follow his fathers steps, especially in defending of
religion. Thirdly, Tacitus lib. 2. Histor.
the alteration of matters gives opportunity to strange and great attempts.
Fourthly, the son by nature from his father obtains a smacke of policy,
and being always present with him, knows the state of the Kingdom better
then any other. Fifthly, the successor is wont to administer justice more
constantly and sincerely. Whereas the elect Prince must in a manner fawn on his
electours and new subjects. Finally, Curtius lib. 4. histor.
No authority can prosper or endure, which is purchased by canuasing and
flatteries, and there is less danger in the acceptance of a Prince, then in
the election.

The duty of a Prince. Chap. 5.
THere are four chief qualities necessary for a Prince to maintain his
reputation. The first is clemency, to forgive trespasses. For as the Sun,
when it is highest in the Zodiake, moves slowest: so the higher a Prince is
soared to greatness, the more gracious and meek he ought to be toward his
humble subjects. The second, to imprint the laws and ordinances of God in his
mind, and to level all his actions to the glory of the king of kings: as
well for the health of his own soul, which he ought to hold dearer then his
whole kingdom, yea, then all the world: as for good ensample and imitation
unto his subjects. The third is liberality, to succor poor scholars and
soldiers; for as there is nothing more common then the sun, that
communicates his light to all the celestial bodies, and chiefly to the
Moon, so a prince ought to impart part of his revenues to the distressed, and
especially above the rest, to students and Soldiers. The fourth, to have
courage and virtue to tolerate abuses. For Boethius lib. 3. de consolation.
philosoph. metr. 5.
Although his power and authority extend so far, that the country of India
quaketh at his commandment: and although the farthest Island in the sea does
serve and obey him: yet if he cannot bridle his own affections, his power is
not worthy to be esteemed.

Of the name of Emperor. Chap. 6.
THis name Emperor the Romans first invented, not for their Kings, but for
their warlike Generalles. Serranus, Camillus, Fabius Maximus, and Scipio the
Affrican, as long as they governed the Roman hosts, were entitled Emperors.
But when they finished their wars, they were called by their own proper
names. Afterward, when Antonie was discomfi^ed by Augustus Caesar, it chanced
that the commonwealth came altogether into his hands. Whereupon the Romans
desired that he would not assume unto himself the name of King, because it
was odious unto the^, but that he would use another title, under which they
would be his loyal and obedient subjects. Then Augustus being at that time
General, and therefore named Emperor, chose this title, to do the Romans
pleasure. So that Augustus Caesar was the first, that called himself by the
name of Emperor. The cause why they hated the name of King, was by reason that
their forefathers in ancient times, having deposed their King Tarquin for his
tyrannies and rapes, had forbidden by an edict and solemn oath, the name of
King ever after to be used among them. Augustus being dead, Tiberius succeeded
him in the Empire of Rome; then Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and four and thirty
more, before the Empire was by Constantine the great, in the year of our Lord
310. transferred to Constantinople, where it continued united until the year
of our Lord seven hundred ninety and four. At which time the Empire was
parted into the East and West, which lasted in that sort, until the year of
our Lord a thousand, four hundred, fifty and three, Constantinople to the
great disparagement of all Christian Princes, was taken by the great Turk,
called Mahomet the second. Nevertheless, the Empire of the West, or rather of
Germany, since that time has as yet remained with the house of Austria,
Rodolph the second now reigning.

Of the name of King. Chap. 7.
TOuching the title of King, it is to be noted, that according to the
diversity of Nations, so did they diversely nominate their Princes: to wit,
among the Egyptians they named them Pharaoes: among the Persians, Arsacides:
among the Bythinians, Ptolomeyes: among the Latins, Siluii: among the
Sicilians, Tyraunts: among the Argiues, Kings: among the Sara^ens, Amiraes: and
now of late among the Persians, Soldanes. In the beginning of the world all
Princes were termed Tyrants: but when people began to perceive, how great
difference was betwixt the one and the other, Plutar. lib. de Repub.
they agreed among themselves, to call the good Princes Kings, and the wicked
Tyrants. Whereby we see, that this title of King is authorized only unto just
Princes, and that do well deserve to be so named.

In this Realm of England, there has not at any time been used any other
general authority, but only the most royal and kingly majesty. Smith. lib.
1. de Repub. Anglica^. cap. 9.
Neither has any King of this Realm, taken any inuestiture at the hands of
the Emperor of Rome, or of any other foreign prince, but held his kingdom
of God to himself, and by his sword, his people and crown, acknowledging no
Prince in earth his superior, and so it is kept and holden at this day.

Of a Gynecracie, or Woman's reign. Chap. 8.
WOmen by governing have got no less renown then men, as is euedent by
learned Histories. For which cause Plato li. 34. de legumlat.
The Divine Philosopher found great fault with his countryme^ the Graecians,
because their Noblewomen were not instructed in matters of state and policy.
Likewise Justinian the Emperor was highly displeased with the Armenians,
Novel 21. de Armen.
For that most barbarously they prohibited women from enjoying heritages, and
bearing rule, as though (quoth he,) women were base and dishonored, and not
created of God. Iustinia^. in Nouel. 18. cap. 4. neque illo de c^ter.
In the right of succession the sisters son is equal to the brothers son.
Whereby is understood, that women are licensed to govern, as well as men.

Moreover, there be two forcible reasons, that conclude women to be most apt
for Seignories. First, Galat. 3.
there is neither Jew, nor Grecian: there is neither bond nor free: there is
neither male, nor female, for they are all one in Christ Jesus. The minds, and
actions of men and women do depend of the soul, in the which there is no
distinction of sex, whereby the soul of a man should be called male, and the
soul of a woman female. The sex rather is the instrument or means of
generation; and the soul ingendreth not a soul, but is always permanent and
the very same. Seeing therefore that a woman's soul is perfect, why should she
be debarred by any statute or salique law from reigning? Aristot. li. 1. Polit.
ca. 3.
The body is but lumpish, and a vassal to the soul, and for that respect not
to be respected. Secondly, Senec. in Epistol.
virtue excludes none, but receives all, regarding neither substance nor
sex. What should I rippe up the examples of sundry nations, Lipsius li. 1.
Polit. cap. 3.
which preferred women before themselves. And for that cause Tacitus li. de
morib. Germanor.
they did neither reject their counsels, nor set light by their answers.
Semiramis after the death of her husband Ninus, fearing lest the late conquered
Aethiopians would revolt and rebel from her Son yet young of years and
ignorant of rule; took upon her the principality, and for the time of his
nonage, ordered the kingdom so princely, that she passed in feats of arms,
in triumphs, conquests, and wealth, all her predecessors. Nicocris defended
her Empire against the Medes, (who then sought the Monarchy of the world) and
wrought such a miracle in the great river of Euphrates, as all men were
astonished at it; for she made it contrary to men's expectation to leave the
ancient course, and so to follow her device to and fro, to serve the city most
commodiously: insomuch that she did not only surpass all men in wit, but
overcame the elements with power. Isis after the decease of her husband Osyris
reigned over Egypt, and took care for so much provision for the common wealth,
that she was after her death worshipped as a Goddess. Debora judged Israel:
Judith the Bethulians: Lauinia after the death of Eneas governed Italy: Dido
Carthage: Olympias Pirrhus his daughter ruled over Epire: Aranea was queen of
Scythia: Cleopatra of Egypt. Helena after the death of Leo the Emperor reigned
in Constantinople over all Asia as Empress. Ioanna was queen of Navarre, and
marying with Philip Pulcher the French king, made him king of Navarre in the
year of our Lord 1243. Margaret ruled over Flaunders in the year of our Lord
1247. And another Princess of that name ye only daughter of Valdemare the 3.
king of De^mark and Norway governed those kingdoms after her fathers death; and
in the year of our Lord 1389. she took Albert the king of Swethland captive,
and kept him in prison 7. years. Ioanna was queen of Naples in the year 1415.
Leonora Duchess of Aquitaine was married to Henry Duke of Gaunt, and in
despite of the French K. brought him Aquitaine and Poiteaux in the year 1552.
Queen Mary reigned here in England in the year 1553. What should I write of
Elizabeth our gracious Queen, that now is? which by her Divine wisdom
brought three admirable things to pass. First, her Majesty reformed religion,
that by the Romish Antichrist was in her sisters time bespotted. Secondly, she
maintained her country in peace, when all her neighbor Princes were in an
uproar. Thirdly, she triumphed over all her foes, both domestical and hostile,
traitorous and outlandish. If a man respect her learning, it is miraculous, for
she can discourse of matters of state with the best Philosopher; she
understands sundry kinds of languages, and answers foreign Ambassadors
in their foreign tongues. If a man talk of the administration of justice, all
the nations under the heavens cannot show her peer. In sum, her Princely
breast is the receiver, or rather the storehouse of all the virtues, as well
moral as intellectual. For which causes England has just occasion to
rejoice, and to vaunt of such a gracious mother. To whom the Monarch of
Monarchs long continue her highness, and strengthen her (as he has done
hitherto) to his perpetual glory, confusion of all her enemies, and to our
everlasting comfort.

Of Tyraunts. Chap. 9.
SIr Thomas Smith terms him Lib. 1. de Repu. Anglic. cap. 7.
a Tyrant, that by force comes to the Monarchy against the will of the
people, breaks laws already made at his pleasure, and makes other without
the advice and consent of the people, and regards not the wealth of his
commons, but the aduaunceme^t of himself, his faction, and kindred. Also, there
be two sorts of Tyrants. Bartol. in tract. de tyra^n.
The one in title, the other in exercise. He is in title Tyrant, that without
any lawful title usurps the government. In exercise, he that has good title
to the principality, and comes in with the good will of the people, but does
not rule well and orderly, as he should. And so not only they, which behave
themselves wickedly toward their subjects, are called Tyraunts, as Edward the
second of this realm in the year of our Lord 1319. and Alphonsus of Naples,
that lawfully came to the crown in the year 1489. but also they are named
tyrants, which albeit they behave themselves well, yet they are to be called
tyraunts, in that they had no title to the principality; as S^eno the King of
Denmark, that usurped this realm of England in the year 1017. and Pope
Clement the eight, that now is, who about two years ago seysed on the Dukedom
of Ferraria only by pretense of a gift, which Constantine time out of mind
bequeathed to the papacy. Furthermore, there be six tokens to know a tyrant.
The first, if he sends abroad pickthanks, talebearers, and espies to hearken
what men speak of him, as Tiberius the Emperor was wont to do. The second,
if he abolisheth the study of learning, and Tacit. in vita Agricolae.
burns the monuments of most worthy wits in the market place, and in the
assembly of the people, least his subjects should attain to the knowledge of
wisdom. As Alaricus king of the Goths did in Italy, in the year 313. and
the great Turk in his Empire. The third, if he maintain schisms, divisions,
and factions in his kingdom, for fear that men should pry into his doings.
As the Popes have done always from time to time: and of late days the Queen
mother in France. The fourth, if he trust strangers more then his own
natural subjects; and continually goes guarded with a strong company: As
Vortiger sometime king of this Realm did, when he brought in Hengist and the
Saxons, and gave them the countries of Kent and Essex to inhabit. The fifth, if
he without cause command his chiefest nobles to be cashiered and branded with
ignominy, or to be imprisoned and put to death, for fear lest they should wax
too popular and ouermighty. Such a one was Frauncis Sfortia Duke of Millain,
that caused Alphonsus king of Naples villanously at a banquet to murder Earl
James son to Nicholas Picinio (whom he had sent Ambassador to the said
Alphonsus) for no other cause, then for that he feared his might, and because
the Braciques in Italy, and some of his subjects highly esteemed him. The sixth
token to know a tyrant, is, if he do away learned and wise men for no other
intent, then that fearing they should reprove him, and write against his
depraved and ungodly life. As Domitius Nero, that commanded Seneca the
Philosopher, and the Poet Lucan to be slain; and Domitian, that banished the
Poet luuenal for the same cause. But of this matter I have spoken In Comment in
Satyr. 3. Pers.
in another book.

Whether it be lawful for subjects to rise against their Prince being a
tyrant or an heretic? Chap. 10.
EVen as the Prince ought to remove the causes of mislike, which his subjects
have conceived against him, and to extinguish the flame, that being nourished
in one several house would break into the next, and at last into the whole
town: so in like manner subjects ought to please their sovereign, and to
tolerat all rigor, yea, and to lay down their necks upon the block, rather
then to conspire against his power, which he has from God. It may be, that he
is raised as another Nabuchodonozor of the Lord for a scourge to punish the
transgressio^s and enormities of the inhabitants. Plautus
The dishonorable things, which a Prince does, ought to be accounted
honorable. Men must patie^tly (for they can do no otherwise) bear with an
unreasonable dear year, with unseasonable storms, and with many blemishes
and imperfections of nature. Therefore they ought to endure with as constant
courages the heresies and tyrannies of their sovereign. But, thou will say,
subjects must obey only just and upright Princes. To which I answer, that
Ephesians. 6. and Coloss. 3.
parents are bound to their children with reciprocal and mutual duties. Yet,
if parents depart from their duty, and provoke their children to desperation:
Ibidem.
it becomes not children to be less obedient to their parents. Calu. li. 4.
Instit. cap. 20.
But they are subject both to evil parents, and to such, as do not their duty.
Further, if servants must be obedient to their masters, as well curteuos as
cursed, much more ought subjects to obey not only their gentle, but also their
cruel Princes.

This Didacus Couarruuias an excellent Lawier confirms, saying: 2. part.
Decret. cap. 3.. 4.
If a Prince, (whether by succession or election he was made, it skilleth not)
does exceed the limits of law and reason, he cannot be deposed, nor put to
death by any subject; Yea, Soto li. 5. de iustitia and ^re. q. 1. artic. 3.
it is heretical to hold that paradoxe. For Dan. 2. and 4.
God is he, which changes the times and seasons: he takes away kings, and
sets up Kings: to the intent, that living men might know, that the most high
has power over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomesoeuer he will, and
appoints over it the most abject among men. Hence is it, that we seldom
hear of rebels, that ever prospered, but in the end they were bewrayed and
brought to confusion. In the time of Henry the fourth there rebelled at one
time against him the Duke of Exceter, with the Dukes of Gloucester, Surrey,
Aumarle, and Salisburie: and at another time the Earl of Worcester, the
Archbishop of York, and Henry Hotspurre son to the Earl of Northumberland;
all which were either slain or beheaded. To come nearer the state of this
question, we find, that Leonagildus an ancient king of the Goths in Spain,
both a tyrant and an Arrian in the year of our Lord 568. pursued the true
Christians, and exiled his own son, because he was of the true religion.
Whereupon this young Prince being moved at the persecution of the Christians in
his country, did twice raise arms against his Lord and Father. At the first
he was taken captive and banished; at the second he was put to death on Easter
day. By which example we may note the effects of Gods judgments, and rebuke
the rashness of this Prince, that rebelled against his sovereign.

Wherefore, O ye that be subject to cruel Princes, refrain your fury, learn
to obey, and beware lest the same chance unto you, which is feigned to have
chanced unto the frogs, who being importunat on Jupiter to have a king, a beam
was given them: the fi^^t fall whereof did somewhat affright them, but when they
saw it still lie in the stream, they insulted thereon with great disdain, and
prayed for a king of a quicker spirit: the^ was sent unto them a stork, which
tyra^nized and daily devoured them. In a word, rebels in taking care to avoid
one calamity, do enta^gle themselves in a whole peck of troubles, as by this
fable of ye frogs is evident. And oftentimes it happens that the remedy is more
dangerous then the malady it self; for of one tyrant they make three Hydraes,
or else in seeking to shun tyranny, they reduce their government to a
troublesome Democracy.

Of an Aristocracy. Chap. 11.
THe rule of a certain and prescribed number of noblemen and Gentlemen
respecting the benefit of the common wealth, is termed an Aristocracy: and if
any ambitiously prefer their private commodity before the public good, and by
co^spiracies dispose of all matters appertaining to the commonwealth, as it
please the^, it is named an Oligarchy. For as iro^ is consumed in time by rust,
although it auoideth al inco^uenie^ces; so some peculiar damage or other
sticks to every commonwealth according to the nature thereof; as for example,
this Aristot. lib. 4. Politicor.
Oligarchy endamageth an Aristocracy; Tyranny is opposite to a Monarchy, and
sedition to a Democracy. That Aristocracy is best allowed, where the government
is allotted to a few noble and virtuous men, which bestow most in common
services, and make laws for the rest, directing their cogitations to no other
scope, then the public good of their country. The citizens of Venice do
deliver the discussing of their matters, as well ordinary, as of importance, to
the Senate, which are very few in number, as not ignorant, how, few being made
privy of their matters, they should be the more privily managed. Nevertheless
this kind of commonwealth being compared with a monarchy, will be found
imperfect and far inferior. True it is, that silver and tin are good, but
yet imperfect metals in comparison of gold, wherein the souerainety and
perfection of all metals consist. In like manner an Aristocracy well tempered
may be good, but seldom it so falls out. This Realm of England, when it was
divided into provinces, as Mercia, Northu^berla^d, and others, and ruled by the
nobles, was soon surprised by the Danes: whereas if it had continued counted,
they durst never adventure to set foot in any one place of this realm.
Briefly, an Aristocracy disagreeth with the law of nations, which all men held
in great estimation, for L. ex hoc genere ff. de iustitia, and iure.
all nations had kingdoms distinct, and Kings appointed for them. The
Israelites required a king of the Prophet Samuel: for, said they, I. Sam. 8.
We will be like all other nations, and our King shall judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.

Objection.
Mediocrity in all things is praiseworthy, and extremes dispraised: an
Aristocracy is the mediocrity between a Monarchy and a Democracy: therefore it
is best.

Answer.
The mediocrity between a Monarchy and a Democracy is perfect and
praiseworthy, if it could be equally divided, and thereby the virtue drawn
out; which is in a manner impossible.

Of a Democracy, Chap. 12.
A Democracy of all regiments is the very worst, as being a market where all
things are sold, and fashioned by owls, whose sight the night lighteneth, and
the day makes dim. What is more preposterous, then to see the multitude (a
mo^ster of many heads) void of discretion, deliberating and determining on wise
men's deeds, yea, and now and then on their lives? are not they still shuffling
the cards and desirous of new co^motions? are not they wavering and corrupt?
wretched, I say, and miserable is that commonwealth, which wa^ts a head, and
where the people reign. Persius Satyr. 5.
Sooner will a fool be brought to play upon a harp, then the indiscreet
multitude be made fit for magistracies. No man is so foolish, that having need
of physicians wise and experienced, he will put his body into the hands of rude
and raw Empiriques. Likewise Guicciard. lib. 2 hist.
as of a judge incapable and indiscreet ca^ be no expectation of righteous
judgments: so in a popular state full of confusion and vanity, there is no
hope, but at adventure of deliberatio^, and resolution wise or reasonable.
Which caused Anacharsis the Philosopher, when he saw the Areopagites
propou^ding causes, and the people resolving the^, to say, that wise men among
the the Athenians moved matters, and fools determined the^. How great troubles
did the Flore^tines sustain by this sort of government, until of late it was
reduced by the Mediceis into a monarchy? In fine, ye multitude co^pou^ded of
many and diverse spirits, of manners, and customs, can never distinguish between
good and bad co sell, by reason that Thucid. lib. 3. histor.
whatsoever is moderat, they esteem a kind of slothful cowardice, and
whatsoever is circu^spectly forewarned, that they hold to be curiosity. But
whatsoever is rash and hasty, that is thought by them to be courageously
deliberated.

The Democracy of the Switzers has Objection
continued without troubles two hundred years and upwards: therefore a
Democracy well constituted may endure as long as an Aristocracy or Monarchy.

Answer.
Of the continuance of the Switzers popular government, I find two causes. The
first, they have slain all their noblemen, and they mistrust not one another.
The second, the most factious and seditious of them are commonly abroad as
mercenary soldiers under the French king and other potentates, and the rest at
home more tractable regard not how the world goes.

The second Plant.
The members of a Commonwealth. Chapt. 13.
ALl the people, which be in every royal commonwealth, are generally either
Gentlemen or of the commonaltie. Of Gentlemen there be three degrees. Under the
first and chiefest is the Prince comprehended. Under the second, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, and Knights of honor. Under the third
and last are contained Knights, Graduates of law, Esquires, Masters of Arts,
Captains, and they that bear the countenance and port of Gentlemen. Whereunto
also might be added a fourth degree of Gentlemen, whom we name Gentlemen of
the first head: I mean them, Smith. li. 1. de Repub. Anglic. cap. 20.
to whom Heraldes for money do give arms, newly made and invented, the title
whereof shall pretend to have been found by the said Heralds, in perusing and
viewing of old Registers, where his ancestors in times past had been recorded
to bear the same. The Commonaltie likewise is divided into Citizens,
Artificers, Merchants, and Yeomen.

Of Noblemen. Chap. 14.
IF we call to remembrance all things that we have seen, we shall find
every one thing in particular to excel the rest of the same kind, in some
perfection or other. Let us look up into the Zodiake, and there we shall see
the sun to surpass the minour^ stars. Among metals, gold, silver, and
brass are best. Among stones, the marble, iuorie, and loadstone. Among
precious stones, the Diamond, the Smaragde, and Sapphire. Among trees, the Pine,
the Juniper, the apple tree. And so among living things, some exceed others.
What marvel therefore is it, if among men, the very same order be observed?
In the buying or selling of a horse, we glory and boast of his sire: and
shall we not respect, of what stock and parentage a man is descended? Boethius
lib. 3. de Consolation. Philosoph. metr. 6.
Eueryman, I confess, comes of Noble seed, that is to say, from God; but
afterward he becomes degenerate and ignoble, by forsaking God his beginning,
and by leaning unto wicked vices. For which cause there was a law in Rome
termed Prosapia, that is, the law of disce^t, by the which it was ordained,
that when contention did arise in the senate house, for the Co^sulship, that
they which descended from the Torquatians, Decians, and Fabricians, should
obtain the place before others.

Concerning Noblemens privileges, they be many, whereof we will at this present
recite only 5. First, a Nobleman cannot be chale^ged to the combat or lists,
by any inferior man. Secondly, a Noblema^ is sooner preferred to bear office
in the Commonwealth, to sit in commission, and to be an arbitrator betwixt
party and party. Thirdly, by the civil law, the testimonies of Noblemen are
sooner approved. And whereas inferior gentlemen must personally appear in
criminal causes, it is lawful for Noblemen to be absent, so that they
substitute an attorney or proctor for them. Fourthly, a Nobleman having
committed an heinous offense, as murder or treason, is judged by his peers
and equals: Smith. li. 2. de Republic. Anglic. cap. 27.
that is, The yeoma^rie does not go upon him, but an enquest of the L. of the
Parliament, and they give their voices, not one for all, but each severally, as
they do in parliament, beginning at the youngest L. and for judge, one L.
sits, who is high steward of England for that day. And this punishment is
beheading: but if an inferior Gent. offend in this sort, then at the next
sessions he has twelve Godfathers on his life, and is condemned to be hanged.
Fifthly, Noblemen and their wives are licensed to wear clothes of gold, but
Knights and Esquires are forbidden them.

To hasten to an end, this honor of auncestrie as it does adorn Noblemen, so
does it greatly disgrace them if they live not virtuously. For thereby they
eclipse their genealogy, and become themselves utterly unknown. In
consideration of which abuse, a notable law was enacted among the Rhodians, to
wit, That those sons, which followed not their fathers virtues, but lived
wickedly, should be disinherited, and their revenues given to the most
virtuous of that race, not admitting any vicious heir whatsoever.

The properties of a Gentleman. Chap. 15.
THe means to discern a Gentleman be these. First, he must be affable and
courteous in speech and behavior. Secondly, he must have an aduenturous heart
to fight, and that but for very just quarrels. Thirdly, he must be endued
with mercy to forgive the trespasses of his friends and servants. Fourthly,
he must stretch his purse to give liberally unto soldiers, and unto them
that have need: for a niggard is not worthy to be called a Gentleman. These
be the properties of a Gentleman, which whosoever lacks, deserves but the
title of a clown, or of a country boore. In brief, it fares with Gentlemen,
as it does with wine: which ought to have four good qualities, namely, it must
not taste of the Caske: next, it must savor of a good soil. Thirdly, it must
have a good color. Last of all, it must savor of the goodness of the grape,
and not be sophistically mingled with water and such like.

That Gentlemen must not greatly respect what the common people speak of them.
Chap. 16.
THe common people ground their actions upon fallible expectations: they are
stout when perils be far off, and very irresolute when they approach. Who
therefore is so brainesicke, as to believe their assertions? What else is
glory, then a windy gale, never coming from the heart, but only from the
lungs? Boethius li. 3. de Co^sol. Philo. pros. 6.
They that be praised unworthily, ought to be ashamed of their praise. Admit
they be justly praised, what thing more has it augmented to the conscience of
a wise man, that measures not his good, by the rumor of the common people,
but by the truth of the conscience? For which cause the Romans built two
temples joining together; the one being dedicated to virtue, and the other to
honor: but yet in such sort, that no man could enter into that of honor,
except first he passed through the temple of virtue. Ari. li. 4. Ethicor.
Honor (as the Philosopher says) is a reverence given to another, for a
testimony of his virtue. Insomuch as honor is not attributed to virtue by
dignity, but rather it is attributed to dignity, by virtue of them that use
the dignity.

Howbeit notwithstanding, Persius satyr. 1.
I have not such horny heart strings, that I would not at al have me^ to be
praised; but my meaning is, that Gentlemen should observe a mean and a
limitation in their common applauses, and fine soothings. For Cicero. li. 1.
Offici.
to be altogether careless (as Stoykes and Cynicks would have every one to
be) what men think of the^, is not only a mark of arrogance, but also a token
of a loose life. Wherefore gentlemen must endeavor by all means, and without
vainglory, to keep a good name, especially among their neighbors, and to bear
themselves such men indeed, as they would have al men account the^. Whereto
accords that saying of the Poet: Thou shall live well, Horat. li. 1. Episto.
17.
if thou take care to be such a one, as thou hear how the people testify
of thee abroad.

Of Knights of honor. Chap. 17.
THose I call knights of honor, who, here in England, are named Knights of the
Garter, and in France, Knights of the order of saint Michael. The original of
the honorable order of the Garter, was first invented after this manner. When K.
Edward the third had, by the means of Edward the black Prince his son, taken
captives King John of France, and King David of Scotland, and had put them both
in ward at London, and also had expelled King Henry the bastard of Spain,
restoring the Kingdom to Peter the lawful King, then he, to honor and grace
his victories, devised an honorable fellowship, and made choice of the most
famous persons for virtue, and honored them with this order, giving the^ a
garter adorned with gold and precious stones, together with a buckle of gold,
to wear only on the left leg. Smith. li. 1. de Republic.
Of which order he and his successors, Kings and Queens of England should be
sovereign, and the rest, by certain laws among themselves, Anglic. cap. 18.
should be taken as brethren and fellows in that order, to the number of six
and twenty. And this breefely touching the invention and author of the
honorable order of Knights here in England. Now I will address my pen to
write of the honorable order in France.

King Jews the eleventh of France, after he had made peace with his peers,
whom in the beginning of his reign, he had excluded from his presence,
invented at Amboise, in the year of our Lord 1469. a society of honor,
consisting of six and thirty Noblemen, and named Saint Michael Patron of them
(even as the English knights had devoted themselves to the tuition of Saint
George) giving ot each of them a golden chain, of the value of two hundred
pound, which they were bound to wear daily, and not to bestow, sell, or gage
the same as long as they lived; and if any one of them chanced to die,
forthwith there was an election to dubbe another in his room, not by voices,
but by little scrowles turned together in the form of balls, the which they
did cast into a basin, and the Lord Chauncelour was to reckon them. Then he,
that had most balls on his side was admitted to the society, the King
speaking these words: The honorable society do accept of thee as their
brother, and in regard of their good will to thee-wards, do bestow this golden
chain on thee: God grant thou may long wear it. When the King had spoken
these words, he gave him a kiss on the right cheek. This is the custom of
dubbing kinghts of the order of Saint Michael.

Also, there be other orders of knights in Christendom, as, the kinghts of the
golden Fleece, knights, of the Bathe, knights of the patent devised by ye Pope,
and knights of the Rhodes. But because the rehearfall of them are not much
appertaining to our purpose, I cease to treat further of them.

Of Citizens. Chap. 18.
Ari. li. 1. Politic. cap. 2.
HE that first invented a city, was the cause of much good. The which praise
some attribute unto eloquent men. Some to Saturn. And others to Orpheus and
Amphion. For in the beginning of the world, people lived barbarously like unto
bruit beasts: and the nature of man was such, that they not having either the
law natural or civil prescribed, rogued up and down dispersed in the world,
and possessed nothing, except that, which by force they took away from others,
Cicero in Oration. pro Sesti. and Plato li. 6. de legib.
til there arose some notable men both in wisdom and valor, who knowing,
how it was to instruct man, assembled all of them into one place, ordamed a
City, and environed them round about with walls.

Further, Citizens in general are they that live under the same laws and
sovereign magistrates. But Citizens particularly are they, that are freemen,
and do dwell in Cities and boroughs, or corporated towns, Generally, in the
shire they be of no account, save only in the Parliament to make laws. Smith.
de Repub Anglic.
The ancient Cities appointed four, and each borough two, (whom we call
Burgesses of the Parliament) to have voices in it, and to give their consent
and dissent in the name of the City or borough, for which they be appointed.

Whether out landish men ought to be admitted into a City. Chap. 19.
Ari. li. 5 Polit. ca. 3.
IT is commonly seen, that sedition often chances there, where the
inhabitants be not all native borne. This Lycurgus the Lawgiuer of the
Lacedaemonians rightly noting, Rhodiginus li. 10 lection. antiquer. cap. 5.
instituted, that no stranger should be admitted into his Commonwealth, but at
a prefixed time. His reason was, because seldom it is seen, that the
homeborne Citizens, and the outlandish do agree together. In the year of our
Lord 1382. the Londiners made an insurrection, and slew all the Jews that
inhabited amongst them. The Neapolitanes and Sicilians, in the year of our
Lord 1168. rose against William their king, because he gave certain offices
to Frenchmen, and killed them all in one night. The Citizens of Geneua repining
at strangers, which resorted and dwelled among them, conspired together in the
year 1556. to expel them; and Beza in Calvin. vita.
if Calvin had not thrust himself between the naked swords to appease the
tumult, doubtless there would have been a great slaughter. There is at this
present day, a religious law in China and Cathaya, forbidding on pain of
death, the access of strangers into the country. What shall I say of the
constitutions of Princes, whereby strangers were utterly extruded and excluded
from bearing offices in the Commonwealth L. in Ecclesiis. 11 de Epis. and
clericis C. statuerunt.
Arcadius and Honorus Empercurs of Rome decreed, that no man out of the parish,
where a benefice fell void, should be admitted minister. Likewise, Cap. bonae.
4.. intelleximus, de postulation. praelat.
Pope Innocent the third was wont to say, that he could not with a safe
conscience prefer any strangers to be officers in the kingdom of Hungary.
King Charles the seventh of France in the year of our Lord 1431. proclaimed,
that no alien or stranger should be presented to any ecclesiastical living
living in his realm.

For which respects, Princes must have great regard touching the admission of
strangers, and especially to their number. For if they exceed the native
inhabitanes in number and strength, then through confidence in their own might,
they will presently invade and overthrow their too too kind fosterers.

Of Merchants. Chap. 20.
FOrasmuch as there be three sorts of Citizens: the first of Gentlemen, who
are wont now and then for pleasure to dwell in Cities: the second, of
Merchants: and the third of manuaries and Artificers: it is expedient, that I
having already declared the properties of Gentlemen, should now conse quently
discourse some what of Merchants: and then of Artificers. By Merchants
necessaries are transported from strange countries, and from hence other
superfluous things are conveyed to other places, where they traffic so
commodiously, that the whole Commonwealth is bettered by them. Every country
has a several grace naturally given unto it, as, Moscouie is plentiful of
honey, wax, Martin-skinnes, and good hides. The country of Molucca yeeldes
cloves, sinnamon, and pepper. In the East Indiaes grow the best olives.
Damascus abounds with prunes, reysins, pomegranates, and quinces. From
France we fetch our wines. From Francoford we have books brought unto us. So
that whosoever considers the general commonwealth of all the world, he
shall perceive, that it cannot continue long in perfection, without traffic
and diversities.

Of Artificers. Chap. 21.
Ari. li. 1. Politic. cap. 7.
AMongst occupations, those are most artificial, where fortune is least
esteemed: those most unseemly, whereby men do pollute their bodies: those most
servile, wherein there is most use of bodily strength: and those most vile,
wherein virtue is least required. And again, the gains of tolegatherers and
usurers are odious: and so are the trades of Butchers, Cooks, Fishmongers, and
Huxters. Pedlers likewise and Chaundlers are accounted base, for that they buy
of Merchants, to the end, they may presently utter the same away. In uttering
of which, they cog and cosen the simple buyers: the^ which nothing is more
impious or more hurtful to the conscience. These kind of men Smith. 1. de
Republic. Anglic.
have no voyee in the commonwealth, and no account is made of them, but only
to be ruled, and not to rule others.

Of Yeomen, and their oppression. Chap. 22.
A Yeoman is he that tilleth the ground, gets his living by selling of
corn in markets, and can dispend yearly forty shillings sterling. There is
no life more pleasant then a yeomans life: for where shall a man have better
provision to keep his winter with fire enough, then in the country? and where
is there a more delightful dwelling, Xenoph. in oeconomic.
for goodly waters, gentle winds and shadows, then in the country? This life
was so highly regarded in ancient time, that even Emperors and generals of war,
have not bin ashamed to exercise it. Persius satyr. 1.
Herehence descended Remus, and Q. Cincinnatus, who, as he was earing his four
acres of land, was by a purseuant called to the City of Rome, and created
Dictator. Dioclesia^ left his Empire at Salona, and became a yeoman. Let a man
repair at any time to a yeomans house, and Horatius Epod. 2. and Cicer.
desenect.
there he shall find all manner of victuals, mead, and all of his own, without
buying or laying money out of his purse.

But now a days yeomanrie is decayed, hospitality gone to wrack, and
husbandry almost quite fallen. The reason is, because Landlords, not contented
with such revenues, as their predecessors received, nor yet satisfied, that
they live like swinish Epicures, quietly at their ease, doing no good to the
Commonwealth, Morus lib. 1. Vtopi.
do leave no ground for tillage, but do enclose for pasture many thousand
acres of ground within one hedge, the husbandme^ are thrust out of their own,
or else by deceit, constrained to sell all that they have. And so either by
hook or by crook, they must needs depart away poor seely souls, men, women,
and children. And not this extremity only do our wicked Ahabs show, but also
with the loss of Naboths life do they glut their ouergreedy minds. This is the
cause, why corn in England is become dearer, then it was wont to be; and yet
notwithstanding all this, sheep and wool are nothing better cheap, but rather
their price are much enhaunsed. Thus do our remorcelesse Puttocks lie lurking
for the poor commons, to spoil them of their teneme^ts, Job 20.
but they shall not long enjoy them. And why? because they are oppressors of
the poor, and not helpers, their bellies are never filled, therefore shall
they soon perish in their covetousness.

The third Plant.
Of Counsel. Chap. 23.
Counsel is a sentence, which particularly is given by every man for that
purpose assembled. There be five rules to be noted in counsel. The first, to
counsel well, wherein is implied, that whatsoever is proposed, should be
honest, lawful, and profitable. The second, counsel must not be rash and
headlong, but mature, deliberated, and ripe, like unto the bark of an old
tree. Thirdly, to proceed according to examples touching things past, as, what
shall chance to the Israelites, because they have worshipped the golden calf.
Fourthly, to give counsel concerning the present time, and of those things,
which are comprehended in the senses. So Christ said unto the disciples of
John: Mat. 11
Go, and show John what things ye hear and see. The blind receive their
sight, and the halt do walk: the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear: the
dead are raised up, and the poor receive the Gospel. Fifthly, to foresee things
to come, and to forewarne men of them; as, Mat. 22
he, that shall offend, shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Of Counselors. Chap. 24.
Seven things are required in a counselor; First, the fear of God, for he is
the only author of al good counsels. Secondly, experience in matters of
policy. Thirdly, learning and knowledge in the lawves. For Cassiod. lib. 8
Epistol. 18
hardly will they be infected with ^^^onious vi^es, whom learning has
purged. Fourthly, mildness. Fifthly, a cou^sellour must be naturally borne
within that state, where he governs. Sixthly, he must be secret, lest he
work to himself the occasion of his own death; as the bishop of Setto did:
who because he revealed to the French king, that Caesar Borgias his master
brought with him a Bull authentike and ratified from the Pope his father, for a
diuorcement to the French king, which he dissembled, was by the said Duke
eftsoone poisoned. Seventhly, a counselor (if it be possible) ought to be of
noble pare^tage, for Aristot. li. 3. Polit. ca. 8.
they which have more nobility, have more right in a co^mo^wealth, then the
ignoble. And every one esteems nobility in his country, as a thing very
honorable, seeing it is likely, that the best parents should beget the best
children: and nobility is the virtue of the stock and race.

Of Parliaments. Chap. 25.
PArliaments are right necessary in a commonwealth, and without them the whole
estate is mortified and senseless. For even as a man cannot live without a
soul: so a commonwealth cannot live without Parliaments. By experience it is
found out, that they have saved commonwealths from ruin and decay. Greece had
never so long flourished, if the great counsel of the Amphictions, first
instituted by Amphiction the son of Deucalion, had not been holden twice a
year, in spring time and in Autumn at Delphos in the temple of Apollo, which
was seated in the heart of all Greece. The counsel of Nicene hindered the
proceedings of the Arrians, and caused the true religion to be planted. The
Parliame^ts of Germany, where the Emperor and the seven Electours meet, have
preserved the state thereof from the intrusions of the Turks. So likewise the
Aggregation of the Genowayes, the Journey or Diet of the Switzers, the great
council of the Vene^ian Gentlemen, the Diuan of the Turks, the assembly of the
states of Polonia, the 7. councels of Spain, to wit, the council of Spain,
of the low Countries, of the Inquisition, of the Indians, of Italy, of the
order of saint John, and of war: the meeting of the states of France, and
the parliament of England consisting of the Prince, Baronrie, and commonalty
have maintained their commonwealths more securely as well from hostile as from
domestical enemies.

To hold a Parliament, is, when the Prince communicates his affairs of
importance with his subjects, demands subsidies of them, takes their
advice, hears their molestations, and provides for them reasonably. Smith.
lib. 2. de Republ. Anglic. cap. 2.
The Judges in our Parliament of England are the Prince, the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and the commons represented by the Knights and Burgesses of
every shire and Borough town. The officers are the speakers, the clarks, and
the committies. The author of this Parliament was king Henry the third,
induced thereunto (as I suppose) by his Barons, who rebelling against him, made
England tributary to Pa^dolph the legate in the Popes name. And doubtless the
calling and holding of it is the chiefest means of all our welfares. For in
times past it appeased civil wars, it delivered the whole realm from the
incursions of foreign enemies, and maintained continual wars abroad with
the Scots and Frenchmen. In a word, this holding of parliament is the anchor of
our whole comonwealth, whereby it is set sure and stayed, as a ship in the water.

Of Judgments. Chap. 26.
IVdgeme^t is that, which is decreed by the Judge, not altogether dissenting
from the tenor of the law. Of judgments some be called civil, some criminal:
but because our Ciuilians have largely treated of them, I will proceed to
another division, which makes most for our politic instruction. Judgments
again are either private or public: Ordinary or extraordinary: Private
judgments concern testaments, successions, marriages, contracts, wardships,
gardianships, bondages, and prescriptions. Public judgments are of grievous
offenses against God and man: as, high treason, petie treason, murders, rapes,
felonies, riot, bribes, forgeries, and insurrections. Ordinary judgments are
those, which are executed by the Judge, according to the prescription of the
law. Cuiacius in Paratit. ff. de extraord. criminib.
Extraordinary are called when the Judge departing somewhat from the rigor of
the law, judges more mercifully according to his own conscience.

The common and usual form of judgment, that is exercised here in England is
by the great assise, or by a quest of 12. men necessarily of that shire, where
the defenda^t dwells. These me^ the sheriff warns to appear upon pain of
amercements. And appearing (unless exceptions be made against the^) they
besworne to tell the truth of that issue or criminal cause, according to their
conscience and evidence or writings authe^ticall laid before them. Then these
12. men are shut up in some room hard by, and kept by a bailiffe without any
kind of sustenance, fire, or candle, until al of them agree upon one verdict
about the said issue or criminal cause. This is our common order of judgment.
There are likewise other forms, whereby judgment is given, as by the
parliament, by combat, and such like, which are absolute, and without appeal;
howbeit they be seldom used.

Of Judges and their duty. Chap. 27.
IVdges must not go astray from the right, but discharge themselves pure and
innocent to God, the prince, and the law. L. ^mne. C. ad leg. Iuli. repetund.
and l. 1. ff. ad leg. Corn. de sicar.
They must not be corrupted with bribes and extorsion, nor by other men's bra
^les hunt for a pray. They must be men for their years, very ripe in prudence,
judgment, and experience; for their countenance, severe and grave; for their
parentage, (if it be possible) renowned above the residue of the people; for
their credit, strong in opinion with the common people. * They must not
pronounce sentence against the statutes of the realm, Iul. Paul. li. 5.
sentent. tit. 25. apud Cuiaciu^.
or against the common law. Neither must they condemn any man upon suspicion:
for better it is to suffer the guilty to escape unpunished, then to condemn an
innocent. They must neither be too severe, nor too remiss, but they must
determine circumspectly, as the matter, and necessities require. Howbeit, in
light matters let them be somewhat addicted to lenity, and in weighty affairs
to severity being te^pered with a meek countenance. And if they would needs
remit penalties, forfeits, or capital punishments, let them first satisfy the
agrieued parties.

Judges may err six manner of ways. First, when they be partial toward their
friends and kinsmen. Secondly, Sotus li. 3. de iustitia and iure.
when they have no power over them, whom they judge. Thirdly, when for hatred
they prosecute any man. Fourthly, when they repriue men for fear to displease
some great personage. Fifthly, when being greased in the fist with the oil of
gold, they wink at enormities, and corruption. Sixthly, when being unlearned
they judge rashly and without premeditation.

Of Bribes, and going to law. Chap. 28.
WOe be unto you, Ezech. 22.
that have taken gifts to shead blood, or have received usury, and the
increase, and that have defrauded your neighbors by extortion. For you respect
not what the law decrees, but what the mind affects: you consider not the
life of the man, but the bribes of the butcher. When the rich man speaks, he
is atte^tiuely heard: but when the poor complains, no man gives ear unto
him. Or if percase one of our fine-headed lawyers vouchsafe to take his cause
in hand, he follows it slowly, and in a dozen sheets not having eight lines
on every side he lays down such fri^olous and disguised contradictions and
replications, that his suites shall hang seven years; yea, and perhaps a dozen
years, according to the number of those superfluous sheets, before they be
brought to any perfection, and until the poor client become far behind
hand. Nowadaies the common fee of an attorney is no less the^ a brace of
angels, notwithstanding he speak but once, and that (the Lord knows) very
coldly to the right sense of the suit. And if a poor man should proffer him
less, he will answer him in this manner: Sir, behold my face and complexion,
and you shall find, that it is all of gold, and not of silver. Innumerable are
the quirkes, quiddities, and starting holes of our English petifoggers: for
sometimes when a definitive sentence is pronounced, they forsooth will invent
some apish trick, either to suspend it from execution upon some small
cauillation or objection, or else they call it into a new controversy by a writ
of error or by a civil petition; or, to conclude, they find out some shift or
drift to reuerse and revoke the sentence. Thus do they play the sophisters with
their seely clie^ts, or rather conies, whom they have catched and intrapped in
their nets. But these disorders would be quickly reformed, if men will
follow my counsel, which is, To forbear awhile from going to law. Honest and
well disposed men might content themselves at home, and not gadde every foot
to the court of Common pleas, to the Chauncery, to the Starchamber. Neighbors,
Isay, and kinsfolks ought to regard one another, and to end all doubts and
quarrels among themselves: I do not mean by brutish combats and affraies, but
by mediations, atonements, and intercessions. Man is by nature humane, that is,
gentle and courteous: and good usage will in time cause him to relent from his
former stubbernesse. Many countries have their Courts, Leetes, or Lawdaies,
where men generally do meet together: there, me thinks, light controversies
and iarres might as soon be taken up and decided, as well as in far places. If
this advice of mine were observed, we should have fewer lawyers and less
controversies.

Of Magistrates. Chap. 29.
EVen as in the body of a living creature the organe of seeing is ascribed only
to the eyes, and all the other off^ces do obey them as their guides: so in like
manner all offices in the commonwealth are committed unto wise magistrates, as
to the eyes of the realm, and the other members must be directed by the^. For
which consideration I require in a magistrate learning and virtue, without
which he is not worthy to be termed the eye of a commo^wealth, but rather a
blind bayard, as wanting both the eyes of the body and the eyes of the mind.
When as we choose a rapier, we choose it not, because the hilt is double-guilt,
and the scabberd of velvet and beset with pearls: but because the point of it
is sharp to enter well, and the blade strong and stiff. So happens it in the
election of magistrates, namely, that they be learned and virtuous, rather then
ha^dsomely and beautifully proportioned in body. Strength of body is required
in a laborer; but policy in a magistrate. This is profitable to a twofold
scope, that the wise and feeble may command, and the strong obey. Next,
magistrates must consider, why the sword of justice both by the law of God and
man is put into their hands; that is to say, they are the ministers of God and
the executioners of the law, to take vengeance on the wicked, and not to let
offenders in any case wilfully to persevere in their errors. In the beginning,
every malady is easy to be cured: but if it be let alone for a while, it
grows past remedy. Magistrates therefore must in time provide salues to
redress abuses: otherwise they incur the anger of God. They must have lions
hearts, that they shrink not in just causes. They must be constant, lest by
their friends intercessions they wax partial. Lastly, they must be both grave
and civil: grave in commanding, and civil in conversation.

Of the great cares and troubles of Magistrates. Chap. 30.
O How greatly are me^ deceived, that persuade themselves, that magistrates do
lead the ioyfullest lives. Little know they, how unquiet be their thoughts.
They think not of their long watchings, and that their nature is weakened, and
through such distemperatures their bodies languish. No man lives exempt from
some sorrow or other. Although ignorant men and fresh water soldiers, to whom
war is pleasant, account it felicity to command: yet if they compare in an
even balance the weight of such troubles, as daily happen in their
magistracies, unto the weakness of pleasure which proceeds by commanding,
they shall perceive, that far greater is the toil of the one, then the toy of
the other. How often are they cumbred with complaints? How long in perusing of
informations? So that in fine their offices will not permit them any
contentation. Cominaeus lib. cap. 13.
Poor men, that weary their bodies to get food for the sustentation of
themselves, their wives and children, and do pay subsidies to their Prince,
should live in too great discomfort and despair, if great men and magistrates
had nothing in this world but pleasure, and they on the contrary side but
toils and calamities. But God has otherwise disposed of the case. For they
languish in mind: whereas poor men do but weary their bodies, which easily
might be recovered again. The consuming of the vital spirits is in a manner
irrecuperable; insomuch as the cares of the one exceed far the labor of the
other.

Whether magistrates may receive presents sent unto them? Chap. 31.
Esa. 33
THey that walk in justice, refusing gain of oppression, and shaking their
hands from taking of gifts, shall dwell on high, their defense shall be the
munitions of rocks, and they shall see GOD in his glory. For Exo. 23 Deuteronomy. 16
and Eccl. 20.
gifts do blind the eyes, and pervert the words of the righteous. No
magistrates therefore must presume to take gifts, Lib. 6. Decretal. tit. 3. ca.
11.
unless they be to be eaten or drunk up within three days at the furthest:
and that not of suitors, for they give them, to the intent they may corrupt
their authority, and so speed of their own pleas and pursuites. Let them
rather imitate Cicero, Cic. lib. 5. ad Atticum, Epist. 10. and 16.
who as long as he was Pretour of Cilicia, would neither himself receive, nor
permit any of his company to take presents, no, not that benevolence, which by
the law Iulia was due unto him. Plutar^. de Iside.
At Thebes the images of judges were put up without hands: whereby is meant,
that they ought not to receive any rewards, that were offered them. There is at
this present time a public law among the Switzers, that magistrates under
pain of death should not take any thing either directly or indirectly for
judging.

The fourth Plant.
Of the Education of Gentlemen. Chap. 32.
Plato li. 6. de legib.
MAn is by nature a gentle creature: who with his happy nature getting good
education, becomes divinely disposed: but if he lack this education, he
waxes the most wicked of all creatures, that are borne upon the earth. Many
drops of water (as we see) falling upon the hard marble stone do pierce and
make it hollow. And the ground being well tilled and manured bears goodly
corn. So in like manner a man well brought up acknowledges his duty toward
his Maker, and knows how to conquer his own affections. Whereas contrariwise
Gentlemen being evil nurtured, ca^ never understand how far the power and
ability extends, that God has given them. For they never read it
themselves, neither are they taught by them that know it; Co^minae. lib. 5.
Nay, few that understand it, are admitted to their presence: and if one be,
yet dare he not instruct them in it, for fear of displeasure; or if happily at
any time he put them in mind thereof, no man will abide him, or at least he
shall be accounted but a fool; peradventure also it may be taken in il part,
and so turn to his harm. Howbeit, the virtuous must not abstain from their
godly admonitions, seeing that Cicero li. 3. de Diuinati.
they cannot benefit the commonwealth more, then when they teach and instruct
young me^, especially in those times, wherein they are so corrupted, that they
must needs by all well disposed persons, be refrained and restrained of
liberty. One says, I am an heir, borne to a thousand pound land. Another
says; Persius satyr. 3.
I have a fat farm, and a house well furnished. What cause have I to fear?
Let the world chance as it will. Another again craketh and breaks his lungs
wel-nigh with windy bragges, because he is a Knights eldest son, Persius
ibid.
fetching his pedigree by a thousand lines and branches, from some worthy
Lord, and because some near kinsman of his is made Censour, Mayor, Justice of
peace, or Lieutenant of the Shire, Persius ibid.
to whom he may say, Good morrow, Cousin.

Infinite are the fooleries of youth, which by due correction, and diligent
exhortation must be rooted out. I will therefore comprehend their education
under four lessons.

The first is instruction, under which are contained four rules. The 1. whereof
is, to teach children the fear and love of GOD, and to show them, that they
must not glory too much in worldly goods. Secondly, to teach them, how to
bridle their tongues, to be modest, and to embrace virtue: for education
properly, is nothing else but a bringing up of youth in virtue. Thirdly, to
show them the faculty of exercise, which serves to the maintenance of health
and strength, Arist. lib. 8. Politicor. cap. 3 and 4.
by ordering the body with light and gentle exercises. Fourthly, familiarly to
declare unto them examples, as well of good men, as of wicked men, that thereby
they may learn how the good are rewarded, and the wicked punished.

The second lesson appertaining to the instruction of youth, is praise, that
is, to commend them, when they do well, that thereby they may be encouraged
the better to go forwards. For youth is like unto moist and soft clay, and
for that respect, is to be egged on to glory in well doing.

The third is counsel, which must be given by their sage Uncles, or ancient
men, concerning their duty toward their parents, elders, and teachers.

The fourth point of instruction is threatening and correction, which is to be
used, when they offend and neglect to follow the advice of their teachers, and
when they begin to be headie, stubborn, and selfe-willed. This the divine
Philosopher very well noted, saying: that Plato Dialog. 7 de legib.
a boy, not as yet having fully and absolutely given himself to virtue, is a
deceitful, cruel and a most proud beast. Wherefore he must be bound with a
schoolmaster as it were with a strong bridle.

The causes why so few Gentlemen no we adays be virtuously disposed. Chap. 33.
I Find that there be four causes, why so few Gentlemen in this age, attain
to the knowledge of virtue. The first is, the corruption of the whole world:
for now are Dan. 9.
the abominations of desolation. These be days of vengeance to fulfill althings
that are written. Mat. 24
The minds of men are so perverse and barren, Luke 21.
that they will not receive the seed of true wisdom. Mar. 13
Their cogitations are too much bent to the pompes and follies of this
transitory world. The second cause proceeds of counterfeit and insufficient
teachers, whose only occupation is covertly to woo young scholars, that come
guidelesse and headless into the University: and (...) gotten them into their
nets, they afterward let them run at randon. But (...) judgment, such youths
as suffer (...) to be snatched up for hawks meat in this or the like manner,
do therein imitate sick folks, who refusing the good Phisician, by some
braine-sicke man's counsel, do commit themselves to the tuition of such a one,
as by ignorance kills them. The third cause is the niggardize of parents, who
continually labor to gather the drossie and unconstant pelf of this world,
and in the mean time make no reckoning of their children, but permit them to
grow old in folly, which destroys them both body and soul. The fourth and
last cause, is the indulgence and fond love of the parents, who take their
sons from the University, as fruit from a tree, before it is ripe, or
rather as pullets without feathers, to place them at the Innes of Court, where,
as I have written in my Commentary upon Persius, In sin. satyr. 1.
they gad to Stage Plays, and are seduced by flattering coni-catchers.

Whether youths ought to be corrected? Chap. 34.
A Good huswife knows how hard a thing it is, to keep flesh sweet and
sauorie, unless it be first poudred and put in brine. So likewise, it is
impossible for parents to reap any joy of their sons, except they be first
corrected. Roses must needs wither, when they be ouergrowne with briers and
thorns: and children that are assailed and overtaken by whole legions of
affections, must at last fall, if they be not accordingly succored. Prou. 13.
* He that spares the rod, spilleth the child. And even as Phisicions and
Surgeons are very necessary in a City for the healing of diseases and
bloody wounds, so are rods expedient for the chastisement of the corruptions
of the soul. Whereunto agrees the proverb: Many times the rod is better
for children then bread. This Xenophon considered, when he brought in his
youth Xenoph. ^i. 1 Paedi.
Cyrus, complaining and telling his mother, that he was beaten by his master.
^ Our Ciuilias also thought it expedient, Lib. 9. and 19. ff. tit. 2.
that boys should be punished. And do we not our selves see by daily
experience, that those parents, who dandle and cocker up their sons, and
wink at their follies, be most commonly agrieued and brought to heaviness?
Eccle. 30
An untamed horse will be stubburne, and a wanton child will be wilful. In
like sort, suffer thy son to have his will for a time, and he will become (do
what thou can) rude, inflexible, and wantonly disposed to all manner of vices.
Wax, as long as it is soft and clammie, receives any impression or seal, but
being hardened, it receives none. So likewise, chastise thy child, and imprint
discipline in his heart, while he is young and towardly, and thou shall bow
him to what instruction thou will, but let him have his own scope, and Seneca
in Thyest.
he will rather break then bow.

Objection.
Diverse youths will perform more at a beck, then they would otherwise at a
blow. Also, it is slavish, as said Socrates, to be beaten: therefore youths
ought not to be corrected.

Answer.
My meaning is not, that all youths should be corrected; for many there be,
that naturally are inclined to live virtuously, and such I would have rather
encouraged by praises, then discouraged by threatenings. My question only
includes sturdie and stubborn youths, who being let alone, will become
worse. And whereas you say with Socrates, that it is slavish to be beaten: I
answer with the same Socrates, that it is slavish to deserve beating. If
Socrates his free nature be not found, surely Socrates his slavish nature must
be beaten, and that even by Socrates his own confession.

Of Schoolemasters and their duties. Chap. 35.
PRinces that in the frontiers of their enemies, keep fortes and garrisons,
do choose wise and expert Captains to ouersee them; otherwise it were better
to batter down the Forts, and to remove the garrisons, then it should come
into the hands of the enemies. So in like manner parents, which tender the
training up of their children, ought to choose out a good schoolmasters, that
will not only instruct them in learning, but also inform them in the precepts
of good manners. Else, they imitate horsecoursers, whose only delight is, to
pamper and fatne their horses, and not to manage them as they should: so that
when such Iades come to travel, they praunse gallantly at the first, but in
the midst of their traveling, their grease melting away, they founder and fall
down in the mire. Even so young men having gotten but a taste of learning,
become so headie with a fond fantasy of that little which they have, that they
tire and lie down in the midst of their bookish pride. The consideration
whereof, has provoked me principally to require in a schoolmasters, moral
and politic Philosophy, thereby to instruct his scholars in awe, obedience,
and love. For would it not grieve the Prince to see his subjects rebellious?
the Father to find his sons disobedient to his will* Withal, a
schoolmaster must be endued with these nine qualities. First, he must be well
skilled in Grammar, Rhetoric, and Poetry. Secondly, he ought to have
discretion to judge of his scholars nature and disposition. Thirdly, courage to
heartne and egg forward a toward youth. Fourthly, perseverance not to give
over his school upon envy or grudge of some particular person. Fifthly, he
must have affability and courtesy, least his scholars as apes taking example
by his froward looks, become rough and disobedient. Sixthly, he must use
mediocritie in correcting, that is, he must correct them according to the
quality of their faults, and while he is so occupied, he must not revile or
nickname them. Seventhly, he must be endued with some majesty of
countenance, and strength of body, otherwise he will be contemned, and made
a iesting-stocke. Eighthly, with continence, to abstain from lechery and
excess in drinking, apparel, and such like. Ninthly, a schoolmasters must
not impose more labors on his scholars, then they can well sustain, least
thereby he cloying them with too much at once, do make them dull, and so
daunt them from their books. For it is love that makes us to take delight,
and to profit in our studies. And this is the cause, why plants moderately
watered do grow, but being too much moystened, they are choked and drowned.

That schoolmasters should have large stipendes. Chap. 36.
IN vain do I treat of necessary schoolmasters, unless parents be
grateful unto them: Cassiod. lib. 9. Epist. 21.
Stipends do nourish Arts. Wherefore teachers are to be stirred up to
benefit the Commonwealth, through the augme^ting of their allowances. L.
medicos.. C. de profeso soribus and medicis.
Constantine the Emperor enacted, that schoolmasters should have large
salaries paid them: whereby he got him an immortal name. It was also decreed
by the council of Laterane, that In cap. de magi. li. 5. tit. 5
prebends should be given to schoolmasters. Council. Trident. sessio. 5.
dereform. c. 1 and sessio. 23. de reforma. c. 18.
The like was done by the council of Trident. It is great pity that every
several parish in this realm of England, has not a good schoolmasters
constituted in it, for the training up of youth, and an indifferent living out
of the same parish, for his travel. For lack whereof, some careful parents
now-a-dayes, are constrained to send their children a hundred miles off, either
to Eaten college, Westminster, Winchester, or other like places, where they
pay much for their diet and tuition, and peradventure so much, as being spared,
might encourage them to kee^^ them the longer at the University. But perhaps
you will ask me, at what time I would have schoolemasters receive their
exhibition? To which I answer: either the one half aforehand, and the other
half at the half years end, or else quarterly, or rather Baldus ad leg. 1.
de suffrag.
The one half at the half years end, and the remnant at the tweluemonths
end. This is my foundation, which being well laid, I doubt not but to see youths
more civil, and better lettered.

Whether it be better for parents to keep their sons at home with a private
schoolmasters, or to send them abroad to the public school. Chap. 37.
IN my judgment this question is worth the deciding, to wit, whether Gentlemen
should maintain their children at the free-schoole, or rather at their houses,
where they themselves may ouersee their towardness? They that approve this
private teaching, allege three special reasons. First, children are by
nature weak, and quickly surprised with infectious diseases, therefore they
had rather have them in sight, where they may be tendered and regarded; which is
likewise confirmed by that common saying: namely, The masters eye fatneth his
horse. Secondly, they will learn modesty and civility at home, whereas if
they were abroad, they would become rude, impudent, and vicious. Thirdly, they
being in number few, will be more diligently taught and informed; which in a
manner is impossible in a common school, by reason of the confusion of so many
scholars. Howbeit notwithstanding these reasons, public teaching seems to
be of most force, and that for four causes. First, because Ari. li. 8
Politic. cap. 1. Xenoph. li. 1. Paed. and Quintilia^. li.
the wisest sort of men have preferred the public instruction before the
private. Secondly, a child will get wit and experience by conuersing with
many. Thirdly, when he misseth in his lesson, he may in the common school
speedily recover that which is lost, 2. cap. 1.
by conferring with his mates. Fourthly, if he be by nature melancholic,
crabbed, or wicked, he will in a free-schoole be reformed, partly for shame
to be beaten in the sight of many, and partly for fear, in seeing offenders
punished. These be all the reasons which I can conjecture on the behalf of
the public scholemaster.

To knit up this question of private and public teaching, this is my
resolution, that children from the first time they be put to school, until
they be at least thirteen years of age, should be cloystered at home with a
private teacher, and then placed in the common school for two or three years
space, till they be ready and fit for the University.

Of Tutours in the University. How to discern a good Tutour. Chap. 38.
PArents in any case must not send their sons to the University, before they
be at least fourteen years of age: whither being once come, they must
curiously hearken (but not of unlearned persons and boys, for they measure
men's sufficiency by their own fancy) after a good Tutour, that will not
only furnish them with necessaries, but also read himself unto them:
otherwise, the parents may one day repent them ^f their sons education. For
many Tutours now-a-dayes will not stick to receive a mark or twenty
shillings a quarter, for each of their scholars tuition, and yet not vouchsafe
once to read themselves unto them, but to substitute young Bachelors of Art,
who, albeit some of them can read tolerably, yet notwithstanding they cannot
correct and provoke the sluggish, as wanting both discretion to judge, and
severity to compel. It is therefore very prudently decreed, although not
always executed, by the University, that none should be a Tutour, under a
Master of Arts, and yet not every Master, but such a one, that for his
integrity of life, and sufficiency of learning, is admitted by the
Vicechancelour, the Head of the house, whereof the Tutour and the scholars are,
and by the consent of two Doctors, or two Bachelors of divinity, to be a
Tutour.

The qualities of a good Tutour be ten: the first is, that he be godly and
virtuously given. The second, that he be well seen in Humanity and
Philosophy. The third, it is requisite that he be no less then seven and
twenty years of age, and no more then forty, because the one lacks audacitie
and gravity to command, and the other most commonly is negligent. The fourth,
a Tutour must be sober as well in words as in deeds. The fifth, he must not (as
many nowadaies do) suffer his pupilles to be idle, and to have their own
wills. The sixth, he must chastise them severely, if they play at dice, swear,
fight, or such like. The seventh, he must (if he may possibly) have them in
his sight and chamber. The eight thing required in a Tutour is, that he be
famous in the University for his learning, and also well friended, that thereby
he may both supply his scholars wantes, and look that they be not iniuried.
The ninth duty of a Tutour is, that he have an especial care and respect to
his scholars battles, lest that by permitting them to spend what they please,
he incur the displeasure of the parents, and so hazard his credit. The tenth
and last duty of a Tutour is, that he keep his scholars in awe and obedience;
and not too familiarly insinuate himself unto them, seeing that according to
the old adage, too much familiarity breeds contempt. And (in conclusion)
whosoever gives his scholars but an inch, may be assured, that they will (do
what he can) take a whole ell.

The fifth Plant.
Of Grammar. Chap. 39.
GRammar is an Art that consists in speaking and enditing truly. It had the
beginning, of noting what is more fit and unfit in communication; which thing
men imitating in their speech, in process of time inverted this Art. Although
before Adams fall from Paradise, learning was natural, yet nevertheless no man
can now of himself come to the knowledge of it, without practice, exercise,
and other men's invention. Charondas the lawgiuer extolled Grammar above all
other Arts: and that justly, for Diodor. Sicul. lib. 12. ca. 4
by means of it the chiefest things in the world are written; as laws,
constitutions, wills, and testaments, and such like, as concern man's life.
Whereby we see that Arist. lib. 8. Polit. ca. 3.
Grammar is many ways profitable to man's life.

But alas, the use thereof is in these days not perfectly known. Albeit we
have many that profes it, yet for all that, few there be that understand it
aright. The reason is, because nowadayes they think, that whosoever can
prattle in Latin, make verses, or patch a declamation, is a substanciall
Grammarian (or, as they term him, an Humanitian) which, God wot, they know not
what it means. For a Quintil. lib. 1. Institut. Oratori.
Gra^marian is he, that can speak the usual tongues elegantly, and expound
the mysteries of Poets with their tropes and figures, and that has some smack
in Philosophy, because sundry places in Poets are quoted out of the
quintesse^ce of the Mathematikes.

Of Logic. Chap. 40.
LIke as they, that dig for metals, do strictly and diligently search the
veins of the earth, and by earnest noting the nature thereof, attain at last
to the perfect knowledge of the mine: so they, that will enjoy learning, as well
for the common good, as for their own profit, must narrowly study this Art of
Logike, Johan. Gra^matic. lib. 1. Prior. Analyt.
which is conversant with us in our daily conferences. And no doubt but having
studied it well, they shall find it expedient three manner of ways. Arist. li.
1. Topic. cap. 2.
First, for exercise. Secondly, for disputations. And thirdly, for the
knowledge of Philosophy. But thou will say, it is obscure, unpleasant, and
therefore in no wise profitable. Oh how weak is the connection of this argument!
Admit that it is at first rough and irksome: yet notwithstanding Gell. lib. 16.
ca. 8
when thou shall enter farther into it, an insatiable desire of learning it,
forthwith will cause thee to embrace it. For without doubt Iamblichus Epistol.
ad Dexippum.
God himself revealed the knowledge of Logike unto us. And if we neglect this
worthy and magnificent gift of his, he will also for our ingratitude withdraw
not only this Art, but all other Arts whatsoever from us: though we have
both wit and learning together, yet shall they little avail without Logic.
What makes youths to speak so boldly and roundly? Logike. What makes
atturneyes to go so fast away with their words and pursuites? Logic. In all
Arts therefore Logic is praise worthy. Logic is defined to be an Art, that
knitteth well together all discourses formed by speeches, and all positions in
them, according as they depend one upon another, and are grounded upon good
reason. And eue^ as gold by seven fires is tried and purified: so in like manner
L. fin.. mixta muner. ff. de muneribus and honorib.
the truth in despite of errors is by logical disputations found out, and
restored to her former liberty. For Zabarella li. 1. de natura logic. cap. 13.
the end of Logic is to discern in philosophy the truth from the false; as if
a man should say, knowledge is the end of it. The duties of it are four;
namely, to define, to divide, to compose true arguments, and to dissolve them
that be false. The parts of Logic are two, to wit, De quibus Aristo. in
praedicame^t.
The first intentions, and De quibus Aristo. in lib. de Interpret. Prior.
Analyt. Posterior. Topic. and Elench.
the second intentions. Howbeit for all this, the feigned Vtopians are reported
Morus lib. 2. Vtop.
never to have been able to find out the second intentions: by reason that none
of them all could see man himself in common, as they term him, though he be,
as some know, bigger then ever was any Giant, and pointed unto us even with our
finger. But I leave the Vtopians to their nullibies.

Of Rhetoric, and the abuse thereof. Chap. 41.
Rhetoric is an Art, that teaches a man to speak finely, smoothly, and
eloquently. And whereas Logic forms speech as it were a bare picture, and
having nothing but simple draughts, which serve to furnish it in respect of each
part and lineament thereof: Arist. lib. 7. Rhetoric. cap. 1. and 2.
Rhetoric being the offspring of Logic shapeth it not only as a picture well
varnished, but also enriched and polished with glorious fields and meadows, and
such like glozing shows, that it may become fair to the eye, and pleasant to
the ear. Being well applied, Aristoph. in Ra^nis.
there is nothing so sacred to persuade as it. But nowadaies it is not much
profitable, especially to preachers. For although Rhetorical speeches do
delight their auditory; yet notwithstanding, they make not much for y^ souls
health. Aeschylus in Prometh.
Simple and material speeches are best among friends. Preachers therefore must
labor to speak and utter that, which the hearers understand, and not go about
the bush with their filing phrases. 1. Cor. 2
They must not (I say) come with excellency of words to show the testimony of
God unto the people. Ibid.
Neither must their preaching consist in the enticing speech of man's wisdom,
but in the plain evidence of the spirit and of power. Moses, when God
commanded him to go down to the Israelites, would have excused himself,
saying, Exodus 4
O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither at any time have been: but I am slow of
speech and slow of tongue. Then the Lord said unto him, Who has given the
mouth to man? or who has made the dumme, or the deaf, or him that sees, or
the blind? have not I the Lord? Therefore go now, and I will be with thy
mouth, and will teach thee, what thou shall say. Calvin that zealous Preacher
had, as many men know, an impediment in his speech, and in his sermons never
used any painted or rhetorical terms.

What shall I write of our common lawyers, who with their glozing speeches do
as it were lay an ambush for justice, and Martia. lib. 1. Epigram.
with their hired tongues think it not dishonest to defend the guilty, and to
patronize unlawful pleas? Why will not they imitate Anacharsis the
Philosopher, who when the scholars of Athens laughed him to scorn, by reason
he could not pronounce Greek distinctly, and eloquently, answered them, that
a speech was not to be termed bad, as long as it contained good counsels, and
as long as honest deeds did follow after his words? Constantine the Emperor
deserves great praise, in that L. 1. and 2. C. de formulis and impetrationis
bus actionu^ sublatis.
he took away the form of making deceitful and fine phrazed libels? In like
sort we read, that l. fin. C. de donationibus.
the elegant solemnities of stipulations, and such like trifling words were
laid aside. In brief, it was decreed among the Areopagites in Athe^s, that no
Orator should use any proheme or forespeech, and digression, nor persuade them
either to mercy or to envy.

Of Poetry, and of the excellency thereof. Chap. 42.
When Exodus 1
the children of Israel were enthralled in the land of bondage: then GOD, who
is always the helper of the friendlesse, raised up Moses his servant, made him
ruler of his distressed people, and delivered them with a strong and
outstretched arm from their miserable captivity. Whereupon Exo. 15
Moses framed a song of thanksgiving unto the Lord in verse, which I take to
be the most ancient of all. So that it is certain, and (as they say) able to
be felt with hands, that Poetry came first by inspiration from GOD. Likewise
Iudic. cap. 5.
Deborasung a Psalm of victory in meetre. David also and the Prophets were
Poets.

If we pry into the lives of the heathen, we shall find that Poetry was the
chiefest cause of their ciuility. When Cic. lib. 1. de Legibus.
before they remained scattered lawless, and barbarous, like unto savage
beasts, Amphion and Orpheus two Poets of the first ages assembled th^se rude
nations, and Hor. de Art poetica.
exhorted them to listen their ear unto their wholesome counsels, and to lead
their lives well and orderly. And as these two Poets, and Linus before them
reclaimed the wildest sort of men: so by all likelihood mo Poets did the same
in other places.

Further, Poets were the first, that observed the secret operations of nature,
and especially the celestial courses, by reason of the perpetual motion of the
heavens, searching after the first mouer, and from thence proceeding by degrees
to consider of the substaunces separate and abstract. They were the first, that
offered oblations, sacrifices, and prayers. They lived chaste, and by their
exceeding continence came to receive visions and prophesies. So likewise 1.
Sam. 9.
Samuel and the Prophets were named Seers.

Now sithence Poetry is so sanctified, it will not be amiss, if I anatomize
her parts, and compare her with other faculties: which done, I doubt not but
she will deserve a more favorable censure even of the Momistes themselves. The
Prince of Philosophers writes, that Aristot. li. 3. Rhetoric.
Rhetoric had her first beginning from Poetry. The chief of the late
Philosophers doubted not to prove, that Zabar. lib. 2. de nature. logic.
Poetry was part of Logic, because it is wholly occupied in delivering the use
of examples, I do not mean that kind of example, which is used in common
conferences; but I mean the manners, affections, and actions of men, which are
brought as examples either to be imitated or shunned of the spectatours, or
readers. In like manner, Poetry is more philosophical and serious then history,
because Poetry medleth with the general consideration of all things: whereas
history treats only of the particular. And not only history, but also
Philosophy, Law, and Physic are subject to Poetry, for whatsoever nature or
policy, case or medicine they rehearse, that may ye Poet, if he please, with
his form or imitation make his own.

But, me thinks, I see a rout of critical Pharisees coming toward me, and
discharging whole volees of cannon shot against my breast, and exclayming
without reason, that I falsely err, for proving Poetry to be derived from
Moses. The Gentiles (say they) were the first founders of Poetry, and therefore
it ought to be rejected. Well do I deny this argument, demanding of the^,
whether philosophy be bad, because the Painims brought the knowledge thereof to
light? whether Greek letters be evil, because Cadmus invented the^? whether
the books of Resolution be blameworthy, for that R. P. a fugitive papist
wrote the^? O monstrous absurdity! What? will they with the foolish Donatists
utterly refuse the Sacraments, because the priests are vicious, that administer
them? Or will they with the Anabaptists forbid alsuites and going to law,
because the lawyers, that co^mence the^, are corrupt? The^ farewell quietness,
farewell money, yea, farewell religion, and all: for each of them was, is, and
will be abused for evermore.

Othersome there be, that judge poetry unlawful, for that they themselves are
not capable thereof. And again there be some, that mean to kill the lion with
a straw, and condemn Poetry for the fables that are contained therein. But if
I should dash these envious Sycopha^ts with a blurre of ink for every offense,
which they commit against the truth, they would, I fear me, become blacker
then Ethiopian Negroes.

As for Poetical Fabies and Parables what else should I retort, but that, which
one of the ancient Fathers has written on their behalf? to wit, Lactantius.
Poets do speak that which is most true, and by their mystical fables do
decipher profound matters. After which manner David in his Psalms says, Psa. 80
Thou have brought forth a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen,
and planted it. What is understood by this vine, and the pla^ting thereof, but
the children of Israel, whom God by his Divine providence brought out of Egypt,
and gave the^ inheritance in the land of Chanaan? likewise we read of the
steward, of the prodigal child, and such like in the new Testament. When
Perseus, Dedalus, and Bellerophon are feigned to fly: what else is meant by
their flying, but their speedy iourneying? what does the tra^sformatio^ of
Halcione into a bird signify? namely, that she, after the death of her
husband Ceix, mourned and sorowed like unto that same bird. When Lycaon is
reported to be metamorphozed into a woolfe: what other sense is understood by
the wolf, then that this king was a tyrant and a ravenous thief? By the
painful travel of Ulysses is portrayed the lively picture of man's miseries.
Icarus had wings, and therewith mounted up into the air: but so soon as the
sun had melted his waxen wings, he fell down into a river, and was drowned.
Whereby is included that no man must rashly reach above his pitch. If men would
speak and inueigh against niggards, what better instance ca^ they make, then
in Danae, Tantalus, and Midas? To blaze prodigality, and such as were given to
pleasures, the Poets painted Acteon turned into a Heart, who was so much
delighted in hunting, that in the end he was eaten up of his dogs; that is, he
spent all his goods in feeding of hounds. For an example of whoredom they
infer Circe, who was so beautiful, that she ravished and enchaunted all such
as beheld her. And so we must judge of the rest. Jupiter betokens the
highest God: Phoebus the Sun: Mars war: Themis law: Minerua learning: Venus
love: Vulcan fire: Ceres corn: Bacchus wine: Neptune the sea: The Nymphs
signify rivers: and by destiny is declared the inevitable will of God. There
is no faculty of any account, but has hard and obscure significations; as for
example, natural philosophy comprehends the first matter and the first
mouer. Alchymy contains dark words: as, Saturn signifies lead: Mercury
quicksiluer: Sol gold: Luna silver: Venus copper: Jupiter tin: Mars iron;
with diverse words of Art a hundred times more mystical then these. I will pass
over the elixers, fixations, and such like names of the Chemists. Thus (gentle
Reader) may thou see, that every Science has other significations, then the
plain names do declare. Why then will Dunces vpbraid Poets with their
intricated Fables, which none but Oedipus can interpret? Only sons of Art, to
whom God has imparted his blessing, must attain to the right knowledge of the
Muses. Hearken what another says, Zabar. lib. 2. de nature. Logic. cap. 19.
The feigned examples of the Poets are fit and convenient for the amendment of
manners. To be short, I am verily of this opinion, that Osor. li. 1. Ciuilis
nobilitat.
all Poets are sworn enemies to lies, and do utterly detest falsehood: and
among the rest Homer was the searcher and lover of truth and verity. Sundry
times have I been conversant with such, as blasphemed Poetry, by calling it
mincing and lying Poetry. But it is no marvel, that they thus deride Poetry,
since they stick not in this outworne age to abuse the ministers of GOD, by
terming them bookish fellows and Puritanes, they themselves not knowing what
they mean.

What more shall I write? Poets at all times have been preferred before all
Artists, and highly esteemed of all Princes. Euripides was entertained of
Amyntas king of Macedon. Sophocles together with Pericles was co^stituted
governor of Athens. Antimenides the Poet was General of an army. Likewise
Tyrtaeus the Poet being lame on one leg, was by the oracle of Apollo chosen
chieftaine of the Lacedaemonians, and got the victory over his enemies. Lysander
king of Lacedemon, in reward of a few verses, gave unto the Poet Antiochus his
hat full of silver. The Sicilians having overcome the Athenians, spared many of
them for Euripides his sake. And if they heard any verses like unto his, they
would have the^ by heart, and one would present them to another with great joy.
Sydn^i. in Apol. Poet.
Alexander the great left his Tutour living Aristotle behind him, but took the
works of dead Homer with him, and every night he caused them to be laid under
his pillow. And not only Homer was thus honored, but also for his sake all
other mean Poets, insomuch as Cherilus a simple Poet had for every good verse,
which he composed, a Philip noble of gold, amounting to the value of an Angel
English. Theocritus the Poet was in estimation with Ptolome king of Egypt, and
with Queen Berenice his wife. Ennius was highly favored by that noble
warrior Scipio: Virgil and Horace were advanced by Augustus the Emperor.

To come nearer our own time, Hiernus an excellent Poet, and yet of base
lineage, when Frotho K. of Denmark died without issue, and the Peers of the
realm had determined him to succeed, that best could honor the dead King:
among the rest, he knowing that Poetry was the only means to revive the
memorial of the dead, made an Epitaph, which publicly repeated, he was by
general consent elected King.

Ieffery Chaucer, the English Poet, was in great account with King Richard the
second, who gave him in reward of his Poems, the Manor of Newelme in Oxford
Shire. Neither will I pass over with silence, the favor of the French Queen
Anne, wife to Lewis the twelfe of France, extended to Poets. This Queen passing
on a time from her lodging toward the Kings side, saw in a gallerie Allen
Chartier a learned Poet, leaning on a tables end fast asleep, which this
Princess espying, she stouped down to kiss him, uttering these words in all
their hearings: We may not of Princely courtesy pass by, and not honor with
our kiss the mouth, from whence so many golden poems have issued. Frauncis the
first, French King in the year of our Lord 1532. made those famous Poets,
Dampetrus and Macrinus, of his privy Counsel. King Henry the eight, her
majesty's Father, for a few Psalms of David turned into English meeter by
Sternhold, made him Groom of his privy chamber, and rewarded him with many
great gifts besides. Moreover, he made Sir Thomas Moore Lord Chauncelour of
this Realm, whose Poetical works are as yet in great regard. Queen Marie for
an Epithalamy composed by Verzoza a Spanish Poet, at her marriage with King
Philip in Winchester, gave him during his life two hundred crowns pension. Her
Majesty that now is, made Doctor Haddon being a Poet, master of the Requests.
In former times, Princes themselves were not ashamed to study Poetry. As for
example, Julius Caesar was a very good Poet. Augustus likewise was a Poet, as by
his edict touching Virgils books appears. Euax King of Arbia wrote a book
of precious stones in verse. Cornelius Gallus treasurer of Egypt, was a
singular good Poet. Neither is our own age altogether to be disprayed. For
the old Earl of Surrey composed books in verse. Sir Philip Sydney excelled
all our English Poets, in rareness of style and matter. King James the sixth of
Scotland, that now reigns, is a notable Poet, and daily sets out most
learned Poems, to the admiration of all his subjects.

Gladly I could go forward in this subject, which in my stripling years
pleased me beyond all others, were it not I delight to be brief: and that
Sir Philip Sydney has so sufficiently defended it in his Apology of Poetry;
that if I should proceed further in the commendation thereof, whatsoever I
write would be eclipsed with the glory of his golden eloquence. Wherefore I
stay my self in this place, earnestly beseeching all Gentlemen, of what
quality soever they be, to advance Poetry, or at least to admire it, and
not to be so hasty shamefully to abuse that, which they may honestly and
lawfully obtain.

Objection.
The reading of Catullus, Propertius, Ouids loves, and the lascivious rimes of
our English Poets, do discredit the Commonwealth, and are the chief
occasions of corruptions, and the spurs of lechery: therefore Poetry is
blameworthie.

Answer.
In many things not the use, August. lib. 3. de Doctrine. Christian. cap. 12.
but the abuse of him that uses them, must be blamed. The fault is not in the
Art of Poetry, but rather in the men that abuse it. Poets themselves may be
traitors and felons, and yet Poetry honest and unattained. Take away the
abuse, which is merely accidental, and let the substance of Poetry stand
still. Every thing that brings pleasure, may bring displeasure. Oui. li. 2
de tristib. Elegi. 1.
Nothing yeeldes profit, but the same may yield disprofit. What is more
profitable then fire? yet notwithstanding we may abuse fire, and burn houses,
and men in their beds. Ibid.
Physic is most commodious for mankind, yet we may abuse it, by administering
of poisoned potions. To end this solution, I conclude, that many of our English
rimers and ballet-makers deserve for their baudy sonnets, and amorous
allurements, to be banished, or severely punished: and that Poetry it self
ought to be honored and made much of, as a precious lewell, and a divine gift.

Of Philosophy. Chap. 43.
^ Philosophy is the knowledge of all good things, both divine and humane.
Cicero li. 3. de Oratore.
It challenges unto it three things: first, contemplation to know those
things, which are subject unto it, as Arist. li. 2. metaphys. text 3.
Natural Philosophy teaches us the knowledge of the world: Geo o^^trae of the
triangle: the Metaphysick of God: and moral Philosophy, of virtue and
felicity. Secondly, Philosophy chalengeth the execution and practice of
precepts. Thirdly, the promotion of a good man; Clemens Alexandrinus. li. 2.
stromat.
* Which three concurring together in one man, do make him a wise Philosopher.
The Jews divided Philosophy into four parts: namely, into Historical,
Civil, Natural of the contemplation of sacrifices, and into Divine of the
speculation of Gods word. Of which I will at this time content my self with
the natural, and the civil Ari. in initio lib. 1. de coelo.
Natural Philosophy is a science that is seen in bodies, magnitudes, and in
their beginnings or ground works, affections, and motions. Or, as others say,
Zabarel. lib. de Constitutione naturalis scientiae. cap. 6.
Natural Philosophy is a contemplative science, which declares the perfect
knowledge of natural bodies, as far forth as they have the beginning of
motion within them. Pererius lib. 2. Physic. cap. 7.
There be seven parts of it. The first is of the first causes of nature, and
of natural bodies. The second of the world. The third, of the mutual
transmutation of the elements, and in general, of generation and corruption.
The fourth is, of the meteours. The fifth, of the soul, and of living
creatures. The sixth, of plants, The seventh, of things perfectly mixed, and of
things without life, as, of Minerals and such like.

Piccolominaeus in introduct. ad 10. gradus Ciuilis Philosophiae. cap. 7.
Civil Philosophy is a science compounding man's actions out of the inward
motion of Nature, and sprung up from the fullness of a wise mind: insomuch
that we may in all degrees of life attain to that which is honest.

This civil Philosophy is divided into four parts: Ethicke, Politic,
Oeconomicke, and Monastic. Ethick is the discipline of good manners. Of
Oeconomick and Politic, I have discoursed before. Monastic is the institution
of a private and a solitary life. But of the worthiness of this civil
Philosophy, and by how much it goes before the natural, I have expressed in
In Commentar. in satyr. 5. Persi.
another book.

Of the Art Magic. Chap. 44.
THe ancient Magicians prophesied either by the stars, and then their Art
was termed Astrology: or by the flying and entrails of birds, and this they
called Augurie: by the fire, and that they named Pyromancie: or by the lines
and wrinckles of the hand, which was termed Chiromancie or Palmistrie: by the
earth, called Geomancie: by the water, and that they termed Hydromancie: or by
the devil, and this we call coniuring or bewitching. All which superstitious
kinds of illusions (I fear me) have been too often used here in England;
witness of late years the witches of Warboise: witness figurecasters, and
calculatours of natiuities: witness also many of our counterfeit Bedlems, who
take upon the^ to tell fortunes and such like. Now-a-dayes among the common
people, he is not adjudged any scholar at all, unless he can tell men's
Horoscopes, cast out devils, or has some skill in southsaying. Little do they
know that Plinius in initi. li. 30.
this Art, (if it b^e lawful to call it an Art) is the most deceitful of all
Arts, as having neither sure foundations to rest upon, nor doing the students
thereof any good: but rather alluring them to throw themselves away unto the
devil both body and soul. Woe be unto the^ that delight therein, for it were
better for them that they had never been borne. A man having in his fury
killed one, may by the grace of God repent, and be sorry for his offense; but
for the coniurer or magician, it is almost impossible that he should be
converted, by reason that the Devil is always conversant with him, and is
present even at his very elbow, and will not once permit him to ask
forgiveness. Experience whereof Doctor Faustus felt, who was at last torn in
pieces by the devil. Cornelius Agrippa likewise, a man famous for his great
skill in Magic, and as yet fresh in some old men's memory, went continually
accompanied with a Devil in the shape of a black do^gge^ and when at his
death he was urged to repent and cry GOD mercy, he pulled off the collar
which was about the dogs neck, and sent him away with these words, Pack
hence, thou cursed curre, which have quite undone me. With that the dog went
away, and drowned himself in the river Arar* Within a little after Agrippa
deceased, whose judgment I leave unto the Lord.

As touching the deeds of coniurers, I confess, they be wonderful; for
Exodus 7.
the charmers of Egypt turned rods into serpents in the sight of Pharao. And
there is nothing which good men do, but Sorcerers like Apes will assay to do
the like. Many of them (among whom I mean Pope Siluester the second, Pope
Benedict the ninth, and Pope Alexander the sixth) were cunning in the
scriptures, professed holiness of life, and gave pardons and indulgences (as
the Pope does now) unto them that would buy them. But in the end they were
pitifully and openly tormented and devoured by the Devil their schoolmasters.
My self have seen about eleven years ago, a counterfeit dumb fellow, that
could by signs and tokens foretell diverse, things to come. He could signify
what misfortunes a man has suffered, what years he was off, what wife he
had married, how many children he had; and which is most strange of all, he
would find out any thing which was hidden of purpose. At last it was this young
Magicians hap to arrive at a zealous Gentleman's house, who having before
heard of his miraculous deeds, eftsoone suspected him and made no more ado,
but by violence and threatening enforced him to speak, and to declare his
dissimulation procured, as he himself confessed, by the Devil, with whom
he had couenated to become dumb, on condition that he might perform such
miracles.

have heard and read of many Coniurers, that wrought wonders, and things almost
incredible: yet never have I either heard or read of any that prospered, but at
the last, they either came to the gallous or faggot, or else they were
prevented, and miserably taken by the Devil. Which is the cause, that wise men
have utterly detested this black Art, as being admonished by other men's
harms, to beware of it. So that none but malicious, simple, and grosse-headed
persons, who either for revenge, or for covetousness are so seduced, do enter
into league and confederacy with the Devil.

To knit up this discourse, I advise all persons, and especially old women, to
take heed of illusions and charms* seeing principally, Exo. 22 Leuit. 19
Deuteronomy. 18
they be damnable, and forbidden by the laws of God. Secondarily, Tacitus li.
1. Annal. Vlpianus lib. 7. de Offic. procons. tit. de mathematic. and Serutus
in lib. 4. Encid. ac Cano^. 1. cause. 24. q. 5. and can. 17. cause. 6. q. 1.
Magic is infamous and abominable by the laws of man both civil and canon.
Finally, men must abstain from sorceries, coniurations, witchcrafts, and such
kind of wickedness, for fear of punishment, because, Leuit. 20.
if any says the Lord, turn after such as work with spirits, and after
southsayers, to go (spiritually) a whoring after them, then will I set my face
against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. And in another
place: Exo. 22.
Thou must not suffer a witch to live. Look therefore unto your selves, and
be prepared, O simple wretches, lest otherwise the siend finding you unready,
will quickly surprise you, and so inueigle your weak and shallow minds.

Of Physic. Chap. 45.
MAny confound Physic and Philosophy together, because both of them do
alike respect natural bodies. but our L. 1. medicoru^ ss^de variis and
extra^rd. cognition.
Ciuilians have distinguished the one from the other. For which cause I will at
this time surcease the concordance, and fall to the declaration of the
goodness thereof. There is no faculty, save law and Divinity, comparable
unto Physic. Insomuch as mighty Potentates have not disdained to exercise
it. Gentius the King of Illyria, found out the virtuous qualities of the herb
called Gentian. Iuba King of Mauritania and Lybia, found the herb called
Euphorbium. Sabor King of the Medes, Sabrel King of the Arabians, Mithridates
King of Pontus, and Auicenna King Corduba, were professed Phisicious. The
Angel Raphael caused blind Tobias with the gall of a fish to receive his
sight. Luke the Evangelist was a Physician: yea, Clemens Alexandrinus li. 1.
Paedag. cap. 2. Eccless. 38.
and * GOD himself is called the supreme Physician both of body and soul.
Wherefore see that you honor Physic, O ye that be rich, and make much of
the Physician for the Lord created him.

Of Law. Chap. 46.
THe law is the knowledge of things As well Divine as Humane, L. Institut. tit,
de Just. and iure.. Iurisprudentia.
and of that which is just and unjust. Of Ciuilians it is declared tripartite:
as it comprehends the law of nature, the law of nations, and the civil law.
The law of nature is a feeling which every one has in his conscience, whereby
he discerns between good and evil, as much as is sufficient to deliver him
from the cloudie cloak of ignorance, in that he is reprehended by himself.
L. Iustitu. tit. de iure. Natu. Gent. and Civil.. ius nature.
Hence comes the conjunction of male and female: the Procreation of children,
and education. The law of Nations is a prescription, that all manner of people
can claim: as, to resist violence was lawful: to defraud the wily and
subtle was no fraud: to hurt a Herald was not tolerable: to pay every man
his own was right: and in a manner all contracts were brought in by this law:
as buying, selling, hiring, gaging, and infinite others. The Civil law is
that, which is squared according to honesty, and is termed every private law,
enacted by one peculiar people.

There is also a Divine law, which is threefold: to wit, the moral law, the
ceremonial law, and the Judicial law. The moral law is that, which is
constituted for all Nations, if they will observe the commandments of GOD, The
Ceremonial law was an instruction of infancy given to the Jews, to be
exercised under the obedience of God, until Christ's coming. The Judicial law
is that, which was given them for politic government, teaching them certain
Maxims of justice, whereby they might live quietly, without molesting one
another.

Of the Common Law in England. Chap. 47.
AS soon as Brutus came into this Realm, he constituted the Trojans laws
throughout all his dominions. But when divisions and civil broils happened a
little after his decease, those laws decayed for a long time, until Malmutius
revived them, enlarging them with many profitable more, and were named
Malmutius laws: unto which Martia a Queen of this land, added the decrees of
her time, and were called Martiaes laws. Besides these, King Lud is reported
to amend them. Then in the succession of time, reigned Saint Edward, a right
virtuous Prince, who selected and enacted excellent good laws: but within a
while after, the Normans conquered this land, and altered the estate thereof,
appoynting new laws in their own language, as a people naturally inclined to
sophistical and doubtful sense, whereby they wrested the laws to all
constructions. Yet notwithstanding, King Edward the third was enduced to
abrogate many of the Norman laws, and in their stead to inuest new and
wholesome laws. The method of which, is at this day put in practice among our
Sergeants and vtter-Sarristers.

Objection.
That law which is of no antiquity, neither grounded upon any good
foundations, nor used in any country but one, cannot be good: such is the
common law of England: therefore it is of no effect.

Answer.
Our Common law of England (I confess) is of no great antiquity: yet grounded
upon the law of Nature, and approved by the universal consent of the Prince,
Nobles, and Commons, in a general Parliament. In brief, necessity has no
reason.

Whether alteration of laws be good in a commonwealth. Chap. 48.
THere was a law among the Locrensians, that whosoever did intrude himself to
make a new law, should come with a halter about his neck: insomuch that if his
laws were approved, he went away safe as he came: if reproved, he was
presently hanged. So in like manner, when we alter our usual diet, we feel
great innouations in our bodies, and do perhaps fall into some sickness or
other: but when we be accustomed once unto it, then we recover, and wax more
lusty then before we were. Custom (as they say) is another nature. But yet
this custom may be reduced into a better. The alteration of laws (I
confess) at the first seems rough and raw unto our frail and queizy
natures. But within a while they be better liked of. Which moved the Divine
Philosopher to say: that Plato li. 7. de ^^gibus,
change of laws, excepting those that be bad, is perilous at all times. This
caused the Kentishmen to rise against king William the Conqueror of this land,
and privily to enclose him round about in the woods, that thereby he might the
sooner be compelled to co^discend to their petition, which was, that they might
be suffered to enjoy their ancient customs and liberties.

As for the deciding of this question, I think, that some laws may be
altered and reduced into better. Howbeit lawmakers must advise themselves well
in that behalf, and take great heed therein for where there arises small good
by innouations of laws, it is an evil thing. Surely, Arist. lib. 2. Politic.
ca. 6
It is better to bear with the imperfections of laws: because the alteration
of them will not do so much benefit, as harm, by using men to disobey.

And again, who is so dull-spirited, which will not grant, that defects of
laws ought now and then to be winked at and dissembled? Upon which occasion
Plato li. 1. de Legibus.
all persons under the age of forty were heretofore forbidden to enquire
whether laws were well or ill made. Ripeness of years is a great mean to
conserve people in their obedience. And for that cause Arist. lib. 1. Ethic.
ca. 3
young men are thought unfit to deal in matters of state and moral Philosophy.

Of Divinity. Chap. 49.
THe ancient Philosophers accounted three kinds of speculatiue or
contemplative Sciences: to wit, Aristot, lib. 11. Metaph. cap. 1.
natural philosophy: the Mathematickes: and Divinity, which is the first and
chiefest beginning of all things, which is the cement that soddereth the pieces
of the building of our estate, and the planke, wherewith our ship is fortified.
Take away this beginning, and the world will seem a confused Chaos. Take away
this cement, and our building is ruinous. In a word, vncaske the pla^ks of a
ship, and it will leake and sink into the sea. Plant ye therefore religion in
your kingdoms, and let not the heathen rise up against you at the day of
judgment. The Romans, we read, through the bare instinct of nature, did so
reuere^tly think of Divinity, that they sent their children into Hetruria to
learn it there. And yet many of us Christians presume to iniure the ministers
God, albeit we know, that Sen. in Epist. 84
nothing is hid from him, and that he is present, and still accompanies us
in the midst of our secret cogitations. God make clean our hearts within us,
and cause us to regard his ministers and word better then we do. Otherwise,
let us expect for nothing, but fearful alarums, wars, heresies, pestilence,
and famine continually without ceasing to annoy and destroy both us and our
country.

Whether two religions may be tolerated in one kingdom? Chap. 50.
TWo religions cannot be suffered in one kingdom: for diversities cause
factions, garboiles, and civil wars, which never end but with the subuersio^
of the commonwealth. The tranquillity of all estates consists in the union
and consent of the inhabitants. Take away this union, and it is but a den for
rouers and thieves. The first foundations of kingdoms were built upon the rock
of one religion; and the heathen themselves had never established their laws,
if they had harbored pluralities of religions. He that displaceth this stone,
shakes all the building. Matt.
No man can serve two masters, for either he must despise the one, or love the
other. Neither must Princes halt between two opinions. 3. Reg. 18.
If the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal be he, then go after him. In
religion there is no mediocrity, for a man must either be a Christian, or else,
he must be an enemy of Christ, that is, an Antichristian, according to our
Savior Christ's words: Luc. 11
He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
scatters. Esa. 42
I am the Lord, says God, this is my name, and my glory will I not give away to
another: neither my praise to graven images. Also, it is written, Matt. 4.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. But how
is it possible to observe this commandment, as long as our Papists believe
that Decret. Part. 1. lib. 6. tit. 6. de Electione.
the Pope is no man, but Gods vicar, and more expressly, that he is God?
Theodosius therefore is highly commended, in that Socrat. li. 5. Eccles.
Histor. c. 10
he made war with the. Arrians, and proclaimed one true religion (...) be
planted throughout all his Empire. in this likewise England may faithfully
glory, that being welnigh drowned in the sea of Popish superstition, she is now
saved and restored to the true and Apostolical doctrine: the which God of his
goodness maintain from heresies and schisms.

Of Simony, one of the chiefest overthrows of religion. Chap. 51.
SImony is a deliberatiue will either of buying and selling, or else of posting
over and exchaunging some spiritual thing, or some thing annexed to the
spirituality, as aduowsons, presentations, and such like. This vice is called
after the name of Simon Magus, by reason that he Act. 8.
offered the Apostles money, that they might give him the power, that, on
whomsoever he laid his hands, he should receive the holy Ghost. For which his
execrable proffer, he had this answer of Peter: Ibid.
Thy money perish with thee, because thou think, that the gift of God may be
obtained with money.

Simony may be committed three manner of wa^es. First, whosoever sells or
buyeth the word of God, is a Simonist. Wherefore the Lord said unto his
disciples, Mat. 10
Freely you have received, freely give. Secondly, he that gives, or takes
any thing for a Bishopric, Benefice, Headship, or for a fellows or Scholars
room, is guilty of Simony. Thirdly, 13. q. 2 Can. que^sta est nobis. and cap.
abo^lendae de sepult.
The Minister that denies to bury the dead, or say Divine service, commits
Simony.

Now having declared how many ways Simony is committed, I will show, that it is
the utter ruin of the Clergy, and consequently of the whole commonwealth.
First, Sotus li. 9. q. 8. art. 1. and Nauarr. in manu^al. ca. 7.
Simony is condemned with excommunication, the seuerest censure of the Church:
and therefore odious. Secondly, Simony hinders housekeeping, so that ministers
cannot distribute alms. Thirdly, it breeds the desolation and destruction of
the state. For commonly Tacitus lib. 13. Annal.
there ensues a dissolution of the commonwealth, when the fruits (...)
reuene^es thereof are decreased. Fourthly, Simony discourageth parents to send
their sons to the University: for what parents be so foolish, as to bestow
in maintenance of their sons at least three hundred pound before they
attain to perfection, and then to pay again two hundred pound for a benefice,
or four hundred pound for a Chauncelorship? surely it is a lamentable case. I
had rather, says one, that my son be a colier then a scholar. For what shall
I put my son to school, when he shall pay so much for a living? Better it is
for me to leave my son an ingram fool, then to buy him a living through
unlawful means. Besides, who is so bluntish, that knows not the great and
infinite labors of Scholars? that sees not their eyes weakened, their bodies
empaired, and which is worse, their spirits decayed? O stony hearts! O wicked
Simonists! Doubtless this abomination portends some great calamity to follow.
Lastly, l. q. 1. ca. Quisquis.
Simony is an heresy, and for that respect it ought to be rejected from all
true Christians.

To wind this up in a word, I wish all Pastors and patrons of benefices and
Chancelourships to look more narrowly unto themselves, and to stand in fear
of God, who undoubtedly is offended with their Simony, and will one day Valor.
Maxim, lib. 1.
requite the slacknes of their punishments with the weight thereof, and will
cast them down headlong into the bottomless and tormenting pit of hell, where
every sense of their bodies shall abide his peculiar punishment. Their eyes
shall have no other objects then Devils and Snakes: their ears shall be
afflicted with clamours and howlings: their noses with brimstone and filthy
smells: their taste with poison and gall: and their feeling shall be vexed
continually with boiling lead and fiery flames.

The sixth Plant.
Of the alteration of a commonwealth. Chap. 52.
COmmonwealths, even as mortal men, have their infa^cy, childhood, stripling
age, youth, virility, middle age, and old age: that is, they have their
beginning, vegetation, flourishing, alteration, and ends. And like as diverse
innouations, and maladies do happen to me^, according to the co^stitutio^ of
their bodies, or according to their diet and education: so in like manner it
falls out with commonwealths, as being altered either by domestical and
civil wars, or else by forreyne, or perhaps by both together, or by the death
of the noblest inhabitaunts, or to be brief, by vices, which are suffered to
creep in. It is necessary that all things, which are in this world should wax
old, and Ovid. li. 10. Metamorph.
hasten to the same end, some sooner, others later, according to the will of
God their Creator, and by his permission through the influence of the heavenly
bodies from which this mutual succession of life and death issues. Howbeit
notwithstanding, I confess that prodigious signs are not the causes of
events, but rather foretokens of them. Like as an Iuy bush put forth at a
vintrie, is not the cause of the wine, but a sign that wine is to be sold
there: so likewise if we see smoke appearing in a chimney, we know that fire
is there, albeit the smoke is not the cause of the fire. Dan. 2.
God only changes the times and seasons, he discovers the deep and
secret things, and the light is with him.

The effects of all the Cometes, and the chiefest Eclipses, which happened in
this last age. Chap. 53.
FOrasmuch as the alterations of commo^wealths are for the most part foreshewed
unto us by heavenly signs: I judge it more meet for me to declare those,
which chanced within this last age, rather then in any other, especially for
that they are nearer to our fathers memories, and also more familiar unto us.

In the year of our Lord 1500. there appeared a Comet in the North, Anno 1500.
after the which followed many and strange effects. For the Frenchmen
assaulted the kingdom of Naples: and the Tartarians the kingdom of Polonia.
Then was a great famine in Swethland, and a cruel plague throughout al
Germany; besides civil wars amongst themselves, in taking part with the
Bauarians against the Bohemians. The^ died Pope Pius the 3. together with the
Archbishop of Tre^ires, and diverse other famous wights.

In the year 1506. Anno 1506.
appeared another Comet. Whereupon died Prince Philip the father of Charles the
fifth and Ferdinand afterward Emperors. Maximilian the Emperor made war with
the Frenchmen and Venetians.

In the year 1514. Anno 1514.
was an Eclipse of the sun. About which time George Duke of Saxony invaded
and spoiled Frizela^d. King Lewis the 12. of France, and Vladislaus king of
Hungary and Bohemia departed out of this world.

In the year 1518. Anno 1518.
was seen another Eclipse of the sun. Immediately after the which died the
Emperor Maximilian the first. Christierne the 2. king of Denmark fought a
most bloody battle with the Swethens: and within a while after he was deposed
of his kingdom.

In the year 1527. Anno 1527.
appeared a great Comet: the operation whereof the poor^ Hungarians felt, as
being barbarously* to the shame of all Christians, martyred and destroyed by
the Turks. The prodigious disease of sweating was rife here in England. The
river Tiber ouerflowed the city of Rome. The sea also consumed away a great
part of the low countries. Anno 1533.


In the year of our Lord 1533. wa^ seen another blazing star: whereupon a
little while after, king H. y^ 8. was divorced from his brothers wife. The sect
of the Anabaptists began to rise. Pope Clement the 7. departed out of this
life: and Pope Paul the 3. was invested in his room.

In the year 1539. Anno 1539.
chanced an Eclipse of the sun: and presently after appeared a Comet: the
effects whereof were many. For there was a great co^motio^ in Gau^t, which the
Emperor not without much damage at length appeased, and took away their
privileges from them. John the K. of Hungary ended his life. And so did Henry
Duke of Saxony. The Duke of Brunswisk was by the young Duke of Saxony and by
the Landgraue of Hassia driven out of his country. The English overcame the
Scots.

In the year 1544. Anno 1544.
chanced four Eclipses, one of the sun, and three of the Moon. Whereupon
the L. high Admiral of England arrived with a fleet of two hundred sail in
Scotland, where he spoiled Lies, and burned Edinburgh. King Henry the eight
went himself in person to France wiith a great army, and conquered Boloigne.
The Marquis of Brandeburge died in his banishment. And before three years
after the fight of the said Eclipses were fully expired, king Henry the eight
deceased. Likewise, the French kings son, the Duke of Bauarie, the Queen of
Polonia, the Queen of Spain, the Archbishop of Mogunce, and Martine Luther
ended their lives.

In the year 1557. Anno 1557.
a blazing star was seen at al times of the night, to wit, the sixth, the
seventh, eight, ninth, and tenth of March: when presently after, open war was
proclaimed between England and France; and a great army was sent by Q. Mary
over to S. Quintaines. The Protestants were persecuted and cruelly dealt
withal in this Realm. And Queen Mary, before a tweluemoneth came about,
departed out of this life.

In the year 1572. Anno 1572.
was seen toward the North a strange star, in bigness surpassing Jupiter,
and seated above the moon. At which time succeeded the bloody massacre and
persecution of the Protestants in France. Many great personages ended their
lives; as, King Charles the ninth of France, Matthew Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury, and sundry other. Pirates robbed and spoiled many of our merchants
on the West seas. The sect of the family of love began to be discovered at
London. Sebastian the king of Portingal, and Mule the king of Moroco were both
slain within less then six years after.

In the year 1581. Anno 1581.
appeared a Comet bearding Eastward. Whereupon a little while after, certain
companies of Italians and Spaniards sent by the Pope to strengthen the Earl of
Desmond in his rebellion, landed on the west coast of Ireland, and there
erected their Antichrists banner against her Majesty. Campian and other
Seminary priests returned to this Realm, and were attached.

In the year 1583. Anno 1583.
appeared another Comet, the bush whereof streamed southeast. But the effects
thereof followed in the death of Edmund Grindal Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Thomas Earl of Sussex: and in the apprehending of Arden, Someruile, and other
traitors in Warwickshire. Also within a while ensued a great dearth here in
England.

In the year 1596. Anno 1596.
appeared a Comet northward. At which time Henry Carew L. Hunsdon, and L.
Chamberlain of her Majesty's household, and Sir Frauncis Knowles ended their
lives. Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles L. high Admiral of England Generalles
of the English fleet burned the Spanish navy, and sacked the town of Cales.
Moreover, there continued here in England a great dearth of corn, with
strange inundations of waters, Grave Maurice got a famous victory over the
Spaniards in the low countries. Alphonsus Duke of Ferraria departed out of
this life. The Pope and the Bastard of Ferraia had diverse bickerings about the
Dukedom. Finally, before the year went about, died Gunilla the Queen mother
of Swethland, and Gustaue Duke of Saxony her Nephew. Likewise John Marquess of
Bra^deburge one of the Electours, and Anne Queen of Polonia, daughter to
Charles Archduke of Austria, being great with child, ended their lives.

In the beginning of the year 1598. was seen a most fearful Eclipse of the
sun, Anno 1598.
in the seventeenth degree of Piscis, near to the Dragons head: the like
whereof was seldom heard off at any time before: for the sun was darkened
full eleven points, which very near is the whole compass of his body. The
effects of it are these following.

Sigismund Prince of Transyluania, not finding his power sufficient to
encounter the Turks, voluntarily resigned his dominion to the Emperor Rodolph
the second. The King of Swethland returning into his Realm from Polonia, had
diverse conflicts and skirmishes with his subjects. William Lord high Treasurer
of England deceased. And so did king Philip the second of Spain, albeit after
a more strange manner. For it is credibly informed, that this tyrant was eaten
up of lice and vermin. A punishment no doubt befitting his usurping life. Rome
was again overflowed by the river Tiber, whereby fifteen hundred houses
perished, and in a manner all the Popes treasure was lost. Cardinal Albert sent
Mendoza Admiral of Aragon, with his rascalitie, into the Low Countries, where,
upon his own confederates of Cleueland, he has exercised many bloody
tragedies. Theodore Duke of Muscouie ended his life. There was a great deluge
of waters in Hungary. The Turks had wonderful bad luck upon the seas. The
united States of the low Countries sent a huge fleet into Spain, where they
had very good success, to the utter undoing of many a Spaniard. What shall I
write of the terrible rumors of wars, which were noysed throughout all
England this last summer? Assuredly these enents were foreshewed unto us by the
horrible Eclipse, which appeared now above two two years ago. Since which
time I waited continually for some notable effect or other: neither could my
mind otherwise presage, but that such things would come to pass, which now
(GOD be thanked) are ouerpast. This after a sort, I communicated at that time
to master Ia. Pr. an ancient wise gentleman, and a dear kinsman of mine, at
whose house, I as then being lately come into my country, after my fathers
decease, soiourned. God grant us better and happier success in this new year.

Of the causes of sedition and civil broils. Chap. 54.
THere be six causes of sedition. The first and chiefest is the contempt of
religion. For if men loved God, which they cannot do, except they love their
neighbor, doubtless no such effects would follow from their actions. Esaias. 2.
The love of religion breaks swords into mattocks, and spears into sithes,
and causes that Micha. 4.
nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither learn to fight any
more. The second cause of sedition is the factions of the subjects, which ever
have been, and ever will be the subversion of estates. The third cause is
riotous prosperity: for ouer-great abundance of wealth, is the provocation of
mischiefs, Ovid. lib. 1. Metamorph.
and makes men to become devils. The fourth is, when the Prince ouerchargeth
his subjects with tributes, and when he substituteth niggardly and deceitful
Treasurers and Lieutenants to receive the levied money, that will not stick to
detain a part thereof for their own private gain. The first cause of
Sedition is iniquity: Arist. li. 5. Politic. cap. 1.
as, when that which is due by proportion, is not given to them that be
equal; and when the Prince bestows honor, which is the hire and guerdon of
virtue, upon raw and mean men. This was one of the original causes of the
late troubles in France, when the Queen mother, for the establishment of her
regencie, dubbed simple Gentlemen knights of the honorable order of Saint
Michael, first instituted by King Lewis the eleventh, and til that time held in
great estimation. The sixth cause of sedition is, when the Prince winketh at the
cosonages of magistrates and Lawyers, and permits some of the richer sort to
enclose commons, and to rake their inferiors out of measure.

Of Treason. Chap. 55.
TReason brings no less danger and hurt to men, Valerius Maxim. lib. 9. ca.
6.
then Loyalty does profit and felicity: for it is far easier to vanquish a
known foe, then to subdue a traitor and a privy conspiratour. This wicked
monster in time of war, works more scath and damage, then all artilleries.
Howbeit, he never enjoys his promised hire, but is at last cruelly punished.
As for example, the great Turk in the year of our Lord 1400. having taken
Constantinople through the treason of John Justinian a Genoway, who^ after he
had made King according to his promise, caused his head to be chopped off within
three days.

To approach nearer our own time, let us bethink with our selves the merciful
providence of God, in discovering the heinous treasons pretended against our
dread sovereign Queen Elizabeth. Of late years, namely, in the year 1588.
what befell to Tilney, Savage, Babington, and the rest of their cursed
accomplices? were they not all executed, and brought to confusion? Likewise
Doctor Lopouze, the Queens Physician, who had poisoned sundry Noblemen of
this Realm, and by the Spanish Kings procurement, went about to poison the
Queen her self, had he not in the year 1594. his deserved punishment? Even so
the last year one Squire, by the instigation of a Spanish Friar, going about
to do away her Majesty, was surprised in his treason, and executed to the
terror of all such devilish traitors.

Be therefore better admonished, ye wavering men, let the example of such as
were executed, terrify your minds from rebellious attempts, and suffer not
wilfully the devil to tempt and lead you into temptation.

Of Idleness. Chap. 56.
O You slothful men, why do you miche, range, and turn your backs to
virtuous labors, seeing that they, who overcame the delites of this world,
have deserved heaven for their rewards? why do you straggle and rogue from
house to house? Believe me, there is no occupation in the world, that brings
with it less profit then yours. Prou. 6.
Go to the emmet, ye slothful sluggards: consider her ways, and learn to
be wise. She has no guide, no teacher, no leader, yet in the summer she
provides her meat, and gathers together her food in the harvest. Oh why
have you forgotten the words of the Lord, namely, Genesis 3
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread? Remember what penalties
are imposed on runnagates and loytering droanes. In the primitive Church it was
decreed, that all men should live of their own labor, and not unprofitably
waste the fruits of the earth. Likewise the (feigned) Syphograuntes or officers
of the Vtopians, Moru^ li. 2. Vtop.
took heed, that no man sat idle, but that each one should diligently apply
his own craft and occupation. What shall I say of our own constitutions here
in England? In the year of our Lord 1572. it was enacted in the parliament,
that all persons above the age of fourteen years, which were taken begging
and roging abroad, should be apprehended, whipped, and burnt through the ear
with a hot iron, for the first time so found; and the second time to be hanged.
For which consideration, look unto your selves ye careless caitifes, get
you masters, that may instruct you in some occupation or other; which done,
labor continually: and that not only for your selves, but for the relief
also of such as are not able to help themselves. In so doing, Satan the
enemy of grace, who hitherto like a wily fox has awaited for you, shall go
away in despair, and (as they say) with a flea in his ear.

Of Dice-play. Chap. 57.
CHristians ought utterly to forbear Dice-play: first, because Cypria^. lib.
de Alea.
The devil invented it. Secondly, because it is flat against the commandment
of GOD, namely, Exo. 20
Thou shall not covet any other man's goods. Thirdly, Dice-play is for the most
part accompanied with swearing and blaspheming Gods holy name. Fourthly,
August. in Epist. 64. ad Maced.
the holy fathers of the church have most vehemently written against it.
Ambros. lib. 1. Offici. cap. 23.
Fifthly, all sports and recreations must have respect to some profit, either
of body or of mind, Chrysostom. homil. 6. in Matthew. P. Marty. Comme^t. in Iudic.
cap. 14. and Danaeus lib. de Alea.
(otherwise it is but lost, for which we must one day yield an account to
God) but Dice-play, as we know, is no exercise for the body; neither is it any
pleasure for the mind: for the event of the hazard or maine, drives the
players mind to a furious hope, and sometimes into a fearful quandarie: to
wit, when he doubts the recovery of his lost money. Sixthly, we are charged,
Coloss. 4.
Not to consume our time in wicked and unlawful exercises. Seventhly, men must
abstain from Dice-play, that they might show good example to their inferiors.
Iuuenal. satyr. 14.
For * if grave parents delight in wicked Dice-play, their sons will likewise
be enduced thereunto. Eighthly, C. lib. 3. tit. 43. L. Alear. vsus. etc. ff. 11.
tit. 5.
Dice-play is condemned by the laws and decrees of Princes. By the law Roscia,
all such as played at dice were banished from their country. It was also
enacted in Rome, that Paedian. in. lib. 2. Diuinat. Ciceron.
Dice-players should be amerced in four times so much as they played for.
King Edward the fourth of this Realm decreed, that every Dice-player should
be imprisoned two years, and forfeit ten pound. King Henry the seventh
enacted, that Dice-players should be imprisoned one day, and that the keeper
of the gaming house should be bound to his good be hauiour, and be fined a
Noble. King Henry the eight ordained, that every one which kept a dicing
house, should pay forty shillings, and the players themselves a Noble, for
every time so occupied. Ninthly, this kind of play is odious and reproachful,
as appeared in Antonie, to whom Cicero objected, that he Cicero Philip. 2.
Sueton. cap. 71.
not only himself was a dicer but also he fostered such men as were dicers,
i Augustus the Emperor was noted, and ill thought of for his dicing. Lastly,
the despair and adversity which Dice-players fall into, and their
extraordinary punishments be sufficient means, to reclaim and terrify men
from it.

In the year of our Lord 1550. one Steckman of Holsatia having lost much money
at dice, fell into despair, and therewithal killed three of his children, and
would have hanged himself, if his wife had not prevented him. Likewise in the
year 1553. one Schetrerus playing at dice in an alehouse near to Belisan, a
town in Heluetia, blasphemed God. Whereupon the devil came in place, and
carried him away. Also, my self have known a wealthy yeoman, that was as
great a dicer, as any other in that shire where he dwelt, and (I think) had
gotten wel-nigh a thousand pound by that his occupation: but what became of him
and his wealth? marry, he bathing himself in a river, was suddenly drowned:
and his son, to whom his goods after his death did rightly appertain, before
3. years were expired, spent al at dice, and at this day is glad to stand at
men's devotion. In sum, do we not commonly see, that dice-players never
thrive? and if perhaps one amongst a thousand chance to win, notwithstanding
at last he loses all, and so may put his winnings in his ere, yea, and which
is worse, he hazardeth his soul, which he ought to hold more dear then all
the world. But because I have largely confuted this vice in In Comme^tar. in
satyr. 3. and 5.
other places, I will proceed to the other cause of the alteration of
commonwealths.

Of superfluity of apparel, another cause Persi. of the alteration of
Kingdoms. Chap. 58.
IN the beginning of the world, men were clothed with pelts and skins of
beasts: whereby is to be noted, that they were become as beasts, by
transgressing the commandment of God, touching the fruit in Paradise. Apparel
was not given to delight men's wanton eyes, but to preserve their bodies from
the cold, and to cover their shame. They had no Beuer hats sharp on the top,
like unto the spire of a steeple, nor flat crownde hats, resembling
rose-cakes. They wore no embrodered shirtes, nor garments of cloth of gold.
They knew not what meant our Italianated, Frenchified, nor Duch and Babilonian
breeches. They bought no silken stockins, nor gaudie pantoffles. Their women
could not tell how to frizle and lay out their hair on borders. They daubed not
their faces with deceitful drugs, wherewith, hiding the handi-work of God,
they might seem to have more beauty, then he has vouchsafed to give them.
They imitated not Hermaphrodites, in wearing of men's doublets. They wore no
chains of gold, nor ouches, jewels, bracelets, nor such like. They went not
clothed in velvet gowns, nor in chamlet peticotes. They smelt not unto
pomanders, Ciuet, Musk, and such like trumperies. And yet for all that, they
far surpassed us in humanity, in kindness, in love, and in virtue. Their
only cogitations were bent to deck the inward mind, and not the outward body,
which is nothing else, saving a living sepulcher. They knew that if the mind
were humble and lowly, the raiment for the body must be even so. Every seed
brings forth herbs according to his kind: as time seed brings forth time,
and tare seed tare. Such as the heart is, such is the body; if the heart be
proud, the fruit thereof will be ill weeds, and proud attires. But why is the
earth and ashes proud? to what end will our fine apparel serve, when death
knocks at out doors, and like a thief in the night surprizeth us unawares?
Our young gallants, when they hire a chamber in London, looking daily to be
sent for home by their parents, will never trouble themselves with any charges
or garnishing it, as otherwise they would do, if they were assured longer to
continue in it. And what, I pray you, is the body, but a chamber lent to the
soul, wherehence it expects continually to be sent for by God our heavenly
father, and (as Saint Paul speaks) to be loosed, and to be with Christ? For
what cause do we take such care to apparel the body, seeing within a while
after it must putrify, and return to the dust of the earth, from whence it
came? what reason have we to neglect the soul, which never dies? why do we
not follow King Henry the sixth of this Realm, who when the Earl of Warwick
asked him wherefore he went so meanly apparelled, answered, It behooves a
Prince to excel his subjects in virtue, and not in vesture? Let us call to
remembrance the wife of Philo, the Jewish Philosopher, who wisely answered one
of her gossips, that demanded of her, why she went not (as other matrons)
attired in precious garments: Because (quoth she) I think the virtues of my
learned husband sufficient ornaments for me. Whereto consents that of the
Comic: Plautus in Mostellar.
z In vain does a woman go well attired, if she be not also well manered.
But what need I spend time in producing of examples, when our Savior Christ
scorned not to wear a coat without a seame? Which kind of apparel if a man
now-a-dayes used here in England, presently, Persius in fin. satyr. 5.
one of our fine Caualeers would laugh at him, and prize both him and his
apparel, scant worth a hundred farthings. Oh, what a shame is it, that every
seruing-man in England, nay, every common Jack, should flaunt in silks and
veluets, and surpass Gentlemen of worship! I have known diverse, who would
bestow all the money they had in the world, on sumptuous garments; and when I
asked them how they would live hereafter, they would answer: A good marriage
will one day make amends for all; thereby implying, that they hoped to inueigle
and deceive some widow or other. Which pretense of theirs being frustrate, they
will be driven to commit burglaries and murders. In respect of which
inconveniences, I exhort every man to live according to his vocation, and to
observe her Majesty's decrees and proclamations, whereby Caualeering grooms,
and dunghilled knaves, are straightly prohibited to wear the same suits and
apparel as Gentlemen

Objection.
God has created al things which are in this world for man's use: therefore any
man may wear cloth of gold, silver, or such like.

Answer.
True it is, that God made all things in this world to be used of man; but
herein I must distinguish men: some men be noble, some ignoble. There is no
reason, why cloth of gold, permitted only to Noblemen, should be equally
permitted to earth-creeping grooms. And again, God has appointed men not sole
co^manders, but bailies of his goods and creatures, with condition, that they
give an account of the utmost farthing of the same. And in this regard Nobleme^
may gorgeously attire themselves, so long as they clothe the needy and
distressed members of Christ. But if Noblemen on the contrary, clothe
themselves sumptuously, without reserving means to furnish the poor members
of Christ, then will the Lord at the great day of judgment, pronounce this
fearful doom against them, Mat. 25.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into eternal fire: for I was naked, and ye clothed
me not. To knit up this briefly, I say, that God created al things for his
own glory, and to take occasion to extol him, but not for our pride, to
abuse them.

The seventh Plant.
Of the conservation of a commonwealth. Chap. 59.
THere be many means to preserve a commonwealth; but above the rest these ten
are of most efficacy. The first, and chiefest is to live uprightly in the fear
of God. The second, to make no delay in executing of attainted and condemned
persons. The third, to suffer every man to enjoy his own, and not lauishly to
spend and rake the private inhabitants goods. The 4. to have a great regard of
mischiefs and evils at the first budding, how small soever it be, for Aristot.
li. 5. Polit. cap. 8
the corruption, that creeps in by little and little, is no more perceived,
then small expenses be, the often disbursing whereof undoes the substance of a
house. And as great rain and horrible storms proceed from vapors and
exhalations, that are not seen: so alteration and changes breed in a
commonwealth of light and trifling things, which no man would judge to have
such an issue. The fifth means is, that Magistrates behave themselves mildly and
modestly toward their inferiors. The sixth, that Princes be not partial in
their subjects factions. The seventh, the Prince and his Counsel must not give
care to every tale and crafty device: for it may be, that the enemy has his
intelligence in the realm. The eight, to cast out Heretics and Schismatickes
from among the people. The ninth, to muster and train the people once a month
in martial affairs. The tenth is, to discard stageplayes, usury, extorsio^,
bribes, and such like abominable vices.

Of Taxes and Subsidies. Chap. 60.
Tacitus lib. 4. Histor.
THe peace and tranquillity of a commonwealth can never be had without
soldiers, nor soldiers without maintenance and pay, not pay ca^ be
purchased without taxes and subsidies, which are the lawful revenues of the
Prince to maintain his Realm. But, thou will say, taxes and subsidies be for
the common good of the Realm, and not for the Princes maintenance. To which I
answer, that Calvin. lib. 4. Instit. c. 20
the Prince may likewise use taxes and subsidies to his private royalty, which
is after a manner conjoined with the honor of the Princely state, that he
bears. How is it possible for a Prince to bear a stately port, unless he
has sufficient revenues? Let therefore all true hearted subjects Mat. 22
give unto Caesar that which is Cesars: Romans 31
tribute to whom tribute belongs: and custom to whom custom. Without this
ground we had long since been a pray unto our enemies. The Scots would have
swalowed us up. The Spaniards also would have triu^phed and cruelly massacred
us, as they did the poor Indians. None but wizards and niggards will seek to
be exempted from contributions, and shake off the necessary yoke of obedience.
Experience lays down before our eyes the success of them, that grudge and
rebelled against their Prince for taxing. The beginnings have been ungodly,
and the ends miserable.

In the year of our Lord 1381. the commons of Kent and Essex, to the number of
threescore thousand, rebelled against king Richard the second being their
Sovereign: but they were discomfited, and the most part of them sharply
punished. Likewise in the year 1484. a great commotion was moved by the
commons of the North, by reason of a tax, which was imposed upon them of the
tenth penny of all their lands and goods. But their rash attempt was speedily
broken, and their ringleaders hanged at York.

By this we see the miserable issue of all such rash reuoltings, and
therewithal consider, how detestable they are in the sight of God, Let
therefore al subjects patiently endure whatsoever subsidy is levied, and night
and day beseech the Lord to grant the^ peace, whereby their taxes will become
shortened.

Remedies against sedition and privy conspiracies. Chap. 61.
THe plasters, that are to be applied unto sedition, be diverse, according to
the causes thereof. Yet notwithstanding, I will epitomize and draw some of them
into a breuiary. First, the Prince must betimes forethinke to alay the
seditions, which begin to kindle. For every mischief at first is soon
cured, but being let alone, and taking farther root, it gathers more
strength. Secondly, the Prince must by espials know, who slander or speak
evil of him. Howbeit, respect must be had, lest the innocent be iniuried.
Thirdly, the Prince must proclaim rewards to the reuealers of conspiracies.
Fourthly, the Prince must aforehand remove munitions and artilleries out of the
way, and put them in safe custody. In so doing he shall find the seditious the
more tractable. Fifthly, the Prince must severely punish the authors of
sedition, Cic. ad Brutu^.
lest they, that come after, go about to imitate such wickedness. Sixthly, the
seditious must be sundred by some policy or other. Seventhly, the seditious
must be allured with ambiguous and doubtful promises. Eighthly, the Prince must
diligently look, that his loyal subjects co^municat not with the seditious,
for Comi^ naeus li. 1 cap. 9.
such communing together at such times, and in such sort, is very dangerous,
especially for the party, that is like to take the foil. Ninthly, Lipsius li.
6. Polit. cap. vle.
the Prince must * send men of honor and dignity unto the rebels under
pretense of reward, to the intent, that their Captains, who desire
innouations, may be withdrawn from them.

Of the felicity of a commonwealth. Chap. 62.
THe felicity of a commonwealth is, when by some Divine providence from above,
there meets in one person the right majesty of a Prince, and the mind of a
wise Philosopher. For then needs no co^pulsion, no rigor, no extremity to
bridle the subjects, what is more delightful, then to see the true image of
virtue in their visible Prince? then to hear the wise lessons and golden
speeches issuing out of such a mouth? Happy, I say, is the Realm, where the
Prince imitateth the order of an expert Physician, who when the remedies, which
he prepares to cure the weakness of the inferior members, increase grief
in the head, he throws away all infirmities most light, and with the favor
of time, he proceeds carefully to the cure of that, which necessarily
imports the health of the patient or commo^wealth.

The eight Plant.
Of wars. Chap. 63.
BEcause * a Prince ought to be provided against all chau^ces as well of war
as of peace: Justinian. in Prolegomen. Institut.
it will not be amiss, if I write somewhat of warrelike affairs. The
original whereof in my opinion proceeded from Genesis 10
Nemrod the jolly hunter before the Lord. The Graecians invented first of all
the use of armor. And the Almaines devised in the year of our Lord 1381.
gunnes being the most terrible engines of al others.

Now touching the causes and effects of war, doubtless, God seeing that no
benefits could fructify, nor threatenings dissuade us from our disobedience,
sends war, as his fearful instrument to rouse us from sluggishnes, and to
plague us for our manifold iniquities: according to that dreadful alarm,
which long since he sounded against us. Leuitic. 26.
If, quoth he, you will walk in my ordinances, I will send peace in the land:
but if you will not obey me, but despise my commandments, I will send a sword
upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant, and you shall be
delivered into the hands of the enemy. This the Spaniards of the Island saint
Mary's knew and felt this last Summer, being the year of our Lord 1599.
insomuch as when two English ships, and one ship of Amsterdame had taken the
said Island, and the General had demanded the Spanish Governor, wherefore
he yielded so soon? He answered, that the sins of the inhabitants were
great, and therefore it was bootlesse for them to resist.

As for the discommodities of war, they be infinite: it treads under foot
the laws of God and man: it makes the Church to be derided, and places
tyrants in the throne of Justice. In conclusion, war enduceth many
maleconte^ts to follow the importunity of the time, and breeds pestilence and
dearth: for victuals spent, dearth must needs ensue. Whereupon sundry
infectious diseases spring.

Whether it be lawful for Christians to make war? Chap. 64.
ALthough the Marcionists have heretofore doubted, whether Christians might
make war? yet notwithstanding, I will by forcible reasons maintain the
contrary. First, it is written, that the Israelites should war against their
enemies, and Deu. 20
not faint, nor fear, nor be amazed, nor a-dread of them. Secondly, lawful
wars are named 2. Paral. 20.
the battles of the Lord. Thirdly, Exo. 15
the Lord himself is a man of war. Fourthly, Saint John Baptist confirms
the lawfulness of war in these words, which he spoke unto the soldiers:
Luc. 3.
Do no violence to any man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages. Fifthly, Cornelius a Captain was so favored of God, that Act. 10
he received the holy Ghost. Sixthly, Romans 13
the Magistrate carries not the sword in vain. Seventhly, it is lawful for
any man to defend himself. For Cic. pro Milon.
reason teaches, that it is lawful to repel force offered to our lives and to
our persons, with force. To conclude, it is lawful for one people to assault
another, so that it it be either to get their own again, or else to punish
reuolters. Howbeit nevertheless, I counsel war to be practiced as a last
and desperate medicine, which without very urgent occasion ought never to be
applied.

What wars be most lawful. Chap. 65.
Liuius lib. 9.
THose wars be most just, whereto we are constrained; and with good
conscience may we take arms, when there is no safet^^ for us, but in arms. To
this an anciet Bishop subscribeth, saying, Ambr. li. 3. Offic.
That fortitude, which defends a man's country from forrayne enemies, or
sustaineth the desolat and oppressed, is perfect justice. Moreover, Calvin.
lib. 4. Institut, ca. 20.
the holy Ghost by many testimonies of Scripture declares such wars to be
lawful.

The injury, which is done to Ambassadors, ministers lawful cause for
Princes to take arms in hand. Therefore K. David made war with the Ammonits,
for that they villanously misused the messengers, 2. Sam. 10.
which he sent to comfort the young king of Ammo^ for his fathers death. Most
just likewise was that war, which king Richard the first of this Realm made
with the Infidels for the recovery of the holy land. And surely it is a
meritorious and religious deed, that Christian Princes should unite their
forces together, and proclaim wars against the Trukes, who to their great
shame have now welnigh conquered all Hungary, and are at the very gates of
Germany, and consequently or all Christendom: this peril how long soever it is
de^ferred, doubtless is like to happen. Suppose our Christian Princes could do
no other good, but keep back the Turks forces from further invasions, would
not this be a means to restore and revive the dismembered estate of
Christendom? Yea certainly. To that end I constantly auerre, that it is
lawful to war: provided still, that the determination be not to put to death
any, that will be brought to the true knowledge of the Gospel. For it is not
with swords, but with words, not with constraint, but with conference, that
misbeleeuers are become converted.

That before we begin wars, preparation is to be made of sufficient
necessaries thereto belonging. Chap. 66.
Lipsius lib. 5. Po^ lit. cap. 6.
TO the execution of wars three things are needful: provision, men, and
adnice. Under provision I comprehend armor, money, and victuals. Touching
armor, I would have an indifferent company of weapons prepared both for
horsemen and footmen: as, artillery, powder, bullets, bills, pikes, lances,
bows and arrows, plated doublets, iackets of male, and such like. Next, money
must be gotten, Demo^th^^. lib. 1. Olynt.
without the which nothing can be done, as it ought to be. And if they fight
with silver spears they will conquer all. Money being gotten, it is meet,
that victuals be provided, seeing Vegetius lib. 3. de remilit. cap. 26.
through want thereof soldiers will be overcome without stroke. Against other
evils there are cures, but there is no striving against hunger. herehence
proceed mutines, despaires, infectious sicknesses, and innumerable kinds of
calamities.

Having forethought of provision, it is also necessary, that men should be
mustered and chosen out. For Xenoph. li. 1. Paedt. Cyr.
if there be a mighty host of men in the field, what town or country is not
willing to welcome them? In like manner the Captain general must forecast,
whether horsemen would serve his turn better then footmen?

This question being well discussed, the General must take advice with his
chief and wisest Lieftenaunts concerning the success of the wars. For Luc.
14
what King going to make war with another King, sits not down first, and
takes counsel, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him, that
comes against him with twenty thousand? or else, while he is yet a-great way
off, he sends an embassage, and desires peace?

The duties of a General. Chap. 67.
IN a General seven things are required. First, that he be religious and
devout: for the^ if he with Iosuah say, Iosu. 10
Sun, stay thou in Gibeon: and thou Moon, in the valley of Aialon: the Sun
will abide, and the Moon will stand still, until he be avenged upon his
enemies. Secondly, a General must be a man of authority, by reason that Cic.
pro lege Manili.
nothing is more auailable in the ordering of battles, then authority. Thirdly,
he ought to be temperate: for how can he govern others, that cannot rule his
own affections? Fourthly, he must be well experienced, that he may see how the
enemy lies, what way is best, either to provoke the enemy, or to defend
himself. Fifthly, a General must be witty and well spoken, because soldiers
minds will be sooner inflamed to fight by sweet exhortations, then by all the
trumpets in the world. Sixthly, he must be courageous and valiant, that he may
Silius Italicus lib. 1.
give the first onset, when any bickering is at hand, and show the way to
others. Lastly, a General ought to be very well seen in Philosophy, and
specially in Geometry, otherwise he will never be able either to incampe
himself, to find out the enemy, or to conceive the situation of places: as
for example, how the champion fields are couched together, how the valleys
hang, how broad the marshes be, and how the mountains are lift up.

Of the choice of Soldiers. Chap. 68.
THere be six notes to discern a good soldier. The first is, that he be an
honest man. The second, that he be strong and valiant. The third, that he be
constant and patient. The fourth, that (if it be possible) he be a Gentleman
borne: the reason is, because most commonly he is more easily trained for the
wars, and will scorn to yield himself vanquished to the enemy. The fifth
mark of a soldier is, that he be nimble, active, and not of a fat or gross
body, lest like a carters jade he founder and fall down. The sixth, a soldier
ought to be chosen from seue^teene years old to six and forty. But in my
opinion elderly soldiers are more apt and fit to go to the wars, then young
men, by reason that they are less mutinous, and better able to endure.

Whether the stranger or the homeborne subject ought to be preferred? Chap. 69.
IF we consider the cause, from whence proceeded the late destruction of Italy,
we shall find, that the calling in of the Switzers and Frenchmen to aid it,
turned to the desolation of it. Lodowick Sfortia Duke of Millaine sent for the
Switzers to succor him against the Frenchmen. But how sped he? Mary, he was
by his own mercenaries delivered prisoner over to Lewis the twelfe, French
king. yea, we read, that the greatest misery, which ever happened to the British
nation divided, was, when Vortiger mistrusting the peers of his Realm, called
in the Saxons to help him, who at last compelled him to deliver the chiefest
part of his kingdom unto them. So that at length they drove away at the
natural inhabitants of the country. For which cause the native subject is to
be esteemed, who stands not so much upon his valor and pay, as upon his
loyalty and reputation. Besides, no man is so barbarous and savage, as to take
part with strangers against his own countrymen.

How the enemy is to be vanquished. Chap. 70.
WE must observe twelve rules, before we discomfit our enemies. Whereof the
first is, that we ask forgiveness of God for our misdeedes, and fervently
beseech him to go before our army. The second is, that the Captain General
forbid all blasphemies, swearing, dicing, rioting, and such like impious
doings. The third, that none but wise men bear office in the camp. The fourth
way to overcome the enemy, is to be well provided of necessaries. The fifth,
Captains must not envy one another. The sixth, niggardly and corrupt officers
must be severely punished. The seventh, our warriors must make no long delay
in the enemies country: especially if the climat thereof be contagious and
noisome. The eight means to obtain the victory over our foes is, not to
permit any to straggle abroad and rob, lest meeting with ambushes, they be
unawares surprised. The ninth, Merchants, on pain of death, must not transport
any news, provision, or commodities into the enemies coast. The tenth, valiant
men must be nobly recompensed for their aduenturous acts. The eleventh rule,
to have a fresh supply always at a beck; and for that purpose, some of the
best experienced Captains must be left behind, to conduct the rawest sort, and
to train them up in martial discipline. The twelfe and last observation is,
that all transgressors be rigorously chastised, to the terror and ensample of
others.

The Conclusion, of peace. Chap. 71.
LEst for treating of Martial affairs, I be either termed a favorer of
contention, or else a simple dizart, as having Cicero. lib. 2. de Orator.
never as yet seen the enemy in the face, no not so much as their tents:
here voluntarily I resign my crest, I lay down mine ensign. In regard
whereof, I demand an olive branch, the only true and undoubted token of
peace. The reason that thus moves me, is our own safety: for if we should
do nothing but fight and enter into skirmishes, in the end, Seneca in Hercule
fureate.
our fields would remain without village, and the ashes of our burat houses
as a grave would cover our dead corpse. Who knows not, that peace is the end
of war? peace therefore must be established betimes. Aelia^. li. de nature.
animal. cap. 3.
All things are sodered together through unity, but disseuered through
discord. The Realm of France is a lively spectacle hereof, which being of late
years hackt by the leaguers, as it were into mammocks, became wel-nigh a pray
unto the Spanish king. But now being united again, she recouereth her former
strength.

Wherefore, O Soldier, lay down thy Musket and Armor, and say not with the
Poet: Homer. lib. 3. Ili^d.
I have as yet long spears, round shieldes, head-peeces, and glistering
cuiraces. Oh, seek not to defile thy hands in thy brothers blood. Forgive
thine enemy, even as GOD forgiueth thee. Hearken (I pray thee) what the
Apostle says, Romans 12.
If it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men. And again,
Colos. 3.
Let the peace of GOD rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called all in
one body.

Finally, to end this discourse, and therewithal my book, I convert my speech
unto thee, O Lord of Hosts, humbly from the bottom of my heart desiring thee
to save us from the fury of our enemies, and to send us peace in Christ
Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy ghost, for this which I have written, and
for all other benefits received, I yield all praise, honor, and glory. Amen.

If I have done well, and as the matter required, 2. Macc. 15.
it is the thing that I would: if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it is
that I could.

FINIS.
In aureum Magistri Gulielm Vaughanni saltum.
AVratum vellus vario discrimine Jason,
Medaea meritis auxiliante tulit:
Auriferos Saltus paribus Vaughannus adiuit,
Auspiciis Musa sub duce multa ferens.
Tota Domus, tota vrbs, Respublica tota labor
Doctior, and coepit ditior esse suo.
Hinc habet Oeconomus fultos virtute Penates,
Inque Magistratu plenus habetur honos.
Quodque magis, Gens quaeque operis loetissima tanti,
Instructa eximiis legibus, alma viget.
Quid dabit Authoritanto pro munere gratae
Post eritas? Laudis praemia nuda placent?
Si foret haec tantis ^etas ingrata, tacerent
Nulla tamen lauds saecula sera tuas.
Mathaeus Gwin, in Medicin. Doctor.

JAMES PERROT ESQVIRE to his assured loving Cousin, the Author of the
Golden-groue.
THy Golde^-groue yields good and golden trees:
The roots thereof are virtues of the mind;
The branches are well trained up families:
The body is the Commonwealth refined.
Good fruit on such good trees do always grow
When wisdom reaps, what virtue first did sow.
In Paradise, (which was a golden grove)
The tree of life in glorious manner grew;
Which erst, when Eve did Satan's speech approve,
Man's life by taste for ever could renew.
In this thy grove grows no forbidden plant,
Here all is sound without bad juice or want.
Of every tree in wisdoms Paradise,
Thy golden Muse (good Cousin) has some taste;
Three books are planted by thine exercise,
Books such, as enuies breath shall never blast.
Thrice blessed art thou, to whom in youth befalls,
To bud, and bring such golden vegetals.
Idem ad eundem.
OMnia fortunae sunt sublunaria ventis
Subdita; nec constant tot monumenta Ducum.
Sirogites: vbi sunt septem miracula mundi?
Alterna referent haec cecidisse vice.
Solatamen fugiunt excusa volumina ventos,
Sola animi viuo sunt bona digna cedro.
Creed mihi (Cognate) tuam virtutibus vrbem,
Auratosque lares famalo quetur anus.
Epigramma 1. (...) ad. Authorem.
A Vriferos alii soliti promittere montes,
Deducunt bardis nania barda modis.
Aurea tu vero promittens, aurea praestas,
Ducis and auriferis aurea rura modis.
Thomas James Master of Arts, and Fellow of New College in Oxford, to Master
Vaughan the Author of the Golden-groue moralized.
WHilst brothers live, as brothers they must love,
As the^ one wo^b, so they one mind must bear.
This Vaughan shows in this his Golde^-groue,
In this his learned work without compare.
Two Brothers like two feet so well they go,
Or like two mariners together row.
The soil which has these loving brothers bred,
Was ever held a soil of great account,
Here Brute of yore his golden time had led,
Whose bruit and fame unto the skies did mount:
Whose noble seed amongst his issue sown,
Has made the Britains through ye world well
Known for great soldiers, and resolved me^ (known
Known for their love to learning and the Arts;
As these two brothers on the worlds Scene,
Approved of late by their true acted parts:
The other by his pen deserved the same.
His pen was silver, but his head of gold,
That could so much in so few lines contain;
That in three books could all things so unfold:
(If all be three, as learned writers said)
Of metals, gold the purest is esteemd;
Of our late writers, thou as best art deemd.
The Muses hire is not well ratified:
(Such is their fare in these accursed days)
But of thy Brother be thou gratified,
Heel pay thee love, as thou do pay him praise.
For both your meeds let golden groves abide,
And after death you golden wreathes betide.
Ad Magistrum Vaughannum de aureo suo saltu 1. Pr. Epigramma.
LIs erat in docto, been nec discussa, Senatu:
An ciues aurum commaculet, vel alat:
I^^pulit ad stuprum Dana^n Iouis aureus imber:
Impulit A^^onidem per mare Vellus ouis.
Aurcolum peperit ^ixas in s^ltibus Idae
Pomum; subiecitteque Atalanta, proco.
Hanc Saltu aurifero tu litem difcutis aurum,
Palladi si detur, non maculat, s^d alit.
FINIS.

