A Method, or brief instruction; very profitable and speedy, for the reading
and understanding of the old and new Testament. (*) The one expounding the
other according to the sense and meaning of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Veritas. Blessed is that man whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and in
his law does exercise himself both day and night. Psalm. 1.2. 1. He shall be
like a tree planted, etc. 2. His leaf shall not weither, etc. 3. Whatsoever he
does shall prosper.
LONDON. Imprinted by T. Orwin. for W. Holme. 1590.

Vitam orna docendo: Vaum hoc gestit Doctrinam Orna Giuendo: Ne ignorata
damnetur:

Teipsum Consule. Memento Mori. Iusu^^andum serua. Praemonitus Praemunitus.

Jesus esto mihi Jesus.

The Preface.
To Theophilus the unfeigned lover of Jesus Christ. Act. 1, 1. and To Lydia his
wife, the painful instructor of her household. Act. 16.15.
THE evil of ignorance, how great a sin it is not rightly to know God, the
common course of all Creatures in their order, duo partly teach, that by
endeavor we may in knowledge excel them, seeing by nature they excel us. And
for experience, if the souls and consciences of ignorant men were set open but
one hour to the world, it would be a world and a warning for ever, to see
their desolation, their fear, their sorrow and resolute condemning of
themselves to that place of perdition of body and soul prepared for the
devil and for them: not knowing which way to wind out, being brought in by
Ariadnes thread, or rather by a corruptible seed, that although the light
shines in the darkness of their hearts, yet they cannot comprehend it: because
they either despise or neglect the knowledge of their Creator, which is not to
be known to any, but by the knowledge of the holy Scriptures. What Father or
Mother would not sigh, and sown for hearty sorrow to see their Children
preparing themselves to hell: what Master so unmerciful that would not pity
to see their servants hearts bleeding for sorrow? And what Pastor would not
willingly resign all to redeem one of his charge, although all the rest were
saved? Behold then how careful ought Parents to be in teaching their
Children the instruction of the Lord? and how watchful every Pastor to give
them their meat in due season. The Devil has received many into his Kingdom
by ignorance of the Scriptures, and he sees it is the way to enlarge it:
therefore he laboreth bodily and Ghostly, night and day, by craft and by
cruelty, to hold men in that miserable thrall of darkness, how necessary the
knowledge of holy Scriptures is for all people to comfort themselves, and to
confirm other many places do testify. Leu. 19, 17. Deu. 3.12.13.2. Kings 23,
2, 3. Neh. 8, 2. Psalm. 1, 1.2.3. Prou. 1, 1.2, etc. 19, 2.29, 18. 1. Cor. 14,
20. Gal. 6, 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. 1. Tim. 2, 4. 2. Tim. 2, 24.25.26. Heb. 3.13.
Iam. 5, 19.20. 1. Pet. 3, 15.16. Beware of false Prophets Math. 7, 15. Try all
things and keep that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 21. But how can these things
be performed without the knowledge of holy Scriptures? How shall a servant do
the will of his Master, when he knows it not? How shall a son rightly obey
his Father, wherein he is not taught? And how much less shall the Master the
servant, the Father or the Son be serviceable to the Lord, and Father of all
things, or by obedience please him when his will is not known by his word; who
in deed is to be served and obeyed according to the line and level thereof,
and not according to man's fleshly invention or worldly reason.

Objection. Yet for all this many object and lay for themselves that the study
of Gods word does only appertain to Divines and men that are not busied
with the affairs and cares of this world.

Alas they are altogether deceived by Satan who works in them that be ill,
always to doubt their ill by preferring ignorance before knowledge: carnal
things before spiritual, and earthly before Heavenly. But Parents must
needs have the knowledge of Scriptures to teach their Children. Genesis 18,
18.19. Exodus 12, 26.27.13, 8.9 10. Deu. 4, 9.10. Psalm. 78, 5. etc. And it is
also the duty of every householder to instruct their families Genesis 18,
18.19. Act. 10, 2.16, 14.15. Romans. 15, 5. Colloss. 4.15. Phil. 2.

Object. Some do hold themselves well excused as touching this account, by
hard travail and pains taking in their vocation and calling.

Object. Some by catechizing in little Books, some by their worshipful and
honorable offices in the common weal, and some by frequenting Sermons early
and late.

Object. Some do think themselves well exercised, and their time well spent
in examining and searching other men's Books for faults and errors, thereby to
get praise and profit: if they find none, then they hew and strike fiercely at
their manners and conuersations, always bearing armor defensive to defend
their own evil; and arms offensive to assail the good manners of others,
whiles they should be occupied in searching their own errors and faults by
the holy Scriptures.

Objection. Some do spend the remainder of their lives in Envy and Arrogancy
enterprising impression against impression, Books, against Books, Sermon
against Sermon.

And thus they bring some to neglect the study of the sacred Bible: some to
doubt of the truth and dignity thereof, and some to hate or to despise the
professors of the same. If these Calummators and busy bodies were as ready to
put in practice their preaching, as they be to follow after a fault in their
living, there should be no such need of Prisons for Malefactors, of Bridewells
for Libellors, nor of Hatchets for traitors.

Object. Another sort there is (in their kind worse then all these) who by
their learning do dissuade the unlearned from that study and order of reading
the Bible which is prescribed priuatlie and publicly by a man whose life is
unrebukable, whose learning counteruaileth the best learned: whose good will
to all men has been published in his Preaching freely, whose undeserved and
unanswerable pains has been set forth by Printing, and whose godly zeal
and care does plainly appear in those whom he has taught in the knowledge
of Gods most holy word, who are in deed as testimonies of his truth and
infallible arguments to prove the experience of his Method and order of
teaching, (which many ignorant men do control secretly) to be principal.
And what should I say more, I doubt not of mildness of constancy, and of the
virtue of Gods holy spirit in him, so as he may live boldly even at the faces
of his adversaries, still prospering in Gods business, and very well in his
own: In the mean time he is honored among them that be honored, that fortune
abateth without fault; and he is ashamed among them that be ashamed, that
fortune enhaunceth without merit; honorable honor rests not in the dignity
that men have, but in the good works whereby they deserve.

Herein J commend not the best, the worst are not tolerable. There is no more
comparison betwixt the Arc and the Tabernacle, than is between Gods word and
worldly wealth: the getting, the keeping and the spending of the one is sin, and
the seeking of the other is not finding: without the diligent reading of the
old and new Testament. Rethorick is good, I grant you, to persuade: Astronomy
is sit to know the course of the Stars. Geometry is profitable to measure
the Land. Music is necessary to recreate: Philosophy to take away the terror
of death. These and the rest, be they never so good, so fit, so profitable, and
so necessary: yet they are all but as dim Stars, in respect of Divinity.
The Phrigian Harmony moved to the Calendes, makes a great noise: but being
moved to Apollo, is still calm and quiet. Hiarchion hearing Ruphinus blow on
his Pipe, would never after play on his flute, the Thrush although having many
good notes, will not sing in the company of the Nightingall. Even so, let all
the world hold their peace, sit down and hear Divinity. It is like the
Pillar of fire by night, and a cloudie pillar by day: to conduct the children
of Abraham through the wast wilderness of this world, to that spiritual and
everlasting kingdom of Canaan: from this miserable Mesapotamia, and out of the
bondage of sinful flesh, to a Gall anointing the eyes of the faithful, that
they may see and avoid that foul spirit Asmodeus. To a Star, leading all
wise men to the true worship of Jesus Christ: and it is a law to control us, a
sheelde to defend us, and a light to teach us.

Seeing then it has so many good uses, how can we be without the knowledge
thereof.

Seeing our journey and voyage is so dangerous, and we such unskillful
trauailers: how shall we miss so good a guide?

Seeing we are all overwhelmed with a cloud of darkness and ignorance: how
can we want such a skillful Schoolmaster?

And seeing we have all sorts of enemies hindering us, and we our selves so
unfurnished, how shall we be able to stand, not having on the whole armor of
God? How shall we quench the fiery darts of the devil? and what shall I say
more? O that my mouth could cause my words to mount over all the world, for to
make such a deep impression in the hearts of all men; that neither things
absent, present or to come in the loss of liberty, living, or life should
make them to start one jot from the Christian delight, the holy and Heavenly
exercise of Gods word.

Many, no doubt, would more willingly give themselves to this godly labor,
seemed not the ^^ble so great and tedious.

And many might soon be brought to the knowledge thereof, if their Minister
had either will or ability to divide unto them the word of God aright.

For the discharge of mine own conscience and duty, in some respect, having
no opportunity or occasion otherwise offered me to benefit my brethren: J
will deliver in this book a short method, and easy rule, and a plain passage
throughout the Bible to great use and profit.

At the first veiw and sight judge not rashly, let christian modesty and the
bands of love hold you, until some time pass for proof of the profit.

And if in any thing you mislke it, I humbly pray you mend it: I seek not
mine own praise or profit, but in plain and simple sort, to teach Christ
Jesus: in whose name J begin and make an end.

Your contrieman and servant for Christ his sake, EDWARD VAVGHAN, Preacher of
Gods holy word in London at S. Marie Wolnor.

^ct your self throughout the Bible, by learning how many ^ookes are in
every part: and how many Chapters every ^ooke contains: The profit I
cannot briefly utter, if you acquaint your self in the same with this order.

The whole Bible may be considered four fould.
Legal. Genesis 50. Exodus 40. Leui. 27. Number. 38 1. Sam. 31.
New
Mat. 28. Mark. 16 Luke 24. Ioh. 21.

Historical. Iosu. 24. Iud. 21. Ruth. 4. 1. Sam. 31. 2. Sam. 24. 1. King. 22
2. King. 25 1. Cro. 29. 2. Cro. 36. Ezra 10. Nehe. 13. Ester. 10.
New
Acts. 24.

Sapientall. Job. 42. Psalm. 150. Pro. 31. Eccl. 10. Can. 8.
New
Romans 16. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Cor. 13. Gal. 6. Ephe. 6. Phil. 4. Collo. 4. 1. These
5. 2. These. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 4. Tit. 3. Phile. 1. Heb. 13. Iam. 5. 1. Pet
5. 2. Pet. 3. 1. Io. 5. 1. Io. 1. 3. Io. 1. Jude. 1.

Prophetical. Isay 66. Iere. 52. Ezec. 48. Dani. 12. Hosea. 14. Joel. 4. Amos.
6. Obedi. 1. Iosuah 4. Micha. 7. Nahum. 3 Habac. 3. Zepha 3.3 Hagg. 2. Zach.
14. Mal. 4.
New
Revel. 22.


The Contents or sum of the first part.
THe first part is called Legal, because it chiefly contains the law and
statutes of God the Creator to all his Creatures: in this order given.

To things not having life, as the Element, the Earth, the Sea, etc. Genesis 1.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

To things having life, as Fowls, Fishes, Beasts, etc. 14, 25.

To Adam before his fall, and after Genesis 2. 15, 16.3.15, 17, 19.

To his posterity, in two Tables of stone written by the finger of GOD. Exodus
19, 20, 34.

To the sanctified members of Christ in the fleshly Tables of their hearts. 1.
Cor. 3.3.

The Contents or sum of the second part.
THe second part is called Historical. for that therein is principally set
forth many and singular examples of Gods mighty power, in protecting the lot
of his inheritance: who, notwithstanding Satan and the world craftelie and
cruelly resists; yet by a few simple men, and of no reputation; he
replenished all the world with the sweet sound of Jesus Christ his son: and
overthrew their Conspiracies, their Trecheries, their cruelty and outrage. In
these Stories he has left perfect notice to all the world, that he never
suffered them that trusted in him to perish; nor such as delighted in their
own Arms to prevail. Besides, he has in these notable Actions and Stories,
as it were registered a perpetual memory to the Church: that the Cross is
ordained as an inseparable companion to a good Christian, which nevertheless,
is turned in short time, to endless and unspeakable joy: for so is the will of
God.

The Contents of sum of the third part.
THe third part, which is Sapiental co^prehendeth matter of great doctrine
concerning true Religion and holiness of life: it does allure the hearts of me^
to the diligent reading of Gods word, which is left as most precious Jewels to
the Church. It describes the dee^auable vanities of this world, that men
should not be addicted to any thing in the same; but rather enflamed with the
desire of heavenly life and bliss in Christ. It shows forth by many sweet
and pleasant Allegories, similitudes, parables, and comparisons, the perfect
love of Jesus Christ in the creation and redemption. It teaches us to tread in
the steps and paths of the true Church, whose affections are enflamed with
pure bounty and love of the Messiah, who is become ours, by taking our nature
upon him, and by accomplishing al things necessary to our Salvation and
Redemption.

The Contents, or sum of the fourth part.
THe 4. part, which is Prophetical, interprets the law contained briefly
in two Tables. It foretells many notable things touching the promise of the
Messiah, his office, his kingdom, the favor of God toward his Church, and the
persuasion that is used with Iaphet to dwell in the house of Sem as God had
said unto Noah. It directs all men to the assurance of Gods eternal
providence, by the consideration of things present, past, and to come; whereof
the Prophets are plentiful.

By observing this order, you shall be able to judge neerelie where every
matter that comes in your hearing does lie in the Bible, or what scripture
soever you shall read elsewhere. For all things profitable to our instruction
and salvation is contained in the four parts before recited: therefore mark
how they are distinguished.

First, learn how the whole is divided into 9. Periods, or stories. Seco^dlie,
where every Period or story do begin and end in the Bible. Thirdly, that
you learn to say some thing as the holy Ghost utters concerning the Creation
in Genesis 1, 2, 3, 4. The Flood, Genesis 7, 8. The Promise, Genesis 12. The giving of
the law, Exodus 19, 20. The going out of Egypt, Exodus 12, 13, 14. Their
entrance into Canaan, Joshua. 1, 2, 3. Their possession, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
The first King, 1. Sam. 9, 10. The Captivity, the book of Daniel, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. Their liberty in Christ, Matthew. 1, 2, 27, 28. The continuance of
every period or story I have laid down at the end of every one such. Be
sure to observe this order.

1. From the Creation to the Flood Genesis 1. to Genesis 7, a story of 1656. years.
2. From the Flood to the promise first to Abram Genesis 8, to Genesis 12, a story of
427. years. 3. From the Promise made to Abram to the giving of the law Genesis
12. to Exodus 19, a story of 430. years. 4. From their going out of Egypt to
their entrance into Canaan Exodus 12, to Joshua 1, a story of 40. years. 5.
From their entrance into Canaan to their quiet possession. Joshua 1, to Judges
1, a Story of 7. years. 6. From their quiet possession to Saul their first
King. Judge. 1. to the 1. Sam. 1, a Story of 450. years. 7. From Saul their
first King, to the Captivity. 1. Sam. to Nehemiah, a Story of 490. years. 8.
From their captivity to their liberty, these books, Nehemiah, Ezra, Hester:
a Story of 70. years. 9. From their liberty unto Christ the everlasting
liberty: the book of Daniel a Story of 490. years.
These things being well and perfectly settled in your mind, then consider
what is contained in every Period particularly, I mean what the Argument or
Sum of every ^uch Story is: whereby you shall see where^pon the Bible does
depend, what Religion was in every Age, the cause of the alteration: which you
must do advisedly in this order.

1. PERIOD.
In every Period mark what is said of God the Creator in this order.

The Creator called himself in the Hebrew tongue Jehovah, whom in our language
we call God, Genesis 1, 1. Deu. 6.4. It is a name of wonderful weight and
unsearchable consideration, and yet not answerable to the greatness of his
Majesty, in respect of his divine person and godly essence. It contains five
vowells, which are the ground and perfection of all languages: for, as without
the same no tongue can be distinct or understood, so without the true knowledge
and love of his eternal Majesty, no man can speak unto him rightly: all will
be but babbling, or as though he understood it not. This name has in it also
2. h. h. which in all languages are nothing else but aspiratio^s or breathings,
thereby making up the number of 7. letters, being the full number of the
Sabbath, alluding to this saying, From him we have our breathing, in him we
live, move, and have our being. For we are his generation, Act. 17.28. And also
to teach that the praising of God is a part of the sanctification of the
Sabbath, without the which, no soul has rest or peace with God.

Jehovah our God. Mark the force of this word Our: It is not attributed to the
Father, nor to the holy Ghost, but directly to the Son of the Father, who is
become ours and we his, Cant. 2.16. by taking our nature upon him.

For the use and interest of all his Creatures, together with the work of
redemption, he has left this exercise for ever in his Sanctuary, saying;

Praise me the eternal God: which is the signification of this holy name
Jehovah, assuring us also thereby of his aeternall favor, in whom is no shadow
of change: for what he was, the same he is, and will be to come.

He has many other names in respect of his quality and rich liberality
toward his Saints, and in regard of his justice toward the reprobate. As

Palmoni, Michael, etc. Of the same number of letters, but of three vowels,
pointing closely to the unity of the Trinity. The one signifies that he
numbreth and finisheth the livings and lives of al men, that he weighs all
men's words and works in a balance or weight of the Sanctuary, that he
divides and gives how he will, and to whom it pleases him. Dan. 5.26, 27, 28.

Michael signifies very God, and shows that there is no other: he is God
alone. Michael is only thrice repeated in Scripture, Dan. 10.21. Dan. 12.1.
Judge. 1.9. There is no Angel of that name.

Wherein we are to consider 4. things.
His Wisdom in creating all good. His Power in governing all his creatures.
His Providence in providing all good things for his. His Justice in destroying
all the wicked.
In every story or Period you shall see these particulars, which will further
your purpose, and put you in mind of diverse other such like concerning GOD:
whereby you shall be perfect in that account, which is the first and
principal point required of every Christian. Then observe wheresoever you
read, what is spoken of GOD, whether he be

3. in one Genesis 1.26, 27.18.2, 3, 9, 10.13.16 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27. Ioh.
10.30. 1. Timo. 3, 16. Ephe. 4, 5.6. Or 1. in 3. distinct Father. Gene. 1.1, 2,
3. Matt. 3.16, 17. Son. Genesis 1, 3. Mat. 3.16. Holy Ghost. Genesis 1.2. Matt. 3,
16.

The Argument or sum of this first Period.
Read Genesis the 5. there you shall see 10. holy Fathers, which I have laid
down in their order, in whom the Church of GOD stood, who as skillful
Musicians, did sweetly sing one song, making a heavenly sound over all the
world, whose lives were ended at the flood, whose holy Religion has end with
the fire, the reward of whose labors has eternal memory with GOD and his
Angels, which are these that follow, with their significations and years.

Fathers. Significations. Years. Adam earthly. 930 Genesis 5.5, Seth settled. 912
8, Enos sorrowful. 905 11, Kenan godly repentance. 910 14, Mahalael praise God.
895 17, Iared the lowly. 962 20, Henoch the Sabbath keeper. 365 24, Methuselah
long life. 969 27, Lamech heart wounded. 777 33. Noah. the comforter. 950 Genesis
9.29

This number of 10. Fathers, wherein God has measured his Church, serves very
necessarily to expound hard sentences in scripture of the same number. But you
must mark that 10. sometimes stands in good part, as in Tithes, Leui. 27.32.
Nu. 18.25, 26, 27, 28. In the 10. month the flood abated Genesis 8.5. God would
have spared many thousands for 10. sake, Genesis 18.42. etc. Sometimes 10. is
taken in account of evil, as Numb. 14.22. Esai. 5.10. Again, 10. horns of
the Beast which Daniel saw, signifies 10. wicked persecuting Kings, Dan. 7.24.
The Pope has 10. stately Kingdoms to assist him, Revel. 13.1. Thus must you
compare one 10. with another as you read.

Now mark briefly the story of every Father particularly, in the which you
may, by comparison, expound other places of like quality in Scriptures.

ADam, his original or kindred was the red earth of Moriah, nere the garden of
Eden a mount in Jerusalem.

Where Isaac was offered, as a figure of Christ the holy of holiest. Genesis 22 2.

Where Sem, or Melchisedech dwelt, which place was called Salem, but upon
Isaac his offering, it was called Jerusalem. Genesis 14.18.

Where Noah's Arc rested in the threshing place of Araunah the Jebusite. 2.
Sam. 24. 16, 17, 18, to 25.

Where Solomon was commanded to build the Temple. 2. Chro. 3.1.

Where was the Oratorie of God, the law and the spirit.

Where Christ in the sulnes of time died, as a high Sacrificer.

Mark every Moriah as you read, and confer one with another by particular
questions.

Adam was in soul a Saint for wisdom and will.

So are all his posterity in Christ.

He was a King, a Prophet, and a Sacrificer.

So was Christ.

And it is certain that he believed the promise concerning Christ, in whose
commemoration he offered continual sacrifice, the which was consumed by fire
from heaven in the allowance thereof, as was the sacrifice of Abram, etc. in
the time of the Law. In the assurance whereof he named his wife Heua, that is
to say, life. And he called his Son Seth, settled or persuaded in Christ. He
brought up his Sons Abel and Cain in the same profession.

By faith Abel offered a greater sacrifice than Cain, by the which he obtained
witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. Hab. 11.4.

God clothed Adam and his wife with the skins of those beasts which he had
sacrificed.

The first promise concerning Christ.

When God had chastened the woman and cursed the serpent. He said unto Adam,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. Genesis 3.15.

He lived with Methusalah to instruct him in this promise, and in the right use
thereof 243. years as in Genesis 5.25, 26, 27, 32.6.6.11.10, 11.

He was skillful in all Sciences the first day, and 30. year of age, by the
use of nature as men are now.

So was Christ at the end of Daniels last week 9, when he was baptized Lu.
2.23.

And it must needs stand by many arguments and plain narrations, that he
fell the the same day of his creation.

His Wife was a goodly, fair, and beautiful Queen.

So is the Wife of Christ, the Church, all glorious, and there is no spot
within her.

Thus by particular observations, you may make your comparison fit with other
places of the same sense out of the old or new.

Read
Mat. 19.4, 5, 6. Mark 10.3, 4, 5, etc. Christ comes of Adam, Romans 5.1. 1. Cor.
15. A comparison between Christ and Adam. 1. Tim. 2. Revel. 12.
SEth was the 3. son of Adam, begotten in the likeness of his Father, when he
was 130. year old. All the world is bound to take instruction of him, to be
settled in Christ the Rock. All places of Scripture that import the Rock
Christ, settled faith and constancy may be reduced unto this.

The number 130. in which he was begotten, serves very well to remember you
of al places of the sam^ number in scripture. As

Terah begat Abram, a new Stablisher of Religion when he was 130. year old.

Jaacob came to Aegipt, a Reuiuer of Religion when he was 130. year old.

You shall read seldom, or but once, in Luke 3.38. of Seth in the New
Testament.

ENos was very zealous and sorrowful for the corruption of Religion and good
manners, which was like to ensue upon the marriage of the sons of GOD with
the daughters of men, who regarded beauty and worldly preferment, rather than
the promises of life and everlasting glory, by serving and praising God in
true Religion.

To this you may refer the zeal of Moses, Elias, Paul, John, etc. who wept
for the people that sinned, and desired rather to be razed out of the book of
life, than that so many thousands should perish in the wrath of the Lord.

To this you may refer all unequal and inordinate marriages, and the
inconveniences that comes thereof.

KEnan had sorowfulnes and withal godly repentance, furnished with a care of
amendment of life.

To this you may reduce all penitent sinners, as David, Peter, etc.

MAhalael had a name very answerable to that acceptable Sacrifice which the
Creator imposed upon his creation, according to the signification of his own
name: both which I have told you.

To this may be reduced all places of thanks giving and praising of God.

So Leah named her fourth son, Judah, signisying, praise the Lord. This ought
to be imitated of all men throughout the course of Religion and trade of life.
Psalm. 47. The reason why, is showed Psalm. 19.102, 105.

IAred had the virtues of his forefathers, which induced him to great humility
and lowlines.

To this you may refer all such like places, how God exalts the lowly and
meek. As

Joseph out of the pit of slyme, to be Lord and ruler in all the Land of Aegipt.

David a poor simple Shepherd, to be a renowned king over his inheritance,
and Daniel and Peter, etc.

This must needs call you to remember the proud and their overthrow upon the
dunghill.

HEnoch walked with God in holy life, he was a man wholly dedicated to the
Lord by his name and in the trade of his life, wherein was seen his fathers
zeal and sound Religion in bringing him up meet for the service of the great
God, as Abram did Jsaac. as Anna did Samuel, etc.

He was faithful. Read Haebr: 11.5.

He was a Prophet. Jude. 1.14, 15.

He is the seventh from Adam, his years are agreeable with the number of the
Sabbath, putting all men in mind of the six days creation, and the seventh
days Rest or redemption. Seven is an holy and an infinite number importing
grace and peace by Jesus Christ. Leuiticus. 25.8, 9, 10, 11. Seven eyes in the
Revelation signifies Gods seven fold and incomprehensible wisdom and
providence.

The number of 7. is also taken, many times, for a time certain, and ceasing
in euillpart, as Nabuchadnezzar was a beast 7. years and no longer. The
Tabernacle was 7. months in building, and no longer.

Sometimes 7. is in good part, and for a certain time ceasing, as the Land of
Canaan was 7. years in conquering.

All notable actions were done in the equal number of 7. from Moses to Christ
his death by 7. seauens. Seueh fifties for the glory of Joseph's house. Seven
seuenties for the house of Judah. Seven tennes for the captivity. Seven
seuenties to Christ.

Thus you shall make use of seven in all actions throughout the holy Bible.

The holy servants of God, as a rare mark to behold, were borne in the equal
number of 7. As Henoch the 7. from Adam. Heber the 7. from Henoch. Isaac the 7.
from Heber. Moses the 7. from Abram. Joshua the 7. from Ephraim Ioram the 7.
from David.


MEthuselah having all the virtues and blessings of his forefathers, after his
death shall have life aeternal which his name did teach him by the signification
thereof. As Adam lived 249. years to instruct him; so he lived with Sem to
teach him 98. years.

Apply this to the faithful, as a reward of their labors in Christ.

His age was an exact number or rule of the Flood, the waters could not drown
the world while he lived.

The like may be said of Lot, that fire could not fall upon Sodom, until he
was entered into Zoar.

LAmech he was outwardly afflicted by men, and inwardly afflicted in
conscience by the devil: he was a Prophet for he spoke of things many hundred
years past, and of the comfort that should fall out by Woah. Genesis 5.28, 29.

A fit resemblance of the Church.

NOah found grace and favor in the sight of God, in him was established the
Covenant made to Adam.

His household, as a small remnant left in the Arc, is lest as an equal
portion of the smalnes of the Church, in respect of the wicked.

The Dove, bringing an Olive leaf, signified peace and plenty.

You may compare it well with the holy Ghost bringing glad tidings and
everlasting joy to the Church.

He was the 10 from Adam.

Remember 10.

Read for Noah, Matt. 24. Luke 17. Hab. 11. 1. Pet. 3. 2. Pet. 2.

The signification of their names being well lincked and chained together, makes
up a Christian Sacrifice and the whole sum of Religion briefly thus.

The Majesty of God foreseeing the fall of Adam, gave him a name answerable
thereunto, which was Earthly, miserable, perishing, dying* etc.

Adam finding the same true in him and in his posterity, he comprehended by
the light of Gods spirit, that the seed of the woman should restore him and all
believers into the favor of God, and therefore he called his third son Seth;
which is in our language settled, persuaded, and resolved in Christ.

Seth was in his profession and trade of life as his name signified: and
because he knew that to be settled in Christ cannot be without contrition and
grief for sin, he named his son Enos, sorrowful: the rather because
sorrowful corruption began to grow by the marriage of the daughters of men.

Enos knowing that there was two sorts of sorrow or repentance, a godly and a
worldly; therefore he named his son Kenan, godly repentance.

Kenan being settled in Christ, sorrowful for sin, and having godly
repentance, he named his son the praise God, in Hebrew Mahalael.

Mahalael, having in himself all the former virtues, he called his son lared,
lowly, without the which all is sin.

Iared, knowing that the sanctification of the Sabbath is a degree of virtue,
and a great piece of this spiritual Sacrifice, he called his son Henoch, the
Sabbath keeper.

Henoch, to set forth the reward of all those excellent virtues, named his
son Methuselah, that is, long life.

Methuselah, knowing well that the Church in the mean time should endure many
tribulations, he called his son Lamech, which is by interpretation, heart
wounded.

Lamech, although his case, and his brethren professing Jesus Christ was
wretched and full of heart wounds, yet after a while they should rejoice, and
in token thereof he called his son Noah, a Comforter.

Go backward or forward, he that has one of these virtues has all; they
cannot be separated: he that misseth of one misseth of all.

He that is settled in Christ is sorrowful for his sin; he that is sorrowful,
is godly sorrowful unto repentance: he that has a godly repentance, praises
God in poverty and in plenty: he that praises GOD, is lowly in all estates:
he that is lowly, sanctifies the Sabbath: he that sanctifies the Sabbath,
shall have long life: he that has these former virtues, shall be hartelie
wounded in this world: but in the world to come he shall have joy and comfort,
which no man shall take from him.

He that keeps not the joy of Christ in his heart, is not heartelie wounded:
he that is not wounded and in afflictions here, has no hope of long life: he
that hops not for long life, keeps not the Sabbath: he that keeps not the
Sabbath, is not lowly: he that is not lowly, praises not God: he that
praises not GOD, has not godly repentance: he that has not godly
repentance, is not sorrowful: he that is not sorrowful, is not settled on Christ
the rock, but is earthly, miserable, perishing, etc.

Now mark who were enemies in their time.

1 Serpent a lier. Genesis 3.1, 2, 3 4, etc. 2 Kain a murder. Genesis 4.1, 2, 3 4,
etc. 3 Lamech an adulterer. Gene. 4.18, 19, 20. etc
By lying, pride entered.

By pride, murder issued.

By fleshly lust, contempt of Religion followed.

These 6. were the sins of the old world, the earth was corrupt, and filled
with the enormitie thereof. Genesis 6.5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13.

Job speaks much of these sinners in those days. 22.15, 16, 17. 1. Pet.
3.19, 20. Jude 1. 14, 15.

1 The Serpent was a goodly fair creature; but very wise and subtle. Matthew.
10.16.

The Angels seeing the excellency of the creation day by day, and perceiving
that they and all creatures else were made but as servants to Adam, they
presently upon his creation murmured, and were not content with their estate;
but left their habitation and calling, which made GOD to reserve them in
everlasting chains. Iud. 1.6. whereupon he presently fell to tempt Adam, 1.
Cor. 11.3.

The head of these evil Spirits was Lucifer; as he was more clear and
brighter than other Angels, so he fell into a more filthy Apostacy: he was
not evil by kind, but of his own aduisement he turned out of kind: he fell
willingly, as Adam from good into evil, from light into darkness: he coueted
highness not meet for him: therefore he was thrown into the lowest place: he
with an infinite multitude more were deprived of their beauty and glory. They
were at the first heavenly bodies: but upon their fall they were turned into
the quality of the air.

These were called by diverse names answerable to their kind and quality.

Whereof 4. are in the 12. chap. and.9. verse. of the Revelation.

1 a Devil. For that he is a quareller, a callenger and a backbiter. 2 a
Dragon. In respect of his wonderful cruelty and speedy spoil. 3 a Satan.
For that he is a Tempter, Matthew. 4.10. Adversary or enemy. Luke 22.31, 32.
2. Cor. 4, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 2, 18. 1. These. 3, 5.2. These. 2.9, 10. Reu. 2.13. 4 a
Serpent. For his subtlety and craft. 2. Cor. 11, 3.
Behemoth, is likened to an Ox: for that he labors and enforces all his
power to draw men to destruction. Job. 40, 10.

Leuiathan, a great mighty fish, not to be ruled with line and hook; so the
Devil cannot be meeked and tamed by the nature of man. Job. 40.20.

Lion, who is very ravening, and always sleeps with his eyes open, most
watchful and vigilant: so the devil seeking who^ he may devour. 2. Pet. 5.8.

Boar, for his rooting, extirpation, utter subversion and destruction. Psalm.
80.13

Now I will speak briefly of those Angels, which were left in heaven, and
continued in their first Estate, of whom you shall read much in holy
Scriptures, and of their sundry names in respect of their several and sundry
offices in the Church, and in heaven: which I pray you diligenly to mark.

AN Angel is a name of office and not of kind. He is of a spiritual and
immortal substance, and of great purity: by reason whereof he perceives in
him self all forms and shapes intelligible, whereby he is stirred to heavenly
contemplations. The likeness of GOD shines in him. Haeb. 1.7.

Angels have three things in them.
1 Essence: by the which they have being of purity, of discretion, and
godliness. 2 Virtue: by the which they have power to understand, to live, and
to continue for ever. 3 Working: by the which they are exercised to do all
things swistly, willingly, and profitably to Gods glory, and to the benefit
of his Church.
Angels called Seraphins. BEcause they are many, they are inflamed with the
clear light and brightness of God: their office is to kindle and inflame
others in the love of God. This fire wherewith they are kindled; burns and
not wastes. Haeb. 1, 14.

Angels are called Cherubins. A Company or a multitude higher than the
Seraphins: these have the gift of fairness in the first virtue that works.
For by the light of wisdom they be drawn into the fairness of GOD
himself. Haeb. 9, 5.

Angels called Thrones. THe Majesty of God sits in and upon these. Their
offices is to set forth GODS Justice against unpenitent sinners. Revel. 1.4.
Revel. 14.17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 80.1. Cherubins and Thrones are one.

Angels called Dominations. THese are above the rest in power, they have
Justice in force, liberty in godliness, and they conform all their actions
to The rule and direction of their President. Haebr. 1, 6.

Angels called Principalities. THeir office is to bring and reduce others to
God. They are over other Angels. Some of them serve, and some wait. Dan. 7.9,
10. Psalm. 68.7.

Angels called Powers. FOr that they have power over evil Angels, and wicked
spirits. Their office is, to keep and comfort the Saints on the earth. These
have equal might with those Angels which are called Dominations. Revel. 16.1,
2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1. Pet. 3, 22.

All these are said to be clothed with fire, and with Light, as with a
garment. Psalm. 104.

They are girded with a golden Girdle, signifying might and courage. Dan. 10 5.
Revel. 15, 6.

They bear in their hands swords and scepters. A sword to rule, and a scepter
to magnify. Genesis 3.24. Numb. 22.31. Joshua 5, 13. Revel. 6.8. warlike weapons,
fighting for the Church spiritually.

They have Trowels, Measures, and all sorts of working tools, to work men a
new unto God.

They have Trumpets, for that they warn and excite men to hear the voice of
God, and to prepare themselves against the spiritual enemy. Revel. 8, 2.

They have Instruments of Music, comforting and refreshing the weak and
wearied, as was signified by the Levites. 2. Cron. 7, 6. Revel. 5.8, 18, 22.

They are likened to Horses of all colors, to Chariots, and to Eagles, for
that they are poasts and speedy messengers betwixt Christ and his Church.
Ierem. 4, 13. Zachar. 1.8, 9. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Revel. 9.16, 17.

They are likened to Warders, and unto Watchmen, for that they forewarne the
Church of perils. Psalm. 141, 3. Esa. 21.6, 7, 8, 9. Ierem. 51, 12. Dan. 4, 10.

They are likened to Haruesters and Laborers, for that they gather men into the
Lords Barn, as wheat. Ierem. 50, 16. Mich. 7, 1. Math. 9.37, 38.

They are called by many other names, and likened to diverse natural things,
thereby to make us the better to discern them, the plainelier to see them, and
the easier to avoid that which may dislike them.

Mark them well, and reduce them by particulars into memory, which will
greatly profit you.

THE particular Ages and Years of the ten Fathers, Genesis 5. before recited
serves as an exact rule to know how long the first Story or Period, and the
world of old did last.

The same manifests unto all Nations the loving kindness of the Lord, who as
yet in the days of Noah, he gave them, one hundred and twenty Years
Repentance and withal the severity of God in making the earth void and
empty, as it was in the beginning because of sin: and in not suffering the
posterity of Noah to live half their former years: which was a noate of Gods
Justice to the wicked in breaking their earthly imaginations: and a testimony
of his love toward his elect, by hastening their kingdom and glory.

2. PERIOD.
The Argument or sum of the 2. Period.
Read Genesis 11. there God in the number of other 10. holy Fathers, begins
to multiply a new Church; over whom he was very careful and provident, as of
a peculiar and special people dedicated to his own glory, and sequestered
from ill and profane uses; which I have laid down in their order, with the
significations of their names and years, which you shall perceive serves to
great purpose.

Fathers. Significations. Years. 1 Sem renowned. 600. Genesis 11.11. 2 Arphaxad
healing. 438. Genesis 11.13. 3 Sale peace 433. Genesis 11.15. 4 Heber pilgrim. 464.
Genesis 11.17. 5 Peleg divided. 209. Genesis 11.19. 6 Regue breaking. 207. Genesis
11.21. 7 Sarug palm trees. 200. Genesis 11.23. 8 Nahor angry or dry. 119. Genesis
11.25. 9 Terah a wretch. 70. Genesis 11.26. 10 Abram. a high father. 175. Genesis
25.7.

Now you must learn what may be said particularly of these Fathers.

Sem was Melchisedech King of Salem, who lived 600. years, who was Noah's Son.

SEm was a perfect figure of Christ, without father and without mother, in
respect of his great age, whose kindred was unknown to any man, when Lot was
taken prisoner, for he was before the flood, and lived a Graundfather in Abram
his time of eight degrees. At the slaughter of the Kings he might well be
renowned; for when all Nations were at variance round about him, he was unto
them at Salem a sight of peace, he ruled with great wisdom and dexterity,
like the Son of God; he outliued all that knew him. None of Chams house could
resemble the Son of God, nor any of Iaphets house, whose Religion came from
Salem.

The 2. promise concerning Christ.

SAint Paul meant when he said that Melchisedech was without father and without
mother, nothing else but to call the Jews to mind, who (in their Story) was
the true figure of Christ, without father and without mother. Sem lived until
50. years of Jsaac his age, to teach Religion. Blessed be the God of Sem. Genesis
9.26.

Saint Paul charge men to consider of him, and to compare him with Abram,
which cannot be, if he be indeed without father and mother. Read more Luke
3. Haebr. 5.6.7.

Heber was a rare man, 2. seuens from the creation, a double Henoch, he was the
4 after the flood.

So is Judah the 4. from Iaacob, of whom Christ came.

Mark always the number 4. and make your comparison.

The Hebrew tongue remained in him, whence he had his name, at the confusion of
tongues, which enlarged his glory. Again, none that ever were before him,
lived after him.

In his time Babel was built, by the curse of Cham there they lost the glory
of their name, which was turned to shame. Thence they were scattered over the
world into 70. companies, where afterward they were in bondage 70. years.
There their ages were again halfed the 2. time.

To this you may refer the fall of Angels, who by pride surmounted above
their Creator, seeking to enlarge their glory, but thereby it was diminished
greatly.

The like may be said of Adam, who coueted to be over wise, became a very
fool, and coveting all, lost all.

The like of Jsrael, who not contented with the Lord, desired to be governed by
man, had an hypocrite for their King.

Abram was a new setter up of Religion in his time, as was Seth in the old
world; he was the 10. from Noah, and the 7. before Moses, showing therein, that
in 10. he was on earth the highest account, and in 7. the holiest by Christ.

Here mark 10. and 7. and confer them elsewhere with the like numbers.

He overcame four Kings with his own household.

To this you may call to mind the conquest of Joshua, who with a small company
subdued mighty Nations; and especially to Christ Jesus, who by himself,
conquered all the world and the power of Satan to deliver the Captive.

He had the Promise concerning Canaan, and concerning Christ to come. God
changed his name Abram, a high father, to Abraham a father of many Nations;
declaring thereby, the unsearchable riches and mercies of the father in Christ.

Here Ages were the third time halfed.

Read more Ioh. 8. Luke 16. Act. 7. Romans 4. Haebr. 7.11. Matthew. 1.

Abram had two sons, Ismael and Isaac: Isaac was a son by the free woman,
which was borne by promise, who being offered and not slain, is a figure of
Christ, who was killed, and behold alive. Revel. 5.6.

Abram is a figure of God the Father, who spared not his only son. Jsaac is
the longest liver after Heber, and lived longer than his father, to show that
he was the child of promise, and by relation closely to (...) the aeternall
joy appointed to every one of the same covenant. Romans 9.

Ismael was borne of the bond woman, and both brothers has a great relation to
the 2. Testame^ts, the calling of some freely of his mercy, and the rejecting
of many other according to upright justice, which was signified by casting
Jsmael and Hagar out of Abrams house. Read Gal. 4. yet he became a Nation of
12. Dukedomes in the land of Chush.

Isaac had two sons at one time, Iaacob and Esau, who did import and signify
two Nations: to wete, the Jews and the Gentiles: the one was chosen by the
free mercy of God, the other left to condemnation, that the purpose of God
might stand. Romans 9.11.

Of Iaacob which is called Israel. Read Matthew. 1. Luke 1.2.4. Joh. 1.4. Romans
9.11. 1 Cor. 10, 11. Gall. 6. Act. 2.13.21.

The other Fathers are not recited in the new Testament, nor in the old, but
only to prove the line of Christ whole from Noah to Abram, of whom he should
come according to the flesh.

The 3. promise concerning Christ.

IN the 10. Age from Sem, Abram lived, to whom GOD said, Jn thy seed shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed. Genesis 12.

Sem lived 150. years in Abrams time, to teach him in the right use of that
promise which God had made unto him many years before. Genesis 11.10 to 27.

Terah was 130. years when he begat Abraham. 11, 32.12.4, etc. Act. 7.4. and
he lived unto the 50. year of Jsaacs age.

Abram being 110. years old Genesis 21.5. lived to teach Isaac 75. years after.
Genesis 25.7

Isaac being 60. years old was borne Jaacob, Genesis 25.26. Abram was then alive
and lived 15. years to teach Jaacob.

These sons of Sem with their posterity are cast out of the holy line, who
were deadly enemies to their kindred. Genesis 10.22, 23.

Elam their issue and posterity Elamites, or Persians. Asshur Assirians. Lud
Lidians. Aram Aramites, or Sirians.

IAphet the son of Noah, and his sons: of these were the Isles of the
Gentiles, every man after his tongue, and family. Genesis 10.2, 5.

Gomer their issue or posterity. Tartarians. Magog Turks, Scythians. Madai
Medes.

Iauan their issue and posterity, read Ezech. 38 1, 2, 3, etc. 39.1, 2, People
of Asia and Graecia. Tuball Read Ezech. 27.12, 13. Mesech Tiras

CHam the Son of Noah, and his Sons. Genesis 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, etc.

Chush their issue and posterity. Nimrod a mighty hunter, the builder of
Babel. Genesis 10.8. Misraim Egyptians in Hebrew Misraims. Put Black Moors.
Canaan Canaanites, Perizites and so forth, as Genesis 10.

Here may you see the great wisdom of GOD, by ruling the hearts and tongues
of these Fathers to give their Children such names, as might in it teach a true
form and proportion of his Church, as he did by the other 10. Fathers before
the flood: which being laid and chained equally together, makes up a short
account of Faith and sum of Religion. It shows to all the world the
providence of God, and it enforces men of good conscience, to give their
children significatiue names, for imitation and examples sake.

Noah having found favor with GOD, above many thousand generations, and
perceiving by a spirit of Prophecy, that his son Sem, the eldest in
account, should be blessed, and of great fame with God and men, he named him
Renowned.

Sem perceiving the purpose of his father to be fallen true in him, and knowing
that perfect Renown stands in the Saving health of the soul, to make his
faith known, he named his son Healing.

Arphaxad being thus named, to show his Religion, that health and salvation
stands by the persuading of Gods justice in Christ, he called his son,
Peace.

Sale being well assured that he was at perfect peace with GOD, as all the
faithful were, and yet seeing their trouble and misery in this world, he
called his Son Pilgrim.

Heber having many singular prerogatives in himself, and foreseing division of
the people for their pride in building Babel, he named his son Dividing.

Peleg perceiving that immediately upon division and dissolution, comes a
starting from the laws of GOD, and a cutting or dismembring from the Church,
he named his son Breaking.

Regu declares his own stay and sound continuance in the Covenant, though
the wicked break and are broken off as rotten branches: he calls his son
Palm Tree.

Sarug was springing and sprouting, he was prosperous and goodly as a Palm
tree among the trees of the Forest: and although nothing could diminish the
force of his faith, yet he called his son Dry.

Nahor being easily moved with displeasure and anger, and dry in respect of
any good fruit without the Lord, he saw that the son of such a father was
to be called, Wretch.

Terah although indeed a poor miserable wretch, and subject to corruption,
because of sin in himself, yet by grace saved, as by testimony of his
Sons name did import, whom he named a high Father.

To every one of these may be called to mind all places of Scripture of like
sense, and so make use thereof: as Renowned, Peace, Dividing, Breaking, Palm
trees for Constancy, etc.

The years how long these Fathers lived serves to great purpose, otherwise
the holy Ghost had not made account thereof so plain.

Therefore mark well the same, and the profit will be yours greatly.

3. Period.
The Argument or sum of this Period.
REad Genesis 29, 30. there you shall see a Church in the number of 12. of the
seed of Abram, who are called in scripture by diverse names, as Vine, Garden,
Vineyard, a Royal nation, a peculiar people, Kings and Priests, etc. The
Majesty of God did keep them as the Apple of his eye, he wrote them upon the
Palm of his hands, he set them as a Signet on his finger, and he wrote their
names in the book of life.

Patriarchs. Significations. 1 Ruben The L. looked upon my tribulation, my
husband will love me. Ge. 29.32 2 Simeon The Lord heard that J was hated. 33. 3
Leui Mine husband will love me and keep me company. 34. 4 Judah Praise the
Lord. 25. 5 Dan God gave sentence on my side Genesis 30.6. 6 Nepthali Excellent
wrestling, J got the upper hand. 8. 7 Gad A company comes. 11. 8 Asher
Blessed am J, for the daughters will love me. 13. 9 Isachar GOD has given me
my reward. 18. 10 Zabulon GOD has endowed me with a good dowry. 20. 11 Joseph
GOD has taken away my rebuke. 23, 24. 12 Benjamin The son of my sorrow. 35,
18.

When you miss them by their names, you shall know them by their
significations, as you read.

Read Genesis 49, there their Father Jacob at his death gave them several
blessings aunswerable to their names, and withal a Prophecy in another sort,
what should come unto them in the later days, by giving them these Arms and
Cognizances according to their Kindred and Tribes, whereby you may know them. And
the cause why he so blessed them is laid down directly: which I pray you for
your own profit to read, and mark the Story well.

Patriarchs. Arms. Chapters. 1 Ruben water. Genesis 49.4. 2 Simeon a Sword. Genesis
49.5. 3 Leui a Book. Genesis 49.5. 4 Judah a Lion. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 5 Dan an
Adder. Ge. 49.16, 17. 6 Nepthali a Hind. Genesis 49.21. 7 Gad a Banner. Genesis
49.19. 8 Asher Bread. Genesis 49.20. 9 Isachar an Ass. Genesis 13.14. 10 Zabulon a
Ship. Genesis 13. 11 Joseph a fruitful bough Genesis 49.22. 12 Benjamin a Woolfe.
Genesis 49.27.

Many times you shall read of these Tribes not by their names, nor by their
significations, but by their Arms, which you must mark, for thereby you shall
know them.

Read all Deuteronomy. 33. where Moses that kingly Prophet at his death blesses
also the same 12. Tribes, ratifying also their former blessings, and enlarging
the same by many regal notes, whereby you may also know them, where they are
dispersed in the Bible, in what sort they lived, and where they died.

Here you have the number of 12. wherein many excellent things were done,
which you are carefully to mark, by comparing them as you read,
particularly. First the number: As

In the Creation GOD was mindful of these 12. Tribes before they were: for as
they went to Canaan he brought them to Elim, where was 12. Fountains. He
divided the year into 12. Months. He caused them to take 12. stones out of
Jordan. There were 12 stones in Aarons breast. 12. Apostles. Thus of all the
rest.

Now mark a brief rehersall of every Tribe, by the observation whereof, you
shall by comparison direct your memory to many other such like.
RVben lost his prerogative, because he went up to his fathers bed, therefore
he was as light as water. Genesis 49.4.

To this you may apply all places of fleshly affections or light behavior.

Simeon Leui. THeir wrath was fierce against Joseph, but Leui afterward
repented and showed tender affection to Joseph: he destroyed I dolatrie,
therefore he had a blessing in Moses will. Simeon was still cruel, therefore
when he came to Egypt he was put in prison. Also his sin with the Suhamites
was great, and seeing he never repented, he was justly cut off. Genesis 49.5, 6,
7.

IVdah has a prerogative that his brethren should praise the Lord, yet who
looser tha^ he, who lay with his daughter Thamar: wherein are manifest the
gifts of grace, and not of nature: for if Judah had been rare of godliness, then
the prerogative of nature might serve to cause Christ to come of him. Genesis
49.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

To this you may bring all places of praising God.

DAn when the Tribes are sealed Revel. 7. is left out, whereby it is thought
that Antichrist should come of him: he caused the first Idolatry, and in this
Tribe it continues until the removing of the Arc from Shiloh. Genesis 49 17, 18.

To this you may refer all places that concern Superstition and Idolatry.

NEpthali, is a Hind let go, giving goodly words. Genesis 49.21. which thing was
performed with Baracke of his Tribe, and Deborah of Ephraim, who sang for the
overthrow of Sisera, at the waters of Magedda. Judge. 4, 6.5.

GAd, he shall lead an Host of men, or a company comes. Genesis 49.19. This
was performed when Ruben, Gad and Manasses gave an overthrow to the Hagarines.
Joshua. 1.21.

ASser was a Farmor, he provided bread and pleasures for a King. Genesis 49.20.

ISachar was contented to live under tribute, like an Ass under two bindens,
rather than by seeking glory in resisting evil. Genesis 49.14.

ZAbulon was a Merchant, and delighted in Ships, he dwelt near the river
Tharsis where was gold. Genesis 49.13.

Joseph was a goodly man and a chaste, he had the spirit of Revel he had favor
with the master of the prison. Genesis 49.22.

So had Daniel.

Joseph his name was changed.

So was Daniels.

Joseph was falselie accused.

So was Christ.

Thus you must remember more by particulars, whereby you may compare. etc.

There were six Judges of this Tribe, by which glory, his posterity began to
despise the Tribe of Judah.

Joseph was sold.

So was Christ.

Benjamin, the son of my sorrow. Genesis 49.27, 28. Iaacob calls him, the son
of my right hand. Moses calls him, the beloved of the Lord. The Temple was
built in this Tribe. In this Tribe was the first King, he continued one of two,
when 10. fell away. Hester came of this Tribe.

So did Paul.

All the whole Story of the Bible from Abram to Christ is contained by these,
with their Actions good or evil, and their Religion.

Now mark their peregrination.

Israel was borne in Canaan. Israel lived 400. years in Egypt and returned
into Canaan; from thence they were carried captive to Babel or Babylon, whence
their father Abram was called, where they lived 70 years. They were restored to
Canaan and there died.

Adam fell in Canaan, Christ was promised in Canaan, Christ was borne in
Canaan, he went into Egypt, returned into Canaan, and there died, to deliver
Israel from their everlasting bondage.

To this you may refer the uncertain state of the Church in this world.

It serves to prove the providence of God, who determines every man's abode,
the time, the place, and the cause of his death in his everlasting Counsel.

Enemies in their time.
Ismael Midianites. Judge. 8.24. and their race. Esau

The continuance of this Story is sure. Galat. 3.17.

Christ shined in Egypt.

Iaacob lived 17. years in Egypt, teaching his people concerning Christ.

Job lived in Egypt. Genesis 47.28. By faith he saw Christ a far off, which
made him to offer. Job. 1.5. and to teach his sons the same.

4. PERIOD.
Read Exodus 12. the going of Israel out of Egypt toward Canaan: in which
journey you shall direct your memory to all that was done in 40. years. They
pitched their Tents in 42. places, whereof some were pleasant, and some
unpleasant: so is our journey to that heavenly house whose builder and maker
is God.

Here I have laid down what was done in every standing, whereby you may
compare them.

Ramases signifies worms meat: such is our nature, Exodus 12.37, etc. 13.18,
19. Mark the Passover which was eaten there. Read Luke 14. Ioh. 12.13.21. 1.
Cor. 5.11. Revel. 19.

Compare it with the Lords supper.

Succoth signifies poor Cottages: so are our habitations. God directs all
men's goings. Exodus 13.21, 22. Read Haeb. 11.1. Pet. 2. to an heavenly house.
1. Cor. 10. Mat. 2.

Etham signifies hard ground: so are our worldly commodities. Exodus 13.20.

Maarah signifies Bitterness: so after a little comfort we fall into trialls
again, showing us that the grace of worldly things lasts not. Exodus 15.23,
etc. All the waters were bitter.

Elim signifies strong hearts: so God encourages the wearied and weak. There
were 12. Fountains, and 70. Palm Trees, putting them in mind of the 70 that
came out of Egypt, and of the 12. Tribes. Exodus 15.27, etc.

Syn signifies Thornie: thereby GOD taught them and us that the cares and
pleasures of this life, are hindrances to life everlasting. Exodus 16.1, etc.

Rephidim signifies Temptation: there there was no water, there GOD proved
them. Exodus 17.

Read Luke 4.5.15. Joh. 6.7. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Timo. 6. Phile. 2. Iam. 1. 2.
Peter 2. Revel. 3.

Sinai, signifies Everlasting temptation, there the Law was given 430. years
after the promise made to Abraham. Exodus 19. Numb. 33.

Read Matthew. 22.23. Luke 2.16. Joh. 1.7.18, 19. Romans 2.3.4.6.7.8.13. 1. Corin.
15.6. Ephe. 2. 1. Timo. 1. Haebr. 7.9, 10. Iam. 24.

Which Law was divided into

1. Moral not removed by Time. 2. Judicial altered Place. 3. Ceremonial
abrogated Person.

In reading of the Law consider well these three aforesaid: mark well the
difference betwixt them.

Times principal, the feasts of Sabaoths. Exodus 16.23, 24, to 30. Leuitic.
23.3, 7, 8. Sabaoths of weeks. Deuteronomy. 16.9, to 12. Passover. Exo. 12. Leuit.
23.5, 6. Deuter. 16.1, 2, to 8.2. King. 23.21, 22, 23. Tabernacles. Leu. 23.34,
etc. to 43. Deu. 16.13, 14, 15, 16 Haeb. 9.2. Iubile years. Leuitic. 25.8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Places principal Temple. 1. Kin. 6. 2. Sam. 24.16. to 25. 1. Cro. 3.1. Ezech.
41. Court. Exodus 27.9, 10, to 18.40.8, etc. 1. King. 7.12. Altar. Number. 4.11.
Deuteronomy. 16.21, 22. 1. Cron. 6, 49. 2. Cron. 4.19. Tabernacle. Exodus 26.1, 2, to
37.33.7, 8, to 23, 40. Number. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Jos. 18.1. 1. Sa. 22. Arc. Exodus
25.1, 2, 3, to 40. Nu. 4.1, 2, to 15.6, etc. 1 ki. 8.1, 2, to 7. Nu. 10.33, to
36. Jos. 3.6, to 17. 1. Sam. 4.6, 7. Holy of holiest. Exodus 26.33, 34, to 37.
Number. 4,4. 1. kin. 6.19, to 36. Haeb. 9, 3.
Persons principal. Aarons apparel. Exo. 28. Leuits office. Jos. 3, 3. Number. 3
7, to 11.4.2, 20. 1. Cro. 15. to 20. 2. Cro. 7.6. Their habitation. Josh. 21.1,
2, etc. Creatures for sacrifices. Leuit. 2.2, 3, etc. 3, 4, 6, 7, 11.

THese particulars being well and advisedly considered by Books and Chapters,
as is laid down, will greatly open unto you the chiefest effects and purposes
of the law. Withal, you shall be thereby called to mind of other such like
places else where, every of which particulars being spiritually applied, and
interpreted by the Gospel, must of necessity establish and confirm a weak and
a troubled soul.

Christ was known and preached in the Law.

The Lamb eaten Exo. 12. figured Christ most plainly, which was promised to
Abra^ the self same day 430 years before. Exo. 12. Gal. 3.17, 18. In which day
the Jews returned from Babel. In which day Christ was killed, the which Moses
knew very well: therefore he said, This day shall be unto you a remembrance,
etc. Exodus 12.14.

Manna, Exodus 16.15. The water out of the stone 17.6. signified Christ. 1. Cor.
10.3. Their offerings pointed to Christ. Leuit. 16 Numb. 19. Haeb. 9.

The Brazen Serpent Numb. 21.6, to 10. signified Christ. Job. 3.14, 15. Aaron
the hie Priest Exodus 28.29. Christ Haebr. 4.14. In Mount Sinai by plain laws,
saying: I am the Lord thy God, which pointed to Christ, for God the Father in
justice was to them as a consuming fire. Again, I will send an Angel before
thee. Exodus 23.20. The Angel of the Covenant says Malach. 3.1. S. Paul
pointing to this time and to this people said, As the Gospel was preached unto
us, even so was it unto them. Haeb. 4.2.

Iotbatha signifies a Turning away. There Chorah, Dathan, etc. rebelled. Numb.
16.1, 2, 3.33.34.

Read Act. 7. Romans 9.13. 2. Timo. 2.3. Iam. 4. 1. Pet. 5.

Hor signifies Declaring, or showing, a Mount where Aaron died 14. years
after he came from Egypt. Numb. 20, 22.33.37. showing the death of that
perpetual Aaron, and high Priest Christ Jesus.

Zalmonah signifies the Shadow of a portion: there they loathed Manna, etc.
Numb. 21.1.5. There they were stinged. 6. etc.

Read Ioh. 3. 1. Cor. 10. Luke 10.

Moah signifies of the Father, who was Lots son of his eldest daughter, of
whom came the wicked Moabites Israel falling to Idolatry are overcome by the^
and so brought into subjection: there they commit whoredom with the daughters
of Madian: there Balaac hired Balaam, etc. Numb. 27.10, 11. etc. 33.44.

Read Romans 1. 1. Cor. 5.6.10. 2. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. 1. These 4. Reu.
2.14.17, 18. Heb. 12.

The rest of the standings seem to no such purpose, as these.

5. Period.
Wherein consider a Conqueror. Land conquered.


Joshua the Conqueror succeeded Moses, he was one of the twelve that viewed the
Land, and one of the two that believed. He was 67 years when he began, and
continued 17 years. Moses called him Thesus, because he was to be a figure of
Christ Jhesus. In him all the promises to Abram and to others concerning
Canaan, was fulfilled. Moses by the Law showed them that good Land, but Joshua
brought them into it: to show forever, that the Law brings no man to
heaven, but Ihesus Christ.

The Land conquered, it was exceeding fruitful, pointing to the land of the
living. Strong people as Giants. 324. great Cities. 31. Kings: a proportion of
Satan's force, of the Captivity in Aegipt and in Babylon.

Canaan was a place that lacked nothing which was in the world. Jud. 18.10.
Compare it with the kingdom of heaven.

It was seven years in conquering, as appears by the words of Chaleb,
saying Forty years old was I, when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me
from Kadesbarnea to epsy the Land, etc. Joshua. 14, 7. Look Number. 13.27.

The space that we came from Kadesbarnea was 38. years, etc. Deuteronomy. 2.14, etc.

Add 7. to 40. and to 38. that makes up 85. Calebs age. Joshua 14.10.

Here is a comparison, as the Land was in conquering 6. years, and at rest
the seventh: so God in six days wrought, and rests the seventh. This is
the state of Christians, and the course of their life.

6. Period.
Here you shall have in the book of Judges by succession thirteen
Governors, who were stirred up to be deliuerers of the poor oppressed people
of God. They were men of great faithfulness and courage, as the Story does
witness. The sins of the people were such and so grievous, as God did
greatly punish by men that were twice worse than themselves. This Story of the
Judges, serves very well to show the judgment of God against obstinate
sinners, and his mercies to the penitent. If you mark the Story well, you
shall find it full of weighty matters: and by many particulars therein, you
shall be called to remember other places of like sense and quality.

Here I have distinguished the Judges from the Oppressors, the time how long
the one and the other reigned: whence the Judges were, and who the oppressors
were: as is expressed in their several Stories: in which you must be perfect.

1. Oppressor.THe Philistines, the Canaanites, the Sidonians, the Heuites, and
Chusan of Mesapotamia. Judge. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Under whom they served.
8. years. 1. Judge. OThoniel of the Tribe of Judah, delivered Jsrael, and set
them at rest forty years. Judge. 3.9, 10, 11.
2. Oppressor. EGlon the King of Moab was stirred up against them, whom they
served 18. years, Judge. 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 2. Judge. EHud of the Tribe of
Benjamin, delivered them, and they had peace four score years Judge. 3.17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
3. Oppressor. IAbin King of Canaan, and Sisera his Captain. He had nine
hundred Chariots of iron. He vexed Jsrael 20. years. Judge. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. 3.
Judge. DEborah a Prophetess reigned with Baracke of the tribe of Nepthali, she
being of the tribe of Ephraim, destroyed the Army of Sisera, and Sisera
himself was slain by a a woman And Iabin the King was also destroyed. The Land
had rest forty years. Judge 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
etc.
4. Oppressor.THe Madianites prevailed against Israel, and vexed them
grievously seven years. The Amalakites and they of the East: Judges 6.1*2, 3,
4, 5*6. Their chief Princes were Oreb and Zeb 7, 25. Zeba and Zalmonah Kings
of Madian 8, 5. 4. Judge. GEdeon of the Tribe of Ephraim, was especially called
by an Angel from the threshing of wheat, to thresh and beat the enemies of
Gods people: whose authority was miraculously confirmed. With a few he
destroyed many in number as the grasshoppers. The Country was in quietness in
his days full forty years. He was called Ierubbaal. Judge. 6.11, 12, 13, etc.
7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. 32. 5. Judge. ABimelech of the
Tribe of Ephraim. He slew his brethren: for the which he was slain himself by
a woman with a stone, after he had reigned 3. years. Judge. 8.33, 34, 35.9.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. 6. Judge. TOla of the Tribe of Jsachar, he judged Israel
twenty and three years. Judges 10.1, 2. 7. Judge. IAir of the Tribe of
Manasses, a Gileadite, ruled Israel twenty two years. Judges 10.3, 4, 5.
5. Oppressor.THe Philistines and the Ammonites vexed and oppressed Israel 18.
years. Judges 10.6, 7, 8, 9. 8. Judge. IEpthe of the Tribe of Ephraim,
delivered Israel, and ruled them in peace 6. years. Judge. 11.1, 2, 3, etc.
12.1, 2, etc. 9. Judge. ABesan of Judah delivered them from their enemies, and
kept the Land in quietness seven years. Judge. 12.8, 9, 10. 10. Judge. EGlon of
the tribe of Zabulon judged Israrael 10. years. Judge. 12.11, 12. 11. Judge.
ABden of the Tribe of Manasses, ruled Israel in peace eight years. Judges
12.13, 14, 15.
6. Oppressor.THE Philistines vexed them sore forty years. Judge. 13, 1. 12.
Judge. SAmpson of the Tribe of Dan was made their King or Captain after a
strange and most miraculous sort, and continued most triumphantly judging
Israel twenty years. Judges 13.3, 4, 5, 6. etc. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 15.1, 2,
3, 4. etc. 16.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. 13. Judge. HEli of the Tribe of Leui, delivered
Israel and preserved them in peace 40. years 1. Sam. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The Judges continued in Storic most sure and certain 450. years, reckoning
withal the years of the Oppressors. Act. 13, 12.

If you mark the particular Story of these Judges and Oppressors, it will not
only make you perfect in this book of Judges: but also by comparison direct
you to many more books for matter of like quality.

7. Period.
Here J will speak briefly and particularly of the Kings.

Saul signifies, desired of the people* he was of the Tribe of Benjamin,
which was a great prerogative to that Tribe being the least and the last: he
was an hypocrite, and an open persecutor. 1. Sam. 10.13, 18, 19.20

David believed God, and his kingdom was reckoned when the Arc was recovered
to Judah at Easter. So Christ at Easter was proclaimed King general: he was of
the Tribe of Judah, of the root of Iesse borne in Bethelem. He killed a Bear,
a Lion, and a Philistin that defied all Israel. Herein he is a figure of
Christ. He had many enemies, therein he is a figure of the Church. 1. Sam. 16,
17. David was upright, except in one thing. 1. King. 15, 5.

Solomon signifies Peaceable: so was his kingdom: for his wisdom and order
in Religion he was a figure of Christ: he was extremely wicked. 1. King. 11,
4.5. Yet he was saved. 2. Sam. 7, 13.14. Herein he was a figure of the Church.

He laid the foundation of the Temple in Moriah, 2. Chro. 3, 1. where Adam was
created, where Isaac was offered, Genesis 22.2. where Christ died, where
afterward the holy kingdom was divided into 2. parts, 1. King. 12. according
to the Lords words unto Solomon. 1. King. 11.11, 12, 13.14, 15. But after 490.
years expired, it was thrown together again, as in Ezech. 37.16, 17, 18. etc.

Thus have I distinguished the Kings in their order as they succeeded, who were
wicked, who were godly, and what Prophet, one, or mo was under every King,
whereby the books of the Kings being laid with the Prophets, the one expounds
the other plainly and easily, if you mark what sins the people committed,
what happened to them or to their Kings, and what not, whereof the Prophets did
by particulars speak of.

Kings of Judah.
REhoboam succeeded Solomon. The Tribe of Judah, and the Tribe of Benjamin
claue to him: thence it was called the kingdom of Judah, his throne was at
Jerusalem: he was 14. years when he began to reign and continued 17. years 1.
Kings 12.1, to 25. 21, he and his people were wicked. 22.

Sesack King of Egypt came in the fifth year of his reign and spoiled
Jerusalem, and the Temple, and carried away their treasures. 1. King. 14.25, 26,
27, 28. He died 31.

Abia his son reigned 41. years, ye was godly. 1. King. 15.9, 10, etc.

Asa his son reigned 41. years, he was godly, 1. King. 15.9, 10, etc.

Ahaziah reigned 1. year. 2. King. 8.25, 26, wicked. 27. Iehu slew him 9, 27.
he is also called Ochosias his mother Athalia the daughter of Omri king of
Israel

Elisha prophesied, 2. Kings 8, 24. etc. 9. etc.

Athalia his mother reigned six years, she slew all the Kings sons saving
Ioash who was hid from her 11, 2. she her self was slain. 11. 3, 16.

Ioash when he was 7. years old 11. 17, 18 19 godly, and the people, he
reigned 40. years 12, 1. etc.

Amasiah his Son reigned 29. years. 2. K. 12, 21.14, 2. slain 14, 19 godly
14, 3.

Ahasiah or Vziah reigned 52. years 14, 21 godly. 15, 2. 3. 4. died, 7.

Esai prophesied.

Hosea, Amos.

Iothan his son reigned 16. years, 15, 7. godly. 34. 35. 36.

Micha, Osea, Esai prophesied.

Ahaz his son reigned 16. years. 2. King. 15, 38. his people wicked. 16, 2.3.

Nahum, Esai, OseaEzec. Micha. prophesied.

Hezekiah his son reigned 29. years, 2. K. 16, 20.28, 2. died 20, 21. godly.

Esai, Osea, Micha, prophesied.

Senacherib came up against Judah and Jerusalem and took them 18, 13.

Esai prophesied. 19, 2

Manasses, Hezekiah his son reigned 55. years, he began at 12. wicked. 1.
King. 21. he repented. 2. Chro. 33.

Jn the 3 year of his reign Esai was Prophet.

Abacuck in the 36. year of his reign prophesied.

Ammon his son at 22. years began, and reigned two years wicked. 2. King. 21,
19. etc

Josiah his son at 8. years old began, and reigned 31 years godly. 22, 23.

Pharo Necho king of Egypt slew him. 29.

Zephania prophesied.

Jeremy began in the thirteen year of his reign.

Zephaniah in the 20 year, Abdias in the 26 year.

Iehoaz his son began at 23. year, and reigned three months wicked.

Pharo Necho imprisoned him, and set the land to tribute. 2. King 23, 31. etc.
He placed

Eliakim in his stead, and changed his name into Iehoiakim, he was 11. years
under taxes to the King of Egypt wicked, after that the time of their
captivity came, spoken of 20, 17. 23, 27. at Babel. There Jeremy, Ezech. Dan.
prophesied. Esai.

King of Babel made Mattamiah his uncle king in his stead, and changed his
name Zedechia, when he was 21 years old, he reigned eleven years wicked: he
rebelled against the King of Babel: in the 9. year of his reign the City was
besieged, he pulled out his eyes, bound him in chains, and burnt up the city.
2. King. 24, 25.

Jeremy his prophecy is accomplished. 25, 11.

Ezech. Dan. Hagg. prophesied.

Kings of Israel.
Jeroboam was the other K. ten Tribes held with him, thence it was called the
kingdom of Israel, whose seat was at Samaria, 1. King. 12.12, 13, 16. he and
his people were wicked. 1. Kin. 12.26, 27, 28, 29, etc. He reigned 20. years.
Here is a proportion of the Church of Antichrist. ten against 2:

Nadab his Son reigned two years. 2. King. 14.20. he was wicked 15.25.

Achab his Son reigned wicked. Iesabell his wife 1. Kin. 16.28, etc. Eliah
prophesied. 1. K. 17.18.19.20.21

Micha prophesied, 1. King. 22.9, 14, 15.

Achab slain 34, 35.

Ahaziah reigned two years. 1. King. 22. 41, 51. wickedlie. 52. 2. King. 1.1,
2, 3. died. 17.

Eliah prophesied. 3, 4.

Jehoram the Son of Achab reigned because he had no son 2. King. 1, 17.12,
years 3, 1.

Eliah is taken up 2, 1. etc. and 3. year of his reign.

Elisha prophesied. 2. King. 3, 14. Kings of Aram besieges Samariah. 6, 24.
he was hurt and died 9, 24.

Iehu the Son of Iehosophat is anointed King by the Prophet Elisha. 2. King.
9, 1. etc he slaieth Iehoram King of Israel according to the word of the Lord.
1. Kings 21, 13. and Ahaziah king of Judah, 2. K. 9, 27. he slew Iezabel and
all Achabs brood 10. etc. godly: He died having reigned 25. years 36.

Iehoahaz his son reigned 17. years, 13, 1. wicked, and so died. 2. 9.

Iehoash his son reigned 16. years 13, 10. wicked. 11.

Elisha died the third year of his reign 13, 20.

Jerusalem is ransacked the second time: the same Iehoash took Amasiah King of
Judah, brake the walls, carried away their treasures, died. 2. Kin. 14, 13.
etc.

Jonah prophesied.

Jeroboam his son reigned 41. years, 14, 23. wicked, 24. died. 29.

Jonas, Amos prophesied.

Zachariah his son reigned six months 8, 15. wicked. 9.

Jonah prophesied.

Shallum the Son of Iabesh conspired against him, he reigned a month. 15.10,
11, etc.

Mehanaen killed him, and reigned ten years wicked. 15. 14, 15, etc.

Pekahiah his son reigned two years wicked. 15, 23. 24.

Pekah his captain reigned twenty years wicked. 15. 25, 27.

Hosea slew him, and reigned 9. years 15, 30. 17, 1. wicked.

Salmanaser king of Assurd besieged Samaria three years, and subdued them and
the King. 2. King. 17. etc. 18.9, 10, 11.

8. Period.
HEre all the world may see the vprightnes of Gods justice in the punishment of
sin, even in his own dear people, by giving them over into the hands of
such cruel Kings as would not spare them whiles they were under their
government. And here is set forth very clearelie the riches of his grace, and
the vnspeakablenes of his mercies, in stirring and raising the hearts of those
beastly and unnatural kings to lenity, to favor, and to liberality toward
them, (as he did to the Egyptians to lend them costly vessels and rich
jewels) whom they had before most bitterly ransacked and unnaturally robbed.
Here you shall see a true proportion of the Church of Antichrist, whose
earthly glory reached unto the heavens, and whose dominions mounted over all:
yet their end is with a flood or with fire, destruction irrecouerable. And who
sees not in this book the wonderful providence of GOD, and the work of his
aeternall spirit in Daniel, recording most exactlie all that was done and
spoken during their 70. years captivity, and whatsoever else was to be
performed thence forth to Christ.

In this Book of Daniel are two special things to be marked.

The one, what Kings ruled in the seventy years.

The other, what Kings ruled thence unto Christ.

Three kings during the captivity.
Nabucadnezzar. Dan. 1, 2, 3, 4. Euilmerodach. 2. Kin. 25, 27, Balthashar. Dan.
5, 8,
Nabucadnezzar saw in a vision a great Image, whose glory was excellent, and
the form terrible. Dan. 2, 31.

His head of fine gold. 32. His breasts and arms of silver. 32. His belly and
thighs of brass. 32. His legs of iron. 33. His feet part of iron and part
of clay. 33.
The head of Gold.
NAbucadnezzar a King of Kings, to whom GOD gave power, strength and glory.
Daniel 2.37, 38. For his greatness he is compared to a Tree, whose height
reached to the heavens, etc. Dan. 4.16, 17, 18. Dan. 7, 4. sees this great
King in a dream as a Lion, with Eagles wings plucked off: it was lifted up and
set upon his feet as a man, and a man's heart was given him, signifying his
unnatural affections and his cruelty. The other two Kings are referred in
comparison to this first King. Who Reigned just 45. years, as appears thus.
He took Iehoiachin King of Judah in the 8. year of his reign.

Euilmerodach his son who succeeded him, lifted up Iehoiachin out of prison
when he had so lain 37. years.

So you must put eight years in which Nabucadnezzer reigned, to thirty seven
years in which Iehoiachin was raised up, that makes up just 45. years the
whole reign of this first King.

Euilmerodach reigned 22. years.

Baltashar reigned 3. years. Dan. 8, 1.

Thus you see plainly the 70. years fully accomplished in the particular
reign of these three Kings, according to a prophecy. Jeremy 25, 12, 27, 7.

Now the head of Gold is gone off and quite taken away. The Kings of Babel are
extinguished, and the 70. years expired.

9. Period.
DAniel understanding that the seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem
were accomplished, he turned his face unto the Lord God, toward the City of
Jerusalem and the holy Mountain confessing the sins of the people, and
praying that his face might shine upon his Sanctuary, which had so long lain
wast and desolate, prescribed and foretold by Moses, Leuit. 26, 40. etc. 1.
King. 8, 46, to 54.

Whiles he was yet speaking unto GOD the Angel Gabriel came fleeing about the
time of the evening oblation, saying: Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people and upon thy holy City to bring in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9,
24.

Here is laid down a plain and an easy account of all the years from
Daniels vision 9, 21. at the Edict, unto the death of Jesus Christ the Prince
of Peace, which is very direct, if you mark it.

Every week has seven days. The Angel means for every day in the week
a year, seven days seven years, after the reckoning of the Iubile year.
Leuit. 29.8, 9, 10. The whole is 490 years.

The same Angel through the mercifulnes of God, for the more plainnes and
perspicuitie, deuideth the same seventy weeks into three parts, after this
manner, in Daniel, 9, 25.

The first part, from the going forth of the commandment that the people
Israel should be freed in the first year of Darius to build and finish the
Temple at Jerusalem, shall be seven weeks: that is to say, 49. years.

The Jews confess 46. years in which the Temple was a building, Ioh. 2, 20.
In the other first year they were hindered from their work. Ezra. 4. Nehemi.
4. In which three years of trouble Cirus reigned, Dan. 10.1, 2. Yet according
to the time prefixed it was finished. Ezra 6. Nehemias 7.8.9.10.11.12.13.

Arms and breasts of silver.
Part of the Image which Nabucadnezzar saw Dan. 2, 39. are 10. Kings of the
Medes and Persians, who were 130. years continuance after the Captivity,
which are these.

Cyrus, or Darius. Artaxerxes, or Cambises. Assuerus or Darius. Histaspes.
Zerxes.
These reigned 29. years. In the 20. year of the reign of Artaxerxes or
Darius, the Temple was finished being full 49. years where they troubled
Jsrael.

There were other Kings that made up the 130. years before mentioned after the
building, which were these.

Ochus. Artaxerxes. Ochus. Arses. Darius the Persian.
These goodly Kings like arms and breasts of silver, Daniel sees them like a
Bear with three ribs in his mouth, which said, Rise and devour much flesh.
So did they indeed devour the Saints of GOD. Daniel. 7, 6.

Now the arms and breasts of silver are cut off: Kings of Madai and Paras are
ended.

2. Part of Daniels division of Time. 9, 26. thus.

THreescore and two Weeks shall be a troublesome time, after the which the
Prince of peace, the King of glory, and the Messiah shall be slain: even he
shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary.

Jn this time the people of GOD suffer great persecutions.

The belly and thighs of Brass.
Does signify King Alexanders power.

TO this belongs the vision of Daniel, 8.3, 4. A Goat Buck with ahorne,
which being broken off, comes out in stead thereof four heads, signifying
Alexanders four Captains, fighting two to two: which two first is also the
legs of iron and claye, and their successors: and the fourth Beast with
ten horns. Alexander continued 6. years.

His legs of Jron.
IS the Beast which Daniel saw 7, 7. very fearful and strong with iron
teeth burst in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet, who was the
fourth kingdom in the earth subduing all to himself. 23.

The ten horns are ten Kings stronger than the Jews that shall rise out of
Siria and Egypt, whereof one is said to be a little horn, 8, 7, 11. boasting
and bragging against the most highest.

Iron like
1. S: Nicator. 2. A: Soter. 3. A: Theos. 4. S: Callicus. 5. S: Ceraunus. 6. A:
Negas. 7. S: Philop. 8. A: Epimanes.
Iauan. kings of Egypt iron like to make up the ten horns.

9. To: Lagie. 10. To: Philodelphus.
His feet part of iron and part of Clay.
Were (Jauan) Kings of Babel clay like, in number 12.

These Kings ruled as Beasts most beastly and unnaturally, and as iron very
strong and invincible two hundred ninety four years to Cleopatras death, who
confirmed Herod in Judah.

3. Part of Daniels division of Times.

He shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week: and in the midst
of the week he shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. Dan. 9, 27.

THese words has plain relation to Jesus Christ his Office and death, for
One week, as in the account aforesaid stands for seven years, a year for
a day.

In the midst of the same Week, that is to say, in the midst of this last
seven years, Christ was baptized, and did preach this last half seven,
confirming his authority with miracles, signs and wonders, until the same
three years, and half the end of Daniels week was ended.

In which he suffered his passion according as it was before decreed many
thousand years in the counsel of his Father, who testified of him unto all
Nations saying, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Now having generally, and particularly compared the old Testament with the
new: you shall in another sort plainly learn how to compare the New Testament
with the Old.

Legal. Ioh. Genesis Mat. Exodus Luke Leuit. Mar Number

Historical. act 1. Joshua 2. 3. 22 27 act 4. Judge. 8. 9. 12 21 act 10 Ruth 13
14 18 22 act 14 1. Sa.

2. Sa.

16 17 23 24 26 act 15 1. K.

2. K.

act all 1. Cr.

2. Cr.

act 10 Ezra 17 19 20 27 act 10 Nehe 17 19 20 27 act 25 Hest. 26

Sapientall. James. Job. 1. Pet. 2. Pet. 1. John 2 John 3. John Jude. Haebr.
Psalm. Galath. Prou.

Eccl.

Ephesians. Philip. Colloss. 1 Thessalonians. 2 Thessalonians. 1. Timo. 2. Timo. Titus. Phile.
Roman. all. Cant.

Prophetical. Revel. Daniel.

The other Prophets are to be compared with the Law, which is enlarged by
time, by place, and by persons, either past, present or to come, in this order,
Book and Chapter.

Prophetical. Legal. Esaias. 1, unto 28.6, Deuteronomy. 1, 1. 40, to 25. Exodus 18, 4,
3. 40, 27. to 16. of 41. Genesis 12. 42, 5, to 21. Genesis 1, 27, 6. to 14. of 28.
Exodus 1, 1. 43.22. to 23, of 44, Leuit. 1. 54, 1.10. Genesis 6, 8. 49.15. to 5. of
51. Deuteronomy. 7, 12. 54, 11. to 22. Deuteronomy. 11.26. 51, 12. to 12. of 52, 60. Deuteronomy.
16, 18. 61, 16. to 10. of 63, 26.7. 55, to 9. of 56, 29, 10.

Prophetical. Legal. Ierem. 1, 2, 3. to 26. Number. 30, 2. 7, 6. to 2, 8, 33, 2.
16, 19. to 14. of 17. Leuit. 6, 1. 32, 6. to 28. 26, 3. 34 8. to the end. 25,
1. 16, 13. to end. Exo. 21, 1. Ezech, 22, to 23, 15. 10, 1. 28, 25. to 30.
Leuit. 16, 43, 10. to the end. Exo 6, 2. 46, 13. to the end. 20, 20. Hosea 2,
1. to 22. Leui. 20, 1. 7, to 15. of 12. Numb. 1, 14, 2. to the end. Genesis 28,
10. Amos 2, to 9. of the 3, Deuteronomy. 29.10. 8. from 21. to end Genesis 37, 1. Obad
all Leuit 29.1. Zach. 2, 14. to 8.3, Genesis 32, 2. Mich. 3, 6, to 9, of 6. Numb.
8, 1. 22, 2.

These Books and Chapters of the old and new Testament do not agree by
comparison in all respects, but in some particulars. And therefore I have laid
down briefly the Argument of every Book in the new Testament, by the which
you may the more easily perceive the like in the old, and make your comparison
fit.

The Argument of S. Matthew.
1. The incarnation of Christ. 1, 2. 2. The office of John Baptist. 3. 3. The
doctrine and miracles of Christ. 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21. 4. The names and offices of the twelve Apostles. 10. 5. The reproof of ill
life. 7, 12, 14, 16. 6. The holy Supper instituted. 26. 7. The Passover and
resurrection. 27, 28.
All 4. Evangelists agree in this, which is a strong proof of the truth and
great dignity of Gods Word, by the length of time, and distance of place in
which it was written. One is more brief than the other, and one handles some
thing larger than the other.

1. Matthew the humanity of Christ, eight years after the ascension of Christ.
2. Mark is brief in all: he shows the end of the law, and deuideth the
Kingdom, 10. years after Christ's ascension. 3. Luke the Office of Christ, by
abolishing the works of the law, fifteen years after Christ. 4. John the
divinity of Christ, and the service of God in spirit 32. years after Christ.
THe Author of the 14. Epistles was Paul, of the Tribe of Benjamin, who was
honorable by birth, in respect whereof his parents named him after Saul the
first King of Israel. He was called Paul in respect of his notable actions in
converting Paulus Sergius the great Consul, as appears Act. 13. And for
another cause used in change of Religion, which I rather allow, to change their
names, as Joseph was called Saphnat, Daniel Balthazar, Ananias Sidrac, Azarias
Abednago, Misael Mesac. So Saul in the Law, Paul in the Gospel. He was
brought up exquisitely in the Law with Gamaliel, Act. 22. he lived very
orderly after his conversion. He wrote these Epistles in order as follows.

The Argument to the Romans
THe Romans were Jews and Gentiles embracing Christ in Rome, among whom were
many false teachers, which moved S. Paul to write exhorting them to take
heed thereof, and to increase in the knowledge of Christ, the dignity of
works in the Jews and in the Gentiles, of sin, of faith, of grace, of
justification by faith, and in conclusion, of salutations.

The Argument of the 1. Cor.
THe Corinthians had their original of Corinthus, who built that city, it was
a place greatly frequented. In that City was the Temple dedicated to the
Goddess Venus. There was that great notorious whore Lais, spoken of over all
the world; and there many other whores: yet in this City God had his Church.
Saint Paul continued there a year and 6. months preaching. But when he
departed into Syria, many false teachers entered in, and taught, that
whoredom, ryor, drunkenness, etc. was lawful, matrimony unlawful; and they
denied the resurrection. S. Paul hearing of this, wrote this Epistle to
withdraw them from all these evils by particulars, with exhortations to remain
in the doctrine he had taught them.

Argument of the 2. Cor.
HE excuses his long absence by diverse troubles which hindered him, he wills
to excommunicate him that was taken in adultrie, and he cleereth himself of
all blame toward them, he shows difference between the spirit and the
letter, between the old Testament and the new.

Argument of the Gallat.
THe Gallathians were people of Asia, after his departure thence, false
teachers pressed in, and taught that the Ceremonies of the Law were to be
kept, and they spoke evil of this holy Apostle thereby to deface his doctrine.
Which moved him to write unto them, discharging himself for the credit of his
calling, and confirming his doctrine, with the overthrow of their false
opinions.

Argument of Ephesians.
EPhesus was a famous City by the Sea of Ionius, where was a Temple dedicated
to the false Goddess Diana. S. Paul at his first coming stayed little there,
but at the second time he stayed 3. years: perceiving that God had many there
to be saved even among the Witches, Sorcerers, Inchaunters, etc. Whereby the
mercy of God appeared more abundantly. At his departure he left among them
Elders, and Timothy as their Bishop. This Argument agrees nearely with the
Romans and Gallathians.

The argument of the Philippians.
PHilip Macedon was the original of that City: they had domestical troubles
and diverse other losses for the Testimony of Christ, wherefore he exhorts
them to patience and watchfulness,

The argument of the Colloss.
THe Collossians were a people of that great City Collossa. Saint Paul was
never with them. They were taught by Epaphras, Onesimus and Titichus. S. Paul
heard that they were troubled with the Jews about Ceremonies, and with the
Gentiles about words and subtle Philosophy. Wherefore he wrote unto them to
confirm them in that they had learned concerning Christ, and to confute the
contrary.

The Argument of 1 Thessalonians.
THessalonica was a famous city of Macedonia, whence the people had their
name. He was among them but three Sabboths by reason of the Jews. He sent
Timothy unto them, by whom he understood of their constancy. Whereupon he
wrote unto them, exhorting them to patience, to love, to constancy, and to
consider well of the resurrection.

The Argument of 2 Thessalonians.
HE excuses his long absence, shows the manner of the resurrection, and the
coming of Christ: he dehorteth from curious questions.

The argument of 1. Timothy.
Timothy his Father was a Grecian, his mother a Jew, which was the cause that
he was not circumcised in his infa^cie according the law. His mother Eunica
and his grandmother Loida were very godly, wherein they brought him up. Saint
Paul his Master sent him in the Lords business to diverse places: in the end he
was left at Ephesus as their Bishop: to whom he wrote this Epistle about the
choice of Pastors in the Church.

The Argument of 2. Timothy.
Timothy did greatly mourn after Paul: he therefore did write to comfort
him, and withal to show him how he was holden in prison, which was the cause
that he came not to Ephesus according to his promise.

The Argument of Titus.
TItus was a Grecian borne, Saint Paul was his master, who left him at Creete
to constitute Ministers in every Parish, and to reform their manners. Titus
was a young man, therefore his master wrote this Epistle that he should do
nothing rashly. What kind of Pastors were to be allowed, and what not.

The Argument of Philemon.
PHilemon was of Collossentia, a rich man, a godly man, and a liberal, he had
a servant called Onesimus, who departed from him and stole his money: when he
heard S. Paul preach, he believed in Jesus Christ, and he confessed his fault.
Whereupon Saint Paul wrote to his master, exhorting him to forgive his servant.

The Argument of the Haebrues.
THere are diverse opinions concerning the authority hereof. Some say it is not
Canonical: some say it is not Paul's writing: some say it is Saint Paul's
Epistle, but not Canonical, because (say they) there is no mention of his
name, and the style is contrary. The truth is by the best and most godly
learned, that it is Saint Paul's writing and Canonical, because the matter is
consonant to the rest of his Epistles. The Graecians did so allow of it, and
the same was confirmed in the Council of Nicen. Nicephorus says, that it was
written in Haebrue by Saint Paul, and translated into Greek by Saint Luke,
who altered the style and method. Iraeneus who was Policarpus scholar said
the same, the truth thereof being received from Saint John, who was Policarpus
master: such was the obstinacy of the Jews resisting the doctrine of Christ.
That gave occasion to Saint Paul to write, exhorting them from the hardness of
their hearts: he magnifieth Christ above the Prophets, Moses, Aaron, Leui, and
all other offices, who fulfilled the prophecies, accomplished the law, and
offered a more perfect sacrifice than they all. Saint Paul speaks of
certain in the 6. Chapter, and 10. who had revolted from the known truth
wittinglie, willingly, stubbornlie and presumptuouslie, that were not by the
word of God to be saved, therefore he alters much of his style and phrase,
especially at the beginning and ending.

The Argument of James.
IN the 10. of Matthew mention is made of two James, the one was the son of
Zebedeus, the other, the son of Alpheus. It is certain the Author of this
Epistle was James the son of Alpheus, who is in that Chapter called Lebbeus
and Thaddeus. He is called the brother of Jude and the brother of our Lord,
Gal. 1, 19. He was the son of Mary Cleophas, who was sister to the Virgin
Mary. It is the phrase of Scripture to call Cousens, Brethren. This Epistle is
called Catholicall, because it is to all people. The sum thereof is to
instruct all men how to live, how to believe: He sets out the conversation
of those that are regenerated, of faith, of patience, and of their teachers.

The Argument of 1. Peter.
THis Peter was by all consent the author of this Epistle. He was called Simon
the son of John the Fisher: Christ named him Cephas, which is Peter. Mark. 3.
he was one of the Apostles and the chiefest for diverse causes. He speaks of
works after regeneration, as Saint James does: he descends into the duties
of each degree, and of the conversion of the Gentiles. It was written upon the
occasion that Siluanus being long with Saint Paul, and travailing to Babylon
met with Saint Peter, who delivered him this Epistle general, to Gentiles and
Jews.

The Argument of the 2. Epistle of Peter.
HE exhorts all men from day to day, and from degree to degree, to increase
in the works of regeneration, to beware of false teachers, the state of the
last times. He thought his death to be at hand, wherefore he wrote to the
glory of his master Christ. 2. Pet. 1.14, 15.

The Argument of the 1. Epistle of John.
THis John was one of the four Evangelists, he was the son of Zebedeus,
beloved of Christ and wrote the Revelation. He exhorts to faith, to
brotherly love, to try and approve the spirits, to avoid false teachers,
hypocrisy, small offenses, and to deck themselves with godly living.

The Argument of the 2. Epistle of John.
HErein he handles mutual love, the duty of widows, to beware of false
Teachers, a way to know them, and with whom is no fellowship laid down. He
wrote especially to a certain godly widow, who with her children and
household labored after Christ.

The Argument of the 3. Epistle of John.
IN this Epistle he exhorts his familiar friends and his host Gains, etc.
thanking GOD for the great comfort received at his hands, he laid him down as
a harborer of all that loved Jesus Christ. He exhorts to constancy, and to
beware of Tyrants.

The Argument of Jude.
HE was one of the Apostles, he instructs the godly to continue in well
doing. He shows the Justice of God against sinners and reuolters, as, the
Angels, the Jews, Zodome, etc.

The Argument of the Revelation.
THis book contains all the doctrine of the Prophets concerning Christ,
which was to be accomplished after his coming. The comfort that comes by his
death: how to know the false spirit, the battle between the Church and the
limbs of Satan, the marriage of Christ with his Saints, the providence of God,
and the force of his word.

Now, the very GOD of peace sanctify you throughout: and I pray God that your
whole spirit, soul and body, may be kept blameles unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it.
1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24.

FINIS.

