THE BLAZON OF IEALOVSIE. A Subject not written of by any heretofore. First
written in Italian, by that learned Gentleman BENEDETTO VARCHI, sometimes Lord
Chauncelor unto the Signorie of Venice: AND Translated into English, with
special Notes upon the same; by R. T. Gentleman.

ARIOST. in Orl. Furio. Cant. 31. Stanz. 1. Che dolce piu, che piu giocondo
Stato,
Saria, di quel, d'vn amoroso cuore?
Che viuer piu felice, e piu beato?
Che ritrouarsi in seruitu d' Amore?
Se non fosse l' huomo sempre stimulato
Da quel Sospetto rio, da quel Timore,
Da quel Martyr, da quella Frenesia,
Da quella Rabbia, detta GELOSIA?
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Busbie, and are to be sold at his Shop in
S. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet, 1615.

TO MY HONORABLE FRIEND, Sir EDWARD DIMMOCK Knight, the most worthy and
generous Champion unto the Sacred Majesty of Great BRITAIN, etc.
SIR, I present unto your judicious view, the Plague of Men, and the ancient
Disease of Women: a Subject known, but too-too well, to many, and yet not
written of by any heretofore, as far as I can find. Tasso touches it (here
and there) in his Works: and Ariosto glanceth at it (a little) in his ORLANDO
FVRIOSO; only this grave Author BENEDETTO VARCHI, has discoursed of it at
large. The draught is both Philosophical and pleasant; If it like you I
esteem the less what Others distaste therein. The ancient Romans used to
set forth the portratures of their best Friends in the foremost front of their
Palaces; and so I hope you will vouchsafe that I may blaze your name, in the
frontispice of my Book. Neither doubt I but that you will as kindly entertayne
it, as it is heartily recommended unto you, considering my meaning, and learded
Martials, is all one in this point: Quod non argentum, quod non tibi misimus
aurum,
Hoc faecimus causa (Stella diserte) tua
Quisquis magra dedit, voluit sibi magna remitti,
Fictilibus nostris exoner atus eris.
That we no Gold nor Silver do thee send,
It Was for thy sake (kind Stella) courteous Friend.
Who great things give, do look for great again,
Our trifting toys shall ease thee of that pain.


This Work then being but a trifle, my labor therein cannot be much, which,
nevertheless, if it be any, is only due to your true, courteous, and
bountiful Nature; to which not my self alone, but diverse other Gentlemen, as
well English as Strangers, were beholding for the kind Entertainment you gave
us at our being in Italy together. Accept then, this small Mite in part of a
greater amends. It is some comfort to an honest mind, to render what (to his
power) he can, although not what he should; and better to repay a small
Interest, then keep back Principal and All, as many Banckerupts (of good
Manners) use now a days to do. And thus with my best wishes for the good of
your Worthy self, and of your virtuous Lady, the true Parallel of all Courtly
Perfection, I end,

From my Lodging in Holborne, this 7. of November, 1614. Ingeniously devoted to
your Worship, R. T.

TO THE JUDICIOUS UNDERSTANDER: To the Ignorant READER: and to the base CARPER
whatsoever.
LEarned) to you, whose true Gentilitie
Is matched with Virtue in Affinity,
Into whose fluent Vain, the Muses nine
Distill all Knowledge, Humane and Divine,
Who have the gifts of Tongues to understand,
(Pure Linguists right) the state of every Land:
Whose Eglets Spirits to mount on high are found,
And not as fearful Swallow, low on ground:
Whose boundless Ocean of Intelligence,
Contains (of Arts) the subtle Quintessence.
Your courteous Nature, being so sweetly framed,
As it commends, what is worthier to be blamed:
To you alone, and unto none but you,
I offer up my Self, and Book, as due.
As for that golden Skonse with leaden Wit,
I scorn, for scorn, does Ignorance best fit.
Rich dunghill Midas with his Asses ears,
Who (with his Heels) not with Discretion hears:
The perfumed gilt-Spurre Muske-Cat, Valors shame,
Who is not (as he counterseits) the same:
Wearing a silver Sword for fashion sake,
And yet disgraceful Blows and words will take:
Whose Speech and Ruff seem Both, as One to be,
Of the new Set, (Twins in Formalitie,)
Where, if you bar him from his Common places,
He is tongue-tide then, for therein his chief grace is,
Whose Apish Tricks and Nods, with ducking low,
The perfect Type of Vanity does show,
Whilst (capring for the nonce) his Coin must ijngle,
His sole Attendance being his loathsome Ingle:
Thinking he should be praised for his pyde Clothes,
(For he no better parts (than these are) shows:)
All such, I bar, and banish from my Book,
Lest they profane it with unhallowed Look.
Their musty Scoffs I bandy them again,
As stricken Ball flies back from whence it came.
These wry-mouthed Curs that bark, but dare not bite;
(Their Mothers (but not Fathers) Children right;)
I Will scourge from hence, and gaul them to the quick,
Whilst on themselves, not me, they poison spit.
But unto you (Judicious) all Respect,
Ass to the Scoffers Hate and base Neglect:
Nor (if they are married) do I wish them worse,
Then to be plagued with IEALOVSIES black Curse.
And he that (causeless) with my Book finds fault,
I will maintain with Vulcans Crest does halt;
Judge (mildely) with sober Discretion then,
So shall you be like Angels, and not Men.
R. T.

TO THE NO LESS NOBLE, THEN FAIR, and yet not more fair then learned, the
Lady GASPARA STAMPA.
CHaste, and matchless VIRGIN, I might justly be taxed to have forgot my self
doubly, at one time: as well, concerning my bounden duty toward your
beauteous self, as in respect of the many Deserts, which that great Scholar
learned Varchi, does merit, if I should not (without lingering or temporising
any longer) make a Present unto the world, of this his admirable and dainty
conceited Lecture, shadowed under your sweet and much prised Name; for then,
like a malicious fore-stauling Merchant, I should engrosse unto my self, that
dear commodity of Praise, which is only due to such a worthy man alone, and
like an unthankful person, show but little, or rather nothing at all, how
much I am beholding unto you, as well in my thoughts, as in all other my
proceedings whatsoever. Which Acknowledgement (although I must needs confess
I am to blame therein) enuiting, and as it were, wooing me to make you some
satisfaction for my backewardnesse in this point, to which your peerless
Worth, and spotless Virtue draw me on, and not knowing what fit course to
take (considering I have not (as now) any thing of mine own, worthy of your
gracious acceptance) yet has it been some comfort unto me, in that my mind
gives me, that this Discourse following shall be sufficient to show some part
of my good meaning toward you: as likewise in some sort to satisfy the
excellency of grave VARCHI'S self. And because I know that it is a mere
vanity of such, as praising and extolling the Bounty and Goodness of God,
imagine that by their many words (only) they shall be able to commend it the
more; therefore I hiding and concealing the praises of VARCHI, and of Monsigor
De la CASA, will only say, that they (both) will hold themselves sufficiently
commended, when they shall understand, that this their much wisht-for Treatise,
shall be read and esteemed of, by such a prayse-worthy Creature as is your
self, your admirable wit and sound Judgment in every thing, being such as you
far exceed any one of your sex, and therefore, counted one of our Italian
Paragons, and that not unworthily. I therefore make bold, to present you with
this deep and excellent Oration or Speech, and relying upon the wonted
Affability of your courteous Nature, desire to be commanded by the same
always.

FRANCESCO SANSOVINO.

The Lives of the Author of this Work, BENEDETTO VARCHI, and of FRANCESCO
SANSOVINO, the publisher of the same, whose EPISTLE is before.
BENEDETTO VARCHI, borne in Florence, (the chief City for Beauty and Wealth,
in all Tuscanie) had to his Schoolmasters one Gasper Mar^scotto, of Maradi, (a
small Town in Lombardie) who taught him as well Latin as Greek, but could not
by any means endure his Scholars should read any Book in their own Mother
Language. As he grew in years, so did he profit in Learning, and in his
youthful time devoted himself unto the virtuous Service of a fair and
learned Gentlewoman, called Gaspara Stampa, (as by the Epistle written before
you may perceive) he making account of her, more for the beauty of her mind,
than for that of her body; she being as much admired for her excellent
Qualities, as any one Gentlewoman of her time in all Italy. He wrote many
learned works, especially, that called L'HERCOLANO, where he discourses of
all Languages in general; but especially of the Excellency of the Tuscane
tongue. He lived in good credit all his life time, being very gracious with
Cosmo, Duke of Florence, and with the Signorie of Venice: having a most
bountiful pension from them, for being one of the chief Readers in their
famous University of Padoa; about which time (he being the President of that
learned Academic of the IMFIAMATI there) delivered this Oration, in an
honorable Assembly, before the Duke himself, and many other noble Personages,
with great commendation, and kind applause of them all. But after this (being
grown in years) he returned back into Tuscanie, his native Country, where
after he had seen many fair and happy years: he dyed at a Summer House he
had, not far from Florence, leaving Thomazo Lenzo, Bishop of Fermo, and
Girolamo Razzi, a Carthusian Friar, his Executors; and lies buried in the
Domo, the Cathedral Church of Florence.

The Life of FRANCESCO SANSOVINO, the first Publisher of this Work in the
Italian tongue.
AS for FRANCESCO SANSOVINO, he also was a Florentine borne; and besides his
Schollership, was so notable an Architect, as for his skill he was surnamed
Archa de Noe, The Arc of NOAH. He was of familiar acquaintance with this
Author BENEDETTO VARCHI, and with a Brother of the foresaid Ladies, Gaspara
Stampa, called Balthazar Stampa, (a Sonnet of which Gentleman's I have
translated, and set down amongst mine other Notes, in the Description of Care.
To conclude, this Francis Sansouino lived (in his youth) much in Rome, but
growing in years, he came to Venice, where the Signorie, employing him about
their buildings of St. Mark, bestowed an ancient pension on him, during his
life: he dying about the year 1570. He had a Kinseman about that time living
in Florence, called Iacomo Sansouino, so sincere and honest a man of life, as
he was surnamed Spaeculum Florentiae, (the Mirror, or Looking-glass of
Florence.) He dyed of the Gowte, and was buried in the same Grave his Cousin
Francis Sansouino was enterred (who after his death was brought from Venice to
Florence) in the famous Church of Saint John Baptist, (called in Italian Il
Battesimo,) the Saint and Patron of the aforesaid City.

To the Jealous Husband, upon this Translation by his kind Friend Mr. R. T.
THou that beleeu'st no Female Virtue, Thou
Which so good looks, and such false love can show
(Enough for fashion) but still doubt'st thy friend,
Least to thy choicest Piece he make his end.
Unhappy soul! that to what is Good art blind,
That always seekst, what thou fearst most to find.
That runst before thy Fair one in the street,
So, with foul mouths, that thy sly ears may meet,
Such as dare black the name of Goodness, such
As n'ere speak true but when they say, 'ts too much,
Thou should enjoy what Fortune, not thy worth
Has given thee in her. Thou that never go forth
But with a longing to hear what they talk
Of Euphys, Sophron, if they chance but walk,
Through thy faind kindness, to thy fairest home,
And then art gal'd to hear some fained dome
Which may concern thy forehead, that is most free
For them to philip, who most like thee be;
That Is such as know nor Virtue, neither can
Nor wish to know; that have the name of Man
Only because they Prate, or Get, or Tell
The fortune of their Voyage, buy and sell;
Can only these, and Fashion; or for worse,
If any be, then he that is only Purse.
And, were not Baseness by her virtue scornd,
Lord how securely, Dyszel, thou would be hornd.
Thou that to The God of Cuckolds Rablais in Hist. Pantagruel lib. 3. chap. 33.
Coquage sacrificest, when
The Calender of Gods was made, among men
Coquage was occupi'd, while Jove assigned
To all the other Gods what special kind
Of Sacrifices, and what Place, what Day
Their Tides should be on; none but he away
No room in Heaven left him; Ioue's Decree
Was that he should with Goddess Jealousy
Partake in Tide, but that, on Earth alone,
(Excluded Heaven) his Dominion
Should be among those whose liberty was lost
By Female union, but of all, those most
Which blessed were with the Fairest, yet of them
Only over such as sacrificed to him
With fear, suspicion, searching, spies and doubt.
None should his Godlike presence Grace without
Such daily rites; no favor, help, or aid,
To any from him, while those dues unpaid.
But, as an Appanage, his Deity
Should to the Jealous still companion be.
Thou that unable fram'st thy policy
Against the Braguettes, and with Treachery
Vainly resists what the sweet sex would do
With him they call on, great Much worshiped in Sheeland, and his Castle
Chapel, or Shrine is the Braguettes.
St. Balletron.
Thou that deserust it, nor had so long mist
What thou so seekst for, if a Spagirist
Could save her Honors individual part,
Yet give the blow, thou know, would never smart.
You that are n'ere at rest but when you wear
Hans Caruel's Ring. Thou eldest Child of Fear,
That of thy Madness first by Varchi done
See here made ours, to us our Friend alone
Is as first AVTHOR. His desert must have
What Censure to first Authors ever gave.
Il Incognito.

The Censure of a Friend, upon this Translation, done by R. T. Gentleman.
WHat of this Book the best Wits censure will,
My reach of apprehension has not skill
To presuppose. The reason's ordinary:
Because men's Judgments with their Minds do vary:
And for the opinion of the Vulgar kind,
(My self being one) they sure are of my mind,
Who, if my sense makes not my censure err,
This subject does on each degree confer
A benefit. The Jealous here may view,
(As in a Glass) what of himself is true.
The Man or Wise from this pollution free,
(For derestation thereof) here may see,
The substance and success of Jealousy.
Unmarried Youth (of eythe sex) are here
Prescribed a Caution, and a course to clear
Themselves of this. The ancient may collect
Prime Principles to dispossess Suspect,
Not ouer-growne in any he or she,
Discovering but The Effects of Jealousy.
Thus have I th'Information of my wit,
And shallow Judgment spent in praise of it,
Which here my Friend translates: if more be fit
In laud of him (so that with truth't agrees)
Thanks to the Writer, more then I, he sees.
ANTH. MAR.

To his Friend Mr. R. T. upon the Translation of this Work.
SO many write: some for the fame of Praise,
And some their empty hours to entertain:
That Books are held but in these later days,
Th'abortiue Issue of an idle Brain.
And hence proceeds the general disesteeme,
The great Neglect of Learning and of Wit;
When men prove not in action what they seem,
But write their fancyes rather then what is fit.
Which Error thou observing, and our age
Fallen into an incurable Disease,
Walk'st not with those in common Equipage,
But writ'st as well to profit as to please.
This little Book shows Wit and Learning to,
A great deal more than greater Volumes do.
W. L.

GEntle Reader, Linxes sight was not so sharp, but that now and then it
ouer-saw; and Argus, for all his hundred eyes, was ouer-taken in the end: Be
one never so curious or careful, yet may a man mistake. ^ome few faults have
escaped in the Printing of this Book, as in fol. 34. for lusty read lazy: the
rest I hope thine own discretion will guide thee to correct. And so fare thou
well.

THE BLAZON of Jealousy.
EVen as the omnipotent and incomprehensible God the beginning of all things
(the IDEA and pattern of all Good and Goodness) is that Almighty
Omnipotency, which wants Beginning and Ending, which being made of None,
has by his own power created all things: and as another says excellent well;
God is beyond frail sense to comprehend.
He, first, began All, and of All is End.

HOLY ONE, is not alone the Author and Preserver of this universal world, and
of every thing that moves therein; but is (likewise) most glorious and most
absolute, most blessed and most perfect, beyond all humane belief and
imagination; so has he given and imparted to all creatures, (most Princely
Duke, Honorable and Grave Senators, and ye my Fellows and Companions of
Amongst other laudable customs, used among the better sort of learned
Gentlemen in Italy, their private Exercises, called ACADEMIES, are most
commendable and praiseworthy, of which the INTRONATI of Sienna, the INFIAMMATI
of Padoa, the GELOSI of Rome, the PAZZI, the ZOPPI, and such like, are of most
fame and note: the manner whereof is after this sort. A certain number of
Gentlemen (the best Scholars and Courtiers of such Cities, where they enhabit)
draw themselves into a Society and Company together, whereof the Duke
himself, or the chief Magistrate of that City is (always) one. These, once
a week, at some hour set down, in the afternoon, assemble and meet in a
goodly Hall, appointed for that purpose; where one of them mounteth up to a
place called the Harangue, a little higher than the rest, and in his own
natural language makes an Oration of an hour long, of what Subject or Theme
soever himself shall like best: this Orator having warning so to do, by an
Officer, a pretty while before his day. For they choose every half year a
Consul or chief Magistrate amongst them, who appoynteth sundry men ^o the
Harangue, for sundry days; and when the hour of their Assembly approaches,
all the Gentlemen of that Company repair to the Consuls house, bringing him
honorably to his Chair, where he sits highest, although the Duke or
chief Governor of that City be there present And these be the Gentlemen of
the foresaid Academies, who in the Christmas and Carnouall time (termed by us
Shroue-tide) devise many rare shows and sports, presenting before the Ladies
and Gentlewomen (there) excellent, witty, and pleasant conceited Comedies, with
such like delightful Exercises, to their own no small commendations and
credit, and to the wonderful applause and conteutment as well of their own
Countrymen as of all other strangers whatsoever.
this flourishing ACADEMIE of this most fervent and zealous INFIAMMATI,) not
only a naked Substance or Being, by means whereof they only are; but
moreover, a good and perfect Being, so far forth, as each ones nature is
apprehensible and capable. And hereof it proceeds that all things contend to
be like the Creator, so far as they are able, and naturally covet and desire
(above all) not only (simply) to exist and be, but farther also, to be
perfect and hap^y, each thing in that, which best stands with his own nature
and quality.

And because (as the He means Aristotle, (Disciple to Plato) who was an
admirable singular witty man, inferior to None; Platoes Better in variety of
knowledge, and all the worlds Superior in disputation.
Philosopher says in his Book, De Coelo) God and Nature is that Spirit or
divine Reason, which is the efficient. Cause of natural works, and the
preserving cause of those things that have being, through the only power of
the heavenly Word.
Nature make not any thing in vain; therefore have all things their Means,
Faculties, or Possibilities, as well to attain unto these two things, as to
preserve and keep them: for as concerning their existence or being, they
(generally) have a kind of promptness and inclination (as we may term it)
from Nature her self, to defend and protect themselves (as much as their force
will give them leave) from all such things as may offend, or corrupt them, any
way.

Now to do good, or to do well, they have likewise a kind of appetite or
desire, through which instinct, they (all) covet, and seek, what is good, or
(at least) that which they imagine to be good for them: As contrariwise, they
shun, and have in hatred, what, either is, or, which may be presupposed by
them, to be hurtful, and bad, considering they are (many times) deceived
before they be aware.

Neither must we think, that the knowledge of the The exterior Senses are the
powers of the Soul and Body, and are in number five, viz. Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting and Touching: the right use of which may be set down thus;
Look, but aright, and long but for your own.
Hear all alike, and Trust, when Truth is known.
Taste (but to feed) yet feed not (still to please.)
Touch never more, than lawful is to sieze.
The Senses thus you (rightly) shall enjoy,
Which (often) makes many, Servants of annoy.

Senses, as well exterior, as interior, (as I may say) of living Creatures,
was given them to any other end, but only for this, viz. that their Judgments
should either prick them forward to good, or else draw them back from that
which is evil: and the Actions of these Faculties or Powers, which our The
Soul is a created Substance, invisible, incorporall, and immortal, resembling
the Image of her Creator: Plato deuideth the Soul into three parts, in his
Timeus, placing Anger in the Heart, Concupiscence in the Liver and Spleen, and
Reason (the Lady and Gouernesse of the work) in the Brain.
Souls have to follow such things, as do delight and help, or be loathsome
and to be avoided, were called by the Latins, Plato says, that Affections in
a man, are like Nerves or little Sinews or strings, whereby Nature draws us
forward into contraries, as themselves are contrary; but he that has given his
Reason (once) dominion over them, shall find their force of no effect worth
esteeming: and to this purpose, one writes very well thus: Sad perturbations,
that Affections guide.
Should not give judgment till their Cause were ^ride.

Affections or Perturbations of the The Mind is that bright eye which guides
the Soul, and gouernes men in all their actions whatsoever: and as one says;
The Mind has in it self a Deity,
And in the stretching Circle of the eye
All things are compast, all things present still.
Will framed to power does make us what we will.

Mind; but the Tuscanes (following, in this, as in many other matters, the
Grecians) term them Passions are certain internal Acts or Operations of the
Soul, bordering upon Reason and Sense, prosecuting some good thing, or flying
some ill thing, causing (therewithal) some alteration in the Body.
Passions, because the whole mind (being troubled and stirred up through the
same) does suffer and endure. Now, of all the perturbations and passions, which
have their Being and Breeding in the unreasonable part of our Souls, and
which are chiefly Viz. Love, Hate, Joy and Sorrow; and they have four chief
Governors, Reason, Patience, Time, and Experience.
four, (as I have discoursed, heretofore more at large in this place,) there
is no question, but that Love, according to Plato, is threefold; the first
imbraceth Virtue only; the second is infamous, which prefers bodily
pleasure; and the third is of the body and the soul: nothing more noble than
the first, than the second nothing more vile: the third is equal to both. But
this Love of which our Author now speaks, is comprehended in these two lines
only: Love is a Fiend, a Fire, a Heaven, a Hell,
Where Pleasure, Pain, Grief, and Repentance dwell.
But he that will see a most lively description of this kind of Love,
indeed, and more at large, let him read Mr, Michael Draitons Definition
thereof, in The Flowers of English Parnassus.
LOVE above all the other three, is (by much odds) most potent and strong, as
being that, from whom (if we consider thoroughly thereof) All the rest
proceed, and therefore not without great reason, was it said of the Father and
Prince of Of Virgil it is said, that for his great learning and judgment, he
encountered with Theocritus, vanquished Hesiodus, and ran the selfsame race,
as fairly and as well as Homer himself did.
Roman Poets: L'Amor vince tutte le cose.
Love ouercomming every thing,
Under his proud subjection does us bring.


And the ancient Poets, and Theologitians of Greece, meant no other thing, by
the mystical History of Paris (who leaving Pallas the Goddess of Wisdom,
and Juno the Lady of Wealth and Riches, took part with Venus, the Commandresse
of Beauty) but to show the marvelous, and incredible power of Love; because
Love dominiereth over us, as does our The Stoickes hold, that, only to be
Will, when a thing is firmly and constantly desired, and therefore it is
defined to be a Desire of any thing with Reason, which is in a wise man only;
but that which is against reason, is called Lust, or an inordinate desire,
being resident in all Fools: whereupon an English Poet, setting down the
difference betwixt Will and Wit, writes thus: Will holds the royal Scepter in
the Soul.
And over the Passions of the Heart does reign.
Wit, is the Minds chief Judge, which does control
Of Fancies Court, the judgment false and vain.
Will puts in practice what the Wit deuiseth.
Will ever acts, and Wit contemplates still:
And as in Wit the power of Wisdom rises,
All other Virtues, Daughters are to Will,

Will, which draws and forces us unto his scope and drift: this his motion
being most vehement, and more stirring than any other whatsoever; as well in
respect of himself, (Love being most mighty and powerful) as also for that it
grows, and increases, with the good leave, the quick readiness, and best
liking of our own will; so that it is no otherwise, than like that man, who is
not alone fiercely spurred forward with a continual force, but (as it were) is
urged thereunto, through his own willingness, maugre his own might, and as
they say, quite against the hair.

And certainly, were it not but that Nature, (who for many respects, is
thought by diverse, to be rather a And yet there are four chief bridles by
which Nature is curbed, which are Want, Authority, Hope, and Fear.
cruel stepdame, than a kind and loving mother) had ordained that all our
sweet meats should be (ever) seasoned with sour sauce, then doubtless should
every one be most happy, but To this sense, one imitating Ariosto (herein)
says thus: The joys of Lovers, if they still should last,
Without Affliction, or Disquietnesse,
That worldly Chances do amongst them cast,
Would be on earth, too great a Blessedness;
Liker to Heaven, than to mortal wretchedness.
Therefore the winged God, to let them weete
That here on earth is no true Happiness.
A thousand sowres has tempered with one sweet,
To make it seem more dainty, as is meet.

above all, loyal Lovers should be more blessed than the rest. But as no
sweetness, no pleasure, nor happiness, are so delightful, so pleasant, nor
so much desired, as that which proceeds from Love; even so again, those
bitter pills, those intolerable Griefs, and those disasterous Mischances, or
rather Mischiefs, which fall out in Love, exceed (beyond all comparison,) all
other Torments, and Tortures whatsoever, as they who have proved, and tried
them, find it to be but ouer-true, especially the A Tragedy so called,
presented by the Gentlemen of the ^^TRONATI, in Sienna, where all the Actors in
the same, came to several unfortunate and disasterous ends.
Perottinian Lovers.

Yet will I not deny, (but justify what I now speak, for a most constant
truth) that all those disdainful Disgraces, but now spoken of, all those
burning Martyrings, all those insupportable Punishments; and to be brief, all
those unspeakable bloody Passions in Love, (yea, were they (All placed in one
body together) are nothiug, or rather, passing pleasing and sweet, in respect
of that one damned Fear, or hellish Suspect, or rather incurable Plague, and
deadly Poison, cleped Socrates says, Jealousy is a disease of the mind,
proceeding from a Fear, which a man has, lest that thing be communicated to
another, which he would not (in any wise) have common, but private to himself.
IEALOVSIE: which (coupled together with Love,) is no other thing, then (as
has oftentimes been delivered in this place,) A certain eager and earnest
Desire to enjoy the Beauty (as a certain grave and learned Gentleman, our
Countryman writes) is nothing else, but a just proportion of the parts, with
an apt correspondency in colors in these inferior bodies: of which Subiect^
the immortal Muse, of our ever memorable SPENSER, sings thus: Naught under
heaven, so strongly does allure
The Sense of Man, and all his Mind possess,
As Beauties loueliest bait, that does procure
Great Warriors (often) their Rigor to suppress,
And mighty Hands forget their Manliness.
Driven with the power of an Heart-robbing eye,
And wrapped in Flowers of a golden Tresse,
That can with melting pleasance mollify
Their hardened Hearts enured to Cruelty.

Beauty of one alone, by himself only. Of which Subject, not any Poet, either
Latin or Grecian, (let it I beseech ye (noble Auditors) be lawful for me
boldly to speak what I think) nor has any other He says so, because, none
have written at all (to speak of any thing to the purpose,) of this Subject
before, and this ( so much, as he terms it) is only here and there a
Stanzo of Ariosto's, in his Orlando Furioso: and this one Sonet of Monsig or
Dela Casa, commented upon by this Author: but now of late a Countryman of
mine, although a stranger unto me, called Mr. George Wither, has penned
diverse witty Satyrs, whereof one is of this Subject, which you may read in his
Abuses stripped and whipped.
discoursed thereon (so much) or so learnedly, as two rare, and (as I may say)
divine Wits of this our Age have done; the first of which, and the most
ancient, was that learned and judicious Mr. Lodouicus Ariosto, borne in
Rheggio, a town subject to the Dukedom of Ferrara, wrote that famous work
ORLANDO FVRIOSO, in honor of Cardinal Hipolito d' ESTA, his Lord and Master,
(whom he then followed,) besides diverse other Books, as his Comedies,
Tragedies, and Satyrs; which Satyrs I translated into English Verse, with
Notes upon the same; although, unknown to me, they were set forth in another
man's name. In his later time, being somewhat discontented, he withdrew
himself privately home to his own house, where after he had continued a few
years, he dyed of a pain in his stomach, and was buried in S. Bennets
Church in Ferrara, where he has a fair Monument of white Marble, with his
Statue erected thereupon, and this Epitaph:

Lodouico Ariosto Poetae, Patritio Ferrariensi, Augustinus Mustus tanto viro,
ac de se been merenti Tumulum and Effigiem Marmoreum are proprio pos^it.
Ann.Dom. 1571. Alfonzo secundo Duce.

Hic ARIOSTVS est situs qui Comico
Aures Theatri sparsit vrbanus sale,
Satiraque mores strinxit acer improbos:
Heroa cultu, qui FVRENTEM carmine
Ducumque curas cecinit atque praelia,
Vates Corona dignus vnus triplici,
Cui trina constant quae fuere vatibus,
Graijs, Latinis, vixque Hetruscis singula.
Natus est Ariost. 1474. Vixitannos. 59. Obijt anno salutis, 1533. Idus 8.
Iulij. But if you will know his whole life more at large, then read the
foresaid English Satyrs, where you shall be satisfied at the full.


Lodouic^ Ariosto of Ferrara; and the other is the reverend, Lord, Giouanni,
surnamed This man was both a Philosopher and a Poet, borne not far from
Florence, and living within the memory of man. He wrote many Sonnets in praise
of a fair Gentlewoman, his Mistress, called DIANA, of the house of the
Saluiati in Florence; and a Treatise in Prose of Good Manners, (ycleped
Galateo) much in request amongst the Italians. He was very inward with
Cardinal Bembo, Speren Speroue, Benedetto Varchi, and other learned men of his
time, with whom he conuersed (for a certain time) in Venice, in the interim
of which, he wrote an excellent Oration (penned in the behalf of Horatio,
Grandchild to Pope Paul the third, of the house of the Farnesi in Rome) who
petitioned with the same, to the Emperor Charles the fifth, that he might
succeed Peter Luigi his father, in the Dukedom of Parma and Piacenza, (as
afterward he did) the Emperor commending highly the foresaid Oration. This
Giouan de la Casa, held Petrar^q to be a better Poet than Dant, contrary to the
opinions of most Scholars in those days. To conclude, he growing in years,
returned back to Florence, where he dyed of the pain of the Collicke, and in
the 62 year of his age, and lies buried in the Certosi, a Sumptuous
Monastery, not far from Florence
De la Casa. The one in his first Stanza of his 31. Canzon of his Orlando
Furioso, The other in a Sonnet of his own, no less grave, then learned, and
as dainty, as every way witty, which he made in the prime of his young and
blooming years: which Sonnet, I (following the laudable custom of this most
flourishing Academie) and to show my devoted Affection, and dutious Service,
unto you (most Royal Prince) have made choice of (this day) to explain and
expound at large, according unto that small Talent, which it has pleased the
Almighty Power to bestow upon me.

To commend, as is reason, and were but fitting, the Bounty and Learning of
this our Author; his own Greatness, and mine Insufficiency, his discreet
Modesty, and native Country (common unto us Both) forbid me to say what I
should, although I am not ignorant, but that as well the one, as the other, is
known unto the mayor part of you here present: part also, shall you perceive
thereof, by this his admirable Sonnet, which whilst I repeat, and make
plain, vouchsafe of your acustomed gentleness (as your courteous nature is
wont to do) with still attention to give me the hearing.

SONETTO.
CVRA, che di timor ti nutri, and cresci,
Et tosto feed a tuoi sospetti acquisti,
Et mentre con la fiammail gelo mesci,
Tutto'l regno d'Amor turbi, and contristi.
Poi che in brieu'hora entro'l mio dolc' hai misti
Tutti gli'amari tuoi, de'l mio cor esci,
Torna a Cocito, a, i lagrimosi, and tristi
Ghiacci d'Inferno, iui' a te stessa incresci.
Iui senza riposo, i giorni mena,
Senza sonno le notti, iui ti duoli
Non men di dubbia che di certa pena.
Vattene: a che piu fiera, che not suoli,
S'el tuo velen m'e c^rso in ogni vena,
Con nuoue Larue, a me ritorni, and voli!
CARE, thou that nourishest thy self, over bold
With Fear, increasing still, and soon d^st g^^e
Credit, to thy suspicions, whilst chill cold
Thou minglest with a hot and burning Flame;
By which thou all the Kingdom of mild Love
Do trouble, heavy make, and too much move:
Since thou so soon upon my sugared Sweet
Have mixed thy bitter Drugs, hence from my Heart,
Turn back to Cocitus, and to those Icies Deep,
Those sad, and woeful waters, full of smart;
Pack (hence) to Hell, thou worse than hellish Elfe,
There, vex, torment, and gawle thine inward self*
There (without rest) prolong thy weary days;
There, let thy nights, withouten sleep be spent;
There torture still, and grieve thy self (always)
As well with doubtful, as sure punishment:
Fret thine own bowels forth, stamp, stare, be mad,
Be ever heavy, never blithe, nor glad.
Dispatch, begone; why fiercer than before,
And far more stronger, then thou wontst to be,
(Since venim thine, to poison me the more,
Through every vein dispersed is in me.)
Do thou return (afresh) in shadows new,
The more to make me still to wail and rue?
THe Subject of this high and Egelike Sonnet, which is both for the Conceit,
the Words, and the Order of the Verse, solemn and grave, and repleate, full of
a kind of religious and compassionate Indignation and Anger; seems to me,
that it is willing to instruct, and declare (no less according unto the truth,
and like a wise A Philosopher, according to Cic^roes definition, is a Lover of
Wisdom, and one that is learned in the knowledge and understanding of the
Arts and Sciences which is the mother of all Virtue and Perfection: the Greek
Monuments recording two kinds of Philosophers. The Italian^^ out of that part
of Italy, whilome called Magna Gretia, and the Ionian in the Country now called
Greece; Pithag^ra^ of Samos, being the first Author of the name of Philosophers.
Philosopher, then There are seven kinds of Poetizing, in the Florenti^^
tongue, as this our Author reports in his Italian Herc^l^no. The first and
principal is that of Dant and Petrarcq: the second, of Luigi, and Lucas Pu^cio
(brethren^) the third, as Burchiello wrote (for he also was a Poet:) the
fourth, the Chapiters of Ber^ia: the fifth, the Sonnets of An^on^ Alleman^^^:
and besides these five, there are two, to sing Pastorals; the one in left, as
that called N^ncia, di Lorenzo de Medices, and that Beca, of Lewis Pulci; and
another in truth and in good earnest: and this also is divided into two parts,
for some write Eglogs, in loose Verse, and the other in Verse, ending in meeter
or rhyme: and this also is done two manner of ways* e^ther with ordinary
versifying, or with that long kind of smooth, sliding, and running Rim^, which
S^nazar used in his Writings and is in Italian called Sdursciol^.
Poetically, with great Invention is an (...) that has more of the Wit,
Imitation of the Will, yet Imitation comes short of Inue^^^^^ (...) though
Invention is the most dangerous of both.
Invention and Skill) what thing Jealousy is, whence it springs, how it is
nourished, and what a wicked, and hurtful plague it is. And this he shows,
by the Effects, and Accidents of the same, which being more apparent, and
better known unto us, (than the Occasions and Substance thereof) will stand us
in great stead (as testifies Aristotle in his first Book De Anima, to learn
us to know, of what nature and condition it is: and therefore he fayneth (or
perhaps because it was so indeed) to discharge, and to drive from him, that
frightfull Monster, and infernal Fury, which with her sad and black poison,
had very much troubled him, in his Business, turning all his amorous
sweetness into sour and hateful bitterness. Neither gave she over, (as if
it had been but a small thing to vex him every hour,) but rather became more
grievous, and troublesome (continually) unto him. And although this Sonnet,
might be divided into two especial parts, yet for our more ease, and for the
better understanding thereof (because the matter is very difficult and hard)
we will divide it into four Stanza's:

The first thus: Of Care one prettily and briefly writes thus: Men dye, and
humane kind does pass away,
Yet Care, that makes them die, does ever stay.
And mine old Acquaintance and Friend, Mr. Henry Cunnestable, having set down
this Passion in her right colors, I could not choose but acquaint the Reader
therewith. Care, the consuming canker of the mind.
The Discord that disorders sweet Hearts tune.
Th'abortiue Bastard of a Cowards kind,
The light-foote Lackie, that runs post to death,
The busy Advocate that sels bis breath,
Denouncing worst to him, that is his Friend.

CARE, thou that nourishest thy self (over bold)
With Fear, increasing still, and too-too soon do gain
Credit, to thy suspicions, whilst chill cold
Thou minglest with a hot and burning Flame,
By which, thou, All the Kingdom of mild Love
Do trouble, heavy make, and too much move.


In this first part, in which the four things (before specified) are
contained, our Poet, no less learnedly than briefly, speaks to IEALOVSIE,
and most artificially calls her, not by her direct and plain name, but uses
a Periphrasis here, and sets down a description of her, saying; Care, thou
that nourishest thy self, etc.

And this course did Ariosto take in his first Stanza, of his 31. Canto, who
before he delivered her proper name, branded her with five villainous words,
every one of them being worse than other; and thus he ranked them, as it were
in battle array: Suspicion is a certain doubtful timerousnes of the mind,
detaining the heart most fearfully, with sundry Affections and uncertain
proceedings, according to this saying: Suspect bewrayes our thoughts, betrays
our words,
Wounds Hearts like sword, and naught but Grief affords.

Suspicion, Fear is twofold, Good and Evil; Good Fear is that which is
grounded upon a good discourse of Reason, and Argument, standing in awe of
blame, reproach and dishonor, more than of Grief or Death: Evil Fear is
destitute of Reason, and is that which we call Cowardlinesse or
Pusillanimitie, always attended upon with two perturbations of the Soul,
Fear and Sadness: and of this sort is this whereof the Author speaks,
whereupon one says well to this purpose. Fear is defect of manly Fortitude,
Continually, by Dread and Doubt pursude.
Montagnie also says, it is so strange a Passion, that as Philosophers
affirm, there is none does sooner transport our Judgment out of his dew
seat, then this does: and to this purpose one says thus: Fear is more pain,
than is the pain it fears,
Disarming humane minds of Natures might,
Where each conceit an ugly figure bears,
Which were not Evil, well viewed in Reasons sight.

Fear, Martyring is a kind of inward painful Conceit or Thought, that
vexes and galleth as well the body as the mind of man most feelingly, not
unlike a martyring kind of sensible rack or torture.
Martyring, Frenzy is a distemperature of the brain, through some so daine
affrighting or inward conceit, but Madness is a furious passion, that takes
away the right Senses and Wits for ever, whereupon one writes thus: This
bedlam Madness for forerunner sends
Mannie and Frenzy, to suborne her Friends,
Whereof the one drying, the other ouer-warming
The feeble brain (the edge of Judgment harming)
Within the Soul fantasticqly they feign
A confused Host of strange Chymera's vain.

Frenzy, and Madness.

But because every one of these four Verses, are full of learning, and all the
difficulty and hardness consists in this first part of the Sonnet, we
therefore for your better understanding (therein) will explain one Verse after
another, with as great case as we may, and after the best manner we can
devise.

Care, thou that nourishest thy self, over bold, etc. Considering that in
these first four Verses he defines, or rather describes what IEALOVSIE is;
and there being two manner of Distinctions, the one, which declares her name,
the other, which shows her nature: pleases it you first to understand that
this Greek word (...), compounded of two words, (from whence Three things
(says one) breeds IEALOVSIE; a mighty State, a rich Treasure, and a fair
Wife. This Fiend, a quondam kind Acquaintance of mine, Mr. Thomas Watson,
paynteth forth very lively in these Verses: Pale IEALOVSIE, child of insatiate
Love,
Of Heart-sicke Thoughts which Melancholy bred,
A Hell tormenting Fear, no Faith can move,
By Discontent with deadly poison fed,
With heedlesse youth, and Error vainly led,
A mortal Plague, a Virtue drowning Flood,
A hellish Fire, not quenched but with Blood.

Gelosia, that is, IEALOVSIE, comes in our language) signifies no other
thing, than a certain Emulation, or an Envy, of Form, or Beauty: which name
it seems that the Latins want. Definitions of IEALOVSIE.
True it is that that famous Orator Mark Tully, translated it Obtrectatio, and
defined it to be a Passion, wherewith some one man is possessed, least another,
should hold and enjoy that which he, only coueteth to possess and keep
alone. Others affirm, that IEALOVSIE is a certain suspicion which the Lover
has, of the party he chiefly loves, least she should be enamoured of
another. A third sort there is, that says, IEALOVSIE is a fearful and
timorous suspicion or Doubt in the Lover, least the Woman whom he affects,
and whom he would not have to be common with any other man, should lend her
body unto another. All which three are in effect one, and the selfsame thing,
but yet particularly, and not universally, as the right and perfect definitions
use to be set down, because they comprehend that Party only, which is
jealous, by reason of his own desire and proper longing or coveting; that is,
that he might (alone) enjoy, what he most wished for; as if there were no
Jealousy to be had of our Daughters, Mothers, Sisters, or others, either she
kindred or Friends, which are left in our Custody, Wardship, and Protection, and
whom we desire to have (not to enjoy them our selves) but least some other,
whom we mislike or disdain, should (against our wills, and to the
disparagement of our Honor) get possession and interest in them. The Authors
defining of IEALOVSIE.
And therefore we will say that IEALOVSIE is a certain Fear or Doubt, least
any one whom we would not, should enjoy a Beauty that we make account of;
and, this, for two Reasons, either because we our selves would enjoy the same
alone, or else, that such a one as we like and desire, might have the sole
fruition and possession thereof. Now there is no doubt but that Envy is a vice
that inflicteth those most extremely, that use itmost, and it (immediately)
succeeds Pride, by nature; for a proud man so loves himself, that he
grieves that any should excel him, which when he cannot avoid, then he enuies
them: and this is the difference betwixt Hatred and Envy; Hate extends to
Some, Envy to All, whereupon one says: Envy is nothing else but grief of
mind,
Conceived that Others Happiness do find:
It Is Honors shame, and Glories secret Foe,
Whose Fruits are Hate, Despite, sad Grief and Woe.

IEALOVSIE is a Spice or Species of Envy, and although it follows not of
necessity, that wheresoever Envy is, there IEALOVSIE should be, yet is it
necessary, that wheresoever IEALOVSIE is the Precursor, there Envy must be the
Follower always, as that which is a living Creature, is not a man, and yet
every man is a living Creature. Whereupon Plato defines a Jealous man to be
one, that has an envy or malice toward another, by reason of some amorous
suspicion, which he conceiueth against him. And for this cause (perhaps) our
non-paraleld Poet Petrarcq in one of his sweet Sonnets, says thus: Liete and
pensose, accompagnate, and sole,
Done, cheragionando ite per via;
Oue, e la vita oue la morte mea, etc.
Fair Ladies, ye, who talking up and down this way,
Pleasant and sad, accompanied, yet (alone) I see,
Ah, tell me, where is my Life? where is my Death I pray?
Why, is she (now) not here? as she was wont to be.
Pleasant we are, when her we call but to our mind:
Sad, that, we cannot have her wisht-for Company,
Whom ENVY and bad IEALOVSIE do stay behind,
Whom neighbors good, more than their own mishap makes cry.
But who can Lovers bridle? who Laws can them give?
None can the Mind restrain. Anger and deep Despite
The Body for a while (perhaps) may vex and grieve,
Which (now) on Her, and (then) on Me does often light.
Yet if the Countenance be the Hearts bright myrrour true
(As often it is) then did we see her Beauty fair,
To be ecclipst, whilst we her lovely Eyes did view
Tears to distill from Limbecke of sad Care,
My comfort's this, in me fault was there none,
'Twas dread of lewd Tongues made her stay at home.


Although (as sometimes after the Poetical manner) he makes his LAVRA to be
enamoured of her own self, like another Narcissus, and so hides herself from
him, as in this Sonnet of his; beginning, Il mio Auersario, in cui videre
solete, etc. My mortal Foe, in whom you wonted were to see
Your diamond eyes, which heaven and love do honor much
Not with his Beauty, (but your own) makes you to be
Enamourd; it is so rare, so sweet, of Virtue such:
(Lady) by his advise you have casshiered me,
(A woeful Exile, from that lovely Lodge of mine)
Although I yield my self unworthy for to be
Placed; where you sit crowned with Favor most divine.
But had I bin (as you made show) dear in your Love,
Me thinks a paltry Looking-glass in my disgrace
Should not have made you half so proud, as to remove
Your fancy from me, which you on your self (now) place.
Assure you, if you think but on Narcissus fall,
Your Destiny, and his, are like to be all one,
Although the ground (when you turn to a Flower) shall
Unworthy be for to enjoy so rare a One.
Remember Pride's the root of every sin:
Rather be Courteous, so you praise shall win.
And in that delightful and pretty Canzon, which begins, S' el pensier chi
mi struggi
Come e pungente and saldo, etc.
If th'amorous Thought of mine that vexes me.
As it is fierce, bad color like the same,
Perhaps my Body then should heated be,
And I should Partner be, in that Loves Flame,
That Flame of Love which now does sleep in her
(May chance) would then begin in me to stir.
If so, I then should not so idly live,
I then (abroad) should wait and on her tend;
Nor I so much with weeping (then) should grieve,
And Heat, not Cold, from me should still ascend:
I should be turned into naught but Fire,
The Brand of Love, the Torch of hot Desire.
And in that Disticq. of his: Se forse ogni sua gioia,
Nel suo bell viso e solo.
If all her Joy and chief delight
Be only in her Countenance bright. etc.


So likewise this Poet (in another place) makes her Jealous again of her own
self: which selfsame course, the learned Francis Maria Molza, borne in
Modena in Lombardie, was one of the best Scholars of his time, as well for
Prose as Verse. He was a Retayner to that great Cardinal Alexander Farnesi, of
whom it is constantly reported, that by his great power, wealth, and friends,
he could have made whom he pleased Pope, in any sede vacant, but for
himself, he was never able to do the same, so much was he doubted and
feared, because of his huge means and great authority he had in Rome. Of this
jolly Cardinal then, was this Molza (as I said) a Follower, who bestowed a
bountiful pension on him during his life, as he did on many others beside. He
was buried in Modena with this Epitaph: Qui lepido Veteres cantauit carmine
MOLZA,
Hic iacet aetatu maximu^ huius honos.

Molza takes, in the end of a certain witty Sonnet of his, where he wishing
and aduising his Mistress, that she should be content, and endure to be eyed
and marked of others, and not stand ouer-long prying and gazing in her Glass,
he (calling her his glorious Sun) concludes after this sort; Voi non
doureste hauer tanta paura,
Ne, l'essere guardata, da chi u'ama.
You need not thus to stand in so great fear,
Nor to be watched, so by him that loves you dear,
As if you doubted, (as it seems to me)
That by your own self you should stolen be.


But leaving (for this present time) to speak any thing at all of that kind
of IEALOVSIE, which Parents have of their Daughters, Brethren of their Sisters,
and of the like by blood and Alliance, near and dear unto them: and reasoning
only of that which is incident to Lovers only, IEALOVSIE of Lovers,
threefold.
I say that they may be jealous three manner of ways; and that IEALOVSIE may
be taken after three several fashions: 1. Either when we would not have, that
any one should obtain, that which we our selves have already gotten: 2. Or
that which we wish and desire to obtain: 3. Or which we have labored and
endeavored, following it in chase, and yet could never gain the same. Now this
IEALOVSIE springing from our own covetous mind and proper greediness to have
such a thing, is after a fourfold manner, viz. By reason 1 Of Pleasure. 2 Of
Passion. 3 Of Property or Right. 4 Of Honor.


IEALOASIE comes of Pleasure is of two sorts; one is said to be of honest and
good things, and the other of dishonest. In respect of honest things it is
called voluntas, but in respect of dishonest, it is called voluptas, therefore
very wittily says one to this purpose. Pleasures, like p^asting guests, make
but small stay.
Where Griefs bide long, and leave a score to pay.

Pleasure, when we estimate and prise the There be two sorts of Delight,
Sensual and Intellectual. Sensual, which takes his sourse from Sense and
Passion; and Intellectual, which draws his original from the Understanding
and the Will.
delight we take in the Party we love, at so high a rate, as we would
engrosse it wholly unto our selves, and when we think, or imagine, it will
decrease and wax less, if it should be communicated, or lent unto another:
and in this point, in my conceit, Tibullus, the Poet, speaks most divinely
(as most commonly he does in all his Writings) but especially in that excellent
Elegy of his, where he begins thus: Quid mihi, sifuer as teneros laesuros
amores,
Foedera per Diuos clam violanda dabas?
Art thou a faithful Friend and seek'st
To cheat me of my Love?
And break'st (in private) Friendships Bonds,
Confirmed by Gods above?


And in those other no less sweet than dainty Disticques beginning after this
manner: Semper, vt inducar, blandos offers mihi vultus,
Post, tamen, es, misero, tristis and asper Amor.
Quid tibi seuitiae est mecum? an gloria magna est
Infidias homini composuisse Deum?
To toule me in, and draw me on,
Most cunning art thou (LOVE,)
Sweet meat (at first) but afterward
Sour sauce thou make me prove,
Why should to me thus cruel show?
What credit is it for thee?
A God to entrap a silly wretch,
Think thou 'twill Glory be?


This Latin Verse is so pleasing, as I could not choose but translate it into
our Italian Tongue, applying it to our purpose, after this manner: Sempre accio
ch'io piu volontier m'inuecchi,
Con lieti risi, and gratiosicenni,
Dolcemente da prima (Amor) m'adeschi,
Ma poscia (lasso) come tuo diuonni,
Si mi gouerni giorno, and notte ch'io,
Altro che danno, and duol may non sostenni,
A che sei tanto in me spietato and rio?
E pero gloria tal con sorza, e'nganni,
Tender lacciuoli ad huom mortal' e Dio? etc.
The better for to bring me to thy Lure,
And as thy prise and pray to get me sure,
( LOVE) thou, at first, do lay thy tising bait
Most cunningly, to catch me with doceit:
Sweetly and mildely, thou do set thy ginne,
By s^gre^^ smiles and looks to draw me in:
But (woe i^ me) no sooner am I caught,
But that I find to danger I am brought.
Thine Entertainment day and night is such,
As makes me grieve and sorrow overmuch:
Why art so spightfull, and incenst against me,
When better guerdon'd I deserve to be?
No doubt great glory shall to thee redound,
When it abroad shall euerywhere be found,
A mighty God, a silly man did ketch
Within his Nets, by force and subtle fetch.


IEALOVSIE proceeds from This Passion may be rightly termed some timorous
conceit, or strange kind of Fear, such Fear commonly bringing much grief to
the mind, as one says to this purpose, thus: Passionate Fear still takes
her delight
In peril, which exceeds perils might.

Passion, when we covet to enjoy or possess that which we most love and like,
wonderfully fearing lest we should loose the possession thereof, as if our
Mistress should become a secret sweet Friend unto another man: and in this
pitiful When IEALOVSIE once siezeth on such weak and resistlesse souls (as
Propertius was) it is pitiful to see, how cruelly it tormenteth, and how
insultingly it tyrannizeth over them, for of all the minds diseases, that is
it, where to most things serve for sustenance, but fewest for remedy; such a
furious perturbation, and moody Agitation it is, which throws them into
Extremities, altogether contrary to the cause.
perplexity and case was Propertius, as may appear, when he made this
mournful and mestfull Elegy; beginning thus: Eripitur nobis iampridem cara
Puella,
Et tu me lachrymas fundere (Amice) vetas?
My Wench is gone and stolen away,
Whom I did love so dear,
And art my Friend, and yet forbidst,
That I from tears forbear?


Thirdly, IEALOVSIE springs from the Property or Right, is a kind of
Interest or Claim, which one challenges to any thing as his own, and as
peculiar and proper to himself, and wherein no other can (truly) demand any
share or part. Yea, so peremptory are some men in this point (especially if
they know they may lawfully challenge this high pris'd commodity of Love as
their own, and that they have paid for the same,) as they have cast off their
Wives, and Mistresses, only upon a mere suspicion, or scandallous report of a
malicious and backe-biting tongue, the poor women being in no fault at all,
but their own fantastique and jealous Conceits and Humors, for who can stop a
slanderous speech when it is once spread abroad? since w^o knows not, that,
Reports* at rand^me run, whi^st Truth they miss.
And Heard s^y ^onne to' a L^ar counted is.
And such a one was a certain Gentleman, a friend of mine, who upon a false
surmise and giddy Toy that troubled his br^ine, forsook a fair Gentlewoman
(his Mistress,) not so much as once vouchsafing or enduring to hear how she
could excuse and answer for her self: he being so peremptory in his opinion,
that because she was thought to be false unto him, therefore she must be
needs so indeed, as you may perceive by these few Verses, being part of a
bitter Letter he sent her, which you shall find at the end of this Book,
and these be they: And where to witness thou do call
(For thy true faith) the Heavens all,
I tell thee (Dame) the Wench that I
Shall like for mine own company,
Shall not alone, right honest be,
But from suspicion shall be free:
That all may say, she has no Fault,
No not so much as she can halt.
So you may perceive by this, he would have her more fortunate than any other;
for what Woman or Man is there, almost living, but that has been either
suspected, scandalized, or ill spoken of by one lewd tongue or another: And it
is but too true, considering, What Malice likes not, straight disprais'd must
be,
For Slander's blind and cannot Virtue see.
Lies, Slander, flattry, Birds are of one feather,
Forsworn false Friends they are, and dwell together.

Property or Right that we have, when we (enjoying our Lady or Mistress)
would have her soly and wholly unto our selves; without being able (by any
means) to suffer or endure, that another man should have any part or interest
in her, any way, or at any time: and to this purpose does the foresaid Poet
write, exceeding well, to Lin^^us, his fellow Poer, (an old smell-smocke, and
an ancient acquaintance and familiar friend of his) who (belike) being more
forward in this amorous Business than the other could have wished; Propertius
takes exceptions against him for the same, and withal, earnestly entreates him
to give over the Game he had in chase, as in this Elegy following, you shall
find more at large: Tumihi vel ferro pectus, vel perde veneno,
A Domina tantum te modo toll mea;
Te socium vitae, te corporis esse licebit,
Te Dominum admitto rebus (Armice) meis,
Lecto te solum, lecto te deprecor vno,
Riualem possum nin ego far Iouem.
Stab me with Sword, or Poison strong
Give me to work my bane,
So thou court not my Less, so thou
From Mistress mine refrain,
Command my self, my Body, Purse,
(As thine own Goods) take All,
And as my nearest, dearest Friend,
I (ever) use thee shall:
Oh spare my Love, to have (alone)
Her, to myself I crave,
Swounds Jove himself I Will not endure
My Rival for to have.


And so puissant and potent is this our desire, which we have to enjoy that
Party (which we love) soly and alone, without the society and company of any
other whatsoever, as that (many times) when this our high-pris'd Commodity
chances to light into some other merchants hands, and that this our private
Enclosure proves to be a Common for others, we care no more for it, but give
it altogether over, quite extinguishing and quenching in us, not alone the
Jealousy we had of the same, but likewise the hot love and affection we bare
it before, as Ovid in his second Book of his amorous Elegies, speaks in a
manner to the same effect, when he says thus: Quod licet ingratum est, quod
non licet acrius vrit,
Ferreus est, si quis quod finit alter amet.
What Is lawful, base; what is hard to get,
More eager does us move:
Senseless, that suffers others court
His Wife, yet her will love.
And in another place thus: Pinguis Amor nimiumque potens, in taedia nobis
Vertitur, and stomaco dulcis vt esca nocet.
Too much of easy yielding Love
My mind does soon annoy,
Too much of common dainty Fare
The Stomach (still) does cloy.
In a third, thus: Quin alium, quem tanta iuuat patientia quaere,
Me tibi Riualem, si iuuat esse veta.
So many Suitors to endure,
Thy patience shows too base,
Another seek, as Rival now,
For to supply my place.


Lastly, IEALOVSIE comes in respect of a man's Honor, is the Reputation and
Credit, or the good name and Fame, of a Man, which the generous Spirit priseth,
at so high a rate, as before he will have the same eclipst, he will loose all
his wealth, yea, and his dearest life to, according unto the saying of a
certain grave and wise Gentleman: Untainted HONOR (not long life) the treasure
is
Which noble Minds do hold to be their chiefest bliss.

Reputation and Honor, according as his nature is, or as his Breeding has
been, or after the fashion and manner of the Country, in which he is borne
and lives, because (in this point) diverse are the opinions of men, and as
contrary are the Customs of Countries, whereupon they say, that the The
Persians were wont to be so jealous of their Wives, as they never suffered them
to go abroad, but in Wagons close shut; but at this day the Italian is
counted the man that is most subject to this vice, the sallow complectioned
fellow, with a black beard, being he that is most prone, as well to suspect,
as to be suspected about Women's matters, according to the old saying: To a Red
man read thy Read,
With a Brown man break thy Bread,
At a Paleman draw thy Knife,
From a Black man keep thy Wife.
Which we expound after this manner: The Red is wise, the Brown trusty,
The Pale envious, and the Black lusty.

Southern Nations, and such as dwell in hot Regions are very Jealous; either
because they are much given and inclined unto Love naturally: or else for that
they hold it a great disparagement and scandal, to have their Wifes, or their
Mistresses taynted with the foul blot of Unchastity: which thing those that
are of contrary Regions, and such as live under the North Pole, take not so
deep at the heart, and therefore we may perceive that this our Poet, has
done excellent well, to call and as it were define IEALOVSIE, to be That
IEALOVSIE, in a manner, is no other thing than a kind of suspicious CARE, or a
careful kind of SVSPITION: this Sonnet following (penned by an Italian
Gentleman) and seeming, (as it were) to be done in imitation of the Authors
Mounsignior de la Casa, aforesaid) shows as much; which because it is annexed
unto this Work of Benedetto Varchies, I thought good to translate into English
thus: CVRA, che sempre vigilant e desta, etc.
CARE, who as vigilant, do always watch,
Persuading me to what is worse than ill,
And seek'st my pensive Heart still for to catch,
To force him yield to thy accursed will,
Making me lead a heavy woeful life,
Whereas (before) Pleasures with me were rife.
Bane to my sweetest Thoughts, thou gloomy storm,
That all my Hopes and best Times overthrows:
Why with Suspicious new make me forlorn?
Why do thou vex my mind with wicked woes?
Why do thou gall me more and more each hour,
To wreake thy vengeance on me through thy power?
O Monster fierce, more Fierce then monsterous!
O Pestilent plague of loyal Lovers true!
What hellish Fiend, what Hagge most furious
From that deep horrid Cave, thee (hither) drew?
Why in so hydeous shape do thou appear?
To torture me, and spoil my pleasures here?
Pack hence, away, thy power thou have too much shown,
And therefore mestfull Jack, with trembling Fear
Shall write the Sorrows which through thee are grown,
And woeful plaints which in my Breast I bear.
(Damned IEALOVSIE) I Will blaze thee, Herauld-like,
That all the world may loath thee with despite.

CARE, that is, a Thought or Passion which proceeds and leads on Fear,
which is as much to say, as if it came of Dread and Suspect. And by this phrase
of speech he gives us to understand from whence it springs, because (as the
Well may Aristotle be termed the Prince of Philosophers, since (as that famous
Auerrois writes) Nature meant (when Aristotle was borne) to show the utmost
proof of all her strength and power, so that what was possible for a mortal
man to know, so much did he understand.
Prince of Philosophers teaches us) we are easily and best nourished with
that with which we are borne.

Neither does he think it sufficient to have said thus much, but he adds
besides, ( Cresci, thou growest or increasest) which word no doubt is set down
by him, with great and excellent judgment, by reason that IEALOVSIE may (as
other like Qualities) increase or diminish, and it increases or diminishes
through four things, IEALOVSIE increases or decreaseth.
or means, to wit, 1. According to the Persons: 2. According to the Places: 3.
According to the Times: 4. And lastly, according to the Businesses taken in
hand.

The persons, by means whereof IEALOVSIE increases or decreaseth, are in a
manner always three.

1 The Party that is Jealous. Three Persons which increase IEALOVSIE.
2 His Mistressee, over whom he is Jealous. 3 The Person whom he suspecteth,
and therefore is Jealous of him.
Concerning the Party that is Jealous: such as know themselves to be Indeed I
am of opinion, that the most worthless persons are always most subject to
this infectious Disease of Jealousy, as Mr. George Wither rightly says. There
is None Jealous I durst pawn my life,
But he that has defilde another Wife:
And commonly, Mala Men's malus Animus, An ill Disposition breeds an ill
Suspicion. And for that he himself has gone astray,
He straightway thinks his Wife will tread that way.
The best counsel therefore I can give to these kinds of suspicious Brains,
is to possess their souls with patience, considering it is the best Salve for
this Sore, and to give over this frantique Malady, following this good
Counsel. Thy Wife being fair, be not thou Jealous,
Because Suspicion cures not women's Follies.

destitute and deprived of every good Quality and Virtue, and that find
themselves to be little (or nothing at all) favored or respected of their
Mistresses and Ladies, swallow down more easily, and sooner, this poison than
others do. A Testimonial of which Mr. John Bocchas sets down most
iudiciously (as is his wonted manner) in the ninth Tale of his seventh
Giornata or days Work, in the person of See this Tale in Bocchas Decameron,
and in his seven Giornata, the Argument whereof is briefly thus: Annigucchio,
a rich Merchant of Florence, being jealous of his fair wife, perceived how
she used to tie a small line or thread about one of her feet when she went to
bed, whereupon he one night finding his Rival to pull the same, leapt out of
his Bed with his Sword drawn to follow him, and she seeing that her devise
was discride, got her maid to lie in her place in the bed, whom her Husband
coming back (for he could not ouer-take the foresaid Fellow) beat most
pitifully, and that done, set his Wives kindred, to see her in that pitiful
taking, but when they saw it was another, and not their kinsewoman, they
began to swagger with him, and she to rail at him, for calling her good name
in question, whereupon he being out-fac't by his Wife, and the rest, that he
was drunk, was glad to ask her forgiveness, as if he had done her great
wrong and, after that, never durst find fault with her more, but suffered her
to have her will, and take her pleasure where she thought good, and liked best.
Annigucchio Berlinghieri, as every one may perceive that will take the pains
to read the same. Besides, it imports very much to know of what nature the
Jealous man is, because if he be naturally suspicious, he then will take
every thing in the worse sense, interpreting all whatsoever he either hears
or sees, in a sinister and bad sense or meaning, and so his Disease (in time)
comes to be desperate. And such a Of the Fellow that suspecting his Wife, and
being exceeding Jealous of her, would needs shriue her in the habit of a
Priest, read Bocchas Tale, in the foresaid Decameron and Giornata 7. the
substance whereof is this: A certain Fellow suspecting his Wife of
Incontinency, persuaded her to go to Confession and Shrift, and she smelling
his drift, made show to be willing thereunto: whereupon he getting the habit
of a Priest, stayed for her in a certain Church, whither he had appointed her
to go to her Ghostly Confessor, she making show, (when she came thither) that
she knew him not, and telling him, how she lay with a Priest every night. He
hearing this, when she was gone, and that it was night, stayed about the door
of his house watching to take her Sir Domine napping, as he should come to his
Wife, whilst she in the mean time, having given a secret Item of all these
proceedings, to her amorous Friend, by a private door in the Gutter, let him
in, where they enjoyed one another company all the night long, the Gull her
Husband staying all that while, shaking for cold in the street, and when
morning began to appear, she let her Friend forth by the same door he came,
Wiseakers her Husband, never so much as once doubting or dreaming of any such
matter.
Fellow was he who (in Bocchas) would needs (in the habit of a Priest)
confess and shriue his Wife, and of this kind of mould are most of our
Jealous Creatures made, and therefore our Poet very wisely added in his second
Verse: Et tosto feed a tu^i sospetti ac quisti.
-- And too-too soon do gain
Credit to thy suspicions. --
For so is the true Copy, and not as I have seen in some other false Books.
Et piu temendo, maggior forza acquisti, etc.
And fearing (still) thou greater force do gain, etc.
Although I deny not, but that this might pass for current, well, and might be
counted tolerable enough, as being perhaps borrowed from Virgill, where he
says: Fama, malum, quo non aliud velotius vllum,
Mobilitate viget viresque acquiret eundo, etc.
Anon through all the Cities great of Africque, Fame is gone,
That blazing Flame, a Mischief such, as swifter there is none,
By moving (...) she breeds, and as she runs her might does rise.
Below (for fear) she lurketh, first, then straight aloft, in skies
She mounteth.


Besides, who knows not, but that the more one fears, the more he is
Jealous? Ariosto likewise sets down the quick swiftness, and the strange
credulity of Jealous folks, when he says, that this incurable and mortal
wound, is so easily imprinted in the heart of a Lover. And certainly it is
wonderful, and almost incredible to believe, that men should be such deadly
enemies unto themselves, and of their own lives (as many times they are,)
through these strange and foolish Humors are tumors of a swelling mind.
Sprung from Self-will unconstant as the wind.

humors, that for one word only, or for a sign, a beck, or a glance cast
upon one, without as much as a thought of any ill; nay, more, that they will
(despite of their own selves) imagine and conceit that which does so much
afflict, gaul, and torment them incessantly, and without any rest, as if there
were not (properly) in love, other Cares and Troubles beside, then those only,
which we our selves (without any profit or pleasure at all) seek to purchase
most unseasonably every hour of the day: To this purpose, one writes that all
the defects of out Wit, may be reduced into two, viz. Ignorance and Error. By
Ignorance we know not things necessary: by Error we know them falsely:
Ignorance is a Privation; Error a positue action: All Ignorances cannot be
prevented; many Errors (but not All) may be escaped. From Ignorance flows
Vice, from Error Heresy, and therefore well may we say of the first. Gross
Ignorance (to Truth the Opposite)
Fa^shood and Doubt do breed, and Foes to Right.
And of the last, thus: Error the Daughter of blind Ignorance.
Hates Wisdoms lore, lead by uncertain Chance.
But of both of them one writes thus: Image of Hellish Horror, Ignorance,
Borne in the Bosom of the black Abisse,
And fed with Furies milk for sustenance,
Of his weak Infancy begot amiss,
By gnawing Sloth upon his Mother Night:
So he, his Sons, both Sire and Brother hight.

A gross Error and a Token of much insufficiency of wit.

But to come to the expounding of this our Sonnet, I say, that (Acquistar feed)
in this place does not signify, to be believed, or to be a means for belief,
as in the first Stanzo of Petrarcqs, where he says: Che acquistar feed alla
pensosa vita, etc.
It nourishes matter to a perplexed life, etc.
And in that other matchless Sonnet of his, beginning thus: Se com'eterna vita
e veder Dio, etc.
As it is a blessed thing God to be^^^^ in sky,
So blessed, as we can, nor ought, to covet more:
So happy am I when I view thy face with eye,
Since nothing in this world I do so much adore,
Nor have I seen thee fayrer then I view thee now,
Unless mine Eyes (as partial) iuggle with Conceit;
Hope of my Life, the Minds chief Beauty true,
On whom (as duty binds) my Heart does wait:
But thou art no sooner seen, but art straight out of sight,
Else would I not thy Company so much desire;
Then if some live by Sent, (as we believe) they write
By Water some, and some by Taste, by Touch, and Fire,
Why by your sweet sight then, should I not live,
Feeding on nothing else, since life you give?


But it signifies (quite contrary) a firm and infallible Belief and Faith:
in which sense Petrarcq uses it in this Sonnet: Solea lontana, in sonno
consolarmi, etc.
Once was I wont to comfort me in sleep
With that sweet heavenly face of Mistress mine;
But now in Fear and Grief it does me keep.
(Yet Grief nor Fear can ease me any time)
Me thought I saw within that beauteous Face
True Pity, and still Sorrow placed aright,
My Heart gave firm Belief to this sad Case,
Disarming me of Hope, and Pleasure quite.
Remember well said she, that latest Eve,
That Night in which I left thee weeping so,
And when (constrained through Time) which me did grieve,
I went my ways and left thee plunged in Woe,
Then could not I tell thee so much for Grief.
Now do I tell thee what thou find'st too true,
Despair therefore, and think not of relief
Thou (never more) me in this world shall view.
Too true I heard what my sick Heart believed,
And (ever) shall, for which it still has grieved.


But to come (where I left) to entreat of IEALOVSIE, I say that this malignant
Spirit, increases and decreaseth, according unto the Party for whose sake we
are Jealous; and this we do, not alone in respect she is well bred, is
pitiful of Nature, proper of Personage, constant, witty, discreet, modest,
of few What others would request or desire in their Wives or Mistresses, I know
not; but my nature so much abhors a Woman of much tongue, as I had rather
have her infected with any of the seven deadly Sins, then to be counted a
notorious Scold: and therefore, A Woman's Tongue that is as swift as Thought,
Is ever bad, and she her self stark Naught:
But she that seldom speaks and mildly then,
Is a rare Pearl amongst all other Women.
Maids must be seen, not heard, or selde or never,
O may I such one wed, if I, wed ever.
A Maid that has a lewd Tongue in her head,
Worse than if she were found with a Man in bed.
Be she best of her Sex, (Good All,) I hold,
She is worse then worst, if once she prove a Scold.
Fly then such Furies as (still) scold and rail,
Queanes of their Tongue, are (most) Queanes of their Tail.

words, tender of her own Reputation and Honor, and other such like good
parts in her: but (withal) likewise consider and have How jealous the Italians
are of their own nearest and dearest Acquaintance and kindred, for fear of
their Wives, and how they use to watch them narrowly, read my Ariostoes Satyrs
in English, and therefore not without cause is that Proverb rise amongst them:
Chi non tocca parentado,
Tocca may, o, rado.
The nigher kin, the farther in.

an eye even unto her own Mother, her Nurse, her Sisters, and Kindred, her
Familiars, Acquaintance, and such Neighbors as she conuerseth withal, which
point is most excellently well set down, by Boccas in many places, whereupon
Petrarcq (his Mistress Laura being a Saint, grave, wise, courteous, honest and
fair) says he is not jealous of her, in the end of that no less pleasant
than hard and dark Sonnet of his, beginning after this manner, where he
speaks of IEALOVSIE thus: L'Amor ch'incend' il cuor d'ardente zelo, etc.
Love, which enflam'st the troubled Heart with burning Zeal
And kep'st him shut in Prison fast with icy Fear;
And (which is most) to the doubtful sense do not reveal
Or Hope, or Fear, or Fire, or Ice, which he does bear.
In greatest Heat I shake, and burn in coldest time:
Full of Desire, and yet is my suspect as much
As if a Woman should hide under garments fine
Some living man, (although there can be nothing such.)
Of all these plagues, the first is proper unto me,
To burn both day and night, yet how this harmefull flame
Is sweet in mind, and pleasant seems for to be
No thought can well express, nor pen can write the same:
The other's none of mine* for my fire's of such power.
As goes beyond the force of man so far to reach:
Who thinks by his flight to the height thereof to skoure:
F^ies but in vain, and soon a dangerous fall may catch:
Well may All strive this golden Ball to gain,
But in the end they shall (deceived) remain.


Besides, the Mind and Condition of the Lover toward the Woman whom he
affects, imports very much in this business; for if he be given to choler,
or is (by any other Accident) discontent and displeased, he will then quickly
take occasion to be angry with her, and every mote (as the Proverb goes) is a
Beam in his eye: which quality you shall find in many of Bocchas Nouels, and
in See the strange passion and life of this Lady more at large in the 32. Canto
of Orlando Furioso. This Bradamanta a warlike Maid, daughter to Duke Aymon,
and Beatrice his Wife, was sister to Rinaldo, one of the douze Peers of
France, for her valiant provvesse King Charlemaine made her Gouernesse of
Marselles in Prouance. She was wife to that brave Rugiero, and dyed for grief
of the Paladines overthrow, who were most of them treacherously slain at
R^uceueax, a City bordering on Spain, through the treason of that
Arch-traitor Gano.
Bradamantas Humors: and so again, if he be temperate, and stayed in
Condition, being well conceited, and having a good opinion of the party he
likes; then is the case quite altered, and he is iocond and blithsome, and not
The more discretion a man has, the less shall he be troubled with these
frantic fits: and seeing, as a certain noble Gentleman faith, the Honor of
a true heroique spirit depends not upon the carriage or behavior of a woman,
I see no reason why the better sort should take this false playing of their
Wives so much at the heart as they do; especially, when it is their Destiny,
and not Desert, to be so used. Montaigne, that brave French Barron, being of
this mind; for says he, the Gallantest men in the world, as Lucullus, Caesar,
Anthony, Cato, and such like Worthies, were all Cuckolds; yea, and (which was
more) knew it, although they made no stir about it: neither was there in all
that time, but one Gull, and Coxcombe, and that was Lepidus, that dyed with the
anguish thereof. Read the third Chapter of the third Book of the foresaid
Montaignies Essays, and he will satisfy you at large in this point.
troubled at all: and therefore is it very requisite and needful that men
should not be ouer-heady, nor rash, in their Humors, and proceedings, but
rather discreet, wary, and cool, canuasing and measuring every action and
behavior of their Mistresses, with sound discretion and judgment, and not to
be ouer-forward and too much credulous, or too too light of belief, without
any For this makes Women worse than they would be, and to do that which they
never meant. For Women thas are chaste, when they are trusted;
Prove wantons when they (causeless) are suspected.

just cause given them, which is the only reason (as we daily see) of many
gross absurdities, springing and issuing from such like light and idle
occasions as these.

Lastly, IEALOVSIE increases or abateth, according as the qualities are in the
party, whom the Jealous man suspecteth to be familiar with his Mistress, and
therefore is jealous of him. For if he be poor, or ill favored, basely
borne, illitered, of bad or no breeding, and has few or no friends of worth,
to be a countenance or credit unto him, he then doubts him the less, and
has no great fear of him; as (contrariwise) if he be rich, a proper man, well
descended, learned, commendable for his qualities, and withal, potent, and
mighty in Friends and Alliance, he then takes on the more, vexing and
tormenting himself without measure, and never giving over to watch and prye
into all his devises and doings. And this is the property of such kind of
natured men: and although Petrarcq (as we said but even now, and as he himself
reports) was (ordinarily) never Jealous, yet he shows how by an Indeed
Montaigne confesses, that the best disciplined have been (heerewith) somewhat
tainted, and some reason may be for the same; but yet never quite carried away
with it, forit is our own fault, that we have raised to the highest strain,
the excess of this moodie Fever, after the example of some barberous Nations.
extraordinary chance, he fell into this fit a little now and than, as you
shall perceive in this his Sonnet, beginning thus. In mezzo di duo amanti,
honesta, altera, etc.
A modest and maiestike Lady did I see,
Betwixt two Lovers; of which twain myself was one.
The other, the glorious Sun with his most brightsome glee:
The Sun on the one side, I on the other then was gone.
But when she did perceive, she compast was about
With the hot rays of her brave and heroycke friend,
She (smiling) turned toward me, and wound her self thereout.
(Ah would that she had never used me more unkind,)
This made me quickly turn my Jealousy to joy,
Which at the first began to grow within my heart,
Lest such a mighty adversary should me noy;
Which he had done, but that she (soon) from him did part.
This caused him seem to have a sad and watery face,
Whilst that a pretty shower did compass him each side
As he did gloomy show because of his disgrace,
So much to be overcome; did it pull down his pride:
The Sun so grieved at Lauras deep disdain,
At his bright Beams were turned to duskie rain.


In this place he calls the Sun by his proper name, which the Latins call
(in such a case as this) a Riuals in Love will be suspicious quickly,
And through Conceit (not reason) straight grow sickly.

Rival: but I must needs confess not so properly, nor so happily (by great
odds) as the Grecians do, which (considering you know better then I can any
way set down) I will give over to speak any more thereof.

Now as concerning the second part of our former Discourse, which is in respect
of the place; there is less or more IEALOVSIE, concerning the quality of the
same, which may be either Of fit places for Amorous purposes, you may read Ovid
de Art Amandi, his first Book, and that notable plot; Mundus (a Roman Knight
laid with the consent of the Priests belonging to the Temple of the Goddess
Isys, to obtain his will of a fair Lady his Mistress,) in S. Augustines
book, called De Ciuitate Dei.
Sacred or Profane; far off, or hard by; open, or shut, commodious, or
unfit, or such like; or after such a manner. And how much every one of these
(different one from another) may import and avail a man about his amorous
affairs, any of mean capacity may comprehend, and the Danae was daughter to
Acrisius, King of the Argiues, unto whom (being closed in a strong Tower)
Jupiter came in the form of a shower of golden Rain, in at the house top, and
begot on her Perseus, that valiant Knight that rescued Andromada from a
Monster. This Perseus gave the name first to the Country and people of Persia.
But the truth is, Jupiter being a gallant young Prince, sent privately rich
treasure unto Danae, and likewise to them that had the keeping of her,
wherewith they (being corrupted) suffered Jupiter to enter into the Tower, and
so he obtained his purpose. The Moral of this Tale declares the force of
Money and Gifts, in assulting of Chastity.
Tower wherein Danae was shut, and close Prisons, and Iayles, can give instance
sufficient, besides that common Proverb of ours.

Lodo inamorarsi in vicinanza. That place I (best of all) commend,
Where nighest at hand is our fair Friend.
So likewise as concerning the third, which is A fit and opporune season is not
a little auaialble in this business, considering that Time is the plotter of
Exp^rience, and Observation the Instrument of Knowledge: which two, taken
right, effect great matters; and to this purpose a certain Philosopher being
demanded, what was the first thing, needful to win the love of a woman,
answered, Opportunity; being asked what the second, replied, Opportunity; and
being demanded what was the third, answered still, Opportunity; and therefore
he spoke not amiss that said, Occasion, Time, and Opportunity,
Compass what we desire effectually.
But me thinks this second spoke better, who wrote thus: Fair Opportunity
can win the coyest she that is,
So wisely he takes time, as he will be sure he will not miss;
Then he that rules her gainesome vain, and tempers Toys with Art,
Bringes Love that swimmeth in her eyes, to diue into her Heart.

Time, there is none but may imagine, that as it is available in other matters,
so no doubt is it of great consequence in this business, considering that such
occasions, as we may take in the This iouiall season amongst the Italians
begins about the 13. of January, and continues till Ashwednesday, it being
the chief time of sports and meriments amongst them, they assuming (as then)
more liberty and licentiousness, for their devises and pleasures, than in all
the year after; which they spend most commonly in Reuelling, Masking, and
Feasting, presenting of Comedies, and pleasing shows, and in courting of their
Mistresses, with such delightful exercises.
Carnouall time, or at Shrouetide, to serve our purpose, The Italians have more
liberty, and access for pleasure on the Holidays, and in many of their
solemn feastiuall days, than in the Lent, and on Fasting days; for those
seasons they observe very precisely, having as then no Feasting, Reuellings,
nor Merry-meetings, but only Fasting and Prayer.
we cannot use them in the Lent, nor may we put them in practice on Fasting
days; and so likewise, is the difference great, which men work to purchase
and compass what they seek to effect on the Holy Days, it being a quite
contrary course to that they take on the working-dayes, about any such matter.

Lastly, as concerning the fourth and last point, which is the employments and
Businesses: who knows not but that he that is laborious, and beats his
brains about one thing or another; is less Jealous than he that is A man
being idle, has his mind apt to all uncleanness, and when the mind is void
of Honesty: Idleness being the only Nurse and Nourisher of sensual
appetites, and the sole maintainer of unlawful affections, whereupon one
says: Sloth is to Virtue chiefest Enemy.
And Idleness the Guide to misery.

idle, and does nothing all the day long: and as Ovid says of Aegistus.

Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter,
In promptu causa est desidiosus erat.
My question's why Aegistus lewd became Adulterer vile,
It Is answered: He not labor would, his lasinesse did him spoil.
So may we say, that he that will take no pains but gives himself to be idle,
will soon come to be Jealous.

Besides, there is no fear of such a one as gives his mind to matters of
great importance and difficulty, or of him that esteems more of commodity
and profit, then of any vain pleasure whatsoever: and so by the contrary,
contrary causes arise, considering that of contrary occasions contrary Effects
spring and grow: so that according as they shall be greater or smaller, the
things (spoken of before) shall be greater or smaller, not according to the
rule of Truth, but as IEALOV^IE it self shall conceit thereof. And although
we (for the most part) speak in the Masculine Gender, yet must you understand
we Bartello the Italian, says, that a pale colored woman, with a black dead
eye, and a reddish hair, of a middle stature, and shrill in voice, is most
subject to IEALOVSIE and such a one is Progne described to be, and this
differs not much from our old Said-saw here in England, about the
complexions and conditions of Women. Fair and foolish, Little and loud,
Long and lusty, Black and proud,
Fat and merry, Lean and sad,
Pale and pettish, Red and bad.
And Burchiello, that fantasticque Writer says thus: High Color (in a Woman)
Choler shows,
And she is unwholesome that like Sorrel grows,
Naught are the Peevish, Proud, Malicious,
But worst of all the Red, shrill, Iealious.
Besides, the Jealous woman and the cursed Shrow, differ not much, they being
very nigh kin one to another: considering the Shrow is reported to be of a
middle Stature, and somewhat pale or sallow in color, with a thin lip, a
sharp nose, a Hawks eye, and a shrill voice, that sounds like a Bell; and
such a one is Zantippe, Socrates wife, noted to be. But as Plato says, to a
shroud horse belongs a sharp bridle, so ought a cursed wife to be curbed
every way, but he that has a peaceable Woman, and of few words, being here on
earth, has attained Heaven, being in want has obtained wealth, and being in
care, has purchased comfort. And as concerning this point, this is my
Catholic belief: A slow soft Tongue betokens Modesty,
But, quick and loud signe's of Inconstancy:
Words, more then swords the inward Heart do wound,
And glib'd tongue'd Women seldom chaste are found.
Much tongue in Wives is bad, in Maids far worse,
A long tongued Maid is right the Devils dry Nurse:
He roares aloud, she scoldeth shrill like bell;
Both worse than Fiends, both fit to live in Hell.
Yea, so distasteful a plague was a bad tongue to Ariosto, as he prefers a
witty woman that secretly plays false with her Husband, before a common and
notorious Scold, as in his fifth Satyr treating of Marriage you may see more
at large.
mean as well Women as Men, who being given no less to love then men, and
having (generally) less wisdom and discretion then the other, they must
therefore What Montagnies opinion is in this point, and what he sets down
of the Female Sex, as concerning this matter, I had rather refer the Readers
to his third Book of Essays, then to say any thing hereof my self,
considering Veritas Odium parit, Verdiuyce and Oate-meale good for a Parrot.
needs fall into this dangerous disease, suffering themselves to be possessed
now and than with this damnable Fury.

But here (perhaps) some of you expect from me, to know whether Man is the
most noblest creature God made, whose duty consists in knowing his own
Nature, and in laboring to profit others, of whom (after Tassos Imitation)
this Disticque is written. Man is a Creature of such excellence.
As (All) created was for his defense.

Man or Woman is of one and the self-same substance with Man, is what Man is,
only so much more imperfect, as she is created the weaker vessel, and Hermes
avouches that a beautiful and chaste woman is the perfect workmanship of God,
the true Glory of Angels, the rare Miracle of Earth, and the sole wonder of the
World, a modern Writer concluding thus: Women to Men are equal every way,
And like infirmities (in both) do stay.
WE MEN are Women, Women are WE MEN;
What difference is twixt us and Women then?

Woman, be more extreme and outrageous, in this more than monstrous Malady.

Noble (no doubt) and magnanimious is Mankind, and so most delicate and
generous is that pleasing Sex of Women, I will not (herein) commend Man much,
neither will I so much as discommend the Woman a little for the same, since
borne we were for their Women are dainty Vessels fine, yet tender weak and
soft;
They must sometimes be born withal, since they do bear so often
Then let us not these creatures sweet disgrace, scorn or disdain,
When (truth to say) we came from the^. and they from us first came.

defense, and brought into the world to do them dutiful service. Comparisons
are odious, and to infer, or affirm upon Conclusions, brings on (oftentimes)
farther danger: only gladly, would I please both Kinds, and not willingly
displease either: vouchsafe then (most Princely and Honorable Assembly) the
opinion herein, of a famous Poet (for I neither dare nor will presume to
deliver mine own) and one, that in my poor conceit, had good judgment in
IEALOVSIE, and that is OVID, a taste and touch whereof you may take, and then
be Judges your selves, provided always that you be not over partial on your
own side.

The Verses are these: Sed neque fuluus Aper medea tam saeuus in ira est.
Fulmineo rapidos dum rotat ore Canes.
Nec Leo dum catulis lactantibus vbera prebet,
Nec breuis ignaro Vipera laesa pede,
Foeminea quam, etc.
But neither ravening Tiger mad,
Nor wildest foaming Bore,
Are half so fierce, baited by Dogs,
Whom they do panch and gore:
Nor ruthlesse Lioness, who suck
Gives to her little ones:
Nor Viper quick, trod on by chance
By Traveler on the stones:
As is a jealous Woman's mind,
Whom Fury does inflame.
Her ghastly Countenance shows her Thoughts,
None can her malice tame:
To Sword and Fire she flies, all Shame
She casts from her quite,
Like such as are possessed in Soul,
With some most hellish Spright.
Behold Medea, how she seeks,
Reuengement for to take
Upon her Children and her Spouse,
Whom she away would make.
Another cruel mother is
The Swallow, which you see
Begor'd with blood on breast, a mark
That with her Fact does gree.
This is that damned IEALOVSIE,
Which over much Love does breed.
The wiser sort must shun this Fiend,
And of the same take heed.


But now let us come unto the third verse of our Sonnet.

Et mentre, con la Fiamma il Gelo mesci.
-- Whilst chill cold
Thou minglest with a hot and burning Flame.
In this Verse our Poet shows the operation and working of IEALOVSIE, viz.
that it mingleth chilly Cold (which is no other thing than Fear and Suspicion)
together with burning Flames of Fire, that is, with Love, which is no thing
else but a kind of Fire. And Poetry is far more commended then Prose, being
far more honor to the Language it writes in, than the other, both because Poets
were before Orators, and for that to write in Verse is more pleasing, more
cunning, and more delightful every way. Besides, Poets (only) have the honor
to be crowned with Myrtle and Laurel, and no Scholars else: for they have
other Rewards; but these, Garlands and Crowns which last for ever.
herevponour Poets use these words (Fiamma and Fuoco) not alone for Love, but
likewise, for the Women themselves whom they affect and like, as Petrarq did,
when he wrote this Canzon: L'alma mia Fiamma, oltre le belle, etc.
My loueliest Flame, more beauteous then the best,
Who had the heavens (her country) so much at command
Is thither gone; where, with the blessed, she does rest,
And (as a glorious star) by Venus (there) does stand,
Now I begin to wake, and (by Her) I do find,
That (for my Good) she crossed me in my prime Desire,
And with a sweet disdain (for my deserts) too kind,
She temper did my more than hot and raging Fire.
I humbly thank her, and thank her Discretion sage,
Who with such mildnes cooled my hasty youthful Heat,
Whilst I given over through fancy fond to rave and rage,
My Mind (thus young) about my souls health I did beat.
O dainty Arts, and rare Effects, fit for the same:
The one, my Verse, her matchles face, the other, wrought.
She virtuous seeds did sow in me, I raised her Fame:
Her sacred self, my witty Brain, to pass this brought.
Thrice happy I, if that so rare a Muse
Had lived (still) Grace in me to infuse.


And the reverend Cardinal Peter Bembo, son to Bernardo Bembo, and to Helena
Marcella, (a Roman borne) was excellent as well in Prose as in Verse, and for
the commendable parts in him, Pope Leo the tenth, made him his Secretary; and
not long after, Paul the third created him Cardinal. He dyed at Venice, and
lies buried in S. Anthonies Church in Padoa, where his Statue (of white
Marble) is to be seen at this day.
Bembo, in those his divine Terzanes of LOVE, says thus: Un dinanzi al suo
fuoco effer de neue,
Iliuro, etc.
He swore his Less, more white than mountain Snow,
Before him sweetly smiling stood, as tho.


Where you must understand, that there is always some pretty Epithet, added
unto the same, as Petrarcq did before: L'alma mia Fiamma.
And in another place: Il mio bell fuoco e tale.
Che io desidero di vederlo, etc.
My dainty Love, my Fire so bright,
It she in whom I do delight.


And this kind of phrase is much in request with the Latins, and not without
great reason; whereupon Virgill in his Bucolickes, says thus: At mihi sese
offert vltro meus Ignis Amyntas.
But my sweet Girl, Amyntas wanton Less,
Offers her self to me, as by her I did pass.


And that Cold or Ice, is set down, for Fear, (that is, the Effect, for the
Occasion, or Cause) is a most usual Figure, not only with those who are
Versifiers, but such likewise as write in prose, follow the same course. Now,
the reason of this is, for that whosoever does fear, waxes pale and cold as
a stone, because Dread and Fear draw up, and weaken the heart, whereupon
Nature (to succor and comfort the same) the Aristotle in his Book De natura
Anim. says, the heart of man, is lodged on the left side of his body, but in
all other creatures else, it is naturally in the midst of their breast. And it
is a common received opinion among all Natural Philosophers, that the very
first part which is formed of man, is the heart of man, (as the maine root of
all his other members, and the spring and fountain of natural heat) and it
is also the only member that last loses his moving, and dies in man; It
being a member so noble and delicate, that it cannot endure any touching, but
presently the party dies.
Heart being the most noble part of man, and being that which (according to the
Peripatetical Philosophers, is the first of all the Body that has life, and
the last that dies) disperseth and sends the blood abroad, that is above it,
and finding that not sufficient, conueyeth that blood also, for his aid and
help which is below; and hereof comes the palenesse in a man's face, and the
fearful cold, he has therewithal. Besides, a man trembles and shakes for
Fear, by reason that (the Heart trembling) all the whole Body shakes after
his first stirring. And this kind of speech did Petrarcq use of IEALOVSIE in
the Sonnet alleged a little before: Amor ch'encende il cuor d'ardente Zelo,
Di gelata paura, il tien costretto, etc.


Where Icy Fear, without doubt, signifies nothing else but IEALOVSIE: and
therefore adds: Et qual sia piu, fa dubbio, all'Intelletto,
La speranz'ol timor, la fiamma o'l gelo.


He taking (as I said ere while) la fiamma, ^'l Gelo, the Fire for Love, and
the cold for Jealousy: as in this place the meaning of our Poet is the like:
so again Petrarcque uses this Verse (Mescere) in the selfsame signification
Mounsignor De la Casa, does; who speaks in the Triumph of Divinity thus:
Ogni gratia mi fia, se may l'impetro,
Che i^ veggio iui present il sommo been, etc.
Oh what great Grace should I think done to me,
If l'that chiefest Good might (present) see.
And not what is bad and ill, which Time alone
Brings mingled with him, and with him is gone?


Although it may be taken as a Metaphor for Wine, as they (commonly) use this
kind of phrase, every where in Florence; in which sense that sharp conceited
Wit of this our days, and my very inward Friend Mr. Lodouicque Martelli took
this phrase, A Florentine borne, and a familiar friend of this our Authors, was
excellent in Poetry, especially for composing of Elogies, and therefore was
termed by many a second Tibu^lus. He wrote (amongst other things) a Tragedy
called Tullia, and replied against Giouan Giorgio Trissino (a learned
Venetian,) about his Epistles, between which twain, was some controversy. He
dyed very young, and as some say, was made away by poison in Regno, a country
belonging to the Kingdom of Naples, about the year 1566. leaving many works
of his vnfinisht, in that he was prevented by so untimely a death.
set down in one of his dainty Madrigals, where he begins after this
manner: Io ho nel cu^re un Gelo,
Che quanto peu lo scaldo, piu s'indura,
A chilly Cold or freesing Ice
Lies bout my Heart below,
Which (more it burns) the harder still
Within me it does grow.


And then a little after, (to come to this our word Mescere) he says: Il
soffrir mesce martire a l'aspra doglia.
If I should seek to ease my Grief,
My self I kill outright:
If, suffer it, it mixeth pain
Among it, more, me to spite.


But now let us come to the fourth Verse of our Sonnet: Tutto il regno d' Amor
turbi and contristi.
By which (thou) all the Kingdom of mild Love
Do trouble, heavy make, and too much move.


In these few words of this Verse only, all the griefs and discontentments
which can be imagined in love, are here (generally) contained, which by how
much it is pleasing and sweet of it self, by so much the more it is
distasteful and unpleasant, being mixed with IEALOVSIE, no otherwise than if a
most bitter poison should be mingled with some excellent and pure Sugar or
Honey.

But it is now high time, to come unto the rest of the other Stanzaes, which we
will quickly dispatch as soon as we shall deliver and show, that not without
great skill and Judgment, these four first verses were wouen, and knit
together, for as much as every one of them concludes with a fit sentence (as
it were) and so likewise end: which, besides a certain kind of Gravity, with
a maiesticq manner of disdain, (that is included within them) force there
Auditors, the more attentively to hear them: this sort of workmanship being as
cunningly contrived by our foresaid grave Bembo, in a Sonnet of his where he
speaks of Hope is a pleasant passion of the mind, which does not only
promise us those things that we do desire, but such things also as we have
utterly despair of, and therefore one speaks wittily to this purpose,
saying; Hope is the Fools God, the Merchants Comfort, the Soldiers Companion,
and the Ambitious Man's poison: but yet notwithstanding this last Definition,
Hope is the sad Hearts help, the sick Thoughts Friend.
And what Distrust impaires, Hope does amend.
True Hope is swift, and flies with Swallows wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meanest Creatures Kings.

Hope thus: Speme, che gli'occhi nostri veli, and fusci,
Sfreni, and sferzi le voglie, etc.
Thou Hope, which cloud'st and shadow'st our sight still,
Which forward yerk'st and whipst our courage and our will.
Thou Hope, the Bread and Food of hungry men,
(Lovers I mean) they often are hungry then.
And so forth, as in the Sonnet.

But now we will come to the second Stanza of our Sonnet.

Poi che in breui hora entrol' mio dolce hai misti, etc
Since thou (so soon) amongst my sugared Sweet
Have mixed thy bitter Drugs, hence from my Heart,
Go pack to Cocytus, and to those Joys Deep,
Those sad and woeful waters full of smart.
As concerning the chief point of this second part (in the which our Poet
having before discoursed of IEALOVSIE, and of her Effects at the full) he now
comes to the particulars, and commanding or rather entreating her to leave
and part from forth his Body and his Heart, having done the worst she could,
after her wonted manner, and made him of a most fortunate man, the most
wretchedst creature alive; and therefore there remaining nothing for her (as
now to do more) he tells her, that she may do well to For there is her
chief mansion house, according to the opinion of a Gentleman, an acquaintance
of mine, who to this effect, writes thus: A seeming Friend, but Enemy to Rest,
A wrangling Passion, yet a gladsome thought;
A bad Companion, yet a welcome Ghest,
A Knowledge wished, yet sound too soon unsought;
From Heaven supposed, but (sure) sprung first from Hell,
Is IEALOVSIE, and there (forlorn) does dwell.
From thence she sends fond Fear, and false Suspect,
To haunt our Thoughts, bewitched with mistrust,
Which breeds in us the Issue and Effect
Both of Conceit, and Fictions most unjust:
The grief, the shame, the smart thereof does prove
That IEALOVSIE is Death, and Hell to Love.
For what but Hell, moves in the jealous Heart,
Where restless fear works out all sugared joys,
Which does both quench, and kill that loving part,
And cloyes the mind with worse then known annoyes
Whose pleasure far exceeds Hels deep Extremes,
Such life leads Love, entangled with Misdeames.

return back to Hell, from whence she (first) came, as this word (Torna)
signifies. But this Stanza because it is easy enough of it self, and because
we have discoursed sufficiently at large thereof before, we will spend no
longer time therein, (only) we will (briefly note) certain special things,
as concerning some words he uses here. And first, we will say, that the first
half line (Since thou so soon) was set down with great Judgment, and for
the nonce, not so much to answer that Verse above written. -- And too-too
soon do gain
Credit to thy suspicions, --
As to show the force and sudden power of this detestable poison, which works
most violently and suddenly. (Hai misti.) That is, have mixed, or mingled, as
Petrarcq says in this his Sonnet.

Se Virgilio and Homero hauessin visto
Quel sol, il qual, vegg'io con gli occhi miei, etc.
If Virgil, or learned Homer seen had my Sun bright,
Which I so often behold with these my happy eyes,
They would have mixed (to blaze her Fame) their utmost might,
In both their tongues they would have raised her to the Skies:
They would have made Aeneas discontent and sad,
Achillis, grave Vlissis, many Heroies then,
Augustus, and Orestes, (who Aegistus bad
Did kill) should still have lain in dark Obliuions den:
Old Ennius sang in harsh and ragged formed Verse,
Don Scipios praise (the matchless wonder of his age.)
I strive a peerless Virgins fame for to rehearse,
Who wins the Garland for her virtuous carriage sage.
Heavens grant, though (for this subject) meane's my wit,
That she will not skorne me, but accept of it.
Torna a Cocito e a lagrimosi, and tristi,
Chiacci d'Inferno, etc.
Giacci, and not Campi, you must read (as I have seen in some Copies) and this
is a certain Poetical description of HELL, and very rightly, and fitly does
he will her to return to Hell, from whence she came; since (certainly) it is
a right Fury indeed, Ariosto having Christened it by the name of an infernal
plague. And therefore you must note, that as every thing which is good and
fair, is said to proceed and come from Paradise; so contrariwise, All,
whatsoever is foul, and bad, we term to come from Hell? as Virgill says that
desperate Gaming, and ghastly Famine issue from thence: Petrarcq speaking as
much of Laura's Looking-glass, after this manner: Questo fu fabricato sopra
l'acque,
d' Abisso, and tinto nel eterno oblio,
Onde il principio dimio morte nacque.
No doubt, some Fiend, this Looking-glass did make,
Within the waters of the infernal Lake;
Forgetfulness eternal, dyed the same
From whence (at first) did spring my mortal bane.
And in another place, taxing the Court of Rome, he calls it the HELL of the
Living; as in a third passage he terms the World after this manner; when he
wrote thus: Non v^rrei riuederla in ques'tinferno, etc.
Not willingly I would her see again,
In this bad world; this Hell, this Gulf of pain:
But now to the rest. Iui, iate stessa incresci, etc.
Pack hence to Hell, thou worse than hellish Elfe,
There vex, torment, and gawle thine inward self.
Meaning, she should there tortor her self, and not be grievous and
troublesome unto others, and in this sort does he paint and set forth the
Nature and Conditions of IEALOVSIE, which Lodouicq Martelli has no less
elegantly, than eloquently set down in one of his Canzons, entreating of Love,
and which, because I perceive you stand attentive to hear, I will most
willingly acquaint you withal.

Quel the interrompe ilor casto desire,
E se quel ch'e d'un solo a molti e dato,
Quest' ingombra i mortai di sdegni, and ire;
Et turba, and volue ogni amorsolo stato, etc,
That which breaks Lovers chaste designs in twain,
And gives to Many, what (to One) does appertain,
Is that which fills men's hearts with furious sire,
And (topsi turui) turns each amorous desire;
Is that which makes Men wish (so often) to dye,
And to contest against God, he is borne disasterously;
Makes him disclaim his Goodness and his Grace,
When as he finds himself in such hard case:
To live as one forsook, and quite exild,
From all good Fortune, and from pity mild:
But although this Verb ( Iucressere) signifies to have compassion and pity
(for the most part) as that deep and This learned Poet was borne in Florence,
his Wife being of the house of the DONATI, there, and called BIANCA, but he
being banished from thence, lived in the ancient City Rauenna, in Romagna,
where he lies enterred, having a fair Tomb over him, which Bernardo Bembo,
(Father to Cardinal Bembo) reedified and made new, when he remained Podesta
(there) for the Signorie of Venice, with this Epitaph over him. Exigua Tumulo
(DANTES) hic sort iacebas,
Squallenti nulli, cognite (paene) situ;
At nunc Marmor^o, subnixus conderis arcu
Omnibus, and cultu splendidiore nites,
Nimirum BEMBVS, Musis incensus Hetruscis,
Hoc tibi, quem imprimus hae coluere dedit.
But the aforesaid City of Rauenna is now subject to the Roman Church. This
Dant is by some learned Italians compared and equalled with Homer and Virgill,
and was not alone a Poet, but a Philosopher, a Divine, a Physician, and an
Astronomer with all: yet does Cardinal Bembo prefer Petrarcq before him.
When Dant was young, he was Scholar to Brunetto Latini, Vincentio Borghim,
Prior of the Hospital of the Innocenti in Florence, having made an excellent
Comment upon all his works.
profound Poet Dant shows, in one of his learned and moral Canzons,
beginning (as it were) somewhat abruptly, thus: Em'incresce di me si altamente
Ch'altro tanto di doglia
Mi reca la pieta, quanto'l martire.
So much I sorrow for my self,
And in so high degree;
As pity brings as much of grief,
As tortors do to me.
And Petrarcq (after the same manner) writes thus: Hor de mici danni a me
medessimo incresse, etc.
Now to my self, I grieve for this my loss.
Though by her looks she showed she sorry was.
Yet nevertheless, the same Poet in the first Stanza of his Canzon, of his
transformations, takes it in this our sense, when he says: Poise giuro si
come a me n'increbbe, etc.
Then swear she that to me she did no wrong,
Although she vexed me for to stay, and look so long.
And this is worth the noting (as I said a little before) that one Tuscan word
alone, should signify two things; and those so much different one from
another: the Latins likewise, having the like signification in these two
Verbes: Miseret, and Taedet: It pittieth me, and it irketh me. Iui senza riposo
i giorni mena, etc.
There (without rest) prolong thy weary days,
And let thy Nights withouten sleep be spent;
There tortor (still) and grieve thy self always,
As well for doubtful as sure punishment, etc.
In this part he goes on, describing and setting down the Nature and Life of
such as be Jealous, under the description of IEALOVSIE herself, who (always)
living as it were, in a continual Hell, take no rest in the day; neither can
they sleep at all in the nights, but (ever) grieve and lament, taking on as
well for that which is false, as for what they stand in doubt of to be true;
imagining many times, and conceiting diverse things that are altogether
impossible; for this strange Malady engenders a continual and a perpetual
According to this saying applied unto a suspicious or Jealous person. Suspect
like traitor false, bewrayes our words,
Suspicious eyes are messengers of woe.
Jealous Suspect ugly Despair affords,
And of thy dearest friend makes deadliest Foe.

coffeehouse and disquietnesse in the mind, so that he is not able, nor
hath-any power to give over from vexing himself, standing (always) watchful
with his cares wide open, to hearken and listen to every word, every voice,
every sound, and every wind: all which, he takes in a wrong and sinister
sense, coniecturing (evermore) worse of the same than he need. And therefore
Propertius excuses himself, about this fault, in one of his Elegies, thus:
Omnia me terrent, timidus sum, ignosce timori,
Et miser in tunica suspicor esse virum;
Me laedit, simulta tibi dabit oscula, matter
Me, Soror, and cum qua dormit Amica simul.
Each thing affrights me, I do fear
Ah pardon me, my fear.
I doubt a man is hid within
The clothes which thou do wear:
If thine own Mother kiss thee (often)
Or Sister thine, I grieve:
I fear the Maid that lies with thee,
And in thy House does live.
Each thing makes me suspect; I look
With jealous watchful eye;
The Nurse makes me to doubt, and Child
That does in Cradle lie.


And this, Petrarcq reprehending as a vain and impossible thing, says: Pur
come Donna in un vestire schietto.
As if a woman in her Gown,
Or in a slender Veil,
A living man should (secret) hide,
Which is a senseless tale.


Yea, this franticque Humor, runs on (oftentimes) so far, as it takes
away a man's senses, as if he were not the same party he was before:
whereupon, all those things not only proceed which Horace sets down in
that pleasant Ode of his: beginning, Cum te Lydia, Telephi, etc.
With thee my wanton Lydia,
Who given art over much to play etc.


But, which is more, we are afraid of our own shadow: which Propertius
confesses thus: Ipse meas solus (quod nil est) aemuler vmbras,
Stultus, quod stulto saepe timore, tremo.
I mine own shadows dread, alone,
Which (nothing are) in vain,
And, like a fool, through foolish fear,
Often put my self in pain.


And the learned Molza, imitating this Poet, begins one of his Sonnets,
after such a manner, writing thus: Io son del mio bell sol, tanto Geloso.
So Jealous am I of my beauteous Sun,
As (scarsely) can I brook,
(Such is my doubt) that any should
As much as on her look.


And because (as I said before) IEALOVSIE is a kind of Envy, grieuing as much
at another Good, as she does at her own hinderance and hurt. Jealous folk
are content to endure any discommodity whatsoever, upon condition that no other
shall enjoy the benefit thereof.

And hereupon our amorous Poet Tibullus, speaks thus in an Elegy of his: At
tu fallacis Coniux incaute puellae,
Tu quoque seruato, peccet vt illa nihil.
But thou (kind Witall) Husband thou
Unto my subtle Wench,
I pray thee have a watchful eye,
Least she play false at Fence.


What shall I say more: such as be jealous, fear not men only, but likewise
suspect and doubt the Gods themselves; and therefore says Ovid in his Epistles
for Sappho: Hunc ne pro Cephalo raperes, Aurora timebam, Ovid in his Epistle of
Sappho to Pha^.

Et faceres, sed te prima rapina tenet, etc.
I dread ( Aurora) least for Cephalus thou would
Have chosen him, save that thy former Rape does thee withold:
If Phoebe view him (once) that all suruayes with Eye,
My Phao shall be quickly forced in slumbers long to lie:
In Iuory Wagon would Dame Venus to the Stars
Have borne him, but she feared, he would have coyde the God of Wars.


Many more examples could I allege for this purpose, most of the Poets,
especially the Grecians and the Latins, not talking of any thing so much, nor
that touches and galleth the Heart so sharply, as this does: which forced
Propertius to write thus: Nullae sunt inimicitiae nisi Amoris acerbae, etc.
There Is no unkindness like Love wronged,
Such things most bitter are to me,
Let me mine own throat cut; yet I
A kind Foe to my self shall be:
With what face can I see strange Arms
My Wench for to embrace and twine,
When she another shall be termed,
Who (but even now) was called Mine?
Sure all things change and Lovers minds
Do change, and (changing) prove.
Win thou in Love, or do thou loose,
So turns the wheel of Love.


But our Tuscane The worth of Poets and Poetry, can never be sufficiently
commended enough, although this Iron age has nothing more in contempt, which
is not the fault of Scholars, but of those dull Midasses, now living, who make
so small account of them, and therefore passing well said he that wrote this
Disticque: The Man that scorneth Poets, and Arts School,
Lackes but a long Coat to be Natures Fool.
Yet in despite of these worse than nasty Iaylors, that keep such store of
wealth in their bard Closets, and secret places far darker than Lymbo it self,
from those that deserve it better every way than themselves, (and all which
dunghill muck is nothing but the base Excrements of this stinking Earth) I will
set down here the worth of a Poet (more in value by much than their Idolatrous
trash) as that sweet Muse of his (who not unworthily bears the name of the
chiefest Archangell) sings after this Soule-rauishing manner: When Heaven
would strive to do the best she can,
And put an Angels spirit into a Man.
Then all her powers she in that Work does spend,
When she a POET to the world does send;
The difference only twixt the Gods and Us,
Allowed by them, is but distinguished thus;
They give them breath, Men by their Powers are borne,
That life they give the POET does adorn:
And from the world, when they dissolve man's breath,
They in the world do give Man life in death.

Poets, loving more chastely than the Heathen, wrote more discretely, and with a
better mind of this subject, neither had they so much cause to complain, or
enueigh against this wicked Fury.

And now as concerning the two first lines of this last Stanza, in my conceit
this word (iui) (there) is not without good grace and much elegancy uttered
three times, one after another, not so much to knit and join the Verses
following, to those that go before, as for that Flourish or Figure, called
Repetitio, by our Rhetoritians, and because of that other which is termed an
Article, the conioyning and coupling of the Conjunction (Et, And) being not put
to any of them.

I giorni mena. This phrase Menare i giorni, is, in this place, after the same
fashion as Petrarcq uses the same in that Sonnet of his: Chi e fermato di
menar sua vita, etc.
Who is resolved to lead his life unsure,
Amid the wavering Seas and Rocks so high
Fearelesse of death in Bark which cannot dure,
Must make account he to his End is nigh.
It Is good for such an one to hoyse his sail,
And toward the Haven get for his avail.


Imitating herein the Latinists, who say, ducere vitam, to live. And yet
Petrarcq in this Sonnet following, turned it to another sense.

Po ben puo tu portarnclaescorza, etc.
Well may thou (Po) my body carry fast,
By reason of thy swift and mighty wane,
My Soul the Ghest within this lodging placed,
For all thy force with thee, thou can not have:
This near gives over, but strives to mount on high,
Forcing (herself) unto the clouds to glide,
Until it to that happy place come nigh,
Where it does hope in perfect Bliss to bide:
Thou Prince of Rivers, prouder than the rest,
Encountering with the Sun when day does break:
And in the ponent of that Light quite disposest,
Where waters thine begin for to grow weak,
Bear thou this outward shape alone with thee,
Whilst my Soul in her sweet lodge longs to be.
And this kind of phrase is (most commonly) taken after the worse sense, as in
the first Chapter of Love, he speaks thus: Qual e morte da lui, qual con piu
graui, etc.
What Death is his? what wretched life,
That pouer wretch sustaines?
Whom Laws severe command him lie
Shut close, and bound in chains, etc.
But now to our Poet again. Non mendi dubbia che dicerta pena.
As well for doubtful as sure punishments, etc.


In my conceit he could never more learnedly, nor more, and as I may say, more
elegantly express and set down the last difference of IEALOVSIE, than he
has (here) done in this Verse, considering there may (perhaps) be found such a
kind of gnawing Corsiue or inward fretting Passion, that may have part, or the
most of these troubles that IEALOVSIE has, but that there (ever) should be
found any one that shall continually, lament and grieve, as much for that which
is impossible and doubtful, as for what is certain and well known, that can
I never be induced to believe: this one thing being rightly the property and
nature of this franticque Malady. And therefore Ariosto said likewise well,
when (speaking of IEALOVSIE) he wrote thus: Non men per falso che per ver
suspetto, etc.
This hellish Hag makes men to wayle and rue,
Through false suspect, as well as for what is true.


Petrarcque intimating as much, when (as before is alleged) he said: Pur come
Donna in un vestir schietto, etc.
Like to a woman that is finely clad,
And under garment hers some man she had.


Inferring hereby no other thing, then (as has been often repeated before)
that Jealous persons are afraid of what they need not, they being always full
of Suspicion and dread, no otherwise than as if it were a likely or possible
thing that a woman should hide a living man under her veil or her attire. And
in this Sonnet (aforesaid) Petrarch sets down IEALOVSIE by four diverse
names: viz. trembling Cold, shiuering Fear, chilly Ice, and melancholy Suspect
Well may Petrarcq brand Love with four such several terms, when, that
learned Philosopher Marcus Aurelius calls it a cruel impression of that
wonderful passion, which to be defined is impossible, because no words reach
to the strong nature of it, and only they know it, who inwardly do feel it.
And therefore I will be bold to descant upon it thus, What is not LOVE? it is
All, Virtue and Vice,
Humble, proud, witty, foolish, kind and nice;
A golden bubble, blown big with idle Dreams,
That waking breaks, and fills us with Extremes.
Or rather thus; LOVE backward speld (put I for O) is EVIL
Add D before the same, and it is the DEVIL.
A DEVIL it is, and mischief such does work,
As never yet did Pagan, Jew, nor Turk.

as he calls Love by four other several words, Zeal, Hope, Fire and
Desire: the Reasons whereof we will (at some other time) disclose, and so
conclude with our Authors Epilogue: Vatene; a che piufiera che non suole, etc.
Dispatch, begone; why fiercer than before,
And far more stranger than thou wont'st to be:
(Since venime thine, to poison me the more
Through every vain dispersed is by thee?)
Do thou return to me in shadows new,
The more to force me still to grieve and rue?


This fourth and last part agrees meruaylous well with the beginning and
midst of this Sonnet, according to Horace his Advice, where he says, in his
Book De Art Poetica.

Primum ne medio, medium ne discrepet imo, etc.
The First with Midst, the Midst with
The latter must agree.
If thus thy work be framde aright,
It needs must perfect be.
Thus with a kind of brief Repetition he concludes and shuts up the whole
substance of his Sonnet, willing IEALOVSIE once more to be packing, and as it
were, seeming to be angry and to chide her, alleging (to persuade her the
sooner to be gone,) the Reasons before alleged: for as much signifies these
two Verses: Since venime thine, to poison me the more,
Through every vein dispersed is in me,
As the other twain above mentioned: Since thou (so soon) amongst my sugared
sweets,
Have mixed thy bitter Drugs, etc.


And partly it declares the nature of this insatiable Monster, who thinks it
not enough, to have infected and spoiled a man with her poison on the sudden:
but she must also turn back again, with diverse and strange Apparisions and
Shadows, that is, with new Fashions and Shapes, after a more cruel and
fearful manner, every day more than other, and so increases continually, to
the greater coffeehouse of his mind. But this Part being sufficient plain
of it self, I will speak the less herein, only, as you know well enough,
this word ( Besides these Laruae (in Latin the condemned Souls of the wicked)
the Heathens held there were these kinds of Spirits more, LARES, GENII, MANES,
and LEMVRES, and the Lares, which came of of LARVE, were those Shadows and
Ghosts which they supposed did torment the domestical and particular
Inhabitants of private houses.
Larue) in the Latin tongue, signifies the condemned Souls of the wicked,
which we in our vulgar tongue term Spirits of Ghosts: but here it intimates A
Fantasme is according to S. Austin, an Imagination, and an Impression in the
Soul, of such Forms and Shapes as are known, or of such as shall be imagined
without any sight had of them. But a Spectre or Apparition is an Imagination of
a Substance without a Body, the which presents it self sensibly unto man,
against the order and course of Nature, and makes him afraid, only the
difference between the one and the other is this; A Fantasme is a thing
without life and substance, and the APPARISION or SPECTRE, has a substance
hidden and concealed, which seems to move the fantasticq body, the which it
has taken.
sundry Shadows, Fantasmes, and Apparisions, in which (as they say) they use
to appear. And this is borrowed out of Petrarcq, in one of his Sonnets
beginning thus: Fuggendo la preson ou' Amor, etc.
Ladies, it tedious were to set down here,
How much I grieve at my new liberty,
Since I brake prison; where so many year
Love kept me (as he pleased) most watchfully,
My Heart would tell me often he could not live,
But as he did, whilst Cupid (subtle Else)
Met me in Shadows false, me (more) to grieve,
And might deceive a wiser than my self.
This makes me often look back, and (sighing) say
Woe's me too late, now to my loss I find,
It Is worse with me now I am escaped away,
My Yoke and Chains were wont to be more kind:
Too late I now perceive my wilful fall,
And hardly (now) can I my self untwine
From my first Error, which I would recall,
In which I wound my self through Follies mine;
When I was bound, I then wished to be free;
Now I am freed, I loath my Liberty.


And now this Sonnet of our being expounded and ended, there are (most noble
Auditors) many and sundry goodly and delightful doubts, no less profitable
than difficult and hard to conceive, about this subject of IEALOVSIE. But
because (presuming upon your courteous patience) I have somewhat exceeded the
prefixed time, appointed for this solemn place, I would be loath (any longer)
to be tedious unto you; and therefore we will only touch some of the chief
and principal of them by the way, and such as we shall think to be most
fitting and necessary for us. First then, some make a doubt, and are marvelous
desirous to be resolved in this point, which is: whether Love, I mean that
There are six properties in LOVE. Self-love is the ground of Mischief.
Laciuious Love, the root of Remorse. Wanton Love the Cowards warfare. Pure
Love never saw the face of Fear. Pure Loves eyes pierce the darkest corners,
and pure Love attempteth the greatest dangers, but this Love which is a desire
of Beauty, is a Hea^^ull of Coldness, a Sweet full of Bitterness, a Pain
full of Pleasantnes making thoughts have Eyes, and Hearts Ears. It is bred by
Desire: nursed by Delight: weaned by Jealousy: killed by Dissembling, and buried
by Ingratitude; to be brief, It is not to be suppressed by Wisdom, because not
to be comprehended with Reason.
Love which is the desire of beauty, may be without IEALOVSIE, as it seems
Petrarcq is of that opinion, in that Sonnet of his, (mentioned so often by us
heretofore) where he says, that he loves his Mistress Laura, without being
Ielous at all; and he shows the reason thereof, and what the cause was he did
so, when he said: L'altra non gia ch'el mio bell fuoco e tale, etc.
The other's none of mine,
For my fire's of such power, etc.
l' Amor chen cend il cuore,
To this we answer briefly thus:

True Love does look with pure suspicious eye,
And you kill Love, cashiering IEALOVSIE?
Although another writes after this sort: On Love (says some) waits IEALOVSIE,
But IEALOVSIE wants Love:
When curiously the overplus,
Does idle quarrels move.

Love (truly) we cannot, unless there be some spice of IEALOVSIE therein; and
the reason is, for that (as Aristotle in his eight Book of Elegies says, Love
is of one alone, but Friendship is amongst few. And where Ovid writes to Ovid.
lib. 2. and Eleg. 10. The substance of which Elegy is this.
Grecinus, well I wot thou told'st me once,
I could not be in Love with two at once;
By thee deceived, by thee surprised am I,
For now I Love two Women equally:
Both are well favored, both rich in array,
And which the lou'liest is, it is hard to say,
This seems the fairest, so does that to me,
And this does please me most, and so does she:
Even as a Boat tossed by contrary Wind,
So with this Love, and that wauers my Mind.

Grecinus, that he liked and loved two women, and (both of them) at one time:
my opinion, under correction) is, he mistook himself in the name, although
greater matters than these are tolerable, and pass for current amongst Poets,
whereupon our amorous Master This man was borne in Pratolino, a small Village
in Tuscanie, not far from Florence, he wrote many sorts of Poemes,
especially, Elegies, in which he is counted, and (as others write) preferred
before Ovid. He had two Kinsemen, that were Scholars, the one Baptista
Allemanni, Bishop of Macone, a little Town in Lombardie, and of inward
acquaintance with this Author Benedisto Varchi, and the other called Antonio
Allemanni, who wrote many pretty and witty works, in the Italian tongue,
imitating Burchiello, in his manner of Verse, called BVRCHIELLESCA, and had
acquaintance with most of the learned men of his time, whom he mentions very
often, especially, in this Sonnet following. Io, non inu^co Apollo, o altro
Iddio,
E veggio che le Muse'launo troppo n^ia,
L'a iuto Orrinzo, el, Fedele, el, Pistoia,
Pietro, Pamfilo, Sasso, el, Tibaldeo,
E frai nostri Toscani, il Vnice, e Ceo,
Questi versacchi miei, son loro a noia,
E come Marzia, io prenderei la quoia,
Che io non son con costor bu^n Cetaro.

Jews Allemanni says, imitating his most witty Shoolemaster Ovid, in one of
his dainty and sweet Tuscan Elegies, thus.

Per qual cagion auien crudel Amore,
Che fuor d'ogn' uso human per Cinthia and Flora,
Porto due fiamme, and non ha piu d'un cuore?
What is the reason (tell me) cruel Love,
That against all common sense I wretch should prove,
And bear two fires, when I have but one heart,
For Cinthia and for Flora, more to make me smart?
Now if the woman that is beloved, should affect another, (when there cannot be
any Love true, but of one alone) it must then of necessity follow, that she
should not care for her first friend or Lover, this being the principal point
required of her. Besides, the According to that saying: Love does desire the
thing beloved to see,
That like it self in lou'ly shape may be.
And as another very wittily writes: LOVES greatest powerful Force and
Excellence,
Is to transform the very Soul and Essence
Of the Lover into the thing beloved,
For so by deep Philosophy to is proved.

Lover coveting and desiring to beget of his Mistress a thing like unto
himself, it must follow by this rule, that he should not obtain his purpose,
having his she-Friend common to another. And whosoever believes, or is of
opinion, that a man may (truly) and from the heart, love and affect more then
one, at one and the selfsame time, is very much mistaken, as (besides the
authority of Aristotle aforesaid) we have proved (even now) in this place:
neither does he rightly understand how that party who loves indeed, loves
his Friend as his own proper and best good, he craving and desiring nothing
so much than that twain should become one, as Plato reports, those two
Lovers answered Vulcan very well, and to this purpose Lodouicq Martelli spoke
excellent well, saying: Nessun puo far, di queich' al mondo sono,
A piu d' una di se gradito dono.
No man (for present) can himself bestow,
But on one woman, if he honest show.
And (me thinks) he spoke as well, when he said thus: Et poco e'ldon, ch'un di
se stesso fece, etc.
Think you that man does give but little wealth,
When (gift-wise) he bestows All himself?
Having said before. Et quei ch'ama diuoi, (done) piu d'una, etc.
Fair Ladies, he that shall love more
Than one of any you;
And at one time dissembler is,
His Love can not be true:
His mind's beyond his might, like he
That with his daring eye
Stands staring on the Sunny beams,
And blinded is thereby:


We will then, for conclusion, say, that wheresoever With which opinion these
Verses agree well. The trewest Love (sometim's) suspicious,
And feeds on Cares and Fears most amorous;
Nor can LOVE live without some IEALOVSIE,
Which taken away, it strait begins to dye.

true Love is, there indeed some IEALOVSIE must most necessarily be, and where
no IEALOVSIE is, there of necessity can be no true Love indeed; as a certain
Gentleman (a friend of mine) wrote to his Mistress, (who took some exceptions
against him, because he seemed to be a little yellow of her) when amongst
other things he wrote thus unto her. Nor let not this (Lady) your mind once
move:
Jealous to be (in some sort) is true Love.
And of this opinion was Petrarcq, as you may perceive in the beginning of that
his Sonnet so often, by peece-meale, repeated by us, although (in the end
thereof) he to insinuate into her favor, (and to commend his Mistres Laura the
more) faineth like a right Poet, that there was no IEALOVSIE in him, which
nevertheless, he yields to be in any other Lover else; and which our
familiar acquaintance Master Jews Allemanni, knowing to be but too true, added
(therefore) those speeches (set down a little before by me) Fuor d'ogni vso
humano. Meaning hereby, as if it were a thing against nature any living man,
should not have some small spice of IEALOVSIE in him.

Another doubt is, whether IEALOVSIE be (naturally) in Lovers or no, many
affirming it is, and withal, alleging the same likewise to be in every bruit
Beast, as well as in man, Considering the great Plagues and Afflictions which
many (too too Jealous over their Wives) inflict most worthily upon themselves,
the voluntary Cuckolds, and kind Wittols, are to be counted wise, in respect
of the other, because they are never tortured with such frightfull and sensible
punishment: for, Most certain to is, where IEALOVSIE is bred,
HORNS in the Mind, are worse then HORNS on the Head.
Nay more, I hold Cockolds for their patience (herein) to be the only true
happy and wise men indeed, for if (according to Seneca in his Epistles) he
that is Temperate, is Constant; who is Constant is untroubled, who is
untroubled is without sorrow; who is without sorrow, is happy, wherefore he
that is such a one is Happy, and wisdom is sufficient to a happy man: then
say I, that all these Qualities coueriuing in a Cuckold, he must needs be
both Wise and Happy.
excepting only in those kind of ouerkinde Creatures, to whom our language
has given a strange name, by reason they are careless and respectlesse of
their own honors, accounting it a small matter for their Wives to be of the
common gender, and more courteous then indeed ciuility or good manners require
they should be.

And certainly it cannot be denied, but that That Beasts participate of this
plague, the Shepherd Cratis found too much to his cost, who being fallen in
Love with a shee-Goat, her Buck (through mere Jealousy) beat out his brains,
as he lay asleep.
many senseless and brute beasts are Jealous, as is apparently seen in Bulls,
in The Tale of the Swanne about Windsor, finding a strange Cock with his Mate,
and how far he swam after the other to kill it, and then returning back,
slew his Hen also (this being a certain truth, and not many years done upon
this our Thames) is so well known to many Gentlemen, and to most Watermen of
this River, as it were needless, to use any more words about the same; yet are
there two brethren that I know, who (should any such strange thing be reported
unto them, especially by a Traveler) they would but scoff at him for his
labor, so peremptory and yet simple are they in their own conceits; yea, they
will not stick to laugh and gibe thereat, as if it were a loud lie, only
because they themselves have never seen nor known the like: but these silly
animals, and jolly crowing Cocks on their own Dunghill, Ariosto taxes
excellently well in the beginning of his seventh Canto, of his Orlando
Furioso, but this being out of their element, I will tell them, in their own
natural and Mother tongue, what our Country man young Master Withers writes:
(Whose pleasing Satyrs never shall decay,
But flourish green, like Laurel and the Bay.)
It Is gross, says he, and vain for to uphold
That all reports which Travelers unfold
Of foreign Lands, are lies; because they see
No such strange things in their own Parish be,
And if I may not term such Fellows vain,
I Will say, they are dull, and of a shallow brain.
And him I count no wiseman that imparts
To men of such base misconceiuing hearts
Any rare matter; for their brutish wit
Will very quickly wrong both him and it:
For thus the saying is, and I hold so,
Ignorance only is true Wisdoms foe.

Swannes, in Lions, in Doves, in Hens, and such like. Besides, me thinks,
it is as natural a thing for a man to be Jealous, as to desire to engender,
and beget that which is like to himself, which is the most natural thing (as
Aristotle avouches in his second Book De Anima) that living Creatures can
do. And this they do, that they might (as he alleges oftentimes) in some
sort, participate and come near unto divine Nature, as much, and after the
best manner they shall be able.

Now if any shall doubt whether IEALOVSIE be a natural thing or no, or (if it
being so) why then should it be condemned and blamed so much (considering that
according to Aristotle's rule, none ought either to be praised or blamed for any
thing, they do through the secret instinct of Nature, they being as it were
indifferent (as we may term them;) To them I answer thus: we condemn not
IEALOVSIE it self, but the Here the Author shows his opinion as concerning
IEALOVSIE, because he would not be mistaken, condemning this foolish and
suspicious Humor; taken or conceited upon no occasion or cause given, by many
men ouer-rashly, and to the utter overthrow, many times of themselves, and of
such as they love and affect most dearly, wishing the golden Mean, that is,
the Mediocritie or Virtue herein, to be used by every one, and that also with
great Discreation and Judgment, remembering always this Lesson. TO is fast
good will, and gentle courtesies,
Reclaimes a Woman, and not watching eyes;
For where Suspect directs forward wills,
Beauties sweet dalliance with despite it kills:
And where a Man is Jealous without cause,
The Woman good, for to be bad (often) draws.

Excess, and the too-too much of the same, as we find not fault with eating
and drinking moderately, and other such natural desires; but the abuse
thereof, through too much glutonie. Surfeiting, Quaffing, and Drunkenness,
being that which we blame and disallow of, and therefore if any shall be
Jealous with discretion, (and not without great and important cause,) observing
a true and temperate decorum in the Time, the place, the person, and the cause,
as is fit and convenient for him; especially, if it shall concern his own
reputation and credit, or the good name of his Mistress, or Wife, he is not to
be discommended at all.

Another doubt is, whether this Disease is to be helped, And yet under
correction, and by the Authors leave, it is hardly cured, if it have once taken
any deep root, especially (as Montagnie writes) in the Femall Sex, whom to
advise, to distaste and give over this franticque Passion, were but time and
labor lost. Their Essence, as he affirms, (for I will not in any wise
subscribe to such an Heretical opinion as this is, and therefore I allege
authority, Certissima omnium regula) being so much infected with IEALOVSIE,
with Vanity, and Curiosity, that there is no hope to cure them by any lawful
means, they often recovering of this infirmity, by a form of health, much
more to be feared, than the disease it self: for even as some Enchantment
cannot rid away an evil spirit, but with laying it upon another, so when
they loose it, they transfer and bestow this Malady upon their husbands. But
(holla) pardon me, (fayre-Ladies and Gentlewomen) to whose lot it shall fall
by chance to read this Note. Had it not been but that I should have left this
part Defective, and a mere Heteroclite, I would not have proceeded so far as
I did: and now for amends, (yet not to flatter you at all,) speak Mounsieur
Montagnie in French what he list, yet could I, and can allege as much, if not
more, against our own Male-kinde, the Italian and others, and (I am sorry so
to say) some here in our own Country of England, testifying as much, who are
and have been as violent, and virulent in this Bedlam-like Humor, as any
Woman Virago whatsoever.
or else be a wound immortal, and incurable, as Ariosto affirms, with diverse
others, who all subscribe to his opinion. To which I answer, that as the
occasions which first bred the same, shall decrease or increase, so shall
IEALOVSIE it self, either decay or continue, and so when the cause shall be
quite removed, Some say I, and some say No,
But few the Truth as yet do know.
Gramatici certant and adhuc sub Iudice lis est,
The Mayor part think this Iealosie to be like the Zwitzers in Germany, who if
they once get entertainment in some good Castle or Hold, they will hardly, or
never out: resembling such as keep possession of a place, from whence they are
seldom removed, but by some great danger, or bloodshed: for as of little
Brooks proceed great Rivers, so from small sparks of IEALOVSIE arise great
flames of distemperature, and then to trouble; such a one with good counsel,
is but to augment his pain with suspicion the more: and as a certain writer
speaks very well. No thraldom like the yoke of IEALOVSIE,
A yoke that makes the living (still) to dye:
It is the gnawing Vultur of the mind,
For which nor Wit, nor Counsel, help can find.

IEALOVSIE it self shall be quite taken away, as the saying is, Sublata causa
tollitur Effectus, I mean the Effects thereof, and that which is more than
needs, for as we see that in a sick body we may expel all superfluities,
with purgations, and all gross humors from thence, either by fit Medicine, or
by abstinence from Meats, or by forbearing of Drinks, or such like good and
wholesome kind of Diet: Even so, with Wisdom, Discretion, and Patience is
the Mother of Opportunity, she presenting her self to them that nourish her
Daughter carefully, when (before Rashness and Anger) she goes inuisibly, and
hinders them from what they most thirst after, and therefore Patience
preuailes against wrongs; effects them All
In Time; when Haste headlong makes Men to fall.
And to this effect another writes thus. The Minds afflictions, Patience can
appease,
It Passions kills, and heals each Disease.
And a third man thus. Patience is praise, Forbearance is a Treasure,
Suffrance an Angel, Rage a Fiend sans measure:
Let gentle Patience profit thee, for Patience is a thing,
Whereby a Beggar gains of a discontented King.

Patience, may we easily drive away and expel the Force and Rage of
IEALOVSIE, either more or less, according to the orders before appointed; and
so again by the contrary reasons (wanting the foresaid discreet remedies) it
sometimes bursteth out so far, and exceeds beyond her bounds so much, as it
turns it self into extreme Hatred, and from thence falls into a Frenzy,
and Madness, not alone against the party it loves, or his adversary or
Rival, but as well against all such, who, as he thinks, may be any way an
obstacle or let, to hinder or cross him in his dissigne and purpose, whereupon
have ensued most cruel reuengements, and most horrible and savage murders,
beyond all common sense and reason; yea, many times against their own
reputations and Honors, and against their own proper selfs, and life's, as we
may see and read in Histories, as well Ancient as Modern, and as Poets in
their fictions and shadows, show more at large, as when they feign how See
Ouids Metamorphosis, for this History, and the other of Calisto at large, which
to set down were tedious.
Io was turned into a Cow, through mere IEALOVSIE, and Calisto into a Bear,
and the Tale of Procris, who by chance was slain by her own Husband Cephalus.

The like tragical Tale may you read in Platoes Moral discourses, of this
Cyanippus, and of another called Emilius, where the Curious may content
himself every way.
Plato likewise, a most grave and veritable writer, affirms such an other
disastre to have happened unto the Wife of one called Cyanippus, and of a
second man ycleped Emilius: but the most These two first Tragedies, the one of
a Captain of Nocera, a Town belonging to the Dukedom of Spoleto in Italy:
and the other of a Knight of Millane, you shall find in diverse Italian Authors,
diversely set down, and as well translated (but that he is a little too
tedious in his phrase of speech) into English by Sir Geffery Fenton Knight, one
of our late Queen Elizabeth's (of everliving memory) privy Counsel in Ireland.
strangest and horrible murders committed in these our days, through the
fury of IEALOVSIE, were these three: the one by a Captain of Nocer^ (a City
in Italy) upon his Lord and Master, by reason of his Wife: the second more
execrable than the other, was of a Knight of Millan, a follower of the Lord
Trivultio, who causeless (through the devilish instinct of this hellish
IEALOVSIE) slew his fair and virtuous wife, only because he could not endure
that any man should match with her, after his own death: and that done, He,
with the selfsame bloody dagger, stabbed himself through his own heart. The
third and last, was, (as I have been credibly informed by a Venetian Merchant,
a friend of mine, traffiking in the famous City of London,) perpetrated by a
This was W. C. of C. in the County of York Esquire; who practiced murder
upon his fair and virtuous Wife, but committed the same upon two young
Infants, his Sons, the 23. of April (then S. Georges day) in Anno 1605. For
which he was executed on Monday the 5. day of May, next following.
young Gentleman of a great House in ENGLAND, who left his fair Wife for dead,
after he had butchered two lovely Babes, his own little Sons, and entending
to have killed the third, but that he was by great good fortune, prevented of
this his bloody purpose.

But leaving to speak any more of such Tragical and unmanly attempts as
these, I say, there are some that deserve to be reprehended, in the sharpest
manner that may be, who, knowing that Love is in God, nay rather, that he is
the first Love, and the occasion of all other good Affections whatsoever, are
so sottish as to suppose, that their is IEALOVSIE, after the same manner in
him, as there is in us, which is mere and monstrous Blasphemy, for one (but in
thought) to conceit as much, they not knowing, or at leastwise forgetting,
that all things in God, or which are attributed unto him, are in him, after
another different manner, then they are in us, because, that Love which is in
God, is mere Piety and Of the marriage of Charity with her other two Sisters
Faith and Hope, there is a pretty Tale, which is this: About the Beginning of
the world, these three Sisters, left Heaven, to come down here to the earth,
to get good Husbands: and such was Faiths good fortune, as she stayed not
long, but sped of her purpose: for Abraham, who was the Father of the
Faithful, took her quickly to Wife. Hope seeing her Sisters good hap, had
good hope to meet with the like good match, yet stayed she somewhat long,
before she could speed; but in the end David took her to his Spouse: for he
always hoped in God, and as he says, My Soul hops in the Lord. But poor
Charity had the worst luck of the three; for ever since her first coming
hither, she has wandered up and down and none would entertain her, nor as
yet will; so that (by reason the world is so cold in Charity,) she is like to
remain a Virgin still, and so return to the better place, from whence she
first came.
Charity, and is in him endless, whereas the Affection and Love, which men
bear one to another, has his End as well as his Beginning: But this Subject,
is too deep and bottomless a Sea, for the light plummet of my Shallow wit to
sound, and too high a Mystery for my slender conceit to diue or search into the
secrets thereof: And therefore rendering most humble thanks unto that
Almighty We will in our Notes, as we began, so conclude with God, who as he
is the Beginning of All things, so is he the End, ALPHA and OMEGA; He is the
First LOVE, and the Last LOVE, and is CHARITY it self: than which nothing
more precious, since he that dwells in CHARITY, dwells in God, and what
more secure? and God in him, then, what more delectable? and to conclude: God
is all Love, Affection, Charity,
Which has no end but is eternally.

Power, who is All in All, knows All, and can do All; and acknowledging my
self much beholding unto All here, for your extraordinary and undeserved
Patience, I rest,

A most devoted Servant unto you All, B. V.

FINIS.

