AN ANSWER TO A CHALLENGE MADE BY A JESUIT in JRELAND. WHEREIN THE IVDGEMENT
OF ANTIQUITY in the points questioned is truly delivered, and the Noveltie of
the now ROMISH doctrine plainly discovered

By JAMES VSSHER Bishop of Mead.

MATTHEW. 19.8. From the beginning it was not so.

DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. 1624.

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY, JAMES BY THE GRACE OF God King of great BRITAIN,
FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign.
We find it recorded for the everlasting honor of Theodosius the younger,
that it was his use Socrat. lib. 7. hist. cap. 22.
to reason with his Bishops of the things contained in the holy Scriptures, as
if he himself had been one of their order: and of the Emperor Alexius in
latter days; that Suthym. Zigaben. in Praefat. Dogmaticae Panopliae.
whatsoever time he could spare from the public cares of the Commonwealth,
he did wholly employ in the diligent reading of Gods book, and in conferring
thereof with worthy men, of whom his Court was never empty. How little
inferior, or how much superior rather, your Majesty is to either of these in
this kind of praise, I need not speak: it is acknowledged even by such as
differ from you in the point of Religion, as a matter that has Io. Brereley,
in his Epistle before S. Augu^tines Religion.
added more than ordinary luster of ornament to your Royal estate; that you
do not forbear so much as at the time of your bodily repast, to have for the
then like feeding of your intellectual part, your Highness table surrounded
with the attendance and conference of your grave and learned Divines.

What inward joy my heart conceived, as often as I have had the happiness to be
present at such seasons, I forbear to utter: only I will say with Job; that
Job 29.11.
the ear which heard you blessed you, and the eye which saw you, gave witness
to you. But of all other things which I observed, your singular dexterity in
detecting the frauds of the Romish Church, and untying the most knotty
arguments of the Sophisters of that side, was it (I confess) that I admired
most. especially where occasion was offered you to utter your skill, not in the
word of God alone, but also in the Antiquities of the Church: wherein you have
attained such a measure of knowledge as (with honor to God, I trust I may
speak it, and without flattery to you) in a well studied Divine we would
account very commendable, but in such a Monarch as your self almost
incredible. And this is one cause (most Gracious Sovereign) beside my general
duty, and the many special obligations whereby I am otherwise bound unto your
Majesty, which has emboldned me to entreat your patience at this time, in
vouchsafing to be a spectator of this combat, which I am now entered into with
a Jesuit, who charge us to disallow many chief articles, which the Saints
and Fathers of the Primitive Church did generally hold to be true; and
undertaketh to make good, that they of his side do not disagree from that holy
Church, either in these, or in any other point of Religion.

Now true it is, if a man do only attend unto the bare sound of the word, (as
in the question of Merit, for example) or to the thing in general, without
descending into the particular consideration of the true ground thereof (as in
the matter of Praying for the dead) he may easily be induced to believe, that
in diverse of these controversies the Fathers speak clearly for them and
against us: neither is there any one thing that has won more credit to that
religion, or more advanced it in the consciences of simple men, than the
conformity that it retains in some words and outward observances with the
ancient Church o^ Christ. Whereas if the thing it self were narrowly looked
into, it would be found that they have only the shell without the kernel, and
we the kernel without the shell: they having retained certain words and rites
of the ancient Church, but applied them to a new invented doctrine; and we on
the other side having relinquished these words and observances, but retained
nevertheless the same primitive doctrine, unto which by their first
institution they had relation.

The more cause have I to count my self happy, that am to answer of these
matters before a King that is able to discern betwixt things that differ, and
has knowledge of all these questions. Act. 26.26.
before whom therefore I may speak boldly: because I am persuaded that none of
these things are hid from him. For it is not of late days that your Majesty
has begun to take these things into your consideration: from a child have you
been trained up to this warfare; yea before you were twenty years of age, the
Lord had taught your hands to fight against the man of sin, and your fingers
to make battle against his Babel. Whereof your Paraphrase upon the Revelation
of S. John is a memorable monument left to all posterity: which I can never
look upon, but those verses of the Poet run always in my mind: Caesaribus
virtus contigit ante diem; Ovid.

Jngenium coeleste suis velocius annis
Surgit, and ignavae fert mala damna morae.


How constant you have been ever since in the profession and maintenance of
the truth: your late protestation, made unto both the houses of your Parliament,
gives sufficient evidence. So much whereof as may serve for a present antidote
against that false and scandalous Merc. Gallobelgic. ann. 1623.
Oration spread amongst forrainers under your Majesty's sacred name: I humbly
make bold to insert in this place, as a perpetual testimony of your integrity
in this behalf.

His Majesty's Answer to the Petition of the Parliament touching Recusants, 23.
April. 1624.
WHAT my religion is my books do declare, my profession and my behavior do
show: and J hope in God, J shall never live to be thought otherwise; sure I am,
J shall never deserve it. And for my part I wish that it might be written in
Marble and remain to posterity, as a mark upon me, when I shall swerve from
my Religion. for he that does dissemble with God, is not to be trusted by man.
My Lords, I protest before God, my heart has bled, when I have heard of the
increase of Popery: and God is my Judge it has been so great a grief unto
me, that it has been like thorns in mine eyes and pricks in my sides; so
far have I been and ever shall be, from turning any other way. And my Lords
and Gentlemen, you all shall be my Confessors; if J knew any way better than
other to hinder the growth of Popery, I would take it: and he cannot be an
honest man, who knowing as J do and being persuaded as I am, would do
otherwise.

As you have so long since begun, and happily continued, so go on (most
renowned King) and still show your self to be a Defender of the faith. fight
the Lords battles courageously, honor him evermore, and advance his truth.
that when you have fought this good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.8
and finished your course, and kept the faith; you may receive the Crown of
righteousness, reserved in heaven for you. for the obtaining of which double
blessing, both of grace and of glory, together with all outward prosperity and
happiness in this life; you shall never want the instant prayers of

Your Majesty's most faithful subject and humble servant, IA. MIDENSIS.

TO THE READER.
IT is now about six years (as I gather by the reckoning laid down in the
25th page of this book) since this following Challenge was brought unto me
from a Jesuit; and received that general Answer, which now serves to make up
the first chapter only of this present work. The particular points, which were
by him but barely named, I meddled not withal at that time: conceiving it to
be his part (as in the 34th page is touched) who sustained the person of the
Assailant, to bring forth his arms and give the first onset, and mine, as the
Defendant, to repel his encounter afterward. Only I then collected certain
materials out of the Scriptures and writings of the Fathers, which I meant to
make use of for a second conflict, whenever this Challenger should be pleased
to descend to the handling of the particular articles by him proposed; the
truth of every of which he had taken upon him to prove, by the express
testimonies of the Fathers of the primitive Church, as also by good and
certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures, if the Fathers authority would
not suffice.

Thus this matter lay dead for diverse years together: and so would still have
done, but that some of high place in both Kingdoms, having been pleased to
think far better of that little which I had done than the thing deserved,
advised me to go forward, and to deliver the judgment of Antiquity touching
those particular points in controversy, wherein the Challenger was so
confident that the whole current of the Doctors, Pastors and Fathers of the
Primitive Church did mainly run on his side. Hereupon I gathered my scattered
notes together, and as the multitude of my employments would give me leave,
now entered into the handling of one point and then of another: treating of
each, either more briefly or more largely, as the opportunity of my present
leisure would give me leave. And so at last, after many interruptions, I have
made up in such manner as thou see, a kind of a Doctrinall History of those
several points, which the Jesuit culled out, as special instances of the
consonancie of the doctrine now maintained in the Church of Rome, with the
perpetual and constant judgment of all Antiquity.

The doctrine that here I take upon me to defend, (what different opinions
soever I relate of others) is that which by public authority is professed in
the Church of England, and comprised in the book of Articles agreed upon in
the Synod held at LONDON in the year 1562. concerning which I dare be bold to
challenge our Challenger and all his accomplices, that they shall never be able
to prove, that there is either any one article of Religion disallowed therein,
which the Saints and Fathers of the Primitive Church did generally hold to be
true, (I use the words of my challenging Jesuit) or any one point of doctrine
allowed, which by those Saints and Fathers was generally held to be untrue. As
for the testimonies of the Authors which I allege, I have been careful to
set down in the margent their own words in their own language (such places
of the Greek Doctors only excepted, whereof the original text could not be
had) as well for the better satisfaction of the Readers (who either cannot come
by that variety of books, whereof use is here made, or will not take the
pains to enter into a curious search of every particular allegation) as for
the preventing of those trifling quarrels that are commonly made against
translations. for if it fall out, that word be not every where precisely
rendered by word (as who would tie himself to such a pedanticall observation?)
none but an idle caviller can object, that this was done with any purpose to
corrupt the meaning of the Author; whose words he sees laid down before his
eyes, to the end he may the better judge of the translation and rectify it
where there is cause.

Again, because it is a thing very material in the historical handling of
controversies, both to understand the Times wherein the several Authors lived,
and likewise what books be truly or falsely ascribed to each of them: for some
direction of the Reader in the first, I have annexed at the end of this book,
a Chronologicall Catalogue of the Authors cited therein (wherein such as have
no number of years affixed unto them, are thereby signified to be Incerti
temporis; their age being not found by me, upon this sudden search, to be noted
by any:) and for the second, I have seldom neglected in the work it self,
whenever a doubtful or supposititious writing was alleged, to give some
intimation whereby it might be discerned that it was not esteemed to be the
book of that Author, unto whom it was entitled. The exact discussion as well
of the Authors Times, as of the Censures of their works, I refer to my
Theological Bibliotheque: if God hereafter shall lend me life and leisure, to
make up that work, for the use of those that mean to give themselves to that
Noble study of the doctrine and rites of the ancient Church.

In the mean time I commit this book to thy favorable censure, and thy self
to Gods gracious direction: earnestly advising thee, that whatsoever other
studies thou intermittest, the careful and conscionable reading of Gods book
may never be neglected by thee. for whatsoever becomes of our disputes
touching other antiquities or novelties: thou may stand assured, that thou
shall there find so much by Gods blessing, as shall be able to make thee wise
unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and to build thee up, Acts 20.32.
and to give thee an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. Which next
under Gods glory, is the utmost thing (I know) that thou aimest at: and for the
attaining whereunto I heartily wish, Coloss. 3.16
that the word of Christ may dwell in thee richly, in all wisdom.

THE CONTENTS of the BOOK.
CHAP. I. A General answer to the Jesuits Challenge. page 1. CHAP. II. Of
Traditions. page 35. CHAP. III. Of the Real presence. page 44. CHAP. IIII. Of
Confession. page 81. CHAP. V. Of the Priests power to forgive sins. page 109.
CHAP. VI. Of Purgatory. page 163. CHAP. VII. Of Prayer for the dead. page 182.
CHAP. VIII. Of Limbus Patrum; and Christ's descent into Hell. page 252. CHAP.
IX. Of Prayer to Saints. page 377. CHAP. X. Of Images. page 447. CHAP. XI. Of
Free Will. page 464. CHAP. XII. Of Merits. page 492.
THE IESVITES CHALLENGE.
How shall I answer to a Papist, demanding this Question?
YOur Doctors and Masters grant that the Church of Rome for 400 or 500 years
after Christ, did hold the true Religion. First then would I feign know, what
Bishop of Rome did first alter that Religion, which you commend in them of the
first 400 years? In what Pope his days was the true Religion overthrown in
Rome?

Next, I would feign know, How can your Religion be true, which dissalloweth of
many chief articles, which the Saints and Fathers of that primitive Church of
Rome did generally hold to be true?

For they of your side, that have read the Fathers of that unspotted Church,
can well testify (and if any deny it, it shall be presently shown) that the
Doctors, Pastors, and Fathers of that Church do allow of Traditions; that they
acknowledge the real presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Altar: that they exhorted the people to confess their sins unto their
ghostly Fathers: that they affirmed, that Priests have power to forgive sins:
that they taught, that there is a Purgatory: that prayer for the dead is both
commendable and godly: that there is Limbus Patrum, and that our Savior
descended into Hell, to deliver the ancient Fathers of the Old Testament;
because before his Passion none ever entered into Heaven: that prayer to Saints,
and use of holy Images was of great account amongst them: that man has
free will, and that for his meritorious works he receives, through the
assistance of Gods grace, the bliss of everlasting happiness.

Now would I feign know whether of both have the true Religion, they that hold
all these above said points, with the Primitive Church; or they that do most
vehemently contradict, and gainsay them? They that do not disagree with that
holy Church, in any point of Religion; or they that agree with it but in very
few, and disagree in almost all?

Will you say, that these Fathers maintained these opinions, contrary to the
word of God? why you know that they were the pillars of Christianity, the
champions of Christ his Church, and of the true Catholic Religion, which they
most learnedly defended against diverse heresies; and therefore spent all their
time in a most serious study of the holy Scripture. Or will you say, that
although they knew the Scriptures to repugne, yet they brought in the aforesaid
opinions by malice and corrupt intentions? Why your selves cannot deny but
that they lived most holy and virtuous lives, free from all malicious
corrupting, or perverting of Gods holy word, and by their holy lives are now
made worthy to reign with God in his glory. In so much as their admirable
learning may sufficiently cross out all suspicion of ignorant error; and their
innocent sanctity freeeth us from all mistrust of malicious corruption.

Now would I willingly see what reasonable answer may be made to this. For the
Protestants grant, that the Church of Rome for 400 or 500 years, held the
true Religion of Christ: yet do they exclaim against the abovesaid Articles,
which the same Church did maintain and uphold, as may be shown by the
express testimonies of the Fathers of the same Church; and shall be largely
laid down, if any learned Protestant will deny it.

Yea, which is more, for the confirmation of all the above mentioned points of
our Religion, we will produce good and certain grounds out of the sacred
Scriptures, if the Fathers authority will not suffice. And we do desire any
Protestant to allege any one Text out of the said Scripture, which condemns
any of the above written points: which we hold for certain they shall never
be able to do. For indeed they are neither more learned, more pious, nor more
holy then the blessed Doctors and Martyrs of that first Church of Rome, which
they allow and esteem of so much, and by which we most willingly will be
tried, in any point which is in controversy betwixt the Protestants and the
Catholics. Which we desire may be done with christian charity and sincerity,
to the glory of God, and instruction of them that are astray.

W. B.

AN ANSWER TO THE FORMER CHALLENGE.
TO uphold the Religion, which at this day is maintained in the Church of Rome,
and to discredit the truth which we profess: three things are here urged, by
one who has undertaken to make good the Papists cause against all gainesayers.
The first concerns the original of the errors wherewith that part stands
charged: the Author and time whereof, he requires us to show. The other two
respect the testimony, both of the Primitive Church, and of the sacred
Scriptures: which, in the points wherein we vary, if this man may be believed,
makes wholly for them, and against us.

First then would he feign know, what Bishop of Rome did first alter that
Religion, which we commend in them of the first 400 years? In what Popes
days was the true Religion overthrown in Rome? To which I answer, First,
that we do not hold that Rome was built in a vain demand, to require from us
the name of any one Bishop of Rome, by whom or under whom this Babylonish
speak lies in hypocrisy. (1. Tim. 4.1, 2.) The impiety of the one is so
notorious, that at the very first appearance it is manifestly discerned: the
other is a mystery of iniquity (as the Apostle terms it, 2. These. 2.7.)
iniquitas, sed mystica, id est, pietatis nomine palliata, (so the ordinary
Gloss expounds the place) an iniquity indeed, but mystical, that is,
cloked with the name of piety. And therefore they who kept continual watch
and ward against the one, might sleep while the seeds of the other were a
sowing; yea peradventure might at unawares themselves have some hand in
bringing in of this Trojan horse, commended thus unto them under the name of
Religion, Act. 23.8.
read that the Sadducees taught, there were no Angels: is any man able to
declare unto us, under what high Priest they first broached this error? The
Grecians, Circassians, Georgians, Syrians, Egyptians, Habassines, Muscovites
and Russians, dissent at this day from the Church of Rome in many particulars:
will you take upon you to show in what Bishops days these several differences
did first arise? When the point has been well skanned, it will be found, that
many errors have crept into their profession, the time of the entrance whereof
you are not able to design: and some things also are maintained by you against
them, which have not been delivered for Catholic doctrine in the primitive
times, but brought in afterward, your selves know not when.

Such, for example, is that sacrilege of yours, whereby you withhold from the
people the use of the Cup in the Lords Supper; as also your doctrine of
Indulgences and Purgatory: which they reject, and you defend. For touching the
first, Valent. de legit. usu Euchar. cap. 10.
Gregorius de Valentia, one of your principal Champions, confesses that the
use of receiving the Sacrament in one kind, began first in some Churches, and
grew to be a general custom in the Latin Church not much before the Council
of Constance, in which at last (to wit, 200 years ago) this custom was made a
law. But if you put the question to him, as you do to us, What Bishop of Rome
did first bring in this custom? he gives you this answer, that it began to be
used, not by the decree of any Bishop, but by the very use of the Churches, and
the consent of the faithful. If you further question with him, quando primum
vigere coepit ea consuetudo in aliquibus Ecclesijs? When first did that custom
get footing in some Churches? he returns you for answer, Minime constat: it
is more then he can tell.

The like does Roffens. Assert. Lutheran. confutat. artic. 18.
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Caietan. Opusc. tom. 1. tract 15. de
Indulgent. cap 1.
Cardinal Caietan give us to understand of Indulgences; that no certainty can
be had, what their original was, or by whom they were first brought in. Fisher
also further adds concerning Purgatory: that in the ancient Fathers, there
is either none at all, or very rare mention of it; that by the Grecians it is
not believed even to this day; that the Latins also, not all at once, but by
little and little received it: and that, Purgatory being so lately known, it
is not to be mervailed, that in the first times of the Church there was no use
of Indulgences; seeing these had their beginning, after that men for a while
had been affrighted with the torments of Purgatory. Out of which confession of
the adverse part, you profane novelties were first brought in: seeing that this
pedetentim (as Fisher acknowledges Purgatory did) by little and little, and by
very slow steps, which are not so easy to be discerned,

And as some superstitious usages may draw their original from the undiscreet
devotion of the multitude: so some also may be derived from want of devotion in
the people; and some alterations likewise must be attributed to the very
change of time it self. Of the one we cannot give a fitter instance, then in
your private Mass, wherein the Priest receives the Sacrament alone: which
Hard. answer to the first Article of Iuels challenge, fol. 26. b. Edit.
Ant^erp. Ann. 1565.
Harding fetdheth from no other ground, then lack of devotion of the peoples
part. When you therefore can tell us, in what Popes days the people fell from
their devotion; we may chance tell you, in what Popes days your private Mass
began. An experiment of the other we may see in the use of the Latin Service,
in the Churches of Italy, France, and Spain. For if we be questioned, When
that use first began there? and further demanded, Allen. artic. 11. demand. 9.
Whether the language formerly used in their Liturgy, was changed upon a
sudden? our answer must be, That Latin Service was used in those countries
from the beginning: but that the Latin tongue at that time was commonly
understood of all, which afterward by little and little degenerated into those
vulgar languages which now are used. When you therefore shall be pleased to
certify us, in what Popes days the Latin tongue was changed into the Italian,
French, and Spanish (which we pray you do for our learning:) we will then
give you to understand, that from that time forward the language, not of the
Service, but of the people, was altered. Nec enim lingua vulgaris populo
subtracta est, sed populus ab ea recessit (says Erasm. in declarationib. ad
censuras Parisiens. tit. 12. sect. 41.
Erasmus:) The vulgar tongue was not taken away from the people; but the
people departed from it.

If this which I have said, will not satisfy you; I would wish you call unto
your remembrance, the answer which Arnobius sometimes gave to a foolish
question, propounded by the enemies of the Christian faith: Arnob lib. 2.
contra Gentes.
Nec si nequivero causas vobis exponere, cur aliquid fiat illo, vel hoc modo,
continuo sequitur, ut infecta fiant, quae facta sunt. And consider, whether I
may not return the like answer unto you. If I be not able to declare unto you,
by what Bishop of Rome, and in what Popes days, the simplicity of the ancient
faith was first corrupted; it will not presently follow, that what was done,
must needs by undone. Or rather, if you please, call to mind the Parable in the
Gospel, where Matthew. 13.24, 25.
the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man, which sowed good seed in his
field; but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed Tares among the Wheat,
and went his way. These that slept, took no notice, when or by whom the Tares
were scattered among the Wheat; neither at the first rising, did they discern
betwixt the one and the other, though they were awake. But Ibid. v.26, 27.
when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the
Tares: and then they put the question unto their Master; Sir, did not thou
sow good seed in thy field? from whence then has it tares? Their Master indeed
tells them, it was the enemies doing: but you could tell them otherwise, and
come upon them thus. You yourselves grant, that the seed which was first sown
in this field, was good seed, and such as was put there by your Master
himself. If this which you call Tares, be no good grain, and has sprung from
some other seed then that which was sown here at first: I would feign know
that man's name, who was the sower of it; and likewise the time in which it was
sown. Now you being not able to show either the one, or the other: it must
needs be, that your eyes here deceive you; or if these be tares, they are of
no enemies, but of your Masters own sowing.

To let pass the slumbrings of former times, we could tell you of an age,
wherein men not only slept, but also snorted: it was (if you know it not) the
tenth from Christ, the next neighbor to that wherein Apoc. 20.7.
Hell broke loose. That Infelix dicitur hoc seculum, exhaustum hominibus
ingenio and doctrina claris, sive etiam claris principibus and pontificibus.
Genebrard. Chro^^. libr. 4.
Unhappy age (as Genebrard, and other of your own Writers term it,)
exhausted both of men of account for wit and learning, and of worthy Princes
and Bishops: In which there were Bellarm. in Chronol. an. 970
no famous Writers, nor Counsels; then which (if we will credit Bellarmine)
there was never age Idem, de Romans Pon^if lib. 4. cap. 12.
more unlearned and unhappy. If I be not able to discover what feats the
Devil wrought in that time of darkness, wherein men were not so vigilant in
marking his conveyances; and such as might see somewhat, were not so forward in
writing books of their Observations: must the infelicitie of that age, wherein
there was little learning, and less writing, yea, which for want of Writers
(as Cardinal Baron. Annal. tom. 10. an. 900. sect. 1.
Baronius acknowledges) has been usually named the Obscure age; must this (I
say) enforce me to yield, that the Devil brought in no tares all that while,
but let slip the opportunity of so dark a night, and slept himself for
company? There are other means left unto us, whereby we may discern the Tares
brought in by the instruments of Satan; from the good seed which was sown by
the Apostles of Christ; beside this observation of times and seasons, which
will often fail us. Ipsa doctrina eorum (says Tertull. Praescript. advers.
Haeret. cap. 32.
Tertullian) cum Apostolica comparata, ex diversitate and contrarietate sua
pronuntiabit, neque Apostoti alicujus auctoris esse, neque Apostolici. Their
very doctrine it self, being compared with the Apostolic, by the diversity
and contrariety thereof, will pronounce, that it had for author, neither any
Apostle, nor any man Apostolical. For there cannot be a better prescription
against Heretical novelties, then that which our Savior Christ uses against
the Pharisees; Matthew. 19.8.
From the beginning it was not so: nor a better preservative against the
infection of seducers that are crept in unawares, then that which is prescribed
by the Apostle Jude, v. 3, 4.
Jude; earnestly to contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints.

Now to the end we Luke 1.4.
might know the certainty of those things, wherein the Saints were at the
first instructed; God has provided, that the memorial thereof should be
recorded in his own Book, that it might remain Esai. 30.8.
for the time to come, for ever and ever. He then who out of that Book is able
to demonstrate, that the doctrine or practice now prevailing, swarveth from
that which was at first established in the Church by the Apostles of Christ;
does as strongly prove, that a change has been made in the middle times, as
if he were able to nominate the place where, the time when, and the person by
whom any such corruption was first brought in. In the Apostles days, when a
man had examined himself, he was admitted unto the Lords Table, there to eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup: as appears plainly, 1. Cor. 11.28. In
the Church of Rome at this day, the people are indeed permitted to eat of the
bread (if bread they may call it) but not allowed to drink of the cup. Must
all of us now shut our eyes, and sing, As it was in the beginning, ^o now.
Sicut erat in principio, and nunc: unless we be able to tell by whom, and
when this first institution was altered? By S. Paul's order, who would have all
things done to edification, Christians should pray with understanding, and not
in an unknown language: as may be seen in the fourteenth chapter of the same
Epistle to the Corinthians. The case is now so altered, that the bringing in of
a tongue not understood (which hindered the edifying of Babel it self, and
scattered the builders thereof) is accounted a good means to further the
edifying of your Babel, and to Ledesim. de Scriptur. quavis lingud non
legendis, cap. 17. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei, cap. 15
hold her followers together. Is not this then a good ground to resolve a man's
judgment, that things are not now kept in that order, wherein they were set at
first by the Apostles: although he be not able to point unto the first author
of the disorder?

And as we may thus discover innovations, by having recourse unto the first
and best times: so may we do the like, by comparing the state of things
present with the middle times of the Church. Thus I find by the constant and
approved practice of the ancient Church; that all sorts of people, men, women,
and children, had free libertic to read the holy Scriptures. I find now the
contrary among the Papists: and shall I say for all this, that they have not
removed the bounds which were set by the Fathers, because perhaps I cannot name
the Pope, that ventured to make the first enclosure of these commons of Gods
people? I hear S. Hieronym. Praefat in libros Solomon. Epist. 115.
Hier^me say: Judith, and Tobiae, and Macchabaeorum libros legit quidem
Ecclesia, sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit. The Church does read
indeed the books of Judith, and Toby, and the Macchabees; but does not receive
them for Canonical Scripture. I see that at this day, the Church of Rome
receives them for such. May not I then conclude, that betwixt S. Hieromes time
and ours, there has been a change; and that the Church of Rome now, is not of
the same judgment with the Church of God the^: howsoever I cannot precisely
lay down the time, wherein she first thought her self to be wiser herein
then her Forefathers?

But here our Adversary closes with us, and lays down a number of points,
held by them, and denied by us: which he undertaketh to make good, as well by
the express testimonies of the Fathers of the Primitive Church of Rome; as
also by good and certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures, if the Fathers
authority will not suffice. Where if he would change his order, and give the
sacred Scriptures the precedence; he should therein do more right to God the
author of them, who well deserves to have audience in the first place: and
withal ease both himself and us of a needless labor, in seeking any further
authority to compose our differences. For if he can produce (as he bears us
in hand he can) good and certain grounds o^t of the sacred Scriptures, for the
points in controversy, the matter is at an end: he that will not rest
satisfied with such evidences as these, may (if he please) travail further,
and speed worse. Therefore as S. Aug. de Pastorib. cap. 14.
Augustine heretofore provoked the Donatists, so provoke I him: Auferantur
chartae humanae, sonent voces divinae: ede mihi unam Scripturae vocem pro part
Donati. Let humane vvritings be removed, let Gods voice sound: bring me on^e
voice of the Scripture for the part of Donatus. Produce but one clear
testimony of the sacred Scripture, for the Popes part, and it shall suffice:
allege what authority you list, without Scripture, and it cannot suffice. We
reverence indeed the ancient Fathers, as it is fit we should; and hold it our
duty to rise up before the hoare head, and to honor the person of the aged:
Levit. 19.32.
but still with reservation of the respect we owe to their Father and ours,
that Ancient of days, Dan. 7.6.
the hair of whose head is like the pure wool. We may not forget the
lesson, which our great Master has taught us: Matthew. 23.9.
Call no man your Father upon the earth; for one is your Father which is in
heaven. Him therefore alone do we acknowledge for the Father of our Faith: no
other Father do we know; upon whose bare credit we may ground our
consciences, in things that are to be believed.

And this we say, not as if we feared that these men were able to produce
better proofs out of the writings of the Fathers, for the part of the Pope,
then we can do for the Catholic cause (when we come to join in the
particulars, they shall find it otherwise:) but partly to bring the matter
unto a shorter trial, partly to give the word of God his due, and to declare
what that rock is upon which alone we build our faith, Ephesians. 2 20.
even the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; from which no slight that
they can devise, shall ever draw us.

The same course did S. Augustine take with the Pelagians: against whom he
wanted not the authority of the Fathers of the Church. Quos si colligere, and
eoru^ testimoniis uti velim, and nimis longum erit, and de canonicis
authoritatibus, a quibus non debemus averti, minus fortasse videbor
praesumpsisse quam debui. Aug. de nupt. and concupiscent. lib. 2. cap 29.
Which if I would collect (says he) and use their testimonies, it would be
too long a work, and I might peradventure seem to have less confidence then
I ought in the Canonical authorities, from which we ought not to be
withdrawn. Yet was the Pelagian Heresy then but newly budded: which is the
time wherein the pressing of the Fathers testimonies is thought to be best in
season. With how much better warrant may we follow this president, having to
deal with such as have had time and leisure enough to falsify the Fathers
writings, and to teach them the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans? The
method of confuting heresies by the consent of holy Fathers, is by none
commended more then by Vincentius Lirinensis who is careful notwithstanding,
herein to give us this caveat. Sed neque semper, neque omnes haereses hoc modo
impugnandae sunt, sed novitiae rece^tesque tantummodo, cum primum scilicet
exoriu^ tur; antequam infalsare vetustae fidei regulas, ^p^^us temporis
vetantur angustiis, ae priusquam manante latius veneno majoru^ volumina vitiare
cone^tur Caeterum dilatatae and inveteratae haereses nequaqua^ ha^ via
adgredie^dae sunt, eo quod proli^o temporum tractu longa his furandae veritatis
patu^rit occasio. V^ncent. de Here Is. cap. 39.
But neither always, nor all kinds of heresies are to be impugned after this
manner, but such only as are new, and lately sprung: namely, when they do
first arise, while by the straitness of the time it self they be hindered from
falsifying the rules of the ancient faith; and before the time that, their
poison spreading farther, they attempt to corrupt the writings of the ancient.
But farre-spred and inveterate heresies are not to be dealt vvithall this way;
for as much as by long continuance of time, a long occasion has lain open unto
them to steal away the truth. The heresies with which we have to deal, have
spread so far, and continued so long, that the defenders of them are bold to
make Universality and Duration the special marks of their Church: they had
opportunity enough of time and place, to put in ure all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness; neither will they have it to say, that in coining and
clipping, and washing the monuments of Antiquity, they have been wanting to
themselves.

Before the Council of Nice (as has been observed by Aeneas Sylvius, Epist.
288.
one, who sometime was Pope himself) little respect, to speak of, was had to
the Church of Rome. If this may be thought to prejudice the dignity of that
Church, which would be held, to have sat as Queen among the Nations, from the
very beginning of Christianity: you shall have a crafty merchant ( Isidorus
Mercator, I trow, they call him) that will help the matter, by counterfeiting
Decretall Epistles in the name of the primitive Bishops of Rome, and bringing
in thirty of them in a row, as so many Knights of the Post, to bear witness
of that great authority, which the Church of Rome enjoyed before the Nicene
Fathers were assembled. If the Nicene Fathers have not amplified the bounds of
her jurisdiction, in so large a manner as she desired: she has had her
well-willers, that have supplied the Councels negligence in that behalf, and
made Canons for the purpose, in the name of the good Fathers, that never
dreamed of such a business. If the power of judging all others will not
content the Pope, unless he himself may be exempted from being judged by any
other: another Con^il. Roman. sub Syl^estr. cap. 20. Nem^ enim judicabi^ primam
sedem.
Council, as ancient at least as that of Nice, shall be suborned, wherein it
shall be concluded, by the consent of 284 imaginary Bishops, that No man may
judge the first seat. and for failing, in an elder Council. Sinuessan. circa fin.
Council then that, consisting of 300 buckram Bishops of the very self same
making, the like note shall be sung: quoniam prima seeds non judicabitur a
quoquam; The first seat must not be judged by any man. Lastly, if the Pope do
not think that the fullness of spiritual power is sufficient for his
greatness, unless he may be also Lord paramount in temporalibus: he has
his followers ready at hand, to frame a fair donation, in the name of
Constantine the Emperor, whereby his Holiness shall be estated, not only in
the City of Rome, but also in the seigniory of the whole West. It would
require a Volume, to rehearse the names of those several Tractates, which have
been basely bred in the former days of darkness, and fathered upon the
ancient Doctors of the Church, who, if they were now alive, would be deposed
that they were never privy to their begetting.

Neither has this corrupting humor stayed it self in forging of whole
Councels, and entire Treatises of the ancient writers: but has, like a canker,
fretted away diverse of their sound parts, and so altered their complexions,
that they appear not to be the same men they were. To instance in the great
question of Transubstantiation: we were wont to read in the books attributed
unto S. Ambrose, De Sacramentis, libr. 4. cap. 4. Si ergo tanta vis est in
sermon Domini Jesus, ut inciperent esse quae non erant: quanto magis
operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur? If therefore
there be so great force in the speech of our Lord Jesus, that the things which
were not begun to be (namely at the first creation:) how much more is the same
powerful to make, that things may still be that which they were, and yet be
changed into another thing? It is not unknown, how much those words, ut sint
quae erant, have troubled their brains, who maintain, that after the words of
consecration, the elements of bread and wine be not that thing which they were:
and what devises they have found, to make the bread and wine in the Sacrament
to be like unto the Beast in the Revelation, Apoc. 17.8.
that was, and is not, and yet is. But that Gordian knot, which they with their
skill could not so readily untye, their masters at Rome (Alexander-like) have
now cut asunder; paring clean away in their Roman Edition (which is also
followed in that set out at Paris, Anno 1603.) those words that so much
troubled them, and letting the rest run smoothly after this manner: quanto magis
operatorius est, ut quae erant, in aliud co^mutentur? how much more is the
speech of our Lord powerful to make, that those things which were, should be
changed into another thing?

The author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, homil. 11. writes thus: Si
ergo haec vasa sanctificata ad privatos usus transfer sic periculosum est, in
quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur:
quanto magis vasa corporis nostri, quae sibi Deus ad habitaculum praeparavit,
non debemus locum dare Diabolo agendi in eis quod vult? If therefore it be so
dangerous a matter, to transfer unto private uses those holy vessels, in
which the true body of Christ is not, but the mystery of his body is
contained: how much more for the vessels of our body, which God has prepared
for himself to dwell in, ought not we to give way unto the Devil, to do in
them what he pleases? Those words (in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed
mysterium corporis ejus continetur: in which the true body of Christ is not,
but the mystery of his body is contained) did threaten to cut the very throat
of the Papists real presence; and therefore in good policy they thought it fit
to cut their throat first, for doing any further hurt. Whereupon, in the
Editions of this Work printed at Antwerpe, apud Ioannem Steelsium, anno 1537:
at Paris, apud Ioannem Roigny, anno 1543: and at Paris again, apud Audoenum
Parvum, anno 1557. not one syllable of them is to be seen; though extant in
the ancienter editions, one whereof is as old as the year 1487. And to the
same purpose, in the 19 Homily, in stead of Sacrificium panis and vini, the
sacrifice of bread and wine, (which we find in the old impressions) these
latter editions have chopped in, Sacrificium corporis and sanguinis Christi, the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.

In the year 1608. there were published at Paris certain works of Fulbertus
Bishop of Chartres, Quae tam ad refutandas haereses huius temporis, quam ad
Gallorum Hist. pertinent.
pertaining as well to the refuting of the heresies of this time, (for so says
the inscription) as to the clearing of the History of the French. Among those
things that appertain to the confutation of the Heresies of this time, there
is one especially, fol. 168. laid down in these words. Nisi manducaveritis,
inquit, carnem filij hominis, and sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in
vobis. Facinus vel flagitium videtur jubere. Figura ergo est, dicet haereticus,
praecipiens Passioni Domini esse co^municandum tantum, and suaviter atque
utiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus crucifixa and
vulnerata sit. Unless (says Christ) ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. He seems to command an
outrage or wickedness. It is therefore a figure, will the heretic say,
requiring us only to communicate with the Lords Passion, and sweetly and
profitably to lay up in our memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded
for us. He that put in those words, ( dicet haereticus) thought he had notably
met with the heretics of this time: but was not aware that thereby he made S.
Augustine an Heretic for company. For the Heretic that speaks thus, is
even S. Augustine himself: whose very words these are, in his third book de
Doctrina Christiana, the 16. chapter. Which some belike having put the
publisher in mind of: he was glad to put this among his Errata, and to
confess that these two words were not to be found in the Manuscript copy
which he had from Petavius; Vide Tom. 11. Bibliothecae Patrum, edit. Colon.
page 44. b.
but tells us not what we are to think of him, that for the countenancing of
the Popish cause, ventured so shamefully to abuse S. Augustine.

In the year 1616. a Tome of ancient Writers, that never saw the light before,
was set forth at Ingolstad by Petrus Steuartius: where, among other Tractates,
a certain Penitential, written by Rabanus that famous Archbishop of Mentz, is
to be seen. In the 33. chapter of that book, Rabanus making answer unto an
idle question moved by Bishop Heribaldus concerning the Eucharist, (what should
become of it, after it was consumed, and sent into the draught, after the manner
of other meats:) has these words. (initio page 669.) Nam quidam nuper de ipso
sacramento corporis and sanguinis Domini non rite sentientes dixerunt: hoc
ipsum corpus, and sanguinem Domini, quod de Maria Virgin natum est, and, in
quo ipse Dominus passus est in cruce, and resurrexit de sepulcro* -- cui errori
quantum potuimus, ad Egilum Abbatem scribentes, de corpore ipso quid vere
credendum sit aperuimus. For some of late, not holding rightly of the Sacrament
of the body and blood of our Lord, have said; that the very body and blood of
our Lord, which was borne of the Virgin Mary, and, in which our Lord himself
suffered on the Cross, and rose again from the grave* -- Against which error,
writing unto Abbot Egilus, according to our ability, we have declared, what is
truly to be believed concerning Christ's body. You see Rabanus tongue is clipped
here for telling tales: but how this came to pass, were worth the learning.
Steuartius freeth himself from the fact, telling us in his margent, Lacuna hic
est in MS exemplari.
that here there was a blanke in the manuscript copy, and we do easily believe
him: for Possevine the Jesuit has given us to understand, that Ad istos enim
quoque purgatio pertinet. Possevi^. lib. 1. Bibliothec^ select. cap. 12.
Manuscript books also are to be purged, as well as printed. But whence was
this Manuscript fetched, think you? Out of Ex MS. Cod. celeberrimi Monasterii
Weingartensis.
the famous Monastery of Weingart; says Steuartius. The Monks of Weingart
then belike must answer the matter: and they (I dare say) upon examination will
take their oaths, that it was no part of their intention to give any
furtherance unto the cause of the Protestants hereby. If hereunto we add, that
Heribaldus and Rabanus both, are Wald. tom. 1. Doctrinal. in Prolog. ad
Martinum V.
ranked among heretics by Thomas Walden, Id. tom. 2. cap. 19. and 61.
for holding the Eucharist to be subject to digestion and voidance, like other
meats; the suspicion will be more vehement: whereunto yet I will adjoine one
evidence more, that shall leave the matter past suspicion.

In the Libraries of my worthy friends, Sr. Rob. Cotton, (that noble Baronett,
so renowned for his great care in collecting and preserving all antiquities)
and Dr. Ward, the learned Mastr of Sidney College in Cambridge; I met with an
ancient Treatise of the Sacrament (beginning thus: Sicut ante nos quidam
sapiens dixit, cujus sententiam probamus, licet nomen ignoremus.) which is the
same with that in the Jesuits College at Lovaine, blindely Ant. Possevin.
Apparat. sac. in Berengario Turon.
fathered upon Berengarius. The author of this Treatise, having first twited
Heribaldus for propounding, and Rabanus for resolving this question of the
voidance of the Eucharist: lays down afterward the opinion of Paschasius
Ratbertus, (whose writing is yet extant) quod non alia plane sit caro quae
sumitur de altari, quam quae nata est de Maria Virgin, and passa in cruce, and
quae resurrexit de sepulcro, quaeque and pro mundi vita adhuc hodie offeratur.
That the flesh which is received at the altar, is no other then that which was
borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered on the Cross, rose again from the grave,
and as yet is daily offered for the life of the world. Contra quem (says he)
satis argumentatur, and Rabanus in Epistola ad al. Elgionem, and, Helgimonem.
Egilonem Abbatem, and Ratrannus quidam libro composito ad Karolum regem;
dicentes aliam esse. Against whom both Rabanus in his Epistle to Abbot Egilo,
and one Ratrannus in a book which he made to King Charles, argue largely;
saying that it is another kind of flesh. Whereby, what Rabanus his opinion was
of this point in his Epistle to Abbot Egilo or Egilus, and consequently what
that was which the Monks of Weingart could not endure in his Penitential, I
trust is plain enough.

I omit other corruptions of antiquity in this same question, which I have
touched De Christian. Eccles. success. and statu, Edit. ann. 1613. page 45. and
198.
elsewhere: only that of Bertram I may not pass over, wherein the dishonesty
of these men, in handling the writings of the ancient, is laid open, even by
the confession of their own mouths. Thus the case stands. That Ratrannus
who joined with Rabanus in refuting the error of the carnal presence, at the
first bringing in thereof by Paschasius Ratbertus; is he who commonly is known
by the name of Bertramus. The book which he wrote of this argument to Carolus
Calvus the Emperor, was forbidden to be read, by order from the Roman
Inquisition, confirmed afterward by the Council of Trent. The Divines of
Doway, perceiving that the forbidding of the book did not keep men from
reading it, but gave them rather occasion to seek more earnestly after it:
thought it better policy, that Bertram should be permitted to go abroad, but
handled in such sort, as other ancient writers, that made against them, were
wont to be. Seeing therefore (say Quum igitur in Catholicis veteribus aliis
plurimos feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato co^mento
persaepe negemus, and commodu^ iis sensu^ affingamus, du^ opponuntur in
disputationibus, aut in conflictionibus cu^ adversariis: non videmus cur non
eande^ aequitatem and diligentem recognitionem mereatur Bertramus. ne haeretici
ogganniant, nos antiquitatem pro ipsis facientem exurere and prohibere. Index
Expurg. Belg^c. page 5. edit. Antuerp. ann. 1571.
they) we bear with very many errors in other of the old Catholic vvriters,
and extenuate them, excuse them, by inventing some device oftentimes deny them,
and feign some commodious sense for them, when they are objected in
disputations or conflicts with our adversaries: we do not see, why Bertram
may not deserve the same equity, and diligent reviseall. Least the heretics
cry out, that we burn and forbid such antiquity as makes for them. Mark this
dealing well. The world must be borne in hand, that all the Fathers make for
the Church of Rome against us, in all our controversies. When we bring forth
express testimonies of the Fathers to the contrary; what must then be done? A
good face must be put upon the matter, one device or other must be invented to
elude the testimonies objected, and still it must be denied that the Fathers
make against the doctrine of the Papists. Bertram, for example, writes thus.
Quae a se differunt, idem non sunt. Corpus Christi quod mortuu^ est and
resurrexit, and immortale factu^ jam non moritur, and mors illi ultra no^
dominabitur, aeternu^ est, nec ja^ passibile. Hoc aute^ quod in Ecclesia
celebratur, te^porale est, non aeternum; corruptibile est, non in corruptum.
B^rtram. de corp. and sang. Dom.
The things which differ one from another, are not the same. The body of Christ
which was dead and rose again, and being made immortal now dies not, (death
no more having dominion over it) is everlasting, and now not subject to
suffering. But this which is celebrated in the Church, is temporal, not
everlasting; it is corruptible, not free from corruption. What device must they
find out here? They must say this is meant of the accidents or Secundum
species Sacramenti corruptibiles: aut de re ipsa and usu sacramenti, qui non
contingit, nisi praesenti in saeculo. Index expurg. page 7.
forms of the Sacrament, which are corruptible; or of the use of the
Sacrament, which continues only in this present world. But how will this shift
serve the turn, when as the whole drift of the discourse tends to prove,
that that which is received by the mouth of the faithful in the Sacrament, is
not that very body of Christ which dyed upon the Cross, and rose again from
death? Non male aut inconsulte omittantur igitur omnia haec; It were not amiss
therefore (say our Popish Censurers) nor unadvisedly done, that all these
things should be left out.

If this be your manner of dealing with antiquity, let all men judge whether it
be not high time for us to listen unto the advice of Vincentius Lirinensis, and
not be so forward to commit the trial of our controversies to the writings of
the Fathers, who have had the ill hap to fall into such hucksters handling. Yet
that you may see, how confident we are in the goodness of our cause: we will
not now stand upon our right, nor refuse to enter with you into this field; but
give you leave for this time both to be the Challenger, and the appointer of
your own weapons. Let us then hear your challenge, wherein you would so feign
be answered. I would feign know (say you) how can your Religion be true, which
disalloweth of many chief articles, which the Saints and Fathers of that
primitive Church of Rome did generally hold to be true? For they of your side,
that have read the Fathers of that unspotted Church, can well testify (and if
any deny it, it shall be presently shown) that the Doctors, Pastors, and
Fathers of that Church do allow of Traditions, etc. And again: Now would I
feign know, whether of both have the true Religion; they that hold all these
abovesaid points with the primitive Church, or they that do most vehemently
contradict, and gainsay them? they that do not disagree with that holy Church,
in any point of Religion; or they that agree with it but in very few, and
disagree in almost all? And the third time too, for failing: Now would I
willingly see, what reasonable answer may be made to this. For the Protestants
grant that the Church of Rome, for 400 or 500 years, held the true Religion
of Christ: yet do they exclaim against the abovesaid articles, which the same
Church did maintain and uphold; as may be shown by the express testimonies
of the Fathers of the same Church, and shall be largely laid down, if any
learned Protestant will deny it.

If Albertus Pighius had now been alive, as great a Scholar as he was, he
might have learned that he never knew before. Who did ever yet (says Quis per
Romana^ Ecclesiam unquam intellexit aut universalem Ecclesiam, aut generale
Concilium? Pigh. Eccles. Hierarch. lib. 6. cap. 3.
he) by the Church of Rome understand the Universal Church? That does this man
(say I) who styleth all the ancient Doctors and Martyrs of the Church
Universal, with the name of the Saints and Fathers of the primitive Church of
Rome. But it seems a small matter unto him, for the magnifying of that
Church, to confound Vrbem and Orbem: unless he mingle also Heaven and Earth
together, by giving the title of that unspotted Church, which is the special
privilege of the Church triumphant in heaven, unto the Church of Rome here
militant upon earth. S. Augustine surely would not have himself otherwise
understood, whenever he speaks of the unspotted Church: and therefore, to
prevent all mistaking, he thus expounds himself in his Retractations.
Vbicunque in his libris co^memoravi Ecclesiam non habentem maculam aut rugam;
non sic accipiendum est quasi jam sit, sed quae praeparatur ut sit quando
apparebit etiam gloriosa. Nunc enim propter quasdam ignorantias and
infirmitates membrorum suoru^ habet unde quotidie tota dicat: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra. August. Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 18.
Wheresoever in these books I have made mention of the Church not having spot
or wrinkle; it is not so to be taken, as if she were so now, but that she is
prepared to be so, when she shall appear glorious. For now, by reason of
certain ignorances and infirmities of her members, the whole Church has cause
to say every day: Forgive us our trespasses. Now as long as the Church is
subject to these ignorances and infirmities, it cannot be otherwise, but there
must be differences betwixt the members thereof: one part may understand that
whereof an other is ignorant; and ignorance being the mother of error, one
particular Church may wrongly conceive of some points, wherein others may be
rightly informed. Neither will it follow thereupon, that these Churches must be
of different Religions, because they fully agree not in all things: or that
therefore the Reformed Churches in our days must disclaim all kindred with
those in ancient times, because they have washed away some spots from
themselves, which they discerned to have been in them.

It is not every spot that takes away the beauty of a Church, not every
sickness that takes away the life thereof: and therefore though we should
admit that the ancient Church of Rome was somewhat impaired both in beauty and
in health too, (wherein we have no reason to be sorry, that we are unlike unto
her) there is no necessity that hereupon presently she must cease to be our
sister. S. Cyprian and the rest of the African Bishops that joined with him,
held that such as were baptized by heretics, should be rebaptized: the
African Bishops in the time of Aurelius were of another mind. Does the
diversity of their judgments in this point, make them to have been of a
diverse Religion? It was the use of the ancient Church to minister the
Communion unto Infants: which is yet also practiced by the Christians in Egypt
and Ethiopia. The Church of Rome, upon better consideration, has thought fit
to do otherwise: and yet for all that will not yield, that either she her
self has forsaken the Religion of her ancestors, because she follows them
not in this; or that they were of the same religion with the Cophtites and
Habassines, because they agree together in this particular. So put case the
Church of Rome now did use prayer for the dead in the same manner that the
ancient Church did: (which we will show to be otherwise:) the reformed Churches
that upon better advice have altered that usage, need not therefore grant that
either themselves hold a different Religion from that of the Fathers, because
they do not precisely follow them in this, nor yet that the Fathers were
therefore Papists, because in this point they thus concurred. For as two may be
discerned to be sisters by the likeness of their faces, although the one have
some spots or blemishes which the other has not: so a third may be brought
in, which may show like spots and blemishes, and yet have no such likeness of
visage as may bewray her to be the others sister.

But our Challenger having first conceited in his mind an Idea of an unspotted
Church upon earth; then being far in love with the painted face of the
present Church of Rome, and out of love with us, because we like not as he
likes: he takes a view of both our faces in the false glasses of affection,
and finds her on whom he doteth to answer his unspotted Church in all points,
but us to agree with it in almost nothing. And thereupon he would feign know,
whether of both have the true Religion? they that do not disagree with that
holy Church in any point of Religion; or they that agree with it but in very
few, and disagree in almost all? Indeed, if that which he assumeth for granted,
could as easily be proved, as it is boldly avouched: the question would
quickly be resolved, whether of us both have the true Religion? But he is to
understand, that strong conceits are but weak proofs: and that the Jesuits
have not been the first, from whom such bragges as these have been heard.
Dioscorus the heretic was as peart, when he uttered these speeches in the
Council of Chalcedon: (...). Council. Chalced. Act. 1. page 97. edit. Romans
I am cast out with the Fathers. I defend the doctrines of the Fathers, I
transgress them not in any point: and I have their testimonies, not barely,
but in their very books. Neither need we wonder, that he should bear us down,
that the Church of Rome at this day does not disagree from the primitive Church
in any point of Religion; who sticks not so confidently to affirm, that we
agree with it but in very few, and disagree in almost all. For those few
points, wherein he confesses we do agree with the ancient Church, must
either be meant of such articles only, wherein we disagree from the now
Church of Rome; or else of the whole body of that Religion which we profess.
If in the former he yield that we do agree with the primitive Church: what
credit does he leave unto himself, who with the same breath has give^ out,
that the present Church of Rome does not disagree with that holy Church in any
point? If he meanethe latter: with what face can he say, that we agree with
that holy Church but in very few points of religion, and disagree in almost
all? Irenaeus, who was the Disciple of those which heard S. John the Apostle,
Irenae. lib. 1. cap 2.3. Epiphan. haeres. 31.
lays down the articles of that faith, in the unity whereof the Churches
that were founded in Germany, Spain, France, the East, Egypt, Lybia, and all
the world, did sweetly accord: as if they had all dwelt in one house, all had
but one soul, and one heart, and one mouth. Is he able to show one point,
wherein we have broken that harmony, which Irenaeus commends in the Catholic
Church of his time? But that Rule of faith so much commended by him and
Tertullian, and the rest of the Fathers; and all the articles of the several
Creedes that were ever received in the ancient Church, as badges of the
Catholic profession (to which we willingly subscribe) is with this man almost
nothing: none must now be counted a Catholic, but he that can conform his
belief unto the Forma professionis fidei, in Bulla Pij IV. edit. ann. 1564.
Creed of the new fashion, compiled by Pope Pius the fourth some four and
fifty years ago.

As for the particular differences, wherein he thinks he has the advantage
of us; when we come unto the sifting of them, it shall appear how far he was
deceived in his imagination. In the mean time, having as yet not stricken one
stroke, but threatened only to do wonders, if any would be so hardy to accept
his Challenge; he might have done very well, to have deferred his triumph,
until such time as he had obtained the victory. For as if he had borne us
down with the weight of the authority of the Fathers, and so astonished us
therewith, that we could not tell what to say for our selves; he thus bestirreth
himself, in a most ridiculous manner, fighting with his own shadow. Will you
say that these Fathers (says he, who has not hitherto laid down so much as
the name of any one Father) maintained these opinions contrary to the word of
God? Why you know that they were the pillars of Christianity, the champions of
Christ his Church, and of the true Catholic Religion, which they most
learnedly defended against diverse heresies, and therefore spent all their time
in a most serious study of the holy Scripture. Or will you say that, although
they knew the Scriptures to repugne, yet they brought in the aforesaid opinions
by malice and corrupt intentions? Why your selves cannot deny but that they
lived most holy and virtuous lives, free from all malicious corrupting or
perverting of Gods holy word, and by their holy lives are now made worthy to
reign with God in his glory. Insomuch as their admirable learning may
sufficiently cross out all suspicion of ignorant error; and their innocent
sanctity freeth us from all mistrust of malicious corruption.

But, by his leave, he is a little too hasty. He were best to bethink
himself more advisedly of that which he has undertaken to perform: and to
remember the saying of the King of Israel unto Benhadad; 1. King. 20.11.
Let not him that girdeth on his harness, boast himself, as he that puts
it off. He has taken upon him to prove, that our Religon cannot be true,
because it disalloweth of many chief articles, which the Saints and Fathers of
that primitive Church of Rome did generally hold to be true. For performance
hereof, it will not be sufficient for him to show that some of these Fathers
maintained some of these opinions: he must prove (if he will be as good as his
word, and deal any thing to the purpose) that they held them generally, and
held them too, not as opinions, but tanquam de fide, as appertayning to the
substance of faith and religion. For (as Vincentius Lirinensis well observes)
Antiqua sanctorum patru^ consensio, non in omnibus divinae legis
quaestiunculis, sed solum, certe praecipue, in fidei regula magno nobis studio
and investiganda est, and sequenda. Vinc^n^* contra haer^s. cap. 39.
the ancient consent of the holy Fathers is with great care to be sought and
followed by us, not in every petty question belonging to the Law of God, but
only, or at least principally, in the Rule of faith. But all the points
propounded by our Challenger, be not chief articles: and therefore if in some
of them the Fathers have held some opinions, that will not bear weight in the
balance of the Sanctuary (as some conceits they had herein, which the Papists
themselves must confess to be erroneous) their defects in that kind do abate
nothing of that reverend estimation which we have them in, for their great
pains taken in the defense of the true Catholic Religion, and the serious
study of the holy Scripture. Neither do I think that he who thus commends
them for the pillars of Christianity, and the champions of Christ's Church;
will therefore hold himself tied to stand unto every thing that they have
said: sure he will not, if he follow the steps of the great ones of his own
Society.

For what does he think of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Epiphanius? Does he
not account them among those pillars and champions he speaks of? Yet, says
Cardinal Bellarmine, Iustini, Irenaei, Epiphani^ atque Oecumenii sententia^
non video, quo pacto ab errore possimus defendere. Bellarmin. lib. 1. de
Sanctor. Beatit. cap. 6.
I do not see, how we may defend their opinion from error. When others object,
that they have two or three hundred testimonies of the Doctors to prove that
the Virgin Mary was conceived in sin: Primo quid^ agunt multitudine Doctoru^,
quos errare in re tanti momenti non est facile admittendum. Respondemus tamen
ex Augustini libro 1. de Morib. Eccles c. 2. tum ex B. Thomae doctrina, locum
ab authoritate esse infirmum. Salmer. in Epist. ad Romans libr. 2. disput. 51.
Salmeron the Jesuit steps forth, and answers them, first, out of the
doctrine of Augustine and Thomas, that the argument drawn from authority is
weak: then, out of the word of God, Exodus 23. In judicio, plurimorum non
acquiesces sententiae, ut a vero devies. In judgment, thou shall not be led
with the sentence of the most, to decline from the truth. And lastly tells
them, Cum Donatistae in autoru^ multitudine gloriarentur; respondit Augustinus,
signu^ esse causae a veritatis nervo destitutae, quae soli multorum autoritati,
qui errare possunt, innititur. Ibid.
that when the Donatists gloried in the multitude of authors, S. Augustine did
answer them, that it was a sign their cause was destitute of the strength of
truth, which was only supported by the authority of many, who were subject to
error. And when his Adversaries press him, not only with the multitude, but
also with the Tertio argumenta petunt a Doctorum antiquitate, cui semper major
honor est habitus, quam novitatibus. Respondetur, quamlibet aetatem antiquitati
semper detulisse: and quilibet senex, ut quidam Poeta dixit, laudator te^poris
acti. Sed illud asserimus: quo juniores, eo perspicaciores esse Doctores. Ibid.
antiquity of the Doctors alleged, unto which more honor always has been
given, then unto novelties: he answers, that indeed every age has always
attributed much unto antiquity; and every old man, as the Poet says, is a
commender of the time past: but this (says he) we aver, that the younger
the Doctors are, the more sharpe-sighted they be. And therefore for his part he
yields rather to the judgment of the younger Doctors of Paris: Nam in
celeberrima Parisiorum Academia nullus Magistri in Theologia titulo dignus
habetur, qui prius etiam iuris iurandi religione non se adstrinxerit ad hoc
Virginis privilegium tuendum, and propugnandum. Ibid. Vid. and Laur. Sur.
commentar. rer. in orb gestar. ann. 1501.
among whom none is held worthy of the title of a Master in Divinity, who has
not first bound himself with a religious oath, to defend and maintain the
privilege of the B. Virgin. Only he forgot to tell, how they which take that
oath, might dispense with another oath which the Pope requires them to take;
that Nec eam unquam nisi juxta unanimem consensum Patrum accipiam, and
interpretabor. Bulla Pij IV. page 478. Bullarij a Petro Matthaeo edit. Lugdun.
ann. 1588.
they will never understand and interpret the holy Scripture, but according to
the uniforme consent of the Fathers.

Pererius in his disputations upon the Epistle to the Romans, confesses that
Graeci Patres, nec pauci etiam Latinorum Doctorum arbitrati sunt, idque in
scriptis suis prodiderunt; causam praedestinationis hominum ad vitam aeternam,
esse praescientia^ quam Deus ab aeterno habuit, vel bonorum operum quae facturi
erant cooperando ipsius gratiae, vel fidei qua credituri erant verbo Dei and
obedituri vocationi ejus. Perer. in Romans 8. sect. 106.
the Greek Fathers, and not a few of the Latin Doctors too, have delivered in
their writings, that the cause of the predestination of men unto everlasting
life is the foreknowledge which God had from eternity, either of the good
works which they were to do by cooperating with his grace, or of the faith
whereby they were to believe the word of God, and to obey his calling. And yet
he for his part notwithstanding thinks, that Sed hoc videtur contrariu^
divinae Scripturae, praecipue aute^ doctrinae B. Pauli. Jdem ibid. sect. 111.
At enimvero praescie^tia^ fidei non esse rationem praedestinationis hominum,
nullius est negotii multis and apertis Scripturae testimoniis ostendere. Ibid.
sect. 109.
this is contrary to the holy Scripture, but especially to the doctrine of S.
Paul. If our Questionist had been by him, he would have plucked his fellow by
the sleeve, and taken him up in this manner. Will you say that these Fathers
maintained this opinion contrary to the word of God? Why you know that they
were the pillars of Christianity, the Champions of Christ his Church, and of
the true Catholic religion, which they most learnedly defended against diverse
heresies, and therefore spent all their time in a most serious study of the
holy Scripture. He would also perhaps further challenge him, as he does us:
Will you say that, although they knew the Scriptures to repugne, yet they
brought in the aforesaid opinion by malice and corrupt intentions? For sure he
might have asked this wise question of any of his own fellows, as well as of
us, who do allow and esteem so much of these blessed Doctors and Martyrs of
the ancient Church (as he himself in the end of his Challenge does
acknowledge:) which verily we should have little reason to do, if we did
imagine that they brought in opinions which they knew to be repugnant to the
Scriptures, for any malice, or corrupt intentions. Indeed men they were,
compassed with the common infirmities of our nature, and therefore subject unto
error: but godly men, and therefore free from all malicious error.

Howsoever then we yield unto you, that their innocent sanctity freeth us from
all mistrust of malicious corruption: yet you must pardon us if we make
question, whether their admirable learning may sufficiently cross out all
suspicion of error, which may arise either of affection, or want of due
consideration, or such ignorance as the very best are subject unto in this
life. For it is not admirable learning that is sufficient to cross out that
suspicion: but such an immediate guidance of the holy Ghost, as the Prophets
and Apostles were led by, who were the penners of the Canocicall Scripture. But
this is your old wont, to blind the eyes of the simple with setting forth the
sanctity and the learning of the Fathers: much after the manner of your
grandfather Pelagius; who in the third of his books which he writ in defense
of Free Will, thought he had struck all dead by his commending of S. Ambrose.
Blessed Ambrose the Bishop (says Beatus Ambrosius Episcopus, in cuius
praecipue libris Romana ^lucet fides, qui scriptorum inter Latinos flos quidam
speciosus enituit, cuius fide^ and purissimum in Scripturis sensum* ne inimicus
quidem ausus est reprehendere.
he) in whose books the Roman faith does especially appear, who like a
beautiful flower shined among the Latin writers, whose faith and most pure
understanding in the Scriptures the enemy himself durst not reprehend. Unto
whom S. Augustine: Ecce qualibus and quantis praedicat laudibus, quamlibet
sanctum and doctum virum, nequaquam tame^ authoritati Scripturae canonicae
comparandum. August. de gratia Christi* cont. Pelag. l^b. 1. cap. 43.
Behold with what and how great praises he extolleth a man, though holy and
learned, yet not to be compared unto the authority of the Canonical
Scripture. And therefore advance the learning and holiness of these worthy
men, as much as you list: other answer you are not like to have from us, then
that which the same S. Augustine makes unto S. Hierome. Solis eis Scripturarum
libris, qui iam Canonici appellantur, didici hunc timore^ honoremque deserre,
ut nullum eorum authorem scribe^do aliquid errasse firmissime credam etc. Alios
autem ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo
veru^ pute^, quia ipsi ita senserunt: sed quia mihi vel per illos authore^
canonicos, vel probabili ratione, quod a vero no^ abhorreat, persuad^^e
potueru^t. Aug. ep. 19.
This reverence and honor have I learned to give to those books of Scripture
only, which now are called Canonical, that I most firmly believe none of their
authors could any whit err in writing. But others I so read, that with how
great sanctity and learning soever they do excel, I therefore think not any
thing to be true, because they so thought it: but because they were able to
persuade me, either by those Canonical authors, or by some probable reason,
that it did not swarve from truth.

Yet even to this field also do our challengers provoke us; and if the Fathers
authority will not suffice, they offer to produce good and certain grounds out
of the sacred Scriptures, for confirmation of all the points of their religion
which they have mentioned: yea, further, they challenge any Protestant to
allege any one text out of the said Scripture which condemns any of the
above written points. At which boldness of theirs we should much wonder, but
that we consider that Bankrupts commonly do then most brag of their ability,
when their estate is at the lowest: perhaps also, that Ignorance might be it,
that did beget in them this Boldness. For if they had been pleased to take the
advice of their learned Counsel: their Canonists would have told them touching
Confession, (which is one of their points;) that Gloss. in Gratian. de
Poeniten. did. 5. cap. 1. In poenitentia.
it were better to hold, that it was ordained by a certain tradition of the
universal Church, then by the authority of the New or Old Testament. Melchior
Canus Can. lib. 3. loc. Theolog. cap. 4.
could have put them in mind, that it is no where expressed in Scripture, that
Christ descended into Hell, to deliver the souls of Adam, and the rest of the
Fathers which were detayned there. And Dominicus Bannes, Bannes, in 2.2 qu. 1.
artic. 10. col. 302.
that the holy Scriptures teach, neither express, nor yet impresse and
involute, that prayers are to be made unto Saints, or that their Images are to
be worshipped. Or, if the testimony of a lesuite will more prevayle with them:
that Images should be worshipped, Saints prayed unto, Auricular Confession
frequented, Sacrifices celebrated both for the quick and the dead, and other
things of this kind; Coster in compendiosa orthodoxae fidei Demonstrat. propos.
5. cap. 2 page 162 edit. Colon. ann. 1607.
Fr. Coster would have to be reckoned among divine Traditions, which be not
laid down in the Scriptures.

Howsoever yet the matter stands, we have no reason but willingly to accept
of their challenge: and to require them to bring forth those good and certain
grounds out of the sacred Scriptures, for confirmation of all the articles by
them propounded: as also to let them see, whether we be able to allege any
Text of Scripture, which condemns any of those points. Although I must
confess it will be a hard matter, to make them see any thing, which before
hand have resolved to close their eyes; having their minds so preoccupied with
prejudice, that they profess before ever we begin, they hold for certain that
we shall never be able to produce any such Text. And why, think you? because,
forsooth, we are neither more learned, more pious, nor more holy, then the
blessed Doctors and Martyrs of that first Church of Rome. As who should say, we
yielded at the first word, that all those blessed Doctors and Martyrs expounded
the Scriptures every where to our disadvantage: or were so well persuaded of
the tenderness of a Jesuits conscience, that because he has taken an oath
never to interpret the Scripture, but according to the uniforme consent of the
Fathers, he could not therefore have the forehead to say: Non nego me huius
interpretationis authorem nemine^ habere: sed hanc eo magis probo quam illam
alteram Augustini, caeterarum alioqui probabilissimam; quod haec cum
Calvinistaru^ sensu magis pugnet: quod mihi magnum est probabilitatis
argumentum. Maldonat. in Io^an. 6.62.
I do not deny, that I have no author of this interpretation: yet do I so
much the rather approve it, then that other of Augustines, though the most
probable of all the rest; because it is more contrary to the sense of the
Calvinists: which to me is a great argument of probability. Or as if lastly a
man might not dissent from the ancient Doctors, so much as in an exposition of
a Text of Scripture, but he must presently make himself more learned, more
pious, and more holy, then they were.

Yet their great Tostatus might have taught them, Sed nec ista argumentatio
valet, se. Iste homo s^it aliquam conclusionem, quam nescivit Aug. e^go est
sapientior Aug.

Et sicut quidam peritus medicus dixit, homines nostri temporis ad antiquos
comparantur, sicut pusillus homo positus collo Gigantis ad ipsum Gigante^ Nam
pusillus ibi positus videt quicquid vidit Gigas, and insuper plus; and tamen si
deponatur de collo Gigantis, parum aut nihil videbit ad Gigantem collatus. Ita
and no^ firmati super ingenia antiquorum and opera eorum, non esset admirandum,
immo foret valde rationabile, si videremus quidquid illi viderunt, and insuper
plus: licet hoc adhuc non profitemur. Abulens. 2. part. D^fensor. cap. 18.


that this argument holds not: Such a one knows some conclusion, that
Augustine did not know; therefore he is wiser then Augustine. Because, as a
certain skillful Physician said, the men of our time being compared with the
ancient, are like unto a little man set upon a Giants neck, compared with the
Giant himself. For as that little man placed there, sees whatsoever the Giant
sees, and somewhat more; and yet if he be taken down from the Giants neck,
would see little or nothing in comparison of the Giant: even so we being settled
upon the wits and works of the ancient, it were not to be wondered, nay it
should be very agreeable unto reason, that we should see whatsoever they saw,
and somewhat more. Though yet (says he) we do not profess so much. And even
to the same effect speaks Friar Stella: that though it be far from him to
condemn the common exposition given by the ancient holy Doctors; Been tamen
sci^us, Pygmaeos Gigantum humeris impositos, plusquam ipsos Gigantes videre.
Stella, enarrat. in Luc. cap. 10.
yet he knows full well, that Pygmeis being put upon Giants shoulders, do
see further then the Giants themselves. Salmeron adds, Per incrementa
temporum nota facta sunt divina mysteria, quae tamen antea multos latuerunt:
ita ut hoc loco nosse, beneficium sit temporis, non quod nos meliores simus,
quam Patres nostri. Salmeron. in epist. ad Roman. lib. 2. disput. ^1.
that by the increase of time, divine mysteries have been made known, which
before were hid from many: so that to know them now, is to be attributed unto
the benefit of the time, not that we are better then our Fathers were. Bishop
Fisher, Neque cui^qua^ obscurum est, quin posterioribus ingeniis multa sint,
tam ex evangeliis, quam ex scripturis caeteris, nunc excussa luculentius, and
intellecta perspicacius, quam fuerant olim. Nimirum, aut quia veteribus adhuc
non erat perfracta glacies, neque sufficiebat illorum aetas, totu^ illud
scripturaru^ pelagus ad amussim expendere: aut quia semper in amplissimo
scripturaru^ ca^po post messores quantumvis exquisitissimos, spicas adhuc
intactas licebit colligere. Rossens confutat. Assert. Lutheran. artic. 18.
that it cannot be obscure unto any, that many things, as well in the Gospels
as in the rest of the Scriptures, are now more exquisitely discussed by latter
wits, and more clearly understood, then they have been heretofore. Either by
reason that the ice was not as yet broken unto the ancient, neither did their
age suffice to weigh exactly that whole sea of the Scriptures: or because in
this most large field of the Scriptures, even after the most diligent reapers,
some ears will remain to be gathered, as yet untouched. Hereupon Cardinal
Caietan, in the beginning of his Commentaries upon Moses, advises his Reader,
Nullus itaque detestetur novu^ sacrae scripturae sensum ex hoc quod dissonat a
priscis doctoribus; sed scrutetur perspicacius textum ac contextum scripturae:
and si quadrare invenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligavit expositionem
scriptura^um sacrarum priscorum doctorum sensibus. Caietan. in Genes. 1.
not to loath the new sense of the holy Scripture for this, that it dissenteth
from the ancient Doctors: but to search more exactly the text and context of
the Scripture; and if he find it agree, to praise God, that has not tied the
exposition of the Scriptures to the senses of the ancient Doctors.

But leaving comparisons, which, you know, are odious (the envy whereof
notwithstanding your own Doctors and Masters, you see, help us to bear off,
and teach us how to decline:) I now come to the examination of the particular
points by you propounded. It should indeed be your part by right, to be the
Assailant, who first did make the Challenge: and I, who sustain the person of
the Defendant, might here well stay, accepting only your challenge, and
expecting your encounter. Yet do not I mean at this time to answer your Bill
of Challenge as Bills are usually answered in the Chancerie, with saving all
advantages to the Defendant: I am content in this also to abridge my self of
the liberty which I might lawfully take, and make a further demo^stration of my
forwardnes in undertaking the maintenance of so good a cause, by giving the
first onset my self.

OF TRADITIONS.
TO begin therefore with Traditions, which is your forlorn Hope that in the
first place we are to set upon: this must I needs tell you before we begin,
that you much mistake the matter, if you think that Traditions of all sorts
promiscuously are struck at by our Religion. We willingly acknowledge, that the
word of God which by some of the Apostles was set down in writing, was both by
themselves, and others of their fellow laborers, delivered by word of mouth:
and that the Church in succeeding ages was bound not only to preserve those
sacred writings committed to her trust, but also to deliver unto her children
viva voce the form of wholesome words contained therein. Traditions therefore
of this nature, come not within the compass of our controversy: the question
being betwixt us de ipsa doctrina tradita, not de tradendi modo; touching the
substance of the doctrine delivered, not of the manner of delivering it. Again,
it must be remembered that here we speak of doctrine delivered as the word of
God, that is, of points of religion revealed unto the Prophets and Apostles,
for the perpetual information of Gods people: not of rites and ceremonies, and
other ordinances which are left to the disposition of the Church, and
consequently be not of divine but of positive and humane right. Traditions
therefore of this kind likewise are not properly brought within the circuit of
this question.

But that Traditions of men should be obtruded unto us for articles of
Religion, and admitted for parts of Gods worship; or that any Traditions should
be accepted for parcels of Gods word, beside the holy Scriptures, and such
doctrines as are either expressly therein contained, or by sound inference may
be deduced from thence: I think we have reason to gainsay. As long as for the
first we have this direct sentence from God himself; Matthew. 15. In vain do
they worship me, teaching for doctrines, the Commandments of men. And for the
second, the express warrant of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3. testifying of the holy
Scriptures, not only that they are able to make us wise unto salvation (which
they should not be able to do, if they did not contain all things necessary
to salvation) but also that by them the man of God (that is, 1. Tim. 6.11.
the minister of Gods word, unto whom it appertains Act. 20.27.
to declare all the counsel of God) may be perfectly instructed to every good
work: which could not be, if the Scriptures did not contain all the counsel
of God which was fit for him to learn, or if there were any other word of God
which he were bound to teach, that should not be contained within the limits of
the Book of God.

Now whether herein we disagree from the doctrine generally received by the
Fathers: we refer our selves to their own sayings. For Rituall Traditions
unwritten, and for doctrinall Traditions written indeed, but preserved also by
the continual preaching of the Pastors of the Church successively; we find no
man a more earnest advocate then Tertullian. Yet he, having to deal with
Hermogenes the heretic in a question concerning the faith, (whether all
things at the beginning were made of nothing?) presses him in this manner,
with the argument ab authoritate negative; for avoiding whereof, the Papists
are driven to fly for succor to their unwritten verities. An autem de aliqua
subjacenti materia facta sint omnia, nusquam adhuc legi. Scriptum esse doceat
Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum timeat Vae illud adjicientibus aut
detrahentibus destinatum. Tertull. advers Hermogen. cap. 22.
Whether all things were made of any subject matter, I have as yet read no
where. Let those of Hermogenes his shop show that it is written. If it be not
written, let them fear that Woe which is allotted to such as add or take away.

In the two Testaments, says Origin, In quibus liceat omne verbum quod ad Deum
pertinet requiri and discuti; atque ex ipsis omnem rerum scientiam capi. Si
quid autem superfuerit quod non divina Scriptura decer^at, nullam aliam debere
tertiam Scripturam ad authoritatem scientiae suscipi: sed igni tradamus quod
superest, id est, Deo reservemus. Neque enim in proesenti vita Deus scire nos
omnia voluit, Orig. in Levit. hom. 5.
every word that appertains to God may be required and discussed; and all
knowledge of things out of them may be understood. But if any thing do
remain, which the holy Scripture does not determine; no other third Scripture
ought to be received for to authorize any knowledge: but that which remains
we must commit to the fire, that is, we must reserve it to God. For in this
present world God would not have us to know all things.

Hippolytus the Martyr, in his Homily against the Heresy of Noetus. Vnus Deus
est, quem non aliunde, fratres, agnoscimus, quam ex sanctis Scripturis.
Quemadmodum enim si quis vellet sapientiam hujus saeculi exercere, non aliter
hoc co^sequi poterit, nisi dogmata Philosophoru^ legate: sic quicunque volumus
pietatem in Deu^ exercere, non aliunde discemus, quam ex Scripturis divinis.
Quaecunque ergo sanctae Scripturae praedicant, sciamus; and quaecunque docent,
cog^noscamus Hippolyt. tom. 3. Biblioth. Pat. pa. 20.21. edit. Colon.
There is one God, whom we do not otherwise acknowledge (brethren) but out of
the holy Scriptures. For as he that would profess the wisdom of this world,
cannot otherwise attain hereunto, unless he read the doctrine of the
Philosophers: so whosoever of us will exercise piety toward God, cannot learn
this elsewhere, but out of the holy Scriptures. Whatsoever therefore the holy
Scriptures do preach, that let us know; and whatsoever they teach, that let us
understand.

Athanasius, in his Oration against the Gentiles, toward the beginning: (...).
Athanas.
The holy Scriptures given by inspiration of God, are of themselves sufficient
to the discovery of truth.

S. Ambrose: Quae in Scripturis sanctis non reperimus, ea quemadmodum usurpare
possumus? Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 23.
The things which we find not in the Scriptures, how can we use them? And
again: Lego quia primus est, lego quia non est secundus* illi qui secundum
aiunt, doceant lectione. Id in Virginis instit. cap. 11.
I read that he is the first, I read that he is not the second; they who say
he is the second, let them show it by reading.

It is well, Been habet, ut iis quae sunt scripta contentus sis. Hilar. l. 3.
de Trinit.
says S. Hilary, that thou art content with those things which be written.
And in another place, In quantum ego nu^c beatae religiosaeque voluntatis vere
te Domine Constanti Imperator admiror, fidem tantum secundum ea quae scripta
sunt desiderantem. Id. lib. 2. ad Constantium. Aug.
he commends Constantius the Emperor, for desiring the faith to be ordered
only according to those things that be written.

S. Basil: (...). Basil. hom. 29. advers. calumniantes S. Trinitat.
Believe those things which are written; the things which are not written
seek not. (...). Idem de Fide.
It is a manifest falling from the faith, and an argument of arrogance, either
to reject any point of those things that are written, or to bring in any of
those things that are not written. He teaches further, (...). Idem, in
Ethicis, Regul 26.
that every word and action ought to be confirmed by the testimony of the holy
Scripture, for confirmation of the faith of the good, and the confusion of the
evil* and that it is the property of a faithful man, to be fully persuaded
of the truth of those things that are delivered in the holy Scripture, (...).
Id. ibid. reg. 80. ca. 22.
and not to dare either to reject or to add any thing thereunto. For if
whatsoever is not of faith be sin, as the Apostle says, and faith is by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God: then whatsoever is without the holy
Scripture, being not of faith, must needs be sin. Thus far S. Basil.

In like manner Gregory Nyssene, S. Basils brother, lays this for a ground,
(...). Gregor. Nyssen. Dialog. de Anima and Resurrect. tom. 2. edit. Grae^olat.
page 639.
which no man should contradict; that in that only the truth must be
acknowledged, wherein the seal of the Scripture testimony is to be seen. And
accordingly in another book (attributed also unto him) we find this
conclusion made: Cum id nullo Scripturae testimonio suffultum sit, ut falsum
improbabimus. lib. de Cognit Dei, citat. ab Euthymio in Panoplia, Tit. 8.
Forasmuch as this is upholden with no testimony of the Scripture, as false
we will reject it.

Thus also S. Hierome disputes against Helvidius^ Vt haec quae scripta sunt
non negamus; ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimu^. Natum Deum esse de Virgin
credimus, quia legimus: Mariam nupsisse post partum non credimus, quia non
legimus. Hieron. advers. Helvid.
As we deny not those things that are written; so we refuse those things
that are not written. That God was borne of a Virgin we believe, because we
read it: that Mary did marry after she was delivered, we believe not,
because we read it not.

In those things, In iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa
omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi. August. de doctrina Christian. li.
2. cap. 9.
says S. Augustine, which are laid down plainly in the Scriptures, all those
things are found which appertain to faith and direction of life. And again:
Quicquid inde audieritis, hoc vobis been sapiat: quicquid extra est respuite,
ne erretis in nebula. Id. in li. de Pastor. cap. 11.
Whatsoever ye hear from the holy Scriptures, let that savor well unto you;
whatsoever is without them, refuse, lest you wander in a cloud. And in another
place: Omnia quae praeteritis te^poribus erga humanu^ genus majores nostri
gesta esse meminerunt, nobisque tradiderunt; omnia etiam quae nos videmus, and
posteris tradimus, quae tamen pertinent ad veram religionem quaerendam and
tenenda^, divina scriptura non tacuit. Idem, ep 42.
All those things which in times past our ancestors have mentioned to be done
toward mankind, and have delivered unto us; all those things also which we see,
and do deliver unto our posterity, so far as they appertain to the seeking
and maintayning of true Religion, the holy Scripture has not passed in silence.

The holy Scripture, Sufficit divina Scriptura ad faciendum eos qui in illa
educati sunt sapientes, and probatissimos, and suffientissimam habentes
intelligentiam: Cyril. li. 7. cont Julian.
says S. Cyrill of Alexandria, is sufficient to make them which are brought up
in it wise, and most approved, and furnished with most sufficient
understanding. And again: (...). Cyril Glaphyroru^, in Genesis l. 2.
That which the holy Scripture has not said, by what means should we
receive, and account it among those things that be true?

Lastly, in the writings of Theodoret we meet with these kind of speeches.
(...). Theod. dialog. 1. (...).
By the holy Scripture alone am I persuaded. (...). Id. dial. 2. (...).
I am not so bold, as to affirm any thing which the sacred Scripture passes
in silence. (...). Id. in Exodus quaest. 26. quod in Graecorum Catena in
Pentateuchum, a Franc. Zephyro edita, ita expositu^ legimus: Impudentis est,
quod a Scriptura reticetur, velle inquirere.
It is an idle and a senseless thing, to seek those things that are passed in
silence. (...). Theodoret. in Genesim. quaest. 45.
We ought not to seek those things which are passed in silence; but rest in
the things that are written.

By the verdict of these twelve men, you may judge, what opinion was held in
those ancient times of such Traditions as did cross, either the verity or the
perfection of the sacred Scripture: which are the Traditions we set our selves
against. If now it be demanded, in what Popes days the contrary doctrine was
brought in among Christians: I answer, that if S. Peter were ever Pope, in his
days it was, that some seducers first labored to bring in Will Worship into
the Church; against whom S. Paul opposing himself, Coloss. 2. counts it a
sufficient argument to condemn all such inventions, that they were the
commandments and doctrines of men. Shortly after them, started up other
Heretics, who taught, that Quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas ab his, qui
nesciant Traditionem. Non enim per literas traditam illam, sed per vivam vocem:
ob quam causam and Paulum dixisse; Sapientiam autem loquimur inter perfectos.
Irenae. contr. hares. lib. 3. cap. 2.
the truth could not be found out of the Scriptures by those to whom Tradition
was unknowen. forasmuch as it was not delivered by writing, but by word of
mouth: for which cause S. Paul also should say; We speak wisdom among them
that be perfect.

The very same Text do the Bellarmin lib. 4. de Verbo Dei, cap. 8.
Jesuits allege, to prove the dignity of many mysteries to be such, that
they require silence; and that it is unmeet they should be opened in the
Scriptures, which are read to the whole world, and therefore can only be
learned by unwritten Traditions. Wherein they consider not, how they make so
near an approach unto the confines of some of the ancientest Heretics, that
they may well shake hands together. For howsoever some of them were so mad as
to Dicentes, se non solum Presbyteris, sed etiam Apostolis existente^
sapientiores, since^am invenisse veritatem. etc. Evenit itaque neque Scripturis
jam neque Traditioni consentire eos. Iren. ut sup.
say, that they were wiser then the Apostles themselves; and therefore made
light account of the doctrine which they delivered unto the Church, either by
writing or by word of mouth: yet all of them broake not forth into that open
impiety; the same mystery of iniquity wrought in some of Antichrists
forerunners then, which is discovered in his ministers now. Confitentur quidem
nihil Apostolos ignorasse, nec diversa inter se praedicasse, sed non omnia
illos volunt omnibus revelasse: quaedam enim palam and universis, quaedam
secreto and paucis demandasse. quia and hoc verbo usus est Paulus ad Timotheum:
O Timothee, depositum custodi. Et rursum: Bonum depositum custodi. Tertull. de
praescript. advers. haeret. cap. 25.
They confessed indeed (as witnesses Tertullian) that the Apostles were
ignorant of nothing, and differed not among themselves in their preaching: but
they say, they revealed not all things unto all men; some things they delivered
openly and to all, some things secretly and to a few. because that Paul uses
this speech unto Timothy: O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust.
And again; That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep. Which very
Texts the Bellar. lib 4. de Verbo Dei, cap. 5.
Jesuits likewise bring in, to prove, that there are some Traditions, which
are not contained in the Scripture.

In the days of S. Hierome also, this was wont to be the saying of Heretics:
Filii sumus sapientium, qui ab initio doctrinam nobis Apostolicam tradiderunt.
Hieron. lib 7. in Esa. ca. 19.
We are the sons of the wise men, which from the beginning have delivered the
doctrine of the Apostles unto us. But Sed and alia, quae absque auctoritate and
testimoniis scripturaru^, quasi traditione Apostolica spo^te reperiu^t atque
co^fingu^t, percutit gladius Dei. Id. in Agg^. c. 1.
those things (says that Father) which they of themselves find out and feign
to have received as it were by Tradition from the Apostles, without the
authority and testimonies of the Scriptures, the sword of God does smite. S.
Chrysostom. in Johan 10. homil. 59. tom. 2. edit. Savil. page 799.
Chrysostom in like manner gives this for a mark of Antichrist, and of all
spiritual thieves: that they come not in by the door of the Scriptures. For
the Scripture (says he) (...) Ibid.
like unto a sure door, does bar an entrance unto Heretics, safeguarding us
in all things that we will, and not suffering us to be deceived. Whereupon he
concludes, that (...). Ibid.
who so uses not the Scriptures, but comes in otherwise, that is, betaketh
himself to another and an unlawful way, he is a thief.

How this mystery of iniquity wrought when Antichrist came unto his full
growth, and what experiments his followers gave of their theevish entry in this
kind, was well observed by the author of the book De unitate Ecclesiae (thought
by some to be Waltram Bishop of Naumburg:) who speaking of the Quale mysterium
iniquitatis praetendunt plures Monachi in vest sua, per quos fiunt, and facta
sunt schismata atque haereses in Ecclesia: qui etiam a matre filios segregant,
oves a pastore ^ollicitant, Dei sacramenta disturbant: qui etiam Dei traditione
conte^pta, alienas doctrinas appetunt, and magist^ria humanae institutionis
inducunt Lib de unitat. Eccl^s. Tom. 1. Script. Germanic. a M. Fre^ero edit.
page 233.
Monks that for the upholding of Pope Hildebrands faction, brought in schisms
and heresies into the Church, notes this specially of them; that despising the
tradition of God, they desired other doctrines, and brought in maisteries of
humane institution. Against whom he alleges the authority of their own S.
Benedict, the father of the Monks in the West; writing thus: Ideoque nihil
debet Abbas extra praeceptum Domini quod sit, aut docere, aut constituere, vel
jubere: sed jussio ejus vel doctrina, ut fermentum divinae justitiae in
discipulorum mentibus conspergatur. Benedict. in Regula.
The Abbot ought to teach, or ordain, or command nothing, which is without the
precept of the Lord: but his commandment or instruction should be spread as the
leaven of divine righteousness in the minds of his Disciples. Whereunto also
he might have added the testimony of the two famous Fathers of Monastical
discipline in the East: S. Antony I mean, who taught his Scholars that (...).
Athanas in Vitae Antonij. quod Evagrius Antioch^nu. presbyter redaidie: Ad
omnem mandatorum disciplinam Scripturas posse sufficere.
the Scriptures were sufficient for doctrine; and S. Basil, who unto the
question, Whether it were expedient that novices should presently learn those
things that are in the Scripture? returns this answer: (...). Basil. in
Reguiis br^viorib. op. 95.
It is fit and necessary, that every one should learn out of the holy
Scripture that which is for his use; both for his full settlement in
godliness, and that he may not be accustomed unto humane traditions.

Mark here the difference betwixt the Monks of Saint Basil, and Pope
Hildebrands breeding. The Novices of the former were trained in the Scriptures,
to the end they might not be accustomed unto humane traditions: those of the
latter, to the clean contrary intent, were kept back from the study of the
Scriptures, that they might be accustomed unto humane traditions. For this, by
the foresaid author, is expressly noted of those Hildebrandine Monks, that
they Qui ne pueros quidem vel adolescentes permittunt in monasteriis habere
studium salutaris scientiae: ut scilicet rude ingenium ^utriatur siliquis
daemoniorum, quae sunt consuetudines humanarum traditionum: ut ejusmodi
spurcitiis assuefacti, non possint gustare quam suavis est Dominus. Lib. de
Vnitat. Eccles. page 22^.
permitted not young men in their Monasteries to study this saving knowledge:
to the end that their rude wit might be nourished with the husks of devils,
which are the customs of humane traditions; that being accustomed to such
filth, they might not taste how sweet the Lord was. And even thus in the times
following, from Monks to Friars, and from them to secular Priests and
Prelates, as it were by tradition from hand to hand, the like ungodly policy
was continued, of keeping the common people from the knowledge of the
Scriptures; as for other reasons, so likewise that by this means they might be
drawn to humane traditions. Which was not only observed by Verum enimvero
vereor, ne isti qui velint populum nihil attingere, non tam periculo
commoveantur illorum quam sui respectu: videlicet ut ab istis solis, velut ab
oraculis petantur omnia. Quid hac de rescriptum est? hoc scriptum est Quem
habet sensum, quod scriptum est? Sic intellige, sic senti, sic loquere. Atqui
istuc est bubalum esse, non hominem. Fortassis movet and nonnullos, quoniam
animadvertunt divinam scripturam parum quadrare ad vitam suam. malunt eam
antiquari, aut certe nesciri; ne quid hinc jaciatur in os. Et ad humanas
traditiunculas populum avocant, quas ipsi ad suam commoditatem probe commenti
sunt. E. asm in ena^rat. 1. Psalmi, edit. ann. 1515.
Erasmus, before ever Luther stirred against the Pope: but openly in a manner
confessed afterward by a bitter adversary of his, Petrus Suitor, a Carthusian
Monk; who, among other inconveniences for which he would have the people
debarred from reading the Scripture, alleges this also for one. Cum multa
palam tradantur observanda, quae sacris in literis express non habentur: nonne
idiotae haec animadvertentes facile murmurabunt, conquerentes cur tantae sibi
imponantur sarcinae, quibus and libertas Evangelica ita graviter elevatur?
Nonne and facile retrahentur ab observantia institutionum Ecclesiasticarum,
quando ^as in lege Christi animadverterint non contineri? Suitor de tralatione
Bibliae cap. 22. fol. 96. ed^t. Paris. an. 1525.
Whereas many things are openly taught to be observed, which are not to be
expressly had in the holy Scriptures: will not the simple people, observing
these things, quickly murmr, and complain that so great burdens should be
imposed upon them, whereby the liberty of the Gospel is so greatly impaired?
Will not they also easily be drawn away from the observation of the ordinances
of the Church, when they shall observe that they are not contained in the Law
of Christ?

Having thus therefore discovered unto these Deuterotae (for so S. Hieronym.
lib. 2. Comment. in Esai. cap. 3. and lib. 9. in Esai. cap. 29.
Hierome uses to style such Tradition-mongers) both their grandfathers, and
their more immediate progenitors: I pass now forward unto the second point.

OF THE REAL PRESENCE.
HOw far the real presence of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, is
allowed or disallowed by us, I have at large declared in an Sermon. a^ Westminst.
before the house of Commons. ann. 1620.
other place. The sum is this: That in the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, we are to distinguish between the outward and the inward action of
the Communicant. In the outward, with our bodily mouth we receive really the
visible elements of Bread and Wine: in the inward, we do by faith really
receive the body and blood of our Lord, that is to say, we are truly and
indeed made partakers of Christ crucified, to the spiritual strengthening of
our inward man. They of the adverse part have made such a confusion of these
things, that for the first, they do utterly deny, that after the words of
consecration there remains any Bread or Wine at all to be received: and for
the second, do affirm, that the body and blood of Christ is in such a manner
present, under the outward shows of bread and wine, that whosoever receives
the one (be he good or bad, believer or unbeleever) does therewith really
receive the other. We are therefore here put to prove, that Bread is bread, and
Wine is wine: a matter (one would think) that easily might be determined by
common sense. That which you see (says Quod ergo vidistis, Panis est and
Calix: quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renunciant. August. in Sermon de sacram.
apud Bedam* in 1. Cor. 10. and Ratrannum de corp. and sangu. Dom. vel in
Sermon de Verbis Domini: ut citatur ab Algero, lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 5.
S. Augustine) is the Bread and the Cup: which your very eyes do declare unto
you. But because we have to deal with men, that will needs herein be
senseless; we will for this time refer them to Tertull. in lib. de Anima,
cap. 17. cui titulus: De quinque sensibus.
Tertullians discourse of the five senses, (wishing they may be restored to the
use of their five wits again:) and ponder the testimonies of our Savior
Christ, in the sixth of John, and in the words of the Institution, which they
oppose against all sense, but in the end shall find to be as opposite to this
fantastical conceit of theirs, as any thing can be.

Touching our Saviors speech, of the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of
his blood, in the sixth of John; these five things specially may be observed.
First, that the question betwixt our Adversaries and us, being not, Whether
Christ's body be turned into bread, but whether bread be turned into Christ's
body; the words in S. John, if they be pressed literally, serve more strongly
to prove the former, then the latter. Secondly, that this Sermon was uttered by
our Savior, above a year before the celebration of his last Supper, wherein
the Sacrament of his body and blood was instituted: at which time none of his
hearers could possibly have understood him to have spoken of the external
eating of him in the Sacrament. Thirdly, that by the eating of the flesh of
Christ, and the drinking of his blood, there, is not here meant an external
eating or drinking with the mouth and throat of the body, (as the Ioh 6.52.
Jews then, and the Romanists far more grossly then they, have since
imagined:) but an internal and a spiritual, effected by a lively faith and
the quickening spirit of Christ in the soul of the believer. For (...). Basil.
in Psalm. 33.
there is a spiritual mouth of the inner man, (as S. Basil notes) wherewith
he is nourished that is made partaker of the Word of life, which is the bread
that comes down from heaven. Fourthly, that this spiritual feeding upon the
body and blood of Christ, is not to be found in the Sacrament only, but also
out of the Sacrament. Fifthly, that the eating of the flesh, and the drinking of
the b^ood here mentioned, is of such excellent virtue, that the receiver is
thereby made to remain in Christ, and Christ in him, and by that means
certainly freed from death, and assured of everlasting life. Which seeing it
cannot be verified of the eating of the Sacrament (whereof both the godly and
the wicked are partakers:) it proves, not only that our Savior did not here
speak of the Sacramental eating; but further also, that the thing which is
delivered in the external part of the Sacrament, cannot be conceived to be
really, but sacramentally only, the flesh and blood of Christ.

The first of these may be plainly seen in the Text: where our Savior does
not only say, I am the bread of life, verse. 48. and, I am the living bread
that came down from heaven, verse. 51. but adds also in the 55. verse. For my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Which words being the
most forcible of all the rest, and those wherewith the simpler sort are
commonly most deluded, might carry some show of proof, that Christ's flesh and
blood should be turned into bread and wine; but have no manner of color to
prove, that bread and wine are turned into the flesh and blood of Christ. The
truth of the second, appears by the four^h verse: in which we find, that
this fell out not long before the Passover; and consequently, a year at least
before that last Passover, wherein our Savior instituted the Sacrament of his
Supper. We willingly indeed do acknowledge, that that which is inwardly
presented in the Lords Supper, and spiritually received by the soul of the
faithful, is that very thing which is treated of in the sixth of John: but
we deny that it was our Saviors intention in this place, to speak of that
which is externally delivered in the Sacrament, and orally received by the
Communicant. And for our warrant herein, we need look no further then to that
earnest asseveration of our Savior in the 53. verse: Verily, verily I say unto
you; Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. Wherein there is not only an obligation laid upon them for
doing of this, (which in no likelihood could be intended of the external
eating of the Sacrament, that was not as yet in being:) but also an absolute
necessity imposed, non praecepti solum ratione, sed etia^ medij. Now to hold,
that all they are excluded from life, which have not had the means to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: is as untrue, as it is uncharitable. And
therefore many of the Papists themselves, as Biel, Cusanus, Cajelan, Tapper,
Hessels, Iansenius, and others, confess, that our Savior in the sixth of John
did not properly treat of the Sacrament.

The third of the points proposed, may be collected out of the first part of
Christ's speech, in the 35. and 36. verses. I am the bread of life: he that
comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes on me, shall never
thirst. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not. But
especially, out of the last, from the 61. verse forward. When Jesus knew in
himself that his Disciples murmured at it, he said unto them; Does this
offend you? What then if you should see the Son of man ascend up where he
was before? It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the
words that I speak unto you are spirit and life. But there are some of you
that believe not. Which words Athanasius (or whosoever was the author of the
Tractate upon that place; Quicunque dixerit verbum in filium homi^is) notes
our Savior to have used; that his hearers might learn, (...). A^hanas.
that those things which he spoke, were not carnal but spiritual. For how
many could his body have sufficed for meat, that it should be made the food of
the whole world? But therefore it was that he made mention of the Son of man's
ascension into heaven, that he might draw them from this corporal conceit; and
that hereafter they might learn, that the flesh which he spoke of, was
celestial meat from above, and spiritual nourishment to be given by him. For
the words which I have spoken unto you (says he) are spirit and life. So
likewise Tertullian: Etsi carnem ait nihil prodes^e, ex materia dicti
dirigendus est sensus. Nam quia durum and intolerabile^ existimaverunt sermonem
ejus, quasi vere carnem suam illis edendam determinasset: ut in spiritu
disponeret slatum salutis, praemisit; Spiritus est qui vivificat. atque ita
subjunxit: Caro nihil prodest, ad vivificandum scilicet. Tertull de Resurrect.
carnis. cap. 37.
Although he says that the flesh profits nothing, the meaning of the speech
must be directed according to the intent of the matter in hand. For, because
they thought it to be a hard and an intolerable speech, as if he had determined
that his flesh should be truly eaten by them: that he might dispose the state
of salvation by the spirit, he premised; It is the spirit that quickneth. and
so subjoyned; The flesh profits nothing, namely to quicken. etc. Quia and
sermo caro erat factus, proinde in causam vitae appetendus, and devorandus
auditu, and ruminandus intellectu, and fide digerendus. Nam and paulo ante
carnem suam panem quoque coelestem pronuntiarat; urgens usquequaque per
allegoriam necessariorum pabulorum, memoriam patrum, qui panes and carnes
Aegyptiorum praeverterant divinae vocationi. Idem ibid.
And because the Word was made flesh, it therefore was to be desired for
causing of life, and to be devoured by hearing, and to be chewed by
understanding, and to be digested by faith. For a little before he had also
affirmed that his flesh was heavenly bread: urging still by the Allegory of
necessary food, the remembrance of the fathers, who preferred the bread and the
flesh of the Egyptians before Gods calling. Add hereunto the sentence of
Origin: Est and in novo Testamento litera quae occidit eum, qui non
spiritualiter ea quae dicuntur adverterit. Si enim secundum literam sequaris
hoc ipsum quod dictum est; Nisi manducave^itis carnem meam, and biberitis
sanguinem meum occidit haec litera. Orig. in Levit. cap. 10. ^om 7.
There is in the New Testament also a letter which kills him that does not
spiritually conceive the things that be spoken. For if according to the letter
you do follow this same which is said; Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood: this letter kills. And those sayings which
every where occur in S. Augustines Tractates upon John: Quomodo in coelum
manu^ mitta^, ut ibi sedente^ tenea^? Fide^ mitte, and tenuisti. Aug. in Evang.
Johan. Tract. 50.
How shall I send up my hand unto heaven, to take hold on Christ sitting there?
Send thy faith, and thou have hold of him! Vt quid paras^dentes and ven^rem?
C^ede, and manducasti. Id. ibid. Tracta^. 25.
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Bele^ve, and thou have eaten.
Credere enim in eum, hoc est mandu^a^e panem vivum. Qui credit in eum,
manducat. Invisibiliter saginatur, quia invisibiliter renascitur. Infans intus
est, novus intus est: ubi novellatur, ibi satiatur. Id. ibid. Tractat. 26.
For this is to eat the living bread, to believe in him. He that believes in
him, eats. He is invisibly fedd, because he is invisibly regenerated. He is
inwardly a b^be, inwardly renewed: where he is renewed, there is he nourished.

The fourth proposition does necessarily follow upon the third. For if the
eating and drinking here spoken of, be not an external eating and drinking,
but an inward participation of Christ, by the communion of his quickening
spirit: it is evident, that this blessing is to be found in the soul, not
only in the use of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but at other times also.
It is no ways to be doubted by any one (says S. Nulli est aliquatenus
ambigendum, tunc unumquemque fidelium corporis sanguinisque Dominici participem
fieri, quando in baptismate membrum Christi efficitur: nec alienari ab illius
pan^s calicisque consortio, etiamsi antequam panem illum comedat and calicem
bibat, de hoc seculo in unitate corporis Christi constitutus abscedat.
Sacramenti quippe illius participatione ac beneficio non privatur, quando ipse
hoc quod illud sacramentum significat, invenit. August. in Sermon ad in^ante^* de
sacram. apud Bedam, in 1. Cor. ^0.
Augustine) that every one of the faithful is made partaker of the body and
blood of our Lord, when he is made a member of Christ in Baptism: and that he
is not estranged from the communion of that bread and cup, although before he
eat that bread, and drink that cup, he depart out of this world, being
settled in the unity of the body of Christ. For he is not deprived of the
participation and the benefit of that Sacrament, when he has found that
which this Sacrament does signify. And hereupon we see, that diverse of the
Fathers do apply the sixth of John, to the hearing of the Word also: as, Clem.
Ale^andr. P^dagog. lib 1. cap. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin. in L^vit. cap. 10 homil. 7.
Origin, Eusebius Caesareensis, and others. We are said to drink the blood of
Christ (says Bibere autem dicimur sanguinem Christi, non solum sacramentorum
rit^, sed and cum sermones ejus recipimus, in quibus vita consistit sicut and
ipse dicit: Verba quae locutus sum, spiritus and vita est. Origin. in Numer.
cap. 24 hom. 16.
Origin) not only by way of the Sacraments, but also when we receive his word,
wherein consists life. even as he himself saith^ The words which I have
spoken, are spirit and life. Upon which words of Christ, Eusebius paraphraseth
after this manner: (...). Eusebius. lib. 3. Ecclesiasticae Theologiae, contra
Marcellum Ancyranum. MS. in publica Oxoniensis Academiae Bibliotheca: and in
privatis virorum doctissimorum, D. Richardi Montacutij and M. Patricij Iunij.
Do not think that I speak of that flesh wherewith I am compassed, as if you
must eat of that; neither imagine that I command you to drink my sensible and
bodily blood: but understand well, that the words which I have spoken unto
you, are spirit and life. So that those very words and speeches of his, are his
flesh and blood; whereof who is partaker, being always therewith nourished as
it were with heavenly bread, shall likewise be made partaker of heavenly life.
Therefore let not that offend you, says he, which I have spoken of the eating
of my flesh and of the drinking of my blood; neither let the superficial
hearing of those things which were said by me of flesh and blood, trouble you.
For these things sensibly heard, profit nothing: but the spirit is it, which
quickneth them that are able to hear spiritually. Thus far Eusebius: whose
words I have laid down the more largely, because they are not vulgar.

There remains the fifth and last point: which is oftentimes repeated by our
Savior in this Sermon. as in the 50. verse: This is the bread which comes
down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye, and in the 51: If
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. and in the 54: Who so
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. and in the 56: He
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. and
in the 58: This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers
did eat Manna, and are dead: he that eats of this bread, shall live for
ever. Whereupon Origin rightly observes the difference that is betwixt the
eating of the typical or symbolicall (for so he calls the Sacrament) and the
true body of Christ. Of the former, thus he writes: Quod sanctificatur per
verbum Dei and per obsecrationem, non suapte natura sanctificat utentem. Nam id
si esset, sanctificaret etiam illum, qui comedit indigne Domino: neque quisquam
ob hunc esum infirmus aut aegrotus fuisset, aut obdormisset. Nam tale quidda^
Paulus demo^strat, quu^ ait: Propter hoc inter vos infirmi, and male habe^tes,
and dormiunt multi. Origin. in Matt. 15.
That which is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, does not of it own^
nature, sanctify him that uses it. For if that were so, it would sanctify
him also which does eat unworthy of the Lord: neither should any one for this
eating be weak, or sick, or dead. For such a thing does Paul show, when he
says: For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. Of
the latter, thus: Mult^ porro and de ipso Verbo dici possent, quod factum est
caro, verusque cibus, que^ qui comederit, omnino vivet in aeternum; quem nullus
malus potest ed ere. Etenim si fieri possit, ut qui malus adhuc perseveret,
edat Verbum factum carnem, quum sit verbum and panis vivus, nequaquam scriptum
fuisset: Quisquis ederit panem hunc, vivet in aeternum Id. ibid.
Many things may be spoken of the Word it self, which was made flesh, and true
meat; which whosoever eats, shall certainly live for ever: which no evil
person can eat. For if it could be, that he who continues evil, might eat
the Word made flesh (seeing he is the word and the bread of life) it should
not have been written: Whosoever eats this bread, shall live for ever. The
like difference does S. Augustine, also upon the same ground, make betwixt the
eating of Christ's body sacramentally and really. For having affirmed, that
wicked men Nec isti dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi. quoniam nec in
membris computandi sunt Christi. August. de Civit. Dei, lib 21. cap. 25.
may not be said to eat the body of Christ, because they are not to be counted
among the members of Christ: he afterward adds. Denique ipse dicens, Qui
manducat carnem meam, and bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo;
ostendit quid sit non sacramento tenus, sed revera manducare corpus Christi,
and ejus sanguinem bibere: hoc est enim in Christo manner, ut in illo maneat
and Christus. Sic enim hoc dixit, tanquam diceret: Qui non in me manet, and in
quo ego non maneo, non se dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meum, aut bibere
sanguinem meum. Id. ibid.
Christ himself saying, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
remains in me, and I in him, shows what it is, not sacramentally but
indeed, to eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood: for this is, to
remain in Christ, that Christ likewise may remain in him. For he said this,
as if he should have said: He that remains not in me, and in whom I do not
remain; let not him say or think, that he eats my flesh or drinks my
blood. And in another place, expounding those words of Christ here alleged;
he thereupon infers thus: Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, and illum
bibere potum; in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc
qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, proculdubio nec
manducat spiritaliter carne^ ejus, nec bibit ejus sanguine^, licet carnaliter
and visibiliter premat dentibus sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi: sed
magis tantae rei sacramentu^ ad judicium sibi manducat et bibit, quia immundus
praesumpsit ad Christi accedere sacramenta. Id. in Evangel. Johan. Tract. 26.
This is therefore to eat that meat, and drink that drink; to remain in
Christ, and to have Christ remaining in him. And by this, he that remains not
in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, without doubt does neither
spiritually eat his flesh, nor drink his blood: although he do carnally and
visibly press with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ;
and so rather eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing for
judgment to himself, because that being unclean he did presume to come unto
the Sacraments of Christ.

Hence it is that we find so often in him, and in other of the Fathers, that
the body and blood of Christ is communicated only unto those that shall live,
and not unto those that shall dye for ever. Hic est panis vitae. Qui ergo vitam
manducat, mori non potest. Quomodo enim morietur, cui cibus vita est? Quomodo
deficiet, qui habuerit vitalem substantiam? Ambr. in Psalm. 118. octonar. 18.
He is the bread of life. He therefore that eats life, cannot dye. For how
should he dye, whose meat is life? how should he fail, who has a vital
substance? says S. Ambrose. And it is a good note of Macarius: that, as men
use to give one kind of meat to their servants, and another to their
children; so Christ who (...). Macar. Egypt. homil. 14.
created all things, nourishes indeed evil and ungrateful persons: but the
sons which he begat of his own seed, and whom he made partakers of his
grace, in whom the Lord is formed, he nourishes with a peculiar refection and
food, and meat and drink, beyond other men; giving himself unto them, that
have their conversation with his Father. as the Lord himself says: He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, remains in me, and I in him, and
shall not see death. Among the sentences collected by Prosper out of S.
Augustine, this also is one. Escam vitae accipit, and aeternitatis poculum
bibit, qui in Christo manet, and cujus Christus habita^or est. Nam qui
discordat a Christo, nec carnem ejus manducat, nec sanguinem bibit: etiamsi
tantae reisacramentum ad judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter
accipiat. Prosp. senten^. 339.
He receives the meat of life, and drinks the cup of eternity, who
remains in Christ, and whose inhabiter is Christ. For he that is at discord
with Christ, does neither eat his flesh nor drink his blood: although, to the
judgment of his presumption, he indifferently does receive every day the
sacrament of so great a thing. Which distinction between the Sacrament and the
thing whereof it is a sacrament, (and consequently between the sacramental
and the real eating of the body of Christ,) is thus briefly and most
excellently expressed by S. Augustine himself, in his exposition upon the sixth
of John. Hujus rei sacramentum de mensa Dominica sumitur; quibusdam ad vitam,
quibusdam ad exitiu^. Res vero ipsa, cujus sacrame^tum est, omni homini ad
vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque ejus particeps fuerit August. in Johan.
tractat. 26.
The sacrament of this thing, is taken from the Lords Table; by some unto life,
by some unto destruction: but the thing it self whereof it is a sacrament, is
received by every man unto life, and by none unto destruction, that is made
partaker thereof. Our conclusion therefore is this: The body and blood of
Christ, is received by all unto life, and by none unto condemnation.

But that substance which is outwardly delivered in the Sacrament, is not
received by all unto life, but by many unto condemnation.

Therefore that substance which is outwardly delivered in the Sacrament, is not
really the body and blood of Christ.

The first proposition is plainly proved by the Texts which have been alleged
out of the sixth of John. The second is manifest, both by common experience,
and by the testimony of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. verse. 17, 27, 29. We may
therefore well conclude, that the sixth of John is so far from giving any
furtherance to the doctrine of the Romanists in this point, that it utterly
overthrows their fond opinion, who imagine the body and blood of Christ to
be in such a sort present under the visible forms of bread and wine, that
whosoever receives the one, must of force also really be made partaker of the
other.

The like are we now to show in the words of the Institution. For the better
clearing whereof, the Reader may be pleased to consider, first, that the words
are not; This shall be my body: nor, This is made, or, shall be changed into my
body: but, This Is my body. Secondly, that the word THIS, can have relation to
no other substance, but that which was then present, when our Savior spoke
that word; which (as we shall make it plainly appear) was Bread. Thirdly,
that it being proved that the word This, does demonstrate the Bread; it must of
necessity follow, that Christ affirming that to be his BODY, cannot be
conceived to have meant it so to be properly, but relatively and sacramentally.

The first of these, is by both sides yielded unto: so likewise is the third.
For this is impossible, says the Gloss Hoc tamen est impossible, quod panis
sit corpus Christi. De consecrat. did. 2. cap 55. Panis est in altari. Gloss.
upon Gratian, that bread should be the body of Christ. And it cannot be,
says Cardinal Non igitur potest fieri, ut vera sit propositio, in qua
sub^ectum supponit pro pane, praedicatum autem pro corpore Christi. Panis enim
and corpus Domini res diversissimae sunt. Bellarmin. de Eucharist. lib. 3. cap.
19.
Bellarmine, that that proposition should be true, the former part whereof
designeth Bread, the latter the Body of Christ: for as much as Bread and the
Lords Body be things most adverse. And therefore he confidently affirms,
Ibide^ scripsi^ Lut^erus, verba Evangelistae, Hoc est corpus meum, hunc facere
sensum, H^^ panis est corpus meum: quae sententia aut accipi debet tropice, ut
panis sit corpus Christi significative; aut est plane absurda and impossibilis.
nec enim fieri potest ut panis sit corpus Christi. Id. lib. 1. de Eucharist.
cap 1.
that if the words, This is my body, did make this sense, This bread is my
body: this sentence must either be taken tropically, that bread may be the body
of Christ significatively; or else it is plainly absurd and impossible for it
cannot be, says he, that bread should be the body of Christ. Doctor Matthew.
Kellison, Survey of the new Religion, lib. 8. chap. 7. sect 7.
Kellison also in like manner does freely acknowledge, that If Christ had said,
This bread is my body; we must have understood him figuratively and
metaphorically. So that the whole matter of difference rests now upon the
second point: whether our Savior, when he said This is my body, meant any
thing to be his Body, but that Bread which was before him. A matter which
easily might be determined, in any indifferent man's judgment, by the words
immedia^ly going before. He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave
it unto them, saying: This is my body which is given for you; this do in
remembrance of me. (Luke 22.19.) For what did he demonstrate here, and said
was his Body, but that which he gave unto his Disciples? What did he give unto
them, but what he brake? What brake he, but what he took? and does not the
Text expressly say, that he took bread? Was it not therefore of the Bread, he
said; This is my Body? And could Bread possibly be otherwise understood to
have been his Body, but as a Sacrament, and (as he himself with the same
breath declared his own meaning) a memorial thereof?

If these words be not of themselves clear enough, but have need of further
exposition: can we look for a better, then that which S. Paul gives of them,
1. Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? Did not S. Paul therefore so understand Christ, as if he had said;
This bread is my body? And if Christ had said so; does not Kellison confess,
and right reason evince, that he must have been understood figuratively?
considering that it is simply impossible, that Bread should really be the Body
of Christ. If it be said, that S. Paul by Bread, does not here understand that
which is properly Bread, but that which lately was bread (but now is become the
body of Christ:) we must remember, that S. Paul does not only say The bread,
but The bread which we break. which breaking, being an accident properly
belonging to the bread it self, and not to the body of Christ (which being in
glory, cannot be subject to any more breaking) does evidently show, that the
Apostle by Bread understands Bread indeed. Neither can the Romanists well
deny this, unless they will deny themselves, and confess that they did but
dream all this while they have imagined that the change of the bread into the
body of Christ, is made by virtue of the sacramental words alone, which have
not their effect until they have all been fully uttered. For the Pronoune
THIS, which is the first of these words, does point to something which was then
present. But no substance was then present but bread: seeing by their own
grounds, the body of Christ comes not in, until the last word of that
sentence, yea and the last syllable of that word, be completely pronounced.
What other substance therefore can they make this to signify, but this bread
only?

In the institution of the other part of the Sacrament, the words are yet more
plain, Matthew. 26. verse. 27.28. He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it
to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood of the new
Testament: or, (as S. Paul and S. Luke relate it) This cup is the new Testament
in my blood. That which he bidd them all drink of, is that which he said was
his blood. But our Savior could mean nothing but the Wine, when he said,
Drink ye all of it: because this sentence was uttered by him before the words
of consecration, at which time our Adversaries themselves do confess, that
there was nothing in the cup but wine, or wine and water at the most. It was
wine therefore which he said was his blood: even the fruit of the Vine, as he
himself terms it. For as in the deliverie of the other cup before the
institution of the Sacrament, S. Luke (who alone makes mention of that part of
the history) tells us, that he said unto his Disciples; Luke 22.18.
I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the kingdom of God shall
come: so does S Matthew and S. Mark likewise testify, that at the deliverie
of the Sacramental cup, when he had said, This is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins; he also added:
Matthew. 26.29. Mark. 14.25.
But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine,
until that day that I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom. Now
seeing it is contrary both to sense and says, that Wine or the fruit of the
Vine, should really be the blood of Christ; there being that formal difference
in the nature of the things, that there is an utter impossibility that in true
propriety of speech the one should be the other: nothing in this world is more
plain, than when our Savior said it was his blood, he could not mean it to be
so substantially, but sacramentally.

And what other interpretation can the Romanists themselves give of those words
of the institution in S. Paul? (...). 1 Cor. 11.25.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood. How is the cup, or the thing
contained in the cup, the new Testament, otherwise then as a Sacrament of it?
Mark how in the like case the Lord himself, at the institution of the first
Sacrament of the old Testament, uses the same manner of speech, Genes. 17.10.
(...). Genesis 17.10.
This is my Covenant, or Testament (for the Greek word in both places is the
same:) and in the words presently following, thus expounds his own meaning.
(...) ( vel, (...). Genesis 17.11
It shall be a SIGN of the Covenant betwixt me and you. And generally for all
Sacraments, the rule is thus laid down by S. Augustine, in his Epistle to
Bonifacius: Si enim Sacrame^ta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum
sacramenta sunt non haberent, omnino Sacrame^ta non essent Ex hac autem
similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo
secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est,
sacramentu^ sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est; ita-sacramentu^ fidei fides
est. Aug. epist. 23.
If Sacraments did not some manner of way resemble the things whereof they are
Sacraments, they should not be Sacraments at all. And for this resemblance they
do of oftentimes also bear the names of the things themselves. As therefore
the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is after a certain manner the body of
Christ, and the sacrament of Christ's blood is the blood of Christ; so likewise
the sacrament of faith, is faith. By the sacrament of faith he understands
Baptism; of which he afterward alleges that saying of the Apostle, Romans 6.4.
We are buried with Christ by baptism into death: and then adds. Non ait,
Sepultura^ significamus: sed prorsus ait, Consepulti sumus. Sacramentu^ ergo
tantae rei non nisi ejusde^ rei vocabulo nuncupavit. Id ibid.
He says not, We signify his burial; but he plainly says, We are buried.
Therefore the sacrament of so great a thing he would not otherwise call but by
the name of the thing it self. And in his Questions upon Leviticus: Solet
aute^ res quae significat, ejus rei nomine qua^ significat nuncupari. sicut
scriptum est: Septe^ spicae, septe^ anni sunt* (non enim dixit; Septem annos
significant) and, septem bo^es, septem anni sunt: and multa hujusmodi. Hinc est
quod dictu^ est: Petra erat Christus Non enim dixit, Petra significat Christu^;
sed ta^qua^ hoc esset, quod utique per substantia^ non hoc erat, sed per
significatione^. Sic and sanguis, quonia^ propter vitale^ quanda^ corpulentia^
anima^ significat, in sacramentis anima dictus est Aug. in Levit. quaest 57.
The thing that signifies (says he) uses to be called by the name of that
thing which it signifies. as it is written: The seven ears of corn, are
seven years; (for he said not; they signify seven years:) and the seven
Kine are seven years: and many such like. Hence was that saying: The Rock was
Christ. For he said not, The Rock did signify Christ; but as if it had been
that very thing, which doubtless by substance it was not, but by
signification. So also the blood, because for a certain vital corpulencie
which it has, it signifies the soul; after the manner of Sacraments it is
called the soul. Our argument therefore out of the words of the institution,
stands thus: If it be true, that Christ called Bread his body, and Wine his
blood: then must it be true also, that the things which be honored with those
names, cannot be really his body and blood, but figuratively and sacramentally.

But the former is true. Therefore also the latter.

The first proposition has been proved by the undoubted principles of right
reason, and the clear confession of the adverse part: the second, by the
circumstances of the Text of the Evangelists, by the exposition of S. Paul, and
by the received grounds of the Romanists themselves. The conclusion therefore
rests firm: and so we have made it clear, that the words of the
Institution do not only not uphold, but directly also overthow the whole frame
of that which the Church of Rome teaches, touching the corporal presence of
Christ under the forms of Bread and Wine.

If I should now lay down here all the sentences of the Fathers, which teach
that that which Christ called his Body, is Bread in substance, and the Body of
the Lord in signification and sacramental relation: I should never make an
end. Justin Martyr, in his second Apology to Antoninus the Emperor, tells
us, that the bread and the wine, even that (...). Justin. Apolog. 2.
sanctified food wherewith our blood and flesh by conversion are nourished, is
that which we are taught to be the flesh and blood of Jesus incarnate. Irenaeus
in his 4th book against heresies, says, that our Lord Quomodo autem just
Dominus, si alterius patris existit, hujus conditionis, quae est secundum nos,
accipiens panem, suum corpus esse confitebatur; and temperamentum calicis suum
sanguinem confirmavit. hen. lib. 4 cap 57.
taking bread of that condition which is usual among us, confessed it to be
his body: and Calicem, qui est ex ea creatura quae est secundum nos, suum
sanguine^ confessus est. Id lib. 4. cap. 32.
the cup likewise containing that creature which is usual among us, his blood.
And in his fifth book he adds: Eum calicem qui est creatura, suum sanguinem
qui effusus est, ex quo auget nostrum sanguinem; and eum panem qui est a
creatura, suum corpus confirmavit, ex quo nostra auget corpora. Quando ergo and
mixtus calix and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis
and corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostrae
substantia. Id. lib. 5. cap 2. edit. Colon an. 1596.
That cup which is a creature, he confirmed to be his blood which was shed,
whereby he increases our blood; and that bread which is of the creature, to be
his body, whereby he increases our bodies. Therefore when the mixed cup and the
broken bread does receive the word of God, it is made the Eucharist of the
blood and body of Christ, whereby the substance of our flesh is increased and
does consist. Our Lord, says Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Clem. Alexand.
Paedagog. lib. 2. cap. 2.
did bless wine, when he said; Take, drink, This is my blood, the blood of
the Vine. Tertullian: Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis, corpus suum
illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Tertull.
advers. Marci^n. lib. 4. cap 40.
Christ taking bread and distributing it to his Disciples, made it his body,
saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. Origin: Ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbum Dei, perque obsecrationem, juxta id quod habet
materiale, in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur: caeterum juxta
precationem quae illi accessit proportione fidei fit utilis, efficiens ut
perspicax fiat animus, spectans ad id quod utile est. Nec materia panis, sed
super illum dictus sermo est, qui prodest non indigne Domino comedenti illum.
Et haec quidem de typico symbolicoque corpore. Origin. in Matthew. cap. 15.
That meat which is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, as touching
the material part thereof goes into the belly, and is voyded into the
draught: but as touching the prayer which is added, according to the portion of
faith it is made profitable; enlightening the mind, and making it to behold
that which is profitable. Neither is it the matter of bread, but the word
spoken over it, which profits him that does not unworthily eat thereof. And
these things I speak of the typical and symbolicall body; says Origin. In
the Dialogues against the Marcionites, collected for the most part out of the
writings of Maximus (who lived in the time of the Emperors Commodus and
Severus) Origin, who is made the chief speaker therein, is brought in thus
disputing against the Heretics: (...); Orig. Dial. 3.
If Christ, as these men say, were without body and blood: of what kind of
flesh, or of what body, or of what kind of blood did he give the bread and
the cup to be Images of, when he commanded his Disciples by them to make a
commemoration of him? S. Cyprian also notes, Qua in part invenimus calicem
mixtu^ suisse quem Dominus obtulit, and vinum suisse, quod sanguinem sun^
dixit. Cypr. epist. ^^. sect. 6,
that it was Wine, even the fruit of the Vine, which the Lord said was his
blood: and that Nec corpus Domini potest esse fa^ina sola, aut aqua sola; nisi
utrumque adunatum fuerit and copulatu^, and panis unius compage solidatum. Id.
ibid. sect. 10.
flower alone, or water alone, cannot be the body of our Lord, unless both
be united and coupled together, and kneaded into the lump of one bread. And
again; that Nam quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat de multorum granorum
adunatione congestum; populum nostrum, quem portabat, indicat adunatu^: and
quando sanguinem suum vinum appellat, de botris atque acinis plurimis expressum
atque in unum coactum, gregem item nostru^ significat, co^mixtione adunatae
multitudinis copulatum. Id. epist. 76. sect. 4.
the Lord calls bread his body, which is made up by the uniting of many
corns: and wine his blood, which is pressed out of many clusters of grapes,
and gathered into one liquor. Which I find also word for word in a manner,
transcribed in the Commentaries upon the Gospels, attributed unto Theoph.
Antioch. in Evang. lib. 1. page 152. tom. 2 Bibliothec. Patr. edit. Colon.
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch. Whereby it appears, that in those elder times
the words of the institution were no otherwise conceived, then as if Christ had
plainly said; This bread is my body, and, This wine is my blood: which is the
maine thing that we strive for with our Adversaries; and for which the words
themselves are plain enough. the substance whereof we find thus laid down in
the Harmony of the Gospels, gathered, as some say, by Tatianus, as others, by
Ammonius, within the second or the third age after Christ. Mox acceptopane,
deinde vini calice, corpus esse suum ac sanguinem testatus, manducare illos
jussit and bibere; quod ea sit futurae calamitatis suae mortisque memoria.
Ammon. harmon. Evang. tom. 3. Biblioth. Patr. page 28.
Having taken the bread, then afterward the cup of wine, and testified it to be
his body and blood, he commanded them to eat and drink thereof; forasmuch as
it was the memorial of his future passion and death.

To the Fathers of the first three hundred years, we will now adjoyne the
testimonies of those that flourished in the ages following. The first whereof
shall be Eusebius: who says that our Savior (...). Eusebius. lib. 8. Demonstrat.
Evangel. in fine cap. 1.
delivered to his Disciples the symboles of his divine dispensation, commanding
them to make the Image of his own body; and (...). Id. ibid.
appointing them to use Bread for the symbol of his Body. and that we still
(...). Id. l^b. 1. Demonstr. cap. ult.
celebrate upon the Lords table, the memory of his sacrifice, by the symboles
of his body and blood, according to the ordinances of the New Testament.
Acacius, who succeeded him in his Bishopric, says that Panis vinumque ex hac
materia vescentes sanctificat. Acac. in Genesis 2. Graec. caten. in Pentate^ch
Zephyro interp.
the bread and wine sanctifies them that feed upon that matter: acknowledging
thereby, that the material part of those outward elements do still remain. In
the Church, says (...). Macar. Egypt. homil. 27.
Macarius, is offered bread wine, the type of his flesh and blood: and they
which are partakers of the visible bread, do spiritually eat the flesh of the
Lord. Christ, says S. In typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam, sed vinum.
Hieronym. lib. 2. advers. Iovinian.
Hierome, did not offer water, but wine, for the type of his blood. S.
Augustine brings in our Savior thus speaking of this matter. Non hoc corpus
quod videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem, quem susu^i sunt
qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi: spiritualiter
intellectum vivisicabit vos. Augustine. in Psalm. 98.
You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink that blood which they
shall shed that will crucify me. I have commended a certain Sacrament unto
you: that being spiritually understood will quicken you. The same Father in
another place writes, that Adhibuit ad convivium, in quo corporis and
sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendavit and tradidit. Id. in Psalm. 3.
Christ admitted Judas to that banquet, wherein he commended and delivered unto
his Disciples the figure of his body and blood: but (as he elsewhere Illi
manducabant panem Dominum: ille panem Domini contra Dominum. Id. in Evang.
Johan. tract. 59.
adds) they did eat that bread which was the Lord himself; he the bread of
the Lord against the Lord. Lastly: the Lord (says Non enim Dominus dubitavit
dicere, Hoc est corpus meum; cum signum daret corporis sui. August. contr.
Adimant. cap. 12.
he) did not doubt to say, This is my body; when he gave the sign of his body.

So the Author of the Homily upon the 22. Psalm, (among the works of
Chrysostom:) Istam mensam praeparavit servis and ancillis in conspectu little,
ut quotidie in similitudinem corporis and sanguinis Christi, panem and vinum
secundum ordinem Melchisedec, nobis ostenderet in sacramento In Psalm 22
Chrysostom. tom. 1
This table he has prepared for his servants and hand-maydes in their sight:
that he might every day, for a similitude of the body and blood of Christ, show
unto us in a sacrament bread and wine after the order of Melchisedec. And S.
Chrysostom himself, in his Epistle written to Caesarius, against the heresy
of Apolinarius: Sicut enim antequam sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus:
divina autem illum sanctificante gratia, mediante sacerdote, liberatus est
quidem ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Dominici corporis
appellatione, etiamsi natura panis in ipso permansit: and non duo corpora, sed
unum Filii corpus praedicatur sic and hic divina i^undante corporis natura (
vel potius, divina natura in corpore insidente: Graece enim (...) hic legitur*
in MS. Bibliothecae Florentinae exemplari, unde ist^ ^ranstulit Perus Martyr)
unum filium, unam personam, ^traque haec fecerunt. Chrysostom. ad Caesarium
monachum.
As before the bread be sanctified, we call it bread; but when Gods grace has
sanctified it by the means of the Priest, it is delivered from the name of
bread, and is reputed worthy the name of the Lords body, although the nature of
the bread remain still in it; and it is not called two bodies, but one body of
Gods son: so likewise here, the divine nature residing in the body of Christ,
these two make one son, and one person. In the self same manner also do
Theodoret, Gelasius, and Ephraemius proceed against the Eutychian heretics.
Theodoret for his part, lays down these grounds. That our Savior (...).
Theod. dialog. 1. (...), fol. 8. edit. Romans ann. 1547.
in the deliverie of the mysteries called bread his body, and that which was
mixed (in the cupp) his blood. That (...). Ibid.
he changed the names; and gave to the body the name of the symbol or sign,
and to the symbol the name of the body. That he (...). Ib.
honored the visible symboles with the name of his body and blood; not
changing the nature, but adding grace to nature. And that (...). Ib.
this most holy food, is a symbol and type of those things whose names it
bears, to wit, of the body and blood of Christ. Gelasius writes thus: Certa
sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi, divina res est, propter
quod, and per eadem divinae efficimur consortes naturae; and tamen esse non
desinit substantia, vel natura panis and vini. Et certe imago and similitudo
corporis and sanguinis Christi, in action mysteriorum celebrantur. Satis ergo
nobis evidenter ostenditur, hoc nobis in ipso Christo Domino sentiendum, quod
in ejus imagine profitemur, celebramus, and sumus: ut sicut in hanc, scilicet
in divinam transeant, sancto spiritu perficiente substantiam, permanente tamen
in suae proprietate naturae; sic illud ipsum mysterium principale, cujus nobis
efficientiam virtutemque veraciter repraesentant, etc. Gelas. de duab. nature.
in Christo, contra Eutychen.
The sacraments which we receive, of the body and blood of Christ, are a divine
thing, by means whereof we are made partakers of the divine nature: and yet
the substance or nature of bread and wine does not cease to be. And indeed the
image and the similitude of the body and blood of Christ are celebrated in the
action of the mysteries. It appears therefore evidently enough unto us, that
we are to hold the same opinion of the Lord Christ himself, which we
profess, celebrate, and are, in his Image. that as (those Sacraments) by the
operation of the holy Spirit, pass into this, that is, into the divine
substance, and yet remain in the propriety of their own nature: so that
principal mystery it self, whose force and virtue they truly represent,
should be conceived to be. namely, to consist of two natures, divine and
humane; the one not abolishing the truth of the other. Lastly, Ephraemius the
Patriarch of Antioch, having spoken of the distinction of these two natures in
Christ, and said, that (...) ( Schottus the Jesuit translateth this, and
sensibilis essentiae non cognoscitur: which is a strange interpretation, if you
mark it) (...). Ephraemius de sacris Antioch^ae legib. lib. 1. in Pho^ij
Bibliotheca, cod. 219.
no man having understanding, could say, that there was the same nature of that
which could be handled, and of that which could not be handled, of that which
was visible, and of that which was invisible; adds. And even thus, the body
of Christ which is received by the faithful, (the Sacrament he means) does
neither depart from his sensible substance, and yet remains undivided from
intelligible grace. and Baptism, being wholly made spiritual, and remaining
one, does both retain the property of his sensible substance, (of water, I
mean) and yet loses not that which it is made.

Thus have we produced evidences of all sorts, for confirmation of the
doctrine by us professed touching the blessed Sacrament: which cannot but give
sufficient satisfaction to all that with any indifferency will take the
matter into their consideration. But the men with whom we have to deal, are
so far fallen out with the truth; that neither sense nor reason, neither
authority of Scriptures or of Fathers, can persuade them to be friends again
with it: unless we show unto them, in what Popes days the contrary falsehood
was first devised. If nothing else will give them content: we must put them in
mind, that about the time wherein Soter was Bishop of Rome, there lived a
cousening companion, called Marcus; whose qualities are thus set out by an
ancient Christian, Vet. author, citatus ab Irenaeo, lib 1. cap. 12
who was famous in those days, though now his name be unknown unto us. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
Where first he charge him to have been an Idolmake^; then he objecteth
unto him his skill in Astrology and Magic, by means whereof, and by the
assistance of Satan, he labored with a show of miracles, to win credit
unto his false doctrines, amongst his seduced disciples: and lastly he
concludes that his father the Devil had employed him as a forerunner of his
antithean craft, or his antichristian deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, if
you will have it in the Apostles language. For he was indeed the Devils
forerunner, both for the Apoc. 9.20, 21.
idolatries and sorceries which afterward were brought into the East, and for
those Apoc. 18.3, 23.
Romish fornications and enchantments wherewith the whole West was corrupted,
by that man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
whose coming was foretold to be after the working of Satan, with all power
and signs, and lying wonders. And that we may keep our selves within the
compass of that particular, which now we have in hand: we find in Irenaeus,
that this Arch-heretick made special use of his juggling feats, to breed a
persuasion in the minds of those whom he had perverted; that in the cup of
his pretended Eucharist, he really delivered them blood to drink. For (...).
Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 9.
fayning himself to consecrate the cups filled with wine, and extending the
words of Invocation to a great length, he made them to appear of a purple and
redd color: to the end it might be thought, that the Grace which is above all
things, did distill the blood thereof into that cup by his Invo^ation. And even
according to this precedent we find it fell our afterward, that the
principal and most powerful means whereby the like gross conceit (of the
gutturall ^ating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ) was at the
first fastened upon the multitude, and in process of time more deeply rooted
in them, were such delusions and fained apparitions as these: which yet that
great Schooleman himself, Alexander of Hales, confesses to happen sometimes,
either by Humana procuratione, vel forte diabolica operatione. Alex. Halens.
Sum. Theolog. part. 4. quaest. 11. memb. 2. artic. 4. sect. 3.
^he procurement of man, or by the operation of the devil. Paschasius
Radbertus, who was one of the first letters forward of this doctrine in the
West, spends a large chapter upon this point: wherein he tells us, Nemo,
qui Sanctorum vitas and exempla legerit, potest ignorare, quod saepe haec
mystica corporis and sanguinis sacramenta, aut propter dubios, aut certe
propter ardentius amantes Christum, visibili specie in agni forma, aut in
carnis and sanguinis color monstrata sint: quatenus de se Christus clementer
adhuc non credentibus fidem faceret: ita u^ dum oblata frangitur, vel offertur
hostia, videretur agnus in manibus and crnor in calice, quasi ex immolatione
profluere. ut quod latebat in mysterio, patesceret adhuc dubitantibus in
miraculo. Paschas. de corp. and sangu. Dom. cap. 14.
that Christ in the sacrament did show himself oftentimes in a visible shape,
either in the form of a Lamb, or in the color of flesh and blood, so that
while the host was a breaking or an offering, a Lamb in the Priests hands, and
blood in the Chalice should be seen as it were flowing from the sacrifice,
that what lay hid in a mystery, might to them that yet doubted be made
manifest in a miracle. And specially in that place he insisteth upon a
narration, which he found in gestis Anglorum, (but deserved well to have been
put into gesta Romanorum for the goodness of it) of one Ple^gils or Plegilus a
Priest; how an Angel showed Christ unto him in the form of a child upon the
Altar, whom first he took into his arms and kissed, but eat him up
afterward, when he was returned to his former shape again. Whereof arose that
jest which Berengarius was wont to use: Speciosa certe pax nebulonis; ut cui
o^is praebuerat basium, dentiu^ inferret exitiu^. Guilielm. Malmesbur. de
gestis Reg. Anglor. lib. 3.
This was a proper peace of the knave indeed, that whom he had kissed with his
mouth, he would devour with his teeth.

But there are three other tales of singular note; which though they may justly
strive for winning of the Whetstone with any other, yet for their antiquity
have gained credit above the rest: being devised, as it seems, much about
the same time with that other of Plegilus, but having relation unto higher
times. The first was had out of the English Legends too, as Io Diac. vit. Greg.
lib. 2. cap. 41.
Johannes Diaconus reports it in the life of Gregory the first: of a Roman
Matron, who found a piece of the sacramental bread turned into the fashion of
a finger, all bloody, which afterward, upon the prayers of S. Gregory, was
converted to his former shape again. The other two were first coined by the
Grecian liars, and from them conveyed unto the Latins, and registered in the
book which they called Vitas patrum: which being commonly believed to have
been collected by S. Sanctus Hieronymus presbyter, ipsas Sanctorum Patrum
Vitas Latino edidit sermon. Paschas. Radbert. in epist. ad Frudegard. Consule
libros Carolinos, de Imaginib. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Hierome, and accustomed to be read ordinarily in every Monastery; gave
occasion of further spread, and made much way for the progress of this mystery
of iniquity. The former of these is not only related there, Inter sententias
Patrum, ae P^^agio Roman^e ecclesiae d^acono Latin versas, libell. ^8. cui
^i^^lus de Providentia vel Proevidentia: sive, ut in P^o^ij ^iblio^heca
habetur, ^od. 98. (...).
but also in the Legend of Simeon Metaphrastes, (which is such another author
among the Grecians, as Iacobus de Voragine was among the Latins) in the Tom.
4. Surij, page 257. edit. Colon an. 1573.
life of Arsenius: how that a little child was seen upon the Altar, and an
Angel cutting him into small piec^s with a knife, and receiving his blood into
the Chalice, as long as the Priest was breaking the bread into little parts.
The latter, is of a certain Jew, receiving the Sacrament at S. Basils hands,
converted visibly into true flesh and blood: which is expressed by Cyrus
Theodorus Prodromus, in this Tetrastich. (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
But the chief author of the fable was a cheating fellow, who, Nomen
Amphilochii ad mentiendum accepit. Baron. tom 4. an. 369. sect. 43.
that he might lie with authority, took upon him the name of Amphilochius,
S. Basils companion, and set out a book of his life Scatens me^daciis, Id.
ibid. an. 363. sect. 55.
fraught with leasings: as Cardinal Baronius himself acknowledges. S.
Augustines conclusion therefore may here well take place. Removean^ur ista vel
figmenta mendacium hominu^, vel portenta fallacium spirituu^. Aut enim non sunt
vera quae dicuntur, aut si haereticorum aliqua mira facta sunt, magis cavere
debemus: quod cum dixisset Dominus quosda^ futuros esse fallaces, qui nonnulla
signa faciendo etiam electos si fieri posset fallerent; adjecit vehementer
commendans, and ait, Ecce praedixi vobis. August. de unitat. Eccles. cap. 16.
Let these things be taken away, which are either fictions of lying men, or
wonders wrought by evil spirits. For either there is no truth in these
reports, or if there be any strange things done by heretics, we ought the more
to beware of them: because, when the Lord had said, that certain deceivers
should come, who by doing of some wonders should seduce (if it were possible)
the very elect, he very earnestly commended this unto our consideration, and
said; Behold, I have told you before. yea and added a further charge also, that
if these impostors should say unto us of him, Matt. 24.26.
Behold he is in secret closets, we should not believe it: which whether it be
appliable to them who tell us, that Christ is to be found in a Pixe, and think
that they have him in safe custody under Lock and Key; I leave to the
consideration of others.

The thing which now I would have further observed, is only this; that, as
that wretched heretic who first went about to persuade m^n by his lying
wonders, that he really delivered wine unto them in the cup of the Eucharist,
was censured for being (...), an Idol-maker^ so in after ages, from the
Idol-makers and Image-worshippers of the East it was, that this gross opinion
of the orall eating and drinking of Christ in the Sacrament, drew it first
breath; Romans 1.27, 28.
God having for their idolatry, justly given them up unto a reprobate mind,
that they might receive that recompense of their error which was meet. The
Popes name in whose days this fell out, was Gregory the second: the man's name
who was the principal setter of it abroach, was Damascen. Orthodox. sid. lib.
4. cap. 14.
John Damascen; one that laid the foundation of Schoole-divinitie among the
Greeks, as Peter Lombard afterward did among the Latins. On the contrary
side, they who opposed the Idolatry of those times, and more especially the
CCCXXXVIII. Bishops assembled together at the Council of Constantinople, in
the year 754. maintained, that Christ (...).
chose no other shape or type under heaven to represent his incarnation by, but
the Sacrament; which (...).
he delivered to his ministers for a type and a most effectual commemoration
thereof; (...).
commanding the substance of bread to be offered, which did not any way
resemble the form of a man, that so no occasion might be given of bringing in
Idolatry. which bread they affirmed to be the body of Christ, not (...) but
(...), that is, (as they themselves expound it) (...).
a holy and (...) etc. So a little after it is called (...), and (...).
a true image of his natural flesh.

These assertions of theirs are to be found in the Council. gener. tom. 3. page
599.600. edit Romans
third Tome of the sixth Action of the second Council of Nice, assembled not
long after for the reestablishing of Images in the Church. where a pratchant
deacon, called Epiphanius, to cross that which those former Bishops had
delivered, confidently avoucheth that none of the Apostles, nor of the Fathers,
did ever call the Sacrament an image of the body of Christ. He confesses
indeed that some of the Fathers (as Eustathius expounding the Proverbs of
Solomon, and S. Basil in his Liturgy) do call the bread and wine (...),
correspondent types or figures, before they were consecrated: (...). Ib. page
601.
but after the consecration (says he) they are called, and are, and believed
to be the body and blood of Christ properly. where the Popes own followers,
who of late published the Acts of the general Counsels at Rome, were so far
ashamed of the ignorance of this blind Bayard; that they correct his boldness
with this marginall note. (...). Ibid. in margin.
The holy gifts are oftentimes found to be called antitypes, or figures
correspondent, after they be consecrated: as by Gregory Nazianz. in the
funeral Oration upon his sister, and in his Apology; by Cyrill of Jerusalem
in his fifth Cateches. Mystagogic. and by others. And we have already heard,
how the author of the Dialogues against the Marcionites, and after him Eusebius
and Gelasius, expressly call the Sacrament an image of Christ's body:
howsoever this peremptory Clerk denies, that ever any did so. By all which
it may easily appear, that, not the oppugners, but the defenders of Images,
were the men who first went about herein to alter the language used by their
forefathers.

Now as in the days of Gregory the third this matter was set afoot by Damascen
in the East: so about a hundred years after, in the Papacy of Gregory the
fourth, the same began to be propounded in the West, by means of one
Amalarius, who was Bishop, not (as he is commonly taken to be) of Triers, but
of Mets first, and afterward of Lions. This man writing doubtfully of this
point; otherwhiles follows the doctrine of S. Augustine, Amalar. de
Ecclesiastic. offic, lib. 1. cap. 24.
that Sacraments were oftentimes called by the names of the things themselves,
and so the Sacrament of Christ's body was secundum quendam modum, after a
certain manner the body of Christ: otherwhiles makes it a part of his Hic
credimus naturam simplicem panis and vini mixti, verti in naturam rationabilem,
scilicet corporis and sanguinis Christi. Id. li. 3. cap. 24.
belief, that the simple nature of the bread and wine mixed, is turned into a
reasonable nature, to wit, of the body and blood of Christ. But what should
become of this body, after the eating thereof, was a matter that went beyond
his little wit: and therefore, said he, Ita vero sumptum corpus Domini bona
intention, non est mihi disputandu^ utrum invisibiliter assumatur in coelum,
aut reservetur in corpore nostro usque in diem sepulturae, aut exhaletur in
auras, aut exeat de corpore cu^ sanguine, aut per os emittatur; dicente Domino,
Omne quod intrat in os in ventrem vadit and in secessum emittitur. Idem, in
epistola ad Guitardum, MS. in Biblioth. Colleg. S. Benedict. Cantabrig. cod. 55.
when the body of Christ is taken with a good intention, it is not for me to
dispute, whether it be invisibly taken up into heaven, or kept in our body
until the day of our burial, or exhaled into the air, or whether it go out
of the body with the blood, (at the opening of a vein) or be sent out by the
mouth; our Lord saying, that every thing which enters into the mouth goes
into the belly, and is sent forth into the draught. For this, and another like
foolerie de Id. de Ecclesiastic. offic. lib. 3. cap. 35.
triformi and tripartito corpore Christi, of the three parts or kinds of
Christ's body (which seem to be those ineptiae de tripartito Christi corpore,
that Paschasius in the end of his Epistle entreats Frudegardus not to
follow:) he was censured in a Florus in Actis Synod. Carisiac. MS. apud N.
Ranchinum, in Senatu Tolosan^ Regium Consiliarium. Vid. Phil. Morn. de Miss.
lib. 4. cap. 8.
Synod held at Carisiacum: wherein it was declared by the Bishops of France,
that Panis and vinu^ efficitur spiritualiter corpus Christi. etc. Mentis ergo
est cibus iste, non ventris: nec corrumpitur, sed permanet, in vitam aeternam.
Ibid.
the bread and wine are spiritually made the body of Christ; which being a meat
of the mind, and not of the belly, is not corrupted, but remains unto
everlasting life.

These dotages of Amalarius, did not only give occasion to that question
propounded by Heribaldus to Rabanus, whereof we have spoken Supr. page 16.
heretofore; but also to that other of far greater consequence: Whether that
which was externally delivered and received in the sacrament, were the very
same body which was borne of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cr^sse, and
rose again from the Grave. Paschasius Radbertus (a Deacon of those times, but
somewhat of a better and more modest temper then the Greek Deacon showed
himself to be of) held that it was the ve^ie same; and to that purpose wrote
his book to Placidus, of the Body and Blood of our Lord: wherein (says a
Jesuit) Genuinu^ Ecclesiae Catholicae sensum ita primus explicuit, ut viam
caeteris aperuerit, qui de eode^ argumento multi postea scripsere. Iac.
Sirmond. in vita Radberti.
he was the first that did so explicate the true sense of the Catholic Church,
(his own Roman he means) that he opened the way to those many others, who
wrote afterward of the same argument. Rabanus on the other side, in a writing
directed to Abbot Egilo, maintained the contrary doctrine: as has before
been noted. Then one Frudegardus, reading the third book of S. Augustine de
doctrina Christiana, and finding there, that the eating of the flesh and
drinking of the blood of Christ was a figurative manner of speech, began
somewhat to doubt of the truth of that which formerly he had read in that
foresaid Treatise of Paschasius: which moved Paschasius to write again of the
same argument, as of a question wherein he confesses Quaeris enim de re ex qua
multi dubitant and again. Quamvis multi ex hoc dubitent, quomodo ille integer
manet, and hoc corpus Christi and sanguis ^sse possit. Paschas. epist. ad
Frudegard.
many were then doubtful. But neither by his first nor by his second writing
was he able to take these doubts out of men's minds: and therefore Carolus
Calvus the Emperor, being desirous to compose these differences, and to have
unity settled among his subjects, required Ratrannus (a learned man of that
time, who lived in the Monastery of Corbey, whereof Paschasius was Abbat) to
deliver his judgment touching these points. Quod in Ecclesia ore fidelium
sumitur corpus and sanguis Christi, quaerit vestrae magnitudinis excellentia,
in mysterio fiat, an in veritate, etc. and utrum ipsum corpus sit, quod de
Maria natum est, and passum, mortuum and sepultum, quodque resurgens and coelos
ascendens, ad dextram Patris consideat? Ratrann. sive Bertram. in lib. de corp.
and sangu. Dom. edit. Colon. ann. 1551. page 180.
Whether the body and blood of Christ which in the Church is received by the
mouth of the faithful, be celebrated in a mystery or in the truth; and
whether it be the same body, which was born of Mary, which did suffer, was dead
and buried, and which rising again and ascending into heaven sits at the
right hand of the Father? Whereunto he returns this answer: that Panis ille
vinumque, figurate Christi corpus and sanguis existit. Ibid. page 183.
the bread and the wine are the body and blood of Christ figuratively; that Nam
secundum creaturarum substantiam quod fuerunt ante consecrationem, hoc and
postea consistunt. Ib. page 105.
for the substance of the creatures, that which they were before consecration,
the same are they also afterward; that Dominicum corpus and sanguis Dominicus
appellantur; quoniam ejus sumunt appellationem, cujus existunt sacramentum.
Ibid. page 200.
they are called the Lords body and the Lords blood, because they take the
name of that thing, of which they are a sacrament; and that Videmus itaque
multa differentia separari mysterium sanguinis and corporis Christi, quod nunc
a fide^ibus sumitur in Ecclesia, and illud quod natu^ est de Maria virgin,
quod passum, quod sepultum, quod resurrexit, quod coelos ascendit, quod ad
dextram Patris sedet. Ibid. page 222.
there is a great difference betwixt the mystery of the blood and body of
Christ, which is taken now by the faithful in the Church, and that which was
borne of the Virgin Mary, which suffered, which was buried, which rose again,
which sits at the right hand of the Father. All which he proves at large,
both Animadvertat (clarissime Princeps) sapientia vestra, quod positis
sanctaru^ Scripturarum testimoniis, and sanctorum Patru^ dictis evidentissime
monstratum est; quod panis qui corpus Christi, and calix qui sanguis Christi
appellatur, figura sit, quia mysterium: and quod non parva differentia sit
inter corpus quod per mysterium existit, and corpus quod passum est, and
sepultum, and resurrexit. Ibid. page 228.
by testimonies of the holy Scriptures, and by the sayings of the ancient
Fathers. Whereupon Turrian the Jesuit is driven for pure need, to shift off the
matter with this silly interrogation. Caeterum, Bertramum ci^are, quid aliud
est, quam dicere, haeresim Calvini non esse novam? Fr. Turrian. de Eucharist.
contra Volanum, lib. 1. cap. 22.
To cite Bertram (so Ratrannus is more usually named) what is it else, but to
say, that the heresy of Calvin is not new? As if these things were alleged by
us for any other end, then to show, that this way which they call heresy is
not new, but has been trodden in long since, by such as in their times were
accounted good and Catholic teachers in the Church. That since they have been
esteemed otherwise, is an argument of the alteration of the times, and of the
conversion of the state of things: which is the matter that now we are
inquiring of, and which our Adversaries (in an evil hour to them) do so
earnestly press us to discover.

The Emperor Charles, unto whom this answer of Ratrannus was directed, had
then in his Court a famous countryman of ours, called Johannes Scotus: who
wrote a book of the same argument, and to the same effect that the other had
done. This man for his extraordinary learning, was in England (where he lived
in great account with King Alfred) surnamed John the wise: and had very lately
a room in the Martyrolog. Romans IV. ID. November. edit. An^uerp. ann. 15^6.
Martyrologe of the Church of Rome, though now he be ejected thence. We find
him indeed censured by the Church of Lions and others in that time, for
certain opinions which he delivered touching Gods foreknowledge and
predestination before the beginning of the world, Man's freewill and the
concurrence thereof with Grace in this present world, and the manner of the
punishment of reprobate Men and Angels in the world to come: but we find not
any where, that his book of the Sacrament was condemned, before the days of x
Lanfranc; who was the first that leavened that Church of England afterward with
this corrupt doctrine of the carnal presence. Till then, this question of the
real presence continued still in debate: and it was as free for any man to
follow the doctrine of Ratrannus or Johannes Scotus therein, as that of
Paschasius Radbertus, which since the time of Satan's loosing, obtained the
upper hand. Men have often searched, and do yet often search, how bread that
is gathered of corn; and through fires heat baked, may be turned to Christ's
body; or how wine that is pressed out of many grapes is turned, through one
blessing, to the Lords blood: says Homilia Paschalis, Anglo-Saxonice impressa
Londini, per Io. Daium: and MS. in publica Cantabrigiensis Academiae
Bibliotheca.
Aelfrick Abbat of Malmesburie, in his Saxon Homily, written about 650. years
ago. His resolution is not only the same with that of Ratrannus, but also in
many places directly translated out of him: as may appear by these passages
following, compared with his Latin laid down in the margent.

Ille panis qui per Sacerdotis ministeriu^ Christi corpus efficitur, aliud
exterius humanis sensibus ostendit, and aliud interius fidelium mentibus
clamat. Exterius quide^ panis, quod ante fuerat, forma praetenditur, color
ostenditur, sapor accipitur: ast interius Christi corpus ostenditur. Ratrann.
sive Bertram. de corp. and sangu. Dom. page 182.
The bread and the wine which by the Priests ministry is hallowed, show one
thing without to men's senses, and another thing they call within to believing
minds. Without they be seen bread and wine both in figure and in taste: and
they be truly after their hallowing Christ's body and his blood by spiritual
mystery. Consideremus fontem sacri baptismatis, qui fons vitae non immerito
nuncupatur. etc. In eo si consideretur solummodo quod corporeus aspicit sensus,
elementum fluidum conspicitur, corruptioni subjectum, nec nisi corpora lavandi
potentiam obtinere. Sed accessit sancti Spiritus per Sacerdotis consecrationem
virtus; and efficax facta est non solum corpora verumetiam animas diluere, and
spirituales sordes spirituali potentia dimovere. Ecce in uno eodemque elemento,
duo videmus inesse sibi resistentia. etc. Igitur in proprietate humor
corruptibilis, in mysterio vero virtus sanabilis. Sic itaque Christi corpus and
sanguis superficie tenus considerata, creatura est, mutabilitati corruptelaeque
subjecta: si mysterii vero perpendis virtutem, vita est, participantibus se
tribuens immortalitatem Ibid. page 187 188.
So the holy font water that is called the wellspring of life, is like in
shape to other waters, and is subject to corruption: but the holy Ghosts might
comes to the corruptible water through the Priests blessing; and it may after
wash the body and soul from all sin, by spiritual virtue. Behold now we see
two things in this one creature: in true nature that water is corruptible
moisture, and in spiritual mystery has healing virtue. So also if we behold
that holy housel after bodily sense, then see we that it is a creature
corruptible and mutable. If we acknowledge therein spiritual virtue, then
understand we that life is therein, and that it gives immortality to them
that eat it with belief. Multa differentia separantur, corpus in quo passus
est Christus, et hoc corpus quod in mysterio passionis Christi qu^tidie a
fid^libus celebratur ^bid. page 212. and 22^.
Much is betwixt the body Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to
housel. Illa namque caro quae c^ucifixa est, de Virginis carne facta est,
ossibus and nervis compacta, and humanorum membrorum lineamentis distincta,
rationalis animae spiritu vivificata in propriam vitam and congruentes motus.
At vero caro spiritualis, quae populum credentem spiritualiter pascit, secundum
speciem quam gerit exterius, frumenti granis manu artificis consistit, nullis
nervis ossibusque compacta, nulla membrorum varietate distincta, nulla
rationali substantia vegetata, nullos proprios potens motus exercere. Quicquid
enim in ea vitae praebet substantiam, spiritualis est potentiae, and
invisibilis efficientiae, divinaeque vi^tutis. Ibid. page 214.
The body truly that Christ suffered in, was borne of the flesh of Mary, with
blood and with bone, with skin and with sinews, in humane limbs, with a
reasonable soul living: and his spiritual body, which we call the housel, is
gathered of many corns, without blood and bone, without lim, without soul;
and therefore nothing is to be understood therein bodily, but spiri^ually.
Whatsoever is in that housel, which gives substance of life, that is
spiritual virtue, and invisible doing. Corpus Christi quod mortuum est and
resurrexit, and immortale factum, jam non moritur, and mors illi ultra non
dominabitur, aeternum est, nec jam passibile. Hoc autem quod in Ecclesia
celebratur, temporale est, non aeternum; corruptibile est, non incorruptum,
etc. dispartitur ad sumendum, and dentibus commolitum, in corpus trajicitur.
Ibid. page 216.217.
Certainly Christ's body which suffered death and rose from death, shall never
dye henceforth, but is eternal and unpassible. That housel is temporal, not
eternal, corruptible and dealed into sundry parts, chewed between teeth and
sent into the belly. Et hoc corpus, pignus est and species: illud vero ipsa
veritas. Hoc enim geritur, donec ad illud perveniatur: ubi vero ad illud
perventum fuerit, hoc removebitur. Ib. page 222.
This mystery is a pledge and a figure: Christ's body is truth it self. This
pledge we do keep mystically, until that we be come to the truth it self;
and then is this pledge ended. Christ hallowed bread and wine to housel before
his suffering, and said: This is my body and my blood. Videmus nondu^ passum
esse Christum, etc. Sicut ergo paulo antequam pateretur, panis substantiam and
vini creaturam convertere potuit in propriu^ corpus quod passurum erat, and in
suum sanguine^ qui post fundendus extabat: sic etia^ in deserto manna and aquam
de petra in suam carne^ and sanguinem convertere praevaluit etc. Ibid. page 193.
Yet he had not then suffered: but so notwithstanding he turned through
invisible virtue, the bread to his own body, and that wine to his blood: as he
before did in the wilderness, before that he was borne to men, when he turned
that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that stone to his
own blood. Manducavit and Moses manna, manducavit and Aaron, manducavit and
Phinees, manducaverunt ibi multi qui Deo placuerunt; and mortui non sunt.
Quare? Quia visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter
esurierunt, spiritualiter gustaverunt, ut spiritualiter satiarentur. Ibid. page
217. ex August. in Evang. Johan. tractat. 26.
Moses and Aaron, and many other of that people which pleased God, did eat
that heavenly bread, and they died not the everlasting death, though they dyed
the common. They saw that the heavenly meat was visible and corruptible: and
they spiritually understood by that visible thing, and spiritually received it.

This Homily was appointed publicly to be read to the people in England, on
Easter day, before they did receive the communion. The like matter also was
delivered to the Clergy by the Bishops at their Synods; out of two other
writings of the same Im^ress. Londini cum Homilia Paschali: and MS. in publica
Oxoniensis Academiae Bibliotheca* and Colleg. S. Benedict. Cantabrig.
Aelfrick: in the one whereof, directed to Wulfsine Bishop of Shyrburne, we
read thus. That housel is Christ's body, not bodily but spiritually. Not the
body which he suffered in, but the body of which he spoke, when he blessed
bread and wine to housel the night before his suffering; and said by the
blessed bread, This is my body: and again by the holy wine, This is my blood
which is shed for many in forgiveness of sins. In the other, written to
Wulfstane Archbishop of York, thus. The Lord which hallowed housel before his
suffering, and says that the bread was his own body, and that the wine was
truly his blood; halloweth daily by the hands of the Priest, bread to his body
and wine to his blood in spiritual mystery, as we read in books. And yet
notwithstanding that lively bread is not bodily so, nor the self same body
that Christ suffered in: nor that holy wine is the Saviors blood which was
shed for us, in bodily thing, but in spiritual understanding. Both be truly,
that bread his body, and that wine also his blood, as was the heavenly bread,
which we call Manna, that fed forty years Gods people; and the clear
water, which did then run from the stone in the wilderness, was truly his
blood: as Paul wrote in one of his Epistles.

Thus was Priest and people taught to believe, in the Church of England, toward
the end of the tenth, and the beginning of the eleventh age after the
Incarnation of our Savior Christ. And therefore it is not to be wondered, that
when Berengarius shortly after stood to maintain this doctrine, Sigebert.
Gemblac. and Guiliel. Nangiac. in Chron. an. 1051. Conrad. Bruwilerens. in vita
Wolphelmi, apud Surium, April. 22.
many both by word and writing disputed for him: and not only the English,
but also all the French almost and the Italians (as Flor. histor. ann. 1087.
Matthew of Westminster reports) were so ready to entertain that which he
delivered. Who though they were so borne down by the power of the Pope (who
now was grown to his height) that they durst not make open profession of that
which they believed: yet many continued, even there where Satan had his
throne, who privately employed both their tongues and their penns in defense of
the truth; as out of Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, Rupertus Tuitiensis, and others
I have De Christian. Eccles. success. and stat. edit. ann. 1613. page
190.191.192. et 208.
elsewhere showed. Until at length, in the year 1215. Pope Innocent the
third, in the Council of Lateran, published it to the Church for an oracle:
that Cujus corpus and sanguis in sacramento altaris sub speciebus panis and
vini veraciter continentur; tra^ssubstantiatis pane in corpus, and vino in
sanguinem potestate divina. Council. Lateran. cap. 1.
the body and blood of Jesus Christ are truly contained under the forms ^f
bread and wine; the bread being transsubstantiated into the body, and the wine
into the blood, by the power of God. And so are we now come to the end of this
controversy: the original and progress whereof I have prosecuted the more at
large, because it is of greatest importance, the very life of the Mass and
all massing Priests depending thereupon. But this prolixitie shall be some
ways recompensed by the briefer handling of the points following: the next
whereof is that

OF CONFESSION.
Our Challenger here tells us, that the Doctors, Pastors and Fathers of the
primitive Church, exhorted the people to confess their sins unto their
ghostly fathers. And we tell him again, that by the public order prescribed
in our Church, before the administration of the holy Communion, the Minister
likewise does exhort the people, that if there be any of them, which cannot
quiet his own conscience, but requires further comfort or counsel; he should
come to him, or some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods word, and open
his grief: that he may receive such ghostly counsel, advice and comfort, as
his conscience may be relieved; and that by the ministry of Gods word he may
receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution, to the quieting of his
conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulnesse. Whereby it
appears, that the exhorting of the people to confess their sins unto their
ghostly fathers, makes no such wall of separation betwixt the ancient Doctors
and us, but we may well for all this be of the same religion that they were of:
and consequently, that this doughtie Champion has more will then skill to
manage controversies, who could make no wiser choice of points of differences
to be insisted upon.

Be it therefore known unto him, that no kind of Confession, either public
or private, is disallowed by us, that is any way requisite for the due
execution of that ancient power of the Keys which Christ bestowed upon his
Church: the thing which we reject, is that new pick-lock of Sacramental
Confession, obtruded upon men's consciences, as a matter necessary to
salvation, by the Canons of the late Conventicle of Trent. where those good
Fathers put their curse upon every one, that either shall Si quis negaverit
Confessionem sacramentalem vel institutam, vel ad salutem necessariam esse jure
divino: etc. Anathema sit. Council. Trident. Sess. 14. Can. 6.
deny, that Sacramental confession was ordained by divine right, and is by the
same right necessary to salvation: or shall Si quis dixerit, in sacrame^to
Poenitentiae ad remissione^ peccatorum necessarium non esse jure divino,
confiteri omnia and singula peccata mortalia, quoru^ memoria cu^ debita and
diligenti praemeditatione habeatur, etiam occulta and quae sunt contra duo
ultima Decalogi praecepta, and circumstantias quae peccati speciem mutant: sed
eam confessionem tantum esse utilem ad erudiendum and consolandum poenitentem,
and olim observatam fuisse tantum ad satisfactionem canonicam imponendam; etc
Anathema sit. Ibid. can. 7.
affirm, that in the Sacrament of Penance it is not by the ordinance of God
necessary for the obtaining of the remission of sins, to confess all and
every one of those mortal sins, the memory whereof by due and diligent
premeditation may be had; even such as are hidden and be against the two last
Commandments of the Decalogue, together with the circumstances which change
the kind of the sin; but that this confession is only profitable to instruct
and comfort the penitent, and was anciently observed only for the imposing of
Canonical satisfaction. This doctrine, I say, we cannot but reject: as being
repugnant to that which we have learned both from the Scriptures and from the
Fathers.

For in the Scriptures we find, that the confession which the penitent sinner
makes to God alone, has the promise of forgiveness annexed unto it: which no
Priest upon earth has power to make void, upon pretense that himself or some
of his fellows were not first particularly acquainted with the business.
Psalm. 32.5.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin. And lest we should think that this was some peculiar privilege
vouchsafed to 2. Sam. 23.1.
the man who was raised upon high, the Anointed of the God of Jacob: the same
sweet Psalmist of Israel does presently enlarge his note, and infers this
general conclusion thereupon. Psalm. 32.6.
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou
may be found. King Solomon, in his prayer for the people at the dedication
of the Temple, treads just in his Fathers stepps. If they turn (says 2.
Chronic. 6.37.39.

1. Kin. 8.47, 50.


he) and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity, saying; We have
sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly: if they return to thee
with all their heart, and with all their soul; etc. forgive thy people, which
have sinned against thee, all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed against thee. And the poor Luke 18.13, 14.
Publican putting up his supplication in the Temple accordingly [ God be
merciful to me a sinner,] went back to his house justified; without making
confession to any other ghostly Father, but only Hebr. 12.9.
the Father of Spirits. of whom S. John gives us this assurance: that 1. Ioh.
1.9.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Which promise, that it
appertained to such as did confess their sins unto God, the ancient Fathers
were so well assured of: that they cast in a manner all upon this Confession,
and left little or nothing to that which was made unto man. Nay, they do not
only leave it free for men, to confess or not confess their sins unto
others (which is the most that we would have:) but some of them also seem, in
words at least, to advise men not to do it at all; which is more then we seek
for.

S. Chrysostom of all others is most copious in this argument: some of whose
passages to this purpose, I will here lay down. Nunc autem neque necessarium
praesentibus testibus confiteri: cogitatione fiat delictorum exquisitio, absque
test sit hoc judicium. Solus te Deus confitentem videat. Chrysostom. homil. de
Poenitent. and Confession. tom. 5 edit. Latin. col. 901. edit. Basil. an. 1558.
It is not necessary (says he) that thou should confess in the presence of
witnesses: let the inquiry of thy offenses be made in thy thought, let this
judgment be without a witness; let God only see thee confessing. (...). Id.
circa finem homiliae 5. (...), de incomprehensib. Dei nature. tom. 6. edit.
Graec. D. Hen. Savil. page 424. and tom. 5. page 262.263.
Therefore I entreat and beseech and pray you, that you would continually make
your confession to God. For I do not bring thee into the theater of thy fellow
servants, neither do I constrain thee to discover thy sins unto men:
unclaspe thy conscience before God, and show thy wounds unto him, and of him
ask a medicine. Show them to him that will not reproach, but heal thee. For
although thou hold thy peace, he knows all. (...) Id. in epist. ad Hebr. cap
12. homil. 31. tom. 4. Savil. page 589.
Let us not call our selves sinners only, but let us recount our sins, and
repeat every one of them in special. I do not say unto thee, Bring thy self
upon the stage, nor, Accuse thy self unto others: but I counsel thee to obey
the Prophet, saying, Reveal thy way unto the Lord. Confess them before God,
confess thy sins before the Judge; praying, if not with thy tongue, yet at
least with thy memory: and so look to obtain mercy. (...). Id. in Psalm. 50.
hom. 2. tom. 1. Savil. page 708.
But thou art ashamed to say, that thou have sinned. Confess thy faults then
daily in thy prayer. For do I say; Confess them to thy fellow servants, who may
reproach thee therewith? Confess them to God, who heals them. For, although
thou confess them not at all, God is not ignorant of them. (...). Id. homil.
4. de Lazaro, tom. 5. Savil. page 258.
Wherefore then, tell me, art thou ashamed and blushest to confess thy sins?
For do thou discover them to a man, that he may reproach thee? Do thou
confess them to thy fellow servant, that he may bring thee upon the stage? To
him who is thy Lord, who has care of thee, who is kind, who is thy physician,
thou show thy wound. (...). Id ibid.
I constrain thee not, says he, to go into the midst of the theater, and to
make many witnesses of the matter. Confess thy sin to me alone in private, that
I may heal thy sore, and free thee from grief. (...). Id. in (...) ad pop.
Antiochen. homil 2^. ^om. 6. Savil. page 608.
And this is not only wonderful, that he forgiveth us our sins, but that he
neither discovers them, nor makes them open and manifest, nor constrains
us to come forth in public and disclose our misdemeanors; but commands us
to give an account thereof unto him alone, and unto him to make confession of
them.

Neither does S. Chrysostom here walk alone. That saying of S. Augustine is
to the same effect: Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus ut audiant confessiones
meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos? Aug. Confess. lib. 10.
cap. 3.
What have I to do with men, that they should hear my confessions, as though
they should heal all my diseases? and that ^ollection of S. Hilary upon the
two last verses of the 52 Psalm, Confessionis autem caussam addidit, dicens:
Quia fecisti. au^orem scilicet universitatis hujus Dominum esse co^fessus;
nulli alii docens co^sitendu^, quam qui fecit Oliva^ fructife^am spei
mise^icordia in seculum seculi. H. lar. in Psalm. 51
that David there teaches us to confess to no other but unto the Lord, who
has made the Olive fruitful with the mercy of hope (or, the hope of mercy)
for ever and ever. and that advise of Pinuphius the Egyptian Abbat (which I
find also inserted amongst the Antiqu. lib. Canon. 66. titulorum, MS. in
Bibliot^eca Cottoni^na.
Canons collected for the use of the Church of England, in the time of the
Saxons; under the title, De poenitentia soli Deo co^fitenda:) Quis est qui non
possit suppliciter dicere? Peccatum meu^ cognitum tibi feci, and in^ustitiam
meam non operui ut per hanc con^essionem etia^ illud confidenter subjungere
mereatur: Et tu remisisti impietatem cordis mei. Quod si verecundia retrahente
revelare ea coram hominibus erubescis, illi quem latere non possunt, confiteri
ea jugi supplicatione non desinas, ac dicere [Iniquitatem meam ego cognosco,
and peccatum meum contra me est semper: tibi soli peccavi, and malum coram te
feci:] qui and absque ullius verecundiae publicatione curare, and sine
improperio peccata donare consuevi^. Io. Cassiar. Collat. 20 cap 8
Who is it that cannot humbly say? I made my sin known unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid. that by this confession he may confidently adjoyne
that which follows: And thou forgavest the impiety of my heart. But if
shamefastness do so draw thee back, that thou blushest to reveal them
before men: cease not by continual supplication to confess them unto him from
whom they cannot be hid, and to say [I know mine iniquity, and my sin is
against me always; To thee only have I sinned, and done evil before thee]
whose custom is, both to cure without the publishing of any shame, and to
forgive sins without upbraiding. S. Augustine, Cassiodor, and Gregory make a
further observation upon that place of the 32 Psalm: I said, I will confess
my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.
that God upon the only promise and purpose of making this confession, did
forgive the sin. Mark (says Attend quanta sit indulgentiae vitalis
velocitas, quan^a misericordiae Dei commendatio: ut confitentis desiderium
comitetur venia, antequam ad cruciatum perveniat poenitentia; ante remissio ad
cor perveniat, quam confessio in vocem ^rumpat. Gregor. exposit. 2. Psalm.
Poenit^ntia al.
Gregory) how great the swiftness is of this vital Indulgence, how great the
commendation is of Gods mercy; that pardon should accompany the very desire of
him that is about to confess, before that repentance do come to afflict him;
and remission should come to the heart, before that confession did break forth
by the voice. So S. Basil, upon those other words of the Psalmist, I have
roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart; (Psalm. 38.8.) makes this
paraphrase. (...). Basil. in Psalm. 37.
I do not confess with my lips, that I may manifest my self unto many. but
inwardly in my very heart, shutting mine eyes, to thee alone who see the
things that are in secret, do I show my groans, roaring within my self. For
the groans of my heart sufficed for a confession, and the lamentations sent to
thee my God from the depth of my soul.

And as S. Basil makes the groans of the heart to be a sufficient confession
so does S. Ambrose the tears of the penitent. Tears (says Lavant lachrymae
delictum, quod voce pudor est co^fiteri. Et veniae fletus consulu^t, and
verecundiae: lachrymae sine horrore culpa^ loquuntur; lachrymae crimen sine
offensione verecundiae confitentur. Ambros. lib. 10. commentar. in Luc. cap. 22.
he) do wash the sin, which the voice is ashamed to confess. Weeping does
provide both for pardon and for shamefastness: tears do speak our fault
without horror, tears do confess our crime without offense of our
shamefastness from whence, he that glosseth upon Gratian (who has inserted
these words of S. Ambrose into his collection of the Decrees) does infer;
that Vnde etsi propter pudorem nolit quis confiteri; solae lachrymae delent
peccata. Gloss. de Poenit. d^stinct 1. cap. 2. Lachrymae
if for shame a man will not confess, tears alone do blot out his sin.
Maximus Taurinensis follows S. Ambrose herein almost verbatim. The tear
(says Lavat lachryma delictum, quod voce pudor est confiteri. Lachrymae ergo
verecundiae consulunt pariter and saluti; nec erubescunt in petendo, and
impetrant in rogando. Maxim. homil. de Poenitent. Petri. Tom. 5. Biblioth.
Pat^. part. 1. page 21. edit. Colon.
he) washes the sin, which the voice is ashamed to confess. Tears
therefore do equally provide both for our shamefastness and for our health:
they neither blush in asking, and they obtain in requesting. Lastly Prosper,
speaking of sins committed by such as are in the ministry, writes thus Deum
sibi facilius placabunt illi, qui non humano co^victi judicio, sed ultro crime^
agnoscunt: qui aut propriis illud confessionibus produnt, aut nescientibus
aliis quales occulti sunt, ipsi in se voluntari^e excommunicationis sententiam
feru^t, and ab altari cui ministrabant, non animo sed officio separati, vitam
tanqua^ mortuam plangunt; certi, quod reconciliato sibi efficacis poenitentiae
fructibus Deo, non solum amissa recipiant, sed etia^ cives supernae civitatis
effecti, ad gaudia sempiterna perveniant. Prosper, de vita contemplativa, lib
2. cap. 7.
They shall more easily appease God, who being not convicted by humane
judgment, do of their own accord acknowledge their offense: who either do
discover it by their own confessions, or others not knowing what they are in
secret, do themselves give sentence of voluntary excommunication upon
themselves, and being separated (not in mind, but in office). from the Altar
to which they did minister, do lament their life as dead; assuring themselves,
that God being reconciled unto them by the fruits of effectual repentance,
they shall not only receive what they have lost, but also being made citizens
of that city which is above, they shall come to everlasting joys. By this it
appears, that the ancient Fathers did not think, that the remission of
sins was so tied unto external confession, that a man might not look for
salvation from God, if he concealed his faults from Man: but that inward
contrition, and confession made to God alone, was sufficient in this case.
Otherwise, neither they nor we do debar men from opening their grievances
unto the Physicians of their souls: either for their better information in the
true state of their disease, or for the quieting of their troubled consciences,
or for receiving further direction from them out of Gods word, both for the
recoverie of their present sickness and for the prevention of the like danger
in time to come.

Si peccavero, etiam in quocunque minuto peccato, and consumit me cogitatio
mea, and arguit me, dicens: Quare peccasti? quid faciam? Respondit senex:
Quacunque hora ceciderit homo in culpam, and dixerit ex cord, Domine Deus
peccavi, indulge mihi; mox cessabit cogitationis vel tristitiae illa
consumptio, Respons. Patr. Egypt. a Pas^hasio diacono Latin verse. cap. 11.
If I shall sin, although it be in any small offense, and my thought do
consume me, and accuse me, saying; Why have thou sinned? what shall I do? said
a brother once to Abbat Arsenius. The old man answered: Whatsoever hour a man
shall fall into a fault, and shall say from his heart, Lord God I have sinned,
grant me pardon; that consumption of thought or heaviness shall cease
forthwith. And it was as good a remedy as could be prescribed for a green
wound: to take it in hand presently, to present it to the view of our heavenly
Physician, Novit omnia Dominus, sed expectat voce^ tuam; non ut puniat, sed ut
ignoscat: non vult ut insultet tibi Diabolus, and celante^ peccata tua arguat.
Praeveni accusatorem tuum: si te ipse accusaveris, accusatorem nullum timebis.

Ambr. de Poenitent. lib. 2. cap. 17.


to prevent Satan by taking his office (as it were) out of his hand, and (...).
LXX. in Esa. 43.26. and P^overb. 18 17.
accusing our selves first, that we may be justified. But when it is not taken
in time, but suffered to fester and ranckle; the cure will not now prove to be
so easy: it being found true by often experience, that the wounded conscience
will still pinch grievously, notwithstanding the confession made unto God in
secret. At such a time as this then, where the sinner can find no ease at
home, what should he do but use the best means he can to find it abroad? Is
Ierem. 8.22.
there no balm in Gilead? is there no physician there? No doubt but God has
provided both the one and the other, for recovering of the health of the
daughter of his people: and S. James has herein given us this direction. Iam.
5.16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed. According to which prescription, Gregory Nyssen, toward the end of his
Sermon of Repentance, uses this exhortation to the sinner. (...), etc. (...),
Greg. Nyssen. de Poenitent. in Operu^ Appendice, edit. Paris. an. 1618. page
175.176.
Be sensible of the disease, wherewith thou art taken, afflict thy self as
much as thou can. Seek also the mourning of thy entirely affected brethren,
to help thee unto liberty. Show me thy bitter and abundant tears, that I
may also mingle mine therewith. Take likewise the Priest for a partner of thine
affliction, as thy Father. For who is it that so falsely obtayneth the name of
a father, or has so adamantine a soul, that he will not condole with his
sonns lamenting? Show unto him without blushing the things that were kept
close: discover the secrets of thy soul, as showing thy hidden disease unto
thy physician. He will have care both of thy credit and of thy cure.

It was no part of his meaning to advise us, that we should open our selves in
this manner unto every hedge-priest; as if there were a virtue generally
annexed to the order, that upon confession made and absolution received from
any of that rank, all should be straight made up: but he would have us
communicate our case both to such Christian brethren, and to such a ghostly
father, as had skill in physic of this kind, and out of a fellow-feeling of
our grief, would apply themselves to our recoverie. Therefore, says Origin,
Tantummodo circumspice diligentius, cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum Proba
prius medicum, cui debeas caussam languoris expone^e, qui sciat infirmari cum
infirmante, fle^e cum flente, qui condolendi and compatiendi noverit
disciplinam: ut ita demum si quid ille dixerit, qui se prius and eruditum
medicu^ ostenderit and mise^icordem, si quid consilii dederit, facias, and
sequaris Origin. in Psalm. 37. homil. 2.
look about thee diligently, unto whom thou ought to confess thy sin.
Try first the physician, unto whom thou ought to declare the cause of thy
malady, who knows to be weak with him that is weak, to weep with him
that weepeth, who understands the discipline of condoling and
compassionating: that so at length, if he shall say any thing, who has first
showed himself to be both a skillful physician and a merciful, or if he shall
give any counsel, thou may do and follow it. For, as S. Basil well
notes, (...). Basil. in Regul. breviorib. resp. 229.
the very same course is to be held in the confession of sins, which is in
the opening of the diseases of the body. As men therefore do not discover the
diseases of their body to all, nor to every sort of people, but to those that
are skillful in the cure thereof: even so ought the confession of our sins be
made, unto such as are able to cure them; according to that which is written.
Ye that are strong, bear the infirmities of the weak, that is, take them
away by your diligence. He requires care and diligence in performance of the
cure: being ignorant (good man) of that new compendious method of healing,
invented by our Roman Paracelsians, whereby a man Secundum Archiepisc. imo
sanctum Thomam, and alios Theologos, in confessione fit quis de attrito
contritus, virtute clavium. Summa Sylvestrina: de Confess Sacramental. ca. 1.
sect. 1.
in confession of attrite is made contrite by virtue of the keys; that the
sinner need put his ghostly father to no further trouble then this. Speak the
word only, and I shall be healed. And this is that Sacramental confession,
devised of late by the Priests of Rome: which they notwithstanding would feign
father upon S. Peter, from whom the Church of Rome (as they would have us
believe) received this instruction. Quod si forte alicujus cor vel livor, vel
infidelitas, vel aliquod malum latenter irrepserit; non erubescat, qui animae
suae curam gerit, confiteri haec huic qui prae est, ut ab ipso per verbu^ Dei
and consilium salubre curetur. Clem. epist. 1.
that if envy, or infidelity, or any other evil did secretly creep into
any man's heart, he who had care of his own soul should not be ashamed to
confess those things unto him who had the oversight over him; that by Gods
word and wholesome counsel, he might be cured by him. And so indeed we read
in the apocryphal epistle of Clement, pretended to be written unto S. James
the brother of our Lord: where in the several editions of Crab, Sichardus,
Venradius, Surius, Nicolinus, and Binius, we find this note also laid down
in the margent; Nota de confessione sacramentali, Mark this of sacramental
confession. But their own Maldonat. Disputat. de Sacrament, tom. 2. de
Confessionis origin cap. 2.
Maldonat would have taught them, that this note was not worth the marking:
forasmuch as the proper end of sacramental confession, is the obtaining of
remission of sins, by virtue of the keys of the Church; whereas the end of
the confession here said to be commended by S. Peter, was the obtaining of
counsel out of Gods word for the remedy of sins. which kind of medicinal
confession we well approve of, and acknowledge to have been ordinarily
prescribed by the ancient Fathers for the cure of secret sins.

For as for notorious offenses, which bred open scandal, private confession
was not thought sufficient: but there was further required public
acknowledgement of the fault, and the solemn use of the keys for the
reconciliation of the penitent. Si peccatum ejus non solum in gravi ejus malo,
sed etia^ in tanto scandalo est alioru^, atque hoc expedire utilitati Ecclesiae
videtur Antistiti, in notitia multorum, vel etia^ totius plebis agere
poenitentiam non recuset, non resistat, non lethali and mortiferae plagae per
pudore^ addat tumore^. August. in lib. de Poenitentia: quae postrema est
homilia ex 50. in 10. Tom.
If his sin do not only redound to his own evil, but also unto much scandal
of others, and the Bishop thinks it to be expedient for the profit of the
Church, let him not refuse to perform his penance in the knowledge of many or
of the whole people also, let him not resist, let him not by his shamefastness
add swelling to his deadly and mortal wound: says S. Augustine. and more
largely in another place; where he meets with the objection, of the
sufficiency of internal repentance, in this manner. Nemo sibi dicat, Occulte
ago, apud Deu^ ago; novit Deus qui mihi ignoscit, quia in cord ago. Ergo sine
caussa dictum est: Quae solveritis in terra, soluta erunt in coelo? Ergo sine
caussa sunt claves datae Ecclesiae Dei? Frustramus Evangelium Dei: frustramus
verba Christi? Promittimus vobis quod ille negat? Nonne vos decipimus? Job
dicit: Si erubui in conspectu populi confiteri peccata mea. Talis justus
thesauri divini obryzi, tali camino probatus, ista dicit: and resistit mihi
filius pestilentiae, and erubescit genu figere sub benedictione Dei? Quod non
erubuit Imperator, erubescit nec senator, sed tantum curialis? Superba cervix,
men's tortuosa. fortassis, imo quod non dubitatur, propterea Deus v^luit ut
Theodosius Imperator ageret poenitentiam publicam in conspectu populi, maxim
quia peccatum ejus celari non potuit: and erubescit Senator, quod non erubuit
Imperator? erubescit nec Senator, sed tantum curialis, quod no^ erubuit
Imperator? Erubescit plebeius sive negotiator, quod no^ erubuit Imperator? Quae
ista superbia est? Nonne sola sufficeret gehe^nae, etiamsi adulteriu^ nullu^
esset. Id. hom. 49. ex 50. ca. 3.
Let no man say unto himself: I do it secretly, I do it before God; God who
pardons me does know, that I do it in my heart. Is it therefore said without
cause; Whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven? Are the
keys therefore without cause given unto the Church of God? Do we frustrate the
Gospel of God? do we frustrate the words of Christ? Do we promise that to
you which he denies you? Do we not deceive you? Job says: If I was abashed
to confess my sins in the sight of the people. So just a man of Gods rich
threasure, who was tried in such a furnace, says thus: and does the child of
pestilence vvithstand me, and is ashamed to bow his knee under the blessing of
God? That which the Emperor was not ashamed to do, is he ashamed of, who is
not as much as a Senator, but only a simple Courtier? O proud neck, o crooked
mind! perhaps, nay it is not to be doubted, it was for this reason God would
that Theodosius the Emperor should do public penance in the sight of the
people, especially because his sin could not be concealed: and is a Senator
ashamed of that, whereof the Emperor was not ashamed? is he ashamed of that
who is no Senator, but a Courtier only, whereof the Emperor was not ashamed?
Is one of the vulgar sort, or a trader ashamed of that, whereof the Emperor
was not ashamed? What pride is this? Were not this alone sufficient to bring
them to hell, although no adultery had been committed? Thus far S.
Augustine, concerning the necessity of public Repentance for known offenses:
which being in tract of time disused in some places, long after this, the
Council. Arelat. IV cap 26 and Cabilonens. II. cap. 25.
Bishops of France, by the assistance of Charles the great, caused it to be
brought in use again, according to the order of the old Canons.

Neither is it here to be omitted, that in the time of the more ancient Fathers
this strict discipline was not so restrained to the censure of public crimes;
but that private transgressions also were sometimes drawn within the compass
of it. For whereas at first, public confession was enjoined only for public
offenses: men afterward, discerning what great benefit redounded to the
penitents thereby, (as well for the subduing of the stubburnesse of their hard
hearts, and the furthering of their deeper humiliation; as for their raising up
again by those sensible comforts which they received by the public prayers of
the Congregation, and the use of the keys) some men, I say, discerning this,
and finding their own consciences burdened with the like sins, which being
carried in secrecy, were not subject to the censures of the Church; to the end
they might obtain the like consolation and quiet of mind, did voluntarily
submit themselves to the Churches discipline herein, and undergo the burden of
public Confession and Penance. This appears by Origin in his second Homily
upon the 37 Psalm, Tertullian in his book de Poenitentia, chap. 9. S. Cyprian
in his Treatise de Lapsis, sect. 23. (or 11. according to Pamelius his
distinction) S. Ambrose in his first book de Poenitentia, chap. 16. and
others. And to the end that this publication of secret faults might be
performed in the best manner: some prudent Minister was first of all made
acquainted therewith; by whose direction the delinquent might understand what
sins were fit to be brought to the public notice of the Church, and in what
manner the penance was to be performed for them. Therefore did Origin advise
(as we heard) that one should use great care in making choice of a good and
skillful physician, to whom he should disclose his grief in this kind. and
Si intellexerit, and praeviderit talem esse languorem tuu^ qui in conventu
totius Ecclesiae exponi debeat, and curari, ex quo for^assis and caeteri
aedificari poterunt, and tu ipse facile sanari: multa hoc deliberatione, and
satis perito medici illius consilio procurandu^ est. Origin. in Psalm. 37.
h^mil. 2.
if he understand (says he) and foresee that thy disease is such as ought to
be declared in the assembly of the whole Church, and cured there, whereby
peradventure both others may be edified, and thou thy self more easily healed;
with much deliberation, and by the very skillful counsel of that physician,
must this be done.

But within a while (shortly after the persecution raised in the days of
Decius the Emperor) it was no longer left free to the Penitent to make choice
of his ghostly father: but by the general consent of the Bishops it was
ordained, that in every Church one certain discreet Minister should be
appointed to receive the confessions of such as relapsed into sin after
Baptism. This is that addition, which (...). Socrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical history notes to have been then made unto
the Penitential Canon; and to have been observed by the governors of the
Church for a long time: until at length in the time of Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople (which was about CXL. years after the persecution of Decius)
upon occasion of an infamy drawn upon the Clergy by the confession of a
Gentlewoman, defiled by a Deacon in that city, it was thought fit it should be
abolished, and that (...). Socrat. ibid. (...). Sozomen. lib. 7. histor. cap.
16.
liberty should be given unto every one, upon the private examination of his
own conscience, to resort to the holy Communion. Which was agreeable both to
the rule of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.28. (Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread and drink of that cup:) and to the judgment of the
more ancient Fathers, as appears by Clemens Alexandrinus, who accounts a
man's own conscience to be his (...). Clem. Alexandr. lib. 1. S^rom.
best directer in this case. howsoever our new Masters of Council. Trid^t. Sess.
13. Can. 11.
Trent have not only determined that sacramental confession must necessarily
be premised before the receyving of the Eucharist; but also have pronounced
them to be excommunicate ipso facto, that shall presume to teach the contrary.

The case then (if these men's censures were ought worth) would go hard with
Nectarius, and all the Bishops that followed him; but especially with S. John
Chrysostom, who was his immediate successor in the Sea of Constantinople. for
thus does he expound that place of the Apostle: (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor.
11. homil. 28.
Let every one examine himself, and then let him come. He does not bid one man
to examine another, but every one himself; making the judgment private, and
the trial without witnesses. and in the end of his second homily of Fasting
(which in others is the eighth de Poenitentia) frames his exhortation
accordingly. (...). Id. tom. 6. Savil. page 837.
Within thy conscience, none being present but God who sees all things, enter
thou into judgment and into a search of thy sins, and recounting thy whole
life, bring thy sins unto judgment in thy mind: reform thy excesses, and
so with a pure conscience draw near to that sacred Table, and partake of that
holy sacrifice. Yet in another place he deeply charge Ministers, not to
admit known offenders unto the Communion. But (...) Id. in fine hom. 82 in
Matt. ^dit. Graec. vel 83 Latin.
if one (says he) be ignorant that he is an evil person, after that he
has used much diligence ther^in, he is not to be blamed. for these things are
spoken by me of such as are known. And we find both in him, and in the
practice of the times following, that the order of public Penance was not
wholly taken away; but according to the ancient discipline established by the
Apostles in the Church, open offenders were openly censured and pressed to make
public confession of their faults. Whereby it is manifest, that the liberty
brought in by Nectarius, of not resorting to any Penitentiarie, respected the
disclosing of secret sins only; such as that foul one was, from whence the
public scandal arose, which gave occasion to the repeal of the former
Constitution. For to suffer open and notorious crimes, committed in the Church,
to pass without control, was not a mean to prevent but to augment
scandalls; nay the ready way, to make the house of God become a den of
thieves.

Two observations more I will add upon this part of the history. The one:
that the abrogation of this Canon shows, that the form of Confession used by
the ancient, was Canonical, that is, appertayning to that external discipline
of the Church which upon just occasion might be altered; and not Sacramental,
and of perpetual right, which is that our Jesuits stand for. The other: that
the course taken herein by Nectarius, was not only approved by S. Chrysostom,
who succeeded him at Constantinople; but (...). Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16.
generally in a manner by the Catholic Bishops of other places. howsoever the
Arrians, and the rest of the sectaries (the Novatians only excepted, who from
the beginning would not admit the discipline used in the Church for the
reconciliation of Penitents) retained still the former usage. as by the
relation of Socrates and Sozomen more fully may appear. And therefore when
within some XXI. years after the time wherein they finished their histories,
and about LXX. after that the publication of secret offenses began to be
abolished by Nectarius, certain in Italy did so do their penance, that they
caused a writing to be publicly read, containing a profession of their
several sins: Leo, who at that time was Bishop of Rome, gave order, that by
all means Ne de singulorum peccatorum genere libellis scripta professio
public recitetur: cum reatus co^scientiarum sufficiat solis sacerdotibus
indicari confessione secreta. Quamvis enim plenitudo fidei videatur esse
laudabilis, quae propter Dei timorem apud homines erubescere non veretur: tamen
quia non omnium hujusmodi sunt peccata, ut ea, quae poenitentiam poscunt, non
timeant publicare, removeatur tam impro babilis consuetudo; ne multi a
poenitentiae remediis arceantur, dum aut crubescunt, aut metuunt inimicis suis
sua facta referare, quibus possint legum constitutione percelli. Sufficit enim
illa confess^o, quae primum Deo offertur, tum etiam Sacerdoti, qui pro delictis
poenitentium precator accedit. Tunc enim demum plures ad poenitentia^ poterunt
provocari si populi aur^bus non publicetur conscientia confitentis. Leo, epist.
80. ad Epis^opos Campaniae, Samnij and Pi^^ni.
that course should be broken off; forasmuch as it was sufficient, that the
guilt of men's consciences should be declared in secret confession to the
Priests alone. For although (says he) the fullness of faith may seem to be
laudable, which for the fear of God does not fear to blush before men: yet
because all men's sins are not of that kind, that they may not fear to
publish such of them as require repentance, let so inconvenient a custom be
removed; lest many be driven away from the remedies of repentance, while
either they are ashamed, or afraid to disclose their deeds unto their enemies,
whereby they may be drawn within the peril of the laws. For that confession
is sufficient, which is offered first unto God, and then unto the Priest, who
comes as an intercessor for the sins of the penitent. For then at length
more may be provoked to repentance, if that the conscience of him who
confesses be not published to the ears of the people.

By this place of Leo we may easily understand, how upon the removeall of
public Confession of secret faults (together with the private made unto the
Penitentiarie, which was adjoined as a preparative thereunto) Auricular
confession began to be substituted in the room thereof: to the end, that by
this means more might be drawn on to this exercise of repentance; the
impediments of shame and fear, which accompanied the former practice, being
taken out of the way. for indeed the shame of this public Penance was such,
that in the time of Tertullian (when this discipline was thought most needful
for the Church) it was strongly Plerosque tamen hoc opus ut publicatione^ sui
aut suffugere, aut de die in diem differ, praesumo; pudoris magis memores
quam salutis. Tertull. de Poenit cap. 9.
presumed, that many did either shun this work as a publication of
themselves, or deferred it from day to day, being more mindful (as he says)
of their shame than of their salvation. Nay S. Ambrose observed that Nam
plerique futuri supplicii metu, peccatoru^ suorum conscii, poenitentiam petunt:
and cum acceperint, publicae supplicationis r^vocantur pudore. Hi videntur
maloru^ petisse poenitentiam, agere bonoru^, Ambr. de poenitent. lib. 2. cap 9.
some, who for fear of the punishment in the other world, being conscious to
themselves of their sins, did here desire their penance, were yet for shame
of their public supplication drawn back, after they had received it. Therefore
the conjecture of Porro non aliam ob caussam compluriu^ hic testimoniis usi
sumus, quam ne quis admiretur Tertullianum de clancularia ista admissorum
confessione nihil locutum: quae, quantum conjicimus, nata est ex ista
Exomologesi per ultroneam hominum pietatem, ut occultorum peccatorum esset and
Exomologesis occulta. Nec enim usquam praeceptam olim legimus. B. Rhenan.
argument. in lib. Tertullian. de Poenitent.
Rhenanus is not to be contemned, that from this public confession, the
private took his original: which by Stapleton, (in his Fortress, part. 2.
chap. 4.) is positively delivered in this manner. Afterward this open and sharp
penance was brought to the private and particular confession now used;
principally for the lewdness of the common lay Christians, which in this open
confession began at length to mock and insult at their brethrens simplicity
and devotion. although it may seem by that which is written by Si ergo
hujusmodi homo memor delicti sui, confitea tur quae commisit, and humana*
confusione parvi pendat eos qui exprobrant eum confitentem, and notant vel
irrident: etc. Origin. in Psalm. 37. homil. 2.
Origin, that the seeds of this lewdness began to sprout long before;
howsoever Certe periculum ejus tunc si forte onerosum est, cum penes
insultaturos in risiloquio consistit, ubi de alterius ruina alter attollitur,
ubi prostrato superscenditur. Caeterum inter fratres atque cons^rvos, ubi
communis spes, metus, gaudium, dolor, passio: quid tuos aliud quam te opinaris?
Quid consortes casuum tuorum, ut plausores fugis? Non potest corpus de unius
membri vexatione laetum agere: Tertullian. de Poenitent. cap 9.
Tertullian imagined, that no member of the Church would be so ungracious as to
commit such folly.

The public confession therefore of secret sins being thus abolished, by
Nectarius first (for the scandal that came thereby unto others) and by the
rest of the Catholic Bishops after him (for the reproach and danger, whereunto
the penitents by this means were laid open:) private Confession was so brought
in to supply the defect thereof, that it was accounted no more sacramental,
nor esteemed (at least generally) to be of more necessity for the obtaining of
remission of sins, then that other. So that whatsoever order afterward was
taken herein, may well be judged to have had the nature of a temporal law,
which, according to the definition of S. Augustine, Appellemus istam legem, si
placet, temporalem, quae quamvis justa sit, commutari tamen per tempora just
potest. August. de lib. arbitr. lib. 1. cap. 6.
although it be just, yet in time may be justly also changed. Nay we find that
Laurence Bishop of Novaria, in his homily de Poenitentia, does resolutely
determine, that for obtaining remission of sins, a man needs not to resort
unto any Priest, but that his own internal repentance is sufficient for that
matter: God (says Post Baptisma, remedium tuum in teipso statuit, remissionem
in arbitrio tuo posuit, ut non quaeras Sacerdote^ cum necessitas flagitaverit:
sed ipse jam acsi scitus perspicuusque magister, errorem tuum intra te emendes,
and peccatum tuu^ poenitudine abluas La^r. Nouar ^om. 6. Biblioth. Patr. part.
1. page 337. a edit. Colon.
he) after Baptism has appointed thy remedy within thy self, he has put
remission in thine own power, that thou need not seek a Priest when thy
necessity requires; but thou thy self now, as a skillful and plain master,
may amend thine error within thy self, and wash away thy sin by repentance.
(...) Author homiliae in illud; Quaecunque ligaveritis etc. inter opera
Chrysostomi, tom. 7. edit. Savil. page 268.
He has given unto thee (says another, somewhat to the same purpose) the
power of binding and loosing. Thou have bound thy self with the chayn of the
love of wealth; loose thy self with the injunction of the love of poverty.
Thou have bound thy self with the furious desire of pleasures; loose thy self
with temperance. Thou have bound thy self with the misbeleefe of Eunomius;
loose thy self with the religious embracing of the right faith.

And, that we may see how variable men's judgments were touching the matter of
Confession in the ages following: Bid would have us In hac sententia illa
debet esse discretio; ut quotidiana levia que pecca^a alteru^um coaequalibus
confiteamur, corumque quotidiana credamus oratione salvari. Porro gravioris
leprae immu^ditia^ juxta legem sacerdoti pandamus, atque ad ejus arbitrium
qualiter and quanto tempore jusserit, purificari curemus. Bed. in Jacob. 5.
confess our daily and light sins one unto another, but open the
uncleanenesse of the greater leprosy to the Priest. Alcuinus, not long after
him, would have us Volens dimittere omnia his qui in se peccaverunt,
confiteatur omnia peccata sua, quae recordari potest. Alcuin. de divin. offi^.
cap 13 in capite Iejunii.
confess all the sins that we can remember. Others were of another mind.
For some (as it appears by the writings of the same Id. epist. 26.
Alcuinus and of Haymo in Evangel. Dominic. 15. post Pentecost. Ite oste^dite
vos Sacerdotib.
Haymo) would not confess their sins to the Priest; but Dicentes, sibi
sussicere, ut soli Deo peccata sua confitea^tur; si tantum ab ipsis peccatis in
reliquo cessent. Haymo, ut supra.
said, it was sufficient for them that they did confess their sins to God
alone, provided always that they ceased from those sins for the time to
come. Others confessed their sins unto the Priests, but not fully Sed and hoc
emendatione egere perspeximus, quod quida^ du^ co^fitentur peccata sua
sacerdotibus, non plene id faciu^t. Council. C. bilo^. II. cap. 32.
: as may be seen in the Council of Cauailon, held in the days of Charles the
great where, though the Fathers think that this had need to be amended: yet
they freely acknowledge, that it remained still a question, whether men should
only confess to God, or to the Priests also; and they themselves put this
difference betwixt both those confessions, that the one did properly serve for
the cure, the other for direction in what sort the repentance (and so the cure)
should be performed. Their words are these. Quida^ solu^modo Deo co^fiteri
debere dicu^t peccata, quida^ vero Sacerdotibus confite^da esse percensent:
quod utru^que non sine magno fructu intra sanctam fit Ecclesia^ ita duntaxat,
ut and Deo, qui remissor est peccatoru^, confiteamur peccata nostra, (and cum
David dicamus: Delictu^ meu^ cognitu^ tibi feci, and injustitia^ meam non
absco^di, Dixi, Co^fitebor adversum me injustitias meas Domino, and tu
remisisti impietate^ peccati mei.) et secundum institutione^ Apostoli,
co^fiteamur alterutru^ peccata nostra, and oremus pro invicem ut salvemur.
Confessio itaque quae Deo fit, purgat peccata: ea vero quae Sacerdoti fit,
docet qualiter ipsa purge^tur peccata. Deus namque salutis and sanitatis author
and largitor, pleru^que ha^c praebet suae pote^tiae invisibili administratione,
pleru^que Medicoru^ operatione. Ibid. cap. 33
Some say, that they ought to confess their sins only unto God, and some
think that they are to be confessed unto the Priests: both of which, not
without great fruit, is practiced within the holy Church. namely thus, that we
both confess our sins unto God, who is the forgiver of sins (saying with
David: I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I
said, I will confess against my self my transgressions unto the Lord: and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.) and according to the institution of
the Apostle, confess our sins one unto another, and pray one for another,
that we may be healed. The Confession therefore which is made unto God, purges
sins: but that which is made unto the Priest, teaches in what sort those
sins should be purged. For God the author and bestower of salvation and
health, gives the same sometime by the invisible administration of his power,
sometime by the operation of Physicians.

This Canon is cyted by Great. de Poenit. distinct. 1. cap. ult. Quida^ Deo.
Gratian out of the Penitential of Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury: but
clogged with some unnecessarie additions. as when in the beginning thereof it
is made the Quida^ Deo solummodo co^fiteri debere peccata dicu^t, ut Graeci:
qui dam vero Sacerdotibus co^fitenda esse percensent, ut tota fere sancta
Ecclesia. Ibid.
opinion of the Grecians, that sins should be confessed only unto God; and
of the rest of the Church, that they should be confessed to Priests. where
those words, ut Graeci, in Gratian seem unto Cardinal Bellarmine, Videtur
irrepsisse in textum ex margin: and marginalem annotationem imperiti alicujus
fuisse, qui ex facto Nectarii collegit sublatam omnino Confessionem
Sacramentalem apud Graecos. Nam alioqui in ipso capitulari Theodori, unde canon
ille descriptus est, non habentur duae illae voces [ut Graeci,] neque etiam
habentur in Concilio II. Cabilonensi, c. 33. unde Theodorus Capitulum illud
accepisse videtur: sed nec Magister Sentent. in 4. lib. did. 17. eandem
sententiam adducens, addidit illud, [ut Graeci.] Bellarmin. de Poenitent. lib.
3. cap. 5.
to have crept out of the margent into the text; and to have been a marginall
annotation of some unskilful man, who gathered by the fact of Nectarius, that
Sacramental Confession was wholly taken away among the Grecians. For otherwise
(says he) in the Capitular it self of Theodorus, whence that Canon was
transcribed, those two words [ut Graeci] are not to be had; nor are they also
to be had in the second Council of Cauaillon, c. 33. whence Theodorus seems
to have taken that chapter: neither yet does the Master of the Sentences, in
his 4. book and 17. distinction bringing in the same sentence, add those
words [ut Graeci.] But the Cardinals conjecture of the translating of these
words out of the margent into the text of Gratian, is of little worth: seeing
we find them expressly laid down in the elder collections of the Decrees,
made by Burchard. Decret. lib. 19 cap. 145.
Burchardus and Ivo Decret. part. 15. cap. 155.
Ivo; from whence it is evident that Gratian borrowed this whole chapter, as he
has done many a one beside. For as for the Capitular it self of Theodorus,
whence the Cardinal too too boldly affirms that Canon was transcribed; as if
he had looked into the book himself: we are to know, that no such Capitular
of Theodorus is to be found: only Burchardus and Ivo, (in whom, as we said,
those controverted words are extant) sets down this whole chapter as taken
out of Theodors Penitential, and so misguided Gratian. for indeed in Theodorus
his Penitential (which I did lately transcribe out of a most ancient copy
kept in Sir Robert Cottons Threasurie) no part of that chapter can be seen:
nor yet any thing else tending to the matter now in hand, this short sentence
only excepted. Confessionem suam Deo soli, si necesse est, licebit agere. It
is lawful, that Confession be made unto God alone, if need require. And to
suppose as the Cardinal does that Theodorus should take this chapter out of
the second Council of Cauaillon: were an idle imagination* seeing it is well
known that Theodore died Archbishop of Canterbury in the year of our Lord
690: and the Council of Cauaillon was held in the year 813. that is, 123.
years after the others death. The truth is; he who made the additions to the
Capitularia of Charles the great and Ludovicus Pius, (gathered by Ansegisus and
Benedict) translated this Canon out of that Council into his Ad. lit. 3. cap.
31. edit. Pi^^ae^, and Lindenbrogij.
Collection: which Bellarmine, as it seems, having someway heard of, knew not
to distinguish between those Capitularia, and Theodors Penitential. being
herein as negligent, as in his allegation of the fourth book of the Sentences:
where the Master does not bring in this sentence at all, but having among other
questions propounded this also for one, Vtrum sufficiat peccata confiteri soli
Deo, an op^rteat confiteri Sacerdoti Quibusdam visum est sufficere, si soli Deo
fiat confessio sine judicio Sacerdotali and confessione ecclesiae. quia David
dixit; Dixi Confitebor Domino, etc. non ait, Sacerdoti: and tamen remissum sibi
peccatum dicit. Petr. Lombard. lib. 4. Senten^ did. 17.
Whether it be sufficient that a man confess his sins to God alone, or
whether he must confess to a Priest; does thereupon set down the diversity
of men's opinions touching that matter, and says, that unto some it seemed to
suffice, if confession were made to God only without the judgment of the
Priest or the confession of the Church. because David said; I said, I will
confess unto the Lord: he says not, Unto the Priest; and yet he shows that
his sin was forgiven him. For in these points, as the same author had before
noted, In his enim etiam docti diversa s^ntire inveniuntur: quia super his
varia ac pene adversa tradidisse videntur doctores. Ibid.
even the learned were found to hold diversely: because the Doctors seemed to
deliver diverse and almost contrary judgement^ therein.

The diverse sentences of the Doctors touching this question, whether external
confession were necessary or not, are at large laid down by Gratian: who in
the end, leaves the matter in suspense, and concludes in this manner. Quibus
auctoritatibus, vel quibus rationu^ firmamentis utraque sententia innitatur, in
medium breviter exposuimus. Cui autem harum potius adhaerendum sit, lectoris
judicio reservatur. Vtraque enim fautores habet sapientes, and religiosos
viros, De P^^ie. did. 1. cap. 29* Quamvis.
Upon what authorities, or upon what strength of reasons both these opinions
are grounded, I have briefly laid open. But to whether of them we should
rather cleave to, is reserved to the judgment of the reader. For both of them
have for their favorers both wise and religious men. And so the matter rested
undetermined 1150. years after Christ: howsoever the Roman Correctors of
Gratian do tell us, that now the case is altered, and that Certissimum est.
and pro certissimo habendum peccati mortalis necessariam esse co^fessionem
sacramentalem eo modo, ac te^pore adhibita^, quo in Concilio Tridentino post
alia Concilia est constitutum. Romans C^rrect. ibid.
it is most certain, and must be held for most certain, that the sacramental
confession of mortal sins is necessary, used in that manner, and at such
time, as in the Council of Trent after other Councels it is appointed. But the
first Council, wherein we find any thing determined touching this necessity,
is that of Lateran under Innocent the III. wherein we heard that
Transsubstantiation was established* for there it was ordained, that Omnis
utriusque sexus fidelis, postquam ad annos discretionis pervenerit, omnia sua
solus peccata confiteatur fideliter saltem semel in anno proprio sacerdoti; and
injunctam sibi poenitentiam studeat pro viribus adimplere, suscipiens
reverenter ad minus in Pascha Eucharistiae sacramentum: etc. alioquin and
vivens ab ingressu Ecclesiae arceatur, and moriens Christiana careat sepultura.
Council. Lateran. cap 21.
Omnis utriusque sexus sidelis, every faithful one of either sex, being come
to years of discretion, should by himself alone, once in the year at least,
faithfully confess his sins unto his own Priest; and endeavor according to
his strength to fulfill the penance enjoined unto him, receiving reverently at
least at Easter the sacrament of the Eucharist: otherwise, that both being
alive he should be kept from entering into the Church, and being dead should
want Christian burial. Since which determination, Thomas Aquinas (in his
exposition of the text of the fourth book of the Sentences, distinct. 17.)
holds Magister and Gratianus hoc pro opinione ponunt Sed nunc post
determinationem Ecclesiae sub Inn. 111. factam, haeresis reputanda est. Thom.
the denial of the necessity of Confession unto salvation to be heresy:
which before that time (says Bonaventure, in his disputations upon the same
fourth book) was not heretical, forasmuch as many Catholic Doctors did hold
contrary opinions therein, as appears by Gratian.

But Medina will not admit by any means, Ideo dicendum, quod praesata
assertio non est stricte haeresis, sed sapit haeresim. Io. Medina. tractat. 2.
de Confessione, quaest. 4.
that it should be accounted strictly heresy: but would have it said, that it
savours of heresy. and for this decree of Confession to be made once in the
year, he says Nam illud, quod illic dicitur de confessione semel in anno,
non procedit declarando, nec divinu^ jus interpreta^do, sed potius tempus
confitendi instituendo. Id. ibid. quaest^ 2.
that it does not declare nor interpret any divine right of the thing, but
rather appoints the time of confessing. Durand thinks that it may be said,
that this statute contains In quo praemittitur exhortatio sancta and salubris
de co^fessione facienda, and subjungitur praeceptu^ de perceptione Eucharistiae
vallatum poena. Durand. in lib. 4. Sentent. distinct. 17. quaest. 14.
an holy and wholesome exhortation of making confession, and then adjoyneth a
precept of the receiving of the Eucharist backed with a penalty: or if both of
them be precepts, that Et ob hoc posset rationabiliter videri alicui, quod
praedicta poena illius statuti respicit solum praeceptum de communione de cujus
transgressione constare potest, and non praeceptum de confessione. Id. ibid.
the penalty respects only the precept of communicating (of the
transgression whereof knowledge may be taken) and not the precept of
confession, of the transgression whereof the Church can take no certain
notice, and therefore can appoint no certain penalty for it. But howsoever;
this we are sure of, that the Canonists afterward held no absolute necessity
of obedience to be required therein, as unto a Sacramental institution
ordained by Christ for obtaining remission of sins; but a Canonical
obedience only, as unto an useful constitution of the Church. And therefore
where Gratian in his first distinction de Poenitentia, had in the 34. chapter
and the three next following, propounded the allegations which made for them
who held, Vnde datur intelligi, quod etiam ore tacente, veniam consequi
possumus. De Poenit. did. 1. cap. 34. Convertimini. Vid. initium eiusd.
distinct. and Glossam. ibid. verb. Sunt enim.
that men might obtain pardon for their sins without any orall confession
of them; and then proceeded to the authorities which might seem to make for
the contrary opinion: Johannes Semeca at the beginning of that part, upon
those words of Gratian, Alij e contrario tes^antur, puts too this Gloss. Ab
hoc loco usque ad sect. His auctoritatib. pro alia part allegat, quod scilicet
adulto peccati^ non dimittitur sine oris confessione. quod tamen falsum est
G^oss.
From this place until the section His auctoritatib. he alleges for the
other part, that sin is not forgiven unto such as are of years, without
confession of the mouth which yet is false: says he. But this free dealing of
his did so displease Friar Manrique, who by the command of Pius Quintus, set
out a censure upon the Glosses of the Canon law; that he gave direction these
words, which yet is false, should be clean blotted out. which direction of his
notwithstanding, the Roman Correctors under Gregory the XIII. did not follow:
but letting the words still stand, give them a check only with this marginall
annotation. Imo verissimum sine confessione in voto non dimitti peccatum. Romans
Correct. ibid. in marg.
Nay it is most true, that without confession, in desire at least, the sin is
not forgiven.

In like manner, where the same Semeca holds it to be the better opinion, that
Confession was Melius dicitur ea^ institutam fuisse a quadam universalis
Ecclesiae traditione, potius quam ex novi v^l veteris Testame^ti auctoritate,
Gloss. de Poenite^t. init. distinct. 5. In poenitentia.
ordained by a certain tradition of the universal Church, rather then by the
authority of the new or old Testament, and infers thereupon, that it is
Ergo necessaria est confessio in mortalibus apud nos, apud Graecos non: quia
non emanavit apud illos traditio talis Ibid.
necessary among the Latins, but not among the Greeks, because that tradition
did not spread to them: Friar Manrique commands all that passage to be
blotted out, but the Roman Correctors clap this note upon the margent for an
antidote. Imo confessio est instituta a Domino, and est omnibus post Baptismum
lapsis in mortale peccatu^, tam Graecis quam Latinis, jure divino necessaria.
Romans Correct. ibid. in marg.
Nay confession was ordained by our Lord, and by Gods Law is necessary to all
that fall into mortal sin after Baptism, as well Greeks as Latins. and for
this they quote only the 14. Session of the Council of Trent: where that
opinion is accursed in us, which was held two or three hundred years ago by
the men of their own religion. among whom, Michael Angrianus in Psalm. 29.
Michael of Bononia (who was Prior general of the order of the Carmelites in
the days of Pope Urban the sixth) does conclude strongly out of their own
received grounds; that confession is not necessary for the obtaining of the
pardon of our sin: and Panormitan the great Canonist, Multum mihi placet illa
opinio: quia no^ est aliqua authoritas aperta, quae innuat Deu^ seu Christum
aperte instituisse confessionem fienda^ Sacerdoti. Panorm. in 5. Decretal. de
Poenit. and remiss. cap. 12. Omnis utriusque. sect. 18.
professes that the opinion of Semeca does much please him, which refers
the original of Confession to a general tradition of the Church: because
(says he) there is not any clear authority, which shows that God or Christ
did clearly ordain that Confession should be made unto a Priest. Yea, Omnes
juris Pontificii periti, secuti primu^ suum Interpretem, dicunt Confessionem
tantum esse introductam jure Ecclesiastico. Maldonat. Disp. de Sacrament. Tom.
2. de Confess. orig. cap. 2.
all the Canonists, following their first Interpreter, say that Confession was
brought in only by the law of the Church, and not by any divine precept: if
we will believe Maldonat. who adds notwithstanding, that Sed tamen haec
opinio, aut jam declarata est satis tanqua^ haeresis ab Ecclesia; aut faceret
Ecclesia operae pretium, si declararet esse haeresim. Id. ibid. de praecepto
Confess. cap 3.
this opinion is either already sufficiently declared by the Church to be
heresy, or that the Church should do well if it did declare it to be heresy.

And we find indeed, that in the year of our Lord 1479. (which was 34. years
after the death of Panormitan) by a special commission directed from Pope
Sixtus the fourth unto Alfonsus Carillus Archbishop of Toledo, one Petrus
Oxomensis, professor of Divinity in the University of Salamanca, was driven
to abjure Quod confessio de peccatis in specie suerit ex aliquo statuto
universalis Ecclesiae, non de jure divino. Congregat. Complutens. sub Alfonso
Carillo: apud Ca^ranzam in Summa Council. sub Sixto IV.
this conclusion, which he had before delivered as agreeable to the common
opinion of the Doctors; that confession of sins in particular was grounded
upon some statute of the universal Church, and not upon divine right. and when
learned men for all this would not take warning, but would needs be meddling
again with that which the Popish Clergy could not endure should be touched,
(as Johannes de Selva, among others, in the end of his treatise de Iurejurando;
Erasmus in diverse of his works, and Beatus Rhenanus in his argument upon
Tertullians book de Poenitentia:) the fathers of Trent within 72. years after
that, conspired together to stop all men's mouths with Council. Trident. S^ss.
14. Can. 6.
an anathema, that should deny sacramental confession to be of divine
institution or to be necessary unto salvation. And so we are come to an end of
that point.

OF THE PRIESTS POWER TO FORGIVE SINS.
FRom Confession we are now to proceed unto Absolution: which it were pity
this man should receive, before he made confession of the open wrong he has
here done, in charging us to deny that Priests have power to forgive sins.
whereas the very formal words, which our Church requires to be used in the
ordination of a Minister, are these: The form of ordering of Priests.
Whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou
do retain, they are retained. And therefore if this be all the matter, the
Fathers and we shall agree well enough: howsoever this makebate would feign put
friends together by the ears, where there is no occasion at all of quarrel.
For we acknowledge most willingly, that the principal part of the Priests
ministry is exercised in the matter of forgiveness of sins: the question
only is of the manner how this part of their function is executed by them, and
of the bounds and limits thereof, which the Pope and his Clergy for their own
advantage have enlarged beyond all measure of truth and reason.

That we may therefore give unto the Priest the things that are the Priests,
and to God the things that are Gods; and not communicate unto any creature the
power that properly belongs to the Creator, who Esai. 48.11.
will not give his glory unto another: we must in the first place lay this
down for a sure ground, that to forgive sins properly, directly, and
absolutely, is a privilege only appertayning unto the most High. I, says he
of himself, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. (Esai. 43.25.) Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquity? says the Prophet, Micah 7.18. which in effect
is the same with that of the Scribes: (Mark. 2.7. and Luke 5.21.) Who can
forgive sins, but God alone? And therefore when David says unto God; Thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin: (Psalm. 32.5.) Gregory surnamed the great
(the first Bishop of Rome of that name) thought this to be a sound paraphrase
of his words. Tu qui solus parcis, qui solus peccata dimittis. Quis enim potest
peccata dimittere, nisi solus Deus? Gregor. exposit. 2. Psalmi Poenittential.
Thou, who alone sparest, who alone forgivest sins. For who can forgive
sins but God alone? He did not imagine that he had committed any great
error in subscribing thus simply unto that sentence of the Scribes: and little
dreamed that any petie Doctors afterward would arise in Rome or Rhemes, who
would tell us a fair tale; that Rhemists, annot. in Matt. 9.6.
the faithless Jews thought, as Heretics now adays, that to forgive sins
was so proper to God, that it could not be communicated unto man; and that
Rich. Hopkins, in the Memorial of a Christ. life, page 179. edis, ann. 1612.
true believers refer this to the increase of Gods honor, which miscreant
Jews and Heretics do account blasphemy against God, and injurious to his
Majesty. whereas in truth the faithlesnesse of the Jews consisted in the
application of this sentence unto our Savior Christ, whom they did not
acknowledge to be God; as the senslesness of these Romanists, in denying of the
axiom it self.

But the world is come unto a good pass, when we must be accounted heretics
now adays, and consorted with miscreant Jews, for holding the self same
thing that the Fathers of the ancient Church delivered as a most certain truth,
whenever they had any occasion to treat of this part of the history of the
Gospel. Old Irenaeus tells us, that our Savior in this place Peccata igitur
remittens, hominem quidem curavit, semetipsum autem manifest ostendit quis
esset. Si enim nemo potest remittere peccata, nisi solus Deus; remittebat aute^
haec Dominus, and curabat homines: manifestum est, quoniam ipse erat Verbum
Dei, Filius hominis factus, etc., and quomodo homo compassus est nobis, tanquam
Deus misereatur nostri, and remittat nobis debita nostra, quae factori nostro
debemus Deo. Irenaeus advers. haeres. lib. 5. cap. 17.
forgiving sins, did both cure the man, and manifestly discover who he was.
For if none (says he) can forgive sins but God alone, and our Lord did
forgive them, and cured men; it is manifest, that he was the Word of God, made
the Son of man: and that as man he is touched with compassion of us, as God
he has mercy on us, and forgiveth us our debts which we do owe unto God our
maker. Tertullian says, that Nam cum Iudaei solummodo hominem eius intuentes,
needum and Deum certi, qua Dei quoque filium, merito retractarent, non posse
hominem delicta dimittere, sed Deum solum, etc. Tertullian. lib 4, advers.
Marcion. cap. 10.
when the Jews beholding only his humanity, and not being yet certain of
his Deity, did deservedly reason, that a man could not forgive sins, but God
alone: he by answering of them, that the Son of man had authority to forgive
sins, would by this remission of sins have them call to mind that he was
Illum scilicet solum filium hominis apud Danielis Prophetiam, consecutum
iudicandi potestatem, ac per eam utique and dimittendi delicta. Id. ibid.
that only son of man, prophesied of in Daniel, who received power of
judging, and thereby also of forgiving sins. (Dan. 7.13, 14.) S. Hilary
commenting upon the ninth of Matthew, writes thus. Movet Scribas remissum ab
homine peccatum Hominem enim tantum in Jesus Christo contuebantur; and remissum
ab eo, quod l^x laxare non poterat Fides enim sola justificat. Deinde
mu^muratione^ eorum Dominus introspicit, dicitque facile esse filio hominis in
terraa peccata dimittere. Verum enim, nemo potest dimittere peccata, nisi solus
Deus: ergo qui remittit Deus est, quia nemo remittit nisi Deus. Deus in homine
manens curationem homini praestabat. Hilar. in Matthew. Canon. 8.
It moves the Scribes, that sin should be forgiven by a man. For they beheld
a man only in Jesus Christ; and that to be forgiven by him, which the law
could not release. For it is faith only that justifies. Afterward the Lord
looks into their murmuring, and says that it is an easy thing for the Son
of man upon earth to forgive sins. For it is true, none can forgive sins
but God alone: therefore he who remitteth is God, because none remitteth but
God. God remaining in man, performed this cure upon man. S. Hierom thus:
Legimus in Propheta dicentem Deu^: Ego sum qui deleo iniquitates tuas.
Consequenter ergo Scribae, quia hominem putabant, and verba Dei non
intelligebant, arguunt eum blasphemiae. Sed Dominus videns cogitationes eorum,
ostendit se Deum, qui possit cordis occulta cognoscere: and quodammodo tacens
loquitur; Eadem majestate and potentia, qua cogitationes vestras intueor,
possum and hominibus peccata dimittere. Hieronym. lib. 1. Commentar. in Matthew.
9.
We read that God says in the Prophet; I am he that blotteth out thine
iniquities. Consequently therefore the Scribes, because they thought him to be
a man, and did not understand the words of God, accuse him of blasphemy. But
the Lord seeing their thoughts, shows himself to be God, who is able to know
the secrets of the heart: and holding his peace after a sort speaks; By the
same majesty and power, wherewith I behold your thoughts, I am able also to
forgive sins unto men. or, as Euthymius expresses it in his commentaries
upon the same place: Vere nullus potest remittere peccata, nisi unus, qui
intuetur cogitationes hominum. Euthym. cap. 13. in Matthew.
In truth, none can forgive sins but one, who beholds the thoughts of men.
S. Chrysostom likewise in his Sermons upon the same, shows that Christ here
declared himself to be God equal unto the Father: and that (...). Chrysostom.
in Matthew. 9. hom 20. Graec. 30. Latin.
if he had not been equal unto the Father, he would have said; Why do you
attribute unto me an unfitting opinion? I am far from that power. To the same
effect also writes Christianus Druthmarus, Paschasius Ratbertus, and
Walafridus Strabus in the ordinary Gloss upon the same place of S. Matthew.
Victor Antiochenus upon the second of Mark; Theophylact and Bid upon the
second of Mark, and the fifth of Luke: S. Ambrose upon the fifth of Luke. who
in another place also brings this sentence of the Scribes, as a ground to
prove the deity of the holy Ghost withal: forasmuch as Peccata nemo condonat,
nisi unus Deus: quia aeque scriptum est; Quis potest peccata donare nisi solus
Deus? Ambros. de Spir. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 19.
none forgiveth sins but one God; because it is written, Who can forgive sins
but God alone? as S. Cyril does to prove the deity of the Son. Istud enim
solum malicia Iudaeorum vere di ebat, quod nullus potest dimittere peccata,
nisi solus Deus, qui legis Dominus est Cyrill. Alexandr. Thesaur. lib. 12. cap.
4.
For this only, says he, did the malice of the Jews say truly, that none
can forgive sins, but God alone, who is the Lord of the law* and thence he
frames this argument. (...); Id. in lib. de recta fide ad Reginas.
If he alone who is the Lord of all does free us from our sins, and this
agreeeth to no other, and Christ bestows this with a power befitting God; how
should he not be God?

The same argument also is used by Novatianus and Athanasius to the self same
purpose. Quod si cum nullius sit nisi Dei, cordis nosse secreta, Christus
secreta conspicit cordis: quod si, cum nullius sit nisi Dei, peccata dimittere,
idem Christus peccata dimittit: etc. merito Deus est Christus Novatian de
Trinitat. cap. 13.
For if, when it agrees unto none but unto God to know the secrets of the
heart, Christ does behold the secrets of the heart; if, when it agrees unto
none but unto God to forgive sins, the same Christ does forgive sins: then
deservedly is Christ to be accounted God, says Novatianus. So Athanasius
demands of the Arrians: (...); Athanas. orat. 3. contra Arian. page 239. tom.
1. edit. Graecolat.
if the Son were a creature, how was he able to forgive sins? it being
written in the Prophets, that this is the work of God. For who is a God like
unto thee, that takes away sins and passes over iniquities? (...). Id. in
epist. de Synodis Arimin. and Seleuc. page 712. Vid. etiam Orat. 4. contra
Arrian. page 254. and 281.
But the son (says he) said unto whom he would; Thy sins are forgiven
thee: when the Jews murmuring also he demonstrated this forgiveness in deed,
saying to the man that was sick of the palsy; Arise, take up thy bed, and
go unto thine house. And therefore Bid rightly infers, that Sed multo
dementius errant Arriani, qui cum Iesum and Christum esse, and peccata posse
dimittere, Evangelii verbis devicti negare non audeant; nihilominus Deum negare
non timent. Bed. in Marc. lib. 1. cap. 10.
the Arrians do err here much more madly then the Jews: who when they dare
not deny, being convicted by the words of the Gospel, that Jesus is both the
Christ and has power to forgive sins; yet fear not for all that to deny
him to be God. and concludes himself most soundly: that Si and Deus est iuxta
Psalmistam, qui quantum distat oriens ab occasu elongavit a nobis iniquitates
nostras, and filius hominis potestatem habet in terra dimittendi peccata: ergo
idem ipse and Deus, and filius hominis est; ut and homo Christus per
divinitatis sure potentiam peccata dimittere possit, and idem Deus Christus per
humanitatis suae fragilitatem pro peccatoribus mori. Id. ibid.
if he be God according to the Psalmist, who removes our iniquities from us as
far as the East is from the West, and the son of man has power upon earth
to forgive sins; therefore the same is both God and the son of man, that
the man Christ by the power of his divinity might forgive sins, and the same
Christ God by the frailty of his humanity might dye for sinners. Whereunto
we will add another sweet passage of his (borrowed from some ancienter
author:) Nemo tollit peccata (quae nec Lex, quamvis sancta and iusta and bona,
potuit auferre) nisi ille in quo peccatum non est. Tollit autem, and dimittendo
quae facta sunt, and adiuvando ne fiant, and perducendo ad vitam ubi fieri
omnino non possint. Bed. in 1. Johan. 3.
No man takes away sins (which the Law, although holy and just and good,
could not take away) but he in whom there is no sin. Now he takes them
away, both by pardoning those that are done, and by assisting us that they may
not be done, and by bringing us to the life where they cannot at all be done.

P Lombard. lib. 4. Sentent. distinct. 18 D.
Peter Lombard alleges this as the saying of S. Augustine: the former
sentence only being thus changed. Nemo tollit peccata, nisi solus Christus, qui
est agnus ^ollens peccata mundi. August.
None takes away sins, but Christ alone, who is the Lamb that takes away
the sins of the world. agreeable to that, which in the same place he cites
out of S. Ambrose: Ille solus peccata dimittit, qui solus pro peccatis nostris
mortuus est. Ambros.
He alone forgiveth sins, who alone dyed for our sins. and to that of
Clemens Alexandrinus: (...). Clem. Alexandr. Paedaegog. lib. 1. cap. 8.
He alone can remit sins, who is appointed our Master by the father of all,
who alone is able to discern disobedience from obedience. to which purpose
also, S. Ambrose makes this observation upon the history of the woman taken
in adultery, Ioh. 8.9. that Donaturus peccatum, solus remanet Jesus. etc. Non
enim legatus neque nuncius, sed ipse Dominus salvum fecit populum suum. Solus
remanet, quia non potest hoc cuiqua^ hominum cum Christo esse commune ut
peccata condonet. Solius hoc munus est Christi, qui tulit peccatum mundi.
Ambros. epist. 76. ad Studium.
Jesus being about to pardon sin, remained alone. For it is not the ambassador
(says he) nor the messenger, but the Lord himself that has saved his
people. He remains alone, because it cannot be common to any man with Christ
to forgive sins. This is the office of Christ alone, who takes away the
sin of the world. Yea S. Chrysostom himself, who of all the Fathers gives
most in this point unto Gods ambassadors and messengers, is yet careful
withal to preserve Gods privilege entire, by often interposing such sentences
as these. (...). Chrysostom. in 2. Corinthians. 3. homil. 6.
None can forgive sins, but God alone. (...). Id. in Johan 8. homil. 54.
edit. Graec. vel 53. Latin.
To forgive sins, belongs to no other. (...). Id in 1. Corinthians. 15 homil.
40.
To forgive sins, is possible to God only. (...). Id. ibid.
God alone does this: which also he works in the washing of the new birth.
Wherein, that the work of cleansing the soul is wholly Gods, and the minister
has no hand at all in effecting any part of it; Optatus proves at large in
his fifth book against the Donatistes: showing that Sordes et maculas mentis
lavare non potest, nisi qui ejusdem fabricator est mentis Optat* lib. 5.
none can wash the filth and sports of the mind, but he who is the framer of
the same mind; and convincing the heretics, as by many other testimonies of
holy Scripture, so by that of Esai. 1.18. which he presses in this manner. Dei
est mundare, non hominis: ipse per Prophetam Esaiam promisit se loturu^, dum
ait; Et si ^uerint peccata vestra velut coccum, ut nivem inalbabo. Inalbabo
dixit; non dixit, faciam inalbari. Si hoc Deus promisit: quare vos vultis
reddere, quod vobis nec promittere licet, nec reddere, nec habere? Ecce in
Esaia fe promisit, Deus inalbare peccatis affectos, non per hominem. Id. ibid.
It belongs unto God to cleanse, and not unto man: he has promised by the
Prophet Esai that he himself would wash, when he says; If your sins were
as scarlet, I will make them as white as snow. I will make them white, he said:
he did not say, I will cause them to be made white. If God has promised this,
why will you give that, which is neither lawful for you to promise, nor to
give, nor to have? Behold in Esai God has promised that he himself will make
white such as are defiled with sins; not by man.

Having thus therefore reserved unto God his prerogative royal in cleansing of
the soul, we give unto his underofficers their due, when we 1. Cor. 4.1, 2.
account of them, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries
of God. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 4. hom. 10.
not as Lords, that have power to dispose of spiritual graces as they please:
Id. in 2. Cor. 4. homil. 8. circa init.
but as servants that are tied to follow their Masters prescriptions therein;
and in following thereof do but bring their external ministry ( (...). Id.
ibid.
for which it self also they are beholding to Gods mercy and goodness) God
conferring the inward blessing of his spirit thereupon, when and where he will.
1. Cor. 3.5.
Who then is Paul, (says S. Paul himself) and who is Apollo? but Ministers by
whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? Therefore, says Optatus,
Est ergo in universis servientibus non dominium, sed ministerium. Optat. lib. 5.
in all the servants there is no dominion, but a ministry. Id. ibid.
simili^er and ^hrysostom. in 1. Cor. 3. homil. 8 (...).
Cui creditur, ipse dat quod creditur, non per quem creditur. It is he who is
believed, that gives the thing which is believed, not he by whom we do
believe. Whereas our Savior then says unto his Apostles, Ioh. 20. Receive the
holy Ghost, Whose sins you forgive shall be forgiven: Ambros. de Spir. sanct.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
S. Ambrose, August. contr. epist. Parmenian. lib. 2. cap. 11. and homil. 23.
ex 50.
S. Augustine, Chrysostom. in 2. Corin. 3. homil. 6.
S. Chrysostom, and Cyrill. Alexandr. in Io^an. lib. 12. cap. 56.
S. Cyrill, make this observation thereupon; that this is not their work
properly, but the work of the holy Ghost, who remitteth by them, and therein
performs the work of the true God. For indeed (says S. Et certe solius very
Dei est, ut possit a peccatis homines solvere. Cui enin alii praevaricatores
legis liberare a peccato licet, nisi legis ipsius autori? Id. ibid.
Cyrill) it belongs to the true God alone, to be able to loose men from their
sins. for who else can free the transgressors of the law from sin, but he who
is the author of law it self? Daturus erat Dominus hominibus Spiritum sanctum;
and ab ipso Spiritu sancto fidelibus suis dimitti peccata, non meritis hominum
volebat intelligi dimitti peccata. Nam quid es homo, nis^ aeger sanandus? Vis
mihi esse medicus? mecum quaere medicum. Augustine. homil. 23. ex. 50.
The Lord (says S. Augustine) was to give unto men the holy Ghost, and he
would have it to be understood, that by the holy Ghost himself sins should
be forgiven to the faithful, and not that by the merits of men sins should be
forgiven. For what art thou, o man, but a sick-man that have need to be healed?
Will thou be a physician to me? Seek the physician together with me. So S.
Ambrose: Ecce quia per Spiritum sanctum peccata donantur. Homines autem in
remissionem peccatorum ministerium suum exhibent, non jus alicujus potestatis
exercent. Ambros. de Spir. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Behold, that by the holy Ghost sins are forgiven. But men to the remission
of sins bring their ministry, they exercise not the authority of any power.
S. Chrysostom, though he make this to be the exercise of a great power (which
also he Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.
elsewhere amplifieth, after his manner, exceeding hyperbolically) yet in the
maine matter accords fully with S. Ambrose; that it lies in (...). Id. in
Johan. 20. homil. 86. edit. Graec. v^l 85. Latin.
God alone to bestow the things wherein the Priests service is employed.
(...). Id. ibid.
And what speak I of Priests? says he. Neither Angel nor Archangell can do
ought in those things which are given by God: but the Father and the Son and
the holy Ghost do dispense all. The Priest lends his tongue, and puts too
his hand. (...) Id. in 2. Tim. cap. 1. homil. 2.
His part only is to open his mouth: but it is God that works all. And the
reasons whereby both he, Id. in Johan. 8. homil. 54 Graec. vel 53. Latin.
and Theophylact after him, do prove that the Priests of the law had no power
to forgive sins; are of as great force to take the same power from the
ministers of the Gospel. first, because (...). Theophylact. in Johan. 8.
it is Gods part only to forgive sins. secondly, because (...). Id. ibid.
the Priests were servants, yea servants of sin, and therefore had no power
to forgive sins unto others: but the Son is the Lord of the house; who 1.
Ioh. 3.5.
was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no sin, says S. John.
upon which saying of his, S. Augustine gives this good note: In quo non est
peccatum, ipse venit auferre peccatu^. Nam si esset and in illo peccatum,
auferendum esset illi, non ipse auferret, August. tract. 4. in I. Johan 3.
It is he in whom there is no sin, that came to take away sin. For if there
had been sin in him too, it must have been taken away from him, he could
not take it away himself.

To forgive sins therefore being thus proper to God only and to his Christ:
his ministers must not be held to have this power communicated unto them, but
in an improper sense; namely because God forgiveth by them; and has appointed
them both to apply those means by which he uses to forgive sins, and to
give notice unto repentant sinners of that forgiveness. Quis enim potest
peccata dimittere nisi solus Deus? qui per eos quoque dimittit, quibus
dimittendi tribuit potestatem Ambros. lib. 5. commentar. in Luc. 5.
For who can forgive sins but God alone? yet does he forgive by them also,
unto whom he has given power to forgive: says S. Ambrose, and his Beda. and
Strabus in Marc. 2. and Luc. 5.
followers. And Quamvis Dei proprium opus sit, remittere peccata: dicuntur
tame^ etiam Apostoli remittere, non simpliciter, sed quia adhibent media, per
quae Deus remittit peccata. Haec autem media sunt, Verbum Dei and Sacramenta,
Io. Ferus, annota^. in Johan 20. Item, lib. 3. Comment. in Matthew. cap. 16.
though it be the proper work of God to remit sins, (says Ferus:) yet are the
Apostles (and their successors) said to remit also, not simply, but because
they apply those means whereby God does remit sins. Which means are, the
Word of God and the Sacraments. Whereunto also we may add, the relaxation of
the Censures of the Church, and Prayer* for in these four the whole exercise
of this ministry of reconciliation (as the 2. Cor. 5.18.
Apostle calls it) does mainly consist. of each whereof it is needful that
we should speak somewhat more particularly.

That Prayer is a means ordained by God for procuring remission of sins, is
plain by that of S. James. Iam. 5.15, 16.
The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed: for the
fervent prayer of a righteous man avayleth much. The later of which sentences
has reference to the prayers of every good Christian, whereunto we find a
gracious promise annexed, according to that of S. John. 1. Ioh. 5.16.
If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall
ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. But the
former, as the verse immediately going before does manifestly prove, pertayneth
to the prayers made by the ministers of the Church; who have a special charge
to be the Lords remembrancers for the good of his people. And therefore, as S.
Augustine out the later proves, that Quod etiam frater fratrem a delicti
poterit contagione mundare. Aug. in Evangel. Johan. tract. 58.
one brother by this means may cleanse another from the contagion of sin: so
does S. Chrysostom out of the former, that Priests do perform this, not
(...). Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerdot. tom. 6. edit. Savil page 17.
by teaching only and admonishing, but by assisting us also with their
prayers. and the faithful prayers, both of the one and of the other, are by S.
Augustine. de Baptismo contra Donatist. lib. 3. cap. 17.18.
Augustine made the especial means whereby the power of the keys is exercised
in the remitting of sins: who thereupon exhorts offenders to show their
repentance publicly in the Church, Id. homil. 49. ex 50. Agite poenitentiam
qualis agitur in Ecclesia, ut oret pro vobis Ecclesia.
that the Church might pray for them, and impart the benefit of absolution
unto them.

In the life of S Basil, fathered upon Tom. 2. Vit. Sanct. ab Aloysio Lipomano
edit. Vene^. ann. 1553. fol. 298. Vit. Patrum, ab Her. Rosweydo edit. Antuerp.
an. 1615. page 160. Miscellan. a Gerardo Vossio edit. Mogunt. an. 1604 page 136.
Amphilochius, (of the credit whereof we have before spoken) a certain
gentlewoman is brought in, coming unto S. Basil for obtaining remission of her
sins: who is said there to have demanded this question of her. Have thou
heard, o woman, that none can forgive sins but God alone? and she to have
returned him this answer. I have heard it, Father: and therefore have I moved
thee to make intercession unto our most merciful God for me. Which agrees
well with that which Alex. in Sum. part. 4 quaest. 21. membr. 1.
Alexander of Hales and Bonaventur. in lib. 4. Sent. did. 18. art. 2. quaest.
1.
Bonaventure do maintain: that the power of the keys extend to the remission
of faults, by way of intercession only and deprecation, not by imparting any
immediate absolution. And as in our private forgiving and praying one for
another, S. Augustine well notes, that Nostrum est donante ipso ministerium
charitatis and humilitatis adhibere: illius est exaudire, ac nos ab omni
peccatorum contaminatione mundare per Christum, and in Christo; ut quod aliis
etiam dimittimus, hoc est in terra solvimus, solvatur and in coelo. Augustine in
fine tractat. 58. in evangel. Iohann.
it is our part, God giving us the grace, to use the ministry of charity and
humility; but it is his, to hear us, and to cleanse us from all pollution of
sins for Christ, and in Christ; that what we forgive unto others, that is to
say, what we loose upon earth, may be loosed also in heaven: so does S.
Ambrose show that the case also stands with the ministers of the Gospel, in
the execution of that commission given unto them for the remitting of sins,
Ioh. 20.23. I^^i rogant, divinitas donat. Humanum enim obsequium, sed
munificentia supernae est potestatis. Ambros. de Spir. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 19.
They make request, (says he) the Godhead bestows the gift: for the service
is done by man, but the bounty is from the power above. The reason which he
renders thereof, is, because in their ministry it is the holy Ghost that
forgiveth the sin; and it is God only that can give the holy Ghost. Non enim
humanum hoc opus, neque ab homine datur; sed invocatus a Sacerdote, a Deo
traditur: in quo Dei munus, ministeriu^ Sacerdotis est. Nam si Paulus Apostolus
judicavit, quod ipse donare Spiritum sanctum sua authoritate non posset; and
intantum se huic officio impare^ credidit, ut a Deo nos spiritu optaret
impleri: quis tantus est, qui hujus traditione^ muneris sibi audeat arrogare?
Itaque Apostolus votum precatione detulit, non jus authoritate aliqua
vindicavit: impetrare optavit, non imperare praesumpsit. Id. ibid. lib. 1. cap.
7.
For this is not an humane work (says he in another place) neither is the
holy Ghost given by man, but being called upon by the Priest, is bestowed by
God: wherein the gift is Gods, the ministry is the Priests. For if the Apostle
Paul did judge, that he could not confer the h^ly Ghost by his authority;
but believed himself to be so far unable for this office, that he wished
we might be filled with the spirit from God: who is so great as dare arrogate
unto himself the bestowing of this gift? Therefore the Apostle did intimate
his desire by prayer, he challenged no right by any authority: he wished to
obtain it, he presumed not to command it. Thus far S. Ambrose of whom
Paulinus writes, that whenever any penitents came unto him, Caussas autem
criminum, quas illi confitebantur, nulli nisi Domino soli, apud que^
intercedebat, loquebatur: bonu^ relinquens exemplu^ posteris sacerdotibus, ut
intercessores apud Deu^ magis sint, quam accusatores ^pud homines. Paulinus, in
vita S. Ambrosij.
the crimes which they confessed unto him he spoke of to none, but to God
alone unto whom he made intercession; leaving a good example to the Priests of
succeeding ages, that they be rather intercessors for them unto God, than
accusers unto men. The same also, and in the self same words, does Iona^, in
vita S. Eustachij Luxovi^nsi^ abbatu, cap. 1. apud Surium, tom. 2. Mart. 29.
Jonas write of Eustachius, the scholar of Columbanus our famous countryman.

Hitherto appertains that sentence cyted by Tho. Waldens. tom. 2. de
Sacramentis, cap. 147.
Thomas Waldensis out of S. Hieroms exposition upon the Psalms: that voice of
God Quotidie in unoquoque nostrum flammam libidinis per confessione^ and
gratiam Spiritus sancti intercidit, id est, per orationem Sacerdotis facit
cessare. Hieronym. in exposit. Psalm. 28. inedit.
cutteth off daily in every one of us the flame of lust by confession and the
grace of the holy Ghost, that is to say, by the prayer of the Priest makes it
to cease in us and that which before has been alleged out of Leo; of the
confession offered first to God, and then to the Priest, Qui pro delictis
poenitentium precator accedit Leo, in fin. epist. 80. ad episc. Campan.
who comes as an intreater for the sins of the penitent. which he more
fully expresses in another epistle, affirming it to be Multu^ enim utile ac
necessarium est, ut peccatoru^ reatus ante ultimu^ diem sacerdotali
supplicatione solvatur. Id. epist. 91. ad Theodor. episc.
very profitable and necessary, that the guilt of sins (or sinners) be
loosed by the supplication of the Priest before the last day. See S. Gregor. in
1. Reg. lib 2. cap. 3. ad illud: Si peccaverit vir in virum, etc.
Gregory, in his moral exposition upon 1. Sam. 2.25. Anastasius Sinaita or
Nicaenus, in his answer to the 141. question (of Gretsers edition:) and
Nicolaus Cabasilas, in the 29. chapter of his exposition of the Liturgy: where
he directly affirms, that remission of sins is given to the penitents by
the prayer of the Priests. And therefore by the Order used of old in the Church
of Rome, the Priest before he began his work, was required to use this
prayer. Domine Deus omnipotens, propitius esto mihi peccatori, ut condign
possim tibi gratias agere, qui me indignum propter tuam misericordiam ministrum
fecisti sacerdotalis officii, and me exiguum humilemque mediat rem constituisti
ad orandum and intercedendum ad Dominum nostru^ Iesum Christum, pro
peccatoribus ad poenitentiam revertentibus. Ideoque dominator Domine, qui omnes
homines vis salvos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis venite, qui non vis
mortem peccatoris, sed ut convertatur and vivat: suscipe orationem meam, quam
fundo ante conspectum clementiae tuae, pro famulis and famulabus tuis, qui ad
poenitentiam and misericordiam tuam confugerunt. Ordo Roman. antiqu. de
officijs divinis, page 18. edit. R^m. ann 1591. Baptizatorum and Confitentiu^
Ceremonia antiquae, edit. Colon. an. 1530. Alcuin. de divin. offic. cap. 13 in
capite Iejunii.
O Lord God almighty, be merciful unto me a sinner, that I may worthily give
thanks unto thee, who have made me an unworthy one, for thy mercies sake, a
minister of the Priestly office; and have appointed me a poor and humble
mediator, to pray and make intercession unto our Lord Jesus Christ, for sinners
that return unto repentance. And therefore, O Lord the ruler, who would
have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, who do not
desire the death of a sinner, but that he may be reconciled and live: receive
my prayer, which I pour forth before the face of thy mercy, for thy servants
and handmaydes, who have fledd to repentance and to thy mercy.

Yea, in the days of Thomas Aquinas there arose a learned man among the
Papists themselves, who found fault with that indicative form of absolution
then used by the Priest, I absolve thee from all thy sins, and would have it
delivered by way of deprecation. alleging, that this was not only the opinion
of Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Hugo Cardinalis; but
also that Addit etiam objiciendo, quod vix 30. anni sunt, quod omnes hac sola
forma utebantur; Absolutionem and remissionem etc. Thom. Opusc. 22. cap. 5.
thirty years were scarce passed, since all did use this form only,
Absolutionem and remissionem tribuat tibi omnipotens Deus, Almighty God give
unto thee absolution and forgiveness. What Thomas does answer hereunto, may be
seen in his little treatise of the form of absolution, which upon this
occasion he wrote unto the General of his order. This only will I add, that
as well in the ancient Ritualls and in the new Pontificale Roman. edit. Rom an.
1615. page 567.568.
Pontifical of the Church of Rome, as in the present practice of the Greek
Church, I find the absolution expressed in the third person, as attributed
wholly to God, and not in the first, as if it came from the Priest himself.
One ancient form of Absolutio Criminum. Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and
dimittat tibi omnia peccata tua, praeterita, praesentia and futura, quae
commisisti coram eo and sanctis ejus, quae confessus es, vel per aliquam
negligentiam seu oblivionem vel malevolentiam abscondisti: liberet te Deus ab
omni malo, hic and in futuro, conservet and confirmet te semper in omni opere
bono: and perducat te Christus filius Dei vivi ad vitam sine fine manentem.
Confitentium Ceremoniae antiqu. edit. Colon. an. 1530.
Absolution used among the Latins, was this. Almighty God be merciful unto
thee, and forgive thee all thy sins, past, present, and to come, visible and
invisible, which thou have committed before him and his Saints, which thou have
confessed or by some negligence or forgetfulness or evil will have
concealed: God deliver thee from all evil, here and hereafter, preserve and
confirm thee always in every good work; and Christ the son of the living
God bring thee unto the life which remains without end: And so among the
Grecians: (...). Ierem. Patriarch. C. P. respons. 1. ad Tubingenses, cap. 11.
whatsoever sins the penitent for forgetfulness or shamefastness does leave
unconfessed, we pray the merciful and most pitiful God that those also may be
pardoned unto him, and we are persuaded that he shall receive pardon of them
from God; says Jeremy the late Patriarch of Constantinople. Where by the way
you may observe, no such necessity to be here held of confessing every known
sin unto a Priest, that if either for shame or for some other respect the
penitent do not make an entire confession, but conceal somewhat from the
notice of his ghostly father; his confession should thereby be made void, and
he excluded from all hope of forgiveness. which is that engine, whereby the
Priests of Rome have lift up themselves into that height of domineering and
tyrannizing over men's conscience, wherewith we see they now hold the poor
people in most miserable awe.

Alexander of Hales and Bonaventure in the form of absolution used in their
time, Secundum quod ascendit, habet se per modum inferioris and supplicantis:
secundum quod descendit, per modum superioris and judicantis. Secundum primum
modum potest gratiam impetrare, and ad hoc est idoneus: secundum secundum modum
potest Ecclesiae reconciliare. Et ideo in signum hujus, in forma absolutionis
praemittitur oration per modum deprecativum, and subjungitur absolutio per modum
indicativum: and deprecatio gratiam impetrat, and absolutio gratiam supponit.
Alexand. Halens. Sum. part. 4. quaest. 21. membr. 1. and Bonaventur. in 4.
Sentent. did. 18. art. 2. quaest. 1.
observe that prayer was premised in the optative, and absolution adjoined
afterward in the indicative mood. whence they gather, that the Priests prayer
obtayneth grace, his absolution presupposes it: that by the former he
ascends unto God and procures pardon for the fault, by the later he
descends to the sinner and reconcileth him to the Church. for Quia etsi
aliquis apud Deum sit solutus, non tame^ in facie Ecclesiae solutus habetur,
nisi per judicium Sacerdotis. Petr. Lombard. lib. 4. Sentent. distinct. 18.
Vid. Ivon. Carnotens. epist. 228. and Anselm. in Luc. 17.
although a man be loosed before God, (says the Master of the Sentences) yet
is he not held loosed in the face of the Church but by the judgment of the
Priest. And this loosing of men by the judgment of the Priest, is by the
Fathers generally accounted nothing else but a restoring of them to the peace
of the Church, and an admitting of them to the Lords table again: which
therefore they usually express by the terms of (...). Council. Laodicen. can.
2.
bringing them to the communion, Communioni, vel communione reconciliari.
Council. Eliberitan can 72.
reconciling them to or with the communion, Reddi ei^ co^munione^. Amb. de
Poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 1. and lib. 2. cap 9.
restoring the communion to them, Ad communicationem admittere. Cypr. epist.
53. communicationem dare. Id. epist. 54. tribuere communicationem. Id. de
lapsis.
admitting them to fellowship, Pacem dare. concedere pacem. Id. ibid.
granting them peace, etc. Neither do we find that they did ever use any
such formal absolution as this, I absolve thee from all thy sins: wherein
our Popish Priests notwithstanding do place the very form of their late
devised sacrament of Penance, nay hold it to be so absolute a form, that
(according to Thomas Aquinas his new divinity) In sacramentali absolutione non
sufficeret dicere, Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, vel, Absolutionem and
remissionem tribuat tibi Deus: quia per haec verba Sacerdos absolutionem non
significat fieri, sed petit ut fiat. Thom. part. 3. quaest. 84. art. 3. ad 1.
it would not be sufficient to say, Almighty God have mercy upon thee, or,
God grant unto thee absolution and forgiveness. because, forsooth, the Priest
by these words does not signify that the absolution is done, but entreats
that it may be done. which how it will accord with the Roman Pontifical,
where the form of Absolution is laid down prayer-wise, the Jesuits who
follow Thomas may do well to consider.

I pass this over, that in the days not only of S. Cyprian. epist. 13.
Cyprian but of Alcuin. de divin. offic. cap. 13. in capite Iejunii.
Alcuinus also (who lived 800. years after Christ) the reconciliation of
Penitents was not held to be such a proper office of the Priest; but that a
Deacon, in his absence, was allowed to perform the same. The ordinary course
that was held herein, Vt secundum formam Canonum antiquoru^ dentur
poenitentiae, hoc est, ut prius eum, quem sui poenitet facti, a communione
suspensum, faciat inter reliquos poenitentes ad manus impositionem crebro
recurrere; expleto au^em satisfactionis tempore, sicuti Sacerdotalis
contemplatio probaverit, eum communioni restituat. Council. Toletan. III. cap.
11.
according to the form of the ancient Canons, is thus laid down by the
fathers of the third Council of Toledo. that the Priest should first suspend
him that repented of his fault from the communion, and make him to have often
recourse unto imposition of hands among the rest of the penitents: then, when
he had fulfilled the time of his satisfaction, as the consideration of the
Priest did approve of it, he should restore him to the communion. And this was
a Constitution of old fathered upon the Apostles: that Bishops (...).
Constitut. Apostolic. lib. 2 cap. 16.
should separate those who said they repented of their sins, for a time
determined according to the proportion of their sin; and afterward receive
them being penitent, as fathers would do their children. To this Penitential
excommunication and absolution, belongs that saying either of S. Ambrose or
S. Augustine (for the same discourse is attributed to them both:) Qui egerit
veraciter poenitentiam, and solutus fuerit a ligamento quo erat constrictus,
and a Christi corpore separatus, and been post poenitentiam vixerit: post
reconciliationem cum desunctus fuerit, ad Dominum vadit, ad requiem vadit,
regno Dei non privabitur and a populo Diaboli separabitur. Ambros. in Exhortat.
ad Poenitent. Augustine. homil. 41. ex 50. and inter Caesarij Arelat. sermones
homil. 43. and 44.
He who has truly performed his repentance, and is loosed from that bond
wherewith he was tied, and separated from the body of Christ, and does live
well after his repentance: whenever after his reconciliation he shall depart
this life, he goes to the Lord, he goes to rest, he shall not be deprived of
the kingdom of God, and from the people of the Devil he shall be separated.
and that which we read in Anastasius Sinaita: (...). etc. (...). Anastas.
Sinait. quaest. 6.
Bind him, and till thou have appeased God, do not let him loose; that he be
not more bound with the wrath of God. for if thou bindest him not; there
remain bonds for him that cannot be broken. Neither do we enquire, whither
the wound were often bound; but whither the binding has profited. If it have
profited, although in a short time, use it no longer. Let the measure of the
loosing, be the profit of him that is bound. and that exhortation which another
makes unto the Pastors of the Church: (...). Homil. in illud. Quaecunque
ligaveritis, etc. inter opera Chrysostom. tom. 7. edit. Savil. page 268.
Bind with separation such as have sinned after baptism; and loose them
again when they have repented, receiving them as brethren. for the saying is
true: Whatsoever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

That this authority of loosing remains still in the Church, we constantly
maintain against the heresy of the Hieronym. epist. 54. contra Montanum, and
lib. 2. adversus Iovinian. Tertullianus Montanizans, in lib. de Pudicitia, cap.
ult.
Montanists and Ambros. lib. 1. de Poenitent. cap. 2. Socrat. lib. 1. histor.
cap. 7. Sozomen. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Novatians, who (upon this pretense among others, that God only had power to
remit sins) took away the ministerial power of reconciling such penitents as
had committed heinous sins; denying that the Church had any warrant to
receive them to her communion again, and to the participation of the holy
mysteries, notwithstanding their repentance were ever so sound. Which is
directly contrary to the doctrine delivered by S. Paul, both in the general;
that Galat. 6.1.
if a man be overtaken in a fault, they who are spiritual should restore such
a one in the spirit of meekness: and in the particular of the incestuous
Corinthian, who though he had been excommunicated for such a crime 1. Cor.
5.1.
as was not so much as named amongst the Gentiles; yet upon his repentance the
Apostle tells the Church, that they 2. Cor. 2.7.
ought to forgive him and comfort him, lest he should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow. Where that speech of his is specially noted and pressed
against the heretics by S. Ambros. de Poenit. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Ambrose: 2. Cor. 2.10.
To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing,
to whom I forgave it, for your sakes I forgave it, in the person of Christ. 1.
Cor. 5 4, 5.
For as in the name, and by the power of our Lord Jesus, such a one was
delivered to Satan; so 2. Tim. 2.25, 26.
God having given unto him repentance, to recover himself out of the snare of
the Devil, in the same name and in the same power was he to be restored
again: the ministers of reconciliation standing 2. Cor. 5.20.
in Christ's stead, and Christ himself being Matthew. 18.18, ^0.
in the mids of them that are thus gathered together in his name, to bind or
loose in heaven, whatsoever they according to his commission shall bind or
loose on earth. And here it is to be noted, that Anastasius (by some called
Nicaenus, by others Sinaita and Antiochenus) who is so eager against them which
say that Confession made unto men profits nothing at all; confesses yet,
that the minister in hearing the confession and instructing and correcting the
sinner, does but give furtherance only thereby unto his repentance, but that
the pardoning of the sin is the proper work of God. (...). Anastas. quaest.
6.
For man (says he) cooperateth with man unto repentance, and ministers, and
builds, and instructs, and reproves, in things belonging unto salvation,
(according to the Apostle, and the Prophet:) but God blotteth out the sins of
those that have confessed, saying; I am he that blotteth out thine iniquities
for mine own sake, and thy sins, and will not remember them.

There follows now another part of the ministry of reconciliation,
consisting in the due administration of the Sacraments: which being the proper
seals of the promises of the Gospel (as the Censures are of the threats) must
therefore necessarily also have reference to the Act. 2.38. Matthew. 26.28.
remission of sins. And so we see, the ancient Fathers do hold, that
Cyprian. epist. 76 ( sect. 4. edit. Pamelij, 8. Goulaertij.) Cyrill. Alexandr.
in Ioann. lib. 12. cap 56. Ambros. de Poenitent. lib. 1. cap. 7. Chrysostom. lib.
3 de Sacerdot. tom. 6 edit. Savil. page 17. lin. 7.5. Vid. and tom. 7. page
268. lin. 37.
the commission, Ioh. 20.23. Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, etc. is executed by the ministers of Christ, as well in the conferring of
Baptism, as in the reconciling of Penitents: yet so in both these, and in all
the sacraments likewise of both the Testaments, that August. quaest. in
Levitic. cap. 84. Optat. lib. 5. contra Donatist. Chrysostom. in Mat. 26. homil.
82. ( edit. Graec. vel 83. Latin.) in 1. Cor. 3. homil. 8. and in 2. Tim 1.
homil. 2. ( circa finem)
the ministry only is to be accounted man's, but the power Gods. For, as S.
Augustine well observes, Aliud enim est baptizare per ministeriu^, aliud
baptizare per potestatem. Aug. in Evang. Joan. tract. 5.
it is one thing to baptize by way of ministry, another thing to baptize by
way of power: Sibi tenuit Dominus baptizandi potestatem, servis ministerium
dedit. Id. ibid.
the power of baptizing the Lord retayneth to himself, the ministry he has
given to his servants: Potestatem dominici baptismi in nullum hominem a Domino
transituram, sed ministerium plane transiturum; potestatem a Domino in neminem
ministrorum, ministerium and in bonos and in malos. Id. ibid.
the power of the Lords Baptism was to pass from the Lord to no man, but the
ministry was; the power was to be transferred from the Lord unto none of his
ministers, the ministry was both unto the good and unto the bad. And the
reason which he assigns hereof is very good: Hoc noluit ideo, ut in illo
spes esset baptizatorum, a quo se baptizatos agnoscerent. Noluit ergo servum
ponere spem in servo. Id. ibid:
that the hope of the baptized might be in him, by whom they did acknowledge
themselves to have been baptized. The Lord therefore would not have a servant
to put his hope in a servant. And therefore those Schoolmen argued not much
amiss, that gathered this conclusion thence. Paris potestatis est interius
baptizare, and a culpa mortali absolvere. Sed Deus non debuit potestatem
baptizandi interius co^municare; ne spes poneretur in homine: Ergo pari ratione
nec potestatem absolvendi ab actuali. Alexand. de Hales.

Sum. part. 4. quaest. 21. memb. 1.


It is a matter of equal power to baptize inwardly, and to absolve from
mortal sin. But it was not fit, that God should communicate the power of
baptizing inwardly unto any; lest our hope should be reposed in man. Therefore
by the same reason it was not fit, that he should communicate the power of
absolving from actual sin unto any. So Bernard, or whosoever was the author
of the book entitled Scala Paradisi: Officium baptiza^di Dominus concessit
multis, potestatem vero and authoritatem in baptismo remittendi peccata sibi
soli retinuit: unde Ioannes antonomastice and discretive de eo dixit; Hic est
qui baptizat in Spiritu sancto. Seal. Paradis. cap. 3 tem. 9 operum Augustini.
The office of baptizing the Lord granted unto many, but the power and
authority of remitting sins in baptism he retained unto himself alone.
whence John by way of singularity and differencing said of him; He it is
which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. And the Baptist indeed does make a
singular difference betwixt the conferrer of the external and the internal
baptism, in saying: Mark. 1.8. Ioh. 1.26, 33.
I baptize with water, but it is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. While
John Illo operante dabat Deus, qui dando non deficit. Et nunc operantibus
cunctis, humana sunt opera, sed Dei sunt munera. Optat. lib. 5. contra Donatist.
did his service, God did give, who fails not in giving: and now when all
others do their service, the service is man's, but the gift is Gods; says
Optatus. and Arnaldus Bonaevallensis (the author of the twelve treatises de
Cardinalibus operibus Christi, falsely ascribed to S. Cyprian:) touching the
Sacraments in general: Remissio peccatorum, sive per baptismum sive per alia
sacramenta donetur proprie Spiritus sancti est; and ipsi soli hujus
efficientiae privilegium manet. Arnald. abbas Bonaevallis, tract. de Baptismo
Christi.
Forgiveness of sins, whether it be given by Baptism or by other
sacraments, is properly of the holy Ghost; and the privilege of effecting this
remains to him alone.

But the word of reconciliation is it, wherein the 2. Cor. 5.18, 19.
Apostle does especially place that ministry of reconciliation, which the
Lord has committed to his Ambassadors here upon earth. This is that key of
knowledge: which Clavis, quae and conscientia^ ad confessione^ peccati aperit,
and gratiam ad aeternitatem mysterii salutaris includit.

Maxim. Taurin. de natali Petri and Pauli. hom 5.


does both open the conscience to the confession of sin, and include therein
the grace of the healthful mystery unto eternity; as Maximus Taurinensis
speaks of it. This is that powerful means, which God has sanctified for
the washing away of the pollution of our souls. Now ye are clean (says our
Ioh. 15.13. Vid. Eph^s. 5.26. and August. in Evangel. Iohann. tract. 80.
Savior to his Apostles) through the word which I have spoken unto you. And
whereas every transgressor is Proverb. 5.22.
holden with the cords of his own sins: the Apostles, according to the
commission given unto them by their Master, that whatsoever they should loose
on earth should be loosed in heaven, did loose those cords by the word of God,
and the testimonies of the Scriptures, and exhortation unto virtues. as Funibus
peccatorum suoru^ unusquisque constringitur. Quos funes atque vincula solvere
possunt and Apostoli, imitantes magistrum suum qui eis dixerat: Quaecunque
solveritis super terram, erunt soluta and in coelo. Solvunt autem eos Apostoli
sermon Dei, and testimoniis scripturarum, and exhortatione virtutum. Hieronym.
lib. 6. comment. in Esai. cap. 14.
says S. Hierome: Thus likewise does S. Ambrose note, that Remittuntur peccata
per Dei verbum, cujus Levites interpres and quidam executor est. Ambros. de
Abel and Cain, lib. 2. cap. 4.
sins are remitted by the word of God, whereof the Levite was an interpreter
and a kind of an executer: and in that respect concludes, that Levites igitur
minister remissionis est. Id. ibid.
the Levite was a minister of this remission. As the Jewish Scribes therefore,
by Luke 11.52. compared with Matthew. 23.13.
taking away the key of knowledge, did shut up the kingdom of heaven against
men: so Matthew. 13.52.
every Scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, by Act. 14 27.
opening unto his hearers the door of faith, does as it were unlock that
kingdom unto them; being the instrument of God herein Act. 26.18.
to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ. And here are we
to understand, that the ministers of Christ, by applying the word of God unto
the consciences of men both in public and in private, do discharge that part
of their function which concerns forgiveness of sins, partly operatively,
partly declaratively. Operatively: inasmuch as God is pleased to use their
preaching of the Gospel as a means of Act. 10.44. Gal. 3.2. 2. Cor. 3 6.
conferring his spirit upon the sons of men, of 1. Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19.
begetting them in Christ, and of Romans 10.17. Ioh. 17.20. 1. Cor. 3.5. Act.
14.27. and chap. 26. ver. 18, 20.
working faith and repentance in them; whereby the remission of sins is
obtained. Thus John Mark. 1.4.
preaching the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, and teaching
Act. 19.4.
the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that
is, on Christ Jesus; is said to Luke 1.16, 17.
turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just, by Ibid. verse 77.
giving knowledge of salvation to Gods people, unto the remission of their
sins. Not because he had properly any power given him to turn men's hearts,
and to work faith and repentance for forgiveness of sins when and where he
thought good: but because he was trusted with the ministry of the Act. 20.32.
Psalm. 19.7. and 119. verse. 50, 93.
word of Gods grace, which is able to convert and quicken men's souls, and to
give them an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. by the powerful
application of which word, Iam. 5.20.
he who converteth the sinner from the error of his way, is said to save a
soul from death, and to hide a multitude of sins. For howsoever in true
propriety, Romans 4.6, 7. Ierem. 31.18. Revel. 1.18. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Act. 3.26.
Matthew. 1.21.
the covering of sins, the saving from death, and turning of men from their
iniquities, is a privilege peculiar to the Lord our God; unto whom alone it
appertains to 2. Cor. 5.19.
reconcile the world to himself* by not imputing their sins unto them: yet
inasmuch as he has committed unto his ambassadors the Ibid.
word of reconciliation, they in performing that work of their ministry, may
be as rightly said to be employed in reconciling men unto God, and procuring
remission of their sins; as they are said to Job. 33.23, 24.
deliver a man from going down into the pit, when they declare unto him his
righteousness, and to 1. Tim. 4.16.
save their hearers, when they 1. Cor. 15.1, 2. Act. 11.14.
preach unto them the Gospel, by which they are saved.

For as the word it self which they speak, is said to be Ioh. 17.20.
their word, which yet 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
is in truth the word of God: so the work which is effectually wrought by that
word in them that believe, is said to be their work, though in truth it be the
proper work of God. And as they that believe by their word, are said to be
their Epistle, 2. Cor. 3.2. that is to say, the Epistle of Christ ministered by
them (as it is expounded in the verse following:) in like manner, forgiveness
of sins and those other great graces that appertain to the believers, may be
said to be their work, that is to say, the work of Christ ministered by them.
For in very deed (as Optatus speaks in the matter of Baptism) Has res
unicuique, non ejusdem rei operarius, sed credentis fides and Trinitas
praestat. Optat. lib. 5. contra Donatist.
not the minister, but the faith of the believer and the Trinity do bring
these things unto every man. And where the preaching of the Gospel does prove
Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. ^.18.
the power of God unto salvation; only the weakness of the external
ministry must be ascribed to men, but 2. Cor. 4.7.
the excellency of the power must ever be acknowledged to be of God, and not of
them: 1. Cor. 3.7.
neither he that planteth, being here any thing, neither he that waters, but
God that gives the increase. For howsoever in respect of the former, such as
take pains in the Lords husbandry may be accounted (...), as the Ibid. verse. 9.
Apostle terms them, laborers together with God (though that little piece of
service it self also be not performed by their own strength, but Ibid. verse.
10.
according to the grace of God which is given unto them:) yet Iam vero quod
sequitur, Sed Deus incrementum dedit; non per illos, sed per seipsum facit.
Excedit hoc humanam humilitatem, excedit angelicam sublimitatem, nec omnino
pertinet, nisi ad agr^colam Trinitatem, Aug. in Evangel. Ioann. tract. 80.
that which follows, of giving the increase, God effects not by them, but
by himself. This (says S. Augustine) exceeds the lowliness of man, this
exceeds the sublimitie of Angels, neither appertains unto any but unto the
husbandman the Trinity.

Now as the Spirit of God does not only 1. Cor. 12.11.
wo^ke diversities of graces in us, distributing to every man severally as he
will; but also makes us to 1. Cor. 2.12.
know the things that are freely given to us of God: so the ministers of the
New Testament, being 1. Cor. 3.6.
made able ministers of the same spirit, are not only ordained to be Gods
instruments to work faith and repentance in men, for the obtaining of
remission of sins, but also to declare Gods pleasure unto such as believe and
repent, and in his name to certify them and give assurance to their
consciences that their sins are forgiven. they having Act. 20.24.
received this ministry of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God; and so by their function being appointed to be witnesses rather
then conferrers of that grace. For it is here with them in the loosing part, as
it is in the binding part of their ministry; where they are brought in, like
unto those seven Angels in the book of the Revelation, Revel. 16.1.
which power out the vialls of the wrath of God upon the earth; 2. Cor. 10.6.
having vengeance ready against all disobedience, and a charge from God, to
I^rem. 15.1.
cast men out of his sig^t: not because they are properly the avengers (for
that Psalm. 94.1.
title God challenges unto himself) or that vengeance did any way appertain
unto them (for Romans 12.19. Hebr. 10.30.
it is written: Vengeance is mine, I will repay; says the Lord) but because
they were the denouncers, not the inflicters of this vengeance. So though it be
the Lord that Ierem. 18.7, 9.
speaks concerning a nation, to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy, or
on the other side, to build and to plant it; yet he Ierem. 1.9, 10
in whose mouth God put those words of his, is said to be set by him over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, to build and to plant: as if he himself were a
doer of those great matters, who was only Ibid verse. 5, ^.
ordained to be a Prophet unto the nations, to speak the things unto them
which God had commanded him. Thus likewise in the thirteenth of Leviticus,
where the Laws are set down that concern the leprosy, which was a type of
the pollution of sin, we meet often with these speeches, (...).
The Priest shall cleanse him, and, (...).
The Priest shall pollute him, and in the 44. verse, (...).
The Priest with pollution shall pollute him: Contaminatione contaminabit eum,
haud dubium quin Sacerdos: non quo contaminationis author sit, sed quo ostendat
eum contaminatum, qui prius mundus plurimis videbatur. Hieronym. lib. 7. in
Esai. cap 23.
not (says S. Hierome) that he is the author of the pollution, but that he
declares him to be polluted, who before did seem unto many to have been
clean. Whereupon the Master of the Sentences (following herein S. Hierome, and
being afterward therein followed himself by many others) observes, that In
remittendis vel in retinendis culpis id juris and officii habent Evangelici
sacerdotes, quod olim habebant sub lege legales in curandis leprosis. Hi ergo
peccata dimittunt vel retinent, dum dimissa a Deo vel retenta indicant and
ostendunt. Ponunt enim sacerdotes nomen Domini super filios Israel, sed ipse
benedixit; sicut legitur in Numeris. Petr. Lombard. lib. 4. Sentent. did. 14.
f.
in remitting or retayning sins the Priests of the Gospel have that right
and office, which the legal Priests had of old under the Law in curing of the
lepers. These therefore (says he) forgive sins or retain them, whiles they
show and declare that they are forgiven or retained by God. For the Priests put
the name of the Lord upon the children of Israel, but it was he himself that
blessed them, as it is read in Numbers. The place that he has referrence unto,
is in the sixth chapter of that book, where the Priests are commanded to
bless the people, by saying unto them, The Lord bless thee, etc. and then it
follows (in the last verse of that chapter:) So they shall put my Name upon
the children of Israel, and I will bless them.

Neither do we grant hereupon, (as the Bellarmin. de Poenitent. lib 3. cap. 2.
sect. ult.
Adversary falsely charge us) that a layman, yea or a woman, or a child,
or any infidel, or the Devil (the Father of all calumniators and liars) or a
Parrat likewise, if he be taught the words, may as well absolve as the Priest as
if 1. Cor. 4.19, 20.
the speech were all the thing that here were to be considered, and not the
power: where we are taught, that the kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power. Indeed if the Priests by their office brought nothing with them but the
ministry of the bare letter, a Parrat peradventure might be taught to sound
that letter as well as they: but we believe, that 2. Cor. 3.6.
God has made them able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but
of the spirit. and that the Gospel ministered by them 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
comes unto us not in word only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost,
and in much assurance. For God has added a special Romans 10.15.
beauty to the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, that howsoever
others may bring glad tidings of good things to the penitent sinner as truly
as they do; yet neither can they do it with the same authority, neither is
it to be expected that they should do it with such power, such assurance, and
such full satisfaction to the afflicted conscience. The speech of every
Christian (we know) should be employed Ephesians. 4.29.
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers; and a
private brother in his place may deliver found doctrine, reprehend vice, exhort
to righteousness, very commendably: yet has the Lord notwithstanding all
this, for the necessary use of his Church, appointed public officers to do
the same things, and has given unto them a peculiar 2. Cor. 10.8. and 13.10.
power for edification, wherein they may boast above others; and in the due
execution whereof God is pleased to make them instruments of ministering a more
plentiful measure of grace unto their hearers, then may be ordinarily looked
for from others. These men are appointed to be of Gods high commission, and
therefore they may Tit. 2.15.
speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authoritie^ they are Gods Revel. 1.20.
Angels and 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors for Christ, and therefore in delivering their message are to be
Gal. 4.14.
received as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus. that look how the Prophet
Esaias was comforted, when the Angel said unto him, Esaias. 6.7.
Thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged; and the poor woman in
the Gospel, when Jesus said unto her, Luke 7.48.
Thy sins are forgiven: the like consolation does the distressed sinner
receive from the mouth of the Minister, when he has compared the truth of
Gods word faithfully delivered by him, with the work of Gods grace in his own
heart. according to that of Elihu: Job. 33.23.24.
If there be an Angel or a messenger with him, an Interpreter, one of a
thousand, to declare unto man his righteousness; then will God have mercy upon
him and say, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have received a
reconciliation. For as it is the office of this messenger and interpreter, to
2. Cor. 5.20.
pray us in Christ's stead, that we would be reconciled to God: so when we have
listened unto this motion, and submitted our selves to the Gospel of peace, it
is a part of his office likewise to declare unto us in Christ's stead, that we
are reconciled to God: and 2. Cor. 13.3.
in him Christ himself must be acknowledged to speak, who to us ward by this
means is not weak, but is mighty in us.

But our new Masters will not content themselves with such a ministerial power
of forgiving sins as has been spoken of; unless we yield that they have
authority so to do properly, directly, and absolutely: that is, unless we
acknowledge that their high Priest sits in the Temple of God as God, and all
his creatures as so many demigods under him. For we Oportet dicere, in summo
Pontifice esse plenitudinem omnium gratiarum; quia ipse solus confert plenam
indulgentiam omnium peccatorum. ut competat sibi, quod de primo principe Domino
dicimus; quia de plenitudine ejus nos omnes accepimus. De regimine Principum,
lib. 3. cap. 10 inter opuscula Thomae, number. 20.
must say (if we will be drunk with the drunken) that in this high Priest
there is the fullness of all graces; because he alone gives a full indulgence
of all sins: that this may agree unto him, which we say of the chief prince
our Lord, that of his fullness all we have received. Nay we must acknowledge,
that the meanest in the whole army of Priests that follows this king of
pride, has such fullness of power derived unto him for the opening and
shutting of heaven before men: that Negatur remissio illis, quibus noluerint
Sacerdotes remittere. Bellar. de Poenit. lib. 3. cap. 2.
forgiveness is denied to them, whom the Priest will not forgive; and his
Absolution on the other side is a sacramental act, which conferreth grace by
the work wrought, that is, (as they Active, and proxime, atque
instrumentali^er efficit gratiam jus^ificationis. Id. de Sacrament. in genere,
lib. 2. cap. 1.
expound it) actively, and immediately, and instrumentally effects the grace
of justification in such as receive it. that Vt flatus extinguit ignem, and
dissi^at n^bulas; sic etiam Absolutio Sacerdotis peccata dispergit, and
evanescere facit. Id. de Poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 2.
as the wind does extinguish the fire, and dispell the clouds; so does the
Priests absolution scatter sins, and make them to vanish away: the sinner
being thereby immediately acquitted before God, howsoever that sound conversion
of heart be wanting in him, which otherwise would be requisite. for Id. ibid.
sect. penult.
a conditional Absolution, upon such terms as these, If thou do believe
and repent as thou ought to do, is (in these men's judgment) to no purpose,
and can give no security to the penitent; seeing it depends upon an
uncertain condition. Have we not then just cause to say unto them, as Optat.
lib. 5.
Optatus did unto the Donatistes: Nolite vobis Majestatis dominium vendicare?
Intrude not upon the royal prerogative of our Lord and Master. No man may
challenge this absolute power of the keys, but Revel. 3.7.
he that has the key of David, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts
and no man opens; he to whom Ioh. 17.2.
the Father has given power over all flesh, yea Matthew. 18.18.
all power in heaven and in earth; even the eternal Son of God, who has in
his hands Revel. 1.18.
the keys of death, and is able to Ioh. 5.21.
quicken whom he will.

The Ministers of the Gospel may not meddle with the matter of soveraignetie,
and think that they have power to proclaim war or conclude peace betwixt
God and man, according to their own discretion: they must remember, that they
are 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors for Christ, and therefore in this treaty are to proceed according
to the instructions which they have received from their sovereign; which if
they do transgress, they go beyond their commission, therein they do not
(...) but (...), and their authority for so much is plainly void. The Bishop
(says S. Gregory, and the Fathers in the Council of Aquisgran following him)
Saepe in solvendis ac ligandis subditis suae voluntatis motus, non autem
caussarum merita sequitur. Vnde fit ut ipsa hac ligandi and solvendi potestate
se privet; qui hanc pro suis voluntatibus, and non pro subjectorum moribus
exercet. Gregor. in Evangel. homil. 26. Council. Aquisgran sub Ludovico Pio,
cap. 37.
in loosing and binding those that are under his charge, does follow oftentimes
the motions of his own will, and not the merit of the causes. Whence it
comes to pass, that he depriveth himself of this power of binding and
loosing, who does exercise the same according to his own will, and not
according to the manners of them which be subject unto him. that is to say, he
makes himself worthy to be deprived of that power, which he has thus abused;
(as the Qui indignos ligat vel solvit, propria potestate se private, id est,
dignum privatione se facit. Petr. Lombard. lib. 4. Sentent. did. 18. C.
Master of the Sentences and Private, id est, meretur privari. ^o. Semeca.
Gloss. Great. cause. 11. quaest 3. cap. 60. Ipse ligandi.
Semeca in his Gloss upon Gratian, would have S. Gregory's meaning to be
expounded) and pro tanto (as has been said) actually voideth himself of this
power, this unrighteous judgment of his given upon earth, being no ways
ratified, but absolutely disanulled in the court of heaven. For he who by his
office is appointed to be a minister of Ephesians. 1.13. Iam. 1.18.
the word of truth, has no power given him to 2. Cor. 13.8.
do any thing against the truth, but for the truth: neither is it to be
imagined, that the sentence of man, who is subject to deceive and be deceived,
should any ways prejudice the sentence of God, whose Romans 2.2.
judgment we know to be always according to the truth. Therefore does
Pacianus, in the end of his first epistle to Sympronianus the Novatian, show
that at that time, absolution was Scio frater, hanc ipsam poenitentiae veniam
non passim omnibus dari, etc. Pacian. epist. 1.
not so easily given unto penitents, as now a days it is: but Magno pondere
magnoque libramine, post multos gemitus effusionemque lachrymaru^, post totius
Ecclesiae preces, ita venia^ verae poenitentiae non negari, ut judicaturo
Christo nemo praejudicet. Ibid.
with great pondering of the matter and with great deliberation, after many
sighs and shedding of tears, after the prayers of the whole Church, pardon
was so not denied unto tr^e repentance, that Christ being to judge, no man
should prejudge him. and a little before, speaking of the Bishop by whose
ministry this was done: Reddet quidem ille rationem, si quid perperam
fecerit, vel si corrupt and impie judicarit. Nec praejudicator Deo, quo minus
mali aedificatoris opera rescindat: interea, si pia illa administratio est,
adjutor Dei operum perseverat, Id. ibid.
He shall give an account (says he) if he have done any thing amiss, or if
he have judged corruptly and wickedly. Neither is there any prejudice done
unto God, whereby he might not undo the works of this evil builder: but in
the mean time, if that administration of his be godly, he continues a helper
of the works of God. Wherein he does but tread in the steps of S. Cyprian, who
at the first rising of the Novatian heresy, wrote in the same manner unto
Antonianus. Neque enim praejudicamus Domino judicaturo, quo minus si
poenitentiam plena^ and justam peccatoris invenerit, tunc ratum faciat quod a
nobis fuerit hic starutum. si vero nos aliquis poenitentiae simulatione
deluserit; Deus qui non deridetur, and qui cor hominis intuetur, de his quae
nos minus perspeximus judicet, and servorum sententiam Dominus emendet. Cypr.
epist. 52. sect. 11. ( edit Goulart.)
We do not prejudice the Lord that is to judge, but that he, if he find the
repentance of the sinner to be full and just, he may then ratify that which
shall be here ordained by us: but if any one do deceive us with the semblance
of repentance, God (who is not mocked, and who beholds the heart of man) may
judge of those things which we did not well discern, and the Lord may amend
the sentence of the servants.

Hereupon S. Hierome, expounding those words, Daniel 4.24. It may be God will
pardon thy sins; reproves those men of great rashness, that are so
peremptory and absolute in their absolutions. Cum beatus Daniel, praescius
futurorum, de sententia Dei dubitet: rem temeraria^ faciunt, qui audacter
peccatoribus indulgentiam pollicentur. Hieronym. in Daniel. cap. 4.
When blessed Daniel (says he) who knew things to come, does doubt of the
sentence of God: they do a rash deed, that boldly promise pardon unto sinners.
S. Basil also resolves us, that (...). Basil regul. brevior. qu. 25.
the power of forgiving is not given absolutely; but upon the obedience of the
penitent, and his consent with him that has the care of his soul. For it is
in loosing, as it is in binding. Coepisti habere fratrem tuum tanquam
publicanum: ligas illum in terra. Sed ut just alliges, vide. Nam injusta
vincula dirumpit justitia. August. de ve^bis Domini, sermon. 16. cap. 4.
Thou have begun to esteem thy brother as a publican, (says S. Augustine:)
thou bindest him upon earth. But look that thou bindest him justly. For unjust
bonds justice does break. So when the Priest says, I absolve thee: Maldonat
confesses, that he means no more thereby but, Quantum in me est, ego te
absolvo. Maldonat. tom. 2. de poenitent. part. 3. these. 5.
As much as in me lies, I absolve thee: and Suarez acknowledges, that it
implicity includes this condition, Nisi suscipiens obicem ponat. Fr. Suarez.
in Thom. tom. 4. disp. 19 sect. 2. number. 20.
Unless the receiver put some impediment; for which he alleges the
authority of Hugo de S. Victore, lib. 2. de Sacramentis, pa. 14. s. 8.
affirming, Hanc forma^ magis significare virtutem suam, quam eventum. Hugo.
that this form does rather signify the power and virtue, then the event of
the absolution. And therefore does the Master of the Sentences rightly observe,
that Ita and hic aperte ostenditur, quod non semper sequitur Deus Ecclesiae
judicium: quae per surreptionem and ignorantiam interdum iudicat; Deus autem
semper iudicat secundum veritate^. Petr. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. distinct.
18. f.
God does not evermore follow the judgment of the Church: which sometimes
judges by surreption and ignorance; whereas God does always judge according
to the truth. So the Priests Aliquando enim ostendunt solutos vel ligatos, qui
ita non sunt apud Deum: and poena satisfactionis vel excommunicationis interdum
indignos ligant vel solvunt; and indignos sacramentis admittunt, and dignos
admitti arcent. Sed intelligendum est hoc in illis, quorum merita solvi vel
ligari postulant. Tunc enim sententia Sacerdotis iudicio Dei and totius
coelestis curiae approbatur and confirmatur, cum ita ex discretione procedit,
ut reorum merita non contradicant. Quoscunque ergo solvunt vel ligant,
adhibentes clavem discretionis reorum meritis, solvuntur vel ligantur in
coelis, id est, apud Deum: quia divino iudicio Sacerdotis sententia sic
progressa approbatur and confirmatur. Id. ibid. h. Vid Gabriel Biel, in eand.
distinct. 18. quaest. 1. lit. b.
sometime declare men to be loosed or bound, who are not so before God: with
the penalty of satisfaction or excommunication they sometime bind such as are
unworthy, or loose them; they admit them that be unworthy to the Sacraments,
and put back them that be worthy to be admitted. That saying therefore of
Christ must be understood to be verified in them (says he) whose merits do
require that they should be loosed or bound. For then is the sentence of the
Priest approved and confirmed by the judgment of God and the whole court of
heaven, when it does proceed with that discretion, that the merits of them who
be dealt withal do not contradict the same. Whomsoever therefore they do
loose or bind, using the key of discretion according to the parties merits,
they are loosed or bound in heaven, that is to say, with God: because the
sentence of the Priest proceeding in this manner, is approved and confirmed by
divine judgment. Thus far the Master of the Sentences: who is followed
herein by the rest of the Schoolmen; who generally agree, that the power of
binding and loosing committed to the Ministers of the Church, is not absolute,
but must be limited with Clave non errante, as being then only of force Quod
in terra Sacerdos clave non errante, and recto iudicio procedens retinet, nec
dimittit; Deus etiam in coelo retinet, nec dimittit. Tolet. comment. in Johan.
20.
when matters are carried with right judgment, and no error is committed in
the use of the keys.

Our Savior therefore must still have the privilege reserved unto him, of
being the absolute Lord over his own house: it is sufficient for his officers,
that they be esteemed as Moses was, Hebr 10.5, 6.
faithful in all his house as servants. The place wherein they serve, is a
Stewards place: and the Apostle tells them, 1. Cor. 4.2.
that it is required in Stewards, that the man be found faithful. They may not
therefore carry themselves in their office, as the Luke 16.6, 7, 8.
unjust steward did, and presume to strike out their Masters debt without his
direction, and contrary to his liking. Now we know that our Lord has given no
authority unto his stewards, to grant an acquittance unto any of his debtors,
that bring not unfayned faith and repentance with them. Nec angelus potest, nec
archangelus: Dominus ipse, (qui solus potest dicere; Ego vobiscum sum) si
peccaverimus, nisi poenitentiam deferentibus non relaxat. Ambr. epist. 28. ad
Theodosium Imp.
Neither Angel nor Archangell can, neither yet the Lord himself, (who alone
can say; I am with you) when we have sinned, does release us, unless we
bring repentance with us: says S. Ambrose. and Eligius Bishop of Noyon, in his
Sermon unto the Penitents: Ante omnia autem vobis scire necesse est; quia licet
impositionem manuum nostrarum accipere cupiatis, tamen absolutionem peccatorum
vestrorum consequi non potestis, antequam per compunctionis gratiam divina
pietas vos absolvere dignabitur. Eligius Nouiomens. homil. 11. tom. 7.
Biblioth. Patr. page 248. edit. Colon.
Before all things it is necessary you should know, that howsoever you desire
to receive the imposition of our hands; yet you cannot obtain the absolution
of your sins, before the divine piety shall vouchsafe to absolve you by the
grace of compunction. To think therefore that it lies in the power of any
Priest truly to absolve a man from his sins, without implying the condition
of his believing and repenting as he ought to do; is both presumption and
madness in the highest degree. Neither dares Cardinal Bellarmine, who
censureth this conditional absolution in us for idle and superfluous, when he
has considered better of the matter, assume unto himself, or communicate unto
his brethren, the power of giving an absolute one. For he is driven to confess
with other of his fellows, that when the Priest Nam qui dicit; Ego te baptizo,
vel absolvo, non affirmat se absolute baptizare vel absolvere, eum non ignoret,
multis modis fieri posse, ut neque baptizet neque absolvat, licet ea verba
pronunciet: nimi^um si is, qui Sacramentum suscipere videtur, forte non habeat
suscipiendi intentionem, vel non sit rite dispositus, aut obicem ponat. Igitur
Minister illis verbis nihil aliud significat, nisi se, quod in se est,
Sacramentum reconciliationis vel absolutionis impendere, quod vim habet in
homine disposito peccata omnia dimittendi. Bellarmin. de Poenitent. lib. 2.
cap. 14. sect. penult.
says, I absolve thee, he does not affirm that he does absolve absolutely; as
not being ignorant, that it may many ways come to pass that he does not
absolve, although he pronounce those words: namely if he who seems to
receive this Sacrament (for so they call it) peradventure has no intention to
receive it, or is not rightly disposed, or puts some block in the way.
Therefore the Minister (says he) signifies nothing else by those words, but
that he, as much as in him lies, conferreth the sacrament of reconciliation
or absolution, which in a man rightly disposed has virtue to forgive all his
sins.

Now that Contrition is at all times necessarily required for obtaining
remission of sins and justification, is a matter determined by the Fathers of
Council. Tridentin. sess. 14. cap. 4.
Trent. But mark yet the mystery. They equivocate with us in the term of
Contrition: and make a distinction thereof into perfect and imperfect. The
former of these is Contrition properly: the latter they call Attrition. which
howsoever in it self it be not true Contrition, yet when the Priest with his
power of forgiving sins interposeth himself in the business, they tell us
that A^t^i^io virtute clavium sit contritio. Romani Corrector^s Gloss.
Gratiani, De poeni^e^t. d^stinct. 1. in principi^: and alij passi^n.
attrition by virtue of the keys is made contrition: that is to say, that a
sorrow arising from a servile fear of punishment, and such a fruitless Matthew.
27.3.4.5.
repentance as the reprobate may carry with them to hell, by virtue of the
Priests absolution is made so fruitful, that it shall serve the turn for
obteyning forgiveness of sins; as if it had been that 2. Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow which works repentance to salvation not to be repented of. By
which spiritual coosenage, many poor souls are most miserably deluded, while
they persuade themselves that upon the receipt of the Priests acquittance upon
this carnal sorrow of theirs, all skores are cleared until that day: and then
beginning upon a new reckoning, they sin and confess, confess and sin
afresh, and tread this round so long till they put off all thought of saving
repentance; and so the Matthew. 15.14.
blind following the blind, both at last fall into the pit.

Mali and facinorosi, carnales, animales, diabolici, a seductoribus suis sibi
da^i arbitrantur, quae non nisi munera Dei sunt, sive sacramenta sive
spiritales aliquas operationes, circa praesentem salutem. August. de Baptism.
contra Donatist lib. 3. cap. ult.
Evil and wicked, carnal, natural, and divellish men (says S. Augustine)
imagine those things to be given unto them by their seducers, which are only
the gifts of God, whether sacraments, or any other spiritual works,
concerning their present salvation. But such as are thus seduced, may do well
to listen a little to this grave admonition of S. Cyprian. Nemo se fallat, nemo
se decipiat: solus Dominus misereri potest. Veniam peccatis, quae in ipsum
commissa sunt, solus potest ille largiri, qui peccata nostra portavit, qui pro
nobis doluit, quem Deus tradidit pro peccatis nostris. Homo Deo esse non potest
major; nec remittere aut donare indulgentia sua servus potest, quod in Dominum
delicto graviore commissum est: ne adhuc lapso and hoc accedat ad crimen, si
nesciat esse praedictum; Maledictus homo qui spem habet in homine. Cyprian. de
Lapsis (sect. 7. edit. Pamel. 14. Goulart.)
Let no man deceive, let no man beguile himself: it is the Lord alone that can
show mercy. He alone can grant pardon to the sins committed against him, who
did himself bear our sins, who suffered grief for us, whom God did deliver
for our sins. Man cannot be greater then God; neither can the servant by his
indulgence remit or pardon that which by heinous trespass is committed against
the Lord: lest to him that is fallen this yet be added as a further crime, if
he be ignorant of that which is said; Cursed is the man that puts his trust
in man. Whereupon S. Augustine sticks not to say, that good ministers do
consider that Ministri enim sunt, pro ^udicibus haberi nolunt, spem in se poni
exhorrescunt. August. in Evangel. Johan. tract. 5.
they are but ministers, they would not be held for Judges, they abhor that
any trust should be put in them: and that the power of remitting and retayning
sins is committed unto the Church, to be dispensed therein, No secundum
arbitrium hominum, sed secundum arbitrium Dei. August. de Baptism. contra
Donatist. lib. 3. cap. 18.
not according to the arbitrament of man, but according to the arbitrament of
God. Whereas our adversaries lay the foundation of their Babel upon another
ground: that Christus instituit Sacerdotes iudices super terram cum ea
potestate, ut sine ipsorum sententia nemo post Baptismu^ lapsus reconciliari
possit. Bellarm. de Poenit. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Christ has appointed Priests to be Judges upon earth with such power, that
none falling into sin after Baptism may be reconciled without their
sentence; and has Igitur in horum a^bitrio munus solvendi and ligandi,
remittendi and retinendi peccata hominum, a Christo Domino, per Spiritum
sanctum fuisse positum, liquido constat. Baron. An^al. tom. 1. ann. 34. s^ct.
197.
put the authority of binding and loosing, of forgiving and retayning the
sins of men, in their arbitrament.

Whether the Ministers of the Gospel may be accounted Judges in some sort, we
will not much contend: for we dislike neither that saying of S. Hierome, that
Qui claves regni coelorum habentes, quodammodo ante iudicii diem iudicant.
Hieronym. epist. 1. ad Heliodorum.
having the keys of the kingdom of heaven, they judge after a sort before the
day of judgment; nor that other of S. Gregory, that the Apostles, and such as
succeed them in the government of the Church, Principatum superni iudicii
sortiuntur, ut vice Dei quibusdam peccata retineant, quibusdam relaxent.
Gregor. h^mil. 26. in Evangel.
obtain a principality of judgment from above, that they may in Gods stead
retain the sins of some, and release the sins of others. All the question
is, in what sort they do judge, and whether the validity of their judgment
do depend upon the truth of the conversion of the penitent: wherein if our
Romanists would stand to the judgment of S. Hierome or S. Gregory (one of whom
they make a Cardinal, and the other a Pope of their own Church) the
controversy betwixt us would quickly be at an end. For S. Hierome, expounding
that speech of our Savior, touching the keys of the kingdom of heaven, in
the sixteenth of S. Matthew; Istum locu^ Episcopi and Presbyteri non
intelligentes, aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum assumunt supercilio: ut vel damnent
innocents vel solvere se noxios arbitrentur: cum apud Deu^ non sententia
Sacerdotum, sed reorum vita quaer^tur Legimus in Levitico de leprosis, ubi
iubentur, ut ostendant se Sacerdotibus, and si lepram habuerint, tunc a
Sacerdote immundi fiant: non quo Sacerdotes leprosos f^ciant and immundos: sed
quo habeant notitiam leprosi and non leprosi, and possint discernere, qui
mundus quive immundus sit. Quomodo ergo ibi leprosum Sacerdos mundum vel
immundum facit: sic and hi alligat vel solvit Episcopus and Presbyter, non eos
qui insontes sunt vel noxii, sed pro officio suo, cum peccatorum audierit
varietates, scit qui ligandus scit quive solvendus, Hieronym. commentar. in
Matthew. cap. 16.
The Bishops and Priests, says he, not understanding this place, assume to
themselves somewhat of the Pharisees arrogancy: as imagining, that they may
either condemn the innocent, or absolve the guilty; whereas it is not the
sentence of the Priests, but the life of the parties that is inquired of with
God. In the book of Leviticus we read of the Lepers, where they are
commanded to show themselves to the Priests, and if they shall have the
leprosy, that then they shall be made unclean by the Priest. not that the
Priests should make them leprous and unclean, but that they should take notice
who was a leper and who was not, and should discern who was clean and who
unclean. Therefore as there the Priest does make the leper clean or unclean;
so here the Bishop or Priest does bind or loose: not bind the innocent, or
loose the guilty; but when according to his office he hears the variety of
sins, he knows who is to be bound and who to be loosed. Thus far S.
Hierome.

S. Gregory likewise in the very same place from whence the Romanists fetch
that former sentence, does thus declare in what manner that principality of
judgment, which he spoke of, should be exercised: being therein also followed
step by step, by the Fathers of the Council of Aquisgran. Caussae ergo
pensandae sunt, and tunc ligandi atque solvendi potestas exercenda. Videndu^
est quae culpa, aut quae sit poenitentia secuta post culpam: ut quos omnipotens
Deus per compunctionis gratiam visitat, illos Pastoris sententia absolvat. Tunc
enim vera est absolutio praesidentis: cum aeterni arbitrium sequitur Iudicis.
Gregor. in Evangel. homil. 26. Council. Aquisgran. cap. 37.
The causes ought to be weighed, and then the power of binding and loosing
exercised. It is to be seen, what the fault is, and what the repentance is
that has followed after the fault: that such as almighty God does visit with
the grace of compunction, those the sentence of the Pastor may absolve. For the
absolution of the Prelate is then true, when it follows the arbitrament of
the eternal Judge. And this do they illustrate by that which we read in the
Gospel of the raising of Lazarus, Ioh. 11.44. that Christ did first of all
give life to him that was dead by himself, and then commanded others to loose
him, and let him go. Ecce illum discipuli iam viventem solvunt: quem magister
resuscitaverat mortuum. Si enim discipuli Lazarum mortuum solverent: foetorem
magis ostenderent quam virtutem. Ex qua consideratione intuendum est: quod
illos nos debemus per pastoralem auctoritatem solvere, quos auctorem nostrum
cognoscimus per suscitantem gratiam vivificare. ^idem ibidem. and El^gius
Noviomens homil. 11. tom. 7: Bibliothec. Pa^r. page 248. ^dit. Colon.
Behold (say they) the disciples do loose him being now alive; whom their
Master had raised up being dead. For if the disciples had loosed Lazarus being
dead: they should have discovered a stinche more then a virtue. By which
consideration we may see: that by our Pastoral authority we ought to
loose those, whom we know that our Author and Lord has revived with his
quickening grace. The same application also do we find made, not only by P.
Lombard. lib. 4. Sent. did. 18. lit. f. Alexand. de Hales, Sum. part. 4.
quaest. 2^. membr. 1. etc.
Peter Lombard, and other of the Schoolmen, but also by Iudocus Clichtoveus,
not long before the time of the Council of Trent. Sed ante prodiit redivivus
Lazarus ex s^pulchro, and deinde ut solveretur a discipulis and sineretur abire
a Domino jussum est: quia peccatorem etiam consuetudine committendi reatus
gravatu^, prius Dominus intrinsecus per seipsum vivificat, postea vero eundem
per Sacerdotum ministeriu^ absolvit. Nullus quippe peccator absolvendus est,
antequam per dignam poenitentiam correctus, and intrinsecus appareat
vivificatus. Vivificare autem interius peccatore^ solius Dei munus est, qui per
Proph^tam dicit: Ego sum qui deleo iniquitates vestras. Clichtov. in Evangel.
Ioann. lib. 7. cap. 23. inter opera Cyrilli.
Lazarus (says Clichtoveus) first of all came forth alive out of the
sepulcher, and then was commandment given by our Lord that he should be
loosed by the disciples and suffered to go his way: because the Lord does first
inwardly by himself quicken the sinner, and afterward absolveth him by the
Priests ministry. For no sinner is to be absolved, before it appears that
he be amended by due repentance, and be quickened inwardly. But inwardly to
quicken the sinner, is the office of God alone, who says by the Prophet: I am
he that blotteth out your iniquities.

The truth therefore of the Priests absolution, depends upon the truth and
sincerity of Gods quickening grace in the heart of the Penitent: which if it be
wanting, all the absolutions in the world will stand him in no stead. For
example, our Savior says: M^tth. 6.14, 15. etc. 18.35.
If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you; but, if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses. and in this respect (as is observed by Sedulius) In
aliorum personis aut absolvimur aut ligamur. Sedul. lib. 2. Paschalis Operis,
cap. 11.
in other men's persons we are either absolved or bound: -- Id. lib. 2. Paschal.
Carm.
graviusque soluti
Nectimur, alterius si solvere vincla negamus.
Suppose now, that a man who cannot find in his heart to forgive the wrong done
unto him by another, is absolved here by the Priest from all his sins
(according to the usual form of Absolution:) are we to think that what is
thus loosed upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven? and that Christ, to make the
Priests word true, will make his own false? And what we say of charity
toward man, must much more be understood of the love of God and the love of
righteousness: the defect whereof is not to be supplied by the absolution of
any Priest. It has been always observed for a special difference betwixt
good and bad men, that the one Odetunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Horas. lib.
1. epist. 16.
hated sin for the love of virtue, the other only for the fear of
punishment. The like difference do our Adve^saries make betwixt Contrition and
Attrition: Fatemur enim perfectum odium peccati esse illud, quod ex amore Dei,
justitiaeque procedit; and ideo dolorem, sive odium ex timore poenae conceptu^,
non Contritionem, sed Attritione^ nominamus. B^llarm. lib. 2. de Poenitent.
cap. 18.
that the hatred of sin, in the one proceeds from the love of God and of
righteousness; in the other, from the fear of punishment. and yet teach for
all this, that Id. ibid.
Attrition (which they confess would not otherwise suffice to justify a man)
being joined with the Priests Absolution, is sufficient for that purpose: he
that was attrite being by virtue of this Absolution made contrite, and
justified, that is to say, he that was led only by a servile fear, and
consequently was to be rancked among disordered and evil persons, being by
this means put in as good case for the matter of the forgiveness of his
sins, as he that loves God sincerely. For they themselves do grant, that
Argumentu^ recte probat eos, qui timorem servilem habeat, inordinatos ac malos
esse etc. Id. ibid.
such as have this servile fear, from whence Attrition issues, are to be
accounted evil and disordered men, by reason of their want of charity: to
which purpose also they allege that saying of Gregory, Recti diligunt te, non
recti adhuc timent te. Such as be righteous love thee, such as be not right^ous
as yet fear thee.

But they have taken an order notwithstanding, that non recti shall stand recti
in curia with them: by assuming a strange authority unto themselves of
justifying the wicked (a thing, we know, that has the curse of Prove. 17.15.
God and Prove. 24.24.
man threatened unto it) and making men friends with God, that have not the love
of God dwelling in them. For although we be taught by the word of God, that 1.
Ioh. 4.18.
perfect love casts out fear; that we Romans 8.15.
have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of
adoption whereby we cry Abba, father; that mount Sinai (which Heb. 12.18, 21.
makes those that come unto it to fear and quake) Gal. 4.24, 25, 31.
engenders to bondage, and is to be cast out with her children, from
inheriting the promise; and that 1. Cor. 13.2, 3. Vid. authorem libri de vera
and fall a poenitentia cap. 17 inter opera Augustini, tom. 4.
without love, both we our selves are nothing, and all that we have does profit
us nothing: yet these wonderful men would have us believe, that by their word
alone they are able to make something of this nothing; that fear without love
shall make men capable of the benefit of their pardon, as well as love without
fear; that whether men come by the way of mount Sinai or mount Sion, whether
they have Legal or Evangelicall repentance, they have authority to absolve
them from all their sins. as if it did lie in their power, to confound Gods
Testaments at their pleasure, and to give unto a servile fear not the benefit
of manumission only, but the privilege of adoption also; by making the
children of the bondwoman children of the promise, and giving them a portion in
that blessed inheritance together with the children of her that is free.

Hebr. 6.1.
Repentance from dead works, is one of the foundations and principles of the
doctrine of Christ. Poenitentia^ certam non facit, nisi odium peccati, and amor
Dei. August sermon. 7. de Tempore.
Nothing makes repentance certain, but the hatred of sin, and the love of
God. and without true repentance all the Priests under heaven are not able to
give us a discharge from our sins, and deliver us from the wrath to come.
Matthew. 18.3.
Except ye be converted, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Luke
13.3, 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all perish: is the Lords saying in the new
Testament. and in the old: Ezech. 18.30, 31.
Repent, and turn from all your transgressions: so iniquity shall not be your
ruin. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye dye,
O house of Israel? Now put case one comes to his ghostly father, with such
sorrow of mind as the terrors of a guilty conscience usually do produce,
and with such a resolution to cast away his sins, as a man has in a storm to
cast away his goods, not because he does not love them, but because he fears
to loose his life if he part not with them: does not he betray this man's soul,
who puts into his head, that such an extorted repentance as this, which has
not one grain of love to season it withal, will qualify him sufficiently for
the receiving of an absolution, by I know not what sacramental faculty that
the Priest is furnished withal to that purpose? For all do confess with S.
Augustine, that Timor namque iste quo no^ amatur justitia, sed timetur poena,
servilis est, quia carnalis est, and ideo non c^ucifigit carnem. Vivit enim
peccandi voluntas, quae tunc apparet in opere, quando speratur impunitas. Cum
vero paena c^editur secutura, latenter vivit, vivit tamen. Mallet enim licere
and dolet non licere quod lex vetat: quia non spiritaliter delectatur ejus
bono, sed carnaliter malum meruit quod minatur. August. in Psalm. 118. conc. 25.
this fear which loves not justice, but dreadeth punishment, is servile,
because it is carnal, and therefore does not crucify the flesh. For the
willingness to sin lives, which then appears in the work, when impunitie
is hoped for: but when it is believed that punishment will follow, it lives
closely, yet it lives. For it would wish rather, that it were lawful to do
that which the Law forbids, and is sorry that it is not lawful: because it
is not spiritually delighted with the good thereof, but carnally fears the
evil which it does threaten. What man then, do we think, will take the
pains to get him a new heart and a new spirit, and undertake the toylsome
work of crucifying the flesh with the lusts thereof; if without all this
ado, the Priests absolution can make that other imperfect or rather equivocall
contrition, arising from a carnal and servile fear, to be sufficient for the
blotting out of all his sins? Or are we not rather to think that this
sacramental penance of the Papists is a device invented by the enemy to
hoodwinke poor souls, and to divert them from seeking that true repentance
which is only able to stand them in stead? and that such as take upon them to
help lame dogs over the style after this manner, by substituting quid pro
quo, attrition in stead of contrition, servile fear in stead of filial love,
carnal sorrow in stead of godly repentance; are physicians of no value, nay
such as minister poison unto men under color of providing a sovereign
medicine for them? He therefore that will have care of his souls health, must
consider, that much rests here in the good choice of a skillful physician;
but much more, in the pains that must be taken by the patient himself. For
that every one who bears the name of a Priest, is not fit to be trusted with
a matter of this moment; their own Decrees may give them fair warning, where
this admonition is Decret. de Poenit. distinct. 1. ca. 88. Quem poenitet. and
did. 6. ca. 1. Qui vult
twice laid down, out of the author that wrote of true and false repentance.
Qui confiteri vult peccata, ut inveniat gratiam, quaerat sacerdotem scientem
ligare and solvere: ne, cum negligens circa se extiterit, negligatur ab illo,
qui eum misericorditer monet, and petit, ne ambo in foveam cada^t, quam stultus
evitare noluit. Lib. de ver. and falls. poenitent. cap 10. inter opera.
Augustini, tom. 4.
He who will confess his sins, that he may find grace, let him seek for a
Priest that knows how to bind and loose: least, while he is negligent
concerning himself, he be neglected by him who mercifully admonishes and
desires him, that both fall not into the pit, which the fool would not avoid.
And when the skilfullest Priest that is, has done his best: S. Cyprian will
tell them, that Poenitenti, operanti, roganti potest clementer ignoscere;
potest in acceptum refer, quidquid pro tasibus and petierint martyrs, and
fecerint sacerdotes. Cyprian. de Lapsis. (sect. 13. edit. Pamel. 29 Goulart.)
to him that repents, to him that works, to him that prays, the Lord of
his mercy can grant a pardon; he can make good that which for such men either
the Martyrs shall request or the Priest shall do.

If we inquire, who they were that first assumed unto themselves this
exorbitant power of forgiving sins: we are like to find them in the Tents of
the ancient heretics and schismatics; who 2 Pet. 2.19.
promised unto others liberty, when they themselves were the servants of
corruption. Quanti panem non hab^n^es and vestimen^a, cum ipsi esuriant and
nudi sint, nec habeant spirituales cibos neque Christi tunica^ integram
reservarint; aliis and alimonia and vestimenta promittunt, and pleni vulneribus
medicos esse se jactant: nec servant illud Mosaicu, Provide alium que^ mittas;
aliud que mandatu^, Ne quaeras judex fieri, ne forte non possis aufe^re
iniquitates. Solus Ie^us omnes (...) scriptum est* Qui sanat contritos cord,
and alligat contritiones eorum. H^^. onym. lib. 2. co^^ent. in Esaei. cap. 3.
How many (says S. Hierom) which have neither bread nor apparel, when they
themselves are hungry and naked, and neither have spiritual meats, nor
preserve the coat of Christ entire; yet promise unto others food and raiment,
and being full of wounds themselves brag that they be physicians: and do not
observe that of Moses, (Exodus 4.13.) Provide another whom thou may send;
and that other commandment (Ecclesiastic. 7.6.) Do not seek to be made a
Judge, lest peradventure thou be not able to take away iniquity. It is Jesus
alone, who heals all sicknesses and infirmities: of whom it is written,
(Psalm. 147.4.) He heals the contrite in heart, and binds up their soars.
Thus far S. Hierom.

The Rhemists in their marginall note upon Luke 7.49. tell us, that as the
Pharisees did always carp Christ for remission of sins in earth, so the
Heretics reprehend his Church that remitteth sins by his authority. But S.
Augustine treating upon the self same place, might have taught them, that
hereby the bewrayed themselves to be the off spring of Heretics, rather then
children of the Church. For whereas our Savior there had said unto the
penitent woman, Thy sins are forgiven; and they that sat at meat with him
began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also? S.
Augustine first compares their knowledge and the knowledge of the woman thus
together. Noverat ergo illum post dimittere peccata: illi autem noverant
hominem non posse peccata dimittere. Et credendum est, quod omnes, id est, and
illi discumbentes, and illa mulier accedens ad pedes Domini, omnes hi no^verant
homine^ non posse peccata dimittere. Cum ergo omnes hoc nossent: illa quae
credidit eum posse peccata dimittere, plus quam homine^ esse intellexit.
August. hom. 23. ex. 50. cap. 7.
She knew that he could forgive sins; but they knew that a man could not
forgive sins. And we are to believe that all, that is, both they which sat
at table, and the woman which came to our Lords feet, they all knew that a man
could not forgive sins. Seeing all therefore knew this, she who believed
that he could forgive sins, understood him to be more then a man. and a
little after: Tamen illud been nost^s, been tenetis Tenete, quia homo non
potest peccata dimittere. Illa quae sibi a Christo peccata dimitti credidit,
Christu^ non homine^ tantum, sed and Deu^ credidit Id. ibid.
That do you know well, that do you hold well; says that learned Father.
Hold, that a man cannot forgive sins. She who believed that her sins were
forgiven her by Christ, believed that Christ was not only man, but God also.
Then does he proceed to compare the knowledge of the Jews then with the
opinion of the Heretics in his days. Herein (says Sed in eo melior
Pharisaeus; quia cum putaret homine^ Christu^, non credebat ab homine posse
dimitti peccata. Melior ergo Iudaeis quam haereticis apparuit intellectus.
Iudaei dixerunt, Quis est hic qui etiam peccata dimittit? Audet sibi homo
usurpare? Quid contra Haereticus? Ego mundo, ego sanctifico. Respondeat illi,
non ego, sed Christus. O homo, quando ego a Iudaeis putatus sum homo,
dimissionem peccatorum fidei dedi. Non ego, respondet tibi Christus. O
Haeretice, tu cum sis homo, dicis; Veni mulier, ego te salvam facio. Ego cum
putarer homo, dixi, Vade mulier, fides tua te salvam fecit. Id. ibid. cap. 8.
he) the Pharisee was better then these men: for when he did think that Christ
was a man, he did not believe that sins could be forgiven by a man. It
appeared therefore that the Jews had better understanding then the Heretics.
The Jews said; Who is this that forgiveth sins also? Dare a man challenge
this to himself? What says the Heretic on the other side? I do forgive, I
do cleanse, I do sanctify. Let Christ answer him, not I: O man, when I was
thought by the Jews to be a man, I ascribed the forgiveness of sins to
faith. Not I, but Christ does answer thee. O Heretic, Thou when thou art but a
man say; Come woman, I do make the safe. I when I was thought to be but a
man said; Go woman, thy faith has made thee safe.

The Heretics at whom S. Augustine here aymeth, were the Donatists: whom
Optatus also before him did thus roundly take up for the same presumption.
Intelligite ves vel sero operarios esse, non dominos. Et si Ecclesia vinea est,
sunt homines and ordinati cultores. Quid in dominium patrisfamilias irruistis?
Quid vobis, quod Dei est, vindicatis? Optat. lib. 5. contra Donatist.
Understand at length, that you are servants, and not Lords. And if the Church
be a vineyard, and men be appointed to be dressers of it: why do you rush into
the dominion of the householder? Why do you challenge unto your selves, that
which is Gods? Concedite Deo, praestare quae sua sunt. Non enim potest munus
abhomine dari, quod divinum est. Si sic putatis, Prophetaru^ voces, and Dei
promissa inanire contenditis, quibus p^obatur, quia Deus lavat, non homo Id.
ibid.
Give leave unto God to perform the things that belong unto himself. For that
gift cannot be given by man, which is divine. If you think so, you labor to
frustrate the words of the Prophets, and the promises of God, by which it is
proved that God washes (away sin,) and not man. It is noted likewise by
Theodoret, of the Audian heretics: that (...). Theodoret. haeretic. fabul.
lib. 4.
they bragged they did forgive sins. The manner of Confession which he says
was used among them, was not much unlike that which Alvarus Pelagius
acknowledges to have been the usual practice of them that made greatest
profession of religion and learning in his time. Vix enim aut rarissime aliquis
talium confitetur nisi per verba generalia: vix unquam aliquod grave
specificant. Quod dicunt una die, dicunt and altera: ac si in omni die
aequaliter offendant. Alvar. de Planct. eccles. lib. 2. artic. 78. A.
For scarce at all (says he) or very seldom does any of them confess
otherwise then in general terms: scarce do they ever specify any grievous
sin. What they say one day, that they say another, as if every day they did
offend alike. The manner of Absolution was the same with that, which Theodoricus
de Niem notes to have been practiced by the pardoners sent abroad by Pope
Boniface the ninth: who Omnia peccata etiam sine poenitentia ipsis
confitentibus relaxarunt; super quibuslibet irregularitatibus dispensarunt
inte^ventu pecuniae: dicentes se omnem potestatem habere super hoc, quam
Christus Petro ligandi and solvendi contulisset in terris. Niem de schismaete,
lib. 1. cap. 68.
released all sins to them that confessed, without any penance (or
repentance;) affirming that they had for their warrant in so doing, all that
power which Christ gave unto Peter of binding and loosing upon earth. just as
Theodoret reports the Audians were wont to do: who presently (...). Theodor.
haer. lib. 4.
after confession granted remission; not prescribing a time for repentance, as
the laws of the Church did require, but giving pardon by authority.

The laws of the Church prescribed a certain time unto Penitents, August.
En^birid ad Laur. cap. 65.
wherein they should give proof of the soundness of their repentance: and
gave order that afterward they should be 2. Cor. 2.7.
forgiven and comforted, lest they should be swallowed up with overmuch
heaviness. So that first their penance was enjoined unto them, and thereby
Vid. Nomocanonem Nesteutae in Theod. Balsamonis coll^ct. Canon. edit. Paris.
an. 1620. page 1101. lin. ult. and Niconis epist. ad. Enclistium, ibid. page
1096 1097. and Anast^s. Sinait. quaest. 6. page 64. edit. Graecola^. Gretseri.
they were held to be bound: after performance whereof they received their
absolution, by which they were loosed again. But the Audian heretics, without
any such trial taken of their repentance, did of their own heads give them
absolution presently upon their confession: as the Popish Priests use to do
now a days. Only the Audians had one ridiculous ceremony more then the
Papists; that having placed the Canonical books of Scripture upon one side,
and certain Apocryphal writings on the other, they caused their followers to
pass betwixt them, and in their passing to make confession of their sins: as
the Papists, another idle practice more then they; that after they have given
absolution, they injoyne penance to the party absolved, that is to say, (as
they of old would have interpreted it) they first loose him and presently after
bind him. which howsoever they hold to be done in respect of the temporal
punishment remaining due after the remission of the fault: yet it appears
plainly, that the penitential works required in the ancient Church, had
reference to the fault it self; and that no absolution was to be expected from
the Minister for the one, before all reckonings were ended for the other. Only
where the danger of death was imminent, the case admitted some exception:
reconci^iation being not denied indeed unto them that desired it at such a
time, yet so granted, that it was left very doubtful, whether it would stand
the parties in any great stead or no. Si quis positus in ultima necessitate
aegritudinis suae, voluerit accipere poenitentiam and accipit, and mox
reconciliatur, and hinc vadit: fateor vobis, non illi negamus quod petit, sed
non praesumimus quia been hinc exit. Non praesumo, non vos fallo, non praesumo.
August. homil. 41. ex 50. Ambros. exhort. ad poenitent.
If any one being in the last extremity of his sickness, says S. Augustine,
is willing to receive penance, and ^oth receive it, and is presently
reconciled, and departs hence: I confess unto you, we do not deny him
that which he asks, but we do not presume that he goes well from hence. I
do not presume, I deceive you not, I do not presume. Agens poenitentiam ad
ultimum and reconciliatus, si securus hinc exit, ego non sum securus. etc.
Poenitentiam dare possum, securitate^ dare non possum. Ibid.
He who puts off his penance to the last, and is reconciled; whether he
goes secure from hence, I am not secure. Penance I can give him, security I
cannot give him. Nunquid dico, damnabitur? Non dico Sed dico etiam,
liberabitur? Non. Et quid dicis mihi? Nescio: non praesumo, non promitto
nescio. Vis te de dubio liberare; vis quod incertum est evadere? Age
poenitentiam dum sanus es. Ibid.
Do I say, he shall be damned? I say not so. But do I say also, he shall be
freed? No. What do thou then say unto me? I know not: I presume not, I
promise not, I know not. Will thou free thy self of the doubt? will thou
escape that which is uncertain? Do thy penance while thou art in health.
Poenitentia quae ab infirmo petitur, infirma est. Poenitentia quae a moriente
tantum petitur, timeo ne ipsa moriatur. Augustine. sermon. 57. de Tempore.
The penance which is asked for by the infirm man, is infirm. The penance
which is asked for only by him that is a dying, I fear lest it also dye.

But with the matter of penance we have not here to deal: those formal
absolutions and pardons of course, immediately granted upon the hearing of men's
confessions, is that which we charge the Romish Priests to have learned from
the Audian heretics. Nonnulli ideo poscunt poenitentiam, ut statim sibi reddi
communionem velint: hi non tam se solvere cupiunt, quam Sacerdotem ligare. Suam
enim conscientiam non exuunt, Sacerdotis induunt. Ambros. de Poenit. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
Some require penance to this end, that they might presently have the communion
restored unto them: these men desire, not so much to loose themselves, as to
bind the Priest; says S. Ambrose. If this be true, that the Priest does bind
himself, by his hasty and unadvised loosing of others: the case is like to go
hard with our Popish Priests, who ordinarily in bestowing their absolutions,
use to make more have then good speed. Wherein, with how little judgment they
proceed, who thus take upon them the place of Judges in men's consciences, may
sufficiently appear by this: that whereas the maine ground, whereupon they
would build the necessity of Auricular confession, and the particular
enumeration of all known sins, is pretended to be this, that the ghostly
Father having taken notice of the cause may judge righteous judgment, and
discern who should be bound and who should be loosed, the matter yet is so
carried in this court of theirs, that every man commonly goes away with his
absolution, and all sorts of people usually receive one and the self same
judgment. Ierem. 1^.19.
If thou separate the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: says
the Lord. Whose mouth then may we hold them to be, who seldom put any
difference between these, and make it their ordinary practice to pronounce
the same sentence of absolution as well upon the one as upon the other?

If we would know, how late it was before this trade of pardoning men's sins
after this manner was established in the Church of Rome: we cannot discover
this better, then by tracing out the doctrine publicly taught in that Church
touching this matter, from the time of Satan's loosing until his binding again
by the restoring of the purity of the Gospel in our days. And here Radulphus
Ardens does in the first place offer himself: who toward the beginning of that
time preached this for sound divinity. Potes^as peccata relaxandi solius Dei
est. Ministerium vero, quod improprie etiam potestas vocatur, vicariis suis
concessit; qui modo suo ligant vel absolvunt, id est, ligatos vel absolutos
esse ostendunt. Prius enim Deus interius peccatore^ per co^pu^ctionem absolvit;
Sacerdos vero exterius, sententiam proferendo, eum esse absolutum ostendit.
Quod been significatur per Lazaru^, qui prius in tumulo a Domino suscitatur,
and post, ministerio discipulorum, a vitiis ( f^r^. vittis) quibus ligatus
fuerat absolvitur. Rad. A. den^, homil. Dominic. 1. post Pascha.
The power of releasing sins, belongs to God alone. But the ministry
(which improperly also is called a power) he has granted unto his
substitutes; who after their manner do bind and absolve, that is to say, do
declare that men are bound or absolved. For God does first inwardly absolve the
sinner by compunction: and then the Priest outwardly by giving the sentence
does declare that he is absolved. Which is well signified by that of Lazarus:
who first in the grave was raised up by the Lord, and afterward by the
ministry of the disciples was loosed from the bands wherewith he was tied.
Then follow both the Anselmes, ours of Canterbury and the other of Laon in
France: who in their expositions upon the ninth of S. Matthew, clearly teach,
that none but God alone can forgive sins. Ivo Bishop of Chartres writes,
that Per internum gemitum satisfit interno judici, and id^irco indilata datur
ab eo peccati remissio, cui manifesta est interna conversio. Ecclesia vero,
quia occulta cordis ignorant non solvit ligatum, licet suscitatum, nisi de
monumento elatum, id est, publica satisfactione purgatum. Ivo Carnotens. epist.
228.
by inward contrition the inward judge is satisfied, and therefore without
delay forgiveness of the sin is granted by him, unto whom the inward
conversion is manifest: but the Church, because it knows not the hidden
things of the heart, does not loose him that is bound, although he be raised
up, until he be brought out of the tomb, that is to say, purged by public
satisfaction. and if presently upon the inward conversion God be pleased to
forgive the sin: the absolution of the Priest which follows, cannot in any
sort properly be accounted a remission of that sin, but a further
manifestation only of the remission formerly granted by God himself.

The Master of the Sentences after him, having propounded the diverse opinions
of the Doctors touching this point, demands at last, In hac tanta varietate
quid tenendum? Ho^ sane dicere ac sentire possumus; quod solus Deus dimittit
peccata and retinet, and tamen Ecclesiae contulit potestatem ligandi and
solvendi: sed aliter ipse solvit vel ligat, alit^r Ecclesia. Ipse enim per se
tantum dimittit peccatum; qui and animam mundat ab interiori macula, and a
debito aeternae mortis solvit. Non autem hoc Sacerdotibus concessit: quibus
tamen tribuit potestatem solvendi and ligandi, id est, ostendendi homines
ligatos vel solutos. Vnde Dominus leprosum sanitati prius per se restituit,
deinde ad Sacerdotes misit, quorum judicio ostenderetur mundatus. Ita etiam
Lazarum jam vivificatum obtulit discipulis solvendum. Petr. Lombard. lib. 4.
S^ntent. distinct. 18. e f.
In this so great variety what is to be held? and returns for answer. Surely
this we may say and think: that God alone does forgive and retain sins, and
yet has given power of binding and loosing unto the Church; but He binds and
loses one way, and the Church another. For he only by himself forgiveth
sin, who both cleanses the soul from inward blot, and loses it from the
debt of everlasting death. But this has he not granted unto Priests: to whom
notwithstanding he has given the power of binding and loosing, that is to say,
of declaring men to be bound or loosed. Whereupon the Lord did first by himself
restore health unto the leper, and then sent him unto the Priests, by whose
judgment he might be declared to be cleansed: so also he offered Lazarus to
his disciples to be loosed, having first quickened him. In like manner Hugo
Cardinalis shows, that it is Solius Dei est dimittere peccata. Hugo Card. in
Luc. 5.
only God that forgiveth sins: and that Vinculo culpae and poenae debitae,
non potest eum Sacerdos ligare vel solvere; sed tantum ligatum vel absolutum
ostendere. Sicut Sacerdos Leviticus non faciebat vel mundabat leprosum; sed
tantum infectum vel mundum ostendebat. Id. in Matthew. 16.
the Priest cannot bind or loose the sinner, with or from the bond of the
fault and the punishment due thereunto; but only declare him to be bound or
loosed. as the Leviticall Priest did not make nor cleanse the leper, but only
declared him to be infected or clean. And a great number of the Schoolmen
afterward showed themselves to be of the same judgment: that to pardon the
fault and the eternal punishment due unto the same, was the proper work of
God; that the Priests absolution has no real operation that way, but
presupposes the party to be first justified and absolved by God. Of this
mind were, Altissiodorens. Sum. lib. 4. cap. de generali usu clavium.
Guilielmus Altissiodorensis, Alexand. Haelens. Sum. part. 4. quaest. 21.
membr. 1.
Alexander of Hales, Bonavent. in 4. did. 18. art. 2. quaest 1. and 2.
Bonaventure, Gu^l Ockam. in 4. Sent. quaest. 9. li^. Q.
Ockam, Argentin. in 4. Sent. did. 18. art. 3.
Thomas de Argentina, Mi^h. Angrian. in Psalm. 29. and 31.
Michael de Bononia, Biel. in 4. Sent. did. 14. quaest. 2. d. n. and did. 18.
quaest. 1. k.
Gabriel Biel, H^nr. de Oyta (al. lu^a) in propositionib apud Ill^ricum, in
Catal. ^est. veritat.
Henricus de Huecta, Ma^or in 4. Sent di^t. 18. quaest. 1.
Johannes Major, and others.

To lay down all their words at large would be too tedious. In general,
Hadrian the sixth (one of their own Popes) acknowledges, that Hadrian in
Quodliberic. quaest ^ art. 3 b.
the most appr^ved Divines were of this mind, that the keys of the Priesthood
do not extend themselves to the remission of the fault: and Mayor in 4. did.
14. qu. 2. concl. 3.
Major affirms, that this is the common Tenet of the Doctors. So likewise is
it avouched by Gabriel Biel, that Et illam opinionem communiter sequuntur
doctores antiqui. Biel. in 4. did. 14. quaest. 2. d.
the old Doctors commonly follow the opinion of the Master of the Sentences;
that Priests do forgive or retain sins, while they judge and declare that
they are forgiven by God or retained. But all this notwithstanding, Suarez is
bold to tell us, that Veruntamen haec sententia Magistri salsa est, and jam hoc
tempore erronea. Fr. Suar^z. in Thom. tom. 4. disp. 19 s^ct 2. number 4.
this opinion of the Master is false, and now at this time erroneous. It was
not held so the other day, when Ferus preached at Mentz, that Non quod homo
proprie remittat peccatum; sed quod ostendat ac certificet a Deo remissum.
Neque enim aliud est Absolutio, quam ab homine accipis, quam si dicat: En sili,
certifico te t^bi remissa esse peccata, annunc^o tibi te habere propitiu^ Deum;
and quaecunque Christus in Baptismo and Evangelio nobis promisit, tibi nunc per
me annunciat and promittit. Io. Ferus, lib. 2 comment. in Matthew. cap. 9. edit.
Mogunt. an. 1^^9.
man did not properly remit sin, but did declare and certify that it was
remitted by God. so that the Absolution received from man, is nothing else then
if he should say: Behold my son, I certify thee that thy sins are forgiven
thee, I pronounce unto thee that thou have God favorable unto thee; and
whatsoever Christ in Baptism and in his Gospel has promised unto us, he
does now declare and promise unto thee by me. Of this shall thou have me to be
a witness: go in peace, and in quiet of conscience. But jam hoc tempore the
case is altered: these things must be purged out of Fer. in Matthew. edit.
Antuerp. an. 1559.1570. etc.
Ferus as erroneous; the opinion of the old Doctors must give place to the
sentence of the new Fathers of Trent. And so we are come at length to the end
of this long question: in the handling whereof I have spent more time, the
(...) ani^ of the r^st, by reason our Priests do make this faculty of
pardoning men's sins to be one of the most principal parts of their
occupation, and the particular discovery thereof is not ordinarily by the
writers of our side so much insisted upon. The performance therefore of my
promise of brevitie, is to be expected in the briefer treating upon those
articles that remain: the fifth whereof we are now to take into our
consideration, which is

OF PVRGATORIE.
FOr extinguishing the imaginary flames of Popish Purgatory, we need not go
far to fetch water: seeing the whole current of Gods word runs mainly upon
this; that 1. Ioh. 1.7.
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; that all Gods children
1. Cor^ 15.1^. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
dye in Christ, and that such as Revel. 14 13.
dye in him, do rest from their labors; that, as they be 2. Cor. 5.6, 8.
absent from the Lord while they are in the body, so when they be absent from
the body they are present with the Lord; and in a word, that they Ioh. 5.24.
come not into judgment, but pass from death unto life. And if we need the
assistance of the ancient Fathers in this business: behold they be here
ready, with full buckets in their hands.

Tertullian, to begin withal, C^ristum laedimus, cum evocatos quosque ab illo,
quasi miserandos non aequanimiter accipimus. Cupio, (...) jam, and (...) cum
Christo quanto melius ostendit votum Christianoru^. Ergo votum si alios
consequutos impatienter dolemus, ipsi consequi no^umus. ^er^ull. lib. ^e
Patient. cap. 9.
counts it injurious unto Christ, to hold that such as be called from hence
by him are in a state that should be pitied. whereas they have obtained their
desire of being with Christ: according to that of the Apostle, Philip. 1.23. I
desire to depart, and to be with Chrest. What pity was it, that the poor
souls in Purgatory should find no (...) in those days to inform men better
of their ruefull condition; nor no Secretary to draw up such another
supplication for them as this, which of late years Sir Thomas Moore presented
in their name, The Supplication o^ souls, made by Sir Tho Moore.
To all good Christen people. In most piteous wise continually calls and
cries upon your devoute charity and most tender pity, for help, comfort and
relief, your late acquaintance, kindred, spouses, companions, playfellowes,
and friends, and now your humble and unacquainted and half forgotten
suppliants, poor prisoners of God, the sely souls in Purgatory, here abiding
and enduring the grievous pains and hot clensing fire, etc. If S. Cyprian had
understood but half thus much: doubtless he would have stricken out the best
part of that famous treatise which he wrote of Mortality (to comfort men
against death, in the time of a great plague) especially such passages as these
are, which by no means can be reconciled with Purgatory.

Ejus est mortem timere, qui ad Christum n^lit ire: ejus est ad Christu^ nolle
ire, qui se non credat cum Chr^sto incipere regnare. Scriptum est enim, justu^
fide vivere. Si justus es, and fide vivis, si vere in Deum credis: cur non cum
Christo futurus, and de Domini pollic tatione securus, quod ad Christum
voceris, amplecteris, and quod Diabolo careas, grat^la^is? Cyprian, de
Mortalit. sect. 2. edit. Goulart.
It is for him to fear death, that is not willing to go unto Christ: it is
for him to be unwilling to go unto Christ, who does not believe that he
begins to reign with Christ. For it is written, that the just does live by
faith. If thou be just and live by faith, if thou do truly believe in God;
why, being to be with Christ, and being secure of the Lords promise, do not
thou embrace the message whereby thou art called unto Christ, and rejoycest
that thou shall be ridd of the Devil? Simeon said; Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Probans scilicet, atque co^testans ^unc esse servis Dei pacem, tunc
liberam tunc tranquillam quiete^; qua^do de istis mundi turbinibus* (...)
tracti, sedi^ and securitatis aeternae portum petimus, quando expuncta hac
morte ad immortalitate^ venimus. Ibid.
proving thereby, and witnessing that the servants of God then have peace, then
enjoy free and quiet rest; when being drawn from these storms of the world,
we arrive at the haven of our everlasting habitation and security, when
this death being ended we enter into immortality. Ad refrigerium justi
vocantur, ad suplicium rapiuntur injusti: datur velocius tutela fidentibus,
perfidis poena. Ibid. sect. 11.
The righteous are called to a refreshing, the unrighteous are haled to
torment: safety is quickly granted to the faithful, and punishment to the
unfaithful. Nec accipiendas esse hic atras vestes, quando illi ibi indumenta
alba jam sumpserint. Ibid sect. 14.
We are not to put on black mourning garments here, when our friends there
have put on white. Non est exitus iste, sed transitus, and, temporali itinere
decurso, ad aeterna transgressus. Ibid. sect. 15.
This is not a going out, but a passage, and, this temporal journey being
finished, a going over to eternity. Amplectamur diem, qui assignat singulos
domicilio suo; qui nos istinc ereptos, and laqueis secularibus exsolutos
paradiso restituit and regno coelesti. Ibid. sect. 18.
Let us therefore embrace the day that brings every one to his own house;
which having taken us away from hence, and loosed us from the snares of this
world, returns us to Paradise and to the kingdom of heaven.

The same holy Father in his Apology which he wrote for Christians unto
Demetrian the proconsul of Africa, affirms in like manner; that Donec aevi
temporalis fine completo, ad aeternae vel mortis vel immortalitatis hospitia
dividamur. Id. ad Demetrian. sect. 16.
the end of this temporal life being accomplished, we are divided into the
habitations of everlasting either death or immortality. Quando istinc excessum
fuerit, nullus jam poenitentiae locus est, nul^us satisfactionis effectus: hic
vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur Id. ibid. sect. 22.
When we are once departed from hence, there is now no farther place for
repentance, neither any effect of satisfaction. here life is either lost or
obtained. But if Tu sub ipso licet exitu and vitae temporalis occasu, pro
delictis roges: and Deum, qui unus and verus est, confessione and fide
agnitionis ejus implores venia confitenti datur, and tredenti indulgentia
salutaris de divina pictate conceditur; and ad immortalitatem sub ipsa morte
transitur. Hanc gratiam Christus impertit, hoc munus miscricordiae sua^
tribuit; subigendo mortem tropha^o crucis, redime^do credente^ pretio sanguinis
sui, reconcilia^do homine^ Deo Patri, vivifica^do mortale^ regeneratione
coelesti. Ib.
thou (says he) even at the very end and setting of thy temporal life, do
pray for thy sins, and call upon the only true God with confession and
faith: pardon is given to thee confessing, and saving forgiveness is granted
by the divine piety to thee believing; and at thy very death thou have a
passage unto immortality. This grace does Christ impart, this gift of his
mercy does he bestow; by subduing death with the triumph of his cross, by
redeeming the believer with the price of his blood, by reconciling man unto God
the Father, by quickening him that is mortal with heavenly regeneration.

Where Solomon says, Ecclesiast. 12.5. that man goes to his everlasting
house, and the mourners go about in the street: S. Gregory of Neocaesarea
makes this paraphrase upon those words; (...). Greg. Neocaesar. metaphras. in
Ecclesiast.
The good man shall go rejoicing unto his everlasting house, but the wicked
shall fill all with lamentations. Therefore did the Fathers teach, that men
should (...). Anton. Meliss. part. 1. sermon. 58. etc.
rejoice at their death: and the ancient Christians framed their practice
accordingly; Nos non nativitatis diem celebramus; cum sit dolorum atque
tentationum introitus: sed mortis diem celebramus; utpote omnium dolorum
depositionem, atque omnium tentationum effugationem. Author ^ib. 3. in Job,
inter opera Origenis. Vide S. Basil. homil. in Psalm. 115. page 318. edit.
Graecolat.
not celebrating the day of their nativitie, which they accounted to be the
entry of sorrows and temptations, but celebrating the day of death, as being
the putting away of all sorrows, and the escaping of all temptations. And so
being filled with (...) and paulo post. (...). Dionys. Ecclesiast. hierarch.
cap. 7.
a divine rejoicing they came to the extremity of death as unto the end of
their holy combats: (...). Ibid.
where they did more clearly behold the way that ledd unto their immortality,
as being now made nearer; and did therefore praise the gifts of God, and were
replenished with divine joy, as now not fearing any change to worse, but
knowing well that the good things which they possessed shall be firmly and
everlastingly enjoyed by them.

The author of the Questions and Answers attributed to Justin Martyr, writes
thus of this matter. (...). Justin. resp. ad Orthodox. quaest. 7 5.
After the departure of the soul out of the body, there is presently made a
distinction betwixt the just and the unjust. For they are brought by the Angels
to places fit for them: the souls of the righteous to Paradise, where they
have the commerce and sight of Angels and Archangels, etc. the souls of the
unjust to the places in hell. That (...). Athanas. de Virginitate.
is not death (says Athanasius) that befalls the righteous, but a
translation: for they are translated out of this world into everlasting rest:
and as a man would go out of a prison, so do the Saints go out of this
troublesome life unto those good things that are prepared for them. S. Hilary
out of that which is related in the Gospel of the rich man and Lazarus
observes; that Nihil illic dilationis aut morae est. Iudicii enim dies, vel
beatitudinis retributio est aeterna vel poenae: tempus vero mortis habet
unumquenque suis legibus, dum ad judicium unumquenque aut Abraham reservat aut
poena. Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
as soon as this life is ended, every one without delay is sent over either
to Abraham's bosom, or to the place of torment, and in that state reserved
until the day of judgment. S. Ambrose in his book of the good of Death,
teaches us, that death Et quia portus quidam est eoru^ qui magno vitae istius
jactati salo, sidae quietis stationem requirunt: and quia deteriorem statum non
efficit, sed qualem in singulis invenerit, talem judicio futuro reservat, and
quiet ipsa fovet, etc. Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 4.
is a certain haven to them, who being tossed in the great Sea of this life,
desire a rode of safe quietness: that it makes not a man's state worse, but
such as in finds in every one, such it reserveth unto the future judgment,
and refreshes with rest. that thereby Transitur autem a corruptione ad
incorruptionem, a mortalitate ad immortalitatem, a perturbatione ad
tranquillitate^. Ibid.
a passage is made from corruption to incorruption, from mortality to
immortality, from trouble to tranquillity. Therefore he says, that where
Insipientes mortem quasi summum malorum reformidant: sapientes quasi requiem
post labores and finem malorum expetunt. Ibid. cap. 8.
fools do fear death as the chief of evils, wise men do desire it, as a
rest after labors and an end of their evils. and upon these grounds exhorts
us, that His igitur freti, intrepide pergamus ad redemptorem nostrum Iesum,
intrepide ad Patriarcharum Concilium, intrepide ad patrem nostrum Abraham, cum
dies advenerit, proficiscamur: intrepide pergamus ad illum sanctorum caetum,
justorumque conventum. Ibimus enim ad patres nostros, ibimus ad illos nostrae
fidei praeceptores: ut etiamsi opera desint, fides opituletur, defendat
haereditas. Ibid. cap. 12.
when that day comes, we should go without fear to Jesus our redeemer,
without fear to the Council of the Patriarchs, without fear to Abraham our
father; that without fear we should address our selves unto that assembly of
Saints, and congregation of the righteous. forasmuch as we shall go to our
fathers, we shall go to those schoolemasters of our faith; that albeit our
works fail us, yet faith may succor us, and our title of inheritance defend
us.

Macarius, writing of the double state of those that depart out of this life,
affirms that when the soul goes out of the body; if it be guilty of
sin, the Devil carries it away with him unto his place: but when the holy
servants of God (...). Macar. Egypt. homil. 22.
remove out of their body, the quyers of Angels receive their souls unto
their own side, unto the pure world, and so bring them unto the Lord. and in
another place, moving the question concerning such as depart out of this world
sustayning two persons in their soul, to wit, of sin and of grace; whither
they shall go that are thus held by two parts? he makes answer, that thither
they shall go, where they have their mind and affection settled. For (...).
Id. homil. 26.
the Lord (says he) beholding thy mind, that thou fightest, and love him
with thy whole soul, separateth death from thy soul in one hour, (for this
is not hard for him to do) and takes thee into his own bosom, and unto
light. For he plucketh thee away in the minute of an hour from the mouth of
darkness, and presently translateth thee into his own kingdom. For God can
easily do all these things in the minute of an hour; this provided only, that
thou bear love unto him. then which, what can be more direct against the
dream of Popish Purgatory? (...). Basil Pr^^m. in Regulas fusius disputat.
(...). Greg. Nazianzen. orat. 9 ad Iulianum (...).
This present world is the time of repentance, the other of retribution: this
of working, that of rewarding: this of patient suffering, that of receiving
comfort: says S. Basil.

Gregory Nazianzen, in his funeral orations, has many sayings to the same
purpose: being so far from thinking of any Purgatory pains prepared for
men in the other world, that he plainly denies, that (...). Nazianz. orat.
42 in Pascha.
after the night of this present life there is any purging to be expected. and
therefore he tells us, (...). Id. orat. 15. in plagam grandinis. indeque in
locis communib. Maximi, sermon. 45. and Antonij, part. 2. sermon. 94.
that it is better to be corrected and purged now, than to be sent unto the
torment there, where the time of punishing is, and not of purging. S. Hierome,
comfort Paula for the death of her daughter Blaesilla, in this matter.
Lugeatur mortuus; sed ille, quem gelienna suscipit, quem tartarus devorat, in
cujus poenam aeternus ignis aestuat. Nos, quorum exitum Angelorum turba
comitatur, quibus obviam Christus occurrit, gravemur magis, si diutius in
tabernaculo isto mortis habitemus. Quia quamdiu hic moramur, peregrinamur a
Domino. Hieronym. epist. 25.
Let the dead be lamented; but such a one, whom Gehenna does receive, whom
Hell does devour, for whose pain the everlasting fire does burn. Let us,
whose departure a troop of Angels does accompany, whom Christ comes forth
to meet, be more grieved, if we do longer dwell in this tabernacle of death.
Because, as long as we remain here, we are pilgrims from God.

By all that has been said, the indifferent Reader may easily discern, what
may be thought of the craking Cardinal, who would face us down, that Omnes
veteres Graeci and Latini ab ipso tempore Apostolorum constanter docuerunt
Purgatorium esse. Bellarmin. de Purgator. lib. 1. c. 15.
all the ancients, both Greek and Latin, from the very time of the Apostles,
did constantly teach that there was a Purgatory. whereas his own partners
could tell him in his ear, that Alphons. de Castro advers. haeres. lib. 8.
tit. Indulgentia. Io. Roffens. Assert. Lutheran. Confutat. artic. 18. Polydor.
Vergil. de invent. ^er. lib. 8. cap. 1.
in the ancient writers there is almost no mention of Purgatory, especially in
the Greek writers; and therefore that by the Grecians it is not believed until
this day. He alleges indeed a number of authorities to bleare m^ns eyes
withal: which being narrowly looked into, will be found either to be
counterfeit stuff, or to make nothing at all to the purpose; as belonging
either to the point of praying for the dead only, (which in those ancient
times had no relation to Purgatory; as in the handling of the next article we
shall see) or unto the fire of affliction in this life, or to the fire that
shall burn the world at the last day, or to the fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, or to some other fire then that which he intended to kindle
thereby. This benefit only have we here gotten by his labors: that he has
saved us the pains of seeking far for the forge, from whence the first
sparkles of that purging fire of his brake forth. For the ancientest memorial
that he brings thereof, (the places which he has abused out of the Canonical
and Apocryphal scriptures only excepted) Bellarmin. de Purgator. lib. 1. cap.
11.
is out of Plato in his Gorgias and Phaedo, Cicero in the end of his fiction of
the dream of Scipio, and Virgil in the sixth book of his Aeneids: and next
after the Apostles times, Id. ibid. cap. 7. and 10.
out of Tertullian in the seventeenth chapter of his book de Anima, and Origin
in diverse places. Only he must give us leave to put him in mind, with what
spirit Tertullian was ledd, when he wrote that book de Anima: and with what
authority he strengthens that conceit of men's paying in hell for their
small faults before the resurrection, namely of Hoc etiam Paracletus
frequentissime commendavit; si quis sermones ejus ex agnitione promissorum
charismatum admiserit. Tertullian. de Anima, cap. ult.
the Paraclete; by whom if he mean Montanus the arch- heretic (as there is
small cause to doubt that he does) we need not much envy the Cardinal, for
raising up so worshipful a patron of his Purgatory.

But if Montanus come short in his testimony, Origin I am sure pays it home
with full measure, not pressed down only and shaken together, but also running
over. For he was one of those (as the Non defuerunt, qui adeo Purgatorium
probarint, ut nullas poenas nisi purgatorias post hanc vitam agnoverint. Ita
Origenes sensit. Bellarmin. de Purgator. lib. 1. cap 2.
Cardinal knows full well) who approved of Purgatory so much, that he
acknowledged no other pains after this life but purgatory penalties only: and
therefore in his judgment Hell and Purgatory being the self same thing, such
as blindely follow the Cardinal may do well to look, that they stumble not
upon Hell, while they seek for Purgatory. The Grecians profess, (...).
Gra^ci. in lib. de Purgatorio igne, a Bon. Vulcanio edit.
that they are afraid to tell their people of any temporary fire after this
life; lest it should breed in them a spice of Origens disease, and put out of
their memory the thought of eternal punishment, and by this means
occasioning them to be more careless of their conversation, make them indeed
fit fuel for those everlasting flames. Which fear of theirs, we may perceive
not to have been altogether causeless; when the Purgatory of Origin
resembles the Purgatory of the Pope so nearly, that the wisest of his
Cardinals is so ready to mistake the one for the other. And, to speak the
truth, the one is but an unhappie sprigge cut off from the rotten trunck of the
other: which sundry men long since endeavored to graffe upon other stocks, but
could not bring unto any great perfection; until the Popes followers tried
their skill upon it, with that success which now we behold. Some of the
ancient that put their hand to this work, extended the benefit of this fiery
purge unto all men in general: others thought fit to restrain it unto such as
some way or other bare the name of Christians, others to such Christians only
as had one time or other made profession of the Catholic faith, and others to
such alone as did continue in that profession until their dying day.

Against all these S. Augustine does learnedly dispute; proving that wicked
men, of what profession soever, shall be punished with everlasting perdition.
And whereas the defenders of the last opinion did ground themselves upon that
place in the third chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, which the
Pope also does make the principal foundation of his Purgatory (although it be
a Vniuscujusque opus quale sit, ignis probabit. 1. Cor. 3.13.
probatory, and not a purgatory fire that the Apostle there treats of) S.
Augustine makes answer, that Augustine. de fide and operib. cap. 15.
this sentence of the Apostle is very obscure, and to be reckoned among those
things which S. Peter says are hard to be understood in his writings, which
men ought not to pervert unto their own destruction: and freely Id ibid. cap.
16
confesses that in this matter he would rather hear more intelligent and more
learned men then himself. Yet this he delivers for his opinion: that by
vvood, hay, and stubble is understood that overgreat love which the faithful
bear to the things of this life; and by fire, that temporal tribulation which
causes grief unto them by the loss of those things upon which they had too
much placed their affections. But Sive ergo in hac vita tantum homines ista
patiuntur, sive etiam post hanc vitam talia quaedam iudicia subsequuntur; non
abhorret, qua^tum arbitror, a ratione veritatis iste intellectus huius
sententiae. Id. ibid. c. 16.
whether in this life only (says he) men suffer such things, or whether some
such judgments also do follow after this life; the meaning which I have given
of this sentence, as I suppose, abhors not from the truth. And again. Sive
ibi tantum, sive hic and ibi, sive ideo hic ut non ibi, secularia (qua^vis a
damnatione venialia) concremantem ignem transitoriae tribulationis invenia^t;
non redarguo, quia forsitan verum est. Id. lib. 21 de Civit. Dei, cap. 26.
Whether they find the fire of transitory tribulation (burning those secular
affections, which are pardoned from damnation) in the other world only, or
whether here and there, or whether therefore here that they may not find
them there; I gainsay it not, because peradventure it is true. And in another
place. Tale aliquid etia^ post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and utrum
ita sit quaeri potest, and aut inveniri aut latere; nonnullos fideles per ignem
que^dam purgatoriu^, quanto magis minusve bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto
tardius citiusque salvari. Id. in Euchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 69.
That some such thing should be after this life, it is not incredible, and
whether it be so it may be inquired, and either be found or remain hidden;
that some of the faithful by a certain purgatory fire, by how much more or
less they have loved these perishing goods, are so much the more slowly or
sooner saved. Wherein the learned Father deals no otherwise, then when in
disputing against the same men, he is content, if they would acknowledge that
the wrath of God did remain everlastingly upon the damned, to give them leave
to think that their pains might some way or other be lightened or mitigated.
Which yet notwithstanding (says Quod quidem non ideo confirmo, quoniam non
refello. Id. de Civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 24.
he) I do not therefore affirm, because I oppose it not.

What the Doctors of the next succeeding ages taught herein, may appear by the
writings of S. Cyrill, Gennadius, Olympiodorus, and others. S. Cyrill from
those last words of our Savior upon the Cross, Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit, Quod nobis magnae spei fundamentum a^que origine^ praebet.
Credere namque deb^mus, quu^ a corporibus sanctorum animae abierint, tanquam in
manus charissimi patris, bonitati divinae co^mendari; nec, ut quidam infidelium
crediderunt, in terris conversari, quousque sepulturae honoribus affectae sint;
nec, ut peccatorum animae, ad immensi cruciatus locum, id est ad Inferos,
deferri: itinere hoc nobis a Christo primum praeparato, sed in manus potius
patris evolare. Tradidit enim animam suam manibus genitoris, ut ab illa and per
illam facto initio, certam huius rei spem habeamus: firmiter credentes, in
manibus Dei nos post morlem futuros, vitamque multo meliorem ac perpetuo cum
Christo victuros. ideo enim Pau^us desideravit resolvi, and esse cum Christo.
Cyrill. Alexandr. in Iohann. lib. 12. cap. 36.
delivers this as the certain ground and foundation of our hope. We ought
to believe that the souls of the Saints, when they are departed out of their
bodies, are commended unto Gods goodness, as unto the hands of a most dear
Father; and do not remain in the earth (as some of the unbeleevers have
imagined) until they have had the honor of burial; neither are carried, as
the souls of the wicked be, unto a place of unmeasurable torment, that is,
unto Hell: but rather fly to the hands of the Father, this way being first
prepared for us by Christ. For he delivered up his soul into the hands of his
Father, that from it, and by it a beginning being made, we might have certain
hope of this thing: firmly believing, that after death we shall be in the
hands of God, and shall live a far better life for ever with Christ. for
therefore Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Gennadius, in a
book wherein he purposely takes upon him to reckon up the particular points
of doctrine received by the Church in his time, when he comes to treat of the
state of souls separated from the body, makes no mention at all of
Purgatory; but lays down this for one of his positions. Post ascensionem
Domini ad coelos, omnium sanctoru^ animae cum Christo sunt, and exeuntes de
corpore ad Christum vadunt, expectantes resurrectionem corporis sui, ut ad
integram and perpetuam beatitudinem cum ipso pariter immutentur: sicut and
peccatorum animae in inferno sub timore positae, expectant resurrectionem sui
corporis, ut cum ipso ad poenam detrudantur aeternam. Gennad. de Ecclesiastic.
dogmatib. cap. 79.
After the ascension of our Lord into heaven, the souls of all the Saints are
with Christ, and departing out of the body go unto Christ, expecting the
resurrection of their body, that together with it they may be changed unto
perfect and perpetual blessedness: as the souls of the sinners also being
placed in Hell under fear, expect the resurrection of their body, that with it
they may be thrust unto everlasting pain. In like manner Olympiodorus,
expounding that place of Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 11.3.
If the tree fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be; makes this inference thereupon. In quocunque
igitur loco seu illustri seu tenebroso, hoc est, sive in turpi scelerum
statione sive in honesta vi^tutum, deprehendatur homo cum moritur, in eo gradu
atque ordine permanet in aeternum. Nam vel requiescit in lumine felicitatis
aeternae cum justis and Christo Domino, vel in tenebris cruciatur cum iniquis
and principe mundi huius Diabolo. Olympiodor. in Ecclesiast. cap. 11.
In whatsoever place therefore, either lightsome or dark, that is, either in
the foul station of sins or in the honest of virtues, a man is taken when he
dies, in that degree and order he remains for ever. For either he rests
in the light of eternal felicity with the just and with Christ our Lord, or
is tormented in darkness with the wicked and with the Devil the prince of
this world.

The first whom we find directly to have held, that Sed tamen de quibusdam
levibus culpis esse ante judiciu^ purgatorius ignis credendus ^st. Gregor.
Dialog. l^b. 4. cap. 39.
for certain light faults there is a purgatory fire provided before the day of
judgment; was Gregory the first, about the end of the sixth age after the
birth of our Savior Christ. It was his imagination, that the end of the world
was then at hand, and that Quemadmodu^ cum nox finiri and dies incipit oriri,
ante Solis o^tu^ simul aliquo modo tenebrae cum luce commixtae sunt, quousque
discedentes noct^s reliquiae in luce diei subsequentis perfect vertantur: ita
huius mundi finis jam cum futuri saeculi ex ordio permiscetur, atque ipsae
reliquiarum tenebrae quadam iam rerum spiritalium permixtione translucent. Id.
ibid. cap. 41.
as when the night begins to be ended and the day to spring, before the
rising of the Sun the darkness is in some sort mingled together with the
light, until the remains of the departing night be turned into the light of
the following day; so the end of this world was then intermingled with the
beginning of the world to come, and the very darkness of the remains thereof
made transparent by a certain mixture of spiritual things. And this he
assigns for the reason, Quid hoc est quaeso te, quod in his extremis
temporibus tam multa de animabus clarescunt, quae ante latuerunt; ita ut
apertis revelationibus atque ostensionibus venturu^ saeculu^ infer se nobis,
atque aperire videatur. Ibid. cap. 40.
why in those last times so many things were made clear touching the souls,
which before lay hid; so that by open revelations and apparitions the world to
come might seem to bring in and open it self unto them. But as we see that he
was plainly deceived in the one of his conceits; so have we just cause to call
into question the verity of the other. the Scripture especially having
informed us, that a people for enquiry of matters should not have recourse to
Esai. 8.19, 20.
the dead, but to their God, to the Law and to the Testimony: it being not Gods
manner, to send men Luc. 16.29, 30.
from the dead to instruct the living, but to remit them unto Moses and the
Prophets, that they may hear them. And the reason is well worth the
observation which the author of the Questions to Antiochus renders, why God
would not permit the soul of any of those that departed from hence to return
back unto us again, and to declare the state of things in Hell unto us: least
(...). Ad Antioch. quaest. 35. inter opera Athanasij.
much error might arise from thence unto us in this life. For many of the
Devils (says he) might transform themselves into the shapes of those men
that were deceased, and say that they were risen from the dead; and so might
spread many false matters and doctrines of the things there, unto our seduction
and destruction.

Neither is it to be passed over, that in those apparitions and revelations,
related by Gregory, there is no mention made of any common lodge in Hell
appointed for purging of the dead (which is that which the Church of Rome now
striveth for) but of certain souls only that for their punishment were
confined to Gregor. Dialog. lib. 4. cap. 40. and 55.
bathes and other such places here upon earth; which our Romanists may believe
if they list, but must seek for the Purgatory they look for somewhere else.
And yet may they save themselves that labor, if they will be advised by the
Bishops assembled in the Council of Aquisgran (240. years after these visions
were published by Gregory) who will resolve them out of the word of God, how
sins are punished in the world to come. Tribus itaque modis peccata mortaliu^
vindicantur: duobus in hac vita, tertio in futura vita. De duobus ita Apostolus
inquit: Si nosmetipsos judicaverimus, a Domino non judicabimur. Haec est
vindicta, quam inspirante Deo omnis peccator, pro suis admissis poenitendo, in
seipso vindicat. Quod autem prosecutus idem Apostolus infert; Cum judicamur
autem, a Domino corripimur, ut non cum mundo damnemur: haec est vindicta quam
omnipotens Deus misericorditer peccatori irrogat, iuxta illud: Deus quem amat,
corripit, flagellat autem omnem filiu^ quem recipit. Tertia autem extat valde
pertimescenda atque terribilis, quae non in hoc sed in futuro, iustissimo Dei
iudicio, fiet saeculo, quando justus iudex dicturus est: Discedite a me
maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est diabolo and angelis eius. Capitul.
Aquisgran. Council. ad Pipinum miss. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The sins of men (say they) are punished three manner of ways: two in this
life, and the third in the life to come. Of those two the Apostle says: If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. This is the
punishment, wherewith (by the inspiration of God) every sinner, by repenting
for his offenses, takes revenge upon himself. But where the Apostle
consequently adjoyneth; When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with this world: this is the punishment, which
almighty God does mercifully inflict upon a sinner, according to that saying;
Whom God loves, he chasteneth, and he scourges every son that he
receives. But the third is very fearful and terrible, which by the most just
judgment of God shall be executed, not in this world but in that which is to
come, when the just Judge shall say: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. Add hereunto the
saying of the author of the book De vanitate saeculi (wrongly ascribed to S.
Augustine:) Scitote, quod cum anima a corpore evellitur, statim aut in paradiso
pro me^itis bonis collocatur, aut certe pro peccatis in infer^i tartara
praecipitatur. Lib. de vanit. saeculi, cap. 1. tomo 9. Operum Augustini.
Know, that when the soul is separated from the body, presently it is either
placed in Paradise for his good merits, or cast headlong into the bottom of
hell for his sins. and, that in the days of Otto Frisingensis himself (who
wrote in the year of our Lord MCXLVI.) the doctrine of Purgatory was esteemed
only a private assertion held by some, and not an article of faith generally
received by the whole Church. (for why should he else write of it in this
manner? Esse apud inferos locum purgatorium, in quo salvandi vel tenebris tantum
afficiantur, vel expiationis igne decoquantur, QVIDAM asserunt. Otto Frising
lib. 8. Chron. cap. 26.
That there is in Hell a place of Purgatory, wherein such as are to be saved
are either only troubled with darkness, or decocted with the fire of
expiation, SOME do affirm.) and lastly, that the Purgatory wherewith the
Romish clergy does now delude the world, is a new devise, never heard of in
the Church of God, for the space of a thousand years after the birth of our
Savior Christ.

For the Gregorian Purgatory, which reached no further then to the expiation
of Sed tamen hoc de parvis minimisque peccatis fieri posse credendu^ est; sicut
est assiduus otiosus sermo, immoderatus risus, etc. Gregor. Dialog. lib. 4.
cap. 39.
small and very light faults, would not serve these men's turn; who very
providently considered, that little use could be made of that fire, if it had
no other fuel but this to maintain it. For such peccadilloes as these (they
say) may be taken away in this life Sext. Proaem. in Glos^a. verb.
Benedictionem. Francisc a Victoria in Summa sacramentor. Eccles. number. 110.
Jacob. de Graffijs, decis. cas. conscient. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 6. number. 10.
by knocking the breast, by receiving the Bishops blessing, by being sprinkled
with holy water, and by such other easy remedies; that if this were all the
matter to be cared for, men needed not greatly to stand in fear of Purgatory.
Yea admit they should be so extremely negligent in their life time, that they
forgot to use any of these helps: they might for all this at the time of
their death be more afraid then hurt; yea this Sed plerumque de culp^s minimis
ipse solus pavor egredientes i^storu^ animas purgat. Gregor. Dialog. lib. 4.
cap 46.
fear alone (if there were nothing else) might prove a means to purge their
souls, at the very parting, from th^se faults of the lightest kind; if
Gregory may be credited Nay, which is more, diverse of their own Dele^ gra^ia
sinalis peccatu^ veni^le in ipsa dissolutione corporis and animae, etc. Hoc ab
antiquis dictum est. sed nunc communiter tenetur, quod peccatu^ veniale cum
hinc deferatur a multis, etiam quantum ad culpam, in Pu^gatorio purgatur.
Albert Magn. in Compend. Theologicae veritat. lib. 3. c. 11. Vid. Alexand.
Halen^ Sum. part. 4. quaest. 15. memb^. ^. artic. 3. Du^and. lib 4. did. 46.
quaest. 1. etc.
elder Divines (to whom we may adjoyne Cardinal Caietan. Opusc. tom 1. tract.
23. de Purgator. quaest. 1.
Caietan also in these later days) have taught; that all the remains of sin
in Gods children are quite abolished by final grace, at the very instant of
their dissolution; so that the stain of the least sin is not left behind to
be carried unto the other world.

Now Purgatory (as Bellarmine describes it) is a Locus quida^, in quo tanqua^
in carcere post hanc vita^ purga^tur animae, quae in hac non plene purgatae
fuerunt; ut nimirum sic purgatae in coelum ingredi valiant, quo nihil intrabit
coinquinatum. De hoc est tota controversia. Bellarmin de Purgator. lib. 1. cap.
1.
certain place, in which as in a prison those souls are ^urged after this
life, which were not fully purged in this life; that being so purged they may
be able to enter in to heaven, wherein to no unclean thing can enter. And of
this, says he, is all the controversy. If that be so: their own Doctors, you
see, will quickly bring this controversy unto an end. For if the souls be
fully purged here from all spot of sin: what need have they to be sent unto
any other Purgatory after this life? Yes, say they, although the fault be
quite remitted, and the soul clearly freed from the pollution thereof: yet
may there remain a temporal punishment due for the very mortal sins that
have been committed; which (if relief do not otherwise come, by the help of
such as are alive) must be soundly laid on in Purgatory. But why in Purgatory,
say we; seeing here there is no more purging work left? for the fault and the
blot being taken away already; what remains yet to be purged? The punishment
only they say is left behind: and punishment, I hope, they will not hold to
be the thing that is purged away by punishment. Again we desire them to tell
us, what Father or ancient Doctor did ever teach this strange divinity? that a
man being clearly purged from the blott of his sin, and fully acquitted here
from the fault thereof; should yet in the other world be punished for it with
such grievous torments as the tongue of man is not able to express. And yet,
as new and as absurd a doctrine as it is, the Pope and his adherents have
builded thereupon both their guilefull Purgatory (with which it suteth as
evill-favouredly as may be) and their gainefull Indulgences; which, by their
own doctrine, Id. de Indulgent. lib. 1. cap. 7. propos. 1.
free not a man from the guilt of any fault, either mortal or venial, but
only from the guilt of the temporal punishment, which remains after the
fault has been forgiven.

When Thomas Aquinas and other Friars had brought the frame of this new
building unto some perfection, and fashioned all things therein unto their own
best advantage: the Doctors of the Greek Church did publickely oppose
themselves against it. Matthaeus Quaestor by name wrote against Thomas herein:
whose book is still preserved in the Emperors Library at Vienna. So
Athanasius his disputation against Purgatory is (or lately was) to be seen in
the French Kings Library: and the like of Germanus (Patriarch of
Constantinople) and others, elsewhere. The Apology of the Grecians touching
the same subject, is commonly to be had: which was penned by Sixth. Senens. lib.
6. Bibliothec. Sanct. annotat. 259.
Marcus Eugenicus archbishop of Ephesus, and Responsio Graecorum ad positione^
Latinorum, opinionem ignis purgatorii fundantium and probantium. Quae lecta and
data fuit reverendiss. and reverendis patribus, and Dominis deputatis, die
sabbati, XIIII. mensis Iunii, 1438. in sacristia frarrum minorum, Basileae
Praesentata Nicolao Cusano. Mar^in. Crusius in Turco-Graecia, page 186, ex
libro MS. Joan. Capnionis.
presented to Cardinal Cusanus and the deputies of the Council of Basil, in
the year MCCCCXXXVIII. the 14 of June; Ast. Council. Florentin.
the very same day, wherein Bessarion Archbishop of Nice disputed with the
Latins of the same matter in the Council assembled at Ferraria. In that
Apology, the Grecians begin their disputation with this proposition. (...).
Apolog Graecor. de Purgator. a Bonav. Vu^can. edit.
A purgatory fire, and a punishment by fire which is temporal and shall at
last have an end; neither have we received from our Doctors, neither do we
know that the Church of the East does maintain. They add further. (...). Ibid.
Neither have we received it from any of our Doctors, and moreover no small
fear does trouble us, least by admitting a temporary fire both penal and
purgatory, we should destroy the full consent of the Church. And thereupon
they conclude very peremptorily. (...). Ibid.
For these reasons therefore, neither have we ever hitherto affirmed any such
thing, neither will we at all affirm it.

Yet within a year after, the Pope and his ministers prevailed so far with
them in the Council at Florence, that they were content for peace sake to
yield, that (...). Council. Florentin. Sess 25.
the middle sort of souls were in a place of punishment; but whether that were
fire, or darkness and tempest, or something else, they would not contend. And
accordingly was the pretented Union betwixt them and the Latins drawn up:
that, Si vere poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint, antequam dignis
poenitentiae fructibus de commissis satisfecerint and omissis; eorum animas
poenis purgatoriis post mortem purgari. Eugenij IV. Bulla Vnionis. ibid. Cuius
(...) etiam inter (...) Cotteniana vidimus.
if such as be truly penitent dye in Gods favor, before they have satisfied
for their sins of commission and omission by worthy fruits of penance, their
souls are purged after death with purgatory punishments; neither fire, nor
any other kind of punishment being specified in particular. But neither would
Marcus the Bishop of Ephesus (who was one of the Legates of the Patriarchs of
Antioch and of Jerusalem) consent to this union: neither could the Greek
Church afterward by any means be drawn to yield unto it. And so unto this
day, the Romish Purgatory is rejected as well by the Grecians, as by the
Muscovites and Russians, the Cophtites and Abassines, the Georgians and
Armenians, together with the Syrians and Chaldaeans that are subject to the
Patriarchs of Antioch and Babylon, from Cyprus and Palaestina unto the East
Indies. And this may suffice for the discovery of this newfound creek of
Purgatory.

OF PRAYER FOR THE DEAD.
PRayer for the dead, as it is used in the Church of Rome, does necessarily
suppose Purgatory: and therefore whatsoever has been alleged out of the
Scriptures and Fathers against the one, does stand in full force against the
other. so that here we need not actum agere, and make a new work of
overthrowing that, which has been sufficiently beaten down already. But on
the other side, the admittall of Purgatory does not necessarily infer Prayer
for the dead: nay, if we shall suppose (with our Adversaries) that Purgatory
is the Matthew. 5.26.
prison, from whence none shall come out, until they have paid the utmost
farthing; their own paying, and not other men's praying, must be the thing they
are to trust unto, if ever they look to be delivered out of that jayle. Our
Romanists indeed do commonly take it for granted, that Bishop against Perkins
reform. Catholic, part. 2. page 149.
Purgatory and prayer for the dead be so closely lincked together, that the one
does necessarily follow the other: but in so doing, they reckon without their
host, and greatly mistake the matter. For howsoever they may deal with their
own devises as they please, and lincke their Prayers with their Purgatory as
closely as they list: yet shall they never be able to show, that the
commemoration and prayers for the dead, used by the ancient Church, had any
relation unto their Purgatory; and therefore whatsoever they were, Popish
prayers we are sure they were not. I easily foresee, that the full opening of
the judgment of the Fathers in this point, will hardly stand with that
brevitie which I intended to use in treating of these latter questions: the
particulars be so many, that necessarily do incur into the handling of this
argument. But I suppose the Reader will be content rather to dispense with that
promise, whereby I did abridge my self of the liberty which otherwise I
might freely have taken: than be sent away unsatisfied in a matter, wherein the
Adversary bears himself confident beyond measure, that the whole stream of
antiquity runs clearly upon his side.

That the truth then of things may the better appear: we are here prudently to
distinguish the original institution of the Church, from the private opinions
of particular Doctors which waded further herein then the general intendment
of the Church did give them warrant; and diligently to consider, that the
memorialls, oblations and prayers made for the dead at the beginning, had
reference to such as rested from their labors, and not unto any souls which
were thought to be tormented in that Vtopian Purgatory, whereof there was no
news stirring in those days. This may be gathered, first, by the practice of
the ancient Christians, laid down by the author of the Commentaries upon Job,
(which are wrongly ascribed unto Origin) in this manner. Propterea and memorias
sanctoru^ sacimus and parentum nostrorum vel amicorum in fide morientium devote
memoriam agimus; tam illorum refrigerio gaudentes, quam etiam nobis piam
consummationem in fide postulantes. Celebramus nimirum, religiosos cum
sacerdotibus convocantes, fideles una ^um clero; invitantes adhuc egenos and
pauperes, pupillos and viduas saturantes: ut fiat festivitas nostra in memoria^
requiei defunctis animabus, nobis autem efficiatur in odorem suavitatis in
conspectu aeterni Dei Lib. 3. commentar. in Job, inter opera Origenis.
We observe the memorialls of the Saints, and devoutly keep the remembrance
of our parents or friends which dye in the faith; as well rejoicing for their
refreshing, as requesting also for our selves a godly consummation in the
faith. Thus therefore do we celebrate the death, not the day of the birth:
because they which dye, shall live for ever. and we celebrate it, calling
together religious persons with the Priests, the faithful with the Clergy;
inviting moreover the needy and the poor, feeding the orphans and widows:
that our festivity may be for a memorial of rest to the souls departed whose
remembrance we celebrate, and to us may become a sweet savor in the sight of
the eternal God. Secondly, by that which S. Cyprian writes of Laurentinus and
Ignatius: whom he acknowledges to have received of the Lord palms and crowns
for their famous martyrdom, and yet presently adds. Sacrificia pro eis
semper, ut meministis, offerimus; quoties martyrum passiones and dies
anniversaria commemoratione celebramus. Cyprian. epist. 34.
We offer sacrifices always for them, when we celebrate the passions and
days of the martyrs with an anniversarie commemoration. Thirdly, by that which
we read in the author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, set out under the name
of Dionysius the Areopagite. For where the party deceased is described by him
to have departed out of this life Vid. supr. page 167.
replenished with divine joy, as now not fearing any change to worse, being
come unto the end of all his labors; and to have been both privately
acknowledged by his friends, and publicly pronounced by the ministers of the
Church to be a happy man, and to be verily admitted into the (...). Dionys.
Ecclesiact. hierarch. cap 7.
society of the Saints that have been from the beginning of the world: yet
does he declare, that the Bishop made prayer for him, (upon what ground we
shall afterward hear) that (...). Ibid.
God would forgive him all the sins that he had committed through humane
infirmity, and bring him into the light and the land of the living, into the
bosoms of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, into the place from whence pain and
sorrow and sighing flies. Fourthly, by the funeral ordinances of the Church,
related by S. Chrysostom: which were appointed to admonish the living, that
the parties deceased were in a state of joy and not of grief. (...); Chrysostom.
in epist. ad H^br. homil. 4.
For tell me (says he) what do the bright lamps mean? do we not accompany
them therewith as champions? What mean the Hymns? (...). Id. ibid.
Consider what thou do sing at that time. Return my soul unto thy rest; for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. and again: I will fear no evil,
because thou art with me. and again: Thou art my refuge from the affliction
that compasses me. Consider what these Psalms mean.

Fifthly, by the forms of the prayers that are found in the ancient Liturgies.
as in that of the Churches of Syria, attributed unto S. Basil: Memento etiam
Domine eorum qui decesserunt migraruntque ex hac vita and Episcoporum
orthodoxorum qui inde a Petro and Iacobo Apostolis ad hunc usque diem, rectu^
Fidei verbu^ clare sunt professi; and nominatim Ignatij, Dionysij, Iulij, ac
reliquoru^ Divoru^ laudabilis memoriae. Memento Domine eoru^ quoque qui usque
ad sanguinem pro Religione steteru^t, and Gregem tuu^ sacrum per justitia^ and
sanctitatem paverunt, etc. Basilij Anaphora, ab Andr. Masio. ex Syriaco
conversa.
Be mindful, O Lord, of them which are dead, and are departed out of this
life, and of the orthodoxe Bishops which from Peter and James the Apostles
until this day have clearly professed the right word of Faith; and namely, of
Ignatius, Dionysius, Julius, and the rest of the Saints of worthy memory. Be
mindful, O Lord, of them also which have stood unto blood for Religion, and by
righteousness and holiness have fedd thy holy Flock. and in the Liturgy
fathered upon the Apostles: (...), etc. Conctitus. Apostolic. lib. 8. cap. 12.
We offer unto thee for all the Saints which have pleased thee from the
beginning of the world, Patriarchs, Prophets, Just men, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Bishops, Priests, Deacons, etc. and in the Liturgies of the
Churches of Egypt, which carry the title of S. Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, and
Cyrill of Alexandria. Memento Domine sanctorum tuoru^: dignare ut recorderis
omniu^ sanctorum tuorum, qui tibi placuerunt ab initio, Patrum nostrorum
sanctorum, Patriarcharum, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, Martyru^, Confessorum,
Euangelizantium, Euangelistaru^, and omnium spirituum justoru^, qui obierunt in
fide: and inprimis sanctae, gloriosae semperque virginis Dei genitricis Mariae;
and sancti Ioannis Praecursoris, Baptistae and Martyris; Sancti Stephani
protodiaconi and protomartyris; Sancti Marci Apostoli, Euangelistae and
Martyris; etc. Liturg. Aegyptiac. Basilij, Gregorij* and Cyrilli, a Victorio
Scialach ex Arabico convers page 22.47. and 60. ed^t. August ann. 1604.
Be mindful, O Lord, of thy Saints: vouchsafe to remember all thy Saints,
which have pleased thee from the beginning, our holy Fathers, the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Preachers, Evangelists, and all the
souls of the just, which have dyed in the faith: and especially, the holy,
glorious, the evermore Virgin, Mary the mother of God; and S. John the
forerunner, the Baptist and Martyr; S. Stephen the first Deacon and Martyr; S.
Mark the Apostle, Evangelist and Martyr; etc. and in the Liturgy of the
Church of Constantinople, ascribed to S. Chrysostom: (...). Chrysostom. Li^urg.
Graec.
We offer unto thee this reasonable service, for those who are at rest in the
faith, our Forefathers, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, religious persons, and every
spirit perfected in the faith. but especially for our most holy, immaculate,
most blessed Lady, the mother of God and aye-virgin Mary. which kind of
oblation for the Saints sounding somewhat harshly in the ears of the Latins,
Leo Thuscus in his translation thought best to express it to their better
liking after this manner. Adhuc offerimu^ tibi rationabile hoc obsequium pro
fideliter dormientibus, pro patribus and proavis nostris* intervenientibus
Patriarchis, Prophetis, Apostolis, Martyribus, Confessoribus, and omnibus
Sanctis. Chrysostom. Liturg. Latin.
We offer unto thee this reasonable service for the faithfully deceased, for
our fathers and forefathers; the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, and all the Saints interceding for them. As if the phrase of (...);
Chrysostom. homil. 21. in Act. tom. 4. edit. Savil. page 736. and tom. 7. page
928.
offering for the Martyrs, were not to be found in S. Chrysostoms own works:
and more universally (...). Epiphan. haeres. 75.
for the just, both the Fathers, and the Patriarchs, the Prophets and
Apostles, and Evangelists and Martyrs and Confessors, the Bishops and such as
ledd a solitary life, and the whole order; in the suffrages of the Church,
rehearsed by Epiphanius. yea and in the Western Church it self: Pro spiritibus
pausantiu^ Hilarij, Athanasij, Martini, Ambrosij, Augustini, Fulgentij,
Leandri, Isidori, etc. Offic. ^^zarab. apud Eugen. R^bi^sium, in vi^a Francis^i
Ximenij.
for the spirits of those that are at rest, Hilary, Athanasius, Martin,
Ambrose, Augustine, Fulgentius, Leander, Isidorus, etc. as may be seen in the
Muzarabicall Office used in Spain.

Sixthly, this may be confirmed out of the funeral orations of S. Ambrose: in
one whereof, touching the Emperor Valentinian and his brother Gratian, thus he
speaks. Credamus quia ascendit a deserto, hoc est, ex hoc arido and inculto
loco ad illas florulentas delectationes, ubi cum fratre conjunctus aeternae
vitae fruitur voluptate. Beati ambo: si quid meae orationes valebunt; nulla
dies vos silentio praeteribit. Nulla inhonoratos vos mea transibit oration.
Nulla nox non donatos aliqua precum mearum contextione transcurret Omnibus vos
oblationibu^ frequentabo. Ambros. ^e obitu Valentinians Imp.
Let us believe that Valentinian is ascended from the desert, that is to say,
from this dry and unmanured place unto those flowery delights; where being
conjoined with his brother, he enjoys the pleasure of everlasting life.
Blessed are you both: if my orizons shall prevayle any thing; no day shall
overslip you in silence. no oration of mine shall pass you over unhonoured. no
night shall run by, wherein I will not bestow upon you some portion of my
prayers. With all oblations will I frequent you. In another, he prays thus
unto God: Da requiem perfecto servo tuo Theodosio, requiem quam praeparasti
sanctis tuis. Id. de obitu Theodosij Imp.
Give rest unto thy perfect servant Theodosius, that rest which thou have
prepared for thy Saints. and yet he had said before of him: Absolutus igitur
dubio certamine fruitur nunc augustae memoriae Theodosius luce perpetua,
tranquillitate diutu^na; and pro ijs quae in hoc gessit corpore, munerationis
divinae fructibus gratulator. Ergo quia dilexit augustae memoriae Theodosius
Dominum Deum suum, meruit sanctoru^ consortia. Id. ibid.
Theodosius of honorable memory being freed from doubtful fight, does now
enjoy everlasting light and continual tranquillity; and for the things which
he did in this body, he rejoices in the fruits of Gods reward: because he
loved the Lord his God, he has obtained the society of the Saints. and
afterward also. Manet ergo in lumine Theodosius, and sanctorum caetibus
gloriatur. Ibid.
Theodosius remains in light, and glories in the company of the Saints. In
a third, he prays thus for his brother Satyrus: Tibi nunc omnipotens Deus
innoxiam commendo animam, tibi hostiam meam offero: cape propitius ac serenus
fraternum munus, sacrificiu^ sacerdotis. Id. de obi^u fratris.
Almighty God, I now commend unto thee his harmless soul, to thee do I
make my oblation; accept mercifully and graciously the office of a brother, the
sacrifice of a Priest. although he had directly pronounced of him before, that
Intravit in regnum coelorum, quoniam credidit Dei verbo, etc. Id. ibid.
he had entered into the kingdom of heaven, because he believed the word of
God, and excelled in many notable virtues. Lastly, in one of his Epistles he
comfort Faustinus for the death of his sister, after this manner. Tot igitur
semirutarum urbium cadavera, terrarumque sub eodem conspectu exposita funera;
non te admonent unius, sanctae licet and admirabilis* foeminae decessionem
consolabiliorem habendam? praesertim cum illa in perpetuum prostrata ac ^iruta
sint; haec autem ad tempus quidem erepta nobis meliorem illic vitam exigat.
Itaque non tam deplorandam, quam prosequenda^ orationibus reor: nec
moestificanda^ lachrymis ^uis, sed magis oblationibus animam ejus Domino
co^mendandam arbitror. Id. epist. 8.
Do not the carkases of so many halfe-ruined cities, and the funerals of so
much land exposed under one view, admonish thee; that the departure of one
woman, although a holy and an admirable one, should be born with greater
consolation? especially seeing they are cast down and overthrowen for ever; but
she, being taken from us but for a time, does pass a better life there. I
therefore think, that she is not so much to be lamented, as to be followed
with prayers: and am of the mind, that she is not to be made sad with thy
tears, but rather that her soul should be commended with oblations unto the
Lord. Thus far S. Ambrose. Unto whom we may adjoyne Gregory Nazianzen also:
who in his funeral oration that he made upon his brother Caesarius, having
acknowledged that he had (...). Greg. Nazianz in fun. Caesarij, orat. 10.
received those honors that did befit a new created soul, which the Spirit
had reformed by water (for he had been but lately baptized before his
departure out of this life) does notwithstanding pray, (...) Ibid.
that the Lord would be pleased to receive him.

Diverse instances of the like practice in the ages following, I have produced
in another Discourse of the Religion prof^ssed by ^he ancient I^ish. page
21.22.23.
place: to which I will add some few more, to the end that the Reader may from
thence observe, how long the primitive institution of the Church did hold up
head among the tares that grew up with it, and in the end did quite choke and
extinguish it. Our English Saxons had learned of Gregory to pray for relief of
those souls that were supposed to suffer pain in Purgatory: and yet the
introducing of that noveltie was not able to justle out the ancient usage of
making prayers and oblations for them which were not doubted to have been at
rest in Gods kingdom. And therefore the brethren of the Church of Hexham, in
the anniversarie commemoration of the obite of Oswald King of Northumberland,
used Vigilias pro salute animae ejus facere, plurimaque psalmorum land
celebrata, victima^ pro eo mane sacrae oblationis offerre. Bed* lib. 3. histor.
Ecclesiast. cap. 2.
to keep their Vigiles for the health of his soul, and having spent the night
in praising of God with psalms, to offer for him in the morning the sacrifice
of the sacred oblation, as Beda writes: who tells us yet withal, that Id.
ibid. cap. 12. and 14.
he reigned with God in heaven, and by his praye^s procured many miracles to
be wrought on earth. So likewise does the same Bid Id. lib. 4. hist. cap. 23.
report, that when it was discovered by two several visions, that Hilda the
Abbess of Streansheale (or Whitby in Yorkshire) was carried up by the Angels
into heaven; they which heard thereof presently caused prayers to be said for
her soul. And Osberne relates the like of Dunstan: that being at Bathe, and
Repent ad superna rap^us cujusdam discipuli nobiliter a se apud Glestoniam
educati animam innumera Angeloru^ frequentia hinc inde stipatam, atque immensi
luminis sulgore perfusam, ad coeli palatium provehi conspexit. Moxque in manus
divi^ae pietatis ea^ commendans, dominos quoque loci ad commendandum invitat.
Osbernus, in vita S. Dunstani, MS. in Bibli^thec. Cottoniana and ^odl^iana.
Notandum vero, in Io. Capgravij Legenda (in qua prior narrationis huius pars ad
verbum ex Osberno, ut alia de Dunstano complura, descripta cernitur)
p^steriorem hanc sententiam omit^i peni^us: in Eadm^ro vero (ex quo, non autem
ex Osberno vel O^berto, Vita Dunstani quae May. 19. apud Surium legitur est
desumpta) ita tantummodo ref^rri. Qui pro tanta gloria fratris ultra quam dici
queat exultans, and immensas cord and ore Deo cunctipotenti gratias agens;
socijs quid acciderit manifesta voce exposuit, and diem ac horam transitus ejus
notari praecepit.
beholding in such another vision the soul of one that had been his scholar at
Glastenbury, to be carried up into the palace of heaven; he straightway
commended the same into the hands of the divine pie^ie, and entreated the lords
of the place where he was to do so likewise.

Other narrations of the same kind may be found among them that have written of
Saints lives: and particularly in the Tome published by Mosander, page 69.
touching the decease of Bathildis Queen of France; and pa. 25. concerning the
departure of Godfry Earl of Cappenberg. who is said there to have appeared
unto a certain Abbess, called Gerbergis, and to have acquainted her, Noveris,
ait, me modo sine ulla dilatione, aut ullo severioris examinis periculo ad
summi Regis palatium commigrasse, atque tanquam Regis immortalis filium beata
immortalitate vestitum. Vit. Godefrid. cap. 13. a Iac. Mosandro edit. Colon.
an. 1581.
that he was now without all delay, and without all danger of any more severe
trial, gone unto the palace of the highest King, and as the son of the
immortal King was clothed with blessed immortality. and the Monk that writ
the Legend adds, that Mox fratribus Cappenbergensibus indicavit beati viri
obitum, and pro eo Missae sacrificium offerendum curavit. Ibid.
she presently thereupon caused the sacrifice of the Mass to be offered for
him. which how fabulous soever it may be for the matter of the vision, yet does
it strongly prove, that within these 500. years (for no longer since it is,
that this is accounted to have been done) the use of offering for the souls of
those that were believed to be in heaven was still retained in the Church. The
letters of Charles the great unto Offa King of Mercia are yet extant; wherein
he Deprecantes ut pro eo intercedi jubeatis: nullam habentes dubitatione^,
beatam illius animam in requie esse; sed ut fidem and dilectionem nostram
ostendamus in amicum nostrum charissimum. Carol. M. apud Guil. Malmesburiens.
de g^st. reg. Anglor. li. 1. cap. 4.
wishes that intercessions should be made for Pope Adrian then lately
deceased: not having any doubt at all (says he) but that his blessed soul is
at rest; but that we may show our faithfulness and love unto our most dear
friend. Lastly, Pope Innocent the third (or the second rather) being inquired
of by the Bishop of Cremona, concerning the state of a certain Priest that
dyed without Baptism: resolves him out of S. Augustine and S. Ambrose, that
Quia in sanctae matris Ecclesiae fide, and Christi nominis confessione
perseveravit; ab originali peccato solutum, and coelestis patriae gaudium esse
adeptum, asserimus incunctanter. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 43. de presbytero non
baptizato, cap. 2. Apostolicam. and Collect. 1. Bernardi Papiensis, lib. 5.
^it. 35 cap. 2.
because he continued in the faith of the holy mother the Church and the
confession of the name of Christ; he was assoyled from original sin, and had
attained the joy of the heavenly country. Upon which ground at last he makes
this conclusion: Sopitis igitur quaestionibus, docto^um patru^ sententias
teneas: and in Ecclesia tua juges preces hostiasque Deo offerri jubeas pro
presbytero memorato. Ibid.
Ceasing therefore all questions, hold the sentences of the learned Fathers;
and command continual prayers and sacrifices to be offered unto God in thy
Church for the foresaid Priest.

Now having thus declared, unto what kind of persons the Commemorations
ordained by the ancient Church did extend: the next thing that comes to
consideration is, what we are to conceive of the primarie intention of those
prayers that were appointed to be made therein. And here we are to understand,
that first prayers of Praise and Thankesgiving were presented unto God for the
blessed estate that the party deceased was now entered upon: whereunto were
afterward added prayers of Deprecation and Petition, that God would be pleased
to forgive him his sins, to keep him from Hell, and to place him in the
kingdom of Heaven. which kind of intercessions, howsoever at first they were
well meant (as we shall hear) yet in process of time they proved an occasion
of confirming men in diverse errors; especially when they began once to be
applied not only to the good but to evil livers also, unto whom by the first
institution they never were intended.

The term of (...), a thankesgiving prayer, I borrow from the writer of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy: who in the description of the funeral observances
used of old in the Church, informs us, first, that the friends of the dead
(...) ( vel (...). Dionys. Ecclesiast. Hierarch. cap. 7.
accounted him to be (as he was) blessed, because that according to his wish he
had obtained a victorious end: and thereupon sent forth Hymns of thankesgiving
to the author of that victory; desiring withal, that they themselves might
come unto the like end. and then that (...). Ibid.
the Bishop likewise offered up a prayer of thankesgiving unto God; when the
dead was afterward (...). Ibid.
brought unto him, to receive as it were at his hands a sacred coronation. Thus
at the funeral of Fabiola, the praising of God by singing Sonabant Psalmi; and
aurata tecta templorum, reboans in sublime qua^icbat alleluia. Hieronym.
inepitaphio Fabiola, epist. 30.
of Psalms, and resounding of Alleluia, is specially mentioned by S. Hierom:
and the general practice and intention of the Church therein is expressed and
earnestly urged by S. Chrysostom in this manner. (...). Chrysostom. in epist. ad
Hebr. homil. 4.
Do not we praise God, and give thanks unto him for that he has now crowned
him that is departed, for that he has freed him from his labors, for that
quitting him from fear he keeps him with himself? Are not the Hymns for
this end? Is not the singing of Psalms for this purpose? All these be tokens
of rejoicing. Whereupon he thus presses them that used immoderate mourning
for their dead. (...); Id. ibid.
Thou say; Return, O my soul, unto thy rest, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee: and do thou weep? Is not this a stage play, is it not
mere simulation? For if thou do indeed believe the things that thou say,
thou lamentest idely: but if thou playest, and dissemblest, and think these
things to be fables; why do thou then sing? why do thou suffer those
things that are done? Wherefore do thou not drive away them that sing? and
in the end he concludes somewhat prophetically; that he (...) Ibid.
very much feared, lest by this means some grievous disease should creep in
upon the Church.

Whether the doctrine now maintained in the Church of Rome, that the children
of God presently after their departure out of this life, are cast into a lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, be not a spice of this disease, and
whether their practice in chanting of Psalms (appointed for the expression of
joy and thankfulness) over them whom they esteem to be tormented in so
lamentable a fashion, be not a part of that scene and pageant at which S.
Chrysostom does so take on: I leave it unto others to judge. That his fear was
not altogether vain, the event it self does show. For howsoever in his days,
the fire of the Romish Purgatory was not as yet kindled: yet were there
certain sticks then a gathering, which ministered fuel afterward unto that
flame. Good S. Augustine, (who lived three and twenty years after S.
Chrysostoms death) declared himself to be of this mind: that the Cum
sacrificia sive altaris sive quarumcunque eleemosynarum pro baptizatis
defunctis omnibus offeruntur; pro valde bonis gratiarum actiones sunt, pro non
valde malis propitiationes sunt, pro valde malis etsi nulla sunt adjumenta
mortiorum, qualescunque vivoru^ consolationes sunt. Augus^in. En^h^rid. ad
Laurent. cap. 110.
oblations and alms usually offered in the Church for all the dead that
received baptism, were thankesgivings for such as were very good,
propitiations for such as were not very bad; but as for such as were very
evil, although they were no helps of the dead, yet were they some kind of
consolations of the living. And although this were but a private exposition of
the Churches meaning in her prayers and oblations for the dead; and the opinion
of a Doctor too, that did not hold Purgatory to be any article of his Creed:
yet did the Romanists in times following greedily take hold of this, and make
it the maine foundation upon which they laid the hay and stubble of their
devised Purgatory.

A private exposition I call this: not only because it is not to be found in
the writings of the former Fathers, but also because it suteth not well with
the general practice of the Church which it intends to interpret. It may
indeed fit in some sort that part of the Church Service, wherein there was made
a several commemoration, first of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and
Martyrs, after one manner; and then of the other dead, after another: which,
together with the conceit that Augustine. de Verbis Apostoli, sermon. 17.
an injury was offered to a Martyr, by praying for him, was it that first
occasioned S. Id. ibid. and in Euang. Johan. tracta^. 84.
Augustine to think of the former distinction. But in the Non sunt
praetermittendae supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum: quas faciendas pro
omnibus in Christiana and Catholica societate defunctis, etiam tacitis
nominibus quorumque, sub generali commemoratione suscepit Ecclesia. Id. de Cura
pro mortuis, cap 4.
supplications for the spirits of the dead, which the Church under a general
commemoration was accustomed to make for all that we^e deceased in the
Christian and Catholic communion: to imagine, that one and the same act of
praying should be a petition for some, and for others a thankesgiving only, is
somewhat too harsh an interpretation. especially where we find it propounded by
way of petition, and the intention thereof directly expressed. as in the Greek
Liturgy, attributed to S. James, the brother of our Lord: (...). Jacob. Liturg.
Be mindful (O Lord God of the spirits and of all flesh) of such as we have
remembered and such as we have not remembered, being of right belief, from Abel
the just until this present day. Do thou cause them to rest in the land of the
living, in thy kingdom, in the delight of Paradise, in the bosoms of Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob, our holy fathers: whence grief and sorrow and sighing are
fledd, where the light of thy countenance does visit them and shine for ever.
and in the Offices compiled by Alcuinus: Te, Domine sancte Pater omnipotens
aeterne Deus, supplices deprecamur pro spiritibus famulorum and famu^arum
tuarum, quos ab origin seculi hujus ad te accersire praecepisti: u^ digneri^,
Domine, dare eis locum luc^dum, locum refrigerij and quietis; and ut liceat eis
transire portas infernorum, and vias tenebrarum, maneantque in mansionibus
Sanctorum, and in luce sancta quam olim Abrahae promisisti and semini ejus
Alcuin. Offic. per ferias. col. 228. Oper. edit. Pa^is. ann. 16.7.
O Lord, holy Father, almighty and everlasting God, we humbly make request
unto thee for the spirits of thy servants and handmaydes, which from the
beginning of this world thou have called unto thee: that thou would
vouchsafe, O Lord, to give unto them a lightsome place, a place of refreshing
and ease; and that they may pass by the gates of hell, and the vvayes of
darkness, and may abide in the mansions of the Saints, and in the holy light
which thou did promise of old unto Abraham and his seed.

So the Commemoration of the faithful departed, retained as yet in the Roman
Missall, is begun with this orizon: Requiem aeternam dona eis Domine: et lux
perpetua luceat eis. Intruitus Missae, in Commem^ratione omnium fidelium
defunctoru^. Age^da mortuoru^. in Antiphonario Gregorij, circ fin.
Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord: and let everlasting light shine unto
them. Whereunto we may add these two prayers (to omit a great number more of
the like kind) used of old in the same Church. Suscipe, sancta Trinitas, ha^c
oblatione^, qua^ tibi offerimus pro omnibus in tui nominis confessione
defunctis: ut te dextera^ auxilij tui porrigente, vitae perennis requie^
habea^t; and a poenis impioru^ segregati, semp^r in tuae laudis laetitia
persevere^t. Miss^^ Latinae antiqua, edit. A^gentin. an. 1557. pa^. 52.
Receive, O holy Trinity, this oblation, which we offer unto thee for all
that are departed in the confession of thy name: that thou reaching unto them
the right hand of thy help, they may have the rest of everlasting life; and
being separated from the punishments of the wicked, they may always persevere
in the joy of thy praise. and, Hanc igitur oblatione^, qua^ tibi pro
co^memoratione animaru^ in pace dormientiu^ suppliciter immolamus, quae sumus,
Domine, benignus accipias; and tua pietate co^cedas, ut and nobis proficiat
hujus p^etatis affectus, and illis impetret beatitudinem sempiternam. Offic.
Gregorian. tom. 5. Oper. Gr^gor. edit Paris an. 1605. col. 235.236. Tom. 2.
Li^urgic. Pamelij page 610 and Praefation. verust ^^it. Colon an. 1530. number.
111.
This oblation, which we humbly offer unto thee for the commemoration of the
souls that sleep in peace, we beseech thee, O Lord, receive graciously; and
of thy goodness grant, that both the affection of this piety may profit us,
and obtain for them everlasting bliss. Where you may observe, that the souls
unto which everlasting bliss was wished for, were yet acknowledged to rest in
peace, and consequently not to be disquieted with any Purgatory torment. even
as in the Canon of the Mass it self, the Priest in the Commemoration for the
dead prays thus: Memento etiam, Domine, famuloru^ famularamque tuarum, qui
nos praecesserunt cum signo fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis. Ipsis Domine,
and omnibus in Christo quiesce^tibus, locu^ refrigerij, lucis and pacis, ut
indulgeas, deprecamur. Canon. Missae, in Officio Ambrosiano and Gregoriano, and
Missa^. Roma^o in Graeca tamen Li^urgia B. Petro at^ributa pro Co^memoratione
defunctoru^ posita ^ic cernitu^ Comm^mora^io viventium ((...).) and in
vetustissimis quibusda^ Romany Missalibus manuscriptis, haec mortuoru^
co^memorationi^ formula nusqua^ extat: (P. (...) lib 5. de adultera^. Coen.
Dom. and Miss myst^r cap. 48.) a^nominatim in votust^ssimo Canone Gregoriano,
qu^ in Tigurinae Abbatiae Biblioth^ca habebatur, ex authentico libro
Bibliothecae cubiculi descriptus, (apud Henric. Bullinger lib. 2. de Origin
erroris, cap. 8.)
Remember, O Lord, thy servants and handmaydes, which have gone before us with
the ensign of faith, and sleep in the sleep of peace. To them, O Lord, and
to all that are at rest in Christ, we beseech thee that thou would grant a
place of refreshing, light, and peace.

Nay the Armenians in their Liturgy, entreat God to P^r han^ etiam obl^tione^
da aeterna^ pa^e^ omnibus. qui nos praece^serunt in fide Christi, ^anctis
patribus, Patriarchis, Apostolis, Prophetis, Martyribus, etc. Litu^g. Armen.
edi^. Cra^^viae, Andrea Lubel^z^ck interp^.
give eternal peace, not only in general unto all that have gone before us in
the faith of Christ; but also in particular to the Patriarchs, Apostles,
Prophets, and Martyrs. which makes directly for the opinion of those (against
whom S^d hic nonnulli decepti sunt, non gratiarum actionem, sed pro sanctis ad
Deu^ supplicatione^, eorum memoriam esse putantes. Cabasil. exposit. Liturg.
cap. 49.
Nicolaus Cabasilas does dispute) who held, that these Commemorations contained
a supplication for the Saints unto God, and not a thankesgiving only. as also
do those forms of prayer which were used in the Roman Liturgy in the days
of Pope Innocent the third: Prosit vel proficiat, huic sancto vel illi, talis
oblatio ad gloriam. Innocent. III. epist. ad archiep. Lugdun. lib. 3. Decretal
tit. 41. de celebrat. missar. cap. 6. Cum Marthae.
Let such an oblation profit such or such a Saint unto glory. and especially
that for S. Leo, which is found in the elder copies of the Gregorian
Sacramentarie. Annue nobis, Domine, ut animae famuli tui Leonis haec prosit
oblatio. Gregor. oper. tom 5. edit. Paris. an. 1^05. col 135 d.
Grant unto us, O Lord, that this oblation may profit the soul of thy servant
Leo. for which the later books have chopped in this prayer: Annue nobis Domine,
ut intercessione famuli tui Leonis haec nobis prosit oblatio. Liturgic.
Pamelij, tom. 2. page 314.
Grant unto us, O Lord, that by the intercession of thy servant Leo this
oblation may profit us. Concerning which alteration, when the archbishop of
Lions propounded such another question unto Pope Innocent, as our Challenger at
the beginning did unto us; Tertio loco tua fraternitas requirit, quis
mutaverit, vel quando fuit mutatum, aut quare, quod in secreta beati Leonis,
secundum quod antiquiores codice^ cont^nent, etc. Inno^ent. ^11. in Collect. 3.
De^retal. (Petri Beneventam) l^b. 3. tit 33 cap. 5.
who it was that did change it, or when it was changed, or why? the Pope
returns him for answer: Super quo ribi taliter respondemus: quod quis illud
mutaverit, aut quando mutatum fuerit, ignoramus; scimus tamen, qua fuerit
occasion mutatum. quia cum sacrae scripturae dicat auctoritas, quod injuriam
facit martyri, qui orat pro martyr: idem est ratione consimili de sanctis
alijs sciendum. Ibid.
that who did change it, or when it was changed, he was ignorant of; yet he
knew, upon what occasion it was changed. because that, where the authority of
the Holy Scripture does say, that he does injury unto a Martyr who prays for
a Martyr, which is a new text of holy Scripture, of the Popes own
canonization) the same by the like reason is to be held of other Saints. The
Gloss upon this Decretall lays down the reason of this mutation a little
more roundly: Olim orabatur pro ipso: hodie ipse orat pro nobis. et ita mutatum
est. Cap. Cum Marthae. Extra. de celebr. Missar. in Glossa.
Of old they prayed for him, now at this day he prays for us; and so was
the change made. And Alphons. Mendoz Controvers. Theolog. quaest. 6.
scholastic. ^um. 7.
Alphonsus Mendoza tells us, that the old prayer was deservedly disused, and
this other substituted in the room thereof: Grant unto us, we beseech thee O
Lord, that by the intercession of thy servant Leo this oblation may profit us.
which prayer indeed was to be found heretofore in modernioribus Sacramentarijs
(as Pope Innocent speaks) and in the Roman Missalls that were published
before the Council of Trent (as namely in that which was printed at Paris, an.
1529.) but in the new reformed Missall (wherewith, it seems, Mendoza was not
so well acquainted as with his Scholasticall controversies) it is put out
again, and another prayer for Leo put in; that by the celebration of those Vt
per haec piae placationis officia, et illum beata retributio comitetur, and
nobis gratiae tuae dona conciliet. Missal. Roman. ex decreto Council. Tridentin.
restitut. in festo S. Leonis.
offices of atonement, a blessed retribution might accompany him. Neither is
there any more wrong done unto S. Leo, in praying for him after this manner,
then unto all the rest of his fellows in that other prayer of the Roman
Liturgy: Sumpsimus, Domine, divina mysteria: quae sicut Sanctis tuis prosunt
ad gloriam, ita nobis, quaesumus, proficiant ad medelam Bellarmin. de Purgator.
lib. 2. cap. 18. Six^, Senens. lib. 6. Bibliothec. Sanct. annotat. 47. ex
Gregorij Sacramentario.
We have received, O Lord, the divine mysteries; which as they do profit thy
Saints unto glory, so we do beseech thee that they may profit us for our
healing, and nothing so much as is done unto all the faithful deceased, when
in their Masses for the dead they say daily: Domine Jesus Chris^e, rex gloriae,
libera animas omniu^ fidelium defunctorum de poenis inferni, and de profundo
lacu: liberae eas de ore leonis, ne absorbeat eas Tartarus, ne cadant in
obscurum. Missa in Commemorat. omniu^ fidelium defunctorum. and in Missi^
Quotidianis defunctoru^. in Offertorio.
Lord Jesus Christ, king of glory, deliver the souls of all the faithful that
are departed, from the pains of Hell, and from the deep lake; deliver them
from the mouth of the Lion, that Hell do not swallow them up, that they fall
not into darkness. So that whatsoever commodious expositions our Adversaries
can bring for the justifying of the Roman service: the same may we make use
of, to show, that the ancient Church might pray for the dead, and yet in so
doing have no relation at all unto Purgatory; yea and pray for the Martyrs and
other Saints that were in the state of bliss, without offering unto them any
injury thereby.

For the clearing of the meaning of those prayers which are made for Leo, and
the other Saints, to the two expositio^s brought in by Pope Innocent,
Cardinal Bellarmine adds this for a third; Add tertio, fortasse peti
gloriam corporis, quam habebunt in die resurrectionis. Nam etiamsi gloriam
illam ce^to consequentur, and debetur eorum meritis; tamen non est absurdum hoc
illis desiderare and petere, ut pluribus modis debeatur. Bellarmin de Purgator.
li. 2. ca. 18.
that peradventure therein the glory of the body is petitioned for, which they
shall have in the day of the Resurrection. For although (says he) they shall
certainly obtain that glory, and it be due unto their merits; yet it is not
absurd to desire and ask this for them, that by more means it may be due unto
them. Where, laying aside those unsavourie terms of debt and merits (whereof
we shall have occasion to treat in their proper place) the answer is otherwise
true in part, but not full enough to give satisfaction unto that which was
objected. For the primary intention of the Church indeed, in her prayers for
the dead, had reference unto the day of the Resurrection: which also in diverse
places we find to have been expressly prayed for. as in the Egyptian
Liturgy, attributed unto S. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria. Resuscita corpora
eoru^, in die quem constituisti, secundum promissiones tuas veras and mendacij
expertes: concede eis secundum promissa tua, id quod non vi^it oculus, and
auris non audivit, and quod in cor hominis no^ ascendi^, quod praeparasti
Domine amatoribus nominis ^ui sancti; ut samuli tui non p^rmaneant in morte,
sed ut inde emigrent, etiamsi p^rsecuta sit eos pigritia aut negligentia, etc
Cyrill. Liturg. a Victorio Sci^la^h. ex Arabico convers. page 62.
Raise up their bodies, in the day which thou have appointed, according to thy
promises which are true and cannot lie: grant unto them, according to thy
promises, that which eye has not seen, and ear has not heard, and which
has not ascended into the heart of man; which thou have prepared, O Lord, for
them that love thy holy name: that thy servants may not remain in death, but
may get out from thence; although slothfulness and negligence have followed
them. and in that which is used by the Christians of S. Thomas (as they are
commonly called) in the East Indies: Resurrectione^ faciat defunctis vestris in
die novissimo; and dignos faciat illos regno incorruptibili Spiritus sanctus
Missa Angamaliensis ex Sy^iaco convers in Itinerar. Alexij. Menesij.
Let the holy Gh^st give resurrection to your dead at the last day; and make
them worthy of the incorruptible kingdom. Such is the prayer of S. Ambrose
for Gratian and Valentinian the Emperors: Te quaeso; sum Deus, ut
charissimos juvenes matura resurrectione suscites and resuscites; ut immaturu^
hunc vitae istius cursu^ matura resurrectione compenses. Ambros. de obit
Valentin^ani: in ipso fine.
I do beseech thee, most high God, that thou would raise up again those
dear young men with a speedy resurrection; that thou may recompense this
untimely course of this present life with a timely resurrection. and that in
Alcuinus: Nulla^ laesione^ sustinea^t animae eoru^; sed cum magnus ille dies
resurrectionis ac remunerationis advenerit, resuscitare eos digneris, Domine,
una eu^ Sa^ctis and electis tuis. Alcuin Offi^ per f^rias; Oper. col 228
Prece^. Eccl^siast. a Georg. Cassan^ro colle^t. page ^84 oper.
Let their souls sustain no hurt; but when that great day of the resurrection
and remuneration shall come, vouchsafe to raise them up, O Lord, together with
thy Saints and thine elect. and that in Grimoldus his Sacramentarie:
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, collocare dignare corpus and anima^ and spiritu^
famuli tui N. in sinibus Abrahae, Isaac, and Jacob; ut cum dies agnitionis tuae
venerit, inter sanctos and electos tuos eu^ resuscitari praecipias G^imola
Sac^am^nt. tom. 2. Liturgi^ Pamel. page 456.457. Habetur eadem o^atio in
Missali R^mano nondum reformato (nam in novo ex de^reto Con^ilij ^^ridentini
restituto nusqua^ com^are^) corporis ta^tum mentione omissa: and tomo 5. oper.
Gregorij edit. Paris. an. 1605. col. 234. corporis simul and spiritus nominibus
praetermissis.
Almighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe to place the body and the soul and
the spirit of thy servant N. in the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; that
when the day of thy acknowledgement shall come, thou may command them to be
raised up among thy Saints and thine elect.

But yet the Cardinals answer, that the glory of the body may be prayed for,
which the Saints shall have at the day of the Resurrection, comes somewhat
short of that which the Church used to request in the behalf of S. Leo. For in
that prayer express mention is made of his soul: and to it is wished that
profit may redound by the present oblation. And therefore this defect must be
supplied out of his answer unto that other prayer which is m^de for the souls
of the faithful depa^ted, that they may be delivered out of the mouth of the
Lion, and that Hell may not swallow them up. To this he says; that Eccl^sia
orat pro animabus, quae in Pu^gatorio degu^^, ne damn^^tur ad poenas Gehennae
sempirernas; non quid^m quod certu^ non sit, eas non damnandas ad eas poenas,
sed quia vult Deus, no^ orare etia^ pro ijs rebus, quas certo accepturi sumus.
Bellarm. de Purgator. l^b. 2 cap. 5.
the Church does pray for these souls, that they may not be condemned unto the
everlasting pains of Hell: not as if it were not certain, that they should not
be condemned unto those pains, but because it is Gods pleasure that we should
pray, even for those things which we are certainly to receive. The same answer
did Alphonsus de Castro give before him: that Saepissime petuntur illa quae
certo sciuntur eventura ut petuntur: and hujus rei plurima sunt testimonia.
A^^h^ns Caestr. contr haeres. lib. 12. de Purgator. haer. 3.
very often those things are prayed for, which are certainly known shall come
to pass as they are prayed for; and that of this there be very many
testimonies. and Johannes Medina: that Gaudet Deus orari, etiam pro his, quae
alioqui facturus esset. Decreverat enim Deus post peccatum Adae, carnem sumere;
decrevitque tempus, quo venturus erat: and gratae illi fuerunt orationes
Sanctoru^ pro sua incarnation^, and adven^u orantium Decrevit etiam Deus omni
peccatori poenitenti venia^ dare and tamen grata est illi oration, qua vel ipse
poenitens pro se, vel aliu^ pro illo o^at, ut ejus poenitentia^ Deus acceptare
dignetur. Decrevit etiam Deus, and promisit Ecclesia^ ^ua^ non deserere, and
Concilijs legit^me congregatis adesse: and tamen grata est Deo o^atio, and
hymni, quibus ejus praese^tia, and favor, and gratia ipsi Concilio, and
Ecclesiae implora^ur. Io^. Medin. de Poe^it. tra^t. 6. quaest. 6. Codicis de
Oratione.
God d^lighteth to be prayed unto, even for those things, which otherwise he
purposed to do. For God had decreed (says he) after the sin of Adam to take
our flesh, and he decreed the time, wherein he meant to come: and yet the
prayers of the Saints, that prayed for his Incarnation and for his coming,
were acceptable unto him. God has also decreed to grant pardon unto every
repentant sinner: and yet the prayer is grateful unto him, wherein either the
penitent does pray for himself, or another for him, that God would be pleased
to accept his repentance. God has decreed also and promised, not to forsake
his Church, and to be present with Counsels lawfully assembled: yet the prayer
notwithstanding is grateful unto God, and the hymns, whereby his presence,
and favor, and grace, is implored both for the Council and the Church. And
whereas it might be objected, that howsoever the Church may sometimes pray for
those things which she shall certainly receive, yet she does not pray for
those things which she has already received; and this she has received,
that those souls shall not be damned, seeing they have received their
sentence, and are most secure from damnation: the Cardinal replieth, that this
objection may easily be avoided. Nam etsi animae Purgatorij jam acceperint
primam sententiam in judicio particulari, eaque sententia liberae sint a
Gehenna: tamen adhuc superest judicium generale, in quo secundam sententiam
accepturae sunt. Quocirca Ecclesia orans, ne in judicio extremo animae illae
cadant in obscurum, neve absorbeantur a tartaro, non orat pro ea re, quam
accepit, sed pro ea quam acceptura est anima, Bellarmin. ut suprae.
For although those souls (says he) have received already their first
sentence in the particular judgment, and by that sentence are freed from Hell:
yet does there yet remain the general judgment, in which they are to receive
the second sentence. Wherefore the Church praying, that those souls in the
last judgment may not fall into darkness, nor be swallowed up of Hell, does
not pray for the thing which the soul has, but which it shall receive. Thus
these men, laboring to show how the prayers for the dead used in their Church
may stand with their conceits of Purgatory, do thereby inform us how the
prayers for the dead, used by the ancient Church, may stand well enough without
the supposall of any Purgatory at all. For if we may pray for those things
which we are most sure shall come to pass; and the Church, by the Adversaries
own confession, did pray accordingly, that the souls of the faithful might
escape the pains of Hell at the general Judgment, notwithstanding they had
certainly been freed from them already by the sentence of the particular
Judgment: by the same reason, when the Church in times past besought God to
(...). Liturg. Basil. and Chrysostom.
remember all those that slept in the hope of the resurrection of everlasting
life (which is the form of prayer used in the Greek Liturgies) and to give
unto them rest, and to bring them unto the place where the light of his
countenance should shine upon them for evermore; why should not we think, that
it desired these things should be granted unto them by the last sentence at the
day of the Resurrection, notwithstanding they were formerly adjudged unto them
by the particular sentence at the time of their dissolution?

For as Quod enim in die judicij futuru^ est omnibus, hoc in singulis die
mortis impletur. Hieronym. in Joel. cap. 2.
that which shall befall unto all at the day of judgment, is accomplished in
every one at the day of his death: so on the other side, whatsoever befalls
the soul of every one at the day of his death, the same is fully accomplished
upon the whole man at the day of the general judgment. Whereupon we find,
that the Scriptures every where do point out that great day unto us, as the
time wherein mercy and forgiveness, rest and refreshing, joy and gladness,
redemption and salvation, rewards and crowns shall be bestowed upon all Gods
children, as in 2. Timoth. 1.16, 18. The Lord give mercy unto the house of
Onesiphorus: the Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in
that day. 1. Cor. 1.8. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore,
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. 2. Thessal. 1.6, 7. It is
a righteous thing with God, to recompense unto you which are troubled, rest
with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty
Angels. Philip. 2.16. That I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not
run in vain, neither labou^ed in vain. 1. Thessal. 2.19. For what is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? 1. Pet. 1. ^. Who are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. 1. Corinthians. 5.5. That the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Ephesians.
4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Luke 21.28. When these things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. 2. Timoth. 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righ^eousnesse, which the Lord
the righteous judge shall give me at that day. and Luke 14.14. Thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

And that the Church in her Offices for the dead had special respect unto this
time of the Resurrection: appears plainly, both by the portions of Scripture
appointed to be read therein, and by diverse particulars in the prayers
themselves that manifestly discover this intention. For there (...). D^onys.
(...). Ecclesiaest. ^ap. 7.
the ministers (as the writer of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy reports) read
those undoubted promises which are recorded in the divine Scriptures of our
holy Resurrection: and then devoutly sang such of the sacred Psalms as were of
the same subject and argument. And so accordingly in the Roman Missall, the
lessons ordained to be read for that time, are taken from 1. Corinthians. 15.
Behold I tell you a mystery. We shall all rise again, etc. Ioh. 5. The hour
comes wherein all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they that
have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life, etc. 1. Thessal.
4. Brethren, we would not have you ignorant concerning them that sleep, that
ye sorrow not, as others which have no hope. Ioh. 11. I am the resurrection
and the life: he that believes in me, although he were dead, shall live. 2.
Maccab. 12. Judas caused a sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the dead,
justly and religiously thinking of the Resurrection. Ioh. 6. This is the will
of my Father that sent me; that every one that sees the Son, and believes
in him, may have life everlasting: and I will raise him up at the last day.
and, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting: and
I will raise him up at the last day. and lastly, Apocal. 14. I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me: Write, Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord,
from henceforth now, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors;
for their works follow them. Wherewith the Sequence also does agree, beginning
Missal. Romans in Commemorat, omnium fideliu^ defunctor,
Dies irae, dies illa,
Solvet saeclum in favilla:
Test David cum Sibylla.
and ending; Lacrymosa dies illa,
Qua resurget ex favilla
Iudicandus homo reus.
Huic ergo parce Deus.
Pie Jesus Domine,
Dona eis requiem.


Tertullian in his book de Monogamia (which he wrote after he had been
infected with the heresy of the Montanists) speaking of the prayer of a widow
for the soul of her deceased husband, says that Enimvero and pro anima ejus
orat, and refrigerium interim ad postulat ei, and in prima resurrectione
consortium. Tertull. de Monogam. cap. 10.
she requesteth refreshing for him, and a portion in the first resurrection.
Which seems to have some tang of the error of the Millenaries (whereunto not
Id de Resurrect. carnis, c. 25.
Tertullian only with his Id. advers. Marcion. lib. 3. cap. ult.
Prophet Montanus, but Sicut Nepos docuit, qui primam justorum resurrectione^,
and secundam imp^orum confinxit. Gennad. de Ecclesiast. dogmat. cap. 55.
Nepos also, and Lactant. Institut. divin. li. 7. cap. 21.24. et 26.
Lactantius, and diverse other Doctors of the Church did fall) who
misunderstanding the prophecy in the 20. of the Revelation, imagined that
there should be a first resurrection of the just that should reign here a
thousand years upon earth, and after that a second resurrection of the wicked,
at the day of the general judgment. Yet in a certain Gotthicke Missall I meet
with two several exhortations made unto the people, to pray after the self
same form. the one, that God would Quiescentiu^ animas in sinu Abrahae
collocare dignetur, and in partem primae resurrectionis admittat. Missal.
Gottic. tomo 6. Biblioth. Patr edit. Paris. an. 1589 col. 251.
vouchsafe to place in the bosom of Abraham the souls of those that be at
rest, and admit them unto the part of the first resurrection: the other (which
I find elsewhere also repeated in particular) that Deu^ judicem universitatis,
Deu^ coelestium and terrestrium and i^fernoru^, fratres dilectissimi,
deprecemur pro spiritibus charorum nostrorum, qui nos in ^ominica pace
praecesserunt; ut cos Dominus in requie collocare dignetur, and in part pr^mae
resurrectionis resuscitet. Ibid. col. 257. Gr^gor. Oper. tom. 5. col. 228.
edit. Paris. Preces. Eccl^^iast. a Georg. Cassandro ^ollect. page 385. Operum.
he would place in rest, the spirits of their friends which were gone before
them in the Lords peace, and raise them up in the part of the first
resurrection. Which how it may be excused otherwise then by saying, that at the
general resurrection 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then the wicked shall be raised after
them; and by referring the first resurrection unto the Luke 14.14.
resurrection of the just which shall be at that day: I cannot well resolve.
For certain it is, that the first r^surrection spoken of in the 20. chapter of
the Revelation of S. John, is the resu^rection of the soul from the death of
sin and error in this world; as the second is the resurrection of the body,
out of the dust of the earth, in the world to come. both which be distinctly
laid down by our Savior in the fifth chapter of the Gospel of S. John: the
first in the 25. verse; The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. the second
in the 28. and 29. Marveile not at this: for the hour is coming, in which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that
have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation:

And to this general resurrection and to the judgment of the last day, had
the Church relation in her prayers: some patterns whereof it will not be
amiss to exhibit here, in these examples following* Quamvis humano generi
mortis illata conditio pectora nostra mentesque contristet; tamen clementiae
tuae dono spe futurae immortalitatis erigimur, ac memores salutis aeternae, non
timemus lucis hujus sustinere jactura^. quoniam beneficio gratiae tuae
fidelibus vita non tollitur, sed mutatur: atque animae corporeo ergastulo
liberatae, horrent mortalia, dum immortalia consequuntur Vnde quaesumus, ut
famulus ^uus N. in tabe^naculis beatorum constitutus, evasisse se carnales
glorietur angustias, diemque iudicij cum fiducia voto glorificationis expectet.
Pr^f^t antiqu edit. Colon. a^. 1530. number. 106. Tom. 2. Liturgi^. Pamel. page
608. and Tom. 5. Oper. G^egorij. edit. Paris. col. 233. Habetur and prior
Praefat. huius pars in M^ssa Ambro^iana, tomo 1. Liturg. Pamel. page 450.451.
posterior in altera praefat. ibid. page 449. and Oper. Gregor. col 232 a.
Although the condition of death brought in upon mankind does make our hearts
and minds heavy: yet by the gift of thy clemency we are raised up with the
hope of future immortality; and being mindful of eternal salvation, are not
afraid to sustain the loss of this light. For by the benefit of thy grace
life is not taken away to the faithful, but changed: and the souls being freed
from the prison of the body, abhor things mortal, when they attain unto
things eternal. Wherefore we beseech thee, that thy servant N. being placed in
the tabernacles of the blessed, may rejoice that he has escaped the straytes
of the flesh, and in the desire of glorification expect with confidence the day
of Judgment. Per Christu^ Dominum nostrum. Cujus sacram passionem pro
immortalibus and been quiescentibus animabus sine dubio celebramus: pro his
praecipue, quibus secundae nativitatis gratiam praestitisti; qui exemplo
ejusdem Jesus Christi Domini nostri coeperunt esse de resurrectione securi.
Quippe qui fecisti quae non erant, potes reparare quae fuerant: and
resurrectionis futurae nobis documenta non solum per Propheticam and
Apostolicam doctrinam, sed per ejusdem unigeniti tui Redemptoris nostri
resurrectionem dedisti. Praesat. antiqu. 112. and 107. G^imold. Sacramentar.
tom. 2. Liturg. Pamel page 460.461 and tom. 5. Oper. Gregor. col. 235.
Through Jesus Christ our Lord. whose holy passion we celebrate without doubt
for immortal and well resting souls: for them especially, upon whom thou have
bestowed the grace of the second birth; who by the example of the same Jesus
Christ our Lord have begun to be secure of the resurrection. For thou who
have made the things that were not, art able to repair the things that were:
and have given unto us evidences of the resurrection to come, not only by the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, but also by the resurrection of the same
thy only begotten Son our Redeemer. Deus, qui universoru^ es Creator and
conditor, quique tuorum es beatitudo Sanctorum; praesta nobis petentibus, ut
spiritum fratris nostri corporis nexibus absolutum in beata resurrectione
facias praesentari. Prec. Ecclesiast Cassandr. Oper. page 385. Tom. 5. Gregor.
col. 228 e.
O God, who art the Creator and maker of all things, and who art the bliss of
thy Saints; grant unto us who make request unto thee, that the spirit of our
brother, who is loosed from the knott of his body, may be presented in the
blessed resurrection of thy Saints. Omnipotens and misericors Deus, tuam
deprecamur. clementiam, quia judicio tuo and nascimur and finimur; ut animam
fratris nostri, quem tua pietas de incolatu hujus mundi transue praecepit, in
requiem aeternam suscipias, and in consortio electorum tuorum in resurrectione
sociari permittas, ut in aeterna beatitudine una cum illis sine fine permaneat.
Alcuin. Offic. per f^rias, Oper. page 230.231. collat. cum simili, tomo 5.
Gregor, col. 228. c. d. and in Operib. Cassandr. page 385.
O almighty and merciful God, we do entreat thy clemency, forasmuch as by
thy judgment we are borne and make an end; that thou will receive into
everlasting rest the soul of our brother, whom thou of thy piety have
commanded to pass from the dwelling of this world, and permit him to be
associated with the company of thine elect, that together with them he may
remain in everlasting bliss without end. Aeterne Deus, qui nobis in Christo
unigenito filio tuo Domino nostro spem beatae Resurrectionis concessist^;
praesta, quaesumus, ut animae, pro quibus hoc sacrificium redemptionis nostrae
tuae offerimus majestati, ad beatae resurrectionis requiem, te miserante, cum
sanctis tuis pervenire mereantur. Praefat. antiqu. 110. edit. Colon. an. 1530.
Tom. 2. Liturg. Pamelij page 609. Tom. 5. Gr^gor. col. 236. e.
Eternal God, who in Christ thine only begotten son our Lord have given
unto us the hope of a blessed Resurrection; grant, we beseech thee, that the
souls, for which we offer this sacrifice of our redemption unto thy Majesty,
may of thy mercy attain unto the rest of a blessed resurrection with thy
Saints. Haec nos communio, quaesumus Domine, purget a crimine: and animae
famuli tui N. coelestis gaudij tribuat consortium, ut ante thronum gloriae
Christi tui segregata cum dextris, nihil commune habeat cum sinistris. Tom. 5
Gregor. col 33. c.
Let this communion, we beseech thee O Lord, purge us from sin; and give unto
the soul of thy servant N. a portion in the heavenly joy, that being set apart
before the throne of the glory of thy Christ with those that are upon the right
hand, it may have nothing common with those that are upon the left. Per
Christum Dominum nostrum. In cujus adventu, cum geminam jusseris sist^re
plebem, jubeas et famulum tuum a numero discerni malorum. Quem una tribuas
poenae aeternae evadere flammas, and justae potius adipisci praemia vitae. etc.
Offic. Ambrosian. tomo 1. Liturgic. Pamel page 450.
Through Christ our Lord. At whose coming, when thou shall command both the
peoples to appear, command thy servant also to be severed from the number of
the evil. and grant unto him, that he may both escape the flames of
everlasting punishment, and obtain the rewards of a righteous life. etc.

In these, and other prayers of the like kind, we may descry evident footsteps
of the primarie intention of the Church in her supplications for the dead:
which was, that the whole man (not the soul separated only) might receive
public remission of sins, and a solemn acquitall in the judgment of that
great day; and so obtain both a full escape from all the consequences of sin
( 1. Cor. 15.26, 34.
the last enemy being now destroyed, and death swallowed up in victory) and a
perfect consummation of bliss and happiness. all which are comprised in that
short prayer of S. Paul for Onesiphorus (though made for him while he was
alive:) 2. Tim. 1.18.
The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. Yea
diverse prayers for the dead of this kind are still retained in the Roman
Offices: of which the great Spanish Doctor Johannes Medina thus writes. Etsi
quamplures orationes fidelium defunctorum legerim, quae in Missali Romano
continentur; in nulla tamen earum legi, per Ecclesiam pe^i, ut citius a poenis
liberentur: legi tame^ in nonnullis peti, ut, ab aeternis poenis liberentur.
Io. Medin. in Codice de Oratione, quaest. 6.
Although I have read many prayers for the faithful deceased, which are
contained in the Roman Missall; yet have I read in none of them, that the
Church does petition, that they may more quickly be freed from pains: but I
have read that in some of them petition is made, that they may be freed from
everlasting pains. For beside the common prayer that is used in the Mass for
the Commemoration of all the faithful deceased, that Christ would free them
from the mouth of the Lion, that Hell may not swallow them up, and that they
may not fall into the place of darkness: this prayer is prescribed for the day
wherein the dead did depart out of this life. Deus, cui propriu^ est misereri
semper and parcere; te supplices exoramus pro anima famuli tui N. quam hodie de
hoc seculo migrare jussisti: ut non tradas eam in manus inimici, neque
obliviscaris in finem; sed jubeas eam a sanctis Angelis suscipi, and ad patriam
paradisi perduci: ut qu^a in te speravit and credidit, non poenas inferm
sustineat, sed gaudia aeterna possideat. Orat. in die obitus s^u d^positionis
^efuncti: in Missali Romano reformato.
O God, whose property is always to have mercy and to spare; we most
humbly beseech thee for the soul of thy servant N. which this day thou have
commanded to depart out of this world: that thou may not deliver it into the
hands of the enemy, nor forget it finally; but command it to be received by the
holy Angels, and brought unto the country of Paradise: that because he has
trusted and believed in thee, he may not sustain the pains of Hell, but
possess joys everlasting. which is a direct prayer, that the soul of him
which was then departed might immediately be received into Heaven, and escape
not the temporary pains of Purgatory, but the everlasting pains of Hell.
for howsoever the new reformers of the Roman Missall have put in here poenas
inferni (under the generality peradventure of the term of the pains of hell
intending to shrowde their Purgatory, which they would have men believe to be
one of the lodges of Hell) yet in the Missal. Romans edit. Paris. an. 1529.
old Missall, which Medina had respect unto, we read expressly poenas
aeternas, everlasting pains; which by no construction can be referred unto the
pains of Purgatory. and to the same purpose, in the book of the Ceremonies of
the Church of Rome, at the exequies of a Cardinal, a prayer is appointed to be
read; that by the assistance of Gods grace he might Gratia tua illi
succurrente, mereatur judicium evadere ultionis aeternae, qui dum viveret
insignitus est signaculo sanctae Trinitatis Lib. 1. sacr. Ceremoniar. Romans
Eccles sect. 15. ca. 1. fol. 152. b. edit. Colon. an. 1574.
escape the judgment of everlasting revenge, who while he lived was marked
with the seal of the holy Trinity.

Again, Sunt aliae orationes, in quibus petitur, ut Deus animas defunctoru^ in
corporibus ad beatitudinem in die judicii suscitet Io. Medin. ut supra.
there be other prayers (says Medina) wherein petition is made, that God would
raise the souls of the dead in their bodies unto bliss at the day of
judgment. Such, for example, is that which is found in the Roman Missall.
Absolve, quaesumus Domine, animam famuli tui ab omni vinculo delictorum: ut in
resurrectionis gloria, inter sanctos and electos tuos resuscitatus respiret.
Orat. p^o d^funct. in Missali Ro^ano, v^tere and novo. nec non in Gregorij
Sacramentario, tom. 2. Liturgic. Pam^lij, ^ag. 386. and tom. 5. oper. Gregor
edi^. Paris. col. 229, 230. Similis etiam oratiuncula habetur in G^egorij
Antiphonario, page 175. Pamel^^, col. 62. ed^^. Paris Erue Domine animas eorum
ab omni vinculo delictorum: ut in resurrectionis gloria inter sanctos tuos
resuscitari mereantur.
Absolve, we beseech thee O Lord, the soul of thy servant from all the bond
of his sins: that in the glory of the resurrection, being raised among thy
saints and elect, he may breath again, or be refreshed. and that other in
the Roman Pontifical. Deus, cui omnia vivunt, and cui non pereunt moriendo
corpora nostra, sed mutantur in melius; te supplices deprecamur, ut suscipi
jubeas anima^ famuli tui N. per manus sanctorum Angeloru^ tuoru^ deduce^da^ in
sinu^ amici tui Abrahae Patriarchae, resuscitandamque in novissimo judicij
magni die: and quicquid vitiorum, Diabolo fallente, contraxit, tu pius and
misericors abluas indulgendo. Pontifical. Roman. Clem. VIII. iussu edit. Romae
an. 1595. page 685. and Venet. an. 1572. fol. 226. col. 4. Lib. 1. sacr.
Ceremon. Romans Eccles. sect. 15. ca. 1. fol. 153 b. edit. Colon. Tom. 5. Oper.
Gregorij, col. 227. edit. Paris. Prec. ^cclesiastic. a G. Cassandro edit. page
384. Operum.
O God, unto whom all things do live, and unto whom our bodies in dying do not
perish, but are changed for the better; we humbly pray thee, that thou would
command the soul of thy servant N. to be received by the hands of thy holy
Angels, to be carried into the bosom of thy friend the Patriarch Abraham, and
to be raised up at the last day of the great judgment: and whatsoever faults
by the deceit of the Devil he has incurred, do thou of thy pity and mercy
wash away by forgiving them. Now forasmuch as it is most certain, that all
such as depart in grace (as the Adversaries acknowledge that all in Purgatory
do) are sure to escape Hell, and to be raised up unto glory at the last day:
Medina perplexeth himself exceedingly in according these kind of prayers with
the received grounds of Purgatory; and after much agitation of the business
too and fro, at last resolves upon one of these two desperate conclusions.
that touching these Respondetur, quantum ad orationes quae pro defunctis in
Ecclesia fiunt, posse primo dici, non esse necessarium omnes eas ab omni
ineptitudine excusare. Multa enim in Ecclesia legi permittuntur, quae quamvis
non omnino vera sint, vel omnino apta, conferunt tamen ad fideliu^ devotione^
excitandam and augendam. Talia multa credendu^ est contineri in historijs non
sacris, and in Lege^dis Sanctoru^, and in opinionibus Doctoru^, and Scripturis,
quae omnia tolerantur in Ecclesia interim, dum super illis nulla movetur
quaestio, nullumque insurgit scandalum. Ac proinde non mirum, in orationibus
praedictis aliquid minus aptum contineri, and ab Ecclesia tolerari: cum tales
orationes factae sint a personis privatis, non a Concilijs, nec per Concilia
omnino sint approbatae. Io. Medin. ut supr.
prayers which are made in the Church for the dead, it may first of all be
said, that it is not necessary to excuse them all from all unfitness. For many
things are permitted to be read in the Church, which although they be not
altogether true, nor altogether fit, yet serve for the stirring up and
increasing the devotion of the faithful. Many such things (says he) we
believe are contained in the histories that be not sacred, and in the Legends
of the Saints, and in the opinions and writings of the Doctors: all which are
tolerated by the Church in the mean time, while there is no question moved of
them, and no scandal arises from them. And therefore it is no marvel, that
somewhat not so fit should be contained in the foresaid prayers, and be
tolerated in the Church: seeing such prayers were made by private persons, not
by Counsels, neither were approved at all by Counsels.

And we easily do believe indeed, that their Offices and Legends are fraught
not only with untrue and unfit, but also with far worse stuff: neither is
this any news unto us. Agobardus Bishop of Lions complained about 800. years
ago, that the Antiphonary used in his Church had Multa ridiculosa et
phantastica. Agobard. ad Cantores Iugdunens de Correct. Antiphonarij, page 396.
edit. Paris.
many ridiculous and fantastical things in it: and that he was feign Hac de
causa and Antiphonarium pro viribus nostris magna ex part correximus:
amputatis his, quae vel superflua, vel levia, vel mendacia, aut blasphema
videbantur. Id. ibid. page 392.
to cut off from thence such things as seemed to be either superfluous, or
light, or lying, or blasphemous. The like complaint was made not long since by
Lindanus, of the Roman Antiphonaries and Missals: Vbi non apocrypha modo ex
Euang. Nicodemi and aliis nugis sunt infarta; sed ipsae adeo secretae preces
(imo ipse, pro pudor and dolor, Canon and varians and redundans) sunt mendis
turpissimis conspurcatae. Will. Lindan de opt. genesis interpr. script. lib. 3. ca.
3.
wherein not only apocryphal tales (says he) out of the Gospel of Nicodemus
and other toys are thrust in; but the very secret prayers themselves are
defiled with most foul faults. But now that we have the Missale Romanum ex
decreto sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini restitutum, Pij V. Pont. Max jussu
editum, and Clementis VIII. auctoritate recognitum. Romans an. 1604. Paris. 1605.
Roman Missall restored according to the decree of the Council of Trent, set
out by the command of Pius V. and revised again by the authority of Clemens
VIII. I doubt much whether our Romanists will allow the Censure which their
Medina has given of the prayers contained therein. And therefore if this will
not please them, he has another answer in store: of which though his country
man Alphons. Mendoz. Controvers. Theologic. quaest. 6. scholastic. number. 5.
Mendoza has given sentence, that it is indigna viro Theologo, unworthy of any
man that bears the name of a Divine; yet such as it is, you shall have it.
Supposing then, that the Church has no intention to pray for any other of the
dead, but those that are detayned in Purgatory: this he delivers for his
second resolution. Sciens Ecclesia Deum potestatem habere puniendi aeternaliter
animas illas, per quas, cum viverent, fuerat mortaliter offensus; quodque Deus
potestate^ suam non alligaverit Scripturis, and promissis quae in Scriptura
con^inentur; quan^oquidem ipse super omnia est, and tam omnipotens post
promissa, acsi nil promisisset: ideo Ecclesia simpliciter Deum orat, ne illa
absoluta omnipotentia contra animas fidelium, qui in gratia decesserunt,
utatur; ideo orat, ut eas ab aeternis poenis, and a vindicta, and judicio
condemnationis liberare, and ut eas cum suis electis resuscitare, dignetur. Io.
Medina, ut supr.
The Church knowing that God has power to punish everlastingly those souls,
by which, when they lived, he was mortally offended; and that God has not tied
his power unto the Scriptures, and unto the promises that are contained in the
Scripture (forasmuch as he is above all things, and a^ omnipotent after his
promises, as if he had promised nothing at all:) therefore the Church does
humbly pray God, that he would not use this his absolute omnipotency against
the souls of the faithful, which are departed in grace; therefore she does
pray that he would vouchsafe to free them from everlasting pains, and from
revenge and the judgment of condemnation, and that he would be pleased to
raise them up again with his Elect. But leaving our Popish Doctors with their
profound speculations of the not limiting of Gods power by the Scriptures, and
the promises which he has made unto us therein: let us return to the ancient
Fathers, and consider the differences that are to be found among them touching
the place and condition of souls separated from their bodies. for according to
the several apprehensions which they had thereof, they made different
applications and interpretations of the use of praying for the dead: whose
particular intentions and devotions in that kind, must of necessity therefore
be distinguished from the general intention of the whole Church.

S. Augustine (that I may begin with him who was, as the most ingenious, so
likewise the most ingenuous of all others in acknowledging his ignorance where
he saw cause) being to treat of these matters, makes this Preface before hand
unto his hearers. Infernum nec ego expertus sum ad^uc nec vos: and fo^tassis
alia via erit, and non per i^fe^num erit. Incerta sunt enim haec. Augustine. in
Psalm. 85.
Of Hell neither have I had any experience as yet, nor you: and peradventure it
may be, that our passage may lie some other way, and not prove to be by Hell.
For these things be uncertain. and having occasion to speak of the departure
of Nebridius his dear friend: Nunc ille vivit in sinu Abraham, quicquid illud
est quod illo significatur sinu; ibi Nebridius meus vivit. Id. Confession. lib.
9. cap. 3.
Now he lives, says he, in the bosom of Abraham, whatsoever the thing be
that is signified by that bosom; there does my Nebridius live. But elsewhere
he directly distinguishes this bosom from the place of bliss into which the.
Saints shall be received after the last judgment. Post vitam istam parvam
nondum eris ubi erunt Sancti quibus dicetur; Venite benedicti Patris mei,
percipite regnum quod vobis paratum est ab initio mundi. Nondum ibi eris: quis
nescit? Sed jam poteris ibi esse, ubi illum quondam ulcerosum pauperem dives
ille superbus and sterilis in medijs suis tormentis vidit a long
requiescentem. In illa requie positus, certe securus expectas judicii diem;
quando recipias and corpus, quando immuteris ut angelo aequeris. Id. in Psalm.
36. conc. 1.
After this short life (says he) thou shall not as yet be where the Saints
shall be unto whom it shall be said; Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
kingdom which was prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Thou shall
not as yet be there: who knows it not? But now thou may be there, where
that proud and barren rich man in the midst of his torments saw a far off
the poor man, sometime full of ulcers, resting. Being placed in that rest,
thou do securely expect the day of judgment; when thou may receive thy
body, when thou may be changed to be equal unto an Angel. and for the
state of souls, betwixt the time of the particular and general judgment,
this is his conclusion in general. Tempus au^em quod inter h^minis mortem and
ultimam resurrectionem inter positum est, animas abditis receptaculis continet;
sicut unaquaeque digna est vel requie vel aerumna, pro eo quod sortita est in
carne cum viveret. Id. Enchirid. ad Laurent. ^ap. 108.
The time that is interposed betwixt the death of man and the last
resurrection, contains the souls in hidden receptacles; as every one is
worthy either of rest or of trouble, according unto that which it did purchase
in the flesh when it lived. Into these hidden receptacles he thought the souls
of Gods children might carry some of their lighter faults with them: which
being not removed, would hinder them from coming into the kingdom of heaven
(whereinto no polluted thing can enter) and from which by the prayers and
almsdeeds of the living he held they might be released. But of two things he
professed himself here to be ignorant. First, Sed quis iste sit modus, and
quae sint ipsa peccata, quae ita impediunt perventionem ad regnu^ Dei, ut tamen
sanctorum amicorum meritis impetrent indulgentiam; difficilimum est invenire,
periculosissimu^ definire. Ego certe usque ad hoc tempus, cum inde satagerem,
ad eoru^ indaginem pervenire non potui. Id. lib. 21. de Civit. Dei, cap. 27.
What those sins were, which did so hinder the coming unto the kingdom of
God, that yet by the care of good friends they might obtain pardon. Secondly,
See before, page 173.
Whether those souls did endure any temporary pains in the Interim betwixt
the time of Death and the Resurrection. For howsoever in his one and twentieth
book of the City of God, and the thirteenth and sixteenth chapters (for the new
patch which they have added to the four and twentieth chapter is not worthy of
regard) he affirm, that some of them do suffer certain purgatory
punishments before the last and dreadful judgment: yet by comparing these
places with the Ex his quae dicta sunt videtur evidentius apparere, in illo
judicio quasdam quorundam purgatorias poenas futuras. etc. Verum ista quaestio
de purgatorijs poenis, ut diligentius pertractetur, in tempus aliud differenda
est. nempe, ubi ad librum 21. perventum fu^rit.
five and twentieth chapter of the twentieth book, it will appear, that by
those purgatory punishments he understands here the furnace of the fire of
Conflagration, that shall immediately go before this last judgment, and (as he
otherwhere describes the effects thereof) Hoc aget caminus: alios in sinistram
separabit, alios in dexteram quodammodo eliquabit. Aug. in Psalm. 103. conc. 3.
separate some unto the left hand, and melt out others unto the right.

Neither was this opinion of the reservation of souls in secret places, and
the purging of them in the fire of Conflagration at the day of judgment,
entertained by this famous Doctor alone: diverse others there were that had
touched upon the same string before him. Origin in his fourth book (...), as we
have him translated by Ruffinus (for in the (...). Origenis Philocalia cap. 1.
Extracts selected out of him by S. Basil and S. Gregory we find the place
somewhat otherwise expressed) says that De hoc mundo secundum communem mortem
istam recedentes, pro actibus suis and meritis dispensantur prout digni fuerint
judicati; alii quidem in locum qui dicitur Infernus, alij in sinum Abrahae, and
per diversa quaeque vel loca, vel mansiones. Origin. de Principijs lib. 4. cap.
2. cum quo conferendus similis eiusdem locus in Numer. 31. homil 26.
such as depart out of this world after the common course of death, are
disposed of according to their deeds and merits, as they shall be judged to be
worthy; some into the place which is called Hell, others into Abraham's bosom,
and through diverse either places or mansions. and in his Commentaries upon
Leviticus, he adds further. Nondum receperunt laetitiam suam, ne Apostoli
quidem; sed and ipsi expectant, ut and ego laetitiae eorum particeps fiam.
Neque enim decedentes hinc Sancti, continuo integra meritorum suorum proemia
consequuntur; sed expectant etiam nos licet morantes, licet desides. Jd. hom.
7. in Levit. cap. 10.
Neither have the Apostles themselves as yet received their joy; but even they
do expect, that I also may be made partaker of their joy. For the Saints
departing from hence do not presently obtain the full rewards of their
labors; but they expect us likewise, howsoever staying, howsoever slacking.
Then touching the purging of men after the Resurrection, he thus delivers his
mind in his Commentaries upon Luke. Ego puto, quod and post resurrectionem ex
mortuis indigeamus sacramento eluente nos atque purgante: nemo enim absque
sordibus resurgere poterit. Id. in Luc. homil. 14.
I think, that even after our resurrection from the dead we shall have need of
a sacrament to wash and purge us: for none can rise without pollutions. and
upon Jeremy: Si quis in secunda resurrectione servatur, iste peccator est qui
ignis indiget baptismo; qui combustione purgatur, ut quicquid habuerit
lignoru^, foeni, and stipulae, ignis consumat. Id. in Ierem. homil. 13.
If any one be saved in the second resurrection, he is that sinner which
needs the baptism of fire, which is purged with burning; that whatsoever he
has of wood, hay, and stubble, the fire may consume it. Neither does
Lactantius show himself to vary much from him, in either of those points; for
thus he writes. Sed and justos cum judicaverit, etiam igni eos examinabit. Tum
quorum peccata vel pondere vel numero praevaluerint, perstringentur igni, atque
amburentur: quos autem plena justitia and maturitas virtutis incoxe^it, ignem
illum non sentient. habent enim in se aliquid inde, quod vim flammae repellat
ac respuat. Tanta est vis innocentiae, ut ab ea ignis ille refugiat innoxius,
qui accepit a Deo hanc potestatem. ur impios urat, just^s obtemperet. Nec tamen
quisquam putet, animas post mortem protinus judicari. Omnes in una, communique
custodia detinentur, donec tempus adveniat, quo maximus Iudex meritorum faciat
examen. Lactant. institut. divin. lib. 7. cap. 21.
When God shall judge the righteous, he will examine them by fire. Then they
whose sins shall prevail either in weight or number, shall be touched with
the fire and burned: but they whom perfect righteousness and the ripeness of
virtue has thoroughly seasoned, shall not feel that fire. for from thence have
they something in them, that will repel and put back the force of the flame:
so great is the force of innocence, that that fire shall fly back from it
without doing any harm, which has received this power from God, that it may
burn the wicked and do service to the righteous. Yet notwithstanding let no
man think, that the souls are presently judged after death. All of them are
detayned in one common custody, until the time come, wherein the great Judge
does make trial of their doings. In like manner does S. Hilary write of the one
part. Exeuntes de corpore, ad introitum illum regni coelestis, per custodiam
Domini fideles omnes reservabuntur, in sinu scilicet interim Abrahae collocati:
quo adire impios interjectu^ chaos inhibet, quousque introeundi iursum in
regnu^ coelorum tempus adveniat. Hilar. in Psalm. 120.
All the faithful, when they are gone out of the body, shall be reserved by
the Lords custody for that entry into the heavenly kingdom, being in the
mean time placed in the bosom of Abraham; whither the wicked are hindered from
coming, by the gulf interposed betwixt them, until the time of entering into
the kingdom of heaven do come. and thus of the other. An cum ex omni otioso
verbo ratione^ simus praestituri, diem judicii concupiscemus, ^n quo nobis est
ille i^defessus ignis obeundus, in quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a
peccatis animae supplicia? Id. in Psalm. 118. octonar. 3.
Being to render an account of every idle word, shall we desire the day of
judgment, wherein that unwearied fire must be passed by us, in which those
grievous punishments for expiating the soul from sins must be endured? for
Salutis igitur nostrae and judicii tempus designat in Domino dieens; Ille
baptizabit vo^ in Spiritu sancto and igni: quia baptizatis in Spiritu sancto,
reliquum sit consummari igne judicii. Id. in Ma^^h. canon. 2.
to such as have been baptized with the holy Ghost, it remains that they
should be consummated with the fire of judgment.

In S. Ambrose also there are some passages to be found which seem to make
directly for either of these points: as these for the former. Solvitur corpore
anima, and post finem vitae hujus, adhuc tamen futuri judicii ambiguo
suspenditur. Ita finis nullus, ubi finis putatur. Ambr. de Cain and Abel, lib.
2. cap. 2.
The soul is loosed from the body, and yet after the end of this life it is
held as yet in suspense with the uncertainty of the future judgment: so that
there is no end, where there is thought to be an end. Siquidem and in Esdrae
libris legimus; quia cum venerit judicii dies, reddet terra defunctorum
corpora, and pulvis reddet eas quae in tumulis requiescunt reliquias mortuorum.
Et habitacula, inquit, reddent animas quae his commendatae sunt: and
revelabitur altissimus super sedem judicii. Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 10. ex
4. Esdr. 7.32, 33.
We read in the books of Esdras; that when the day of judgment shall come,
the earth shall restore the bodies of the deceased, and the dust shall restore
the relics of the dead which do rest in the graves: and the habitacles shall
restore the souls which were committed to them; and the most high shall be
revealed upon the seat of judgment. Denique and scriptura habitacula illa
animarum promptuaria nuncupavit: quae occurrens querelae humanae, eo quod justi
qui praecesserunt videantur usque ad judicii diem, per plurimum scilicet
temporis, debita sibi remuneratione fraudari; mirabiliter ait Coronae esse
similem judicii diem, in quo sicut novissimorum tarditas, sic non priorum
velocitas. Coronae enim dies expectatur ab omnibus; ut intra eum diem and victi
erubescant, and victores palmam adipiscantur victoriae. Id. ibid. ^u 4. Esdr.
4.35. and 5.41, 42.
Also that scripture names those habitacles of the souls, Promptuaries (or
secret receptacles:) and meeting with the complaint of man, that the just which
have gone before may seem to be defrauded (until the day of judgment, which
is a very long time) of the reward due unto them; says wonderfully, that the
day of judgment is like unto a crown, wherein as there is no slackenesse of
the last, so is there no swiftness of the first. For the day of crowning is
expected by all; that within that day both they who are overcome may be
ashamed, and they who do overcome may obtain the palm of victory. Ergo dum
expectatur plenitudo temporis, expectant animae remunerationem debitam. Alias
manet poena, alias gloria: and tamen nec illae interim sine injuria, nec istae
sine fructu sunt. Ibid.
Therefore while the fullness of time is expected, the souls expect their due
reward. Pain is provided for some of them, for some glory: and yet in the
mean time neither are those without trouble, nor these without fruit. and
these for the latter. Igne ergo purgabuntur filij Levi, igne Ezechiel, igne
Daniel. Sed hi etsi per igne^ examinabuntur, dicent tamen: T^ansivimus per
igne^ and aquam. Alij in igne remanebunt. Id. in Psalm. 36.
With fire shall the sons of Levi be purged, with fire Ezechiel, with fire
Daniel. But these, although they shall be tried with fire, yet shall say: We
have passed through fire and water. Others shall remain in the fire. Et si
salvos faciet Dominus servos suos; salvi erimus per fidem, sic tamen salvi
quasi per ignem. Etsi non exuremur, tamen uremur. Id. ibid.
And if the Lord shall save his servants, we shall be saved by faith, yet saved
as it were by fire. Although we shall not be burned up, yet shall we be burned.
Siquidem post consummationem seculi, missis angelis qui segregent bonos and
malos, hoc futurum est baptisma; quando per caminu^ ignis iniquitas exuretur,
ut in regno Dei fulgeant justi sicut Sol in regno patris sui. Et si aliquis ut
Petrus sit, ut Ioannes, baptizatur hoc igni Id in Psalm. 118. sermon 3.
After the end of the world, when the Angels shall be sent to separate the
good and the bad, this baptism shall be; when iniquity shall be burnt up by the
furnace of fire, that in the kingdom of God the righteous may shine as the
Sun in the kingdom of their Father. And if any one be as Peter, or as John,
he is baptized with this fire. Seeing therefore Sed quia hic purgatus, iterum
necesse habet illic purificari: illic quoque nos purificet, quando dicat
Dominus; Intrate in requiem meam. ut unu^quisque nostrum ustus romphaea illa
fiammea non exustus, introgrestus in illam paradisi amoenitatem, gratias agat
domino suo, dicens: Induxisti nos in ref^igerium Id. ibid. Vid. and scim. 20.
i^ cund. Psalm. 118.
he that is purged here, has need to be purged again there: let him purge us
there also, when the Lord may say; Enter into my rest. that every one of us
being burned with that flaming sword, not burned up, when he is entered into
that pleasure of Paradise may give thanks unto his Lord, saying: Thou have
brought us into a place of refreshment.

Hereunto we may adjoine that observation of Suarez the Jesuit. Qui
opinantur, animas hominum non judicari in morte, nec proemiu^ aut poenam
recipere, sed reservari in abditis receptaculis usque ad judicium universale;
consequenter dicunt, sicut non accipiunt homines ultimum proemium vel poenam,
ita neque etiam purgari, donec sit facta generalis Resurrectio, and Iudicium:
ex quo satis consequenter dice^e potuerunt, purgandos esse homines igne
conflagrationis. Fr. Suarez, in 3 part Thom. quaest. 9 a^t. 6. d^sput. 57.
sect. 1.
They who think, that the souls of men are not judged at their death, nor do
receive reward or punishment, but are reserved in hidden receptacles until the
general judgment; do consequently say, that as men do not receive their last
reward or punishment, so neither are they also purged, until the general
Resurrection and Judgment do come: from whence they might say with
reasonable good consequence, that men are to be purged with the fire of
Conflagration. and with as good consequence also (may we further add) that
prayers were not to be made for the deliverie of the souls of the dead from
any purgatory pains, supposed to be suffered by them betwixt the time of
their death and their resurrection; which be the only prayers which are now in
question. (...). Gregor. Ceram. h^mil. in Indictionis sive novi anni principium.
In the Resurrection, when our works, like unto clusters of grapes, shall be
cast into the probatory fire as it were into the wine press; every man's
husbandry shall be made manifest: says Gregorius Cerameus, sometime archbishop
of Tauromenium in Sicilia. and, (...). Anastas. Sinait. (al. N^can.) quaest. 91.
No man as yet is entered either into the torments of Hell or into the kingdom
of Heaven, until the time of the resurrection of the bodies: says Anastasius
Sinaita upon whom Gretser bestows this marginall annotation: that this is the
Error veterum quorundam, and recentioris Graeciae. Grets^r. ibid. in marg. page
501. edit. Ing^lstad.
Error of certain of the ancient, and of latter Greece. And we find it to be
held indeed both by some of the ancient (as namely in Caius, who lived at Rome
when Zephyrinus was Bishop there, and is accounted to be the author of the
treatise falsely fathered upon Josephus, (...), a large fragment whereof has
been lately published by Hoeschelius in his notes upon Photius his
Bibliotheke:) and by the latter Grecians; in whose name, Marcus Eugenicus
archbishop of Ephesus, does make this protestation against such of his
countrymen as yielded to the definition of the Florentine Council. (...).
Marc. Ephesius, in Epistola Encyclica contra Council Florentin. Vid. and
Gennadium Scholarium, in Defens. Council. Florentin. cap. 3. sect. 2.
We say, that neither the Saints do receive the kingdom prepared for them and
those secret good things, neither the sinners do as yet fall into Hell: but
that either of them do remain in expectation of their proper lot; and that
this appertains unto the time that is to come after the Resurrection and the
Judgment. But these men, with the Latins, would have these to receive
presently after death the things they have deserved: but unto those of the
middle sort, that is, to such as dye in penance, they assign a purgatory fire
(which they feign to be distinct from that of Hell) that thereby, say they,
being purged in their souls after death, they likewise may be received into
the kingdom of heaven together with the righteous.

That barbarous impostor (as Io. Molan. histor. Imag. lib. 3. cap 36.
Molanus rightly styleth him) who counterfeyted a letter, as written by S.
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem unto S. Augustine, touching the miracles of S.
Hierome, takes upon him to lay down the precise time of the first arising of
this sect among the Grecians in this manner. Postobitu^ gloriosissimi Hieronymi,
qua^dam haeresis inter Graecos, id est, secta surrexit, quae ad Latinos usque
devenit, quae suis nefandis nitebatur rationibus probare: quod animae beatoru^
usque ad universalis judicii die^, in quo eorum corporibus erant iterum
conjungendae, visione and cognitione divina, in qua tota constitit beatitudo
sanctoru^, privabuntur; and damnatoru^ animae similiter ad diem illum nullis
cruciabuntur poenis. Quorum ratio talis erat; Sicut anima cum corpore meruit
vel peccavit, ita cum corpore recipit proemia sive poenas. Asserebant etiam
illius sectae nequissimi, nullum fore purgatorij locum in que animae, quae
nondum de suis peccatis in mundo plenam egissent poenitentiam, purgarentur. Qua
quidem sectaa pestifera crebrescente, tantus in nos dolor irruit, ut nos
amplius pigeret vivere. Pseudo-Cyrillus, tom. 2. operum Augustini, epist 206.
and sub finem tomi 4. operum Hieronymi edit. Basil. vel 9. ut a Mariano
Victorio ^omi sunt dispositi.
After the death of most glorious Hierome, a certain heresy or sect arose
amongst the Grecians, and came to the Latins also, which went about with their
wicked reasons to prove: that the souls of the blessed until the day of the
general Judgment, wherein they were to be joined again unto their bodies, are
deprived of the sight and knowledge of God, in which the whole blessedness of
the Saints does consist; and that the souls of the damned in like manner
until that day are tormented with no pains. Whose reason was this: that as
the soul did merit or sin with the body; so with the body was it to receive
rewards or pains. Those wicked sectaries also did maintain, that there was no
place of Purgatory wherein the souls, which had not done full penance for
their sins in this world, might be purged. Which pestilent sect getting head,
so great sorrow fell upon us, that we were even weary of our life. Then he
tells a wise tale, how S. Hierome, being at that time with God, for the
confutation of this new-sprong heresy, raised up three men from the dead
(after that he had first Nam (ut mihi postmodum interroganti dixerunt) beatus
Hieronymus eos conduxerat secum in Paradisum, Purgatorium, and Infernum: ut
quae ibi agebantur, patefacerent universis. Ibid.
ledd their souls into Paradise, Purgatory, and Hell; to the end they might
make known unto all men the things that were done there:) but had not the wit
to consider, that S. Cyrill himself had need to be raised up, to make the
fourth man among them. for how otherwise should he, who dyed thirty years
before S. Hierome (as is known to every one that knows the history of those
times) have heard and written the news which those three good fellows, that
were raised by S. Hierome after his death, did relate concerning Heaven, Hell,
and Purgatory? Yet is it nothing so strange to me (I confess) that such idle
dreams as these should be devised in the times of darkness, to delude the
world withal: as that now in the broad day light, ^i^sfeld. de condition
animr. post morte^, sect 5.
Binsfeldius and Fran. Suarez in 3 part. Thom. tom 4. disput. 45. sect. 1. number.
1.
Suarez, and other Romish merchants should adventure to bring forth such rotten
stuff as this, with hope to gain any credit of antiquity thereby unto the
new erected staple of Popish Purgatory.

The Dominican Friars, in a certain treatise written by them at Constantinople
in the year 1252. assign somewhat a lower beginning unto this error of the
Grecians: affirming that they Sequentes quenda^ hujus haereseos inve^to^em
Archiepiscopu^ quondam Caesareae Cappadociae, Andream nomine; qui dicit,
propria corpora praestolari, ut cum cis, cum quibus bona vel mala co^miserint,
retributiones similiter factoru^ recipiant. Tractat. contra Graecos: in tomo
auctorum a Petro Steuartio edit. Ingelstad. an. 1616. page 562.
followed therein a certain inventer of this heresy named Andrew, Archbishop
sometime of Caesarea in Cappadocia; who said, that the souls did wayt for
their bodies, that together with them, with which they had committed good or
evil, they might likewise receave the recompense of their deeds. But that
which Andrew says herein, he says not out of his own head; (and therefore is
wrongfully charged to be the first inventer of it:) but out of the judgment of
many godly fathers that went before him. (...). Andr. Caesar. cap. 17.
commentar. in Apocalypse.
It has been said (says he) by many of the Saints, that all virtuous men
(after this life) do receive places fit for them; whence they may certainly
make conjecture of the glory that shall befall unto them. Where Peltanus
bestows such another marginall note upon him, as Gretser his fellow-Iesuite
did upon Anastasius. Haec sententia diserte est jam condemnata; and ab Ecclesia
proscripta. Theod. Peltan. ad marginem Latinae sua versionis.
This opinion is now expressly condemned, and rejected by the Church. And yet
does Alphonsus de Castro aknowledge, that Sunt adhuc alij hujus erroris
patroni, viri quidem illustres, sanctitate perinde ac scientia clari: Irenaeus
videlicet beatissunus pro Christo martyr, Theophylactus Bulgariae episcopus,
beatus Bernardus. Nec mirari quisquam debet, si tanti viri in tam pestiferum
erro^e^ sunt lapsi: quoniam (ut beatus Iacobus Apostolusait) qui non offendit
in verbo, hic perfectus est vir. Alphons. Castr. lib. 3. advers. haereses;
verbo, Beatitudo, haer. 6.
the Patrons thereof were famous men, renowned as well for holiness as for
knowledge: but tells us withal, that no man ought to marvel, that such
great men should fall into so pestilent an error; because (as the Apostle S.
James says) he that offends not in word, is a perfect man.

Another particular opinion, which we must sever from the general intention
of the Church in her oblations and prayers for the dead, is that which is noted
by Theophylact upon the speech of our Savior, Luke 12.5. in which he wishes
us to observe, that (...). Theophylact. in Luc. 12.
he did not say, Fear him who after he has killed casts into hell; but,
has power to cast into hell. For the sinners which dye (says he) are not
always cast into hell: but it remains in the power of God, to pardon them
also. And this I say for the oblations and doales which are made for the dead,
which do not a little avayle even them that dye in grievous sins. He does not
therefore generally, after he has killed, cast into hell; but has power to
cast. Wherefore let us not cease by alms and intercession to appease him, who
has power to cast, but does not always use this power, but is able to pardon
also. Thus far Theophylact: whom our Adversaries do blindely bring in for
the countenancing of their use of praying and offering for the dead; not
considering, that the prayers and oblations which he would uphold, do reach
even unto such as dye in grievous sins (which the Romanists acknowledge to
receive no relief at all by any thing that they can do) and are intended for
the keeping of souls from being cast into Hell, and not for fetching them out
when they have been cast into Purgatory; a place that never came within the
compass of Theophylacts belief. His testimony will fit a great deal better
the prayer of S. Dunstan; O^bern. and Eadmer. (and ex ^is, Capgrav. and Suriu^)
in vita Dunstani. Vid. Gulielm. Malme^buriens. de gestis Regum Anglor. lib. 2.
fol. 30. b. and lib. 1. de gestis Pontific. Anglor. fol. 115. ^. edit. Londin.
who (as the tale goes) having understood that the soul of King Edwin was to
be carried into Hell, never gave over praying until he had gotten him ridd of
that danger, and transferred unto the coast of penitent souls: where he well
deserved, doubtless, to undergo that penance which Injungatis mihi, ut
secundum voluntate^ Dei sim in poenis Purgatorij usque in diem ^ud^cii. Matthew.
Paru hist. Angl. an. 1198.
Hugh Bishop of Coventry and Chester on his deathbed imposed upon himself;
even to lie in the dungeon of Purgatory, without bail or mainprise, until the
general jayl^-deliverie of the last day.

Another private conceyte, entertained by diverse (as well of the elder as of
middle times) in their devotions for the dead, was; that an augmentation of
glory might thereby be procured for the Saints, and either a total
deliverance, or a diminution of torment at least wise, obtained for the wicked.
(...). Chrys^st. in Ma^th. homil. 31. Graec. (32. Latin.) indeque homil. 69.
pe^pe^am insc^ipted populum Antiochen.
If the Barbarians (says S. Chrysostom) do bury with their dead the things
that belong unto them: it is much more reason, that thou should send with
the deceased the things that are his; not that they may be made ashes, as they
were, but that they may add greater glory unto him. and, if he be departed
hence a sinner, that they may loose his sins; but if righteous, that an
addition may be made to his reward and retribution. Yea in the very latter
days, Iuo Carnotensis writing unto Mawd Queen of England, concerning the
prayers that were to be made for the King her brother his soul; says, that
Non vid^tur otiosum, si pro his intercedimus, qui jam requie perfruu^tur, ut
eorum requies augeatur. Iuo, ep. 174.
it does not seem idle, if we make intercessions for those who already enjoy
rest, that their rest may be increased. Whereupon Pope Innocent the third does
bring this for one of the answers, wherewith he labors to salve the prayers
which were used in the Church of Rome, that such or such an oblation might
profit such or such a Saint unto glory: that Licet plerique reputent non
indignum, Sanctorum gloria^ usque ad judicium augmentari: and ideo Ecclesiam
interim sane posse augmentum glorificationis eorum optare. Innoc. 111. epist.
ad archiep. Lugdun. Cap. Cum Marthae Extr^. de celebr. M^ssar.
many repute it no indignity, that the glory of the Saints should be
augmented until the day of judgment; and therefore that in the mean time the
Church may wish the increase of their glorification. So likewise for the
mitigation of the pains of them, whose souls were doubted to be in torment;
this form of prayer was of old used in the same Church (as in Grimoldus his
Sacramentary may be seen) and retained in the Roman Missall it self, until
in the late reformation thereof it was removed. Omnipotens and misericors Deus,
inclina, qua sumus, venerabiles aures tuas ad exiguas preces nostras, quas ante
conspectum majestatis tuae p^o anima famuli tui N. humiliter fundimus: ut quia
de qualitate vitae ejus diffidimus, de abundantia pietatis tuae consolemur; and
si plenam veniam anima ipsius obtinere non potest, saltem vel inter ipsa
tormenta quae forsitan patitur, refrigerium de abundantia miserationum tuarum
sentiat. Orat. pro defunc^. in M^ss^li Romano, edit. Parisan. 1529. Grim^ld.
Sacramentar. tom. 2. Liturgic. Pamelij, page 457.
O almighty and merciful God, incline (we beseech thee) thy holy ears unto
our poor prayers, which we do humbly pour forth before the sight of thy
Majesty for the soul of thy servant N. that forasmuch as we are distrustful
of the quality of his life, by the abundance of thy pity we may be comforted;
and if his soul cannot obtain full pardon, yet at least in the midst of the
torments themselves, which peradventure it suffers, out of the abundance of
thy compassion it may feel refreshment. which prayer whither it tended, may
appear partly by that which Prudentius writes of the play-dayes, which he
supposes the souls in Hell sometime do obtain; Prudent. lib. Cathem^riu^^n,
^ymn. ^.
Sunt and spiritibus saepe nocentibus
Poenarum celebres sub Styge feriae, etc.
Marcent supplicijs Tartara mitibus,
Exultatque sui carceris otio
Vmbrarum populus, liber ab ignibus;
Nec fervent solito flumina sulphur.
partly by the doubtful conceits of Gods merciful dealing with the wicked in
the world to come, which are found in August. E^chirid. ad Laurent. cap.
110.112.113. Hieronym. lib. 1. contra Pelag. and in fine Commenta^ior. in Esai.
Gregor. Nazianz orat. 40. de Baptismo. (...).
others: but especially by these passages that we meet withal in the Sermons
of S. Chrysostom.

(...); ( the Latin ^dition r^ndreth this, not very faithfully: Hoc igitur non
plorabimus, dic, oro? non tentabimus nos ab his periculis eripere?) (...).
Chrysostom. in Act. hom. 21.
This man has spent his whole life in vain, neither has lived one day to
himself, but to voluptuousness, to luxury, to covetousness, to sin, to the
Devil. Tell me therefore; shall we not mourn for him? shall we not endeavor
to pull him out of these dangers? For there be means, if we will, whereby his
punishment may be made light unto him. If then we do make continual prayers
for him, if we besto^ alms; although he be unworthy, God will respect us. For
(...). Ibid.
many have received benefit by the alms that have been given by others for
them: and found thereby, although not a perfect, yet some consolation. (...).
Ibid.
This therefore is done, that although we our selves be not virtuous, we may be
careful to get virtuous companions and friends, and wife and son; as looking
to reap some fruit even by them also: reaping indeed but little, yet reaping
some fruit notwithstanding. (...); Id. in epist. ad Philip. hom. 3.
Let us not therefore simply ^eepe for the dead, but for such as are dead in
their sins: these be worthy of lamentations and bewaylings and tears. For
what hope is there (tell me) for men to depart with their sins, where they
cannot put off their sins? for as long as they were here, there was
peradventure great expectation, that they would be altered, that they would be
bettered. but being gone unto Hell, where there is no gayning of any thing by
repentance (for in hell, says he, who shall confess unto thee?) how are they
not worthy of lamentations? (...). Ibid.
Let us therefore weep for such, let us succor them to our power, let us
find out some help for them, little indeed, but yet such as may releeve them.
How and after what manner? both praying our selves, and entreating others to
make prayers for them, and giving continually unto the poor for them. for this
thing brings some consolation.

The like doctrine is delivered by Andr. Hierosolymitan. (...). page ^9. edit.
Meursij.
Andrew archbishop of Crete, in his Sermon of the life of man, and of the dead;
and by John Damascen, or whosoever else was author of the book ascribed unto
him, concerning them that are departed in the faith: where three notable tales
are told, of the benefit that even Infidells and Idolaters themselves should
receive by such prayers as these. One touching the soul of the Emperor
Trajan, delivered from Hell by the prayers of Pope Gregory: of the truth
whereof least any man should make question, he affirms very roundly, that no
less then (...). Damascen. sermon. de Defunctis.
the whole East and West will witness that this is true and uncontrollable.
And indeed in the East this fable seems first to have risen: where it
obtained such credit, that the Grecians to this day do still use this form of
prayer; (...). Eucholog. Grae^. cap. 19.
As thou did loose Trajan from punishment by the earnest intercession of thy
servant Gregory the Dialogue-writer, hear us likewise who pray unto thee. And
therefore to them does Hugo Etherianus thus appeal, for justifying the truth
of this narration: Nolite quaeso dicere in cordibus vestris, falsum hoc aut
fictum esse. Quaerite, si placet, apud Graecos: Graeca certe omnis testatur
haec Ecclesia. Hug. Etherian. de regr^ssu animar. ab Inferis, cap. 15.
Do not, I pray you, say in your hearts, that this is false or feigned. Inquire,
if you please, of the Grecians: the whole Greek Church surely does testify
these things. He might, if he had pleased, being an Italian himself, have
inquired nearer home of the Romans, among whom this feate was reported to have
been acted; rather then among the Grecians, who were strangers to the
business. But the Romans, as we understand by Io. Diacon. Vit. Gregor. li. 2.
cap. 44.
Johannes Diaconus in the life of S. Gregory, found no such matter among their
records; and when they had notice given them thereof out of the Legends of the
Church of England (for from thence received they the news of this and some
other such strange acts reported to have been done by S. Gregory among
themselves) they were not very hasty to believe it: because they could hardly
be persuaded, that S. Gregory who had taught them, that Gregor. Moral. in Job,
lib. 34. cap. 16. quod pen^ ad verbum descriptum etiam habetur lib. 4.
Dialogor. cap. 44.
Infidels and wicked men departed out of this life, were no more to be prayed
for then the Devil and his angels which were appointed unto everlasting
punishment; should in his practice be found to be so much different from his
judgment. The second tale touches upon the very times of the Apostles:
wherein the (...). Basil. Seleuc. in ipso initio Commentarij de vita Theclae.
Apostolesse Thecla is said to have prayed for Falconilla (the daughter of
Tryphaena, whom S. Paul saluteth, Romans 16.12.) (...). Damascen.
a gentile and an Idolatresse, altogether profane and a servitour of another
God, to this effect. (...). Simeon. Metaphrast. in vita Theclae,
O God, Son of the true God, grant unto Tryphaena according to thy will, that
her daughter may live with thee time without end. or as Basil Bishop of
Seleucia does express it. (...). Basil. Sel^us. lib. 1. de vita The^lae
Grant unto thy servant Tryphaena, that her desire may be fulfilled concerning
her daughter: her desire therein being this, that her soul may be numbered
among the souls of those that have already believed in thee, and may enjoy the
life and pleasure that is in Paradise.

The third tale he produces out of Palladius his historical book written unto
Lausus (although neither in the Greek set out by Meursius, nor in the three
several Latin editions of that history published before, the^e be any such
thing to be found): touching a dead man's skull, that should have uttered this
speech unto Macarius the great Egyptian anchorer. (...). Damas^en.
When thou do offer up thy prayers for the dead, then do we feel some
little cons^lation. A brainlesse answer you may well conceive it to be, that
must be thought to have proceeded from a dry skull lying by the highway side:
but as brainl^sse as it is, it has not a little troubled the quick heads of
our Romish Divines, and put many an odd cratchet into their nimble brains.
Renatus Laurentius tells us, that Non est dubium quin Angelus fuit qui in
cranio loquebatur Renat. ^au^ent. annotat. in ^er^ullian de Aniwa. cap. 33.
without all doubt it was an Angel that did speak in this skull. And Ad rem
itaque dico, caput illud, quod, ut habetur in D. Damasceno, in via jacebat, no^
fuisse hominis damnat^, sed justi existentis in Purgatorio: nam Damascenus non
dicit in illo sermon, quod fuerit hominis Gentilis, ut ibi patet. Alp^o^s
Mend^z. Controv T^eolo^ qu^ scholast ^e^t 5
I say (quoth Alphonsus Mendoza) that this head which lay in the way, was not
the head of one that was damned, but of a just man remaining in Purgatory: for
Damascen does not say in that sermon, that i^ was the head of a Gentile, as it
may there be seen. And true it is indeed, he neither says that it was so,
neither yet that it was not so: but the Grecians generally relate the matter
thus; that Macarius (...). M^na. Graec. Ian^ar. 19.
did hear this, from the skull of one that had been a Priest of Idols, which
he found lying in the wilderness; that by his prayers such as were with him in
punishment received a little ease of their torment, whenever it fell out that
he made the same for them. and among the Latins, Thomas Aquinas, and other of
the Schoolmen take this for granted: because they found in the Lives of the
Fathers, that the speech which the dead skull used was this. Vit. Paltum. edit.
Lugdun. an. 1515. f^l 105. col. 3.4. and fol. 143. col. 1.2. and edi. Antuerp.
an. 1615. page 526. and 656.
I was a Priest of the Gentiles (so John the Roman subdeaco^ translateth it)
or, as Rufinus is supposed to have rendered it, I was the chief of the Priests
of the Idols, which dwelt in this place: and thou art abbot Macarius, that art
filled with the spirit of God. At whatsoever hour therefore thou take pity
of them that are in torments, and prayest for them; they then feel some
consolation. Well, says Mendoza then, Quod si D. Tho. hanc historiam referens
ex Vitis patrum, dicit fuisse caput Gentilis, ipse nodum hunc tenetur enodare.
Alphons. Mendoz ut supr.
if S. Thomas relating this history out of the Lives of the Fathers, does say
that this was the head of a Gentile; he himself is bound to untye this knot.
And so he does: resolving the matter thus; Thom. Aquin. in lib. 4. Sentent.
distinct. 45. quaest. 2. artic. 2 ad 4. and Dura^d. in eand. quaest. number. 15.
that the damned get no true ease by the prayers made for them, but such a
fantastical kind of joy only, as the Devils are said to have, when they have
seduced and deceived any man. At fortasse melius rejicerentur, ut falsa and
apocrypha, quae afferuntur de illo cranio. Bellarmin. de Purgator. lib. 2. cap.
^8.
But peradventure, says Cardinal Bellarmine for the upshott, the things which
are brought touching that skull, might better be rejected as false and
apocryphal. and Stephen Durant, more peremptorily: Quare quod de Trajano and
Falconilla (quos liberatos ex inferno orationibus S. Gregorij and Theclae, ex
Damasceno, and quibusdam alijs, vulgo fertur:) quae item de Cranio arido
interrogato a Macario, ex historia Pailadij ad Lausum referuntur, ficta and
commentitia sunt. Steph. Durant. de ritib. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 43. sect. 12.
The things which are told of Trajan and Falconilla, delivered out of hell by
the prayers of S Gregory and Thecla, and of the dry skull spoken too by
Macarius, be feigned and commentitious.

Which last answer, though it be the truest of all the rest; yet is it not to
be doubted for all that, but that the general credit which these fables
obtained, together with the countenance which the opinion of the Origenists did
receive from Didymus, Euagrius, Gregory Nyssen, (if he be not corrupted) and
other Doctors, inclined the minds of men very much, to apply the common use of
praying for the dead unto this wrong end of hoping to relieve the damned
thereby. S. Augustine does show, that in his time not only Frustra itaque
nonnulli, imo quamplurimi, aete^nam damnatorum poenam, and cruciatus sine
intermissione perpetuos, humano miserantur affectu; atque ita futuru^ esse non
credunt. Augustine. Enchirid. ad Laurent cap. 112.
some, but exceeding many also, did out of an humane affection take compassion
of the eternal pains of the damned, and would not believe that they should
never have an end. And notwithstanding this error was publicly condemned
afterward in the Origenists, by the fifth general Council held at
Constantinople: yet by idle and voluptuous persons was it still greedily
embraced (as Ioh^n. Climac. in fine 5. gradus Scalae suae.
Climacus complains) and Sunt enim nunc etiam, qui ideirco peccatis suis
ponere finem negligunt, quia habere quandoque finem futura super se judicia
suspicantur. Gregor. Moral. in Job, lib. 34. cap. 16.
even now also, says S. Gregory, there be some, who therefore neglect to put
an end unto their sins, because they imagine that the judgments which are to
come upon them shall sometimes have an end. Yea of late days this opinion was
maintained by the Porretanians (as Thomas calls them) and some of the Gloss.
in Graetian cause. 13. quaest. 2. cap. 23 Tempus. Durand in lib. 4. Sentent.
did. 45. quaest. 2. number. 7. Haec est sententia aliquorum Iuristarum.
Canonists (the one following therein Gilbert Porreta Bishop of Poictiers, in
his book of Theological Questions; the other John Semeca, in his Gloss upon
Gratian) that by the prayers and suffrages of the living the pains of some of
the damned were continually diminished; in such manner as infinite
proportionable parts may be taken from a line, without ever coming unto an end
of the division: which was in effect to take from them at the last all pain of
sense or sense of pain. For (as Quia in divisione lineae tandem pervenitur ad
hoc quod non est sensibile: corpus enim sensibile non est in infinitum
divisibile. Et sic sequeretur, quod post mu^ta suffragia poena reman^^s propter
sui parvitatem non sentiretur; and ita non esset poena. whom in 4. Sentenl.
did. 45. qu. 2. art. 2.
Thomas observes it rightly, and Durand, in 4. d 45. q. 2. number 8.
Durand after him) in the division of a Line, at last we must come unto that
which is not sensible: considering that a sensible body cannot be divided
infinitely. and so it would follo^, that after many suffrages that pain
remaining should not be sensible; and consequently should be no pain at all.

Neither is it to be forgotten that the invention of All Souls day (of which
you may read, if you please, Polydore Vergil in his sixth book of the
Inventers of things, and the ninth chapter) that solemn day, I say, wherein
our Romanists most devoutly perform all their superstitious observances for the
dead; was occasioned at the first by the apprehension of this same erroneous
conceit, that the souls of the damned might not only be eased, but fully also
delivered by the alms and prayers of the living. The whole narration of the
business is thus laid down by Sigebertus Gemblacensis in his Chronic^e, at the
year of our Lord 998. Hoc tempore quidam religiosus ab Hicrosolymis re diens
in Sicilia reclusi cujus^a^ humanitate a liquandiu recreatus, didicit ab eo
intercete^^, quod in illa v^^inia essent (...) ^ructantia flammarum incendia,
quae ^oca vocantur ab incolis O^lae Vulcani, in quibus animae reproboru^ luant
diversa pro meritoru^ qualitate supplicia; ad ea exequ^nda d^pu^atis ibi
daemonibus, quorum se crebro voces, iras, and terrores, saepe etiam ^julatus
(...) dicebat, plangen^ium quod animae damnatoru^ eriperentur de manibus eorum
per (...) and preces fideliu^; and hoc tempore magis per orationes
Cluniacens^um, orantiu^ indefesse pro defunctorum requie. Hoc per ipsum Abbas
Odilo compe^o, constituit per omnia monasteri^ sibi ^ubjecta, ut sicut primo
die Novembris solemnitas omniu^ Sanctorum agitur, ita s^que^^i die memoria
omniu^ in Christo quies e^tiu^ celebretur Quiritus ad multas Ecclesias
transions, fideliu^ defunctoru^ memoria^ solemnizari fecit. Sigeberi. Ch^on.
an. 998.
This time, says he, a certain religious man returning from Jerusalem, being
entertained for a while in Sicile by the courtesy of a certain anchoret,
learned from him among other matters, that there were places near unto them
that used to cast up burning flames, which by the inhabitants were called the
Potts of Vulcan, wherein the souls of the reprobate according to the quality
of their deserts did suffer diverse punishments; the Devils being there deputed
for the execution thereof whose voices, angers and terrors, and sometimes
howlings also he said he often heard, as lamenting that the souls of the
damned were taken out of their hands by the alms and prayers of the faithful;
and more at this time by the prayers of the monks of Cluny, who prayed
without ceasing for the rest of those that were deceased. The abbot Odilo
having understood this by him, appointed throughout all the monasteries under
his subjection, that as upon the first day of November the solemnity of all
the Saints is observed, so upon the day following, the memorial of all that
rested in Christ should be celebrated. Which rite passing into many other
Churches, made the memory of the faithful deceased to be solemnized.

For the elect, this form of prayer was wont to be used in the Roman Church.
Dues, cui soli cognitus est numerus electoru^ in superna felicitate locandorum:
tribue quaesumus, ut universoru^, quos in oratione commendatos suscepimus, vel
omnium sideliu^ nomina, beatae praedestinationis liber asscripta retineat.
Gregor. Oper. tom. 5. col. 226. Alcuin. lib. Sacramentor. cap. 18. Oper. col.
1190. Missal. Roman. edit. Paris^an. 1529. inter Orationes commun^s.
O God, unto whom alone is known the number of the elect that are to be placed
in the supernall bliss: grant, we beseech thee, that the book of blessed
predestination may retain the names of all those whom we have undertaken to
recommend in our prayer, or of all the faithful, that are written therein. And
to pray, that the names of all those that are written in the book of Gods
election, should still be retained therein, may be somewhat tolerable:
considering (as the Divines of that side have informed us) that those things
may be prayed for, which we know most certainly wilcome to pass. But hardly, I
think, shall you find in any Rituall a form of prayer answerable to this of
the monks of Cluny for the reprobate: unless it be that, whereby S. Francis
is said to have obtained, that friat Elias should be made Raphael Volater^an.
Commentar. Urban. lib. 21.
ex praescito praedestinatus, an elect of a reprobare. Yet it seems, that
some were not very well pleased, that what was done so seldom by S. Francis the
Bonaventur. in Prelogo Vitae Francisci. Bernardin. d^ Busto, Rosar tom. 2.
sermon. 27. ^a. 1.2.
Angel of the Friars, (and that for a reprobate yet living) should be so
usually practiced by the followers of S. Odilo the Fulbert. Carnot^^s. epist.
66.
Archangel of the Monks for reprobates that were dead: and therefore in the
common editions of Sigeberts Chronicle they have clean struck out the word
damnatoru^, and instead of reproboru^ chopped in defunctoru^. which depravatio^
may be detected, as well by the sincere edition of Sigebert published by Aubertus
Miraeus out of the Manuscript of Gemblac abbay (which is thought to be the
original copy of Sigebert himself) as by the comparing of him with Petrus
Damiani in the life of Odilo, whence this whole narration was by him borrowed.
For there also do we read, that in those flaming places In quibus etiam locis
a^in^e reproboru^ d^versa luunt pro meritorum qualitate tormenta. Petr. Dami^n
in vit. Odd. ^omo. 1. Suri^, Ianuar. 1.
the souls of the reprobate according to the quality of their deserts did
suffer diverse torments: and that the Devils did complain, Quod orationibus
and eleemosynis quorundam, adversus eos infoe derabiliter concertantiu^,
frequenter ex eorum manibus eriperentur animae damnatorum. Inter caetera de
Cluniacensium caetu permaxima^ and eorum abbate querimoniam faciunt, quia quam
sae pe per eos sui ^uris vernaculos perdunt. Ibid.
that by the alms and prayers of Odilo and others, the souls of the damned
were taken out of their hands.

By these things we may see, what we are to judge of that which our Adversaries
press so much against us out of Epiphanius: that he Allen of Purgatory and
prayer for the dead, lib. 2. cap. 14.
names an obscure fellow one Aerius to be the first author of this heresy;
that prayers and sacrifice profits not the departed in Christ. For neither
does Epiphanius name this to be an heresy: neither does it appear that
himself did hold, that prayers and oblations bring such profit to the dead as
these men dream they do. He is much deceived, who thinks every thing that
Epiphanius finds fault withal in heretics, is esteemed by him to be an
heresy: seeing heresy cannot be but in matters of faith, and the course which
Epiphanius takes in that work is not only to declare, in what special points
of faith heretics did dissent from the Catholic doctrine, but in what
particular observances also they refused to follow the received customs and
ordinances of the Church. Therefore at the end of the whole work he sets
down a Brief, (...). Epiphan. infine Panarij. page 465.
first of the faith, and then of the ordinances and observances of the Church:
and among the particulars of the latter kind, he rehearses this: (...). Ibid.
page 466.
For the dead, they make commemorations by name, performing (or, when they do
perform) their prayers and divine service and dispensation of the mysteries,
and disputing against Aerius touching the point it self, he does not at all
charge him with forsaking the doctrine of the Scriptures, or the faith of the
Catholic Church concerning the state of those that are departed out of this
life: but with rejecting the order observed by the Church in her Commemorations
of the dead; which being an ancient institution, brought in upon wonderful
good considerations, should not by this humorous heretic have been thus
condemned. (...). Id. haeres. 75. page 388.
The Church, says he, does necessarily perform this, having received it by
tradition from the Fathers: and who may dissolve the ordinance of his mother,
or the law of his Father? and again. (...). Ibid.
Our mother the Church has ordinances settled in her, which are inviolable and
may not be broken. Seeing then there are ordinances established in the Church,
and they are well and all things are admirably done: this seducer is again
refuted.

For the further opening hereof, it will not be amiss to consider both of the
objection of Aerius, and of the answer of Epiphanius. Thus did Aerius argue
against the practice of the Church. (...). Aerius, apud Epiphan. ib. page 386.
For what reason do you commemorate after death the names of those that are
departed? He that is alive prays, or makes dispensation (of the mysteries:)
what shall the dead be profited hereby? And if the prayer of those here do
altogether profit them that be there: then let no body be godly, let no man do
good, but let him procure some friends by what means it pleases him, either
persuading them by money, or entreating friends at his death; and let them pray
for him, that he may suffer nothing there, and that those inexpiable sins which
he has committed may not be required at his hands. This was Aerius his
argumentation: which would have been of force indeed, if the whole Church had
held, as many did; that the judgment after death was suspended until the
general Resurrection, and that in the mean time the sins of the dead might
be taken away by the suffrages of the living. But he should have considered,
as Stephanus Gobarus (who was as great an heretic as himself) did, that the
Doctors were not agreed upon the point; some of them maintayning, (...). Gobar
in Photij Bibliothe: a vel. 232.
the soul of every one that departed out of this life received very great
profit by the prayers and oblations and alms that were performed for him, and
others on the contrary side, that it was not so: and that it was a foolish part
of him, to confound the private opinion of some, with the common faith of the
universal Church. That he reproved this particular error, (which seems to
have gotten head in his time, as being most plausible to the multitude, and
very pleasing unto the looser sort of Christians) therein he did well: but that
thereupon he condemned the general practice of the Church, which had no
dependence upon that erroneous conceit, therein he did like unto himself,
headily and perversely. For the Church in her Commemorations and prayers for
the dead had no relation at all unto those that had ledd their lives lewdly and
dissolutely (as appears plainly, both by the (...). Di^nys. Eccles. Hierarch.
cap. 7. init E^ postea: (...).
author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and by diverse other evidences before
alleged) but unto those that did end their lives in such a godly manner, as
gave pregnant hope unto the living, that their souls were at rest with God:
and to such as these alone did it wish the accomplishment of that which
remained of their redemption; to wit, their public justification and solemn
acquitall at the last day, and their perfect consummation of bliss, both in
body and soul, in the kingdom of heaven for ever after. not that the event of
these things was conceived to be any ways doubtful (for we have been told,
that things may be prayed for, the event whereof is known to be most certain)
but because the commemoration thereof was thought to serve for special use,
not only in regard of the manifestation of the affection of the living toward
the dead (he that prayed, as Dionysius notes, (...). Id. ibid.
desiring other men's gifts as if they were his own graces) but also in respect
of the consolation and instruction which the living might receive thereby; as
Epiphanius in his answer to Aerius does more particularly declare.

The objection of Aerius was this. The Commemorations and prayers used in the
Church bring no profit to the dead: therefore as an unprofitable thing they are
to be rejected. To this does Epiphanius thus frame his answer. (...). Epiphan.
haeres. 75.
As for the reciting of the names of those that are deceased; what can be
better then this? what more commodious, and more admirable? that such as are
present do believe, that they who are departed do live, and are not
extinguished, but are still being and living with the Lord: and that this most
pious preaching might be declared; that they who pray for their brethren have
hope of them as being in a peregrination. Which is as much in effect, as if he
had denied Aerius his consequence: and answered him, that although the dead
were not profited by this action, yet it did not therefore follow that it
should be condemned as altogether unprofitable. because it had a singular use
otherwise: namely to testify the faith and the hope of the living, concerning
the dead. the faith: in (...) Dionys. Eccl^s. Hierarch. cap. 3. (...). Clem.
Consti^ut Apost. lib. 6. cap. 29.
declaring them to be alive, (for so does Dionysius also expound the Churches
intention in her public nomination of the dead) and as Divinity teaches, not
mortified but translated from death unto a most divine life. the hope: in that
they signified hereby, that they accounted their brethren to have departed from
them no otherwise than as if they had been in a journey, with expectation to
meet them afterward; and by this means made a difference betwixt themselves,
and 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
others which had no hope. Then does Epiphanius proceed further in answering
the same objection, after this manner. (...). ( f. (...) Epiphan haer. 75.
The prayer also which is made for them does profit, although it do not cut
off all their sins: yet forasmuch as whilst we are in the world, we
oftentimes slip both unwillingly and with our will; it serves to signify that
which is more perfect. For we make a memorial, both for the just and for
sinners: for sinners, entreating the mercy of God; for the just, (both the
Fathers and Patriarchs, the Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, and
Martyrs and Confessors, Bish^ps also and Anchorites, and the whole order) that
we may sever our Lord Jesus Christ from the rank of all other men by the
honor that we do unto him, and that we may yield worship unto him. Which, as
far as I apprehend him, is no more then if he had thus replied unto Aerius.
Although the prayer that is made for the dead do not cut off all their sins
(which is the only thing that thou go about to prove) yet does it profit
notwithstanding for another purpose: namely to signify the supereminent
perfection of our Savior Christ above the rest of the sons of men, who are
subject to manifold slipps and falls as long as they live in this world.

For as well the righteous, with their involuntarie slipps, as sinners, with
their voluntary falls, do come within the compass of these Commemorations:
wherein prayers are made, both for Luke 15 ^^.
sinners that repent, and for righteous persons that have no such need of
repentance. For sinners; that being by their repentance recovered out of the
snare of the Devil, they may find mercy of the Lord at the last day, and be
freed from the fire prepared for the Devil and his angels: For the righteous;
that they may be recompensed in the resurrection of the just, and received into
the kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world. Which kind of
prayer being made for the best men that ever lived (even the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and Martyrs themselves) Christ only excepted;
shows that the profit which the Church intended should be reaped therefrom,
was not the taking away of the sins of the parties that were prayed for, but
the honoring of their Lord above them: it being hereby declared, (...).
Epiphan. contra Aeri. haer. 75.
that our Lord is not to be compared unto any man; though a man live in
righteousness a thousand times and more. for how should that be possible?
considering that the one is God, the other man, (as the praying to the one, and
for the other, does discover) and the one is in heaven, the other in earth by
reason of the remains of the body yet resting in the earth, until the day of
the Resurrection, unto which all these prayers had special reference. This do
I conceive to be the right meaning of Epiphanius his answer: as suting best
both with the general intention of the Church, which he takes upon him to
vindicate from the misconstruction of Aerius, and with the application thereof
unto his objection, and with the known doctrine of Epiphanius, delivered by him
elsewhere in these terms. (...). Id. cont. Cathar. haer. 59.
After death there is no help to be gotten, either by godliness, or by
repentance. For Lazarus does not go there unto the rich man, nor the rich man
unto Lazarus: neither does Abraham send any of his spoils, that the poor may
be afterward made rich thereby; neither does the rich man obtain that which he
asks, although he entreat merciful Abraham ^ith instant supplication. For
the Garners are sealed up, and the time is fulfilled, and the combat is
finished, and the lists are voyded, and the Garlands are given, and such as
have fought are at rest, and such as have not obtained are gone forth, and such
as have not fought cannot now be present in time, and such as have been
overthrown in the lists are cast out, and all things are clearly finished,
after that we are once departed from hence.

We are to consider then, that the prayers and oblations, for rejecting whereof
Aerius was reproved, were not such as are used in the Church of Rome at this
day, but such as were used by the ancient Church at that time: and therefore as
we in condemning of the one, have nothing to do with Aerius or his cause; so
the Romanists, who dislike the other as much as ever Aerius did, must be
content to let us alone, and take the charge of Aerianisme home unto
themselves. Popish prayers and oblations for the dead, we know, do wholly
depend upon the belief of Purgatory: if those of the ancient Church did so
too; how comes it to pass that Epiphanius does not directly answer Aerius,
as a Papist would do now, that they brought singular profit to the dead, by
delivering their tormented souls out of the flames of Purgatory? but
forgetting as much as once to make mention of Purgatory (the sole foundation
of these suffrages for the dead, in our Adversaries judgment) does trouble
himself and his cause, with bringing in such far fett reasons as these: that
they who performed this duty, did intend to signify thereby that their
brethren departed were not perished, but remained still alive with the Lord;
and to put a difference betwixt the high perfection of our Savior Christ, and
the general frailty of the best of all his servants. Take away Popish
Purgatory on the other side, (which in the days of Aerius and Epiphanius
needed not to be taken away, because it was not as yet hatched) and all the
reasons produced by Epiphanius will not withhold our Romanists from absolutely
subscribing to the opinion of Aerius: this being a case with them resolved;
that Ad hoc etia^ est univ^rsalis ^cclesiae consue^udo, quae p^o defunctis
o^at: quae quidem oration inu^ilis esset, si Purgatorium post mortem non
ponatur. Thom. contr. Gentiles, lib. 4. cap. 91.
if Purgatory be not admitted after death, prayer for the dead must be
unprofitable. But though Thomas Aquinas and his abettors determine so, we must
not therefore think that Epiphanius was of the same mind; who lived in a time
wherein prayers were usually made for them that never were dreamed to have
been in Purgatory, and yields those reasons of that usage, which overthrow
the former consequence of Thomas every whit as much, as the supposition of
Aerius.

For Aerius and Thomas both agree in this: that prayer for the dead would be
altogether unprofitable, if the dead themselves received no special benefit
thereby. This does Epiphanius (defending the ancient use of these prayers in
the Church) show to be untrue; by producing other profits that redounded from
thence unto the living: partly by the public signification of their faith,
hope, and charity toward the deceased; partly by the honor that they did unto
the Lord Jesus, in exempting him from the common condition of the rest of
mankind. And to make it appear, that these things were mainly intended by the
Church in her Memorialls for the dead, and not the cutting off of the sins
which they carried with them out of this life, or the releasing of them out of
any torment: he alleges (as we have heard) that not only the meaner sort
of Christians, but also the best of them without exception, even the Prophets
and Apostles and Martyrs themselves, were comprehended therein. from whence, by
our Adversaries good leave, we will make bold to frame this syllogism. They who
reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead, which was practiced by
the Church in the days of Aerius, are in that point flatt Aerians.

But the Romanists do reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead,
which was practiced by the Church in the days of Aerius.

Therefore the Romanists are in this point flatt Aerians.

The assumption or second part of this argument (for the first we think no
body will deny) is thus proved. They who are of the judgment, that prayers
and oblations should not be made for such as are believed to be in bliss; do
reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead, which was practiced by
the ancient Church.

But the Romanists are of this judgment.

Therefore they reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead, which
was practiced by the ancient Church.

The truth of the first of these propositions does appear by the testimony of
Epiphanius, compared with those many other evidences whereby we have formerly
proved, that it was the custom of the ancient Church to make prayers and
oblations for them, of whose resting in peace and bliss there was no doubt at
all conceived. The verity of the second is manifested by the confession of the
Romanists themselves: who reckon this for one of their Fr. Suaerez, tom 4. in
3. part. Thom. disp. ^8. sect. 4. ^um. 10.
Catholic verities; that suffrages should not be offered for the dead that
reign with Christ. and therefore that ancient Illa formula precandi pro
Apostolis, Martyribus and caet. merito per des^etudinem exolevit. Alphons.
Mend^z. Controvers Theologic. quaest. 6. s^holast. s^ct. 7.
form of praying for the Apostles, Martyrs, and the rest of the Saints, is by
disuse deservedly abolished; says Alphonsus Mendoza. Nay Graeci sacrificia and
preces offerunt Deo pro mortuis; non beatis certe, neque damnatis ad inferos,
quod plane esset absurdum and impium. Io. Azor. Institut. moral. tom. 1. lib.
8. cap. 20.
to offer sacrifices and prayers to God for those that are in bliss, is
plainly absurd and impious, in the judgment of the Jesuit Azorius: who was
not aware, that thereby he did outstrippe Aerius in condemning the practice of
the ancient Church, as far, as the censuring it only to be unprofitable (for
(...); what shall the dead be profited thereby? was the furthest that Aerius
durst to go) comes short of rejecting it as absurd and impious. And
therefore our Adversaries may do well, to purge themselves first from the
blott of Aerianisme which sticks so fast unto them, before they be so ready
to cast the aspersion thereof upon others.

In the mean time, the Reader who desires to be rightly informed in the
judgment of Antiquity touching this point, is to remember; that these two
questions must necessarily be distinguished in this inquiry. Whether prayers
and oblations were to be made for the dead? and, Whether the dead did receive
any peculiar profit thereby? In the latter of these, he shall find great
difference among the Doctors: in the former, very little, or none at all. For
Quamvis de statu illo animarum, quibus haec prodessent, non satis constaret,
nee inter omnes conveniret: omnes tamen hoc officium, ut testimonium charitatis
erga defunctos, and ut professione^ fidei de immortalitate animarum and futura
resurrectione, Deo gratum and Ecclesiae utile esse judicarunt. Cassand.
Consultat. ad Fe^dinand. l. and Maximilian. II. artic. 24.
howsoever all did not agree about the state of the souls (says Cassander, an
indifferent Papist) which might receive profit by these things: yet all did
judge this duty, as a testimony of their love toward the dead, and a
profession of their faith touching the souls immortality and the future
resurrection, to be acceptable unto God and profitable to the Church. Therefore
for condemning the general practice of the Church herein, which aimed at those
good ends before expressed, Ae^ius was condemned: but for denying that the dead
received profit thereby, either for the pardon of the sins which before were
unremitted, or for the cutting off or mitigation of any torments that they did
endure in the other world, the Church did never condemn him. For that was no
new thing invented by him: diverse worthy men before and after him declared
themselves to be of the same mind, and were never for all that charged with
the least suspicion of heresy. (...). Justin. r^sp. ad Orthod. quaest. 60.
The narration of Lazarus and the rich man (says the author of the Questions
and Answers in the works of Justin Martyr) presents this doctrine unto us:
that after the departure of the soul out of the body, men cannot by any
providence or care obtain any profit. (...). Greg. Nazianz in Ca^m. de rebus
suis.
Then (says Gregory Nazianzen) in vain shall any one go about to relieve
those that lament. Here men may have a remedy, but afterward there is nothing
but bonds, or, all things are fast bound. For Post morte^ poena peccati est
immedicabilis. Theodoret. quaest. in lib. 2. Reg. cap 18.19.
after death the punishment of sin is remediless: says Theodoret. and
therefore S. Hierome does conclude: Obscure licet docemur, per hanc
sententiolam, novum dogma quod la^tat: dum in praesenti saeculo sumus, sive
orationibus sive consilijs invice^ posse nos coadjuvari; cum autem ante
tribunal Christi venerimus, non Job, non Daniel, nec Noe rogare posse pro
quoquam, sed unumquemque portare onus suum. Hieronym. lib. 3. Comm^ntar in
Galat. cap. 6.
that while we are in this present world, we may be able to help one another,
either by our prayers or by our counsels; but when we shall come before the
judgment seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah can entreat for
any one, but every one must bear his own burden.

Other Doctors were of another judgment: that the dead received special
profit by the prayers and oblations of the living; either for the remission of
their sins, or the easing of their punishment. but whether this were
restrained to smaller offenses only, or such as lived and died in great sins
might be made partakers of the same benefit, and whether these men's torments
might be lessened only thereby, or in tract of time quite extinguished; they
did not agree upon. That Stephanus Gobarus, whom before I alleged, made a
collection of the different sentences of the Fathers: (...). Phot. Bibliothec.
volum. 232.
whereof some contained the received doctrine of the Church, others the
unallowable opinions of certain of the ancient that varied therefrom. Of this
latter kind he makes this sentence to be one: (...). Ibid.
that such sinners as be delivered unto punishment, are purged therein from
their sins, and after their purging are freed from their punishment; albeit
not all who are delivered unto punishment, be thus purged and freed, but some
only. whereas the true sentence of the Church was; that none at all was freed
from punishment. If that were the true sentence of the Church, that none of
those who suffered punishment in the other world were ever freed from the same:
then the applying of prayers to the helping of men's souls out of any such
punishments, must be referred to the erroneous apprehension of some particular
men, and not to the general intention of the ancient Church; from which in
this point, as in many others beside, the latter Church of Rome has swarved
and quite gone astray. The ancient writer of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
handling this matter of praying for the dead professedly, (...). Dionys.
Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 7.
does by way of objection move this doubt: to what purpose should the Bishop
entreat the divine goodness to grant remission of sins unto the dead, and a
like glorious inheritance with those that have followed God? seeing by such
prayers he can be brought to no other rest, but that which is fitting for him
and answerable unto the life which he has here ledd. If our Romish divinity
had been then acknowledged by the Church; there had been no place left to such
questions and doubts as these. The matter might easily have been answered,
that though a man did die in the state of grace, yet was he not presently to be
admitted unto the place of rest, but must first be reckoned withal; both for
the committall of those smaller faults, unto which through humane frailty he
was daily subject, and for the not performance of full penance and satisfaction
for the greater sins into which in this life he had fallen: and Purgatory
being the place wherein he must be cleansed from the one, and make up the just
payment for the other; these prayers were directed unto God for the deliverie
of the poor soul, which was not now in case to help it self, out of that
place of torment.

But this author, taking upon him the person of S. Paul's scholar, and
professing to deliver herein (...). Id ibid.
that tradition which he had received from his divine Masters; says no such
thing, but gives in this for his answer. The divine Bishop, as the Scriptures
witness, is the interpreter of the divine judgments: for he is the Angel of
the Lord God almighty. He has learned therefore out of the oracles delivered
by God, that a most glorious and divine life is by his just judgment worthily
adwarded to them that have lived holily; his divine goodness and kindness
passing over those blots which by humane frailty he had contracted: forasmuch
as no man, as the Scriptures speak, is free from pollution. The Bishop
therefore knowing these things to be promised by the true oracles; prays that
they may accordingly come to pass, and those sacred rewards may be bestowed
upon them that have lived holily. The Bishop at that time belike did not know
so much as our Popish Bishops do now; that Gods servants must dearly smart in
Purgatory for the sins wherewith they were overtaken through humane
infirmity: he believed that God of his merciful goodness would pass by
those slipps, and that such after-reckonings as these should give no stoppage
to the present bestowing of those holy rewards upon the children of the
promise. (...), etc. Id ibid.
Therefore the divine Bishop (says our author) asks those things which were
promised by God and are grateful to him and without doubt will be granted:
the^eby as well manifesting his own good disposition, unto God who is a lover of
the good; as declaring like an interpreter unto them that be present, the gifts
that shall befall to such as are holy. He further also adds, that the
Bishops have a separating power, as the interpreters of Gods judgments:
according to that commission of Christ; Whose sins ye remitt, they are
remitted unto them, and whose you shall retain, they are retained. and,
Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall loose upon earth shall be loosed in heaven. And as in the use of the
keys, the Sea above, page 135.161.162.
Schoolmen following S Hierom do account the minister to be the interpreter
only of Gods judgment, by declaring what is done by him in the binding or
loosing of men's sins: so does this author he^e give them power only to
(...). Dionys^u^. supra.
separate those that are al^eady judged of God, and by way of (...). ^d ibid.
declaration, and convoy, to bring in those that are beloved of God, and to
exclude such as are ungodly. And if the power which the Ministers have received
by the foresaid commission do extend it self to any further real operation
upon the living: Pope Gelasius will deny that it may be stretched in like
manner unto the dead; because that Christ says, Whatsoever thou shall bind
upon earth. Super ter^a^ inquit nam in hac ligatione defunctum nusquam dixit
absolvi. Gelas in Commonitorio ad (...).
He says upon earth: for he that dies bound, is no where said to be loosed.
and, Quod manens in corpore non receperit, consequi exutus carne non poterit.
Leo, epist 89. v^l 91. ad Th^od^rimo.
that which a man remaining in his body has not received, being uncloathed of
his flesh he cannot obtain: says Leo.

Whether the dead received profit by the prayers of the living, was still a
question in the Church. Maximus in his Greek scholies upon the writer of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, wishes us to (...). Maxim. schol. in Eccles.
Hierarch cap. 7.
mark, that even before his time that doubt was questioned. Among the
questions wherein Dulcitius desired to be resolved by S. Augustine, we find
this to be one; Virum oblatio, quae sit pro quiescentibus, aliquid eorum
conserat animabus? Augustine ad Dul^it. qu^est. 2.
Whether the offering that is made for the dead, did avayle their souls any
thing? and that Ad quod multi dicunt, quod si al. quis beneficij in hoc locus
possit esse post mortem; quanto magis sibi anima ferret i^sa refr^geria, sua
per s^ illic confitendo peccata, quam in eorum refrigeriu^ ab alijs oblatio
procuratur. Ibid.
MANY did say to this, that if herein any good were to be done after death; how
much rather should the soul it self obtain ease for it self, by it own
confessing of her sins there, than that for the ease thereof an oblation
should be procured by other men. The like also is noted by Cyrill or rather
John Bishop of Jerusalem; that he (...); Cyr^ll. Cateches. 5. My^tagogic.
knew MANY who said thus. What profit does the soul get that goes out of
this world (either with sins, or not with sins) if you make mention of it
in prayer? and by Anastasius Sinaita (or Nicaenus:) (...). Anastas. sin. page
540 edit. Graecolat.
Some do doubt; saying that the dead are not profited by the oblations that
are made for them. and (long after them) by Petrus Cluniacensis in his treatise
against the followers of Peter Bruise in France: Quod bona vivorum mortuis
prodesse valiant, and hi haeretici negant, and ^uidam etiam Catholici dubitare
videntur. Petr. Cluniac. ^p^st. contra Petrobrusianos.
That the good deeds of the living may profit the dead, both these heretics
do deny, and some Catholics also do seem to doubt. Nay in the West, not the
profit only, but the lawfulness also of these doings for the dead was called
in question: as partly may be collected by Boniface archbishop of Mentz his
consulting with Pope Gregory, about 730. years after the birth of our Savior;
Pro obeuntibus quoque consul^isse dignosceris, si lice at oblationes offerre.
Gregor. II. vel III. epist. ad Bonifac. in tomis Concilioru^.
Whether it were lawful to offer oblations for the dead (which he should have
no reason to do, if no question had been made thereof among the Germans) and
is plainly delivered by Hugo Etherianus, about 1170. years after Christ, in
these words. Scio plerosque vanis opinionibus defor^ari, putantes non esse
orandum pro mortuis; eo quod neque Christus, neque Apostoli ejus successores
haec scriptis intimaverint. Nesciu^t quidem illi plura esse, ac persumme
necessaria, quae sancta Ecclesia frequentat, quorum traditio ex scripturis non
habetur: nihilo tamen minus ad cultum Dei pertinent, and vigorem maximum
obtinent. Hug. Etherian. de Animar. regr^ss. ab infer. cap. 13
I know that many are deformed with vain opinions, thinking that the dead are
not to be prayed for: because that neither Christ, nor the Apostles that
succeeded him have intimated these things in the Scriptures. But they are
ignorant that there be many things, and those exceeding necessary, frequented
by the holy Church, the tradition whereof is not had in the Scriptures: and yet
they pertain nevertheless to the worship of God, and obtain great strength.
Whereby it may appear, that this practice wanted not opposition even then,
when in the Papacy it was advanced unto his greatest height. And now is it
high time, that I should pass from this article, unto the next following

OF LIMBVS PATRVM; And CHRIST'S DESCENT INTO HELL.
HEre does our Challenger undertake to prove against us; not only that there is
Limbus Patrum, but that our Savior also descended into Hell, to deliver the
ancient Fathers of the Old Testament; because before his Passion none ever
entered into Heaven. That there was such a thing as Limbus Patrum, I have heard
it said: but what it is now, the Doctors vary, yet agree all in this; that
Limbus it may well be, but Limbus Patrum sure it is not. An ab eo loco
distinctus fue^it, in quo nunc in^a^tes sine baptismo de vita decedent^s recipi
creduntu^, Theologi dubitan^; nec est qui^quam de re dubia temere pronuntiandum
^o. Maldon. ^omment. in Luc. ^6.22.
Whether it were distinct from that place, in which the infants that depart out
of this life without baptism are now believed to be received, the Divines do
doubt; neither is there any thing to be rashly pronounced of so doubtful a
matter: says Maldonat the Jesuit. The Dominican Friars, that wrote against
the Grecians at Constantinople in the year 1252 resolve, that In quem (
limbum) aute adventu^ Christi sancti Patres descendebant: nunc vero pueri, qu^
absque baptismo decedunt, sine poena sensibili, detinentur. ^act. contr. Graec.
in tomo auctorum a P. Situartio edit. page 565.
into this Limbus the holy Fathers before the coming of Christ did descend;
but now the children that depart without baptism, are detained there: so that
in their judgment, that which was the Limbus of Fathers, is now become the
Limbus of Children. The more common opinion is, that these be two distinct
places: and that the one is appointed for unbaptized infants, but the other
Nunc vacuus remanet. Bell^r. de Purgator. lib. 2 cap. 6.
now remains void, and so Manet autem, manebitque, licet vacuus, hic
infernus; ut testimonium perhibeat tum justitiae, tum misericordiae Dei.
Henric. Vicus, de ^es^ensu Christi ad inf^ros, sect. 41. Vi^. Abu^^us. Paradox
5 cap. 183.
shall remain, that it may bear witness as well of the justice as of the
mercy of God. If you demand, how it came to be thus void, and emptied of the
old inhabitants: the answer is here given; that our Savior descended into Hell
purposely ^o deliver from hence the ancient Fathers of the Old Testament. But
Aliud enim Inferi; ut puto, aliud quoque Abrahae sinus. Tertull. advers.
Mar^ion lib. 4. ca^. 34
Hell is one thing, I ween, says Tertullian, and Abraham's b^some (where the
Fathers of the old Testament rested) another: Non utique sinus ille Abrahae, id
est, secret^^ cujusda^ quietis habitatio, aliqua pars Inserorum esse credenda
est. Augustine epist. 99. ad Euodium.
neither is it to be believed, that the bosom of Abraham, being the habitation
of a secret kind of rest, was any part of Hell; says S. Augustine. To say
then, that our Savior descended into Hell, to deliver the ancient Fathers of
the old Testament out of Limbus Patrum: would by this construction prove as
strange a tale, as if it had been reported, that Caesar made a voyage into
Britain, to set his friends at liberty in Greece.

Yea, but before Christ's Passion none ever entered into Heaven: says our
Challenger. The proposition that Cardinal Bellarmine takes upon him to prove,
where he handles this controversy, is: Quod animae piorum no^ fuerint in
coelo ante Christi ascensionem. Be^larmin. de Christ. lib. 4. cap. 11.
that the souls of the godly were not in Heaven before the As^ension of
Christ. Our Jesuit, it seems, considered here with himself, that Christ had
promised unto the penitent thief upon the cross; that not before his
ascension only, but also before his resurrection, even Luke 23.43.
that day he should be with him in Paradise: that is to say, in the kingdom of
heaven; as the Vera ergo expositio est Theophylacti, Ambrosij, Bedae, and
aliorum, qui per paradisum intelligunt regnum coelorum. Bellarm. de Sanct
Beatit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Cardina^l himself does prove, both by the authority of S. 2. Cori^. 12.2.4.
Paul, making Paradise and the third heaven to be the self same thing, and by
the testimony of the ancient expositors of the place. This, belike, stuck
somewhat in our Jesuits stomach: who being loath to interpret this of his
Limbus Patrum (as Henr. Vic. de des^ens. ad infer. sect 41 page 129. Vide Thom.
in 3. part. Sum quaest. 52. art. 4.. ad ^. and Lyranu^s in Luc. 23.43.
others of that side had done) and to maintain that Paradise, in stead of the
third Heaven, should signify the third or the fourth Hell; thought it best to
shift the matter handsomely away, by taking upon him to defend, that, not
before Christ's ascension (least that of the Thief should cross him) but
before his passion none ever entered into Heaven. But if none before our
Saviors Passion did ever enter into Heaven: whither shall we say that Elias
did enter? The Scripture assures us, that he went up into heaven: (2. Kings,
2.11*) and of this Mattathias put his sons in mind upon his death-bedd; that
(...)* 1. Maccab. 2.58.
Elias being zealous and fervent for the law, was taken up into heaven. Elias
and Moses both, before the passion of Christ are described to be Luke 9.31.
in glory: Luke 16.22, 25.
Lazarus is carried by the Angels into a place of comfort, and not of
imprisonment: in a word, all the Fathers Hebr. 11.1^, 14, 16.
accounted themselves to be strangers and pilgrims in this earth, seeking for a
better country, that is, an heavenly, as well as Hebr. 13.14.
we do; and therefore having ended their pilgrimage, they arrived at the
country they sought for, as well as we. They Act. 15.11.
believed to be saved through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as
we; they Habak 2 4. Rom 1.16, 17.
lived by that faith, as well as we; they 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
dyed in Christ, as well as we; they received Romans 4.6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 3.8, 9.
remission of sins, imputation of righteousness, and the blessedness arising
therefrom, as well as we: and the mediation of our Savior being of that
present efficacy, that it took away sin and brought in righteousness from
the very beginning of the world, it had virtue sufficient to free men from the
penalty of loss as well as from the penalty of sense, and to bring them unto
him in whose Psalm. 16 11.
presence is fullness of joy, as to deliver them from the ^uk. 16.28.
place of torment where Matthew. 8.11, 12.
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The first that ever assigned a resting place in Hell to the Fathers of the old
Testament, was (as far as we can find) Marcion the heretic: Sed Marcion
aliorsum cogit, scilicet utramque mercedem Creatoris, sive torme^ti sive
refrigerij, apud inferos determinet eis positam qui Legi and Prophetis
obedierint; Christi vero and Dei sui coel^stem desiniat sinum and portum.
Tertullian. lib. 4. contra Marcion. cap. 34. Vid. etia^ lib. 3. cap. 24.
who determined that both kind of rewards, whether of torment or of
refreshing, was appointed in Hell for them that did obey the Law and the
Prophets. Wherein he was gainsayd by such as wrote against him, not only for
making that the place of their eternal rest; but also for lodging them there at
all, and imagining that Abraham's bosom was any part of Hell. This appears
plainly by the disputation, set out among the works of Origin, betwixt Marcus
the Marcionite, and Adamantius the defender of the Catholic cause: who
touching the In D. Bez^^ Grae^olitino Euangeliorum ve^e^and^e vit^statis
e^emplari, quod in pu^lica Cant^brigie^sis academi^e Bibliotheca asservatur;
historiae h^ic praet^^i^t^tur i^^a pr^es^tio. (...). (...) ^imilis e^iam in
Missali R^m^no ^feria 5 post Dominicam 2. Quadragesimae) legebatur: Dixit Jesus
discipulis suis parabolam hanc. Verum in Missali reformato duae po^teriores
voces sublatae nuper sunt.
parabolicall history of the rich man and Lazarus in the sixteenth of S. Luke,
are brought in reasoning after this manner. (...). Ori^en. Dialog. 2. contra
Marcion.
MARCUS. He says that A^raham is in hell, and not in the kingdom of heaven.
ADAMANTIUS. Read whether he sayt^ that Abraham was in Hell. MARC. In that the
rich man and he talked one to the other, it appears that they were together.
ADAMANT. That they talked one with another, thou hear; but the great gulf
spoken of, that thou hear not. For the middle space betwixt heaven and earth
he calls a gulf. MARC. Can a man therefore see from earth unto heaven? it is
impossible. Can any man lifting up his eyes behold from the earth, or from hell
rather see into heaven? If not; it is plain, that a valley only was set betwixt
them. ADAMANT. Bodily eyes use to see those things only that are near: but
spiritual eyes reach far. and it is manifest, that they who have here put
off their body, do see one another with the eyes of their soul. For mark how
the Gospel does say, that he lifted up his eyes. toward heaven one uses to
lift them up, and not toward the earth. In like manner does Respondebimus, and
hac ipsa scriptura revincente oculos ejus, quae ab infernis discernit Abrahae
sinum pauperi. Aliud enim Inferi, ut puto, aliud quoque Abrahae sinus. Nam and
magnum ait intercedere regiones istas prosundum, and transitum utrinque
prohibere Sed nec allevasset dives oculos, and quidem de longinquo, nisi in
superiora, and de altitudinis longinquo per im^ensam illa^ distantiam
sublimitatis and profunditatis. Tertull. advers. Marcion, lib. 4 cap 34.
Tertullian also retort the same place of Scripture against Marcion, and prove
that it makes a plain difference between Hell and the bosom of Abraham. For
it affirms (says he) both that a great deep is interposed betwixt those
regions, and that it suffers no passage from either side. Neither could the
rich man have lifted up his eyes, and that afar off, unless it had been
unto places above him, and very far above him, by reason of the mighty
distance betwixt that height and that depth. Thus far Tertullian: who though
he come short of Adamantius, in Eam itaque reg^onem sinu^ dico Abrahae, etsi
non coelestem, sublimiorem tamen inferis, interim refrigeriu^, praebituram
animabus justoru^, donec consummatio rerum resurrectionem omnium p^^nitudine
mercedis expungat. I^. I^id.
making Abraham's bosom not to be any part of Heaven, although no member at all
of Hell; yet does he concur with him in this, that it is a place of bliss,
and a common receptacle wherein the souls of all the faithful as well of the
new as of the old Testament do still remain, in expectation of the general
resurrection* which quite marteth the Limbus Patrum of our Romanists, and the
journey which they fancy our Savior to have taken for the fetching of the
Fathers from thence.

With these two does S. Augustine also join, in his 99. epistle to Euodius:
concerning whose judgment herein, I will not say the deceitful, but the
exceeding partial dealing of Cardinal Bellarmine can very hardly be excused.
Augustinu^, etsi in epist. 99. ambigere videtur, an sinus Abraham, ubi erant
animae Patrum olim, in inferno esset an alibi: tame^ lib. 20 de civit. Dei, cap
15. affi^at in inferno fuisse; ut caeteri omnes Patre^ semper docuerunt.
Bellarmin de Christ. lib. 4. cap. 11. in fine.
Although Augustine (says he) in his 99. epistle do seem to doubt, whether the
bosom of Abraham, where the souls of the Fathers were in times past, should
be in Hell or somewhere else: yet in the 20. book of the City of God, the 15.
chapter, he affirms that it was in Hell; as all the rest of the Fathers have
always taught. If S. Augustine in that epistle were of the mind (as he was
indeed) that Abraham's bosom was no part of Hell: he was not the first inventer
of that doctrine; others taught it before him, and opposed Marcion for teaching
otherwise. (...): alone he went not, two there were at least (as we have seen)
that walked along with him in the same way. But for that which he is said to
have doubted off in one place, and to have affirmed in another: if the
indifferent Reader will be pleased but to view both the places, he shall easily
discern that the Cardinal looked not into these things with a single eye. In
his 99. epistle, Quanquam in his ipsis tanti magistri verbis, ubi ait dixisse
Abraham, Inter vos and nos chaos magnum firmatum est; satis, ut opinor,
appareat non esse quandam parte^ and quasi membrum Inferorum tantae illius
felicitatis sinum. Aug^st. epist 99.
from that speech of Abraham; Between you and us there is a great gulf fixed:
he makes this inference. In these words it appears sufficiently, as I
think, that the bosom of so great happiness is not any part and member of
Hell. These seem unto the Cardinal to be the words of a doubtful man: with
what words then, when he is better resolved, does he affirm the matter? With
these forsooth. Si enim non asburde credividetur, antiquos etiam sanctos, qui
venturi Christi tenuerunt fide^, locis quidem a tormentis impiorum
remotissimis, sed apud inferos fuisse, donec eos inde sanguis Christi, and ad
ea loca descensus c^ueret: profecto deinceps boni fideles effuso illo pretio
jam redempti, prorsus inferos nesciunt, do^ec etiam receptis corporibus bona
recipiant quae merentur. Id. de Civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 15.
If it do seem no absurdity to believe, that the old Saints which held the
faith of Christ to come, were in places most remote from the torments of the
wicked, but yet in Hell; until the blood of Christ, and his descent into those
places, did deliver them: truly from henceforth the good and faithful, who
are redeemed with that price already shed, know not Hell at all. If, satis ut
opinor apparet, [it appears sufficiently, as I think,] must import doubting;
and, si non absurd credi videtur, [if it do seem no absurdity to believe,]
affirming: I know not, I must confess, what to make of men's speeches.

The truth is: S. Augustine in handling this question discovers himself to be
neither of the Jesuits temper nor belief. He esteemed not this to be such an
article of faith, that they who agreed not therein must needs be held to be of
different religions: as he does modestly propound the reasons which induced him
to think that Abraham's bosom was no member of Hell; so does he not lightly
reject the opinion of those that thought otherwise, but leaves it still as a
disputable point. Vtrum sinus ille Abrahae ubi dives impius, cum in tormentis
esset inferni, requiescentem pauperem vidit, vel paradisi censendus vocabulo,
vel ad inferos pertinere existimandus sit; non facile dixerim. I^. epist 57.
Whether that bosom of Abraham where the wicked rich man, when he was in the
torments of Hell, did behold the poor man resting, were either to be accounted
by the name of Paradise, or esteemed to appertain unto Hell, I cannot readily
affirm: says he in one place. and in another: Etenim apud inferos ut^um in
locis quibusda^ fuisset jam Abraham; non satis possumus definire. Id. in Psalm.
85.
Whether Abraham were then at any certain place in Hell, we cannot certainly
define. and in his 12. book de Genesi ad literam: Proinde, ut dixi, nondu^
inveni, and adhue quaero nec mihi occurrit inferos alicubi in bono posuisse
Scriptura^ duntaxat Canonicam. Non aute^ in bono accipiendum sinum Abrahae, and
illam requiem, quo ab angelis pius pauper ablatus est, nescio utrum quisquam
possit audire: and ideo quo modo eum apud inferos credamus esse, non video. Id.
de Gen ad lit. l^b. 12. cap. 33.
I have not hitherto found, and I do yet inquire, neither do I remember that
the canonical Scripture does any where put Hell in the good part. Now that the
bosom of Abraham and that rest, unto which the godly poor man was carried by
the Angel, should not be taken in the good part, I know not whether any good
man can endure to hear: and therefore how we may believe that it is in Hell I
do not see. Where it may further also be observed, that S. Augustine does here
assign no other place to this godly poor man, then he does unto the souls of
all the faithful that have departed since the coming of our Savior Christ:
the question with him being alike of them both, whether the place of their rest
be designed by the name of Hell or Paradise. Therefore he says: Quanquam and
illud me nondum invenisse confiteor, inferos appellatos, ubi justorum animae
requiescunt. Id. ibid.
I confess, I have not yet found, that it is called Hell, where the souls of
just men do rest. and again: Quanto magis ergo post hanc vitam etiam sinus
ille Abrahae Paradisus dici potest; ubi jam nulla tentatio, ubi tanta requies
post omnes dolores vitae hujus? Neque enim and lux ibi non est propria quaedam
and sui generis, and profecto magna; quam dives ille de tormentis and tenebris
inferoru^, tam u^ique de longinquo cum magnu^ chaos esset in medio, sic tamen
vidit ut ibi illu quonda^ contemptu^ paupere^ agnosceret. Id. ibid. cap. 34.
How much more after this life may that bosom of Abraham be called Paradise;
where now there is no temptation, where there is so great rest after all the
griefs of this life? For neither is there wanting there a proper kind of
light and of it own kind, and doubtless great; which that rich man out of
the torments and darkness of Hell, (even from so remote a place, where a great
gulf was placed in the midst) did so behold, that he might there take notice
of the poor man whom sometime he had despised. and elsewhere, expounding that
place in the 16. of S. Luke: Sinus Abrahae, ^equies ^st bea^on^^ pauperum,
quoru^ est r^gnu coelotum, in quo post hanc vita^ recipiuntur. Id. Quaestion.
Eli^^^el. lib. 2. cap. 38.
The bosom of Abraham, says he, is the rest of the blessed poor, whose is
the kingdom of heaven, in which after this life they are received.

Bid in his Commentaries upon the same place, and Strabus in the ordinary
Gloss do directly follow S. Augustine in this exposition: and the Greek
interpreter of S Luke (who wrongly bears the name of Titus Bostrensis, and
Chrysos^om) for proof thereof produces the testimony of Per sinum Abrahae,
Isaac, and ^acob, sanctus Dionysius Areopagita divinissimas illas fo^tunatasque
seeds designatas asserit, quae omnes justos post ^ehe^ssima^ consummationem
intia sese recipient. ^it. Bo^^r. in Luc. cap. 16. in ipso fine.
Di^nysius Areopagita, affirming that by the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, those most divine and blessed seats are designed, which do receive
within them all just men after their most happy consummation. The words that he
has relation unto, be these, in the 7. chapter of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy. (...) Diot^^^ Eccl Hi^r cap. 7.
The bosoms of the blessed Pa^riarches and of all the rest of the Saints are,
as I think, the most divine and blessed resting places, which do recei^e all
such as are like unto God, into that never-fading and most blessed perfection
that is therein. Hitherto appertain those passages in S. Ambrose. Veni in
gremium Jacob: ut sicut Lazarus p^uper in Abrahae simi, ita etiam tu in Jacob
patriarchae tramquillitate requiescas. Sinu^ enim Patriarcharum recessus quidam
est quietis aeternae. Ambros. orat. de obitu Valentinian^ Imp.
Come into the bosom of Jacob: that as poor Lazarus did in the bosom of
Abraham, so thou also may rest in the tranquillity of the patriarch Jacob.
For the bosom of the Patriarchs is a certain retyring place of everlasting
rest. Ibimus ubi sinum suum Abraham sanctus expandit, ut suscipiat pauperes,
sicur suscepit and Lazaru^: in quo sinu requiescunt, qui in hoc seculo gravia
atque aspera pertulerunt. Id de bono mortis. cap. 12.
We shall go where holy Abraham opens his bosom, to receive the poor, as
he did receive Lazarus: in which bosom they do rest, who in this world have
endured grievous and sharp things. In Paradisum ascenditur, in Infernu^
descenditur. Descendant, inquit, in infernum viventes. Ideoque Lazarus pauper
per angelos in Abrahae sinum est elevatus. Id. in Psalm. 48.
Into Paradise is a ascent, into Hell a descent. Let them descend, says he,
quick into Hell. And therefore poor Lazarus was by the Angels lifted up into
Abraham's bosom. Vide illuna pauperem bonis omnibus abundantem, quem sancti
Patriarchae requies beata circumdabat. Id. ibid.
Behold that poor man abounding with all good things, whom the blessed rest of
the holy Patriarch did compass about. Lazarus in Abrahae sinu recumbens, vitam
carpebat aeternam. Id. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 3.
Lazarus lying in Abraham's bosom, enjoyed everlasting life.

S. Chrysostom, or whosoever else was the author of that homily touching the
Rich man and Lazarus, upon those words of the text, that the rich man lifting
up his eyes beheld Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, moves this question: (...).
Chrysostom. homil. in Divit. and Lazar. tom. 5. edit. Savil. page 730.
Why Lazarus did not see the rich man, as well as the rich man is said to see
Lazarus? and gives this answer thereunto: because Etenebris autem quae sunt in
luce tuemur. Quod contra facere in tenebris e luce nequimus. Lucret. de rer.
not. lib. 4.
he that is in the light does not see him that stands in the dark, but he
that is in the dark beholds him that is in the light; taking it for granted,
that Abraham's bosom was a place of light and not of darkness. He that wrote
the Homily upon that sentence of the Psalm, What man is he that would have
life and desires to see good days? who is commonly also, though not rightly,
accounted to be Chrysostom; goes further and says, that the rich man Erexit
oculos in coelum de loco tormentorum, and clamavitad patrem Abraham. Homil. in
illud Psalm. 33. Quis est homo. tom. 1. Oper. Chrysostom.
lifted up his eyes unto Heaven out of the place of torments, and cried unto
father Abraham: yea he expressly affirms there, that Beatus pauper migravit
ad. oelum; and dives pu^pu^a tectus mansit in inferno. ^. id.
the blessed poor man did go unto Heaven, and the rich man covered with purple
did remain in Hell. which agrees well with that undoubted saying of S.
Chrysostom himself: (...). Chrysostom. lib. 1. de Provident. ad Stager. tom. 6.
^dit Savil. page 96.
Lazarus, who was worthy of Heaven and the kingdom that is there, being full
of sores was exposed to the tongues of dogs, and strove with perpetual
hunger. and with that which he writes elsewhere: that (...). Id. in illud:
Intrate per ang^st port. t^m. 5. edit. Savil. page 179.
after famine, and soars, and lying in the porch, he enjoyed that refreshing
which is impossible to be expressed by speech, even (...). Ibid. page 180.
unspeakable good things. Whereunto may be added that collection of his out of
the words of our Savior: Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaak, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
8.11. that this kingdom is (...). Id. in Matthew. homil. 26. edit. Graec. 27.
Latin.
designed here by a new term of the bosom of Abraham; and the (...), etc Ibid.
consummation of all good called by the name of the bosoms of the Patriarchs.

S. Basil in his sermon of Fasting, places Lazarus in Paradise. (...); Basil.
homil. 1. de Ieiunio.
Do not thou see Lazarus (says he) how he entered by fasting into Paradise?
and the ancient compiler of the Latin sermon translated from thence, frames
his exhortation accordingly, Vtamur ergo and nos hac via qua rediri ad
Paradisum potest. etc. Illuc praecessit Lazarus Sermon de Ieiunio, Zenoni
Veronensi perpe^aem attributus.
Let us therefore use this way, whereby we may return unto Paradise. Thither
is Lazarus gone before us. Asterius Bishop of Amasea places him in (...).
Asterius, in homil. de divite and Lazaro.
a sweet and joyous state: Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, in (...). Cyrill.
Alexandr. homil. Paschal. 11.
unexpected delights: Salvianus, in bliss and everlasting wealth. Pauper
beatitudinem emit mendicitate; dives suppliciu^ facultate. Pauper cum pen^tus
nil haberet, emit a^ternas divitias egestate. Salvian. Massil. lib. 3. ad
Eccles. Catholic. advers. avaritia^. Prior e^iam sententiae habetur apud
authorem sermon. 227. de Tempore, tom. 10. Oper. Augustini.
The poor man (says he) bought bliss with beggerie; the rich man punishment
with wealth. The poor man, when he had just nothing, bought everlasting riches
with penury. Gregory Nazianzen says, he (...) Gregor. Nazianz. orat. 16. de
pauperum amore, page 262. edit Graecolat.
was enriched with refreshment in the bosoms of Abraham, that are so much to
be (...). Id. orat. 44. in Pentecost. page 714.
desired. Prudentius, in his poetical vain, describes him to be there hedged
about with flowers, as being in the garden of Paradise, even in the same
paradise wherein pure souls do now rest since the ascension of Christ. for
thus he writes: Prudent. Cathemerin^^. Hymn. 10.
Sed dum resolubile corpus
Revocas Deus, atque reformas;
Quanam regione jubebis
Animam requiescere puram?
Gremio senis abdita sancti
Recubabit, ubi est Eleazar;
Quem floribus undique septum
Dives procul adspicit ardens.
Sequimur tua dicta Redemptor,
Quibus atra e morte triumphans,
Tua per vestigia mandas
Socium crucis ire latronem.
So where Job says; Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return thither: the Greek scholies expound it thus: Thither: Nimirum ad Deum;
ad illum, inquam, beatum finem and requietem. Catena Graec. in Job. cap. 1. a
P. Comitolo conversa.
namely unto God, unto that blessed end and rest. which the author of the
Commentaries upon Job ascribed to Origin, expresses thus at large. Illo,
inquit, ibo, ubi sunt tabernacula justoru^, ubi sunt sanctorum gloriae, ubi est
fidelium requies, ubi est piorum consolatio, ubi est misericor dium ha^reditas,
ubi est immaculatorum beatitudo, ubi est veracium laetitia and consolatio.
Illuc ibo, ubi est lux and vita, ubi est gloria and jucunditas, ubi est
laetitia and exultatio; vel unde aufugit dolor, tristitia and gemitus, ubi
obliviscuntur priores tribulationes has quae sunt in corpore super terram.
Illuc ibo, ubi est tribulationum depositio, ubi est remuncratio laborum, ubi
Abrahae sinus, ubi Isaac proprietas, ubi Israel familiaritas, ubi sanctorum
animae, ubi angelorum chori, ubi archangelorum voces, ubi spiritus sancti
illuminatio, ubi Christi regnum, ubi aeterni Dei patris infecta gloria atque
beatus conspectus. Origin. in Job. lib. 1.
Thither will I go, says he, where are the tabernacles of the righteous,
where the glories of the Saints are, where is the rest of the faithful, where
is the consolation of the godly, where is the inheritance of the merciful,
where is the bliss of the undefiled, where is the joy and consolation of such
as love the truth. Thither will I go, where is light and life, where is glory
and jocundnesse, where is joy and exultation: whence grief and heaviness and
groaning fly away, where they forgett the former tribulations that they
sustained in their body upon the earth. Thither will I go, where there is a
laying aside of tribulations, where there this a recompense of labors, where is
the bosom of Abraham, where the propriety of Isaac, where the familiarity of
Israel; where be the souls of the Saints, where the quire of Angels, where
the voices of Archangels, where the illumination of the holy Ghost, where the
kingdom of Christ, where the endless glory and blessed sight of the eternal
God the father. What difference I pray you now, is there betwixt this Limbus
Patrum and Heaven it self?

Of Abraham's bosom Gregory Nyssen writes after this manner. (...). Gregor.
Nyssen. Dialog de Anima and Resurrect. tom. 2. Oper. page 651.
As by a certain abuse of speech we call a baye of the sea an arm or bosom:
so it seems to me that the word does signify the exhibitio^ of those
unmeasurable good things by the name of a bosom; into which good bosom, or
baye, all men that sail by a virtuous course through this present life, when
they loose from hence, put in their souls as it were into a haven free from
danger of waves and tempests. and in another place. (...). Id tractat. 2. de
Psalm. inscript. cap. 6. ( tom. 1. Oper. page 304.)
If one hearing of a bosom, as it were a certain large baye of the sea;
should conceive the fullness of good things to be meant thereby where the
Patriarch is named, and that Lazarus is therein: he should not think amiss.
True it is indeed, that diverse of the Doctors who make Abraham's bosom to be a
place of glory, do yet distinguish it from Heaven: but it is to be considered
withal that they hold the same opinion indifferently, of the place whereunto
the souls of all godly men are received, as well under the state of the New as
of the Old Testament. For they did not hold (as our Romanistes do now) that
Christ by his descension emptyed Limbus, and removed the bosom of Abraham from
Hell into Heaven: their Limbus is now as full of Fathers as ever it was, and is
the common receptacle wherein they suppose all good souls to remain until
the general resurrection; before which time they admit neither the Fathers nor
us unto the possession of the kingdom of Heaven. (...) Id. de Hominis
Opificio, cap. 22.
For Abraham (says Gregory Nyssen) and the other Patriarchs, although they
had a desire to see those good things, and never left seeking that heavenly
country, as the Apostle says: yet are they notwithstanding that, even yet in
expectancie of this favor; God having provided some better thing for us,
according to the saying of S. Paul, that they without us should not be made
perfect. So Tertullian: Vnde apparet sapienti cuique qui aliquando Elysios
audierit, esse aliquam localem determinationem, quae sinus dicta sit Abrahae,
ad recipiendas animas filiorum ejus etiam ex Nationibus, patris scilicet
multarum Nationum in Abrahae censum deputandarum, and cade^ fide qua and
Abraham Deo credidit, nullo sub jogo legis, nec in signo circumcisionis. Eam
itaque regionem sinum dico Abrahae, etsi non coelestem sublimio^em tamen
inferis, interim refrigeriu^ praebitura^ animabus justoru^, donec consummatio
rerum resurrectionem omniu^ plenitudine mercedis expungat. Tertullian. lib. 4.
coutr. Marci^n. cap. 34.
It appears to every wise man, that has ever heard of the Elysian fields,
that there is some local determination, which is called Ab^ahams bosom, to
receive the souls of his sons, even of the Gentiles; he being the Father of
many nations that were to be accounted of Abraham's family, and of the same
faith wherewith Abraham believed God, under no yoke of the law, nor in the
sign of Circumcision. That region t^erefore do I call the bosom of Abraham,
although not heavenly yet higher than hell, which shall give rest in the mean
season to the souls of the righteous, until the consummation of thin^s do
finish the resurrection of all, with the fullness of reward. And we have heard
S. Hilary say before, that Exeuntes de corpore ad in^io^tum illum regni
coelestis per custodiam Domini fideles omnes reservabuntur: in sinu scilic^t
interim Abrahae collocati, quo adire impios interjectum chaos inhibet, quousque
introeundi rursum in regnum coelorum tempus adveniat. Huar. in Psalm 120.
all the faithful, when they are gone out of the body, shall be reserved by
the Lords custody for that entry into the heavenly kingdom; being in the
mean time placed in the bosom of Abraham, whither the wicked are hindered from
coming by the gulf interposed betwixt them, until the time of entering into
the kingdom of heaven do come. and again. Testes nobis Euangelicus dives and
pauper: quorum unu ^angeli in sedibus beatorum and in Abrahae sinu lo^averunt,
aliu^ statim poenae regio suscepit. id. in Ps^lm. 2.
The rich and the poor man in the Gospel do serve us for witnesses: one of
whom the Angels did place in the seats of the Blessed and in Abraham's bosom;
the other the region of punishment did presently receive. Indicij enim dies,
vel beatitudinis retr^butio est aeterna vel po^na^ Tempus vero mortis habet
unumquemque suis legibus, dum ad judi^ium unumqu^^ q^e aut Abraham reservat aut
poena. Jd. ibid.
For the day of judgment is the everlasting retribution either of bliss or
pain: but the time of death has every one under his laws, while either
Abraham or punishment reserveth every one unto judgment.

The difference betwixt the Doctors in their judgment concerning the bosom of
Abraham, and the resting of the ancient Fathers therein, we find noted in
part in those expositions upon the Gospel, which go under the name of
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch and Eucherius Bishop of Lions. In hoc quod apud
^nfe^^^^ Abrahamum vidit, haec subesse a quibusda^ ratio putatur; quod omnes
Sancti ante adventum Domini nostri Jesus Christi etiam ad inserna, licet in
r^f^igerij locum, descendisse dicuntur. Alij opinantur locum illum in quo
Abraham erat, ab illis inferni locis seorsim in superioribus fuisse
co^stitutum: propter quod dicat Dominus de illo Divite, quod elevans oculos
suos cum esset in tormentis, vidit Abraham de long. Theophil. Antioch.
Allegor. in Johann. lib. 4. ^ucher. Lugd. de quaestionib. novi Testam in Luca.
In that the rich man (say they) did in Hell behold Abraham, this by some is
thought to be the reason: because all the Saints before the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, are said to have descended into Hell, although into a place of
refreshment. Others think, that the place wherein Abraham was, did lie apart
from those places of Hell, situated in places above: for which the Lord should
say of that rich man, that lifting up his eyes when he was in torments, he saw
Abraham a far off. The former of these opinions is delivered by some of the
Doctors doubtfully, by others more resolutely. Primasius sets it down with
S. Augustins qualification: Si non absurd credi videtur Primasius, lib. 5 in
Apocalypse. cap 20 secutus Augustinum, lib. 20. de Civil. Dei, cap. 15.
It s^em^th that without absurdity it may be believed. The author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew says, that Vis autem manifest scire, quoniam
ante Christum coeli si aperiebantur, iterum claudebantur Na^ justi quidem
forsitan ascendebant in coelum; peccatores autem nequaquam. Ideo autem dixi,
forsitan, ne quibusdam placeat etiam ante Christi adventum justorum animas
ascendere potuisse in coelum Alioqui nullam animam ante Christum arbitror
ascendisse in co^lum, ex quo peccavit Adam, and clausi sunt ei coeli: sed omnes
in inferno detentas. Op. imper^. in Matt^. homil. 4. int^r Opera Ch^ysostomi.
peradventure the just did ascend into heaven before the coming of Christ: yet
that he does think, that no soul before Christ did ascend into heaven, since
Adam sinned and the heavens were shut against him; but all were detayned in
Hell. and, Vt enim arbitror, etiam patres nostri Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
totus chorus sanctorum Vatum and justorum, Christi adventu perfru^ti sunt
Catena Graeca in Cantica utriusque Testamenti, ab Ant. Carafa convers. tom. 1.
Operu^ Theo^oreti, page 729. edit. Colon. 1573.
as I do think, says the Greek expositor of Zacharies Hymn likewise, even
our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the whole queere of the holy
Prophets and just men, did enjoy the coming of Christ. Of which coming to
visit the Fathers in Hell, Hieronym. ep. 151. ad Algas. quaest. 1. and lib. 2.
^ommentar. in Matthew. cap. 11.
S. Hierome, Ruffin. in exposit. Symboli.
Ruffinus, Ven. Fortunat. in exposit. Symboli.
Venantius Fortunatus, Gregor. lib. 1. in Ezechiel. homil. 1. and in Euangel.
hom. 6.
Gregory, Julian. Tolet. lib. 2. contra Iudaeos.
Iulianus Toletanus, and Eusebius. Homil. in Euangel. Dominic. 3. Adventus.
Eusebius Emissenus (as he is commonly called) interpret that question
propounded by the Baptist unto our Savior. Matthew. 11.3. Luke 7.19, 20.
Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? which exposition is by
S. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 11. hom. 36. edit. Graec. vel 37. Latin.
Chrysostom justly rejected, as utterly impertinent and ridiculous. Anastasius
Sinaita affirms very boldly, that (...). Anastas. Sinait. (al. Nicaenus)
quaest. 112.
all the souls as well of the just as the unjust were under the hand of the
Devil, until Christ descending into Hell said unto those that were in bonds,
Come forth, and to those that were indurance, Be at liberty. For Non enim
solum interitu^ corporu^ dissolvit in sepulchro; sed and captivas animas ex
inferno, in quo per tyrannidem detinebantur, liberavit, and fortasse non per
tyrannidem, sed pro multis debitis detinebantur: quibus persolutis, qui propter
liberationem descenderat, reduxit magnam copiam captivorum. Anastas. Sinait. de
rect. dogmatib. o^at. 5.
he did not only (says he in another place) dissolve the corruption of the
bodies in the grave: but also delivered the captive souls out of Hell,
wherein they were by tyranny detained, and peradventure not by tyranny
neither, but for many debts. which being paid, he that descended for their
deliverie, brought back with him a great company of captives. and thus was In
eo spoliati sunt Inferni. In eo liberatus est Adamus ex moeroribus. Id. in
Hexaemer. l^b. 7.
Hell spoiled, and Adam delivered from his griefs. Which is agreeable to that
which we read in the works of Athanasius: that (...), ( sive (...) Athanas. de
sa^utari adventu Christi, advers. Apollinar.
the soul of Adam was detayned in the condemnation of death, and cried
continually unto the Lord; such as had pleased God, and were justified in the
law of nature, being detayned together with Adam, and lamenting and crying out
with him. and that the Devil, (...). Author ser^onis in Passionem and Crucem
Dom. inter opera Athanasij.
beholding himself spoiled, did bemoane himself; and beholding those that
sometime were weeping under him, now singing in the Lord, did rent himself.

Others are more favorable to the souls of the Fathers, though they place
them in Hell: for they hold them to have been there in a state of bliss, and
not of misery. Thus the author of the Latin homily concerning the Rich man and
Lazarus, which is commonly fathered upon Chrysostom, notwithstanding he
affirms that Simulque considerandum, quod Abraham apud inseros erat: necdum
enim Christus resurrexerat, qui illum in Paradisum duceret. Antequam Christus
moreretur, nemo in Paradisum conscenderat, nisi latro. Rhomphaea illa flammea,
and vertigo illa claudebat paradisum. Non poterat aliqui^ intrare in Paradisum,
quem Christus clauserat: latro primus cum Christo intravit. Homil. in Luc. 16.
de Divit. tomo 2. Oper. Chrysostom. Lati^.
Abraham was in Hell, and that before the coming of Christ, none ever entered
into Paradise: yet does he acknowledge in the mean time that Lazarus did
remain there in a kind of Paradise. For Paradisus pauperis, sinus erat
Abrahae, Ibid.
the bosom of Abraham, says he, was the poor man's Paradise. and again.
Dicat mihi aliquis: In inferno est Paradisus? Ego hoc dico, quia sinus Abrahae
Paradisi veritas est: sed and sanctissimum Paradisum fateor. Ibid.
Some man may say unto me: Is there a Paradise in Hell? I say this, that the
bosom of Abraham is the truth of Paradise: Yea and I confess it to be a most
holy Paradise. So Tertullian in the fourth book of his Verses against Marcion,
places Abraham's bosom under the earth, but in an open and lightsome seat,
far removed from the fire and from the darkness of Hell: -- sub corpore
terrae
In part ignota quidam locus exstat apertus,
Luce Confer locum ex Augustino, de Genesi ad li^et. lib. 12. cap. 34. supra
citatum, in fine page 259.
sua fretus; Abrahae sinus iste vocatur,
Altior a tenebris, long semotus ab igne,
Sub terra tamen.
Yea he makes it to be one house with that which is eternal in the heaven,
distinguished only from it, as the outer and the inner Temple (or the Sanctum
and the Sanctum Sanctorum) were in the time of the Law, by the Veil that hung
between: which veil being rent at the passion of Christ, he says these two
were made one everlasting house. Tempore divisa and spatio, and ratione ligata
Vna domus, quamvis velo partita videtur.
Atque adeo passo Domino velamine rupto,
Coelestes patuere plagae, coelataque sancta;
Atque duplex quondam, facta est domus una perennis.
Yet elsewhere he makes up the partition again: maintaining very stiffly,
that the gates of Nulli patet coelum t^r^a a^huc salva, ne dixerim clau^a. Cum
transactione enim mundi reserabuntur regna coelorum. Tertull. de A^ima, cap. 5^.
Heaven remain still shut against all men, until the end of the world come
and the day of the last judgment. Only Q^omodo Perpetua for^issima martyr sub
die passionis in revelatione Paradisi, solos illic commartyre^ suos ridit; nisi
quia nullis romphaea Paradisi janitrix cedit, nisi qui in Christo decesse^i^t?
Tota Paradisi clavis tuus sanguis est. Ibid. Vid. etia^ lib. de Resurrect. carn
cap. 4^.
Paradise he leaves open for Martyrs (as that other author of the latin Homily
Si persecutio venerit, imitemur latronem: si pax fuerit, imitemur Lazarum Si
martyrium fecerimus, statim intrabimus Paradisum: si paupertatis poenam
sustinuerimus, statim in sinum Abrahae. Habet and sanguis, habet and pax loca
sua: habet and paupertas martyrium suum, and egestas been tolerata facit
marty^ium; sed egestas propter Christum, non propter necessitatem. Homil. de
Divite. inter ^pera Chrysostom.
seems also to do:) but the souls of the rest of the faithful he Habes
etiam de Paradiso a nobis libellum, quo constituimus o^nem animam apud inferos
sequestrari in diem Domini. Tertull. de Ani^ cap. 55 Omnes ergo animae penes
inferos? inquis, Velis ac nolis, and supplicia jam illic and refrigeria habes,
pauperem and divitem. etc Cur enim non p^tes animam and puniri and fov^ri in
inferis, interim sub expectati^ne utriusque judicij in quadam usurpatione and
candida ejus? Ibid. cap ult.
sequest^eth into Hell, there to remain Quod si Christus Deus, quia and homo,
mortuus secundum scriptu^as, and sepultus secundum ea them, hic quoque legi
satisfecit, forma humanae mortis apud inferos functus; nec ante ascendit in
sublimiora coelorum, quam descendit in inferiora terrarum, ut illic Patriarchas
and Prophetas compotes sui faceret: habes, and regionem inferum subterraneam
credere, and illos cubito pellere, qui satis superbe non putent animas fidelium
inferis dignas; servi super magistrum, aspernati si forte in Abrahae sinu,
expectandae resurrectionis solatium earpere. Ibid. cap. 55.
in Abraham's bosom until the time of the general resurrection. And to this
part of Hell does he imagine Christ to have descended, not with purpose to
fetch the souls of the Fathers from thence (which is the only errand that our
Romanistes conceive he had thither) but, ut illic Patriarchas and Prophetas
compotes sui faceret, that he might there make the Patriarchs and Prophets
partakers of his presence.

S. Hierome says, that Dominus noster Jesus Ch^istus ad forna^em descendit
inferni, in quo cla^s^^, and p^ccatorum. and justo^um animae ten^bantur. ut
absq^e executi^ne and noxa ^ui, ^os qui tenebantur in^lusi, m^rtis vinculi lib
raret. Id lib. ^ in Dan^el cap. 3.
our Lord Jesus Christ descended into the furnace of Hell, wherein the souls
both of sinners and of just men were held shut; that without any burning or
hurt unto himself, he might free from the bonds of death those that were held
shut up in that place: and that he Invo^avit ergo rede^ptor ^oster nomen
Domini d^ lacu nov^ssimo, cum in virtute divinitatis descendit ad inferos, and
destructis claustris Tartari, suos quos ibi reperit eruens, victo^ ad superos
ascen^it. Id. lib. 2. in Lament. Ierem. cap. 3.
called upon the name of the Lord out of the lowermost lake, when by the power
of his divinity he descended into Hell, and having destroyed the bars of
Tartarus, (or the dungeon of Hell) bringing from thence such of his as he found
there, ascended conqueror up again. He says further, that Infernus locus
suppliciorum atque cruciatuum est, in quo videtur dives purpuratus: ad quem
descendit and Dominus, ut vinctos de carcere dimitteret. Id. lib. 6 in Esai.
cap. 14.
Hell is the place of punishments and tortures, in which the rich man that was
clothed in pu^ple is see^e: unto which also the Lord did descend, that he
might let forth those that were bound out of prison. Lastly, Descendit ergo in
inferiora terrae, and ascendit super omnes coelos filius Dei: ut non tantum
legem prophetasque compleret, sed and alias quasdam occultas dispensationes,
quas solus ipse novit cum patre. Neque enim scire possumus, quomodo and angelis
and his qui in inferno erant, sanguis Christi profuerit; and tamen quin
profuerit, nescire non possumus. Id. lib. 2. in. phes. cap 4.
the Son of God (says he, following Origin, as it seems, too unaduisedly
here) descended into the lowermost parts of the earth, and ascended above all
heavens: that he might not only fulfill the law and the prophets, but certain
other hidden dispensations also, which he alone does know with the Father. For
we cannot understand, how the blood of Christ did profit both the Angels and
those that were in Hell; and yet that it did profit them, we cannot be
ignorant. Thus far S. Hierome; touching Christ's descent into the lowermost
Hell: which Thomas and the other Schoolmen will not admit that he ever came
unto. Yet this must they of force grant, if they will stand to the authority of
the Fathers. Restabat tamen ad plenu^ nostrae redemptionis effectu^, ut illuc
usque homo sine peccato a Deo susceptus descenderet, quousque homo separatus a
Deo, peccati merito cecidisset; id est, ad Infernum, ubi solebat peccatoris
anima torqueri, and a^ Sepulchru^, ubi consueverat peccatoris caro corrumpi:
sic tamen, ut nec Christi caro in sepulchro corrumperetur, nec inferni
doloribus anima torqueretur. Quoniam anima immunis a peccato, non erat subdenda
supplicio: and carnem sine peccato no^ debuit vitiare corruption Fulgent ad
Trasimund lib. 3. cap. 30.
It remained, says Fulgentius, for the full effecting of our redemption, that
man assumed by God without sin, should thither descend, whither man separated
from God should have fallen by the desert of sin; that is, unto Hell, where
the soul of the sinner was wont to be tormented, and to the Grave, where the
flesh of the sinner was accustomed to be corrupted: yet so, that neither the
flesh of Christ should be corrupted in the Grave nor his soul be tormented
with the pains of Hell. Because the soul free from sin, was not to be
subjected to such punishment: neither ought corruption to tainte the flesh
without sin. Hoc autem ideo factum est, ut per morientem temporaliter carnem
justi, donaretur vita aeterna carni; and per descendentem ad infernum animam
justi, dolores solverentur inferni Ibid.
And this he says was done for this end: that by the flesh of the just dying
temporally, everlasting life might be given to our flesh; and by the soul of
the just descending into Hell, the pains of hell might be loosed.

It is the saying of S. Ambrose, that Expers pec^ati Christus, cum ad
tartari^ma descendens, seras inferni januasque confringens, vinctas peccato
animas mortis dominatione destructa, e diaboli faucibus revocavit ad vitam.
Ambros. de mysterio Paschae, cap 4.
Christ being void of sin, when he did descend into the lowermost parts of
Tartarus, breaking the bars and gates of Hell, called back unto life out of
the jaws of the Devil the souls that were bound with sin, having destroyed
the dominion of death: and of Eusebius Emissenus or Gallicanus (or who ever was
the author of the sixth Paschall homily attributed to him) that Deposito quidem
corpore imas atque abditas Tartari seeds filius hominis penetravit: sed ubi
retentus esse inter mortuos putabatur, ibi vincula mortuorum ligata morte
laxavit. Eusebius. homil. 6. de Pas^ha.
the son of man laying aside his body, pierced the lowest and hidden seats
of Tartarus: but where he was thought to have been detained among the dead,
there binding death; did he loose the bonds of the dead. Presently Confestim
igitur aeterna nox inferorum Christo descendente resplenduit: siluit stridor
lugentium ille, soluta sunt onera catenaru^, dirupta ceciderunt vincula
damnatorum. Attonitae mentis obstupue^e tortores: omnis simul impia officina
contremuit, cum Christum repent in suis sedibus vidit. Ib. homil. 1. Caesarius
Arelatens. de Pasch. hom. 3.
therefore, says Caesarius (in his third Paschall homily; which is the same with
the first of those that go under the name of the former Eusebius) the
everlasting night of Hell at Christ's descending shined bright: the gnashing of
the mourners ceased, the burdens of the chains were loosed, the bursted bands
of the damned fell from them. The tormentors astonished in mind were amazed:
the whole jmpious shop trembled together, when they beheld Christ suddenly
in their dwellings: So Arnoldus Bonaevallensis in his book de Cardinalibus
operibus Christi (commonly attributed to S. Cyprian) notes, that at that time
Ab inferna. lib. tormentis cessatum est. Arnald. abb. Bonaevallis, tract. de
Unction Chrismatis, in fine.
there was a cessation from infernal torments: which by Arator, historiae
Apostolicae lib. 1.
Arator is thus more amply expressed in verse.

-- pavidis resplenduit umbris
Pallida regna petens, propria quem luce corruscum
Non potuit fuscare chaeos. fugere dolores,
Infernus tunc esse timet, nullumque coercens
In se poena redit, nova tortor ad otia languet:
Tartara moesta gemunt, quia vincula cuncta quiescunt.
Mors ibi quid faceret, quo vitae portitor ibat?
S. Augustine does thus deliver his opinion touching this matter. Christi
animam venisse usque ad ea loca, in quibus peccatores cruciantur, ut eos
solveret a tormentis, quos esse solvendos occulta nobis sua justitia judicabat,
non immerito creditur. Augustine. de Genesi ad literam, lib. 12. cap. 33.
That Christ's soul came unto those places wherein sinners are punished, that
he might loose them from torments, whom by his hidden justice he judged fit to
be loosed; is not without cause believed. Nec ipsam tamen rerum partem noster
salvator mortuus pro nobis visitare contempsit; ut inde solveret quos esse
solvendos secundum divinam secretamque justitiam ignorare non potuit. Jbid.
cap. 34.
Neither did our Savior being dead for us, scorn to visit those parts: that
he might loose from thence such as he could not be ignorant, according to
his divine and secret justice, were not to be loosed. Sed quia evid^ntia
testimonia and infernum commemora^t and dolores; nulla causa occurrit, cur illo
credatur venisse salvator, nisi ut ab ejus doloribus salvos faceret. Sed utrum
omnes quos in eis inven^t, an quosdam quos illo beneficio dignos judicavit,
adhuc requiro. Fuisse tame^ cum apud inferos, and in eoru^ doloribus
constitutis hoc beneficiu^ praestitisse, non dubito. Id. epist. 99. ad Euodium.
But whether he loosed all that he found in those pains, or some whom he
thought worthy of that benefit, I yet enquire. For that he was in hell, and
bestowed this benefit upon some that did lie in the pains thereof, I do not
doubt. Thus did S. Augustine write unto Euodias, who inquired of him; whether
Si omnes inde solvit salvator, and sicut ^equirens scripsisti, exinanivit
inferna. Item: Si, ut quaere^do dicis, exinaniti sunt inferi. Jb.
our Savior loosed all from thence, and emptied Hell? which was in those days
a great question: and gave occasion to that speech of Gregory Nazianzen. (...)
Greg Nazianz orat. 42. quae est 2. in Pascha.
If he descend into Hell, go thou down with him (namely in contemplation and
meditation) learn the mysteries of Christ's doings there, what the dispensation
and what the reason was of his double descent (to wit, from heaven unto earth,
and from earth unto hell:) whether at his appearing he simply saved all, or
there also such only as did believe. What Cleme^s Alexandrinus his opinion was
herein, every one knows, that (...), etc. Clem. Alexandr. lib. 6. Strom.
our Lord descended for no other cause into Hell, but to preach the Gospel;
and that (...) ( leg.(...). Ibid.
such as lived a good life before the time of the Gospel, whether Jews or
Grecians, although they were in hell and in durance, yet hearing the voice of
our Lord (either from himself immediately or by the working of his Apostles)
were presently converted and did believe: in a word, that (...), Ibid.
in Hell things were so ordered, that eve^ there all the souls, having heard
this preaching might either show their repentance, or acknowledge their
punishment to be just, because they did not believe. Hereupon, when Celsus the
Philosopher made this objection concerning our Savior: (...). Cells.
Surely you will not say of him, that when he could not persuade those that
were here, he went unto Hell to persuade those that were there. Origin, the
scholar of Clemens, sticks not to return unto him this answer. (...).
Origin. lib. 2. contra Celsum.
Whether he will or no, we say this, that both being in the body he did
persuade, not a few, but so many that for the multitude of those that were
persuaded by him he was laid in wayt for: and after his soul was separated
from his body, he had conference with souls separated from their bodies;
converting of them unto himself such as would, or such as he discerned to be
more fit for reasons best known unto himself.

The like effect of Christ's preaching in Hell, is delivered by Anastas Sinait.
vel Nicaen. quaest 111.
Anastasius Sinaita, Iobius, de V^rbo inca^natio lib 9. cap. 38. in Photij
Bibliotheca, volum. 222.
Iobius or Iovius, Io. Damascen. de Or^hodoxa fide, lib. 3. cap ult. and in
Sermon. de Defunct.
Damascen, Oecumen. in 1. Petr. 3.
Oecumenius, Mich. Glyc. part. 2. Annalium.
Michael Glycas, and his transcriber Theodor. Metochit. in Historia Romana, a
Meursio nuper edita: quae ex Glyca tota est de sumpta.
Theodorus Metochites. Procopius says; that (...). Procop. in Esai. cap. 42.
he preached to the spirits that were in Hell, restrained in the prison house,
releasing them all from the bonds of necessity. wherein he follows S. Cyrill
of Alexandria, writing upon the same place, Quod spiritibus in inferno
praedicatum abierit, and detentis in domo custodiae apparuerit Christus, and
omnes vinculis liberaverit, and necessitate, and poena, and supplicio Cyrill.
Ale^andr. fin. lib. 3. in Esai. cap. 42.
that Christ went to preach to the spirits in Hell, and appeared to them that
were detayned in the prison house; and freed them all from bonds and
necessity, and pain, and punishment. The same S. Cyrill in his Paschall
homilies affirms more directly, that our Savior (...). Id. Homil. Paschal.
20.
entering into the lowermost dens of Hell, and preaching to the spirits that
were there; (...). Id. hom. 11.
emptied that unsatiable den of death, (...). Id. hom. 6.
spoiled Hell of spirits, and having thus (...). Id. homil. 7.
spoiled all Hell, left the Devil there solitary and alone. Nam Christo ad
inferos descendente, non sanctorum animae tantum liberatae sunt inde; sed omnes
adeo prius in Diaboli errore, and simulachro^u^ cultu servitutem servientes,
aucti agnitione Dei, salutem sunt consecuti: quare and gratias agebant, Deum
laudantes. Andronic. Dialog. contra Iudaeos, cap. 60.
For when Christ descended into Hell, says Andronicus, not only the souls of
the Saints were delivered from thence; but all those that before did serve in
the error of the Devil and the worship of idols, being enriched with the
knowledge of God, obtained salvation: for which also they gave thanks,
praising God. Whereupon the author of one of the sermons upon the Ascension,
fathered upon S. Chrysostom, brings in the Devil complaining, that the son
of Mary, Omnibus, qui jam inde ab initio apud me fuerant, tanquam accipiter
celeriter advolans, abrep^is; desertum me reliquit. Chrysostom. in Ascens.
Domini, sermon. 8. a Ger. Vossio edit.
having taken away from him all those that were with him from the very
beginning, had left him desolate. whereas the true Chrysostom does at large
confute this fond opinion: censuring the maintayners thereof, as the (...).
Chrysostom. in Matthew. cap. 11. homil. 36. edit. Graec. vel 37. Latin.
bringers in of old wives conceytes and Jewish fables. Yea Alij sunt haeretici,
qui dicunt Dominum in infernum descendisse, and omnibus post mortem etiam
ibidem renunciasse (se nunciasse, corrigendum est ex Gregorio) ut confitentes
ibide^ salvarentur. Philastr. Bri^ciens. de Haeresib. ca^. 74.
Philastrius, and S. Alia ( haeresis) descendente ad inferos Christo credidisse
incredulos, and omnes inde existimat liberatos. Augustine. de Haeresib. cap. 79.
Augustine out of him, does brand such for heretics: whose testimony also is
urged by S. Gregory against George and Theodore, two of the clergy of
Constantinople; who held in his time (as many others did before and after them)
that Omnipotentem Dominum salvatorem nostrum Iesum Christu^ ad inferos
descendente^, omnes qui illic confiterentur eu^ Deu^, salvasse atque a poenis
debitis libe^asse Vid. Gregor. lib. 6. epist. 15. and in Euangel. hom. ^2.
our omnipotent Lord and Savior Jesus Christ descending into Hell, did save
all those who there confessed him to be God, and did deliver them from the
pains that were due unto them. and when Clement our countryman, about 150.
years after, did renew that old error in Germany, that Qui contra fidem
sanctoru^ contendit, dicens; quod Christus filius Dei descendens ad inferos,
omnes quos inferni carcer detinuit inde liberasset, credulos and incredulos,
laudatores Dei simul and cultores idolorum. Bonifa^. Moguntin. ad Zacharia^ P.
e^ist. 135.
the son of God descending into Hell delivered from thence all such as that
infernal prison did detayne, believers and unbeleevers, praysers of God and
worshippers of idols: the Dominum Iesum Christu^ descendentem ad inferos, omnes
pios and impios exinde praedicat abstraxisse, ab omni sit sacerdotali officio
nudatus, and anathematis vinculo obligatus; pariterque Dei judicio condemnatus,
vel omnis qui ejus sacrilegis consenserit praedicationibus. S^nod. Romana sub
Zacharia P. an. 745. ha^ita: Ibid. and Concilior tom. 3.
Roman Synod held by Pope Zachary condemned him and his followers for it.

But to leave Clemens Scotus, and to return unto Clemens Alexandrinus, at whom
Philastrius may seem to have aimed specially: it is confessed by our
Adversaries, that he fell into this error, partly being Deceptus fuit
superficie verboru^ Petri; quem non animadvertit long distinctiu loqui, atque
prima facie videatur. Henric. Vicus, d^ D^s^ens. Christi ad inferos. sect. 43.
deceived with the superficial consideration of the words of S. Pet^r,
touching Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison, Delusus authoritate
Hermetis, putat Christu^ euangeliu^ praedicasse damnatis, and eorum aliquos
liberasse, qui ex gentilibus sancte vixerant. Alphons. Mendoz. in Controvers.
Theologic. quaest. 1. positiv. sect. 4 secu^us And^adium lib. 2. Defens fidei
Tridentinae.
1. Pet. 3.19. partly being deluded with the authority of Hermes, the supposed
scholar of S. Paul; by whose (...). He^mes in Past^re, lib. 3. simili^ud. 9.
Citatur a Clemen. Al^xandrino, lib. 2. Stromat.
dreams he was persuaded to believe, that not only Christ himself, but his
Apostles also did descend into Hell, to preach there unto the dead and to
baptize them. But touching the words of S. Peter is the maine doubt: whether
they are to be referred unto Christ's preaching by the ministry of Noe unto
the world of the ungodly; or unto his own immediate preaching to the spirits
in Hell after his death upon the Cross. For seeing it was the spirit of Christ
which spoke in the Prophets, (as S. 1. Pet. 1.11.
Peter shows in this same Epistle) and among them was Noe 2. Pet. 2.5.
a preacher of righteousness (as he declares in the next:) even as in S.
Paul, Christ is said to have Ephesians. 2.17.
come and preached to the Ephesians, namely by his spirit in the mouth of his
Apostles; so likewise in S. Peter may he be said to have gone and preached to
the old world, Nehem. 9.30. Zachar. 7.12. 1. Sam. 23.2.
by his spirit in the mouth of his Prophets (and of Noe in particular) when God
having said that his Spirit Genes. 6.3.
should not always strive with man, because he was flesh, did in his long
suffering wait the expiration of the time which he then did set for his
amendment, even an hundred and twenty years. For which exposition the
Ethiopian Translation makes something: where the Spirit, by which Christ is
said to have been quickened and to have preached, is by the Interpreter termed
Manphes Kades, that is, the Holy Spirit. the addition of which epithet we may
observe also to be used by S. Paul in the mention of the resurrection, and by
S. Luke in the matter of the preaching of our Savior Christ. for of the one we
read, Romans 1.4. that he was declared to be the Son of God, with power,
according to the Spirit of Holiness, (or, the most holy Spirit) by the
Resurrection from the dead. and of the other, Act. 1.2. that he gave
commandments to the Apostles by the holy Spirit.

Thus does S. Hierome relate, that Vir prudentissimus. Hiero^ym. lib. 15. in
Esai. cap. 54.
a most prudent man (for so he terms him) did understand this place:
Praedicavit spiritibus in carcere constitutis, quando Dei patientia expectabat
in diebus Noe, diluviu^ impijs inferens. Jbid.
He preached to the spirits put in prison; when the patience of God did wait
in the days of Noe, bringing in the flood upon the wicked. as if this
preaching were then performed, when the patience of God did expect the
conversion of those wicked men in the days of Noe. S. Augustine more directly,
wishes us to Considera tamen ne forte totum illud, quod de conclusis in
carcere spiritibus, qui in diebus Noe no^ credidera^t, Petrus Apostolus dicit,
omnino ad inferos non pertineat; sed ad il^a potius tempora, quorum formam ad
haec tempora translit. August. ^p 99
consider, least happily all that which the Apostle Peter speaks of the
spirits shut up in prison, which believed not in the days of Noe, pertain
nothing at all unto Hell, but rather to those times which he compares as a
pattern with our times. For Christ (says he) Quoniam priusquam veniret in
carne pro nobis moriturus, quod semel fecit, saepe antea veniebat in spiritu ad
quos volebat, visis eos admonens sicut volebat utique in spiritu; quo spiritu
and vivificatus est, cum in passione esset carne mortificatus. Ibid.
before ever he came in the flesh to die for us, which once he did, came often
before in the spirit to such as he pleased, admonishing them by visions in the
spirit as he pleased: by which spirit he was also quickened, when in his
passion he was mortified in the flesh. Venerable Bede, and Walafridus Strabus
in the Ordinary Gloss after him, set down their minds herein yet more
resolutely. Qui nostris temporibus in carne veniens iter vitae mundo
praedicavit, ipse etiam ante diluvium eis qui tunc increduli erant and
carnaliter vivebant, spiritu veniens praedicavit. Ipse enim per spiritum
sanctum erat in Noe, caeterisque qui tunc fuere sanctis; and per eorum bonam
conversationem, pravis illius aevi hominibus, ut ad meliora converterentur
praedicavit. Bed. in 1. Pe^. 3. and Gloss. ordinar. ibid.
He who in our times coming in the flesh, preached the way of life unto the
world, even he himself also before the flood, coming in the spirit preached
unto them, which then were unbeleevers and lived carnally. For by his holy
spirit he was in Noe, and the rest of the holy men which were at that time;
and by their good conve^sation, preached to the wicked men of that age, that
they might be converted to a better course of life. The same exposition is
followed by Anselmus Laudunensis in the Interlineary Gloss, Thom. 3. part.
Sum. quaest. 52. artic. ^. ad 3.
Thomas Aquinas in his Sum, and diverse others in their Commentaries upon
this place. Yea since the Council of Trent, and in a book written in defense
of the faith of Trent, Doctor Andradius professes that he thinks this to
be the plain meaning of the place. In quo spiri^u jam olim ipse veniens (ne
nunc primum Eccl^siae cura^ eum suscepisse arbitraremur) praedicavit spiritibus
illis, qui nunc in carcere meritas jam infidelitatis suae poenas luunt; quippe
qui Noe ^ecta monenti, and arcam Dei jussu construenti, fidem habere nunquam
voluerunt, quamvis Dei illos patientia diutissime, hoc est, centum aut eo
amplius annos expectaret. Andrad. Defens. Tridentinae fidei, lib. 2.
In which spirit he himself long since coming (that we may not imagine, that
he now first undertook the care of his Church) did preach unto those spirits,
which now in prison do suffer the d^served pains of their infidelity;
forasmuch as they would not believe Noe giving them good counsel, and
building the Arc by Gods appointment, notwi^hstanding the patience of God did
wayt for them very long, to wit, a hundred years or more. which accords
fully with that interpretation of S. Peter's words, which is delivered by the
learned of our side. In which spirit he had gone and preached ^o them that now
are spirits in prison: because they disobeyed when the time was: when the
patience of God once waited in the days of Noe, while the Arc was a
preparing. (1. Pet. 3.19, 20.)

But there were diverse apocryphal scriptures and traditions afoot in the
ancient Church, which did so possess men's minds with the conceit of Christ's
preaching in Hell, that they never sought for any further meaning in S. Peter's
words. as that sentence especially, which was fathered upon the Prophet Esaias or
Jeremy; and from whence, if Cardinal Bellarm. lib. 4. de Christo, c^p. 13.
Bellarmines wisdom may be heard, it is credible that S. Peter took his
words. namely: (...). Citatur a Iustino Mart. in Dialog. cum Tryphone: and
Irenaeo, lib. 3. cap. 23. lib. 4. cap. 39. and lib. 5. cap. 31.
The Lord the holy one of Israel remembered his dead, which slept in the earth
of their graves; and descended to them, to preach unto them his salvation. and
that blind tradition, which Anastasius Sindita does thus lay down, immediately
after his citation of S. Peter's text. (...). Anast. Sin. vel Nican. qu. 111.
It is now related among the old traditions, that a certain Scholar using
many opprobrious speeches against Plato the philosopher; Plato appeared unto
him in his sleep, and said. Man, forbear to use opprobrious speeches against
me: for thereby thou hurtest thy self. That I was a sinful man I do not
deny: but when Christ descended into Hell, in very deed none did believe in
him before my self. Nicetas Serronius recites this out of the histories of
the Fathers: Hoe de Platone commemoratur: quod credendum sit necne, auditoribus
judicandum relinquo. Nicet. commentar. in Gregor. Nazianz orat. 2. de Pascha.
which whether it be to be believed or no, I leave (says he) to be judged by
the hearers. as if any great matter of judgment should be requisite, for the
discerning of this to be ( as Bellarmine does censure it) Quare inter fabulas
numeranda est illa narratio, quam in historijs Patrum circumferri dicit
Nicetas, etc. Haec quidem fabula est, Bellarm. lib. 4 de Christo, cap. 16.
a fable, or (as Dionysius Carthusianus before him) Istud inter Apocryphoru^
computandu^ est somnium. Dionys. Carthusian. in 1. Pet. 3.
an apocryphal dream. The like stuff is that also which was vented
heretofore unto the world in the apocryphal gospel of Nicodemus. to say
nothing of that sentence which is read in the old Latin edition of the book of
Ecclesiasticus; Penetrabo omnes inferiores parts terrae, and inspicia^ omnes
dormie^tes, and illuminabo omnes sperantes in Domino. vel ut ab authore Operis
imperfecti in Matthew. (inter opera Chrysostomi) homilia 4 citatur. Descenda^ ad
inferiores parts terrae, and visitabo omnes dormientes, and illuminabo
sperantes in Deum. Ecclesiastic. 24.45.
I will pearce all the lower-most parts of the earth, and behold all that are
asleep, and enlighten all them that hope in the Lord. which although it be not
now to be found in the Greek original, and has perhaps another meaning then
that to which it is applied; yet is it made by the author of the imperfect
work upon Matthew one of the chief inducements, which ledd him to think that
our Savior descended into Hell, to visit there the souls of the righteous.

The tradition that of all others deserves greatest consideration, is the
article of the Creed touching Christ's descent into Hell: which Gilbert.
Genebrard. lib. 3. de Trinitate.
Genebrard affirms to have been so hateful to the Arrians, that, as Ambrose
reports upon the fifth Chapter of the epistle to the Romans, they struck it
quite out of the very Creed. But neither is there the least footstep of any
such matter to be seen in S. Ambrose: and it sufficiently appears otherwise,
that the Arrians did not only add this article unto their Creedes, but also
set it forth and amplified it with many words; so far off were they, from
being guilty of suppressing it. For as the Fathers of the first general
Council, held in the year of our Lord CCCXXV. at Nice in Bithynia, did
publish a Creed against the Arrians: so the Arrians on the other side, in the
year CCCLIX. set out a Creed of their own making, in a Synod purposely kept
by them at Nice in Thracia, Sozomen. lib. 4. hist. cap. 18.
that by the ambiguitie of the Counsels name, the simpler sort might be more
easily induced, to mistake this Nicene for that other Catholic Nicene Creed.
And whereas the true Nicene fathers had in their Creed omitted the article of
the descent into Hell (which, as we shall afterward hear out of Ruffinus, was
not to be had in the Symbols of the Eastern Churches:) these bastard
fatherlings in their Nicene Creed, did not only insert this clause, (...).
Theodoret. lib. 2. hist. cap. 21.
He descended to the places under the earth; but added also for further
amplification, Whom Hell it self trembled at. The like did they (with the
words a little altered) in another (...). Athanas. in epist. de Synodis Arimini
and Selenciae. Socrat. lib. 2. hist. cap. 41. edit. ^raec. vel 32. Latin.
Creed set out in a Conventicle gathered at Constantinople: and in a third
Creed likewise (framed by them at Sirmium and confirmed the same year in their
great Council at Ariminum) they put it in with a more large augmentation,
after this manner. (...). Athanas. ibid. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 37. edit. Graec.
vel 29. Laetin. The speech is taken from Job 38 17. in the Septuagint.
He descended to the places under the earth, and disposed things there; whom
the keepers of Hell gates seeing, shook for fear. If therefore any fault were
committed in the omission of this article; it should touch the Orthodoxe
Fathers of Nice and Constantinople rather: whom the Constat ex hoc, nihil esse
de Symbolo Apostolorum subtrahendum. Subtractum tamen est illud: Descendit ad
inferos. Verum qui detraxeru^t, id non negabant neque cum veritate pugnabant.
Ioann. F^roli viensi^ episc. in Session. 10. Council. Ferrar.
Latins, disputing with the Grecians in the Council of Ferrara, do directly
charge with subtracting this article from the Apostles Creed; although they
free them from blame in so doing, because they that took it away (say they)
did not deny it, nor fight against the truth.

But first they should have showed, that the Fathers of Nice and Constantinople
did find this article of Christ's descent into Hell in the Apostles Creed:
before they excused them from taking it away from thence. For the Creed of the
Council of Constantinople (which commonly goes under the name of the Nicene
Creed) being nothing else but an explanation and a more ample enlargement of
the Creed Apostolical; yea and so fully expressing the same, that it self
has been heretofore Epiphaen. in (...). page 518. (...).
accounted and In Misia Latina antiqua, ^dit. Argentin. an. 1557. page 41. post
^ecitatu^ Symbolum Constantinopolit. subijcitur. Finito Symbolo Apostolorum
dicat Sacerdos. Dominus vobiscu^.
named the Apostles Creed: it is not to be thought that it would leave out any
article either unexplained or altogether unnamed, which was then commonly
believed to have been any parcel of the Creed received from the Apostles.
Add hereunto the ingenuous confession of Busaeus the Jesuit, in his positions
touching Christ's descent into Hell. Beatus Cyprianus, vel potius Ruffinus, in
expositione symboli negat hunc articulu^ legi in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo, and
Orientis Ecclesijs: et vetustissimi patres quida^, dum vel summam fidei
Christianae, vel symbolum Apostolicu^ exponunt, hoc dogma praetermiserunt.
Quando autem insertum s^t Symbolo, certe constitui non potest. Io. Busae. de
descensu Christi^ad inferos, These. 33.
S. Cyprian, or Ruffinus rather, in his exposition of the Creed denies that
this article is read in the Creed of the Church of Rome, or the Churches of the
East: and some of the most ancient Fathers, while either they gather up the
sum of the Christian faith, or expound the Creed of the Apostles, have
omitted this point of doctrine. But at what time it was inserted in the Creed,
it cannot certainly be determined. The first particular Church that is known
to have inserted this article into her Creeed, is that of Aquileia: which added
also the attributes of Omnipotentem.] His additur: Invisibile^ and
impassibile^. Sciendu^ quood duo isti sermones in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non
habe^tur Constat autem apud nos additos haereseos causa Sabelij. Ruffin. in
exposit. Symb.
invisible and impassible, unto God the Father almighty in the beginning of
the Creed; as appears by Ruffinus, who Nos tamen illum ordinem sequimur, que^
in Aquileiensi Ecclesia per lavacri gratiam suscepimus Id. ibid.
framed his exposition of the Creed according to the order used in that Church.
But whether any other Church in the world for 500. years after Christ, did
follow the Aquileians in putting the one of these additions to the Apostolical
Creed, more then the other; can hardly, I suppose, be showed by any approved
testimony of antiquity. Cardinal Bellarmine notes, that S. Augustinus in
libro de Fide and Symbolo, and quatuor libris de Symbolo ad Catechumenos, non
meminit hujus partis, cum totum Symbolum quinquies. exponat. B^llarm. de
Christo, lib. 4. cap. 6.
Augustine in his book de Fide and Symbolo, and in his four books de Symbolo
ad Catechumenos, makes no mention of this part, when he does expound the
whole Creed five several times. Nay Petrus Chrysologus, who was archbishop of
Ravenna 450. years after Christ, does Pe^r. Chrysolog. sermon. 57.58.59.60.61.62
six several times go over the exposition of the Creed: and yet never medleth
with this article. The like also may be observed in Maxim. Homil. d^ traditione
Symboli.
Maximus Taurinensis his exposition of the Creed. For as for the two Tom. 5.
Oper. Ch^ysost. Latin.
Latin expositions thereof that go under the name of S. Chrysostom (the latter
whereof has it, the former has it not) and the others that are found in the
tenth Tome of S Augustins works among the Sermons de Tempore ( S^rm. de
Tempore, 115.131.181 195.
four of which do repeat it, and Sermon. 119. and 123.
two do omit it:) because the authors of them, together with the time wherein
they were written, be altogether unknown; they can bring us little light in
this inquiry.

Neither is there hereby any whit more derogated from the credit of this
article, then there is from others, whose authority is acknowledged to be
undoubted and ^eyond all exception: as namely that of our Saviors death, and
the Communion of Saints. the one whereof as sufficiently implied in the article
of the Crucifixion as a consequent, or the burial as a necessary antecedent
thereof, the other as virtually contained in the article of the Church; we
find omitted not in the Constantinopolitan Symboll alone, and in the ancient
Apostolical Creeds expounded by Ruffinus, Maximus, and Chrysologus, but also
in those that are extant in Fortunat. lib. 11. number. 1. in Exposit. Symbol.
Venantius Fortunatus 580. and in Either et Beat. lib. 1. contra Elipandu^
Tol^tan. page 51. edit. Ingo^sta^.
Etherius and Beatus, 785. years after Christ. In all which likewise may be
noted, that the title of Maker of heaven and earth is not given to the Father
in the beginning of the Creed: which out of the Creed of Constantinople we see
is now every where added thereunto. Of which additions as there is now no
question any where made: so Descensum ad inferos nu^c, consentientibus
sectarijs, inter germanos Symboli Apostolici articulos numeramus. Io. Busaeus,
de descens. these. 33.
by the consent of both sides, this of the descent into Hell also, is now
numbered among the articles of the Apostles Creed. For the Act. 2.27 31.
Scripture having expressly testified, that the prophecy of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 16.10.
Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell, was verified in Christ; S. Augustins
conclusion must necessarily be inferred thereupon. Quis ergo nisi infidelis
negaverit fuisse apud Inferos Christum? Augustine. epist. 99.
Who therefore but an Infidel will deny that Christ was in Hell? Thus Ac
primum omnes co^veniunt, quod Christus aliquo modo ad. inferos descenderit.
etc. At quaestio tota est de explicatione hujus articuli. Bellarm. de Christo.
lib. 4. cap. 6.
all agree, that Christ did some manner of way descend into Hell: says
Cardinal Bellarmine. But the whole question is touching the exposition of this
article. The common exposition which the Romish Divines give thereof, is this:
that by Hell is here understood, In 3. Sent. did. 22. D. Thom. Bonavent.
Richard. Gab. Palud. and Marsil. quaest. 13. and reliqui in hoc co^veniu^t,
quod ad locu^ damnatoru^ non descendit. Fr. Suarez tom. 2. in 3. part. Thom.
disp. 43. sect. 4. Non descendit ad inferos reproborum ac in perpetuum
damnatorum, quoniam ex eo nulla est redemptio: igitur ad eum locum descendit,
qui vel Sinus Abrahae, vel co^muniter Limbus Patrum appellatur. Fr. Feuardent
Dialog. 6. contr. Calvinian. page 509 edit. Colon.
not that place wherein the wicked are tormented, but the bosom of Abraham,
wherein the godly Fathers of the old Testament rested; for whose deliverie from
thence they say our Savior took his journey thither. But S. Augustine in that
same place, wherein he counts it a point of infidelity to deny the going of
Christ into Hell, gain says this exposition thereof: professing that he could
find the name of Hell no where given unto that place wherein the souls of the
righteous did rest. Qua propter si in illum Abrahae sinum Christum mortuum
venisse sancta scriptura dixisset, non nominato inferno ejusque doloribus:
miror si quisqua^ ad inferos eum descendisse asserere auderet. Sed quia
evidentia testimonia and infernu^ commemorant and dolores; nulla caussa
occurrit, cur illo credatur venisse salvator, nisi ut ab ejus doloribus salvos
faceret. August. ep. 99.
Wherefore (says he) if the holy Scripture had said, that Christ being dead
did come unto the bosom of Abraham, not having named Hell and the pains
thereof: I marvayle whether any would have been so bold, as to have avouched
that Christ descended into Hell. But because evident testimonies do make
mention both of Hell and pains: I see no cause, why our Savior should be
believed to have come thither, but that he should deliver men from the pains
thereof. And Vnde illis justis qui in sinu Abrahae erant, cum ille in inferna
descenderet, nondum quid contulisset inveni; a quibus eum secundum beatificam
praesentiam suae divinitatis nunquam video recessisse. Id. ibid.
therefore, what benefit he brought unto those just men that were in the
bosom of Abraham, when he did descend into Hell, I have not yet found. Thus
far S. Augustine.

For the better understanding of this, we are to call unto mind that saying
of the (...). Plutarch. in lib. de Jside and Osiride.
Philosophers: that they who do not learn rightly to understand words, use to
be deceived in the things themselves. It will not be amiss therefore, to
consider somewhat of the name of Hell: that the (...). Plato, in Cratylo.
nature of the word being rightly understood, we may the better conceive the
truth of the thing that is signified thereby. We are to know then first of our
English word Hell, that the original thereof is by diverse men delivered
diversely. Some derive it from the Hebrew word Sheol: either subtracting the
first letter, or including it in the aspiration. For Adeo aute^ cognatio est
huic literae, id est S, cu^ aspiratione; quod pro ea in quibusdam dictionibus
solebant Boeoti pro S, H scribere Muha pro Musa dicentes. Priscian. lib. 1.
this letter S (says Priscian) has such an affinity with the aspiration;
that the Boeotians in some words were wont to write H for S, saying Muha for
Musa. Others bring it from the Greek word (...), which signifies a lake:
others from the English hole, as signifying a pit-hole; others from hale, as
noting the place that haleth or draws men unto it. Some say, that in the old
Saxon or German, Hell signifies deep; whether it be high or low. But the
derivation given by R^ch. Ve^sl^g. Restitution of English antiquiti^s, chap. 7.
Verstegan is the most probable; from being helled over, that is to say, hidden
or covered. For in the old German tongue (from whence our English was
extracted) Vid. Goldasti animadvers. in Winsbekij Paraeneses, page 400.
Hill signifies to hide: and Hiluh in Otfridus Wissenburgensis; is hidden. And
in this country, with them that retain the ancient language which their
forefathers brought with them out of England, to hell the head, is as much as
to cover the head: and he that covers the house with tile or slate, is from
thence commonly called a hellier. So that in the original propriety of the
word, our Hell does exactly answer the Greek (...), which denotes (...), the
place which is unseene or removed from the sight of man.

We are in the second place therefore to observe, that the term of Hell,
beside the vulgar acception, wherein it signifies that which Luke 16.28. is
called the place of torment; is, in the Ecclesiastical use of the word,
extended more largely to express the Greek word Hades and the Latin Inferi,
and whatsoever is contained under them. Concerning which S. Augustine gives
this note: Vary in Scripturis and sub intellectu multiplici, sicut re^um de
quibus agitur sensus exigit, nomen ponitur inferorum. Augustine. quaest. super
Numer. cap. 29.
The name of Hell is variously put in Scriptures, and in many meanings,
according as the sense of the things which are entreated of does require. and
Master Casaubon (who understood the property of Greek and Latin words as
well as any) this other. Qui (...) proprie sedem damnatorum esse existmant, non
minus hallucinantur, quam illi qui cum legunt agunt apud Latinos scriptores,
Inferos, de eodem loco interpretantur. Casaub. in Gregor. Nyssen. epist. ad
Eustath. Ambros. and Basiliss. no^. 116.
They who think that HADES is properly the seat of the damned, be no less
deceaved, then they who, when they read INFEROS in Latin writers, do interpret
it of the same place. The less cause have we to wonder, that Hell in the
Scripture should be made the place of all the dead in common, and not of the
wicked only. as in Psalm. 89.47, 48. Remember how short my time is: wherefore
have thou made all men in vain? What man is he that lives, and shall not see
death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of HELL? and Esai. 38.18, 19.
HELL cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into
the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The LIVING, the LIVING, he shall praise
thee, as I do this day. Where the opposition betwixt Hell and the state of
life in this world is to be observed. Now as the common condition of the dead
is considerable three manner of ways, either in respect of the body separated
from the soul, or of the soul separated from the body, or of the whole man
indefinitely considered in this state of separation: so do we find the word
Hades (which by the Latins is rendered Infernus or Inferi, and by the English,
Hell) to be applied by the ancient Greek interpreters of the old Testament to
the common state and place of the body severed from the soul, by the heathen
Greeks to the common state and place of the soul severed from the body, and
by both of them to the common state of the dead, and the place proportionably
correspondent to that state of dissolution. And so the Doctors of the Church,
speaking in the same language which they learned both from the sacred and the
foreign writers, are accordingly found to take the word in these three
several significations.

Touching the first we are to note, that both the Septuagint in the Old
Testament, and the Apostles in the Act. 2.27. 1. Cor. 15.55.
New, do use the Greek word (...) HADES (and answerably thereunto the Latin
Interpreters the word Infernus or Inferi, and the English the word Hell) for
that which in the Hebrew text is named (...) SHEOL: on the other side, where in
the New Testament the word HADES is used, there the ancient Syriack translator
does put (...) Shejul in steed thereof. Now the Hebrew Sheol (and so the
Chaldy, Syriack and Ethiopian words which draw their original from thence)
does properly denote the interior parts of the earth, that lie hidden from our
sight; namely whatsoever tends downward from the surface of the earth unto
the center thereof. In which respect we see that the Scripture describes Sheol
to be a deep place; and opposes the depth thereof unto the height of Heaven.
(Job. 11.8. Psalm. 139.8. Amos 9.2.) Again, because the bodies that live upon
the surface of the earth, are corrupted within the bowels thereof; Ecclesiast.
12.7. Job. 34.15.
the dust returning to the earth as it was: therefore is this word commonly put
for the state and the place wherein dead bodies do rest, and are disposed for
corruption. And in this respect we find that the Scripture does oppose Sheol
not only unto Heaven, but also unto this land of the living wherein we now
breathe. (Esai. 38.10, 11. Ezech. 32.27.) the surface of the earth being the
place appointed for the habitation of the living; the other parts ordained to
be the chambers of death. Thus they that are in the graves (Ioh. 5.28.) are
said to sleep in the dust of the earth (Dan. 12.2.) The Psalmist, in his
prophecy of our Saviors humiliation, terms it the dust of death: (Psalm.
22.15.) which the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds (...) the house of the grave;
interpreting Sheol after the self same manner, in Psa. 31.18. and 89.49. R.
Mardochai Nathan in his Hebrew Concordance, gives no other interpretation of
the word (...) Sheol, but only (...), or, the grave. R. Abraham Aben-Ezra in
his commentary upon those words, Genes. 37.35. I will go down into Sheol unto
my son mourning; writes thus. (...) Aben Ezra, in Genes. 37.
Here the Translator of the erring persons (he means the Vulgar Latin
translation used by the Christians) erreth, in translating Sheol Hell or
Gehenna: for behold, the signification of the word is (...) or the grave. for
proof whereof he alleges diverse place of Scripture. Where by the way you may
note, that in the last edition of the Masoriticall and Rabbinicall Bible,
printed by Bombergius, both this and diverse other passages elsewhere have
been cut out by the Romish Correctors: which I wish our Buxtorfius had
understood, when he followed that mangled and corrupted copy in his late
renewed edition of that great work. R. Salomo Iarchi, writing upon the same
words, Genesis 37.35. says, that (...) Salom. Iarchi, in Genes. 37.
according to the literal sense, the interpretation thereof is the Grave: (In
my mourning I will be buried, and I will not be comforted all my days:) but
after the Midrash or Allegorical interpretation, it is Gehenna. In like manner,
R. David Kimchi expounding that place, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall turn into
Hell, and all the nations that forget God; acknowledges, that by the Derash or
Elias in Tisc^bi, ^erb. (...).
Allegorical exposition, into Hell is as much to say, as into Gehenna: but
according to the literal meaning he expounds it, (...) into the grave;
intimating withal, that the Prophet (...) Kimchi in Ps. 9.
uses here the term of turning or returning, with reference to that sentence,
Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.

Out of which observation of Kimchi we may further note, that the Hebrews,
when they expound Sheol to be the grave, do not mean so much thereby an
artificial grave (to wit, a pit dug in the earth, or a tomb raised above
ground) as a natural sepulcher: such as the Poet speaks of in that verse;
Nec tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos. and Seneca in his Controversies.
Omnibus natura s^pulturam dedit. naufragos ide^ fluctus qui expulit, sepelit.
suffixorum corpora crucibus in sepulturam suam defluunt: eos qui vivi uruntur,
poena funerat. Senec. lib. 8. Controvers. 4.
Nature has given a burial unto all men: such as suffer shipwreck the same
wave does bury, that cast them away; the bodies of such as are crucified dropp
away from the Crosses unto their burial; to such as are burnt alive, their
punishment is a funeral. For this is the difference that is made by authors,
betwixt burying and interring: that Sepultus intelligitur quoquo modo co^ditus:
humatus vero humo cont^ctus. Plin. lib. 7. na^. hist. cap. 54.
he is understood to be buried who is put away in any manner, but he to be
interred who is covered with the earth. Hence different kinds of (...).
Lucianu^. de luctu.
burialls are mentioned by them, according to the different usages of several
nations: the name of a sepulture being given by them, as well to the Nec
dispersis bustis humili sepultura crematos. Cicer. Philippic. 14.
burning of the bodies of the dead, used of old among the more civil nations;
as to the devouring of them by dogs, which was the barbarous custom of the
Eamque optimam illi censent esse sepulturam. Jd. lib. 1. Tuscul. quaest.
Hyrcanians. Therefore (...). Stobaeus.
Diogenes was wont to say, that if the dogs did tear him, he should have an
Hyrcanian burial: and those beasts which were kept for this use, the (...).
Strabo Geograph. lib. 11.
Bactrians did term in their language Sepulchrall dogs; as Strabo relates
out of Onesicritus. So in the Scripture, the Prophet Jonas calls the belly of
the Whale, wherein he was devoured, Ion. 2.2.
the belly of Sheol, that is, of Hell or the Grave. For (...). Basil. Seleuc
orat 12. quae in Ionam est 1.
Jonas (says Basil of Seleuciae) was carried in a living grave, and dwelt in a
swimming prison; dwelling in the region of death, the common lodge of the dead
and not of the living, while he dwelt in that b^lly which was the mother of
death. and in the prophecy of Jeremy, King Iehojakim is said to be Ier^m.
22.19.
buried, (although with the burial of an ass,) when his carcass was drawn
and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. -- Lucan. lib. 7.
capit omnia tellus
Quae genuit; coelo tegitur, qui non habet urnaem.
The earth which begets all, receives all: and he that wants a coffin,
has the welkin for his winding sheet. Magna parens terra est. Ovid. 1. Metam.
The earth is our great mother; Lucret. de rernatur. lib. ^.
Omniparens, eadem rerum commune sepulcrum. the common mother, out of whose
womb as naked we came, so Job. 1.21.
naked shall we return thither. according to that, in Psalm. 146.4. His spirit
goes forth, he returns to HIS earth. and Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away
their breath, they die; and return to THEIR dust. And this is the Sheol, which
Job waited for, when he said: Job. 17.13, 14.
Sheol or the grave, (for that is the Hell which is meant here: as is confessed
not by Lyranus only, but by the Jesuit Pineda also) is mine house; I have made
my bed in the darkness. I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to
the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister.

This is that common sepulcher, non factum sed natum, not made by the hand of
man, but provided by nature it self: betwixt which natural and artificial
grave these differences may be observed. The artificial may be appropriated to
this man or that man. The Patriarch David is both dead and buried, and his
sepulcher is with us unto this day: says S. Peter, Act. 2.29. and, Ye build
the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous: says
our Savior Matthew. 23.29. But in the natural there is no such distinction. It
cannot be said, that this is such or such a man's Sheol: it is considered as the
common receptacle of all the dead. as we read in Job: Job. 30.23.
I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all
living. Cuilib^t enim homini domus pro sepulchro ipsa terra est constituta.
Olymp^odor. Ca^en. Gr^c. in I^b 30.
For to every man (as Olympiodorus writes upon that place) the earth it self
is appointed as a house for his grave. Job. 3.18.19.
There the prisoners rest together (says Job) they hear not the voice of the
oppressor. The small and great are there; and the servant, free from his
master. Again, into a made grave a man may enter in alive and come out alive
again (as Joh. 20.6, ^.
Peter and John did into the sepulcher of Christ:) but Sheol either finds men
dead when they come into it (which is the ordinary course) or if they come
into it alive (which is Number. 16.30.
a new and unwonted thing) it brings death upon them; as we see it fell out
in Korah and his accomplices, who are said to have gone down alive into Sheol,
when the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up. (Numb. 16.30.33.)
Lastly, as many living men do go into the grave made with hands, and yet in
so doing they cannot be said to go into Sheol (beacuse they come from thence
alive again:) so some dead men also want the honor of such a grave (as it was
the case of Gods servants Psalm. 79.2.3. Revel 11.8, 9.
whose bodies were kept from burial) and yet thereby are not kept from Sheol;
which is the way that all flesh must go to. For all go unto one place; all
are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. (Ecclesiast. 3.20.) We conclude
therefore, that when Sheol is said to signify the grave; the term of grave
must be taken in as large a sense, as it is in that speech of our Savior,
John. 5.28. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. and in Esai. 26.19.
according to the Greek reading: The dead shall rise, and they that are in the
graves shall be raised up. upon which place Origin writes thus. Sepulchra
autem mortuorum in hoc loco, similiter and in multis alijs secundum ce^tiore^
Scripturae sensum accipie^da sunt, non solum ea quae ad depositionem humanorum
corporu^ videntur esse constructa, vel in saxis excisa, aut in terra desossa;
sed omnis locus in quocunque vel integrum humanu^ corpus, vel ex part aliqua
jacet: etia^ si accidat ut unum corpus per loca multa dispersum sit, absurdum
non erit omnia ea loca in quibus pars aliqua corporis jacet, sepulchra corpor^^
ejus dici. Si enim non ita accipiamus resurgere de sepulchris suis mortuos
divina virtute: qui nequaquam sunt sepulturae mandati, neque in sepulchris
depositi, sed sive naufragijs* sive in desertis aliquibus defuncti sunt locis,
ita ut sepulturae mandari non potuerint; no^ videbun^ur annumerari inter eos,
qui de sepulchris resuscitandi dicuntur. Quod utique valde absurdu^ est.
Origin. in Esai. lib. 28. citatu^ a Pamphilo, v^l ^usebio potius, in Apologia
pro Origene.
In this place and in many others likewise, the graves of the dead are to be
understood according to the more certain meaning of the Scripture, not such
only as we see are builded for the receiving of men's bodies, either cut out
in stones or dug down in the earth: but every place wherein a man's body
lies, either entire or in any part, albeit it fell out that one body should be
dispersed through many places; it being no absurdity at all, that all those
places in which any part of the body lies, should be called the sepulchers of
that body. For if we do not thus understand the dead to be raised by the
power of God out of their graves: they which are not committed to burial, nor
laid in graves, but have ended their life either in shipwrackes or in some
desert places, so as they could not be committed to burial, should not seem
to be recokoned among them who are said should be raised up out of their
graves. which would be a very great absurdity. Thus Origin.

Now you shall hear, if you please, what our Romish Doctors do deliver
touching this point. Duae super hac questione sunt sententiae. Vna est
Hebraeorum, and d^ Christianis multorum in hac aetate nostra, maxim vero
Haereticorum affirmantium vocem Sceol non significare aliud in Scriptura nisi
fossam sive sepulchrum, and ex hoc falso argumentantiu^. Dominum nostrum non
descendisse ad Infernu^. Per^^. in Genes. 37. sect 92.
There be two opinions, says Pererius upon Genes. 37.35. concerning this
question. The one of the Hebrews, and of many of the Christians in this our
age, but especially of the Heretics, affirming that the word Sheol signifies
nothing else in the Scripture, but the pit or the grave, and from thence
reasoning falsely, that our Lord did not descend into Hell. Altera est sententia
exploratae certaeque veritatis; vocem Hebrae^ Sceol, and Latinam ei
respondentem Infernus, and in hoc loco Scripturae, and alibi saepenumero
significare non fossam vel sepulchru^, sed locu^ inferorum, and subterranea
loca, in quibus sunt animae post morte^. Ibid. sect. 96.
The other opinion is of undoubted and certain truth: that the Hebrew word
Sheol, and the Latin Infernus answering to it, both in this place of Scripture
and elsewhere oftentimes does signify, not the pit or the grave, but the place
of Hell, and the places under the earth wherein the souls are after death.
Hebraice, ubicunque; Hieronymus ac Septuaginta infernu^ interpretati sunt, est
Sheol, hoc est, fossa sive sepulchru^ Neque enim significat cum locum, ubi
sceleratoru^ animas recipi antiquitas opinata est. Aug. Steuch. in Genesis cap. 37.
Wheresoever Hi^rome (says Augustinus Steuchus upon the same place) and the
S^ptuagint have translated Hell, it is in the Hebrewe, Sheol, that is, the pit
or the grave. For it does not signify that place, wherein Antiquity has
thought that the souls of the wicked are received. The Hebrew word properly
signifies the grave: says Iansenius upon Proverb. 15.12. the Grave properly,
and Hell only metaphorically* says Arias Montanus, in his answer unto Leo a
Castro. and, Fere semper Inferni nomen sepulchrum sonat in veteri Testamento.
Alphons. Mendoz Controvers. Theologic. quaest. 1. ^^sitiv sect. 5.
in the old Testament, the name of Hell does always almost import the Grave:
says Alphonsus Mendoza. The Jesuit Pineda commends one Illud non
praeteribo, parum considerate (ne graviori inuram nota) Cyprianu^ Cisterciensem
(virum alioqui doctrina and pietate conspicuum) affirmasse, Sheol, id est,
inferos vel infernum in toto vetera Testamento accipi pro sepulchro. Io. Pinea.
in Job. cap. 7. verse. 9. number. 2.
Cyprian a Cistercian monk, as a man famous for learning and piety: yet
holds him worthy to be censured, for affirming that Sheol or Hell is in all
the old Testament taken for the Grave. Another croaking monk ( Crocquet they
call him) cries out on the other side, that we shall Et ne vehementius sibi
placeant ob suum illud Sheol: nunquam efficient ut uno saltem Scripturae loco
prolato praeclaram illa^ interpretatione^ sepulchri confirment Andr. Crocquet.
Caeteches. 19.
never be able to prove by the producing of as much as one place of Scripture,
that Sheol does signify the Grave. Cardinal Bellarmine is a little (and but a
very little) more modest herein. The Hebrewe Sheol, he says, Ordinary
accipitur pro loco animaru^ subterranco; and vel raro vel nunquam, pro
sepulchro. Bella^min. lib. 4. de Christo, cap. 10.
is ordinarily taken for the place of souls under the earth; and either rarely
or never, for the grave: but the Greek Vox (...) significat semper infernum,
nunquam sepulchrum. Ibid. cap. 12
word Hades always signifies Hell, never the grave. But Stapleton will stand
to it stoutly, Contra Bezam late ostendimus, nec (...), nec (...) pro sepulchro
unquam, sed pro inferno semper in Scripturis accipi. Stapleton. Antidot in 1. Corinthians. 15.55. and Act. 2.27.
that neither Hades nor Sheol is in the Scriptures ever taken for the grave,
but always for Hell. Caeterum pro sepulchro vox infernus, (...), nuuquam
accipitur. Sepulchru^ Graece (...), Hebraice (...) vocatur. Quare and omnes
paraphrastae Hebraeorum illam voce^^ (...) explicant per vocem gehennae; urlate
ostendit Genebrardus lib. 3. de Trinitate. Ibid. in Act. 2.27.
The word Infernus, Hades, Sheol, says he, is never taken for the grave. The
grave is called in Greek (...), in Hebrewe (...). Wherefore all the
Paraphrastes of the Hebrews also do expound that word Sheol by the word
Gehenna; as Genebrard does show at large in his third Book of the Trinity.
Where yet he might have learned some more moderation from Genebrard himself,
unto whom he refers us: who thus lays down his judgment of the matter
in the place by him alleged. Quemadmodum in errore versantur qul Sheol nunquam
sepulchru^ designare contendunt: sic front sunt perfricta, qui uspiam gehennae
regionem negant significare. Genebrard. de Trinitat. lib. 3.
As they be in an error who contend that Sheol does never design the grave: so
have they a shameless forehead, who deny that it does any where signify the
region of the damned or Gehenna.

It is an error therefore in Stapleton (by his own authors confession) to
maintain that Sheol is never taken for the grave; and in so doing, he does
but bewray his old wrangling disposition. But least any other should take the
shameless forehead from him, he faceth it down, that all the paraphrastes of
the Hebrews, do interpret Sheol by the word Gehenna. Whereas it is well
known, that the two Paraphrastes that are of greatest antiquity and credit
with the Hebrews, Onkelos the interpreter of Moses, and Jonathan ben Vzziel of
the Prophets, never translate it so. Beside that of Onkelos, we have two other
Chaldee Paraphrases which expound the harder places of Moses; the one called
the Targum of Jerusalem, the other attributed, unto Jonathan: in neither of of
these can we find, that Sheol is expounded by Gehenna; but in the latter of
them we see it Genes. 37.35. and 44.29.
twice expounded by (...) the house of the grave. In the Arabicke
interpretations of Moses, where Ibidem (in Genesi, quam cum Commentaerio
Arabico MS penes me habeo* and D^uteron^m.) 32.22.
the translator out of the Greek has (...) al-gehim, Hell; there Pentateuch*
Arabic. ab Erpenio, edi^. an 1622.
the translator out of the Hebrew puts (...) al-tharai, which signifies
earth or clay. Pentateuch. Quadrilingue a Iudaeis. Constantinopoli encus.
Iacobus Tawosius in his Persian translation of the Pentateuch, for Sheol does
always put Ier apud. Armenios and Turcas terram significat.
Gor, that is, the grave. The Chaldee Paraphrase upon the Proverbs keeps
still the word (...) deflected a little from the Hebrew: the Paraphrast upon
Job uses that word Job. 11.8. and 24.19. and 26.6.
thrice, but Job. 21.13.
(...) and Job. 7.9. and 14.13. and 17.13, 16.
(...) (which signify the grave) in steed thereof five several times. In
Ecclesiastes the word comes but Ecclesiast. 9.10.
once: and there the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it (...) the house of the
grave. R. Joseph Coecus does the like in his paraphrase upon Psalm. 31.17. and
89.48. In Psalm. 141.7. he renders it by the simple (...) the grave: but in
the 15. and 16. verses of the 49. Psalm, by (...) or Gehenna. And only there,
and in Cantic 8.6. is Sheol in the Chaldee paraphrases expounded by Gehenna:
whereby if we shall understand the place not of dead bodies (as in that place
of the Psalm the Paraphrast makes express mention of the (...) Psalm. 49.15.
Chald.
bodies waxing old or consuming in Gehenna) but of tormented souls (as the
Elias in Tisch^^, verb. (...).
Rabbines more commonly do take it) yet do our Romanists get little advantage
thereby, who would feign have the Sheol into which our Savior went, be
conceived to have been a place of rest and not of torment, the bosom of
Abraham and not Gehenna the seat of the damned.

As for the Greek word Hades: it is used by Hippocrates to express the first
matter of things, from which they have their beginning, and into which
afterward being dissolved they make their ending. For having said, that in
nature nothing properly may be held to be newly made, or to perish: he adds
this. (...). Hippocrat. de d^a^a, sive vi^tus ratione, lib. 1.
But men do think, that what does grow from Hades into light, is newly made;
and what is diminished from the light into Hades, is perished. by light
understanding nothing else but the visible structure and existence of things:
and by Hades, that invisible and insensible thing which other Philosophers
commonly call (...), Chalcid in Timaum Plato^n.
Chalcidius the Platonic translateth Sylvam, the Aristotelians more fitly
Materiam primam. whence also it is supposed by Casaub. in Baron. exercit. 1.
cap. 10.
Master Casaubon, that those passages were borrowed, which we meet withal in
the books that bear the name of Hermes Trismegistus. (...). Merm. P^^mandr.
sermon. 1.
In the dissolution of a material body, the body it self is brought to
alteration, and the form which it had is made invisible: (...). Jd. sermon. 8.
and so there is a privation of the sense made, not a destruction of the
bodies. (...). Id. sermon. 11.
I say then that the world is changed, in as much as every day a part thereof
is made invisible, but never utterly dissolved. wherewith we may compare
likewise that place of Plutarch in his book of living privately. Generation
(...). Plutarch. in illud (...).
does not make any of the things that be, but manifests them: neither is
corruption a translation of a thing from being to not being, but rather a
bringing of the thing that is dissolved unto that which is unseene. Whereupon
men, according to the ancient traditions of their fathers, thinking the sun
to be Apollo, called him Delius and Pythius: (namely from manifesting of
things:) and the ruler of the contrary destiny (whether he be a God, or an
Angel) they named Hades; by reason that we, when we are dissolved, do go unto
an unseene and invisible place. By the Latins this Hades is termed Dispiter or
Diespiter: which name they gave unto this Idem hic Diespiter dicitur, infimus
aer, qui est conjunctus terra^, ubi omnia oriuntur, ubi aboriuntur: quoru^ quod
finis ortus, Orcus dictus, Varro, de lingua Latin. lib. 4. cap. 10.
lower air that is joined to the earth, where all things have their beginning
and ending; quorum quod finis ortus, Orcus dictus, says Varro. Terrenam vim
omnem atque naturam, Ditem patrem dicunt: quia haec est natura terrae, ut and
recidant in eam omnia, and rursus ex ea orta procedant. Iul. Firmic. Matern. de
errore profan. relig. ex Ciceron. lib. 2. de nature. Deor.
All this earthly power and nature, says Julius Firmicus, they named Ditem
patrem; because this is the nature of the earth, that all things do both fall
into it, and taking their original from thence do again proceed out of it.
Whence the Earth is brought in, using this speech unto God, in Hermes. (...).
Herm. Minerva Mundi. apud. lo. Stebaum in Eclogis Physicis, page 124.
I do receive the nature of all things. For I, according as thou have
commanded, do both bear all things, and receive such as are deprived of life.
The use which we make of the testimony of Hippocrates, and those other
authorities of the heathen, is to show, that the Greek Interpreters of the old
Testament did most aptly assume the word Hades, to express that common state
and place of corruption which was signified by the Hebrew Sheol. and therefore
in the last verse of the 17. of Job, where the Greek makes mention of
descending into Hades; Paul. Comitol. Caten. Graec. in Job. 17. ult.
Comitolus the Jesuit notes that S. Ambrose renders it, in sepulchrum, into
the grave. which agrees well with the paraphrase that the Greek Scholiasts
make upon that place. An non common est mortalium omniu^ mori? an non Infernus
est omnium domicilium? an non illic omnes suorum laborum exitum invenitunt?
Polychronius, vel Olympiodorus, in Catena, ibid.
Is it not a thing common unto all mortal men, to die? is not Hell (or Hades)
the house of all? do not all find there an end of their labors? Yea some do
think, that Homer himself does take (...) either for the earth or the grave,
in those verses of the eighth of his Iliads. (...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
-- I Will cast him down as deep
As Tartarus (the brood of night) where Barathrum does sleep
Torment in his profoundest sinks; where is the floor of brass,
And gates of iron: the place, for depth as far does Hell surpass,
As heaven for height exceeds the earth.
For Tartarus being commonly acknowledged to be a part of Hades, and to be the
very Hell where the wicked spirits are tormented: they think the Hell, from
whence Homer makes it to be as far distant as the heaven is from the earth,
can be referred to nothing so fitly as to the Earth or the Grave. It is taken
also for a tomb in that place of Pindarus: -- Pindar. Pyth. Od. 5.
(...) --
(...)
(...)
(...).
Other sacred Kings have gotten a tomb apart by themselves before the houses,
or before the gates of the City. And therefore we see that (...) is by Suidas
in his Lexicon expressly interpreted (...), and by Hesychius, (...), a tomb,
or a grave, and in the Greek Dictionary set out by the Romanists themselves,
for the better understanding of the Bible, it is noted, that (...), Orcu^,
Tartarus, sepulchru^. Lexic. Graecolat. in saecro Apparatu Biblior. Regior.
edit. Antuerp. an. 1572.
Hades does not only signify that which we commonly call Hell, but the
sepulcher or grave also. Of which, because Stapleton and Bellarmine do deny
that any proof can be brought: these instances following may be considered.

In the book of Tobi, chap. 3.10. I shall bring my fathers old age with sorrow
(...), unto Hell: what can it import else, but that which is in other words
expressed, chap. 6.14. I shall bring my fathers life with sorrow (...), unto
the grave? In the 93. and 113. Psalm. according to the Greek division, or the
94. and 115. according to the Hebrew; where the Hebrew has (...) the place of
silence (meaning the grave, as our adversaries themselves do grant) there the
Greek has Hades or Hell. In Esai. 14.19. where the vulgar ^atin translateth
out of the Hebrew; Descenderunt ad fundamenta laci, quasi cadaver putridum,
They descended unto the foundations of the lake or pit, as a rotten carkeis: in
steed of the Hebrew (...) which signifies the lake or pit, the Greek both
there and in Esai. 38.18. puts in Hades or Hell. and on the other side
Ezech. 32.21. where the Hebrew says, The strong among the mighty shall speak
to him out of the midst of Sheol or Hell; there the Greek reads, (...) or
(...), in the depth of the lake or pit: by Hell, lake and pit nothing but the
grave being understood; as appears by comparing this verse with the five that
come after it. So in these places following, where in the Hebrew is Sheol, in
the Greek Hades, in the Latin Infernus or Inferi, in the English Hell: the
place of dead bodies, and not of souls is to be understood. Genesis 44.31. We
shall bring down the gray hairs of our father with sorrow unto Hell. where no
lower Hell can be conceited, into which gray hairs may be brought, then the
Grave. So 1. King. 2.6. David gives this charge unto Solomon concerning Ioab:
Let not his hoare head go down to Hell in peace. and in the ninth verse
concerning Shimei: His hoare head bring thou down to Hell with blood. Psalm.
141.7. Our bones are scattered at the mouth of Hell. Esai. 14.11. Thy pomp is
brought down to Hell: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover
thee. Psalm. 6.5. In death there is no remembrance of thee: in Hell who shall
give thee thanks? of which there can be no better paraphrase, then that which
is given in Psalm. 88.11, 12. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the
grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction? Shall thy wonders be known in the
dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?

Andradius in his defense of the faith of the Council of Trent, speaking of
the difference of reading which is found in the sermon of S. Peter, Act. 2.24.
(where God is said to have raised up our Savior, loosing the sorrows of
death, as the Greek books commonly read, or the sorrows of Hell, as the
Latin) says for reconciliation thereof, that Nullum erit inter Latina
Graecaque exemplaria dissidiu^, si animadvertamus infernu^ hoc loco pro morte
atque sepulchro, Hebraeorum dicendi more, usurpari: ut Psalm. 15. quem mox
Petrus citat; Quoniam non dereliquisti anima^ mea^ in inferno. and Esai. 38.
Quia non infernus co^fitebitur tibi. Nam cum de Christi resurrectioned
disserat; multis atque apertissimis Davidis testimonijs confirmat, ita pro
humano genere mortem Christu^ obijsse. ut morte obrui and delitescere inter
mortuos diu non posset. Videtur autem mihi per dolores inferni sive mortis,
mortem doloris atque miseriarum plenam, Hebraeorum dicendi more, significari:
sicut Matthaei c. 24. abominatio desolationis accipitur pro desolatione
abominanda Andrad. desens. Tridentin fid. lib. 2.
there will be no disagreement betwixt the Latin and Greek copies, if we do
mark that Hell in this place is used for Death and the Grave, according to the
Hebrews manner of speaking: as in the 15 th Psalm, which Peter presently after
cites; Because thou will not leave my soul in Hell. and Esai. 38. For Hell
cannot confess unto thee. For when he disputes (says he) of the
resurrection of Christ; he confirms by many and most evident testimonies of
David, that Christ did suffer death for mankind in such sort, that he could
not be overwhelmed with death nor long lie hidden among the dead. And it
seems to me, that by the sorrows of Hell or Death, a death full of sorrow
and miseries is signified, according to the Hebrews manner of speaking: as in
Matthew. 24. the abomination of desolation is taken for an abominable
desolation. Thus far Andradius: clearly forsaking herein his
fellow-defenders of the Tridentine faith, who by the one text of loosing the
sorrows of death, would feign prove Christ's descending to free the souls that
were tormented in Purgatory; and by the other of not leaving his soul in Hell,
his descending into Limbus to deliver the souls of the fathers that were at
rest in Abraham's bosom.

The former of these texts, Act. 2.24. is thus expounded by Ribera the Jesuit.
Suscitavit illum Deus, solvens and irritans dolores mortis, hoc est, quod per
tot dolores mors effecerat, ut scilicet anima separaretura corqore. Fr. Ribera,
in Hose. cap. 13. number. 23.
God raised him up loosing and making void the sorrows of death, that is to
say, that which death by so many sorrows had effected; namely that the soul
should be separated from the body. His fellow Sa interprets the loosing of
the sorrows of death to be the Quasi dicat, Ereptu^ a mortis molestijs: has
enim dolores vocat. qua^quam mortis epitheton pos sit esse dolor; quood morti
conjungi soleat. Emman Sa. No^at. in Act. 24.
delivering of him from the troubles of death: although sorrow (says he) may
be the epithet of death. because it uses to be joined with death. The
Apostles speech has manifest reference to the words of David, 2. Sam. 22.5,
6. and Psalm. 18. (al. 17.) 4, 5. where in the former verse mention is made of
(...) the sorrows of death, in the latter of (...) which by the Septuagint is
in the place of the Psalms translated (...), the sorrows of Hell, in 2. Sam
22.6. Inedit, Aldina and Vaticana nam Complutensis h^bet (...).
(...), the sorrows of Death; according to the explication following in the
end of the self same verse. The sorrows of Hell compassed me about; the
snares of Death prevented me. and in Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows of Death
compassed me, and the pains of Hell found me, or, gate hold upon me. where
Lyranus has this note. In Hebraeo pro inserno ponitur Sheol; quod non solum
significat infernum, sed etiam significat fossam, sive sepulturam; and fic
accipitur hic, eo quod sequitur ad mortem. N^c. de Lyra, in Psalm. 114.
In the Hebrew for Hell is put Sheol: which does not signify only Hell, but
signifies also the pit, or the grave; and so it is taken here, by reason it
follows upon Death. The like explicatorie repetition is (...) R. Dav Kimchi
in Psalm. 16.10. Hoc melius ex sua consuetudine explicans, exaggeransque; Nec
dabis sanctu^ tuu^ videre corruptionem. Aug. Steuchus.
noted also by the interpreters to have been used by the Prophet, in that
other text alleged out of Psalm. 16.10. as in Psalm. 30. (al. 29.) 3. (...).
Thou have brought up my soul from Hell; thou have kept me safe (or alive) from
those that go down to the pit. and Job. 33.22. (...). His soul drew near
unto death, and his life unto Hell. whence that in the prayer of Jesus the
son of Sirach is taken, Ecclesiastic 51. (...). My soul drew near unto
death, and my life was near to Hell beneath. And therefore for Hell does
Pagnin in his translation of the sixteenth Psalm put the Grave (being therein
also followed in the Interlineary Bible Censorum Lovauiensium judicio
examiminata, and Academiae suffragio comprobata. Biblia interlineat. edit. an.
1^72.
approved by the Censure of the Universitie of Lovaine) and in the notes upon
the same, that go under the name of Vatablus, the word Soul is (by comparing
of this with Levitic. 21.1.) expounded to be the Body. So does Arias Montanus
directly interpret this text of the Psalm: No^ relinques animam meam in
sepulchro. Psalm. 16.10. id est, Corpus meum, Ar. Mont. in Hebraicae linguae
Idiotismis, voc. Anima. in sacr Bibl. Appaerat. edit. an. 1572.
Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave, that is to say, my body. and
Isidorus Clarius in his annotations upon the second of the Acts, says that, [
My soul in hell,] in that place is according to the manner of speech used by
the Hebrews, put for [ Heb. pro, Corpus meum in sepulchro vel tumolo, Isid.
Clarius, in Act. 2.
My body in the grave or tomb.] least any man should think that Master Beza
was the first deviser or principal author of this interpretation.

Yet him alone does Cardinal Bellarmine single out here, to try his manhood
upon: but does so miserably acquit himself in the encounter, that it may well
be doubted whether he labored therein more to cross Beza, then to strive
with himself in the wilful suppressing of the light of his own knowledge.
For whereas Beza in his notes upon Act. 2.27. had showed out of the 1. and 11.
verses of the 21. Chapter of Leviticus, and other places of Scripture, that the
Hebrew word (...), which we translate Soul, is put for a dead body: the
Cardinal, to rid himself handsomely of this which pinched him very shrewdly,
tells us in sober sadness, Dico, multu^ inter (...) and (...) interesse. Nam
(...) est generalissima vox, and significat sine ullo tropo tam animam, quam
animal, immo etiam corpus; ut patet ex plurimis Scripturae locis. etc. Itaque
in Levitico non ponitur pars pro part, id est, anima pro corpore; sed
vocabulu^, quod ipsum corpus significare solet: aut certe ponitur totum pro
part, id est, vivens pro corpore. At Actor. 2. ponitur (...), quae anima^
solam significat. Bellarm. de Christ lib. 4. cap. 12.
that there is a very great difference betwixt the Hebrew (...) and the Greek
(...). For (...) (says he) is a most general word, and signifies without any
trope as well the soul as the living creature it self, yea and the body it
self also; as by very many places of Scripture it does appear. And therefore
in Leviticus, where that name is given unto dead bodies, one part is not put
for another, to wit, the soul for the body; but a word, which does usually
signify the body it self: or the whole at leastwise is put for the part,
namely the living creature for the body thereof. But in the second of the Acts
(...) is put, which signifies the soul alone. Now did not the Cardinal know
(think you) in his own conscience, that as in the second of the Acts (...) is
put, where the original text of the Psalm there alleged has (...), so on
the other side, in those places of Leviticus (which he would feign make to be
so different from this) where the original text reads (...), there the
Greek also puts (...)? Do we not there read, (...), Levit. 21.1. and in
the 11. verse: (...), He shall not go in to any dead soul, that is, to any
dead body? The Cardinal himself brings in Number. 23.10. and 31.35. and Genesis
37.21. and Number. 19.13. to prove that (...) does signify either the whole man,
or his very body: and must not the word (...), which the Greek Bible uses in
all those places, of necessity also be expounded after the same manner? Take,
for example, that last place, (which is most pertinent to the purpose) Numb.
19.13. (...), which the vulgar Latin renders, Omnis qui tetigerit humanae
animae morticinum: and compare it with the 11. verse; (...), He that touches
any soul of a dead man (that is, as the vulgar Latin rightly expounds the
meaning of it, Qui tetigerit cadaver hominis, He that touches the dead body of
any man) shall be unclean seven days. and we shall need no other proof,
that the Greek word (...), being put for the Hebrew (...), may signify the
dead body of a man: even as the Latin Anima also does, in that place of the
heathen Poet, -- Virgil. Aeneid. 3.
animamque sepulchro Condimus. We buried his soul in the grave. The argument
therefore drawn from the nature of the word (...), does no way hinder, that in
Act 2.27. Thou will not leave my soul, should be interpreted, either Thou will
not leave me (as in the 31. verse following, where the Greek text says that
his soul was not left, the old Latin has, He was not left) or, Thou will not
leave my body. as the Interpreters, writing upon that place, Genes. 46.26. All
the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt which came out of his loins, do
generally expound it, either by a Synecdoche, whereby the one part of the man
is put for the whole person (as we may see in the commentaries upon Genesis
attributed to Eucherius, lib. 3. cap. 31. Alcuinus in Genes. interrog. 269.
Anselmus Laudunensis in the interlineary Gloss, Lyranus and others) or by a
Metonymie, whereby that which is contained is put for that which does contain
it; for illustration whereof, S. Augustine very aptly brings in this example.
Sicut ergo appellamus Ecclesiam basilicam, qua continetur populus, qui vere
appellatur Ecclesia; ut nomine Ecclesiae, id est, populi qui continetur,
significemus locum qui continet: ita quod animae corporibus continentur,
intelligi corpora filio^u^ per nominatas animas possunt. Sic enim melius
accipitur etiam illud quod Lex inquinari dicit cu^, qui intraverit super anima^
mortuam, hoc est, super defuncti cadaver; ut nomine animae mortuae, mortuum
corpus intelligatur, quod anima^ continebat: quia and absente populo, id est
Ecclesia, locus tamen ille nihilominus Ecclesia nun^upatur. Augustine. epist.
157. ad Optat.
As we give the name of a Church unto the material building, wherein the
people are contained, unto whom the name of the Church does properly
appertain; by the name of the Church, that is, of of the people which are
contained, signifying the place which does contain them: so because the souls
are contained in the bodies, by the souls here named the bodies of the sons
(of Jacob) may be understood. For so may that also be taken, where the Law
says that he is defiled, who shall go in to a dead soul (Levit. 21.11.) that
is, to the carkase of a dead man; that by the name of a dead soul, the dead
body may be understood which did contain the soul: even as when the people
are absent, which be the Church, yet the place nevertheless is still termed
the Church.

Yea but Vox (...), ut supra ostencimus, significat semper infernu^, nunqua^
sepulch^um. At corpus Christi non fuit in inferno: ergo anima ibi fuit.
Bellarm. l^b. 4. de Christo, cap. 12.
the word Hades (says Bellarmine) as we have showed, does always signify
Hell, and never the Grave. But the bo^y of Christ was not in Hell: therefore
his soul was there. If he had said, that the word Hades did either rarely or
never signify the Grave, although he had not therein spoken truly, yet it
might have argued a little more modesty in him, and that he had taken some
care also, that his latter conceits should hold some better correspondencie
with his former. For he might have remembered, how in the place unto which he
does refer us, he had said, that Jd. ibid. cap. 10.
the LXXII. Seniors did every where in their translation put Hades in stead of
Sheol: which (as he the^e has told us) is ordinarily taken for the place of
souls under the earth, and either rarely or never for the grave. But we have
showed not only out of those Dictionaries, unto which the Consulantur omnia
dictionaria. I^id. cap. 12.
Cardinal does refer us (having forgotten first to look into them himself)
but by allegation of diverse particular instances likewise (unto none of which
he has made any answer) that Hades in the translation of the LXXII. Seniors
is not rarely, but very usu^lly taken for the place of dead bodies. So for the
use of the word Infernus in the Latin translation; Lyranus notes, that it is
Accipitur Infernus in sc^iptura dupliciter. uno modo pro fossa, ubi ponuntur
mortuorum cadavera A^io modo pro loco, ubi descendunt animae damnato^um ad
purgandu^, and generaliter illoru^, qui non admittuntur statim ad gloriam.
Lyran. in ^sai. 5.
taken in the Scripture, not for the place of the damned only, but also for the
pit wherein dead ^ens carkases were laid. And among the Jesuits, Gaspar
Sanctius yields for the general, that Est in Scriptura frequens infernum pro
sepultura, atque adeo pro morte sumi. Gosp. S^nct. commentar. in Act. 2. sect.
56.
Infernus or Hell is frequently in the Scripture taken for burial: and in
particular, Emmanuel Sa confesses it to be so taken, in Genesis 42.38. 1. Sam.
2.6. Job. 7.9. and 21.13. Psalm. 29.4. and 87.4. and 93.17. and 113.17. and
114.3. and 140.7. (according to the Greek division) Prove. 1.12. and 23.14.
Ecclesiast. 9.10. Cantic. 8.6. Ecclesiastic. 51.7. Esai. 28.15. and 38.10.
Baruch. 2.17. Dan. 3.88. (in the Hymn of the three children) and 2. Maccab.
6.23. in all which places, Hades being used in the Greek, and Inferi or
Infernus in the Latin, it is acknowledged by the Emm. Sa, Notat. in Scriptur.
Jesuit, that the Grave is meant: which by Bed. in Psalm. 48.
Bid also is termed Infernus exterior, the exterior Hell. So Alcuinus, moving
the question, how that speech of Jacob should be understood, Genes. 37.35. I
will go down to my son mourning into Hell. makes answer: that Perturbati
and dolentis verba sunt, mala sua etiam hinc exaggerantis. vel etia^ inferni
nomine sepulchrum significavit, quasi diceret: In luctu maneo donec. me terra
suscipiat, sicut illu^ sepulchrum. Aleuin. in Genesis Jnterrog. 256.
these be the words of a troubled and grieving man, amplifying his evils even
from hence. Or else (says he) by the name of Hell he signified the Grave: as
if he should have said. I remain in sorrow, until the earth do receive me,
as the grave has done him.

So Primasius, expounding the place, Hebr. 13.20. Deus ergo pater eduxit filium
suum de mortuis: hoc est, de inferno, vel de sepulchro, juxta quod Psalmista
praedixerat: Non dabis sanctum tuum videre corruptionem. Primaes. in Hebr. 13.
God the father (says he) brought his son from the dead, that is to say,
from Hell; or from the Grave: according to that which the Psalmiste had
foretold; Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. And Maximus
Taurinensis says, that Maria Magdalene non leviter fuit objurgata, cur post
resurrectionem Dominum quaereret in sepulchro; and non reminiscens verborum
ejus, quibus se ab inferis tertia die rediturum esse dixerat, putaret eum
inferni legibus detineri. Maxim. Taurin. de sepultur. Dom. homil. 4.
Mary Magdalene received a reproof, because after the resurrection she sought
our Lord in the grave, and not remembering his words, whereby he had said that
the third day he would return from hell, she thought him still to be detayned
by the laws of hell. And therefore (says he) while Vnde and illa Maria
Magdalene, quae Dominum inter caeteros defunctos in sepulchro quaerebat,
arguitur, and dicitur illi: Quid quaeris vivente^ cum mortuis? hoc est, Quid
quaeris apud inferos, quem redijsse jam constat ad superos? Id. de ead. homil.
3.
she did seek the Lord in the grave among the rest of the dead, she is
reprehended, and it is said umto her: Why seek thou him that lives, among
the dead? that is to say, Why seek thou him among them that are in the
infernal parts, who is now known to have returned unto the supernall? Nam qui
eu^ aut in infernis requirit, aut tumulis, dicitur ei; Quid quaeris vivente^
cum mortuis? Ibid.
For he that seeks for him either in the infernal places, or in the graves,
to him it is said; Why seek thou him that lives among the dead? and to the
same purpose he applies those other words of our Savior unto Mary; Touch me
not, for I am not yet ascended unto my Father as if he had said. Quid me
co^tingere cupis, quae me dum inter tumulos quaeris, adhuc ad Patrem ascendisse
non credis: quae dum me inter inferna scrutaris, ad coelestia redijsse
diffidis; dum inter mortuos quaeris, vivere cu^ Deo patre meo non speras? Id.
de sepul^ur. Dom. hom. 4.
Why do thou desire to touch me, who while thou seek me among the graves,
do not as yet believe that I am ascended to my Father: who while thou
searchest for me among the infernalls, do distrust that I am returned to the
celestials; while thou seek me among the dead, do not hope that I do live
with my father? Where his Inferi and Inferna, do plainly import no more but
tumulos and sepulchra.

Hereupon Ruffinus in his exposition of the Creed, having given notice,
Sciendum sane est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo non habetur additum;
Descendit ad inferna: sed neque in Orientis ecclesijs habetur hic sermo. vis
tamen verbi eadem videtur esse in eo quod sepultus dicitur. Ruffin. in exposit.
Symbol.
that in the Symbol of the Church of Rome there is not added, He descended into
hell, nor in the Churches of the East neither; adjoyneth presently: Yet the
force or meaning of the word seems to be the same, in that he is said to
have been buried. For the terms of burial and descending into hell in the
Scripture phrase tend much to the expressing of the self same thing: but that
the bare naming of the one does lead us only to the consideration of the honor
of burial, the addition of the other intimates unto us that which is more
dishonorable in it. Thus under the burial of our Savior may be comprehended
his (...) and (...), his funeration and his interring: which are both of them
set down in the end of the 19. chapter of the Gospel according to S. John. the
latter in the two last verses, where Joseph and Nicodemus are said to have laid
him in a new Sepulcher, wherein was never man yet laid: the former in the two
verses going before, where it is recorded that they wound his body in linen
clothes, with spices, (...), as it is the manner of the Jews to bury. for to the
(...) or funeratio^ belongs the imbalming of the dead body, and all other
offices that are performed unto it while it remains above ground. So Genesis
50.2. where the Physicia^s are said to have imbalmed Israel; the Greek
translators render it: (...). and when Mary poured the precious ointment upon
our Savior; himself interprets this to have been done for his (...).
Matthew. ^6.12. (...). Marc 14.8. (...). Ioh. 12.7.
funeration or burial. Mos enim antiquitus fuit, ut nobiliu^ corpora
sepelienda unguentis pretiosis ungerentur, and cum a^omatibus sepelirentur.
Eusebius. Emiss. homil. Dominic. in Ramis Palmarum.
For it was a custom in times past (says Eusebius, commonly called Emissenus)
that the bodies of noble men being to be buried, should first be anointed with
precious ointments, and buried with spices. And Quis nescit sepulchrum mortuo
honori esse, non dedecori; and quorundam sceleribus sepulchra negari?
Stapleton. Antid^t. in 1. Corinthians. 15.55.
who knows not (says Stapleton) that a sepulcher is an honor to the dead,
and not a disgrace? But the mention of Sheol (which has special relation, as
has been showed, to the disposing of the dead body unto corruption) and so of
Hades, Infernus, or Hell, answering thereunto, carries us further to the
consideration of that which the Apostle calls the sowing of the body in
corruption and dishonor. (1. Corinthians. 15.42, 43.) For which, that place in S.
Augustine is worth the consideration. Nonne inferna Christo testimonium
perhibuerunt, quando jure suo perdito Lazaru^, que^ dissolvendum acceperant,
integru^ per quatriduum reservaverunt; ut incolume^ redderent, cum vocem Domini
sui jubentis audirent? O^at. c^ntra Iudaeos. Pagan. and Arrian cap. 17. tom. 6.
Oper. Augustine.
Did not the Hells (or, the Grave) give testimony unto Christ, when loosing
their power, they reserved Lazarus (whom they had received to dissolve) for
four days together; that they might restore him safe again, when they did
hear the voice of their Lord commanding it? where you may observe an H^ll
appointed for the dissolution of dead men's bodies: the descending into which
(according to Ruffinus his note) differs little or nothing from the
descending into the Grave.

In the thirteenth of the Acts S. Paul preaches unto the Jews, that God
raised up his Son from the dead, (...). Act. 13 34.
not to return now any more unto corruption: and yet presently adds, that
therein was verified that prophecy in the Psalm; (...). ibid. verse. 35. ex
Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not suffer thy Holy one to see corruption. implying thereby, that he
descended in some sort for a time into corruption, although in that time he did
not suffer corruption. And Ne mireris quomodo descenderit in corruptionem;
cujus caro non vidit corruptionem. Descendit quidem in locum co^ruptionis, qui
penetravit inferna; sed corruptionem incorruptus exclusit. Ambros. de Virginib.
lib. 3.
do not wonder (says S. Ambrose) how he should descend into corruption, whose
flesh did not see corruption. He did descend indeed into the place of
corruption, who pierced the Hells; but being uncorrupted he shut out
corruption. For as the word (...), which the Prophet uses in the Psalm, does
signify as well the pit or place of corruption, as the corruption it self: so
also the word (...), whereby S. Luke does express the same, is used by the
Greek Interpreters of the old Testament to signify not the corruption it self
alone, but the very place of it likewise. as where we read in Psalm. 7.15. He
is fallen into the pit which he made. and, Psalm. 9.16. The heathen are sunk
down in the pit that they made. and, Proverb. 26.27. Who so diggeth a pit,
shall fall therein. Aquila in the first place, the Septuagint in the second,
Aquila and Symmachus in the third, retain the Greek word (...), So that our
Savior, descending into Sheol, Hades or Hell, may thus be understood to have
descended into corruption, that is to say, into the pit or place of corruption,
(as S. Ambrose interprets it) although he were free in the mean time from
the passion of corruption. And because (...) and (...) and (...), Hell and
Corruption, have reference to the self same thing: therefore does the Arabic
interpreter, an. 1578. although in the Arabi^k Testament, printed by Erpenius
ann. 1616. the terms be varied: (...) al-hawita being put for Hell, and (...)
phasada for corruption.
translated by Iunius, in Act. 2.31. (or, as the Arabian divides the book,
Act. 4.10.) confound them together, and retain the same word in both the parts
of the sentence, after this manner. He was not left in perdition, neither did
his flesh see perdition. even as in the 29. Psalm (or the 30. according to the
division of the Hebrews) the Arabic reads, Psalter. Arabic. edit. Genuae,
an. 1516. and Romae, an. 1619. Verum in duobus meis MSS. exemplarib. habetur
hic (...) alhalaci, quod perditione^ vel interitu^ notat.
(...) al-gehim, or Hell, where the Greek has (...), the Hebrew (...), and the
Chaldee paraphrase (...), that is, the house of the grave.

Athanasius in his book of the Incarnation of the Word, written against the
Gentiles, observes that when God threatened our first parents, that whatsoever
day they did eat of the forbidden fruit they should die the death; by (...);
Athanas. de Incarnat. Verbi, tom. 1. Oper. Graecolat. pa. ^9.
dying the death he signified, that they should not only die, but also
remain in the corruption of death: and that our Savior coming to (...).
Ibid. page 54.
free us from this corruption, kept his own body uncorrupted, as a pledge and
an evidence of the future resurrection of us all. which has wrought such a
contempt of death in his disciples, that (as he adds afterward) we may
(...). etc. Ib. page 59.
see men which are by nature weak, leaping or dancing unto death, being not
agaste at the corruption thereof, nor fearing the descents into Hell. So the
Grecians sing in their Liturgy at this day: (...). Graeci in Octoecho
Anastasimo.
The corruption-working palace of Hell was dissolved, when thou did arise
out of the Grave, O Lord* and again. (...). etc. (...). Cumulas, in Graecorum
Pentecostario.
The stone is rouled away, the grave is emptied. Behold corruption is troaden
under by life. That which was mortal is saved by the flesh of God. Hell
mourns. For God (says Neque nostras animas derelinquet in inferno, nec dabit
nos in corruptione in perpetuu^ manner: sed qui illum post die^ tertium
revocavit ab inferis, and nos revocabit in tempore opportuno; and qui illi
donavit, ut no^ videat caro ejus corruptionem, nobis donabit, non quidem ut non
videat caro nostra corruptionem, sed ut liberetur a corruptione tempore
opportuno. Origin. tractat. 3^. in Matthew. cap. 27.
Origin) will neither leave our souls in hell, nor suffer us to remain for
ever in corruption: but he that recalled him after the third day from hell,
will recall us also in fit time; and he who granted unto him, that his flesh
should not see corruption, will grant also unto us, that our flesh shall not
see corruption, but that in fit time it shall be freed from corruption.
Neither is it any whit strange unto them that are conversant in the writings of
the ancient Doctors, to hear that our Savior by his burial descended into
Hell, spoiled Hell, and brought away both his own body and the bodies of the
Saints from Hell. We find the question moved by Gregory Nyssen, in his sermon
upon the Resurrection of Christ; (...). G^eg. Nyss in Pascha and Christi
Resurrect. t^m. 2. Oper. Graecolat page 823.
how our Lord did dispose himself at the same time three manner of ways? both
in the heart of the earth, (Matthew. 12.40.) and in Paradise with the thief,
(Luke 23.43.) and in the hands of his Father. (Luke 23.46.) (...). Ibid.
For neither will any man say, (quoth he) that Paradise is in the places under
the earth, or the places under the earth in Paradise, that at the same time he
might be in both; or that those (infernal) places are called the hand of the
Father. Now for the last of these, he says the case is (...). Ib. page 825.
plain, that being in Paradise he must needs be in his Fathers hands also: but
the greatest doubt he makes to be, (...); Ibid. page 824.
how he should at the same time be both in Hades and in Paradise. for with him,
the heart of the earth, the places under the earth, and Hades or Hell, are in
this question one and the same thing. And his final resolution is, that in
this Hell Christ remained with his dead body, when with his soul he brought
the thief into the possession of Paradise. (...). Ib. page 825.
For by his body (says he) wherein he sustained not the corruption that
follows upon death, he destroyed him that had the power of death: but by his
soul he ledd the thief into the entrance of Paradise. And these two did work
at the self same time, the Godhead accomplishing the good by them both:
namely, by the incorruption of the body, the dissolution of death, and by the
placing of the soul in his proper seat, the bringing back of men unto
Paradise again.

The like sentence do we meet withal in the same Fathers epistle unto
Eustathia, Ambrosia, and Basilissa. (...). Id. in Epist. ad Eustath. ibid. page
1093.
His body he caused by dispensation to be separated from his soul: but the
indivisible deity being once knit with that subject, was neither dis-joyned
from the body, nor the soul. but was with the soul in Paradise, making way by
the thief for an entrance unto mankind thither; and with the body in the
heart of the earth, destroying him that had the power of death. Wherewith we
may compare that place, which we meet withal in the works of S. Gregory
Bishop of Neocaesarea: wherein our Savior is brought in speaking after this
manner. (...). Gregor. Neocaesar. sermon. in Theophanta, page 111. Oper. edit.
Mogunt. and inter Opera Chysostomi, tom. 7. edit. Savilian. page 660.
I must descend into the very bottom of Hell, for the dead that are
detay-there. I must by the three days death of my flesh overthrow the power of
long continuing death. I must light the lamp of my BODY unto them which sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death. and that of S. Chrysostom (who is
accounted also to be the author of that other sermon attributed unto S.
Gregory:) (...). Chrysostom in Matthew. cap. 11. homil. 36. edit. Graec. vel 37.
Latin.
How were the brazen gates broken, and the iron bars burst? By his BODY. For
then appeared first a body immortal, and dissolving the tyranny of death it
self: whereby was showed, that the force of death was taken away, not that the
sins of those who dyed before his coming were dissolved. and that which we
read in another place of his works: (...) reponendum, ex MS.
Constantinopolitano) (...). Orat. Catechetic. in S. Pascha; tom. 5. oper.
Chrysostom. edit. Savilian. page 916. and in Graecorum Pentecostario: ubi pro
prima voce (...), rectius habetur (...).
He spoiled Hell, descending into Hell: he made it bitter, when it tasted of
his flesh. Which Esaias understanding before hand, cried out, saying: Hell was
made bitter, meeting thee below. (so the Septuagint render the words, Esai.
14.19.) It was made bitter: for it was destroyed. It was made bitter: for it
was mocked. It received a BODY, and light upon God: it received Earth, and met
with Heaven: it received that which it saw, and fell from that which it did
not see. Thus Caesarius expounding the parable, Luke 13.21. wherein the
kingdom of God is likened unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three
pecks of flower, till all was leavened: says that Farinae aute^ sata tria,
primu^ quidem universa mortalium natura, deinde mors, postea orcus; in quo
absconditu^ per sepultura^ divinu^ corpus, ferme^tavit omnia in resurrectione^
and vitam Caesarius, Dialog. 4.
the three pecks of flower are first the whole nature of mankind, then death,
and lastly Hell; wherein the divine BODY being hidden by BURIAL, did leaven
all unto resurrection and life. Whereupon he brings in our Savior in another
place speaking thus. Idcirco sepeliar, propter eos qui in Orco sunt: idcirco
veluti saxum aliquod percutia^ illius portas, educens vinctos in fortitudine,
quemadmodu^ inquit Davides servus meus. Id. Dialog 3.
I will therefore be buried, for their sakes that be in Hell: I will therefore
as it were a stone strike the gates thereof, bringing forth the prisoners in
strength, as my servant David has said. So S. Basil asks, (...). Basil. de
Spiritu sancto. cap. 15.
How we do accomplish the descent into Hell? and answers, that we do it in
imitating the BURIAL of Christ, in Baptism. For the bodies of those that be
baptized, are as it were buried in the water: says he. S. Hilary makes
mention of Christ's Et haec vermis, vel non ex co^ceptu co^muniu^ originu^
vivens, vel e profundis terrae vivus emergens, ad significatione^ assumptae and
vivificatae per se etia^ ex inferno carnis professus est. Hilar. de Trinitat.
lib. 11,
flesh quickened out of Hell by himself. and Arator in like manner: Arator.
Histor. Apostolic. lib. 1.
Infernum Dominus cum destructurus adiret,
Detulit inde suam spoliato funere carnem.
When the Lord went to Hell to destroy it, He brought from THENCE his own
flesh, sp^yling the grave.

Philo. in Cantic. 5.2. (...). inter fragmenta Eusebij in Cantic. a Men^sio
edita page 52.
Philo Carpathius adds, that in his grave he spoiled Hell. Whereupon the
Emperor Leo in his oration upon the burial of our Savior, wishes us to
(...). Leo Imp. homil. 1.
honor it, by adorning our selves with virtues, and not by putting him in the
grave again. For it behoved (says he) that this should be once done, to the
end that Hell might be spoiled: and it was done. And the Grecians retain the
commemoration hereof in their Liturgies unto this day: as their Octoechon
Anastasimon and Pentecostarion do testify; wherein such hymns and prayers as
these are frequent. (...).
Thou did receive death in thy flesh, working thereby immortality for us, O
Savior: and did dwell in the grave, that thou might free us from Hell,
raising us up together with thy self. (...).
When thou vvast put in the tomb as a mortal man, the keepers of Hell gates
shook for fear: for, having overthrown the strength of Death, thou did
exhibit incorruption to all the dead by thy Resurrection. (...).
Although thou did descend into the grave as a mortal man, o giver of life,
yet did thou dissolve the strength of hell, o Christ, raising up the dead
together with thy self, whom it had also swallowed; and did exhibit the
resurrection, as God, unto all that in faith and desire do magnify thee.
(...).
Thou who by thy three-dayes burial did spoil Death, and by thy
life-bringing resurrection did raise up corrupted man (o Christ our God) as a
lover of mankind: to thee be glory. (...).
Thou who by thy three-dayes burial did spoil Hell, and by thy resurrection
did save man; have mercy upon me. (...).
By thy three-dayes burial the enemy was spoiled, the dead loosed from the
bands of Hell, death deaded, the palaces of hell voyded. Therefore in hymns
do we honor and magnify thee, o giver of life. (...).
Thou wast put in the tomb, being voluntarily made dead; and did empty all
the palaces of hell (o immortal King) raising up the dead with thy
Resurrection. (...). Tom. 6. Bibliothec. Pair. edit, an. 1589. col. 128.
Thou who spoyledst hell by thy burial, be mindful of me.

Hitherto also belongs that of Prudentius, in his Apotheosis: -- tumuloque
inferna refringens
Regna, resurgentes secum jubet ire sepultos.
Coelum habitat, terris intervenit, abdita rumpit
Tartara, vera fides, Deus est, qui totus ubique est.
where, in saying that our Savior by his grave did break up the infernal
kingdoms, and commanded those that were buried to rise up with him; he has
reference unto that part of the history of the Gospel, wherein it is recorded,
that The graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which slept arose,
and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy
city, and appeared unto many. (Matthew. 27.52, 53.) upon which place S. Hilary
writes thus. Illuminans enim mortis tenebras, and infernorum obscura
collustrans; in sanctorum ad praesens conspicatorum resurrectione mortis ipsius
spolia detrahebat. Hilar. in Matthew. Canon. 33.
Inlightning the darkness of death, and shining in the obscure places of
Hell; by the resurrection of the Saints that were seen at the present, he
took away the spoils of death it self. To the same effect writes S. Ambrose
also. Sed nec sepulchrum quidem ejus miraculo caret. Nam cum esset unctus a
Joseph, and ^n ejus monumento sepultus; novo opere quodam, ipse defunctus
defunctorum sepulchra reserabat. Et corpus quidem ejus jacebat in tumulo, ipse
autem inter mortuos liber, remissionem in inferno positis, soluta mortis lege
donabat. Erat enim caro ejus in monumento, sed virtus ejus operabatur e coelo.
Ambros ^e^^ura. not, ^ap. 5
Neither did his sepulcher want a miracle. For when he was anointed by Joseph,
and buried in his tomb; by a new kind of work, he that was dead himself did
open the sepulchers of the dead. His body indeed did lie in the grave; but he
himself being free among the dead, did give liberty unto them that were
placed in Hell, dissolving the law of death. For his flesh was in the tomb,
but his power did work from heaven. which may be a sufficient commentary upon
that sentence, which we read in the Exposition of the Creed attributed unto S.
Chrysostom. Descendit ad infernum, ut and ibi a miraculo non vacaret. Nam multa
corpora sanctorum resurrexerunt cum Christo. Homil. 2. in Symbol. tom. 5.
Latin. Oper. Chrysostom.
He descended into Hell, that there also he might not want a miracle. For many
bodies of the Saints arose with Christ. namely, Reddunt inferi corpora rediviva
sanctorum: and in occur^um authoris inferos penetrantis, temporalem accipiunt
beatae animae commeatum Homil. 4 de P^oditore, and Pass. Dominic. tom. ^.
Latin. Oper Chrysostom.
HELL rendering up the BODIES of the Saints alive again: as either the same, or
another author that goes under the like name of Chrysostom, does elsewhere
directly affirm. which is a further confirmation of that which we have heard
delivered by Ruffinus, touching the exposition of the article of the Descent
into Hell; that the substance thereof seems to be the same with that of the
Burial. for what other Hell can we imagine it to be but the Grave, that thus
receives and gives up the bodies of men departed this life?

And hitherto also may be refer^ed that famous saying, of Christ's descending
alone and ascending with a multitude: which we meet withal in four several
places of antiquity. First, in the h^ads of the sermon of Thaddaeus, as they
are reported by Eusebius out of the Syriack records of the city of Edessa.
(...). Thaddaeus, ^pud Eusebius. lib. 1. histor. Ecclesiast. ca. ult
He was crucified, and descended into Hades or Hell, and brake the rampiere
never broken before since the beginning; and rose again, and raised up with
him those dead, that had slept from the beginning: and descended alone, but
ascended to his Father with a great multitude. Secondly, in the epistle of
Ignatius unto the Trallians. (...). Ignat. epist. 2. ad Trallian.
He was truly, and not in opinion, crucified, and died; those that were in
heaven, and in earth, and under the earth, beholding him. those in heaven, as
the incorporeall natures. those in earth, to wit the Jews and the Romans, and
such men as were present at that time, when the Lord was crucified. those under
the earth, as the multitude that rose up together with the Lord: for many
bodies (says he) of the Saints which slept arose, the graves being opened. And
he descended into Hades or Hell alone, but returned with a multitude, and
brake the rampiere that had stood from the beginning, and overthrew the
partition thereof. Thirdly, in the disputation of Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem,
in the first general Council of Nice. (...). Macar. Hierosolymit. apud
Gelasium Cyzicen. in Act. Council. Nicaen. lib. 1. ca. 23. al. 24.
After death we were carried into Hades or Hell. Christ took upon him this
also, and descended voluntarily into it; he was not detayned as we, but
descended only. For he was not subjected unto death, but was the Lord of
death. And descending alone, he returned with a multitude. For he was that
spiritual grain of wheat, falling for us into the earth, and dying in the
flesh; who by the power of his godhead raised up the temple of his body,
according to the Scriptures, which brought forth for fruit the Resurrection of
all mankind. Fourthly, in the Catechises of Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem: whose
words are these. (...). Cyrill. Hierosol cateches. 14.
I believe that Christ was raised from the dead. For of this I have many
witnesses, both out of the divine scriptures, and from the witness and
operation even unto this day of him that rose again: of him (I say) that
descended into Hades or Hell alone, but ascended with many. For he did descend
unto death; and many bodies of the Saints that slept were raised by him. which
resurrection he seems afterward to make common unto all the Saints that dyed
before our Savior. (...). Id. ibid.
All the righteous men (says he) were delivered, whom death had devoured. For
it became the proclaimed King, to be the deliverer of those good proclaymers of
him. Then did every one of the righteous say: O death where is thy victory? o
Hell, where is thy sting? for the conqueror has delivered us. wherewith we may
compare that saying of S. Chrysostom. (...). Ch^ysost. in Matthew 27. homil. 88.
edit. Graec. vel 89. Latin ubi tamen Interpres vertit: Multo majus profecto est
multos jam olim mortuos in vita^ reduxisse.
If it were a great matter, that Lazarus being four days dead should come
forth: much more, that all they who were dead of old should appear together
alive. which was a sign of the future resurrection. For many bodies of the
Saints which slept arose; says the text. and these articles of the Confession
of the Armenians. Ergo and in sepulcrum quoad corpus, quod mo^tuu^ erat,
descendit: juxta vero divinitatem, quae vivebat, infernu^ interea devicit.
Te^tio die resurrexit: sed and animas fideliu^ secum una suscitavit; and dedit
spem corporibus etia^ a morte resurgendi sib similiter in secundo adventu
Con^ess. A^men. artic. ^22.123.124.
According to his body, which was dead, he descended into the grave: but
according to his divinity, which did live, he over came Hell in the mean
time. The third day he rose again: but withal rays^d up the souls (or
persons) of the faithful together with him; and gave hope thereby, that our
bodies also should rise again like unto him at his second coming.

Of those who arose with our Savior from the Grave, or (as anciently they used
to speak) from Hell; two there be whom the Fathers nominate in particular:
Adam and Job. Of Job, S. Ambrose writes in this manner. Audito igitur quod
locutus esset in eo Deus, and cognito per Spiritum sanctum quod filius Dei non
solum veni^et in terras, sed etiam descensurus esset ad inferos, ut mortuos
refuscitaret, (quod tunc quide^ factum est ad testimonium praesentium, and
exemplum futuroru^) conversus ad Dominum ait: Vtinam in inferno conservares,
absconderes autem me donec desinat ira tua, and statuas mihi tempus in quo
memoriam mei facias. Am^ros. de Int^rpellatio^^, lib. 1. cap. 8.
Having heard what God had spoken in him, and having understood by the holy
Ghost, that the Son of God was not only to come into the earth, but that he
was also to descend into Hell to that he might raise up the dead, (which was
then done, for a testimony of the present, and an example of the future:) he
turned himself unto the Lord and said: O that thou would keep me in Hell,
that thou would hide me until thy wrath be past, and that thou would
appoint me a time in which thou would remember me. (Job. 14.13.) in which
words he affirms that Job did prophecy, Quod in passione Domini
resuscitandus foret; sicut in fine hujus libri testatur. Ibid.
that he should be raised up at the passion of our Lord; as in the end of this
book, says he, he does testify. meaning the apocryphal Appendix, which is
annexed to the end of the Greek edition of Job: wherein we read thus. (...).
Append. ad Job.
It is written, that he should rise again, with those whom the Lord was to
raise. which although it be accounted to have proceeded from the Septuagint;
yet the thing it self shows, that it was added by some that lived after the
coming of our Savior Christ. Touching Adam, S. Augustine affirms that Et de
illo quidem primo homine patre generis humani, quod eum ibidem solverit,
Ecclesia fere tota consentit: quod eam non inaniter credidisse credendum est,
undecunque hoc traditum sit, etiamsi canonicarum scripturarum hinc expressa non
proferatur authoritas. Aug. epist. 99.
the whole Church almost did consent, that Christ loosed him in Hell. which we
are to believe (says he) that she did not vainly believe, whencesoever this
tradition came; although no express authority of the Canonical Scriptures be
produced for it. The only place which he could think off that seemed to look
this way, was that in the beginning of the tenth Chapter of the book of
Wisdom: She kept him who was the first formed father of the world, when he
was created alone, and brought him out of his sin. which would be much more
pertinent to the purpose, if that were added, which presently follows in the
In Biblijs Regijs, edit. Antuerp. an. 1572 and magnis Latinis Biblijs edit
Venet. an. 1588. ubi in hanc particulam habentur notae Glossae interlinealis
and Nic. Lyrani.
Latin text (I mean in the old edition: for the new corrected ones have left
it out) Et eduxit illum de limo terrae, and brought him out of the claye of the
earth. which being placed after the bringing of him out of his sin, may seem
to have reference unto some deliverance (like that of David's, Psalm. 40 2. He
brought me up out of the horrible pit, out of the mirye claye) rather then unto
his first creation out of the dust of the earth. So limus terrae may here
answer well unto the Arabians (...) al-tharai: which properly signifying moist
earth or slime or claye, is by the Arabic interpreter of Moses used to
express the Hebrew Fr. Rapheleng in Lexico Arabico, page 53. and 55 (...) and
(...) Sepulcrum, infernus, (...). Male: inquit Erpenius, in observation. ad
hunc locum. significat terram humidam. Verum Raphelengium ab hac reprehensione
vindicat Arabs Pentateuchi interpres ab ipso Erpenio editus: qui Sheol vertit
Tharai, Genes. 37.35. and 44.29, 31. item Number. 16.30, 33. and Deuteronomy. 32.22.
(...) which we translate Hell or Grave. And as this place in the book of
Wisdom may be thus applied unto the raising of Adams body out of the ear^h
wh^rein he lay buried: so may that other tradition also, which was so current
in the Church, be referred unto the self same thing; even to the bringing of
Adam out of the Hell of the Grave.

The very Liturgies of the Church do lead us unto this interpretation of the
tradition of the Church: beside the testimony of the Fathers, which discover
unto us the first ground and foundation of this tradition. In the Liturgy of
the Church of Alexandria, ascribed to S. Mark, our Savior Christ is thus
called upon. (...). Marc. Liturg.
O most great King, and coeternall to the Father, who by thy might did spoil
Hell, and tread down death, and bind the strong one, and raise Adam out of
the grave by thy divine power and the bright splendor of thine unspeakeable
Godhead. In the Liturgy of the Church of Constantinople translated into Latin
by Leo Thus^us, the like speech is used of him. Crucem sponte pro nobis subijt,
per quam resuscitavit protoplastum, and a morte animas nostras salvavit.
Chrysostom. Liturg. Latin.
He did voluntarily undergo the Cross for us, by which he raised up the first
formed man, and saved our souls from death. And in the Octoechon Anastasimon
and Pentecostarion of the Grecians at this day, such sayings as these are very
usual. (...). Nov. Autholog. Graec. edit. Romae, an. 1598. pa. 23. b
Thou did undergo burial, and rise in glory, and raise up Adam together
with thee, by thy almighty hand. (...). Ibid. fin. pa. 239.
Rising out of thy tomb, thou did raise up the dead, and break the po^er of
death, and raise up Adam. (...). Ibid. page 262. b.
Having slept in the flesh as a mortal man, o King and Lord, the third day
thou did arise again; raising Adam from corruption, and abolishing death.
(...). Ib. page 278. b.
Jesus the deliverer, who raised up Adam of his compassion, etc. Therefore does
Theodorus Prodromus begin his Tetrastich upon our Saviors Resurrection with
(...). Rise up, thou first formed old man, rise up from thy grave.

S. Ambrose points to the ground of the tradition, when he intimates that
Christ suffered in Quam suscepit in Golgotha Christus, ubi Adae sepulchrum, ut
illu^ mortuu^ in sua cruce resuscitaret. Vbi ergo in Adam mors omnium, ibi i^
Christo omniu^ resurrectio. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 19.
Golgotha, where Adams sepulcher was, that by his Cross he might raise him
that was dead; that where in Adam the death of all men lay, therein Christ
might be the resurrection of all. Which he received (as he did many other
things besides) from Origin: who writes thus of the matter. Venit ad me
traditio quaeda^ talis, quod corpus Adae primi hominis ibi sepultum est ubi
crucifixus est Christus: ut sicut in Adam omnes moriuntur, sic in Christo omnes
vivificentur; ut in loco illo qui dicitur Calvariae locus, id est locus
capitis, caput humani generis resurrectionem inveniat cum populo universo per
resurrectionem Domini Salvatoris, qui ibi passus est, and resurrexit.
Inconveniens enim erat, ut cum multi ex eo nati remissionem acciperent
peccatorum, and beneficium resurrectionis consequerentur; non magis ipse pater
omnium hominum hujusmodi gratiam consequeretur. Origin. in tractat. 35. in
Matthew. cap. 27.
There came unto me some such tradition as this, that the body of Adam the
first man mas buried there, where Christ was crucified: that as in Adam all do
die, so in Christ all might be made alive; that in the place which is called
the place of Calvarie, that is, the place of the head, the head of mankind
might find resurrection with all the rest of the people, by the resurrection
of our Lord and Savior, who suffered there and rose again. For it was unfit,
that when many which were borne of him did receive forgiveness of their sins
and obtain the benefit of Resurrection, he who was the father of all men
should not much more obtain the like grace. Athanasius, (or who ever else was
author of the Discourse upon the Passion of our Lord, which bears his name)
refers this tradition of Adams burial place unto the report of the (...).
Athanas. in passion. and crucem Domini.
Doctors of the Hebrews (from whom belike he thought that Origin had received
it) and adds withal, that it was very fit, that where it was said to Adam,
Earth thou art and to earth thou shall return; our Savior finding him there,
should say unto him again. Arise thou that sleep, and stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Epiphan. cont. Tatian. haeres. 46. Vide
etiam Paulae and Eusto^hij epist. ad Marcellami, tomo ^. oper. Hieronymi,
epist. 17.
Epiphanius goes a little furthet, and finds out a mystery in the water and
blood that fell from the Cross upon the relics of our first father lying
buried under it: applying thereunto both that in the Gospel, of the arising of
many of the Saints, Matthew. 27.52. and that other place in S. Paul, Arise thou
that sleep, etc. Ephesians. 5.14. which strange speculation, with what great
applause it was received by the multitude at the first delivery of it, and for
how little reason: he that list may read in the fourth book of S. Hieroms
commentaries, upon the 27. of S. Matthew, and in his third upon the fifth to
the Ephesians, for upon this first point, of Christ's descent into the Hell of
the grave, and the bringing of Adam and his children with him from thence, we
have dwelt too long already.

In the second place therefore we are now to consider, that as Hades and
Inferi, (which we call Hell) are applied by the Interpreters of the holy
Scripture, to denote the place of bodies separated from their souls: so with
foreign authors (in whose language, as being that wherewith the common people
was acquainted, the Church also did use to speak) the same terms do signify
ordinarily the common lodge of souls separated from their bodies, whether the
particular place assigned unto each of them be conceived to be an habitation of
bliss or of misery. For as when the Grave is said to be the common receptacle
of dead bodies, it is not meant thereby that all dead carcasses are heaped
together promiscuously in one certain pit: so when the Heathen write that all
the souls of the dead go to Hades, their meaning is not, that they are all
shut up together in one and the self same room: but in general only they
understand thereby the translation of them into the other world, the extreme
parts whereof the Poets place as far asunder as we do Heaven and Hell. And
this opinion of theirs S. Ambrose does well like off ( Atque utina^ non
superflua his and inutilia miscuissent. Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 10.
wishing that they had not mingled other superfluous and unprofitable conceits
therewith) Satis fuerat dixisse illis, quod liberatae animae de corporibus
(...) peterent, id est, locum qui non videtur. Quem locum Latin infernum
dicimus Jbid.
that souls departed from their bodies did go to (...), that is, to a place
which is not seen: which place (says he) we in Latin call Infernus. So
likewise says S. Chrysostom. (...). Chrysostom. in 2. Corinthians. homil. 9.
The Grecians, and Barbarians, and Poets, and Philosophers, and all mankind
do herein consent with us, although not all alike; and say that there be
certain seats of judgment in Hades: so manifest and so confessed a thing is
this. and again. (...). Chrysostom. de fato and providentia, orat. 4. tom. 6.
edit. Savil. pa. 874.
The Grecians were foolish in many things; yet did they not resist the truth of
this doctrine. If therefore thou vvilt follow them, they have granted that
there is a certain life after this, and accounts, and seats of judgment in
Hades, and punishments, and honors, and sentences, judgments. And if thou
shall ask the Jews, or heretics, or any man; he will reverence the truth of
this doctrine: and although they differ in other things, yet in this do they
all agree and say, that there are accounts to be made there of the things that
be done here. Only among the Iwes, the Sadducees, which Act. 23 8.
say that there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor Spirit; (...), take away
the punishments, and honors that are in Hades: as is noted by Joseph de Bello
Iudaic. lib. 2. cap. 12. circa finem.
Josephus. For which wicked doctrine they were condemned by the other sects of
the Jews: who generally acknowledged, that there was (...) Olam hanneshamoth
(for so do they in their language until this day call that, ^lia^ Levita in
Tis^hbi, verb. (...).
which Josephus in Greek terms Hades) that is to say, the world of spirits;
into which they held that the souls were translated presently after death, and
there received their several judgments.

The same thing does Theodoret suppose to be signified by that phrase of being
gathered to ones people, which is so usual in the word of God. For it being
said of Jacob, before he was buried, that he gave up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people, Genes. 49.33. Theodoret observes, that Moses (...).
^heodoret. in Genes. quaest. 109.
by these words did closely intimate the hope of the resurrection. For if men
(says he) had been wholly extinguished, and did not pass unto another life;
he would not have said, He was gathered to his people. So likewise where it is
distinctly noted of Abraham, Genes. 25.8, 9. first, that he gave up the ghost
and died, then, that he was gathered to his people, and lastly, that his
sons buried him: Cardinal Caietan. on Genes. 25.
Cajetan and the Jesuit Lorin. in Act. 13.36.
Lorinus interpret the first de compositi totius dissolutione, of the
dissolution of the parts of the whole-man, consisting of body and soul; the
second of the state of the soul separated from the body, and the third of the
disposing of the body parted from the soul. Thus the Scriptures speech of
being gathered to our people should be answerable in meaning to the phrase used
by the heathen of descending into Hell or going to Hades: which, as Syn^s.
epist. 4.
Synesius notes out of Homer, was by them opposed (...), to a most absolute
extinguishment as well of the soul as of the body. And forasmuch as by that
term, the immortality of the soul was commonly signified: therefore does
Plato in his Phaedo disputing of that argument, make this the state of his
question; (...). Plat. Phaedoa. page 81. edit. Graecolatin. an. 1590.
Whether the souls of men deceased be in Hades or no? and our Ecc^esiasticall
writers also do from thence sometimes fetch a difference betwixt Death and
Hades. Comperies aliquod esse inferni and mortis discrimen: videlicet quod
animas infernus contineat, mors vero corpora. Nam immortales sunt animae.
Theophylact. in 1. Corinthians. 15.
You shall find, says Theophylact, that there is some difference betwixt
Hades and Death: namely that Hades contains the souls, but Death the bodies.
For the souls are immo^tall. The same we read in Hoc differunt mors and
infernus: quod illa corpora, hic animas detineat. Nicet. in Gregor. Nazianz.
orat 42.
Nicetas Serronius his exposition of Gregory Nazianzens second Paschall
oration. Andreas Caesareensis does thus express the difference. (...). Andr.
Caesareens. in Apocalypse. commentar. cap. 64. edit. Graec. 63. Latin.
Death is the separation of the soul and the body. But Hades. is a place to us
invisible or unseen and unknown, which receives our souls when they depart
from hence. The ordinary Gloss, following S. Hierome upon the thirteenth of
Hosea, thus. Mors est, qua separatur anima a corpore. Infernus est locus ubi
recluduntur animae, vel ad refrigerium, vel ad poenam. Strabus in Gloss.
ordinar. ^n Hieronym. lib. 3. in Ose. cap. 13.
Death is that, whereby the soul is separated from the body. Hell is that
place, wherein the souls are included, either for comfort or for pain.

The (...), Nicet init. Historiae.
soul goes to Hades, says Nicetas Choniates in the Prooeme of his History:
but the body returns again into those things, of which it was composed.
Caius, (or who ever else was the author of that ancient fragment, which we
formerly signified to have been falsely fathered upon Josephus) holds that
(...), Caius, in fragmento de Caussa sive essentia Vniversi: de quo supra, page
222.
in Hades, the souls both of the righteous and unrighteous are contained:
(...). Ibid.
but that the righteous are led to the right hand by the Angels that awayte
them there, and brought unto a lightsome region, wherein the righteous men that
have been from the beginning do dwell (and this we call Abraham's b^some:
says he) whereas the wicked are drawn toward the left hand by the punishing
Angels, not going willingly, but drawn as prisoners by violence. Where you may
observe how he frames his description of Hades, according to that model
wherewith the Poets had before possessed men's minds. Virgil A^neid. 6.
confere^d. cum Platonis narratione lib. 10. de Republ. paulo post citanda
Dextera, quae Ditis magni sub moenia tendit,
Hac iter Elysium nobis: at laeva malorum
Exercet poenas, and ad impia tartara mittit.
The right hand path goth underneath the walls of Pluto deep;
That way we must, if paths to Paradise we think to keep:
The left hand leads to pain, and men to Tartarus does send.
For (...). Io. Tzetz. in Hesiodi (...).
as We do allot unto good men a resting place in Paradise; so the Greeks do
assign unto their Heroes the Fortunate Islands, and the Elysian fields: says
Tzetzes. And as the Scripture borrows the term of (...). 2. Pet. 2.4.
Tartarus from the Heathen: so is it thought by Tertullian. Apologetic. cap. 47.
Tertullian and Greg. Nazianz. orat. 20 in laud. Basilij.
Gregory Nazianzen that the Heathen took the ground of their Elysian fields
from the Scriptures Paradise.

To heap up many testimonies out of the Heathen authors, to prove that in
their understanding all souls went to Hades, and received there either
punishment or reward according to the life that they led in this world; would
be but a needless work: seeing none that has read any thing in their
writings can be ignorant thereof. If any man desire to inform himself herein,
he may repair to Plutarches consolatory discourse written to Apollonius: where
he shall find the testimonies of Pindarus and many others alleged, (...),
touching the state of the godly in Hades. Their common opinion is sufficiently
expressed in that sentence of Diphilus, the old Comicall Poet. (...).

(...). D^phil. apud Clement. Alexandr. lib. 5. Stromat, ind^que apud Eusebius.
Praeparat. Euangeli^. lib. 13. page 400. edit Grae^. and Theodoret. in
Therapeutic. ad Graec. lib. 8. page 88.89. who commends this for true,
philosophy indeed.


In Hades we resolve there are two paths: the one whereof is the way of the
righteous, the other of the wicked. But as in this general they agreed
together both among themselves and with the truth: so touching the particular
situation of this Hades, and the special places whereunto these two sorts of
souls were disposed, and the state of things there, a number of ridiculous
fictions and fond conceits are to be found among them; wherein they dissented
as much from one another, as they did from the truth it self. So we see, for
example, Vid. Tertullian. de Anima cap. 54.55. and Macrob. in Somn. Scipionis.
lib. 1. cap. 9.10.11.12.
that the best souls are placed by some of them in the company of their Gods
in heaven, by others in the Galaxias or milky circle, by others beyond the
Ocean, and by others under the earth: Antholog. lib. 1. cap. 37.
(...), yet one Hades notwithstanding was commonly thought to have received them
all.

Plato relates this, as a sentence delivered by them who were the first
ordayners of the Grecian Mysteries: (...). Plat. Phaedon. page 380. f. and 386.
a.
Whosoever goes to Hades not initiated and not cleansed, shall lie in the mire;
but he that comes thither, purged and initiated, shall dwell with the Gods.
So Zoroaster the great father of the Magi in the East, is said to have used
this entrance into his discourse touching the things of the other world. (...).
Zoroaster. apud. Clement. Alexandr. lib. 5. Stromat. indeque apud Eusebius.
Praeparat. Euangel. lib. 13.39^.
These things wrote Zoroaster, the son of Armenius, by race a Pamphylian,
having been dead in the war, which I learned of the Gods, being in Hades. as
Clemens Alexandrinus relates in the fifth book of his Stromata: where he also
notes, that this Zoroaster is that Er the son of Armenius, a Pamphylian, of
whom Plato writes in the tenth book of his Commonwealth; that being slain in
the war he revived the twelfth day after, and was sent back as a messenger
to report unto men here the things which he had heard and seen in the other
world one part of whose relation was this: that he saw certain Plato, lib. 10.
de Republ. page page 518.
gulfes beneath in the earth, and above in the heaven, opposite one to the
other; and that the just were commanded by the Judges that sat betwixt those
gulfs, to go to the right hand up toward Heaven, but the wicked to the left
hand and downward. which testimony Eusebius. Praeparat. Euangel. lib. 11. page
330.
Eusebius brings in, among many others, to show the consent that is betwixt
Plato and the Hebrews in matters that concern the state of the world to come.
Next to Zoroaster comes Pythagoras: whose golden verses are concluded with
this distich. Phytag^r^aur. Ca^m. cum commentar. H^er^cli^* page 310.
(...),
(...)^
When thou shall leave the body, and come unto a free heaven; thou shall be an
immortal God, incorruptible, and not subject to mortality any more. So
Epicharmus the scholar of Pythagoras: (...). Epicharm. apud Clement. Alexandr.
lib. 4. stro^^.
If thou be godly in mind, thou shall suffer no evil when thou art dead; thy
spirit shall remain above in heaven. and Pindarus: (...). Pindar. ibid. and
apud Theodore^. in Therapeutic. ad Grae^os, lib. 8.
The souls of the ungodly fly under the heaven (or under the earth) in cruel
torments, under the unavoydable yoakes of evils. but the souls of the godly,
dwelling in heaven, do praise that great blessed one with songs and hymns.

Ci^ero in his Tusculan questions alleges the testimony of Romulus in co^lo
cum dijs agit aevum: ut famae assentiens dixit Ennius. Cic Tus^ul. quaest. lib.
1.
Ennius, approving the common fame, that Romulus did lead his life in heaven
with the Gods. and in the sixth book of his Commonwealth, he brings in
Scipio teaching that Omnibus, qui patriam conservarint, adjuverint, auxerint,
certum esse in coelo ac definitum locum, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruantur.
Id. in Som^o Scipionis.
unto all them which preserve, assist, and enlarge their country, there is a
certain place appointed in heav^n, where they shall live blessed world without
end. Ea vita, via est in coelum, and in hunc coetum eorum, qui jam vixerunt,
and corpore laxati, illum incolunt locum quem vides (erat autem is
splendidissimo candore inter flammas elucens circulus) quem vos, ut a Graijs
accepistis, orbem lacteum nuncupatis Ibid.
Such a life (says he) is the way to heaven, and into the company of these,
who having lived and are now loosed from their body, do inhabit that place
which thou see, p^inting to the Galaxiaes or milky circle. whereof we read
thus also in Manil. lib. 1. Astronom.
Manilius: An fortes animae, dignatque nomina coelo
Corporibus resoluta suis, terraeque remissa;
Huc migrant ex orb, suumque habitantia coelum,
Aethereos vivunt annos, mundoque fruuntur?
With Damascius the philosopher of Damascus, this circle (...) Damasc.
is the way of the souls that go to the Hades in heaven. Against whom
Johannes Philoponus does reason thus, from the etymology of the word. (...);
Philopon in 1. Mettor. fol. 104. b.
If they pass through the Galaxias or milky circle; then this should be that
(...) or Hades that is in heaven: and how can that be Hades, which is so
lightsome? To which, they that maintained the other opinion, would peradventure
oppose that other common derivation of the word from the Dorick (...), which
signifies to please or to delight; or that which (...). Socrat. apud Platonem
in Cra^ylo. page 265.
Plato does deliver in the name of Socrates, (...) from seeing or knowing all
good things. For, there did Socrates look to find such things: as appears
by that speech which Plato in his Dialogue of the Soul makes him to use the
same day that he was to depart out of this life. (...). Id. apud. eund. in
Phaedone. page 385. g.
The soul, being an invisible thing, goes hence into such another noble and
pure and invisible place; to Hades, in truth, unto the good and wise God:
whither, if God will, my soul must presently go. which place is alleged by
Eusebius. Praepar. Euangel. lib. 11. page 325.
Eusebius, to prove that (...). Ibid. page 323.
in the things which concern the immortality of the soul, Plato does differ
in opinion nothing from Moses. The tale also which Socrates there tells of
the Plat. Phaedon. page 39^.399.
pure land seated above in the pure heaven, though it have a number of toys
added to it (as tales use to have) yet the foundation thereof both Eusebius and
Origin do judge to have been taken from the speeches of the Prophets touching
the land of promise and the heavenly Canaan: and for the rest, Origin refers
us to Platoes interpreters, affirming that (...) Origin lib 7. contra Celsum,
page 362.
they who handle his writings more gravely, do expound this tale of his by way
of allegory.

Such another tale does the same philosoper relate in the Dialogue which he
intituleth Gorgias: showing, that (...). Plato, in Gorg. page 312. c.
among men he that leads his life righteously and holily, shall when he is
dead go unto the Fortunate Islands, and dwell in all happiness, free from
evils. but he that leads it unrighteously and impiously, shall go unto the
prison of punishment and just revenge, which they call Tartarus. which
Theodoret brings in, to prove that (...). Theodoret. Therapeutic. ad Graec.
lib. 11. page 155.
Plato did exactly believe that there were judgments to pass upon men in
Hades. For being conversant with the Hebrews (says he) in Egypt, he heard
without doubt the oracles of the Prophets: and (...). Ibid. page 166.
taking some things from thence, and mingling other things therewith out of the
fables of the Greeks, made up his discourses of these things. Among which
mixtures, that which he has of the Fortunate Islands, is reckoned by Ibid. page
157.
Theodoret for one: whereof you may read in Hesiod. in (...).
Hesiod, Pindar. Olymp. Od. 2.
Pindarus, Diodor. Bibliothec. lib. 3.
Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch. in vita Serlorij.
Plutarch, and Joseph. de bello Iudaico, lib. 2. cap. 12. page 730. edit. Graec.
Josephus also; who treating of the diverse sects that were among the Jews,
shows that the Essenes borrowed this opinion (of the placing of good men's
souls in a certain pleasant habitation beyond the Ocean) from the Grecians.
But the Pharisees (as he notes (...). Jd. lib. 18. Antiquit. cap. 2. page 548.
elsewhere) held that the place, wherein both rewards were given to the good
and punishments to the wicked, was under the earth: which as (...). Origin
cont^a Celsum, lib. 5 page 267.
Origin does declare to have been the common opinion of the Jews, so does
Lucian show that it was the more vulgar opinion among the Grecians. For among
them (...). Lucian. de luctu.
the common multitude, whom wise men (says he) call simple people, being
persuaded of these things by Homer and Hesiod and such other fabulous authors,
and receiving their Poems for a law; took HADES to be a certain deep place
under the earth. The first original of which conceit is by Cicero derived
from hence. In terram enim cadentibus corporibus, hisque humo tectis, ex quo
dictum est humari; sub terra censebant reliquam vitam agi mortuorum. quam ^orum
opinionem magni errores consecuti sunt: quos auxerunt Poetae. Cic. Tuscul.
quaest. lib. 1.
The bodies falling into the ground, and being covered with earth, (whence they
are said to be interred) men thought that the rest of the life of the dead was
led under the earth, upon which opinion of theirs (says he) great errors did
ensue: which were increased by the Poes. Others do imagine, that the Poets
herein had some relation to the Hera^lid Pontic de Allegor. Homer. Servius, in
Virgil. Ae^e^d. lib. 6.
sphericall situation of the world: for the better understanding whereof, these
particulars following would be considered by them that have some knowledge in
this kind of learning.

First, the material Spheres in ancient time were not made moveable in their
sockets, as they are now, that they might be set to any elevation of the Pole:
but were (...). G^minus, in Phaenomen. cap. 13.
fixed to the elevation of XXXVI. degrees; which was the height of the Rhodian
climat. Secondly, the Horizon which divided this Sphere through the middle, and
separated the visible part of the world from the invisible, was commonly
esteemed the utmost bound of the earth: so that whatsoever was under that
horizon, was accounted to be under the earth. for neither the common people,
nor yet some of the learned Doctros uf the Church (as Lactant Institut. lib. 3.
cap. 23.
Lactantius, Augustine. de Civit. De^. lib. 16. cap. 9.
S. Augustine, Procop. in Genes. cap. 1.
Procopius, and others) could be induced to believe that which our daily
navigations find now to be most certain; that there should be another
southern hemisphere of the earth, inhabited by any Antipodes, that did walk
with their feet just opposite unto ours. Thirdly, the great Ocean was supposed
to be the thing in nature which was answerable to this horizon in the Sphere.
Therefore it is observed by Strabo, Geograph. lib. 1. ad quem doctiss.
Casauhonus hane ex Grammaticis Oceani definitionem producit. (...).
Strabo that Homer, and by (...). Theon in Arat. page 6. (...). Ibid. page 59.
edit. Paris.
Theon, (...). Ach^l. Stat. in Ar^^. page 93 ^dit. Florentin. ubi etiam alius
scholiastes, page 115. de horizonte similiter notat. (...).
Achilles Statius, and others that Aratus and the rest of the Poets do put the
Ocean for the Horizon: and thereupon where the astronomers say that the Sun
or the stars at their setting, go under the horizon the common phrase of the
Poets is, that they do tingere se Oceano, dive themselves into the Ocean. for
as they took the Earth to be but half a globe, and not a whole one: so they
imagined that demye globe to be as it were a great mountain or Island seated
in, and environed round about with the Ocean. Thus the author of the book de
Mundo, affirms that (...). Aristot. de Mundo, cap. 3.
the whole world is one Island, compassed about with the Atlanticke sea: and
Dionysius Alexandrinus, in the beginning of his Geography, (...)
(...).
wherein he followed Eratosthenes, as his expositor Eustathius there notes:
who compares also with this, that place of Orpheus (...), -- (...),
(...).
whereunto answers that of Citat ab Arati scholiaste, edit. cum Hipparcho,
Florent. an. 1567. page 115.
Euphorion, or (as Achil. Stat. in Arateis, ibid. page 93.
Achilles Statius cites it) of Neoptolemus Parianus in his (...).

(...). And this opinion of theirs the Fathers of the Church did the more
readily entertayne: because they thought it had ground from Vid. Augustine.
Quaest. 132. in Genesim.
Psalm. 24.2. and 136.6. and such other testimonies of holy Scripture. Quod
aute^ universa terra in aquis subsistat, nec ulla sit pars ejus, quae infra nos
sita est, aquis vacua and denudata, omnibus notum reor. Nam sic docet
Scriptura: Qui expandit terram super aquas. Et iterum: Quia ipse super maria
fundavit eam, and super flumina praeparavit eam. etc. Nec decet ut credamus
aliquam terram infra nos coli nostro orbi oppositam. Procop. in Genes. cap. 1.
That the whole earth (says Procopius Gazaeus) does subsist in the waters, and
that there is no part of it which is situated under us void and cleared of
waters; I suppose it be known unto all. For so does the Scripture teach: Who
stretches out the earth upon the waters. and again: He has founded it upon
the seas, and prepared it upon the floods. Neither is it fit we should believe,
that any earth under us is inhabited, opposite unto our part of the world. The
same collection is made by S. Hilari. in Psalm. 2.
Hilary, Chrysostom. in Genes. cap. 2. homil. 12.
Chrysostom, Caesar. Dialog. 1.
Caesarius, and others. Fourthly, it was thought by the ancient heathen, that
the Ocean (supplying the place of the Horizon) did (...). Proclus Diadoch. in
Hesiodi (...). ab Hugone Sanfordo citatus; qui complura Veterum testimonia huc
facientia diligenter congessit.
separate the visible world from the kingdom of Hades: and therefore that such
as went to Hades (or the world invisible to us) must first pass the Ocean. and
that the pole Antarctick was seen by them there, as the Arctick or North pole
is by us here: according to that of Virgil in his Georgicks, Hic vertex nobis
semper sublimis: at illum
Sub pedibus Styx atra videt, manesque profundi.
Fifthly, as they held that Hades was for situation placed from the center of
the earth downward; so betwixt the beginning and the lowest part thereof they
imagined as great a space to be interjected, as there is betwixt Heaven and
Earth. So says Apollodorus of Tartarus, the dungeon of torment. (...).
Apollodor. Bibliothec. lib. 1.
This is a dark place in Hades, having as great a distance from the earth, as
the earth from the heaven. and Hesiod in his Theogonia (agreably to that which
before we heard from Homer) (...),
(...).
It is as far beneath the earth, as heaven is from the earth: for thus equal
is the distance from the earth unto dark Tartarus. whereunto that of Virgil
may be added, in the ^ixt of the Aeneids: -- tum Tartarus ipse
Bis patet in praeceps tantum tenditque sub umbras,
Quantus ad aethereum coeli suspectus Olympum.
-- then Tartarus it self, that sinke-hole steep
Two times as low descends, two times as headlong downright deep
As heaven upright ^s hie.
that, see how hye the heaven is over us, when we look upward to it; the
downright distance from thence to Tartarus, should be twice as deep again.
for so we must conceive the Poets meaning to be: if we will make him to
accord with the rest of his fellows.

These observations, I doubt not, will be censured by many to savor of a
needless and fruitelesse curiosity: but the intelligent reader for all that
will easily disc^rne, how hereby he may be led to understand, in what sense the
ancient both heathen and Christian writers did hold Hades to be under the
earth; and upon what ground. For they did not mean thereby (as the Schoolmen
generally do, and as Nobis inferi, non nuda cavositas, nec subdivalis aliqua
mundi sentina credu^tur: sed in fossa terrae and in alto vastitas, and in ipsis
visceribus ejus abstrusa profunditas. Tertull. de anima, cap. 55.
Tertullian sometime seems to imagine) that it was contained within the
bowels of the earth: but that it lay under the whole bulk thereof, and
occupied that whole space, which we now find to be taken up with the earth,
air and firmament of the southern hemisphere. Esse autem hujus infernae
regionis vas^aeque abyssi incolas pl^res, beati Ioannis Apocalypsi docemur.
e^c. Hila^^. ^n P^alm. 2.
the inhabitants of which infernal region and vast depth are thereupon
affirmed by S. Hilary to be non intra terram sed infra terram, not within the
earth but beneath the earth. And this proceeded from no other ground, but the
vulgar opinion, that the southern hemisphere of the earth was not inhabited by
living men, as our north^rne is insomuch that some of the heathen atheists,
finding the contrary to be true by the discourse of right reason; endeavored to
persuade themselves from thence, that there was no such place as Hades at all.
Lucretius ex majore part^, and alij integre docent, inferorum regna ne esse
quidem posse. Nam locum ipso^um quem possumus dicere; cum sub ^erris d^^a^^ur
esse Antipodes? in media vero terra eos esse, nec soliditas patitur, nec
centrum terrae, quae terra si in ^ ^edio mundi est; tanta ejus esse profunditas
non potest, ut in medio sui habeat inferos, in quibus est Tartarus: de quo
legitur, Bis patet in praeceps tantum, etc. Servius, in Aen^i^. 6.
Lucretius for the greater part, (says Servius) and others fully teach, tha^
the kingdoms of Hell cannot as much as have a being. For what place can we say
they have; when under the earth our Antipodes are said to be? and that they
should be in the midst of the earth, neither will the solidity permit, nor the
center of the earth. which earth if it be in the middle of the world, the
profundity thereof can not be so great, that it may have those Inferos within
it, in which is Tartarus: whereof we read, Bis patet in praeceps tantum,
tenditque sub umbras
Quantus ad aethereum coeli suspectus Olympum.
But Chrstiian men, being better instructed out of the word of God, were taught
to answer otherwise. Si de situ and loco quaesieris, respondebo, dicamque
extra terra^u^ orbe^ hunc aliquo esse positam. Non ergo erit, quo fuerit haec
loco sita, quin magis quo pacto evitari possit, quaerendu^^ Chrysostom de
p^aemij. sanctor. tom. 3. Oper. Lae^in.
If thou do ask me (says S. Chrysostom) of the situation and place of
Gehenna: I will answer and say, that it is seated somewhere out of this world;
and that it is not to be inquired in what place it is situated, but by what
means rather it may be avoided.

In the Dialogue betwixt Gregory Nyssen and that admirable woman Macrina, S.
Basils sister, touching the Soul and the Resurrection, this point is stood
upon at large: the question being first proposed by Gregory in this manner.
(...). Gregor. N^ssen. in Macrin^s, tom. 2 Oper. page 641.
Where is that name of Hades so much spoken of? which is so much treated of in
our common conversation, so much in the writings both of the heathen and our
own. into which all men think that the souls are translated from hence as
into a certain receptacle. For you will not say that the elements ar^ this
Hades. whereunto Macrina thus replyeth. (...). ( fort. (...).) Ibid. page
641.642.
It appears that thou did not give much heed to my speech. for when I spoke
of the translation of the soul from that which is seen unto that which is
invisible; I thought I had left nothing behind to be inquired of Had^s.
Neither does that name, wherein souls are said to be, seem to me to signify
any other thing either in profane writers or in the holy scripture, save only
a removing unto that which is invisible and unseene. Thereupon it being further
demanded: (...); etc. Ibid. page 642.
how then do some think that a certain subterraneall place should be so
called, and that the souls do lodge therein? for answer thereunto it is
said, that there is no manner of difference betwixt the lower hemisphere of the
earth, and that wherein we live: that as long as the principal doctrine of the
immortality of the soul is yielded unto, no controversy should be moved
touching the place thereof; that local position is proper to bodies, and the
soul being incorporeall has no need to be detained in certain places. then
the place objected from Philip. 2.10. of those under the earth that should bow
at the name of Jesus, being largely skanned: this in the end is laid down for
the conclusion. (...) Ibid, page 644.
These things being thus, no man can constrain us by the name of things under
the earth to understand any subterraneall place: forasmuch as the air does so
equally compass the earth round about, that there is no part thereof found
naked from the covering of the air. Both these opinions are thus propounded by
(...). Theophylact. in Luc. cap. 16.
Theophylact, and by Infernum autem hi quidem putant regionem sub terra
caliginis and tenebrarum. etc. Alij vero Infernum ex apparitione ad
disparitionem animae nominaverunt. Quandiu anima est in corpore, per proprias
videtur actiones: sed ubi a corpore discessum est, omnibus modis incognita
nobis existit. Hugo. Etherian. de animar. regress. ab Inferis, cap. 11.
Hugo Etherianus after him. What is Hades or Hell? Some say that it is a dark
place under the earth. Others say, that it is the translation of the soul from
that which is visible unto that which is unseene and invisible. For while the
soul is in the body, it is seen by the proper operations thereof: but being
translated out of the body, it is invisible; and this did they say was Hades.

So where the author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy defines death to be a
separation of the united parts, and the bringing to them (...), unto that which
is invisible to us: his scholiast Maximus notes thereupon, that (...) Maxim.
in Dionys. Ecclesiast. Hi^rarch. cap. 2.
this invisible thing some do affirm to be Hades; that is to say, an unseene
and invisible departure of the soul unto places not to be seen by the sense
of man. Hitherto also may be referred the place cited Supra, page 217.
before out of Origin in his fourth book (...): which by S. Hierome is thus
delivered. In isto mundo qui moriuntur separatione carnis and animae, juxta
operum differentia^ diversa apud Inferos obtine^t loca. Origin. de Prin^ipijs,
lib. 4. apud Hieronym. epist. 59. ad Avitum.
They who dye in this world by the separation of the flesh and the soul,
according to the difference of their works obtain diverse places in Hell.
Where by Hades, Inferi, or Hell he means indefinitely the other world: in
which how the souls of the godly were disposed, he thus declares in another
place. Relinquit anima mundi hujus tenebras, ac naturae corporeae caecitatem,
and transfertur ad aliud seculum: quod vel sinus Abrahae, ut in Lazaro, vel
Paradisus, ut in latrone qui de cruce credidit, indicatur; vel etiam si qua
novit Deus esse alia loca, vel alias mansiones, per quae transiens anima Deo
creden^, and perveniens usque ad flumen illud quod laetificat civitatem Dei,
intra ipsum sortem promissae patribus haereditatis accipiat. Origin. in Numer.
31. homil. 2^.
The soul leaves the darkness of this world, and the blindness of this
bodily nature, and is translated unto another world: which is either the bosom
of Abraham, as it is showed in Lazarus, or Paradise, as in the thief that
believed upon the cross; or yet if God know that there be any other places, or
other mansions, by which the soul that believes in God passing, and coming
unto that river which makes glad the city of God, may receive within it the
lot of the inheritance promised unto the Fathers. For touching the determinate
state of the faithful souls departed this life, the ancient Doctors (as we
have showed) were not so thoroughly resolved.

Now, all the question betwixt us and the Romanistes is, whether the faithful
be received into their everlasting tabernacles presently upon their removeall
out of the body, or after they have been first purified to the point (as Allen
speaks) in the furnace of Purgatory: but in the time of the Fathers, as S.
Augustine notes, the Illa receptio utrum statim post istam vitam flat, an in
fine suculi in resurrectione mortuorum, atque ultima retributione judicij; non
minima quaestio est. August. Quaestion Euange^ lib. 2. cap. 38.
great question was, whether the receiving of them into those everlasting
tabernacles were performed presently after this life; or in the end of the
world, at the resurrection of the dead, and the last retribution of judgment.
And so concerning Hell the question was as great among them, whether all, good
and bad, went thither or no? whereof the same S. Augustine is a witness also;
who upon that speech of Jacob, Genesis 37.35. I will go down to my son
mourning into Hell, writes thus. Solet esse magna quaestio, quo modo
intelligatur infernus: u^rum illuc mali tantum, an etiam boni mortui descendere
soleant. Si ergo tantum mali: quo modo iste ad filium suum se dicit lugentem
descendere? Non enim in poenis inferni eum esse credidit. An per turbati and
dolentis v^rba sunt, mala sua etiam hinc exagggerantis? Id. Quaestio. 126, in
Genesim. and Eucher. in Genes. l^b. 3. cap. 18.
It uses to be a great question, in what manner Hell should be understood:
whether evil men only, or good men also when they are dead do use to go
down thither. And if evil men only do; how does he say that he would go
down unto his son mourning? for he did not believe that he was in the pains
of Hell. Or be these the words of a troubled and grieving man, amplifying his
evils from hence? and upon that other speech of his, Genes. 42.38. You shall
bring down mine old age with sorrow unto Hell. Vtrum ideo ad infernum, quia cum
tristitia? An etiam si abesset tristitia, tanquam ad in^ernum moriendo
descensurus haec loquitur? De inferno enim magna quaestio est: and quid inde
Scriptura sentiat, locis omnibus ubi forte hoc commemoratum fuerit, observandum
est. Augustine. Quaest. 142. in Genes^m. and Eucher. in Genes. lib. 3. cap. 27.
Whether therefore unto Hell, because with sorrow? Or although sorrow were
away, speaks he these things as if he were t^ go down into hell by dying?
For of Hell there is a great question: and what the Scripture delivers
thereof, in all the places where it has occasion to make mention of it, is to
be observed. Hitherto S. Augustine: who had reference to this great question,
when he said as has been Supr. page 215.
before alleged. Of Hell neither have I had any experience as yet, nor you:
and peradventure there shall be another way, and by Hell it shall not be. For
these things are uncertain. Neither is there greater question among the
Doctors of the Church concerning the Hell of the Fathers of the Old Testament,
then there is of the Hell of the faithful now in the time of the New: neither
are there greater differences betwixt them touching the Hell into which our
Savior went (whether it were under the earth or above, whether a darkesome
place or a lightsome, whether a prison or a paradise) then there are of the
mansions wherein the souls of the blessed do now continue.

S. Hierome, interpreting those words of King Ezechias, Esai. 38.10. I shall
go to the gates of Hell: says that this is meant, Vel communi lege naturae,
vel^illas portas, de qu^bus quod liberatus sit, Psalmista decantat: Qui exaltas
me de portis mortis, ut annunciem omnes laudationes tuas in portis filiae Sion
Hi^ronym. lib. 11. in Esai. cap. 38.
either of the common law of nature, or else of those gates, from which that he
was delivered, the Psalmist sings; Thou that liftest me up from the gates of
death, that I may show forth all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of
Sion. (Psalm. 9.13, 14.) Now as some of the Fathers do expound our Saviors
going to Hell, of his descending into Gehenna: so others expound it of his
going to Hell according to the common law of nature; the common law of nature
(I say) which extends it self indifferently unto all the dead, whether they
belong to the state of the New Testament or of the Old. For as Christ's soul
was in all points made like unto ours (sin only excepted) while it was
joined with his body here in the land of the living: so when he had humbled
himself unto the death, it became him in all things to be made like unto his
brethren, even in that state of dissolution. (...). Eustathius Antiochen. in
Psalm. 15. citatus a ^heodoreto in (...). dialog. 1.
And so indeed the soul of Jesus had experience of both. For it was in the
place of human souls, and being out of the flesh did live and subsist. It
was a reasonable soul therefore and of the same substance with the souls of
men; even as his flesh is of the same substance with the flesh of men,
proceeding from Mary: says Eustathius the Patriarch of Antioch in his
exposition of that text of the Psalm; Thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
Where by (...) or Hell, you see, he understands (...), the place of human
souls (which is the Hebrews (...) or world of spirits) and by the disposing
of Christ's soul there after the manner of other souls, concludes it to be of
the same nature with other men's souls. So S Hilary in his exposition of the
138. Psalm. Humanae ista lex necessitatis est, ut consepultis corporibus ad
inferos animae descendant. Quam descensionem Dominus ad consummationem very
hominis non recusavit. Hilari. in Psalm. 138.
This is the law of human necessity, says he, that the bodies being buried,
the souls should go to Hell. Which descent the Lord did not refuse for the
accomplishment of a true man. and a little after he repeateth it, that de
supernis ad inferos mortis lege descendit, he descended from the supernall to
the infernal parts by the law of death. and upon the 53. Psalm more fully. Ad
explendam quidem hominis naturam etia^ morti se, id est, discenssioni se
tanquam animae corporisque subjecit; and ad infernas seeds, id quod homini
debitum videtur esse, penetravit. Id. in Psalm. 53.
To fulfill the nature of man he subjected himself to death, that is, to a
departure as it were of the soul and body; and pierced into the infernal
seats, which was a thing that seemed to be du^ unto man.

So Leo, in one of his Sermons upon our Lords passion. Leges inferni moriendo
subijt, sed resurgendo dissolvit: and ita perpetuitatem mortis incidit, ut eam
de aeterna faceret temporalem. Leo de passion. sermon. 8.
He did undergo the laws of Hell by dying, but did dissolve them by rising
again: and so did cut off the perpetuity of death, that of eternal he might
make it temporal. So Irenaeus, having said, that our Lord Nunc autem tribus
diebus conversatus est ubi erant mortui. Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. ult.
conversed three days where the dead were, adds that therein he Dominus
legem mortuoru^ servavit, ut fieret primogenitus a mortuis, et commoratus usque
ad te^tia^ die^ in inferioribus terrae, post deinde surgens in carne, ut etia^
figuras clavoru^ ostenderet discipulis, sic ascendit ad patrem. Ibid.
observed the law of the dead, that he might be made the first begotten from
the dead; staying until the third day in the lower parts of the earth, and
afterward rising in his flesh. Then he draws from thence this general
conclusion. Cum enim Dominus in medio umbrae mortis abierit, ubi animae
mortuorum erant, post deinde corporaliter resurrexit, and post resurrectione^
assumptus est: manifestu^ est quia and discipulorum ejus, propter quos and haec
operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt in invisibilem locum, definitu^ eis a Deo,
and ibi usque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur, sustinentes resurrectionem; post
recipientes corpora and perfect resu^gentes, hoc est corporaliter, quemadmodum
and Dominus resurrexit, sic venient ad conspectum Dei. Nemo enim est discipulus
super magistrum: perfectus autem omnis erit, sicut magister ejus. Ibid.
Seeing our Lord went in the midst of the shadow of death, where the souls of
the dead were, then afterward rose again corporally, and after his
resurrection was assumed: it is manifest that the souls of his disciples also,
for whose sake the Lord wrought these things, shall go to an invisible place
appointed unto them by God, and there shall abide until the resurrection,
waiting for the resurrection; and afterward receaving their bodies, and rising
again perfectly, that is to say corporally, even as our Lord did rise again,
they shall so come unto the presence of God. For there is no disciple above his
master: but every one shall be perfect, if he be as his master. The like
collection does Tertullian make in his book of the Soul. Tertullian de Anima,
cap. 55. vid. supr. page 270. ad liter. b.
If Christ being God, because he was also man, dying according to the
Scriptures, and being buried according to the same, did here also satisfy the
law, by performing the course of an humane death in Hell; neither did ascend
into the higher parts of the heavens, before he descended into the lower parts
of the earth, that he might there make the Patriarchs and Prophets partakers
of himself: thou have, both to believe that there is a region of Hell under
the earth, and to push them with the elbowe, who proudly enough do not think
the souls of the faithful to be fit for Hell; servants above their Lord, and
disciples above their Master, scorning perhaps to take the comfort of expecting
the resurrection in Abraham's bosom. And in the same book, speaking of the
soul: Quid est illud quod ad inferna transfertur post divortium corporis, quod
detinetur illic, quod in diem judicij reservatur, ad quod and Christus moriendo
descendit, puto ad animas Patriarcharum. Jbid. cap. 7.
What is that, says he, which is translated unto the infernal parts (or Hell)
after the separation of the body? which is detayned there, which is reserved
unto the day of judgment, unto which Christ by dying did descend, to the
souls of the Patriarchs, I think. Where he makes the Hell unto which our
Savior did descend, to be the common receptacle not of the souls of the
Patriarchs alone, but also of the souls that are now still separated from
their bodies: as being the place quo universa humanitas trahitur (as he
speaks Ibid. cap. 58.
elsewhere in that book) unto which all mankind is drawn.

So Novatianus after him, affirms that the very places Quae infraterram
jacent, neque ipsa sunt digestis and ordinatis potestatibus vacua. Locus enim
est, quo piorum animae impiorumque ducuntur, futuri judicij pra^judicia
sentientes Novatian. de Trinitat. cap 1.
which lie under the earth be not void of distinguished and ordered powers.
For that is the place (says he) whither the souls both of the godly and
ungodly are led, receiving the fore-judgements of their future d^ome.
Lactantius says that our Savior Lactant. Justitut. lib. 4. cap. 19.
rose again ab inferis, from Hell: but so he says also that the dead Saints
shall be I^. lib. 7. cap. 24. vid. and cap. 22.
raised up ab inferis at the time of the Resurrection. S. Cyrill of Alexandria
says that the Jews (...) Cyrill. Glaphyr. in Genes. lib. 6. page 154.
killed Christ, and cast him into the deep and dark dungeon of death, that
is, into Hades: adding afterward, that (...). Ibid. page 155.
Hades may rightly be esteemed to be the house and mansion of such as are
deprived of life. Nicephorus Gregoras in his funeral Oration upon Theodorus
Metochites, puts in this for one strain of his lamentation. (...); Niceph.
G^egor. histor. Roman. lib. 10.
Who has brought down that heavenly man unto the bottom of Hades? and Andrew
archbishop of Crete, touching the descent both of Christ and all Christians
after him even unto the dark and comfortless Hades writes in this manner.
(...); Andre. Hierosolymitan. sermon. in vitam humanam, and in Defunctos.
If he, who was the Lord and master of all, and the light of them that are in
darkness, and the life of all men, would taste death, and undergo the descent
into Hell, that he might be made like unto us in all things, sin excepted;
and for three days went thorough the sad, obscure and dark region of Hell:
what strange thing is it, that we who are sinners, and dead in trespasses
(according to the great Apostle) who are subject to generation and corruption;
should meet with death, and go with our soul into the dark chambers of
Hell, where we cannot see light, nor behold the life of mortal men? For are
we above our Master, or better then the Saints, who underwent these things of
ours after the like manner that we must do?

Iuvencus intimates, that our Savior giving up the ghost sent his soul unto
heaven, in those verses of his: Juvenc. Histor. Euangel. lib. 4.
Tunc clamor Domini magno conamine missus,
Aethereis animam comitem commiscuit auris.
Eusebius Emesenus collecteth so much from the last words which our Lord
uttered at the same time; Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit. (...),
says Eusebius. Em^sen. a Theodore^o citatus in (...). dialog. 3.
he, (...). His spirit was above, and his body remained upon the cross for us.
In the Greek exposition of the Canticles, collected out of Eusebius, Philo
Carpathius and others, that sentence in the beginning of the sixth chapter, My
beloved is gone down into his garden, is interpreted of Christ's (...). Eusebius.
in Cantic. page 68.
going to the souls of the Saints in Hades. which in the Latin collections
that bear the name of Philo Carpathius is thus more largely expressed. Per
descensum Sponsi quem patruelem appellat, Domini nost^i Jesus Christi descensum
ad inferos possumus intelligere, ut arbitror: nam and haec sequentia probant,
cum dixit; Ad aromatum phialas sive areolas. Prisci enim illi sanctissimi viri,
per phialas aromatum non inepte significantur; quales fuere, Noe, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Job, David, Samuel, Elisaeus, Daniel, alijque quamplurimi
ante Legem and in Lege: qui quidem omnes, veluti aromatum phialae sive areolae,
sanctissimae justitiae odores ac fructus suavissime oluerunt. Tunc enim
Paradisum triumphator ingressus est, cum ad inferos penetravit. Adest nobis
ipse Deu^ hac in re testis, cum in Cruce Latroni (sese illi ipsi religiosissime
commendanti) clementissime respondit; Hodie mecu^ eris in Paradiso. Philo
Carpath in Canti^. 6.
By this descending of the Bridegroom, we may understand the descending of our
Lord Jesus Christ into Hell as I suppose: for that which follows proves
this, when he says; To the beds of spices. For those ancient holy men are not
unfi^ly signified by the beds of spices; such as were, Noe, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, Job, David, Samuel, Elisaeus, Daniel, and very many others before
the Law and in the Law: who all of them, like unto beds of spices, gave a most
sweet smell of the odours and fruits of holy righteousness. For then as a
triumpher did he enter into PARADISE, when he pierced into Hell. God himself
is present with us for a witness in this matter, when he answered most
graciously to the Thief upon the Cross, commending himself unto him most
religiously; To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Lastly touching this
Paradise, the various opinions of the ancient are thus laid down by
Olympiodorus; to seek no farther. Digna fane inquisitu res est, ubina^ sub
Sole justi vita functi collocentur. Constat autem quod in Paradiso: cum dixerit
Christus Latroni; Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. Sciendumque est, quod literalis
Traditio Paradisum docet esse in terra. Nonnulli vero dixerunt, quod Paradisus
etiam est in inferno, id est, subterraneo loco: ad quam suam opinionem illud
accommodant Euangelium. Dives Lazarum vidit, ipse tamen in inferiore demersus,
cum Lazarus eminentiore esset in loco, ubi esset Abraham. Verum quomodocumque
se habeant; illud proculdubio constat, tum ex praesenti Ecclesiastae nostri
loco, tum ex omni ^acra ^criptura, futuros pios in prosperitate ac pace,
in^ustos vero in supplicijs ac tormentis. Alijs autem placuit Paradisum esse in
coelis: bonus autem ac ingenuus Ecclesiastes historiae sensum potius
consectabitur. Olympiodor. in Ecclesiast. cap. 3.
It is a thing worthy of inquiry, in what place under the Sun the righteous
are placed which have left this life. Certain it is, that in Paradise:
forasmuch as Christ said unto the Thief; This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. And it is to be known, that the literal Tradition teaches Paradise
to be in earth. But some have said that Paradise also is in Hell, that is, in a
place under the earth: unto which opinion of theirs they apply that of the
Gospel; where the rich man saw Lazarus, being yet himself sunk down in a
lower place, when Lazarus was in a place more eminent, where Abraham was. But
howsoever the matter goes; this without doubt is manifest, as well out of
Ecclesiastes as out of all the sacred Scripture, that the godly shall be in
prosperity and peace, and the ungodly in punishments and torments. And others
are of the mind, that Paradise is in the Heavens, etc. Hitherto Olympiodorus.

That Christ's soul went into Paradise, Bishop answer to Perkin^ advertisement,
page 9.
Doctor Bishop says, being well understood, is true. For his soul in hell,
had the joys of Paradise: but to make that an exposition of Christ's descending
into hell, is to expound a thing by the flat contrary of it. Yet this
ridiculous exposition, he affirms to be received of most Protestants. Which
is even as true, as that which he avoucheth in the same place; that this
article of the descent into Hell is to be found Ibid. page 8.
in the old Roman Creed expounded by Ruffinus: where Ruffinus (as we have
heard) expounding that article, delivers the flat contrary, that it is not
found added in the Creed of the Church of Rome. It is true indeed, that more
than most Protestants do interpret the words of Christ uttered unto the Thief
upon the Cross, Luke 23.43. of the going of his soul into Paradise: where our
Savior meaning simply and plainly, that he would be that day in Suarez. tom.
2 in 3. part. Thom. quaest. 46. art. 11. and quaest. 52. art. 8. disp. 43.
sect. 4. Bellarmin de Sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 1. cap. 3. testim. 4. See before,
page 254.
Heaven; M. Bishop would have him so to be understood, as if he had meant that
that day he would be in Hell. And must it be now held more ridiculous in
Protestants, to take Hell for Paradise; then in M. Bishop, to take Paradise for
Hell? (...), be the words of the Apostles Creed in the Greek: and, (...), in
the Symbol of Tom. 2. Oper. Athanas page 39. edit. Graecolat.
Athanasius. Some learned Protestants do observe, that in these words there is
no determinate mention made, either of ascending or descending, either of
Heaven or Hell (taking Hell according to the vulgar acception) but of the
general only, under which these contraries are indifferently comprehended: and
that the words literally interpreted, import no more but this; HE WENT UNTO
THE OTHER WORLD. Which is not to expound a thing by the flat contrary of it, as
M. Bishop fancieth: who may quickly make himself ridiculous, in taking upon
him thus to censure the interpretations of our learned linguistes; unless his
own skill in the languages were greater, then as yet he has given proof of.

Master Broughton (with whose authority he elsewhere presses us, as of a man
Bishop. Preface to the second part of his Reformat. of Perkins Catholic page
19.
esteemed to be singularly seen in the Hebrew and Greek tongue) has been
but too forward in maintayning that exposition, which by D. Bishop is accounted
so ridiculous. In one place, touching the term Hell, as it does answer the
Hebrew Sheol and the Greek Hades, he writes thus. Brought. in his epistle to
the Nobility of Engl. edit. an. 1597. page 38.
He that thinks it ever used for Tartaro or Gehenna, otherwise then the term
Death may by Synecdoche import so: has not skill in Ebrew or that Greek,
which breathing and live Graecia spoke, if God has lent me any judgment that
way. In Id. in alio Opusculo, edit. an. 1604.
another place he alleges out of Portus his Dictionary, that the Macedonians
call (...) Heaven. And one of his acquaintance beyond the Sea, reports that
he should deliver, that in Inveniri insupe^ asserit in multis vetussissimis
exemplaribus MS^. orationem Dominicam in hunc modum; (...) Pater noster qui es
in inferno etc. Veteres quoque Macedones aliter orationem Dominicam nunquam
precatos fuisse. Io. Rodolph. Lavator. de descensu ad inferos, lib. 1. part 1.
cap 8.
many most ancient Manuscript copies the Lords prayer is found with this
beginning: (...), Our Fat^er which art in Hades. which I for my part will then
believe to be true, when I shall see one of those old copies with mine own
eyes. But in the mean time for Hades, it has been sufficiently declared
before out of* good authors, that it signifies the place of souls departed in
general; and so is of extent large enough to comprehend under it, as well
(...) (as Damascius speaks) that part of Hades (or the unseene world) which
is in heaven, as that which by Joseph. de Bello Iudaic. lib. 3. cap. 25. page
785.
Josephus is called (...) the darker Hades, and in the Matthew 8.12. and 22.13.
and 25.30.
Gospel (...) outer darkness. And as for (...) the other word; in the Acts of
the Apostles it is used ten times: and in none of all those places signifies
any descending from a higher place unto a lower, but a removing simply from
one place unto another. Whereupon the Vulgar Latin edition (which none of the
Romanists Nemo illam rejicere quovis praetextu audeat, vel praesumat. Conci^.
Tridentin. sess. 4.
upon any pretense may presume to reject) does render it there by the general
terms of Act. 13.4.
abeo, 18.5. et 27.5.
venio, 9.32.
devenio, 11.27. and 21.10.
supervenio. and where it retayneth the word 8.5. and 12.19. and 15.1. and
18.22.
descendo, it intends nothing less, then to signify thereby the lower
situation of the place unto which the removeall is noted to be made. If
descending therefore in the Acts of the Apostles imply no such kind of thing:
what necessity is there; that thus of force it must be interpreted in the
Creed of the Apostles? Menelaus declared unto us, (...): says King Antiochus,
in his epistle unto the Jews, 2. Maccab. 11.29. Velle vos descendere ad
vestros, it is in the Latin edition: whereby what else is meant, but that they
had a desire to go unto their own?

I omit the phrases of descending in praelium, in forum, in campum, in
amicitiam, in caussam, etc. which are so usual in good Latin authors: yea and
of descending into heaven it self; if that be not a jest which the Poet
breaks upon Claudius. Iuvenal. Satyr. 6.
Ille senis tremulumque caput descendere jussit
In coelum.
Others add unto this, that the phrase of descending ad inferos, is a popular
kind of speech, which sprung from the opinion that was vulgarly conceived of
the situation of the recept^cle of the souls under the earth: and that
according to the rule of Aristo^le in his Top^cks, we must speak as the
vulgar, but think as wise men do. Even as we use to say commonly, that the
Sun is under a cloud, because it is a vulgar form of speech: and yet it is
far enough from our meaning for all that, to imagine the cloud to be
indeed higher then the Sun. So Cicero, they say, where ever he has
occasion to mention any thing that concerns the dead, speaks still of
Inferi according to the vulgar phrase: although he misliked the vulgar
opinion, which bred that manner of speaking; and professed it to be his
judgment, that Animos cum e corpore excesserint, in sublime ferri. Cic lib 1.
Tusculan. quaest.
the souls when they depart out of the body are carried up on high, and not
downward unto any habitations under the earth. So Chrysostom and Theophylact
think that the Apostle termed the Death and Hell unto which our Savior did
descend, the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. homil.
11.
(...), Theop^^lact. in Ephesians. cap. 4.
from the common opinion of men. So in the translation of the holy Scripture,
S. Hierome shows that we use the names of Arcturus and Orion, not approving
thereby the ridiculous and monstrous figments of the Poets in this matter, but
expressing the Hebrew names of these constellations by the words of heathenish
fables; because Qui non possumus intelligere quod dicitur, nisi per ea
vocabula, quae usu didicimus, and errore combibimus. Hieronym. lib. 2. in Amos
cap. 5.
we cannot understand that which is said, but by those words, which we have
learned by use, and drunk in by error.

And just so stands the case with this word Hades: which with the G^eeke
Poets is the name of Pluto, whom they feigned to be the God of the dead under
the earth, and gave a denomination unto (...), from riches; Phurnutus de natura
D^or. in Plutone.
because that all things coming to their dissolution, there is nothing which
is not at last brought unto him, and made his possession. Thus Homer and
Hesiod, with Plato, in Gorgia.
Plato and others after them, say that Rhea brought forth three sons, to
Saturn; Jupiter, Neptune, Hesiod. in Theogonia.
(...),
(...).
and mighty Hades, who inhabiteth the houses under the earth, having a
merciless heart: for that attribute does Hesiod give unto him, because Death
spares no man. So Homer: -- Homer. Iliad. 15.
(...): which is also the description that Hesiod makes of him in that verse:
Hesiod. Theog^n.
(...), Hades was afraid, who reigns over them that lie dead in the earth.
Now that (...) in the Creed is a phrase taken from the heathen, and applied to
express a Christian truth; the very Grammatica^l construction may seem to
intimate: where the nowne is not put in the accusative case (as otherwise it
should) but after the manner of the Greeks in the genitive case, implying the
defect of another word necessarily to be understood; as if it had been said,
He went unto the place or house of Hades. as the Poets use to express it,
sometimes defectively (...), and sometimes more fully (...). Pindar. Phyth. od.
3.
(...) or (...)

(...). Homer. Iliad. (...).


(...), into the house or chambers of Hades. Thus then, they that take Hades
for the common receptacle of souls, do interpret the context of the Creed, as
Cardinal Cajetan before did the narration of Moses touching Abraham's giving up
the ghost, being gathered to his people, and being buried, Genes. 25.8, 9. that
the article of the death is to be r^ferred to the whole manhood, and the
dissolution of the parts thereof; that of the burial, to the body s^parated
from the soul, and this of the descending into Hades, to the soul separated
from the body as if he had said. He suffered death truly, by a real
separation of his soul from his body: and after this dissolution, the same
did befall him that uses to betide all other dead men; his livelesse body was
sent unto the place which is appointed to receive dead bodies, and his
immortal soul went unto the other world, as the souls of other men use to
do.

Having now declared, how the Greek Hades (and so the Latin Inferi, and our
English Hell) is taken for the place of the bodies and of the souls of dead
men, severally: it follows that we show, how the common state of the dead is
signified thereby, and the place in general which is answerable unto the parts
of the whole man thus indefinitely considered in the state of separation.
Concerning which, that place of Dionysius, wherein he sets forth the
signification of our being dead and buried with Christ by Baptism, is to be
considered. (...) Dionys. Ecclesiastic. Hierarch. cap. 2.
Forasmuch as death is in us, not an utter extinguishment of our being, as
others have thought, but a separation of the united parts, bringing them unto
that which is to us invisible; the soul as being by the deprivation of the
body made unseene, and the body as either being covered in the earth, or by
some other of the alterations that are incident unto bodies, being taken away
from the sight of man: the whole covering of the man in water is fitly assumed
for an image of the death and burial which is not seen. Thus Dionysius,
concerning the separation of the united parts by Death, and the bringing of
them unto that which is invisible: (...). Georg pachymer thid.
according whereunto, as his paraphrast Pachymeres notes, it is called Hades,
that is to say, an invisible separation of the soul from the body. And so
indeed we find as well in foreign authors, as in the Scriptures and the
writings of the Greek and Latin Fathers, that Hades and Inferi are not only
taken in as large a sense as Death (and so extended unto all men indifferently,
whether good or bad) but are likewise oftentimes indifferently used for it. For
proof whereof, out of heathen authors these testimonies following may suffice.
Pindar. Olymp. od. 8.
(...)
(...):
says Pindarus. The man that does things befitting him, forgets Hades:
meaning, that the remembrance of death does no whit trouble him. and again:
Id. Isthm. Od. 6.
(...)
(...) --
(...)
(...).
The son of Cleonicus wishes that with such manners he may meet and receive
Hades (that is, death) and hoare old age. So another Poet, cyted by Plutarch.
de consolat ad Apollon.
Plutarch: (...).
(...).
O Death, the sovereign physician, come: for Hades is in very truth the haven
of the earth. So the saying, that the best thing were, never to have been born,
and the next to that, to dye quickly; is thus expressed by Theognis, in his
elegies: (...),
(...).
(...),
(...).


Sophocles in the beginning of his Trachiniae, brings in D^ianira affirming
that, howsoever it were an old saying among men, that none could know whether a
man, life were happy or unhappy before he were dead; yet she knew her own to be
heavy and unfortunate before she went to Hades. (...),
(...).
where (...), is the same with (...) before death: as both the ancient
Scholiast and the matter it self does show. So in his Ajax: (...). He is
better that is hidden in Hades (that is to say, he that is dead, (...), as the
Scholiast rightly expounds it) then he that is sick past recoverie. and in
his Antigone: (...),
(...).
My father and mother being laid in Hades, it is not possible that any brother
should spring forth afterward. Wherewith Clem. Strom. lib. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus does fitly compare that speech of the wife of Intaphernes
in Herodot. histor. lib 3.
Herodotus: (...) (...). My father and mother being now no longer living,
another brother by no manner of means can be had. So that (...) or (...), being
in Hades, with the one, is the same with (...), not now living, in the other;
or as it is alleged by Clemens, (...), not now being: which is the Scripture
phrase of them that have left this world, Genes. 5.24. and 42.36. Psalm. 39.13.
Ierem. 31.15. and 49.10. used also by Homer, Iliad. b.

(...)
(...).
Touching the use of the word Hell in the Scriptures, thus writes Iansenius,
expounding those words, Proverb. 15.11. Hell and destruction are before the
Lord: how much more then, the hearts of the children of men? Sciendum quod per
Infernum (pro quo dictio Hebraica proprie significat sepulchrum) and
perditionem, quae duo in scripturis saepe conjunguntur, significatur status
mortuorum; and non solum damnatorum, ut nos fere ex his vocibus auditis
concipimus, sed in genere status defunctorum. Cornellansen. in Proverb 15.
It is to be known, that by Hell and destruction (which two in the Scriptures
are often joined together) the state of the dead is signified; and not of the
damned only, as we commonly do conceave when we hear these words, but the
state of the deceased in general. So Gasp. ^anct. in Act. 2. sect. 56.
Sanctius the Jesuit, with Sa his fellow, acknowledges, that Hell in the
Scripture is frequently taken for Death. Therefore are these two joined
together, Revel. 1.18. I have the keys of Hell and of Death, or (as other
Greek copies read; agreeably to the old Latin and Ethiopian translation) of
Death and of Hell. and Esai. 28.15. We have made a covenant with Death, and
with Hell we are at agreement. where the Septuagint, to show that the same
thing is meant by both the words, do place the one in the room of the other,
after this manner: We have made a covenant with Hell, and with Death an
agreement. The same things likewise are indifferently attributed unto them
both: as that they are unsatiable, and never full; spoken of Hell, Proverb.
27.20. and of Death, Haback. 2.5. So the gates of Hell, Esai. 38:10. are the
gates of Death, Psalm. 9.13. and 107.18. and therefore where we read in the
book of Wisdom; (...). Sapient. 16.13.
Thou leadest to the gates of Hell, and bring back again: the Vulgar Latin
translateth it; Deducis ad portas mortis, and reducis. Lat. ibid.
Thou leadest to the gates of Death, and bring back again. So the sorrows
of Death, Psalm. 18.4. are in the verse following termed, the sorrows of Hell:
and therefore the LXX. (as has been showed) translating the self same words
of David, do in the Psalm render them the sorrows of Hell, and in the
history 2. Sam. 22.6. (where the same Psalm is repeated) the sorrows of
Death. Whence also that difference of reading came, Act. 2.24. as well in the
copies of the text as in the citations of the ancient Fathers: which was the
less regarded, because that variety in the words bredd little or no
difference at all in the sense. Therefore Epiphanius in one place, having
respect to the beginning of the verse, says that Christ loosed Epiphan in
Anacephalaeosi, page 531. edit. Graec.
(...) the sorrows of Death: and yet in another, citing the later end of the
verse, because it was not possible he should be holden by it, adds this
explication thereunto, Id. in Anchora^o, page 484. Vid. etiam eund. contra
Ariomani^. haeres. 69. page 337.
(...), that is to say, by Hell. And the author of the Sermon upon Christ's
passion, among the works of Athanasius, one where says that he loosed the
sorrows of Athana^. Oper. Gra^olat. tom. 1. page 801.
Hell, and otherwhere that he loosed the sorrows of Ibid. page 805.
Death. unto whom we may adjoyne Bid, Solutos per Dominu^ dicit dolores
inferni, sive mortis. Bed. Retract. in Act. cap. 2.
who is in like manner indifferent for either reading.

In the Proverbs, where it is said; There is a way which seems right unto a
man, but the end thereof are the ways of Death: Proverb. 14.12. and 16.25. the
LXX. in both places for Death put (...) the bottom of Hell. and on the other
side, where it is said; Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver
his soul from Hell: Proverb. 23.14. they read, (...), Thou shall deliver his
soul from Death. So in Hose. 13.14. where the Hebrew and Greek both read: I
will deliver them from the hand of Hell: the Vulgar Latin has; De manu mortis
liberabo eos, I will deliver them from the hand of Death. which S. Cyrill of
Alexandria shows to be the same in effect. for (...) Cyrill. in Hoseam. page
371.
he has redeemed us (says he) from the hand of Hell, that is to say, from the
power of Death. So out of the text, Matthew. 16.18. Eusebius notes, that the
Church does (...). Eusebius. lib. 1. Praeparat. Euangelic. page 7.
not give place to the gates of DEATH, for that one saying which Christ did
utter: Upon the rock I will build my Church, and the gates of HELL shall not
prevail against it. S. Ambrose also from the same text collecteth thus, that
Fides ergo est Ecclesiae fundamentu^. Non enim de carne Petri, sed de fide
dictum est, quia portae mortis ei non praevalebunt; sed confessio vicit
infernum. Ambros. de Incarnat. sacrament. cap. 5.
faith is the foundation of the Church. For it was not said of the flesh of
Peter, but of the faith, that the gates of DEATH should not prevail against
it: but the confession (of the faith) overcame HELL. So Theodoret notes, that
the Infernum autem ex opinione, quae invaluit, usurpavit; hoc etiam morti nomen
imponens. Theodoret. in Cantic. 8.
name of Hell is given unto Death, in that place, Cantic. 8.6. Love is strong
as death, jealousy is hard or cruel as Hell. which in the writings of the
Fathers is a thing very usual. Take the Poems of Theodorus Prodromus for an
instance: where delivering an history out of the life of S. Chrysostom, of a
woman that had lost four of her sons; he says that they four were gone
unto Hades, -- (...)
(...).
and relating how S. Basil had freed the country of Cappadocia from famine,
thus he expresses it: (...)
(...)
(...).
and showing how Gregory Nazianzen, when he was a child, was recovered from
death by being brought to the communion Table; he says he was brought unto the
Sun from Hades: (...).

Gregory himself likewise in his Poems, setting out the dangers of a
seafaring life, says that (...). Nazianz. Carm. 15. de Vitae itinerib. tom.
2. edit. Graecolat. page 91.
the greater part of them that sail the seas is in Hades. Baesil of Seleucia,
speaking of the translation of Enoch and Elias, says in one place, that (...).
Basil. Se^enc. in Ionam orat. 2. page 114.
Enoch remained out of Deaths nett, Elias obeyed not the laws of nature; and
in another, that (...). Id in illud: Ecce as^endimus Hierosolym. page 268.
Elias remained superior to death, Enoch by translation declined Hades: making
Death and Hades to be one and the same thing. So he makes Elias to pray thus,
at the raising of the widows son. (...). Id. in Eliam. page 97.
Show, o Lord, that Death is made gentle toward men, let it learn the
evidences of thy humanity; let the documents of thy goodness come even to
Hades. And as he there notes that (...). Ibid.
Death received an overthrow from Elias: so in another place he notes that
(...). Id. in illud: Ecc^ ascendimus Hierosolym. page 265.
Hades received a like overthrow, by Christ's raising of the dead. whereupon he
brings in S. Peter, using this speech unto our Savior: (...); ^b. page 268.
Shall Death make any youthful attempt against thee, whose voice Hades could
not endure? The other day thou did call the widows son that was dead; and
Death fled, not being able to accompany him unto the grave whom he had
overcome: how shall Death therefore lay hold on him, whom it fears? and our
Savior himself speaking thus unto his Disciples. (...). Ibid. page 267.
I will arise out of the grave, renewing the Resurrection: I will teach Hades
that it must expect the Resurrection to succeed it. For in me both Death
cease, and immortality is planted. So says S. Cyrill of Alexandria: (...).
Cyrill. Alexand^. Glaphyr. in Genes. lib. 5. page 121.
Christ was raised up for us. for he could not be detayned by the gates of
Hades, nor taken at all by the bonds of Death. And therefore Cyrill of
Jerusalem having said that our Savior did Cyrill Hierosolym. Cateches. 14.
descend into Hades, does presently add as an explication thereof. (...). for
he did descend into Death. (...). Athanas. de Incarnat. Verbi, contra Gentes,
page 77.
He descended into Death as a man: says Athanasius. Divina natura in mortem
per carnem descendit; non ut lege mortalium detineretur a morte, sed ut per se
resurrecturus januas mortis aperiret. Ruffin. in exposit. Symbol.
The divine nature (says Ruffinus, meaning the divine person) by his flesh
descended into Death; not that according to the law of mortal men he should be
detayned of death, but that rising again by himself he might open the gates
of death. (...). Octoe^ch. Anastas. Graec. and Li^urg. Chr^sost. Latin. a ^eone
Thus^o edit.
When thou did descend into Death, o immortal Life, (say the Grecians in
their Liturgy) thou did then mortify Hades or Hell with the brightness of
thy divinity.

And thus, if my memory do not fail me, (for at this present I have not the
book lying by me) is the article expressed in the Hebrew Creed, which is
printed with Potkens Syllabar. Aethiopic. ad calcem Psalterij, edit. Hebraic.
Graec. Latin. and Aethiopic. in fol.
Ethiopian Syllabarie. (...) He descended into the shadow of death. where the
Hebrew Interpreter does render Hades by the shadow of death: as the Greek
Interpreters, in that text (which by the Athanas. ^rat. 4. contra Arian. tom.
1. edit Graecolat. page 291. sermon. in passion. and Cruc. Dom. ibid. page 801.
quaest. ad Antio^h. tom. 2 page 321. Eusebius. lib. 5. Demonstrat. Euangeli^. page
155. and lib. 10. page 313. edit. Graec. Caesarius. Dialog. 3. page 1132. edit.
Basil. See before, page 282.
Fathers is applied to our Saviors descent into Hell) Job. 38.17. do render
the shadow of death by Hades. for where the Hebrew has (...) the gates of the
shadow of death, they ^eade; (...), the keepers of the gates of Hades seeing
thee, shranke for fear. (...). Eusebius. Demonstrat. Euangelic. lib. 10. page 307.
The resurrection from the dead therefore being the end of our Saviors
s^ffering (as Eusebius notes) and so the beginning of his glorifying: the first
degree of his exaltation would thus very aptly answer^ unto the last degree of
his humiliation that as his Resurrection is an arising from the dead, so his
descending unto Hades or ad inferos should be no other thing but a going to the
dead. For further confirmation whereof, let it be considered, that S. Hierome
in the vulgar Latin translation of the Bible, has ad inferos deducentur,
Ecclesia^^is 9.3. where the Hebrew and Greek read, to the dead: and in like
manner, Proverb 2.18. he has ad inferos again, where (...) is in the Hebrew;
which being a word that sometimes signifies the dead, and sometimes Giants, the
LXX. do join both together and read, (...), in Hades ^ith the Giants. So in
the Sibylline verses cyted by Lactant. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 18.
Lactantius, -- (...), that he may speak unto the dead; is in Prosper de
promiss and praedict part. 3. cap. 20.
Prosper translated, Vt inferis l^quatur: and those other ve^ses touching our
Saviors Resurrection Lacta^t ut sup. cap. 19.
(...)
(...).
Then coming forth from the Dead, etc. are thus turned into Latin in Prosper.
Prosp. ut sup. cap. 29.
Tunc ab inferis regressus, ad lucem veniet primus resurrectionis principio
revocatis ostenso. Then returning from Hell, he shall come unto the light first
showing the beginning of the Resurrection unto those who^ he shall call back
from thence. for (...). Basil. Seleuc. in Ionam, orat. 2.
Christ returning back a conqueror from Hades unto life (as Basil of Seleucia
writes) the dead were taught the reviving again unto life. His (...) ( leg
(...). Gregor. Nazianz. in Definitionib. Jambic. 15. tom. ^. edit. Graecolat.
page 201.
rising from the Dead, was the loosing of us from Hades: says Gregory
Nazianzen. Excitatus est ab infe^is, meque mortuum simul excitavit. Nectar.
^rat. in Theodor. martyr. a Perionio convers.
He was raised from Hades or from the dead; and raised me being dead with him:
says Nectarius, his successor in the Sea of Constantinople. Therefore is he
called (...). Tract. de Definitionib tom. 2. Oper. Athanas. Graecolat. page 59.
the first begotten of the dead, because he was the first that rose from Hades;
as we also shall rise at his second coming: says the author of the Treatise
of Definitions, among the works of Athanasius.

To lay down all the places of the Fathers, wherein our Lords rising again
from the Dead, is termed his rising again from Hades, Inferi or Hell, would be
a needless labor: for this we need go no further then to the Canon of the
Mass it self; where in the prayer that follows next after the Consecration,
there being a Commemoration made of Christ's passion, resurrection, and
ascension, the second is set out by the title ab inferis resurrectionis, of the
resurrection from Hell. For as the Liturg. Ia^obi, Marci, Clementis, Basilij,
and Gregorij Theologi.
Liturgies of the Eastern Churches do here make mention (...) of the
resurrection from the dead: so those of the Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap.
6. Offic. Ambrosian. tom. 1. Liturgic. Pamelij. page 302. Sacramentar.
Gregorian. tom. 2. page 181.
West retain that other title of the resurrection ab inferis, that is (...)
(as it is in the Liturgy that goes under the name of S. Peter) or (...), as
it is in the Gregorian Office translated into Greek by Codinus. If then the
resurrection from the dead be the same with the resurrection from Hades, Inferi
or Hell: why may not the going unto Hades, Inferi or Hell, be interpreted, by
the same reason, to be the going unto the dead? whereby no more is understood,
than what is intimated in that phrase which the Latins use of one that has left
this world; Abijt ad plures: or in that of the Hebrews, so frequent in the
word of God; He Genes. 25.8. compared with 15.15. Numb. 20.24. and 27.13. etc.
went or was gathered unto his people, he went or was gathered unto his
fathers. which being applied unto a whole generation, Judge. 2.10. as well as in
other places unto particular persons; must of necessity denote the common
condition of men departed out of this life.

Now, although Death and Hades, dying and going to the dead, be of near
affinity one with the other: yet be they not the same thing properly, but the
one a consequent of the other; as it appears plainly by the vision, Revelat.
6.8. where Hades is directly brought in as a follower of Death. Mortem nihil
aliud esse definiunt sapientes, nisi separationem animae a corpore. Origin.
tractat. 35. in Matthew. cap. 27. Vid. Tertullian. de Anima, cap. 27. and 51. and
August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 13. cap. 6.
Death it self, as wise men do define it, is nothing else but the separation
of the soul from the body; which is done in an instant: but Hades is the
continuation of the body and soul in this state of separation, which lasts
all that space of time which is betwixt the day of death and the day of the
resurrection. For as the state of (...). Gregor. Nyssen. orat. Catechetic. cap.
27.
life is comprehended betwixt two extremes, to wit, the beginning thereof and
the ending; and there be (...). Ibid. cap. 16.
two motions in nature answerable thereunto, the one whereby the soul
concurreth to the body, (which we (...). Ibid.
call Generation) the other whereby the body is severed from the soul (which
we call Death:) so the state of death in like manner is contained betwixt two
bounds, the beginning, which is the very same with the ending of the other; and
the last end, the motion whereunto is called the Resurrection, whereby the body
and soul formerly separated are joined together again. Thus there be three
terms here, as it were in a kind of a continued proportion, the middlemost
whereof has relation to either of the extremes: and by the motion to the first
a man may be said to be natus, to the second denatus, to the third renatus. The
first and the third have a like oppositio^ unto the middle; and therefore are
like betwixt themselves: the one being a generation, the other a regeneration.
For that our Lord does call the last Resurrection the Regeneration, Matthew.
19.28. Regenerationem quippe hoc loco, ambigente nullo, novissimam
resurrectionem vocat. August. contra duas epist. Pelagian. lib. 3. cap. 3.
S. Augustine supposes that no man doubts. Neither would our Lord himself
have been styled Revel. 1.5.
(...) the first borne from the dead; unless the Resurrection were accounted
to be a kind of a new nativitie: whereof he himself was in the first place to
be made partaker, (...). Coloss. 1.18.
that among all or in all things he might have the preeminence; the rest of
Luc. 20.36.
the sons of God being to be children of the Resurrection also, but in their
due time, and in the order of Post-nati.

The middle distance betwixt the first and second term, that is to say, the
space of life which we lead in this world betwixt the time of our birth and the
time of our death; is opposite to the distance that is betwixt the second and
third term, that is to say, the state of death under which man lies from the
time of his departure out of this life unto the time of his resurrection: and
see what difference there is betwixt our birth, and the life which we spend
here after we are borne; the same difference is there betwixt Death and Hades,
in that other state of our dissolution. That which properly we call Death
(which is the parting a sunder of the soul and the body) stands as a middle
term betwixt the state of life and the state of death, being nothing else but
the ending of the one, and the beginning of the other: and as it were a common
meare between lands, or a communis terminus in a Geometrical magnitude,
dividing part from part, but being it self a part of neither, and yet
belonging equally unto either. Which gave occasion to the question moved by
Taurus the philosopher: Quando moriens moreretur; cum jam in morte esset, an
tum etiam cum in vita foret. Taur.
When a dying man might be said to die; when he was now dead, or while he was
yet living? whereunto Gellius returns an answer out of Plato: Plato neque
vitae id tempus, neque morti dedit (vidit quippe utrumque esse pugnans) sed
tempori in confinio. A. Gell. N^ct. Attic. lib. 6. cap. 13.
that his dying was to be attributed neither to the time of his life nor of his
death (because repugnances would arise either of those ways) but to the time
which was in the confine betwixt both; which Plato calls (...). ( al. (...).)
Plat^. in Parmenide, page 67,
(...), a moment or an instant, and denies to be properly any part of time at
all. Therefore Death does his part in an instant (as has been said) but Hades
continues that work of his, and holds the dead as it were under conquest,
until the time of the resurrection; 1. Corinthians. 15.54, 55.
wherein shall be brought to pass the saying that is written. O Death, where
is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy victory? For Haec just dicentur tunc,
quando mortalis haec and corruptibilis caro (circa quam and mors est, quae and
quodam dominio mortis pressa est) in vitam conscendens, induerit incorruptelam
and immortalitate^. Tunc enim vere erit victa mors, quando ea quae continetur
ab ea caro, exierit de dominio ejus. Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 13.
these things shall rightly be spoken then (says Irenaeus) when this mortal
and corruptible flesh (about which Death is, and which is holden down by a
certain dominion of Death) rising up unto life shall put on incorruption and
immortality. for then shall death be truly overcome, when the flesh that is
holden by it, shall come forth out of the Dominion thereof. Death then, as it
imports the separation of the soul from the body (which is the proper
acception of it) is a thing distinguishable from Hades, as an antecedent from
his consequent: but as it is taken for the whole state of death, and the
domination which it has over the dead ((...) Basilius Seleuciensis calls it,
in his oration upon Elias) it is the self same thing that Hades is; and in
that respect (as we have seen) the words are sometimes indifferently put, the
one for the other.

As therefore our Savior (that we may apply this now unto him) after he was
fastened and lifted up on the Cross, if he had come down from thence (as
Matthew. 27.40, 41, 42.
the standers by in mocking wise did wish him to do) might be truly said to
have been crucified, but not to have dyed: so when he gave up the ghost, and
laid down his life, if he had presently taken it up again, he might truly be
said to have dyed, but not to have gone to the dead, or to have been in Hades.
His remaining under the power of Death until the third day, made this good.
Whom God did raise up, loosing the sorrows of death, (...). Act. 2.24.
forasmuch as it was not possible that he should be holden of it: says S.
Peter. and Christ being raised from the dead, dies now no more, (...). Romans
6.9.
Death has no more dominion over him: says S. Paul. implying thereby, that
during the space of time that passed betwixt his death and his resurrection, he
was holden by death, and death had some kind of domination over him. And
therefore Athanasius (or who ever else was author of that writing to Liberius
the Roman Bishop) having reference unto the former text; affirms that (...).
Athanas. Rescript. ad Liberium, tomo 1. page 397.
he raised up that buried body of his, and presented it to his Father, having
freed it from Death, of which it was holden. and Maximus (or he that collected
the Dialogues against the Marcionites, under the name of Origin, out of him)
expounding the other text; (...). Origin. Dialog. 3.
Over whom then had Death dominion? says he. For the saying that it has no
more dominion, shows that before it had dominion over him. Not that Death
could have any dominion over Act. 3.15.
the Lord of Life, further than he himself was pleased to give way unto it:
but as, when Death did at the first sease upon him, Act. 8.33.
his life indeed was taken from the earth, yet Ioh. 10.18.
none could take it from him, but he laid it down of himself; so his
continuing to be Deaths prisoner for a time, was a voluntary commitment only,
unto which he freely yielded himself for our sakes, not any yoke of
miserable necessity that Death was able to impose upon him. For Ibid.
he had power to lay down his life, and he had power to take it again: yet
would he not take it again, before he had first not laid himself down only
upon Deaths bed, but slept also upon it; that arising afterward from thence, he
might become 1. Cor. 15.20.
the first fruits of them that slept. In which respect, the Cyprian testimon.
advers. Iudaeos, lib. 2. sect. 24. Lactant. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 19. Ruffin.
in exposit. Symbol.
Fathers apply unto him that text of the Psalm; I laid me down and slept, I
awaked, for the Lord sustained me. (Psalm. 3.5.) and Lactantius that verse of
Sibyll, (...),
The term of death he shall finish, when he has slept unto the third day.
His dying, or his burying at the farthest, is that which here is answerable
unto his lying down: but his (...) or (...) (as Dionys Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
cap. 2.
Dionysius calls it) his his three-dayes burial, and his continuing for that
time in the state of death, is that which answers unto his sleeping or being
in Hades. And therefore the Fathers of the fourth Council of Toledo, declaring
how in Baptism Et ne forte cuiquam sit dubium hujus simpli mysteriu^
sacramenti; videat in eo mortem and resurrectionem Christi significari. Nam in
aquis mersio, quasi in infernum descensio est; and rursu^ ab aquis emersio,
resurrectio est. Council. Toletan. IIII. cap. 5. ( al. 6.)
the death and resurrection of Christ is signified, do both affirm, that the
dipping in the water is as it were a descension into Hell, and the rising out
of the water again, a resurrection; and add likewise out of Gregory (with
whom many other Dionys ut sup. Cyrill. vel Johan. Hierosolymitan. Cateches. 2.
Mystagogic. Petrus Chrysologus, sermon. 113. Leo I. epist 4. cap. 3. Paschasius
de Spiritu S. lib. 2. cap. 5. Io. Damascen. Orthodox. fid. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Germanus in rer. Ecclesiast. Theoria. Walafrid, Strab. de reb. Ecclesiastic.
cap. 26. Theophylact. in Johan. cap. 3.
Doctors do herein agree) that Nos autem quod tertio mergimus, triduanae
sepulturae sacramenta signamus: ut dum tertio infans ab aquis educitur,
resurrectio triduani temporis exprimatur, Council. Toletan. ex Gregorio, lib. 1.
Registri, epist. 41.
the threefold dipping is used to signify the three-dayes burial. which
differs as much from the simple burial or putting into the earth, as (...)
does from (...), the transportation or leading into captivity from the
detayning in bondage, the committing of one to prison from the holding of him
there, and the sowing of the seed from the remaining of it in ground.

And thus have I unfolded at large the general acceptions of the word Hades
and Inferi, and so the Ecclesiastical use of the word Hell answering
thereunto: which being severally applied to the point of our Saviors descent,
make up these three propositions that by the universal consent of Christians
are acknowledged to be of undoubted verity. His dead body, though free from
corruption, yet did descend into the place of corruption, as other bodies do.
His soul, being separated from his body, departed hence into the other world,
as all other men's souls in that case use to do. He went unto the dead, and
remained for a time in the state of death, as other dead men do. There
remains now the vulgar acception of the word Hell, whereby it is taken for
the place of torment prepared for the Devil and his Angels: and touching this
also, all Christians do agree thus far, that Christ did descend thither at
leastwise in a virtuall manner; as God Descendere dicitur, cum aliquid facit in
terra, quod praeter usitatu^ naturae cursum mirabiliter sactum praesentiam
quodam modo ejus ostendat. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 5.
is said to descend, when he does any thing upon earth, which being wonderfully
done beyond the usual course of nature may in some sort show his presence, or
when he otherwise Descendere dicitur Deus; quando curam humanae fragi litatis
habere dignatur. Aug. sermon. 70. de Tempore.
vouchsafes to have care of human frailty. Thus when Christ's Erat caro ejus
in monumento; sed virtus ejus operabature coelo. Ambros. de Incarnat. cap. 5.
flesh was in the tomb, his power did work from Heaven: says S. Ambrose.
which agrees with that which was before cyted out of the Armenians Confession:
Supr. page 3 22
According to his body which was dead, he descended into the grave; but
according to his DIVINITY, which did live, he overcame Hell in the mean time.
and with that which was cyted out of Philo Carpathius, upon Cantic. 5.2. I
sleep, but my heart waketh: Supr. page 317
in the grave spoiling Hell. for which, in the Latin Collections that go under
his name, we read thus. Ego dormio, in Cruce scilicet, and cor meu^ vigilat:
cum divinitas Tartara spoliavit, and opima spolia retulit de triumpho superatae
mortis aeternae, atque dejectae diabolicae potestatis. Philo Carpath. in
Cantic. 5.
I sleep, to wit on the Cross, and my heart waketh: when my DIVINITY
spoiled Hell, and brought rich spoils from the triumph of everlasting death
overcome, and the Devils power overthrown. The author of the imperfect work
upon Matthew, attributes this to the Divinity, not clothed with any part of
the Humanity, but naked, as he speaks. Seeing the Devils Quem in corpore
constitutum timuerunt, dicentes; Quid nobis and tibi, Jesus fili Dei excelsi?
venisti ante tempus torquere nos? quomodo nudam ipsam divinitatem contra se
descendentem pote^unt sustinere? Ecce post tres dies mortis suae revertetur ab
inferis, quasi victor de bello. Op. imperfect. in Matthew. homil. 35. tom. 2.
Chr^sost^m.
feared him, (says he) while he was in the body, saying; What have we to do
with thee, Jesus the son of the high God? art thou come to torment us before
our time? how shall they be able to endure his NAKED DIVINITY descending
against them? Behold after three days of his death he shall return from Hell,
as a conqueror from the war.

This conquest others do attribute to his Cross, others to his Death, others
to his Burial, others to the real descent of his soul into the place of the
damned, others to his Resurrection: and extend the effect thereof not only to
the deliverie of the Fathers of the old Testament, but also to the freeing of
our souls from Hell. from whence how men may be said to have been delivered,
who never were there, S. Augustine declares by these similitudes. Recte dicis
medico, Liberasti me ab aegritudine; non in qua jam eras, sed in qua futurus
eras. Nescio quis habens caussa^ molestam, mittendus erat in carcerem: venit
alius, defendit eum. gratias agens, quid dicit? Eruisti animam meam de carcere
Suspendendus erat debtor: solutum est pro eo; liberatus dicitur de suspendio
In his omnibus non erant: sed quia talibus meritis agebantur, ut, nisi
subventum esset, ibi essent; inde se recte dicunt liberari, quo per liberatores
suos non sunt permissi perduci. Augustine. in Psalm. 85.
Thou say rightly to the physician, Thou have freed me from this sickness;
not in which thou wast, but in which thou wast like to be. Some body else
having a troublesome business, was to be cast into prison: there comes
another, and defends him. what says he, when he gives thanks? Thou have
delivered me from prison. A debtor was in danger to be hanged: the debt is paid
for him; he is said to be freed from hanging. In all these things they were
not: but because such were their deserts, that unless they had been helped,
there they would have been; they say rightly that they were freed thence,
vvhither by those that freed them they were not suffered to be brought. That
Christ destroyed the power of Hell, Ephesians. 2.15.
spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them: is acknowledged by all Christians. Neither is there any who will
refuse to subscribe unto that which Proclus delivered in his Sermon before
Nestorius then Bishop of Constantinople (inserted into the Acts of the Council
of Ephesus.) (...). Procli C^ziceni episc. homil. de Nativitate Domini, in Act.
Council. ^phes. part. 1. cap. 1. edit. Romans
He was shut up in the grave, who stretched out the heavens like a skin: he
was reckoned among the dead, and spoiled Hell. and that which S. Cyrill and the
Synod of Alexandria, wrote unto the same Nestorius, concerning the Confession
of their faith: (approved not only by the Act. Council. Ephesin. part. 1. cap
26. edit. Romans
third general Council held at Ephesus, but also by the Council. Chalced. Act.
5.
fourth at Chalcedon, and the Quint. Synod. Constantinop. Collat. 6.
fifth at Constantinople.) (...). Synod. Alexandrin epist. ad Nostorium.
To the end that by his unspeakable power treading down death in his own as the
first and principal flesh, he might become the first borne from the dead and
the first fruits of those that slept; and that he might make a way to man's
nature for the turning back again unto incorruption: by the grace of God he
tasted death for all men; and revived the third day, spoiling Hell. All, I say,
do agree, that Christ spoiled or (as they were wont to speak) harrowed Hell:
whether you take Hell for that which keeps the soul separated from the body,
or that which separateth soul and body both from the blessed presence of him
who is our true life; the one whereof our Savior has conquered by bringing in
the Resurrection of the body, the other he has abolished by procuring for us
Life everlasting.

Touching the manner and the means, whereby Hell was thus spoiled, is all the
disagreement. The manner: whether our Lord did deliver his people from Hell by
way of prevention, in saving them from coming thither; or by way of
subvention, in helping those out whom at the time of his death he found there.
The means: whether this were done by his Divinity or his Humanity or both,
whether by the virtue of his sufferings, death, burial and resurrection, or by
the real descending of his soul into the place wherein men's souls were kept
imprisoned. That he descended not into the Hell of the damned by the essence
of his soul or locally, but virtually only by extending the effect of his
power thither: is the common doctrine of Thom. in Sum. part. 3. quaest 62. art.
2.
Thomas Aquinas and the rest of the School. Cardinal Bellarmine at first held
it to be Bellarm lib. 4. ^e Ch^isto, cap. 16.
probable, that Christ's soul did descend thither, not only by his effects, but
by his real presence also: but afterward Re melius conside^ata, sequendam
esse existimo sententia^ S. Thoma^, quae estaliorum Scholastico^um in 3. Sent
did. 22. Id. in Recognitione Op^rum.
having considered better of the matter, he resolved that the opinion of Thomas
and the other Schoolmen was to be followed. The same is the judgment of
Suarez. tom. 2. in ^. part. Thom. disput. 43. sect. 4.
Suarez: who concerning this whole article of Christ's descent into Hell, does
thus deliver his mind. Si nomine articuli intelligamus veritatem, quam omnes
fideles explicit scire ac c^edere teneantur: sic non existimo necessarium hunc
computare inter articulos fidei. Quia non est res ad modum necessaria singulis
hominibus: and quia ob hanc fortasse caussamin symbolo Niceno omittitur cujus
symboli cognitio videtur esse sufficiens ad praeceptum fidei implendum. Denique
proptero^ forte Aug. and alij Patres in principio citati exponentes symbolum,
non explicant populo hoc mysterium. Id. ibid. sect. 2.
If by an Article of faith we understand a truth, which all the faithful are
bound explicitly to know and believe: so I do not think it necessary to
reckon this among the Articles of faith. Because it is not a matter altogether
so necessary for all men: and because that for this reason peradventure it is
omitted in the Nicene Creed; the knowledge of which Creed seems to be
sufficient for fulfilling the precept of faith. Lastly for this cause
peradventure Augustine and other of the Fathers expounding the Creed, do not
unfold this mystery unto the people. And to speak the truth, it is a matter
above the reach of the common people to enter into the discussion of the full
meaning of this point of the descension into Hell: the determination whereof
depends upon the knowledge of the learned tongues and other sciences that
come not within the compass of their understanding. some experiment whereof
they may find in this; that whereas in the other questions here handled, they
might find themselves able in some reasonable forre to follow me; here they
leave me, I doubt, and let me walk without their company.

It having here likewise been further manifested, what different opinions have
been entertained by the ancient Doctors of the Church concerning the
determinate place wherein our Saviors soul did remain during the time of the
separation of it from his body: I leave it to be considered by the learned,
whether any such controverted matter may fitly be brought in to expound the
Regulam fidei pusillis magnisque communem in Ecclesia perseveranter tenent.
August. epist. 57. ad Dardaenum.
Rule of faith by, which being common both to the great and the small ones in
the Church, must contayn such verities only as are generally agreed upon by the
common consent of all true Christians. and if the words of the article of
Christ's going to Hades or Hell, may well bear such a general meaning as this;
that he went to the dead, and continued in the state of death until the time
of his Resurrection: it would be thought upon, whether such a truth as this,
which finds universal acceptance among all Christians may not safely pass
for an article of our Creed; and the particular limitation of the place unto
which our Saviors soul went (whither to the place of bliss, or to the place
of torment, or to both) be left, as a number of other Theological points are,
unto further disputation. In the articles of our faith common agreement must
be required: which we are sure is more likely to be found in the general,
than in the particular. And this is the only reason which moved me to enlarge
my self so much in the declaration of the general acceptions of the word
Hades, and the application of them to our Saviors descent spoken of in the
Creed. wherein if the zeal which I bear to the peace of the Church, and the
settlement of unity among brethren has carried me too far, (as it has made
me indeed quite to forget my intended brevity) I entreat the Reader to pardon
me; and ceasing to be further troublesome unto him in the prosecution of this
intricate argument, I pass to the next question

OF PRAYER TO SAINTS.
THat one question of S. Paul, Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him, in
whom they have not believed? among such as lust not to be contentious, will
quickly put an end unto this question. For if none can be invocated but such as
must be believed in; and none must be believed in but God alone: every one may
easily discern, what conclusion will follow thereupon. Again, all Christians
have been taught, that no part of divine worship is to be communicated unto
any creature. for Matthew. 4.10.
it is written: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. But prayer is such a principal part of this service, that it is Ierem.
10.25^ Joel. 2.32. Act 9.14. 1. Corinthians. 1.2. Sic apud Optatum, lib 3. contr.
Donatist. Vt negaretur Christus and Idola rogarentur. Item: Testamentum divinum
legimus pariter; unum Deum rogamus.
usually put for the whole: and the public place of Gods worship, has from
hence given it the denomination of Esai. 56.7. Matthew. 21.13.
the house of prayer. Furthermore, he that hears our prayers, must be able
to search the secrets of our hearts; and discern the inward disposition of our
souls. For the pouring out of good words, and the offering up of external
sighs and tears, are but the carkase only of a true prayer: the life thereof
consists in the Psalm. 62.8. 1. Sam. 1.13, 15.
pouring out of the very soul it self, and the sending up of those secret Rom
8.26.
groans of the spirit which cannot be uttered. But Romans 8.27.
he that searches the hearts, and only he, knows what is the mind of the
spirit: he 1. Kings. 8.39. 2. Chron. 6.30.
hears in heaven his dwelling place, and gives to every man according to his
ways, whose heart he knows. for he even he ONLY knows the hearts of all
the children of men: as Solomon teaches us in the prayer which he made at the
dedication of the Temple. whereunto we may add that golden sentence of his
father David for a conclusion: Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

If it be further here ob^ected by us; that we find neither precept nor
example of any of the Fathers of the old Testament, whereby this kind of
p^aying to the souls of the Saints departed may be warranted: Cardinal
Bellarmine will give us a reason for it. Nam id circo ante Christi adventum non
ita colebantur, neque invocabantur spiritus Patriarcharu^ et Prophetaru^,
quemadmodu^ nunc Apostolos and Martyrs colimus and invocamus: quod illi adhuc
inferni carceribus clausi detinebantur. Bellarmin. fin. Praefat. in Controvers.
de Ecclesia triumphante, in Ord. disputat.
for therefore (says he) the spirits of the Patriarchs and the Prophets
before the coming of Christ were neither so worshipped nor invocated, as we
do now worship and invocate the Apostles and Martyrs: because that they were
detayned as yet shut up in the prisons of Hell. But if this reason of his be
grounded upon a false foundation (as we have already showed it to be) and the
contrary supposition be most true; that the spirits of the Patriarchs and
Prophets were not thus shut up in the prisons of Hell: then have we four
thousand years prescription left unto us, to oppose against this innovation.
We go further yet, and urge against them, that in the New Testament it self we
can descry no footsteps of this new kind of Invocation, more then we did in
the Scriptures of the old Testament. For this, Salmeron does tell us, that Quia
Scripturas conditas and publicatas in primitiva Ecclesia oportebat Christu^
fundare, and explicare, qui per tacitam suggestionem Spiritus Sanctos secum
adducebat: and durum esset id Iudaeis praecipere; and occasio daretur Gentibus
put^ndi sibi exhibitos multos Deos pro multitudine Deorum quos relinquebant.
Alphons. Salmer. in 1. Timoth. 2. disput. 8.
the Scriptures which were made and published in the primitive Church ought to
found and explain Christ, who by the tacit suggestion of the Spirit did bring
the Saints with him: and that it would have been a hard matter to enjoyne this
to the Jews; and to the Gentiles an occasion would be given thereby to think,
that many Gods were put upon them in steed of the multitude of the Gods whom
they had forsaken. So this new worship, you see, fetches his original neither
from the Scriptures of the Old nor of the New Testament: but from I know not
what tacit suggestion, which smelt so strongly of Idolatry, that at first it
was not safe to acquaint either the Jews or the Gentiles therewith. But if any
such sweet tradition as this were at first delivered unto the Church by Christ
and his Apostles: we demand further, how it should come to pass, that for the
space of 360. years together after the birth of our Savior, we can find
mention no where of any such thing? For howsoever our Challenger gives it out,
that prayer to Saints was of great account, amongst the Fathers of the
primitive Church, for the first 400. years after Christ: yet for nine parts of
that time, I dare be bold to say, that he is not able to produce as much as one
true testimony out of any Father, whereby it may appear, that any account at
all was made of it; and for the tithe too, he shall find perhaps before we
have done, that he is not like to carry it away so clearly as he weeneth.

Whether those blessed spirits pray for us, is not the question here: but
whether we are to pray unto them. That God only is to be prayed unto, is the
doctrine that was once delivered unto the Saints, for which we so earnestly
contend: the Saints praying for us does no way cross this (for to whom should
the Saints pray, but to the Revel. 15.3.
King of Saints?) their being prayed unto, is the only stumbling block that
lies in this way. And therefore in those first times, the former of these was
admitted by some, as a matter of probability: but the latter no way yielded
unto, as being derogatorie to the privilege of the Deity. Origin may be a
witness of both: who touching the former writes in this sort. Ego sic
arbitror, quod omnes illi qui dormierunt ante nos patres, pugnent nobiscum and
adjuvent nos orationibus suis Ita namque etia^ quendam de senioribus magistris
audivi dicente^. Origin. in Iosue. homil. 16.
I do think thus, that all those fathers who are departed this life before
us, do fight with us and assist us with their prayers: for so have I heard one
of the elder Masters saying. and in another place. Iam vero si etiam extra
corpus positi sancti, qui cum Christo sunt, agunt aliquid, and laborant pro
nobis ad similitudinem angelorum qui salutis nostrae ministeria procurant. etc.
habeatur hoc quoque inter occulta Dei, nec chartis committenda mysteria. Id.
lib. 2. in epist. ad Roman. cap. 2.
Moreover if the Saints, that have left the body and be with Christ, do any
thing and labor for us, in like manner as the Angels do who are employed in
the ministry of our salvation: let this also remain among the hidden things
of God, and the mysteries that are not to be committed unto writing. But
because he thought that the Angels and Saints prayed for us: did he therefore
hold it needful, that we should direct our prayers unto them? Hear, I pray
you, his own answer; in his eighth book against Celsus the philosopher.
(...). Origin. lib. 8. contra Cells page 432.433.
We must endeavor to please God alone, who is above all things, and labor to
have him propitious unto us, procuring his good will with godliness and all
kind of virtue. And if Celsus will yet have us to procure the good will of any
others, after him that is God over all: let him consider, that as when the body
is moved, the motion of the shadow thereof does follow it; so in like manner,
having God favorable unto us who is over all, it follows that we shall have
all his friends, both Angels and souls and spirits, loving unto us. For they
have a fellow-feeling with them that are thought worthy to find favor from
God. Neither are they only favorable unto such as be thus worthy, but they
work with them also that are willing to do service unto him who is God over
all, and are friendly to them, and pray with them, and entreat with them. So
as we may be bold to say, that when men which with resolution propose unto
them selves the best things do pray unto God, many thousands of the sacred
powers pray together with them UNSPOKEN to.

Celsus had said of the Angels: (...) Celsus, ibid. page 406.
that they belong to God, and in that respect we are to put our trust in them,
and make oblations to them according to the laws, and pray unto them, that
they may be favorable to us. To this Origin answers in this manner. (...).
Origin ibid.
Away with Celsus his counsel, saying that we must pray to Angels: and let us
not so much as afford any little audience to it. For we must pray to him alone
who is God over all: and we must pray to the Word of God his only begotten
and the first borne of all creatures; and we must entreat him, that he as high
Priest would present our prayer (when it is come to him) unto his God, and our
God, and unto his Father and the father of them that frame their life according
to the word of God. And whereas Celsus had further said that we (...), Celsus,
ibid. page 411.
must offer first fruits unto Angels, and prayers, as long as we live; that we
may find them propitious unto us: answer is returned by Origin in the name of
the Christians; that they held it rather fit to offer first fruits unto him
which said; Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the
fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind. (...). Origin. ibid. page 411.412.
And to whom we give the first fruits, (says he) to him also do we send
our prayers; having a great high Priest that is entered into the Heavens, Jesus
the Son of God: and we hold fast this confession whiles we live, having God
favorable unto us, and his only begotten Son Jesus being manifested amongst
us. But if we have a desire unto a multitude, whom we would willingly have to
be favorable unto us: we learn that thousand thousands stand by him, and
millions of millions minister unto him. who beholding them that imitate their
piety toward God, as if they were their kinsfolks and friends; help forward
their salvation who call upon God, and pray sincerely: appearing also, and
thinking that they ought to do service to them; and as it were upon one
watchword to set forth for the ^enefit and salvation of them that pray to God,
unto whom they themselves also pray. For they are all ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation. Thus far
Origin, in his eight book against Celsus: to which for a conclusion we will
add that place of the fifth book. (...). etc. (...) (fort. (...). Jd. lib. 5.
page 239.
All prayers and supplications and intercessions and thankesgivings, are to be
sent up unto God the Lord of all, by the high Priest who is above all Angels,
being the living Word and God. For to call upon Angels, we not comprehending
the knowledge of them which is above the reach of man, is not agreeable to
reason. And if by supposition it were granted, that the knowledge of them
(which is wonderful, and secret) might be comprehended: this very knowledge,
declaring their nature unto us and the charge over which every one of them is
set, would not permit us to presume to pray unto any other but unto God the
Lord over all, who is abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior the Son
of God.

Tertullian and Cyprian in the books which they purposely wrote concerning
Prayer, deliver no other doctrine: but teach us to regulate all our prayers
according unto that perfect pattern prescribed by our great Master; wherein we
are required to direct our petitions unto Our Father which is in heaven.
(Matthew. 6.9. Luke 11.2) Haec ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo me scio
consecuturum: quoniam and ipse est qui solus praestat, and ego sum cui
impetrare debetur; famulus ejus qui eum solum observo, qui propter disciplinam
ejus occidor, qui ei offero opimam and majorem hostiam, quam ipse mandavit,
orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto profectam.
Tertullian. Apologetic. cap. 30.
These things (says Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians of his time)
I may not pray for from any other, but from him of whom I know I shall obtain
them: because both it is he who is alone able to give, and I am he unto whom it
appertains to obtain that which is requested, being (...) servant who
observe him alone, who for his religion am killed, who offer unto him a rich
and great sacrifice, which he himself has commanded, Prayer proceeding from a
chaste body, from an innocent soul, from a holy spirit. where he accounts
Prayer to be the chief sacrifice, wherewith God is worshipped: agreeably to
that which Clemens Alexandrinus wrote at the same time. (...). Clem. Alexandr.
lib. 7. Stromat.
We do not without cause honor God by prayer; and with righteousness send up
this best and holiest sacrifice. The direction given by Ignatius unto Virgins
in this case, is short and sweet: (...). Ignat. epist. 6. ad Philadelph.
Ye Virgins, have Christ alone before your eyes and his Father in your
prayers, being enlightened by the Spirit. for explication whereof that may be
taken, which we read in the exposition of the Faith, attributed unto S.
Gregory of Neocaesarea. Qui recte invocat Deum, per Filium invocat: and qui
proprie accedit, per Christu^ accedit. Accedere autem ad Filium non potest sine
Spiritu Sancto. Gregor. Neocaesar. (...). a Fr. Turriano convers.
Whosoever rightly prays unto God, prays by the Son; and whosoever
comes as he ought to do, comes by Christ: and to the Son he can not
come, without the holy Ghost.

Neither is it to be passed over, that one of the special arguments whereby
the writers of this time do prove our Savior Christ to be truly God, is
taken from our praying unto him and his accepting of our petitions. Si homo
tantummodo Christus; quomodo adest ubique invocatus, cum haec hominis naturae
non sit, sed Dei, ut adesse omni loco possit? Si homo tantummodo Christus; cur
homo in orationibu^ mediator invocatur, cum invocatio hominis ad praestandam
salutem inefficax judicetur? Si homo tantummodo Christus; cur spes in illum
ponitur, cum spes in homine maledicta referatur? Novatian. de Trinitat. cap. 14.
If Christ be only man, (says Novatianus) how is he present being called upon
every where; seeing this is not the nature of man, but of God, that he can be
present at every place? If Christ be only man: why is a man called upon in our
prayers as a mediator; seeing the invocation of a man is judged of no force to
yield salvation? If Christ be only man: why is there hope reposed in him;
seeing hope in man (...) said to be cursed? So is it noted by Origin, that S.
Paul Sed and in principio epistolae quam ad Corinthios scribit, ubi dicit; Cum
omnibus qui invocan^ nomen Domini Jesus Christi in omni loco, ipsorum and
nostro: eum, cujus nomen invocatur, Deum, Iesum Christum esse pronuntiat. Si
ergo and Enos and Moses and Aaron and Samuel invocabant Dominum, and ipse
exandiebat eos, sine dubio Christum Iesum Dominum invocabant: and si invocare
Domini nomen, and adorare Deu^, unum atque idem est, sicut invocatur Christus
and adorandus est Christus: and sicut offerimus Deo Patri primo omniu^
orationes, ita and Domino Jesus Christo: and sicut offerimus postulationes
Patri, ita offerimus postulationes and Filio: and sicut offerimus gratiarum
actiones Deo, ita gratias offerimus Salvatori. Origin. lib. 8. in epist. ad
Roman. cap. 10.
in the beginning of the former epistle to the Corinthians, where he says,
With all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours; (1. Corinthians. 1.2.) does thereby pronounce Jesus Christ, whose
Name is called upon, to be God. And if to call upon the Name of the Lord,
(says he) and to adore God, be one and the self same thing: as Christ is
called upon, so is he to be adored; and as we do offer to God the Father first
of all prayers, (1. Tim. 2.1.) so must we also to the Lord Jesus Christ; and ^s
we do offer supplications to the Father, so do we offer supplications also
to the Son; and as we do offer thankesgivings to God, so do we offer
thankesgivings to our Savior. In like manner Athanasius, disputing against the
Arrians, by that prayer which the Apostle makes, 1. Thessal. 3.11. God
himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you;
does prove the unity of the Father and the Son. (...). Athanas. orat. 4.
contra Arian. page 259.
For no man (says he) would pray to receive any thing from the Father and the
Angels, or from any of the other creatures: neither would any man say; God and
the Angel give thee this. And whereas it might be objected, that Jacob in the
blessing that he gave unto Ephraim and Manasseh (Genes. 48.15, 16.) did use
this form of prayer: The God which fed me from my youth unto this day; The
Angel which delivered me from all evils, bless those children. (which
Cardinal Bellarm. de Eccles. triumph. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Bellarmine places in the forefront of the forces he brings forth to
establish the Invocation of Saints.) Athanasius answers, that (...). Athanas.
ut supr. page 260.
he did not couple one of the created and natural Angels with God that did
create them; nor omitting God that fed him, did desire a blessing for his
nephews from an Angel: but saying, Which delivered me from all evils, he did
show that it was not any of the created Angels, but the WORD of God (that is to
say, the Son) whom he coupled with the Father and prayed unto. and for
further confirmation hereof he alleges (among other things) that neither
(...) etc. (...). Id. ibid.
Jacob, nor David did pray unto any other but God himself, for their
deliverance.

The place wherein we first find the spirits of the deceased to be called
unto, rather then called upon; is that in the beginning of the former of the
Invectives which Gregory Nazianzen wrote against the Emperor Julian, about the
CCCLXIV. year of our Lord. (...). Hear o thou soul of great Constantius (if
thou have any understanding of these things) and as many souls of the Kings
before him as loved Christ. where the Schol. Graec. in priorem Nazianzeni
Jnvectivam, page 2. edit. Rtonens.
Greek Scholiast upon that parenthesis puts this note. (...). He speaks
according to the manner of Isocrates; meaning, If thou have any power to hear
the things that are here, and therein he says rightly: for Isocrates uses
the same form of speech, both in his Euagoras and in his Aegineticus. (...)
(or (...). If they which be dead have any sense of the things that are done
here. The like limitation is used by the same Nazianzen toward the end of the
funeral oration which he made upon his sister Gorgonia: where he speaks thus
unto her. (...). Greg. Nazianz. orat. 11. in Gorg^n.
If thou have any care of the things done by us, and holy souls receive this
honor from God, that they have any feeling of such things as these; receive
this Oration of ours, in stead of many and before many funeral obsequies. So
doubtful the beginnings were of that, which our Challenger is pleased to
reckon among the chief articles not of his own religion only but also of the
Saints and Fathers of the primitive Church, who (if his word may be taken for
the matter) did generally hold the same touching this point that the Church of
Rome does now. But if he had either himself read the writings of those Saints
and Fathers with whose minds he bears us in hand he is so well acquainted;
or but taken so much information in this case, as the books of his own new
Masters were able to afford him: he would not so peremptorily have avouched,
that prayer to Saints was generally embraced by the Doctors of the primitive
Church as one of the chief articles of their Religion.

His own Bellarmine (he might remember) in handling this very question of the
Invocation of Saints, had wished him to Notandum est quia ante Christi adventum
Sancti, qui moriebantur, non intrabant in coelum, nec Deum videba^t, nec
cognoscere poterant ordinary preces supplicantiu^: ideo non fuisse consuerum
in Testamento veteri, ut diceretur; Sancte Abraham, ora pro me, etc Bellarmin
de Sanct. Beatit. lib. 1. cap. 19.
note, that because the Saints which died before the coming of Christ did not
enter into heaven, neither did see God, nor could ordinarily take knowledge of
the prayers of such as should petition unto them; therefore it was not the use
in the old Testament to say, Saint Abraham pray for me, etc. For at that time,
says Suarez, Quod aute^ aliquis direct oraverit Sanctos defunctos, ut se
adjuvarent, vel prose orarent, nusquam legimus. Hic enim modus orandi est
proprius legis gratiae, in quo Sancti videntes Deum, possunt etiam in eo videre
orationes, quae ad ipsos funduntur. Fr Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. tom. 2. disput
42. sect. 1.
we read no where, that any man did directly pray unto the Saints departed,
that they should help him, or pray for him; for this manner of praying is
proper to the law of Grace, wherein the Saints beholding God, are able also to
see in him the prayers that are powered out unto them. So does Salmeron also
teach, Dicendum est, ideo non fuisse morem in Veteri Testamento adeundi Sanctos
intercessores, quia nondum erant beati and glorificati, ut modo sunt: ideo non
debebatur eis tantus honos, quantus est iste. Alphons. Salmer. in 1. Timoth. 2.
disput. 8.
that therefore it was not the manner in the old Testament to resort unto the
Saints as intercessors; because they were not as yet blessed and glorified, as
now they be: and therefore so great an honor as this is, was not due unto
them. And Ant^a frustra fuissent implorata ipso^um suffragia, utpote nondum
conjunctorum cum Deo in gloria, sed ad reconciliationem usque and regni
apertionem per sanguinem redemptoris Christi, loco quodam ordinato a Deo adhuc
expectantium: and propterea non percipientium orationes and vota viventium, ut
quae, non propria rationis ad nos usque pertingentis efficacia, sed in verbi
divini speculo (quod intue^i ipsis nondum datu^ erat) beati intuentur and
audiunt. At post persolutum redemptionis nostrae pretium, sancti jam regnantes
cum Christo in coelesti gloria, etia^ nostras preces votaque exaudiunt: ut quae
universa, in verbo, clarissime intuentur, velut quodam speculo. Albert. Pigh.
Controvers. 13.
in vain, says Pighius, should their suffrages have been implored, as being
not yet joined with God in glory, but until the reconciliation and the opening
of the kingdom by the blood of Christ the redeemer, waiting as yet in a
certain place appointed by God; and therefore not understanding the prayers
and desires of the living. which the blessed do behold and hear, not by the
efficacy of any proper reason reaching from them unto us, but in the glass of
the divine Word; which it was not as yet granted unto them to behold. But after
the price of our redemption was paid, the Saints now reigning with Christ in
heavenly glory, do hear our prayers and desires: forasmuch as they behold them
all most clearly in the Word, as in a certain glass.

Now, that diverse of the chief Doctors of the Church were of opinion, that
the Saints in the New Testament are in the same place and state that the Saints
of the Old Testament were in, and that before the day of the last judgment
they are not admitted into Heaven and the clear s^ght of God (wherein this
metaphysicall speculation of the Saints seeing of our prayers is founded:) has
been See above, from page 215. to 225. item page 259.260.265.266.270.343.344.
etc.
before declared out of their own writings. where that speech of S. Augustine;
Augustine. in Psalm. 36. conc. 1.
Nondum ibi eris: quis nescit? (Thou shall not as yet be there: who knows it
not?) shows that the opinion was somewhat general, and apprehended generally
too as more then an opinion. By the Romanists own grounds then, the more
generally this point was held by the ancient Fathers, and the more resolvedly:
the less generally of force, and the more doubtfully must the Popish doctrine
of praying to Saints have been intertayned by them. And if our Challenger
desire to be informed of this doubt that was among the ancient Divines
(touching the estate of the Saints now in the time of the New Testament) by the
report of the Doctors of his own religion, rather than by our allegations: let
him hear from Franciscus Pegna, what they have found herein. Olim controversum
fuit, number animae S^nctoru^ usque ad diem judicij De^m viderent, and divina
visione frueren^ur: cum multi insignes viri and doctrina and sanctitate clari
tenere viderentur, eas nec videre nec frui usque ad diem judicij, donec
receptis corporibus una cum illis divina beatitudine perfruantur. nam Irenaeus,
Justinius martyr, Tertullianus, Clemens Romanus, Origenes, Ambrosius,
Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prud^ntius, Theodoretus,
Aretas, Oecumenius, Theophylactus, and Euthymius hujus referuntur fuisse
sententiae: ut commemorant, Castrus, and Medina, and Sotus. ^r. Pegna, in ^art.
2 D^re^io^ Inquisitor comment 21.
It was a matter in controversy (says he) of old, whether the souls of the
Saints before the day of judgment did see God, and enjoy the divine vision:
seeing many worthy men and famous both for lea^ning and holiness did seem to
hold, that they do not see nor enjoy it before the day of judgment, until
receiving their bodies together with them they should enjoy divine
blessedness. For Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Origin,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, Theodoret,
Aretas, Oecumenius, Theophylact, and Euthymius are said to have been of this
opinion: as Castrus and Medina and Sotus dorelate. To whom we may adjoyne one
more of no less credit among our Romanists then any of the others: even Thomas
Stapleton himself, who takes it for granted, that Tot illi and tam celebres
antiqui patres, Tertu^lianus, Irenaeus, Origenes, Chrysostomus, Theodoretus,
Oecumenius, Theophylactus, Ambrosius, Clemens Romanus, D Bernardus, huic
sententiae (quae nunc in Concilio Florentino magna demum conquisitione facta ut
dogma fidei definita est) quod justorum animae ante diem judicij Dei visione
fruuntur, non sunt assensi; sed sententiam contrariam tradiderunt. S^ap^eton.
Desens. Ecclesiastic. authorit. cont^a Whitake^. lib. 1. cap. 2.
these so many famous ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, Ambrose, Cl^mens Romanus, sss
and Bernard, did not assent unto this sentence (which now, says he, in the
Council of Florence was at length after much disputing defined as a doctrine
of faith) that the souls of the righteous enjoy the sight of God before the
day of judgment; but did deliver the contrary sentence thereunto.

We would entreat our Challenger then, to spell these things and put them
together: and afterward to tell us, whether such a conclusion as this may not
be deduced from thence. Such as held that the Saints were not yet admitmitted
to the sight of God; could not well hold that men should pray unto them, in
such manner as the Romanists use now to do. because the Saints not enjoying the
sight of God, are not able ordinarily to take notice of the prayers that are
put up unto them.

But many and very famous Doctors too among the ancient, did hold, that the
Saints are not yet admitted to the sight of God.

Therefore many and very famous Doctors among the ancient, could not well
hold, that men should pray unto the Saints in such manner as the Romanists use
now to do.

The first proposition is given unto us by Bellarmine and his fellow Jesuits;
the second by Stapleton and other Doctors of the Romish Church: yet all of them
with equal boldness agree in denying the Conclusion. Certa est and manifesta
Conciliorum definitio, perpetuo ab Apostolorum temporibus usu, and omnium
Graecorum and Latinorum patru^ authoritate firmata; Sanctos esse orandos et
invocandos. Jo. Azor. Insti^ut. Moral. tom. 1. lib. 9. cap. 10.
It is the certain and manifest definition of the Counsels (says a Jesuit)
confirmed by perpetual use from the times of the Apostles, and by the
authority of ALL the Greek and Latin Fathers; that Saints are to be prayed
unto and invocated. Omnes Patres Graeci and Latini docent, Sanctos esse
invocandos. Bellarmin. de Eccles. triumph. lib. 1. cap. 6.
ALL the Fathers Greek and Latin teach this: says Bellarmine. Patres universi,
tam Graeci quam Latini, perpetuo Sanctos interpellarunt Alphons Salmer. tit 1.
Timoth. 2. d^sput. 7.
ALL the Fathers, as well Greek as Latin, perpetually have called upon the
Saints: says Salmeron. and Stapleton, Forness. part. 1. chap. 9.
this is clear by ALL the writers of the first six hundred years: quoth
Stapleton. for these kind of men have so enured their tongues to talk of all
fathers and all writers; that they can hardly use any other form of speech:
having told such tales as these so often over, that at last they persuade
themselves that they be very true indeed.

The memory of the Martyrs indeed was from the very beginning had in great
reverence: and at their Memorialls and Martyria, that is to say, at the places
wherein their bodies were laid (which were the Churches whereunto the
Christians did in those times usually resort) prayers were ordinarily offered
up unto that God for whose cause they laid down their lives. Where, the Lord
being pleased to give a gracious answer to such prayers, and to do many
wonderful things for the honoring of that Christian profession which those
worthy champions maintained unto the death men began afterward to conceive,
that it was at their suite and mediation that these things were granted and
effected. Which was the rather believed, by reason that the Martyrs themselves
were thought to have appeared unto diverse that were thus releeved, both at the
places of their memorialls and other where. Notwithstanding, in what sort these
things were brought about, S. Augustine professes that it did pass the
strength of his understanding to define. Vtrum ipsi per seipsos assint uno
tempore tam diversis locis, and tanta inter se longinquitate discretis, etc.
Augustine. de Cura pro mortuis, cap. 16.
whether the Martyrs themselves were in their own persons present at one time
in such diverse places, so far distant one from another: or whether they
remaining in a certain place removed from all commerce with the affairs of
men here, Et tamen generaliter orantibus pro indigentia supplicantium. ibid.
but praying in general for the necessities of suppliants; God by the
ministry of Angels did effect these things when, where, and in what manner he
pleased, but maximeque per eorum memorias; quoniam hoc novit expedire nobis ad
aedificandam f^dem Christi, pro cujus illi confessione sunt passi. I^si^.
especially at the Memorialls of the martyrs, because he knew that to be
expedient to us for the building of the faith of Christ, for whose confession
they did suffer. Res haec altior est, quam ut a me possit a^ting^, and
abstrusior quam ut a me valeat perscrutari: and ideo quid ho^u^ duoru^ sit, an
vero fortassis utrumque sit, ut aliquando ista fiant per ipsam praesentia^
martyrum, aliquando per Angelos suscipientes personam martyru^, definere non
audeo. Ibid.
This matter is higher (faith he) than that it may be touched by me, and more
abstruse than that it can be searched into by me: and therefore whether of
these two it be, or whether peradventure both of them be; that these things may
sometimes be done by the very presence of the Martyrs, sometimes by Angels
taking upon them the person of the Martyrs, I dare not define.

The first of these opinions pleases S. Hierome best: who alleges for proof
thereof that place in the Revelation; Revel. 14.4.
These follow the Lamb, whethersoever he goes. whereupon he infers a
conclusion, which has need of a very favorable interpretation. Si agnus
ubique: ergo and hi, qui cum agno sunt, ubique esse credendi sunt. Hieronym.
advers. Vigilant.
If the Lamb be every where: therefore they also that are with the Lamb, must
be believed to be every where. From whom Maximus Taurinensis seems not much
to differ, where he says: Licet universi Sancti ubique sint, and omnibus
prosi^t: specialiter illi tamen pro nobis interveniunt, qui and supplicia
pertulere pro nobis. Maxim. homil. in Natali Taurinorum martyrum.
Although all the Saints be every where, and profit all men: yet they specially
do labor for us, who have also suffered punishments for us. So one Eustratius
a priest of Constantinople made a collection of diverse testimonies both out of
the Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers; to prove, (...). Eustrat. in
Photij Bibliotheca, cod. 171.
that the souls which oftentimes and in different manners appear unto many,
do themselves appear according to their proper existence; and it is not the
divine power, assuming the shape of the holy souls, that shows forth these
operations. And so strongly did this opinion prevayle, when superstition had
once gotten head; that at length this Canon was discharged against those that
should hold otherwise. (...). Canon. Synodi a Michaele Syncello citat. in
Ignatij Patriarch. C.P. Encomio.
If any man say, that the Saints themselves do not appear, but their Angels
only; let him be anathema. The author of the Questions to Antiochus, commonly
attributed unto Athanasius, thus determines the matter on the contrary side.
(...). Athanas. quaest 26. ad Antioch.
Those adumbrations and visions which appear at the chapels and tombs of the
Saints, are not made by the souls of the Saints; but by holy Angels
transformed into the shape of the Saints. For how otherwise (tell me) can the
soul of S. Peter or S. Paul, being but one, appear at the same instant being
commemorated in a thousand Churches of his throughout the whole world? For this
can neither one Angel do at any time: it being proper unto God alone, to be
found at the same instant in two places and in the whole world. And Anastasius
Sinaita or Nicanus, in the self same manner. (...). Anastas. Sinait. Quaest. 89.
It is fit we should know, that all the visions which appear at the chapels
or tombs of the Saints, are performed by holy Angels, by the permission of
God. For how else should it be possible, that the resurrection of the bodies
being not yet made, but the bodies and the flesh of the Saints being as yet
dispersed; that these should be seen in shape complete men, and oftentimes
appear upon horses armed? And if thou think that thou may contradict
these things: tell me, how can Paul or Peter, or any other Apostle or Martyr,
being but one, appear oftentimes at the same hour in many places? For neither
is an Angel able to be at the same instant in diverse places; but God only who
is uncircumscriptible. Whereunto we may further add those judicious
observations of S. Augustine touching this matter.

Si ergo me potest aliquis in somnis videre, sibi aliquid quod factum est
indica^tem, vel etiam quod futurum est praenu^ciantem; cum id ego prorsus
ignore^, and omnino non curem, non solum quid ille somniet, sed utrum dormie^te
me vigilet, an vigilante me dormiat, an uno eodemque tempore vigilemus ambo
sive dormiamus, quando ille som^ium videt and in quo me videt: quid mirum si
nescientes mortui, nec ista sentientes, tamen a viventibus videntur in somnijs,
and aliquid dicunt, quod evigilantes verum esse cognoscant? August de cura pro
mortuis, cap. 10.
If one in his sleep may see me, telling unto him something that is done, or
foretelling also something that is to come; when I am altogether ignorant
thereof, and have no care at all, not only of what he dreameth, but whether he
awaketh I being a sleep, or he sleeps I being awake, or whether both of us
at one and the some time do either wake or sleep, when he sees the dream in
which he sees me: what marvel is it if the dead, not knowing nor perceiving
these things, are yet seen in dreams by the living, and say somewhat which
they being awake may know to be true? Sic autem infirmitas humana sese habet,
ut cum mortuum in somnis quisque viderit, ipsius animam se videre arbitretur;
cum aute^ vivum similiter somnia verit, non ejus animam, neque corpus, sed
hominis similitudinem sibi apparuisse non dubitet: quasi non possint and
mortuorum hominum, eodem modo nescientium, non animae sed similitudines
apparere dormientibus. Ibid. cap. 11.
But such is man's weak^esse, that when any one sees a dead man in his sleep,
he thinks that he does see his soul; but when he dreameth in like manner of
one that is alive, he makes no doubt, that it is neither his soul nor his
body, but a similitude of the man that did appear unto him: as if not the
soul^s but the similitudes of dead men, not knowing it, might not also after
the same sort appear. So he tells of one Eulogius a rhetorician in Carthage,
who lighting upon a certain obscure place in Ciceroes Rhetorickes which he was
the next day to read unto his scholars, was so troubled therewith that at
night he could scarce sleep. Qua nocte somnianti, ego illi quod non
intelligebat exposui: immo non ego, sed imago mea nesciente me, and tam long
trans mare aliquid aliud, sive agente, sive somniante, and nihil de illius
curis omnino curante. Ibid.
In which night (says S. Augustine) I expounded unto him while he was in a
dream, that which he did not understand: nay not I, but my image, I not
knowing, and so far beyond the sea either doing or dreaming some other thing,
and nothing at all caring for his cares. The like he does also note to happen
unto those that are in raptures and ecstasies. Et his enim apparent imagines
vivorum atque mortuoru^: sed cum fuerint sensibus redditi, quoscunque mortuos
vidisse se dixerint, vere cum eis fuisse creduntur: nec attendunt qui haec
audiunt, similiter ab eis absentium atque nescientiu^ quorundam etiam imagines
visas esse vivorum. Ibid. cap. 12.
For unto these also do appear images as well of the living as of the dead:
but after they have been restored unto their senses, as many of the dead as
they say that they have seen, with them they are truly believed to have been:
neither do they mark who hear these things, that the images of some living
men, that were absent and ignorant of these things, were in like manner seen by
them. And for the confession of the Devils in parties possessed, he brings in
a memorable instance, of that which fell out in Nam Mediolani apud sanctos
Protasium and Gervasium martyrs, expresso nomine, sicut defunctorum quos eodem
modo commemorabant, adhuc vivum daemones Episcopum confitebantur Ambrosium,
atque ut sibi parceret obsecrabant; illo aliud agente, atque hoc cum ageretur
omnino nesciente. Ibid cap. 17.
Millaine, at the place of the memorial of the martyrs Protasius and
Gervasius. where the Devils did not only make mention of the Martyrs that were
dead, but also of Ambrose the Bishop then living; and besought him that he
would spare them: he being otherwise employed, and being utterly ignorant of
the thing when it was a doing

But as S. Augustine does put us in mind in that discourse, that Aliquando
autem fallacibus som^ijs ( al. visis) hi homines in magnos mittuntur errores:
quos talia perpeti justum est. Ibid. cap. 10.
men are sometimes ledd into great errors by deceitful dreams or visions; and
that it is just, that they should suffer such things. so S. Chrysostom gives a
good admonition, that little heed should be taken of the Devils sayings. (...).
^hrysost. de Lazaro, conc. 2. tom. 5. edit. Savil. page 235.236.
What is it then (says he) that the Devils do say; I am the soul of such a
Monk? Surely for this I believe it not, because the Devils say it: for they
deceive their hearers. And therefore Paul (Act. 16.18.) silenced them, although
they spoke truth; least taking occasion from thence, they might mingle false
things again with those truths, and get credi^ to themselves. and touching
dreams and apparitions of the dead, he adds further. (...). Id. de Lazar.
conc. 4. ibid page 256.
If at this time, the dreams that appear oftentimes in the shapes of them
that have departed this life, have deceived and corrupted many: much more if
this were once settled in men's minds, that many of those that are departed did
return again unto us; that wicked Devil would plot a thousand guiles, and
bring in much deceit into our life. And for this cause God has shut up the
doors, and does not suffer any of the deceased to return back and tell the
things that are there: least he, taking occasion from thence, should bring in
all his own devices. It was the complaint of Synesius in his time, that there
were (...). Synes. epist. 54.
many both private men and Priests too, who feigned certain dreams, which they
called Revelations^ and in ancient writings we meet with sundry visions, which
if they be truly related, may more justly be suspected to have been illusions
of deceitful spirits, than true apparitions of blessed either Souls or Angels.

He that will advisedly read over Basilius Seleuciensis his narration of the
miracles of S. Thecla (for example) must either reject the work as strangely
corrupted, or easily be drawn to yield unto that which I have said. For who
can digest such relations and observations as these? that Basil. Sele^e. de
miraculus S. Theclae, lib. 2. cap. 10.
they who watch the night that goes before her festivitie, do at that time
yearly see her driving a fiery chariot in the air, and removing from Seleucia
unto Dalisandus, as a place which she did principally affect, in regard of the
commodity and pleasantness of the situation. that both she and other of the
Saints deceased do (...). Ibid. cap. 21.
rejoice much in solitary places, and do ordinarily dwell in them. that after
her death she should (...). Ib. cap 24.
affect Oratory and P^etry, and be continually delighted with such as did more
accurately set forth her praises: (even as Homer brings in Apollo, (...).
Hom. Iliad. ^.
tickled at the heart with hearing the songs that were made unto him in the
camp of the Grecia^s:) of which he produces two special instances: the one
of Alypius the Grammarian, unto whom being forsaken of the physicians Thecla
(he says) did appear in the night, and demanded of him, what he ayled, and
what he would. He, to show his art, and to win the Virgins favor with the
aptness of the verse; returns for an answer unto her that verse, wherewith
Homer makes Achilles to answer his mother Thetis, in the first of the Iliads:
(...);
Thou know why should I tell it thee that know all?
Whereat (...). Basil Seleuc. ut supr. cap. 24.
the Martyr smiling, and being delighted partly with the man partly with the
verse, and wondering that he had answered so aptly; conveyed a certain round
stone unto him, with the touch whereof he was presently set on foot from his
long and perilous sickness. For ^he other instance the writer reports that
which happened unto himself. For (...) Ibid. cap. 27.
the Marty^ (says he) is such a lover of learning, and takes such a delight
in these oratorious p^ayses; that I will tell somewhat of those things that
were done to my self and for my self: which the Martyr, who did it, does
know to have been done, and that I lie not. Then he tells, how having
prepar^d an oration for her anniversarie festivitie, the day before it should
be pronounced, he was taken with such an extreme pain in his ear, that the
auditorie was like to be quite disappointed: but that the Martyr the same night
appeared unto him, and shaking him by the ear took all the pain away. He
adds further, that the same Martyr used often to appear unto him in his
study at other times: but once more specially, while he was in hand with
writing this self same book. For having begun to be (...), Ibid. cap. 16.
weary of the labor, the Martyr (says he) seemed to sit by close in my sight,
where I used to be at my book; and to take the quaternion out of my hand, in
which I transcribed these things out of my table-booke. Yea and she seemed unto
me to read it, and to rejoice, and to smile, and to show unto me by her look
that she was pleased with the things that were written, and that it behoved me
to finish this work and not to leave it unperfect.

These things do I here repeat, not with any intention to disgrace antiquity
(whereof I profess my self to be as great an admirer as any) but to discover
the first grounds from whence that Invocation of Saints did proceed, whereby
the honor of God and Christ's office of mediation was afterward so much
obscured. That saying of S. Augustine is very memorable, and worthy to be
pondered. Quem invenirem, qui me reconciliaret tibi? An e^ndum mihi fuit ad
Angelos? Qua prece? quibus sacramentis? Multi conantes ad te redire, neque per
seipsos valentes, sicut audio, tentave^unt haec; and incid^^unt in deside^ium
curiosaru^ visionu^, and digni habiti sunt illusionibus Augustine. Confes^ lib.
10. cap. 42.
Whom should I find, that might reconcile me unto thee? Should I have gone
unto the Angels? With what prayer? with what sacraments? Many endeavoring to
return unto thee, and not being able to do it by themselves, as I hear, have
tried these things; and have fallen into the desire of curious visions, and
were accounted worthy of illusions. Whether they that had recourse unto the
mediation of Martyrs, in such sort as these had unto the mediation of Angels,
deserved to be punished with the like delusions; I leave to the judgment of
others: the thing which I observed was this; that such dreams and visions as
these, joined with the miraculous cures that were wrought at the monuments of
the Martyrs, bredd first an opinion in men's minds of the Martyrs ability to
help them; and so afterward ledd them to the recommending of themselves unto
their prayers and protection. where at first they expected only by their
intercession to obtain temporal b^essings (such as those cures were that were
wrought at their t^mbes, and other like external benefits) but proceeded
af^erward to crave their mediation for the procuring of the remission of their
sins and the furthering of their everlasting salvation. Quotiescumque, Fratres
charissimi, sanctorum Martyrum solennia celebramus; ita ipsis intercedentibus
expectemus a Domino consequi temporalia beneficia, ut ipsos Martyrs imitando
accipere mereamur aeterna. Sermon. de Martyrib. ad calcem fe^monum Leonis 1 and
tom. 1. Oper. Augustine. sermon. 47. de Sanctis.
As often, dear brethren, as we do celebrate the solemnities of the holy
Martyrs; let us so expect by their intercession to obtain from the Lord
TEMPORAL benefits, that by imitating the Martyrs themselves we may deserve to
receive eternal: says the author of the sermon of the Martyrs, which is found
among the homilies of S. Augustine and Leo, and in the Breviar. Roman. in
Communi plurimorum Martyrum extra tempus Paschale, lect. 4.
Roman Breviary is appointed to be read at the common festival days of many
Martyrs. (...). Basil homil. 26 de S. Mamante.
Be mindful of the Martyr (says S. Basil in his Panegyricall oration upon
Mamas) as many of you as have en^oyed him by DREAMS; as many of you as coming
to this place, have had him a helper to your praying; as many as to whom, being
called by name, he showed himself present by his works; as many travailers
as he has brought back again; as many as he has raised from sickness; as
many as he has restored their children unto being now dead; as many as have
received by his means a longer term of life

Here a man may easily discern the breedings of this disease, and as it were
the grudgings of that ague that afterward brake out into a pestilentiall
fever. The Martyr is here vocatus only, not invocatus yet: not called upon by
being prayed unto, but called to join with others in putting up the same
petition unto his and their God. For as here in the Church militant we have our
fellow soldiers Romans 15.30.
(...) striving together with us, and 2. Cor. 1.11.
(...) helping together with their prayers to God for us; and yet because we
pray one for another, we do not pray one to another: so the Fathers which
taught that the Saints in the Church triumphant do pray for us, might with S.
Basil acknowledge that they had the Martyrs (...) fellow-helpers to their
prayer; and yet pray with them only, and not unto them. For howsoever this
evil weed grew apace, (among the superstitious multitude especially) yet was
it so cropped at first by the skillful husbandmen of the Church, that it got
nothing near that height which under the Papac^ we see it is now grown unto.
Which that we may the better understand, and more distinctly apprehend, how
far the recommending of men's selves unto the prayers of the Saints, which
began to be used in the latter end of the fourth age after Christ, came short
of that Invocation of Saints, which is at this day practiced in the Church of
Rome: these special differences may be observed betwixt the one and the other.
First in those elder times, he that prayed silently was thought to honor God
in a singular manner; as one that Qui in silentio orat, sidem defert, and
confitetur quod Deu^ scrutator cordis and renis sit, and orationem tua^ ante
ille audiat, quam tuo ore fundatur. Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 6. cap. 4.
brought faith with him, and confessed that God was the searcher of the heart
and reins, and heard his prayer before it was powered out of his mouth: the
understanding of the present secrets of the heart, by the general judgment of
the Fathers, (...). Quaest. 99. ad Antioch. tom. 2. Oper Athanasij, page 303.
edit. Graecolat.
being no more communicated by him unto the creatures, then the knowledge of
things to come. for before the day wherein the secrets of the heart shall be
manifested, Et prius quidem solus omnipotens Deus cernit occulta, dicente
sermon Euange^ico; Et pater qui videt in abscondito. Et in alio loco: Scrutans
corda and renes Deus. Et in Regum volumine. Tu solus nosti corda cunctorum
filioru^ hominu^. Hi^ronym. lib 5^ in Ezech. ca. 16. Vid. eund. lib. 4. in
Ezech. ca. 14. li. 4* in Ierem. cap. 20. and lib. 1. in Matthew cap. 9 ( supra.
pa. 112.) lo. Chrysostom. in Matthew homil. 29* edit Graec. vel 30. Latin.
Gennadium de Ecclesiasticis dogmatib. cap. 81. Jo Cassian. Collat. 7. cap. 13.
Sedulium in Romans 2. Paeschasium de Spiritu Sancto, lib 2. cap. 1. and alios
possim.
almighty God alone does behold the hidden things: says S. Hierome, alleging
for proof of this the text, Matthew. 6.4. Thy Father that sees in secret.
Psalm. 7.9. God searches the hearts and reins. and 1. King. 8.39. Thou only
know the hearts of all the children of men. But now in the Church of Rome
mental prayers are pre^ented to the Saints, as well as vocal: and they are
believed to receive both the one and the other.

Secondly, in the former times Respondeo magna^ quide^ esse quaestione^, nec in
praesentia disserendam, quod sit ope^is prolixioris; utrum, vel quatenus, vel
quomodo ea quae circa nos aguntur noverint spiritus mortuorum. Augustine. in
Psalm. 108. ^narrat. 1.
it was a great question, whether at all, or how far, or after what manner the
spirits of the dead did know the things that concerned us here: and
consequently, whether they pray for us only Vid. eund. de Cura pro mortuis,
cap. 16 supra citatum, initio page 392. Sanctos in genere sollicitos esse pro
Ecclesia, and orare posse, atque etiam reipsa orare; fatentur Philippus in
Apologia Confessionis Augustanae, articulo de invocatione Sanctorum, Brentius
in Confessione Wirtembergensi, capite de invocatione Sanctorum, Kemnitius in
tertia part Examinis Concilij Tride^tini: Calvinus quoque lib^o t^rtio
Institut. cap. 20. sect. 21. and 24. non repugnat huic sententiae. Bellarmin.
de Missa, lib 2. cap. 8.
in general, and for the particulars God answers us according to our
several necessities, where, when, and after what manner he pleases. Anselmus
Laudunensis in his interlineall Gloss upon that text; Abraham is ignorant of
us, and Israel knows us not: (Esai. 63.16) notes, that Augustinus dicit:
Quia mortui nesciunt, etia^ sancti, quid agant vivi, etia^ eoru^ filij Gloss.
inte^lineal in Esai 63.
Augustine says, that the dead, even the Saints do not know what the living
do, no not their own sons. And indeed S. Augustine in his book of the Care
for the dead, makes this inference upon that place of Scripture. Si tanti
Patriarchae quid erga populum ex his procreatu^ ageretur, ignoraverunt, quibus
Deo credentibus populus ipse de illoru^ stirpe promissus est: quo modo mortui
vivorum rebus atque actibus cognoscendis adjuvandisque miscentur? Augustine. de
Cura pro mo^tuis, cap. 13.
If such great Patriarchs as these were ignorant, what was done toward the
people that descended from them, unto whom (believing God) the people it self
was promised to come from their stock: how do the dead interpose themselves
in knowing and furthering the things and acts of the living? and af^erward
draws these conclusions from thence, which Lib. de Spiritu and Anima, tom. 3.
operum August qui ide^ est cu^ libro 2. de Anima, inter opera Hugonis Victorint.
Hugo de Sancto Victore borrowing from him, has inserted into his book De
Spiritu and anima, cap. 29. Ibi sunt spiritus defunctorum, ubi non vident
quaecunque aguntur, aut eveniunt in ista vita hominibus. ^ugustin. de Cura ^ro
mortuis, cap. 13.
The spirits of the dead be there, where they do neither see nor hear the
things that are done or fall out unto men in this life. Ita illi ( Diviti) fuit
cura de vivis, quanvis quid agerent, omnino nesciret: quemadmodum est nobis
cura de mortuis, quanvis quid agant, omnino utique nesciamus. Ibid. cap. 14.
Yet have they such a care of the living, although they know not at all what
they do, as we have care of the dead, although we know not what they do.
Proinde fatendum est, nescire quidem mortuos quid hic agatur, sed dum hic
agitur; postea vero audire ab eis, qui hinc ad eos moriendo p^rgunt. Non quide^
omnia, sed quae sinuntur indicare, qui sinuntur etiam ista meminisse; and quae
illos, quibus haec indicant, oportet audire. Possunt and ab Angelis, qui rebus
quae aguntur hic praesto sunt, audire aliquid mortui, quod unumquenque illo^um
audire debere judicat cui cuncta subjecta sunt. etc. Possunt etiam spiritus
mortuorum aliqua quae hic aguntur, quae necessarium est eos nosse, and quae
necessarium non est eos non nosse, non solum praeterita vel praesentia,
verumetiam futura spiritu Dei revelante cognoscere. Ibid. cap. 15.
The dead indeed do not know what is done here, while it is here in doing: but
afterward they may hear it by such as die and go unto them from hence; yet
not altogether, but as much as is permitted to the one to tell and is fit for
the other to hear. They may know it also by the Angels which be here present
with us, and carry our souls unto them. They may know also by the revelation
of Gods spirit such of the things done here as is necessary for them to know.
Hitherto Hugo out of S. Augustine: who is herein also followed by Gratian, in
the second part of the Decrees, cause. 13. quaest. 2. cap. 29. where the Gloss
lays down his resolution thus. Facit Great. quamdam incidentem quaestionem;
utrum defuncti sciunt quae in mundo geruntur a viris? and respondet, quod non:
and hoc probat auctoritate Isaiae. Gloss. in 13. q. 2. De mortuis.
Gratian moves a certain incident question; whether the dead know the things
that are done in this world by the living? and he answers, that they do not:
and this he proves by the authority of Esai. (vz. Esai. 63.16.)

The like question is moved by the Master of the Sentences; Sed forte quaeris;
Nunquid preces supplicantium Sancti audiunt, and vota postulantium in eorum
notitiam perveniunt? Non est ineredibile, animas Sanctorum, quae in abscondito
faciei Dei very luminis illustratione laetantur, in ipsius contemplatione ea
quae foris aguntur intelligere, quantum vel illis ad gaudium, vel nobis ad
auxiliu^ pertinet. Sicut enim Angelis, ita and Sanctis qui Deo assistunt,
petitiones nostrae innotescunt in Verbo Dei quod contemplantur. Petr. Lombard.
Sentent. lib. 4. distinct, 45.
Whether the Saints do hear the prayers of suppliants, and the desire of
petitioners do come unto their notice? and this answer is returned thereunto:
It is NOT INCREDIBLE, that the souls of the Saints, which in the secret of
Gods presence are joyed with the illustration of the true light, do in the
contemplation thereof understand the things that are done abroad, as much as
appertains either to them for joy, or to us for help. For as to the Angels,
so to the Saints likewise which stand before God, our petitions are made known
in the Word of God which they contemplate. Upon which place of the Master,
Scotus disputing, grows to this conclusion. Dico, quod non est necesse ex
ratione beatitudinis, quod beatus videat orationes nostras: neque regulariter
sive universaliter in Verbo, quia non est aliquid quasi necessaria sequela
beatudinis; neque quod revelentur, quia neque talis revelatio nec^ssario
sequitur beatitudinem. etc. Tame^ probabile est, quod Deus beatis revelat de
orationibus sibi, vel ^eo in nomine ejus oblatis. Io. Scotus, in 4. did 45.
quaest. 4.
I say, that it is not necessary in respect of the beatitude, that one in
bliss should see our prayers: neither regularly or universally in the Word,
because it is not such a thing as is a necessary sequel of beatitude; nor yet
that they be revealed, because that neither such a revelation does necessarily
follow upon beatitude. Notwithstanding (for a reason which we shall hear of
afterward) he says, it is PROBABLE, that God does specially ^eveale unto him
that is in bliss such of our prayers as are offered unto him, or unto God in
his name. The same conclusion does Gabriel Biel make in his lectures upon the
Canon of the Mass. for having showed, first, that Dicendum, quod Sancti in
patria qui de facto in coelis sunt, naturali cognitione puta vespertina, quae
est cognitio rerum in proprio genere, nullas orationes nostrum in terra
consistentium, neque mentales n^que vocales cognoscunt propter immoderatam
distantiam inter nos and ipsos Gabr. Biel, in Canon Miss. ^ect 31.
the Saints in heaven, by their natural knowledge, which is the knowledge of
things in their proper kind, know no prayers of ours that are here upon earth,
neither mental nor vocal, by reason of the immoderate distance that is
betwixt us and them. secondly, that Non est de ratione beatitudinis
essentialis; ut nostras orationes, aut alia facta nostra, matutina cognitione
videant in verbo. Ibid.
it is no part of their essential beatitude, that they should see our prayers
or our other actions in the Word; and thirdly, that Vtrum autem videre nostias
orationes pertineat ad eorum b^atitudinem accidentalem; non per omnia certum
est. I^id.
it is not altogether certain, whether it do appertain to their accidental
beatitude, to see our prayers: he thus at length concludes. Vnde probabili^e^
dicitur, quod licet non necessario sequitur ad s^nctorum beatitudinem, ut
orationes nostras audia^t de co^gruo: tame^ Deu^ eis revelat omnia quae ipsis
ab h^minib^s off^runtur, si^e ipsos magnificando and la^dando, sive eos orando
and auxili^ implorando Ibid.
It is therefore said PROBABLY, that although it do not follow necessarily upon
the Saints beatitude, that they should hear our prayers of congruitie: yet
that God does reveal all things which are offered unto them by men; whether in
magnifying and praising them, or in praying unto them and imploring their
help. Cardinal Bellarmine supposes, that S^ indigerent Sancti nova
revelatione, Ecclesia non diceret ita audacter omnibus Sanctis; Orate ^ro nobu:
sed peteret aliquando a Deo, ut and rev^laret preces nostras. Bellarm. de
Eccles. triumph. lib. 1. cap 20.
if the Saints should have need thus of a new revelation, the Church would not
so boldly say unto all the Saints; Pray for us: but would sometimes entreat of
God, that he would reveal our prayers unto them. Yet because Superfluum
videtur ab eis ( qui sunt in Purgatorio) ordinary petere, ut pro nobis orent:
quia non possunt ordinary cognoscere quid agamus in particulari, sed solum in
genere sciunt nos in multis periculis versari Id de Purgator. lib. 2. cap. 15.
it seems unto him superfluous, to desire ordinarily of them that they should
pray for us, which cannot ordinarily unde^stand what we do in particular, but
know only in general that we are exposed to many dangers: he resolves, that
Etsi dubitatio esse possit, quemadmodum cognoscant absentia, and quae solo
cordis affectu interdum proferuntur; tamen certum est eos cognoscere Id de
Eccles. triumph. lib. ca^. ^0.
although there may be some doubt, in what manner the Saints may know things
that be absent, and which are sometime delivered by the affection of the heart
alone; yet it is certain that they do know them. And you must Notandum est,
quod est de fide, beatos cognoscere orationes quas ad eos fundimus. Pesa^t. in
1. part. Thom. quaest. 1^.
note, says another Jesuit, that this is to be held for a point of faith,
that the Saints do know the prayers which we pour unto them. So that to make
good the Popish manner of praying unto Saints, that which at the first was but
probab^e and problematicall, must now be held to be de fide, and an undoubted
axiom of Divinity.

Thirdly, in the Popish Invocation, formal and absolute prayers are tendered to
the Saints: but the compellations of them used at first, were commonly either
wishes only, or requests of the same nature with those which are in this kind
usually made unto the living; where the requester is oftentimes superior to him
whose prayers he desires (which stands not well with the condition of Est
enim oration actus quidam rationis, quo unus alteri supplicat, inferior
videlicet superiori. Bella^min. de bonis operib. in particulari, lib. 1. cap. 7.
Prayer properly so called) and they that are requested, be evermore accounted
in the number of those that pray for us, but not of those that are prayed unto
by us. Of this you may hear, if you please, what one of the more moderate
Romanists writes. Si Prophetae licuit appellare Angelos, and universum
coelestem exercitum, eosque hortari ut Deu^ laudent, quod tamen nullo etiam
monente assidue faciunt; quo sane nihil aliud quam abundantia quaedam studij
divinae gloriae amplificandae declaratur: cur etiam non liceat beatos illos
spiritus ejusdem corporis societate nobiscum conjunctos, ex quadam pij
desiderij redundantia compellare, atque exhortari, uti id faciant, quod eos
ultro facere credimus? ut perinde valeat; Omnes Sancti orate Deum pro me: ac si
dicatur. Vtinam omnes Sancti Deum orent pro me quam velim ut omnes Sancti Deum
orent pro me Georg. Cassand. Schol. in Hymn. Ecclesiastic. Op^rum page 242.
If it were lawful for the Prophet to call to the Angels and the whole hoaste
of heaven, and to exhort them that they would praise God, which notwithstanding
they do continually without any one admonishing them, whereby nothing else but
a certain abundance of desire of the amplifying of Gods glory is declared: why
may it not be lawful also, out of a certain abundance of godly desire to call
upon those blessed spirits which by the society of the same body are conjoined
with us; and to exhort them, that they should do that, which we believe they
otherwife do of themselves? That to say; All ye Saints, pray unto God for me:
should import as much, as if it were said; Would to God, that all the Saints
did pray unto God for me! I wish earnestly, that all the Saints should pray to
God for me! Thus writes Cassander, in his notes upon the ancient
Ecclesiastical Hymns, published by him in the year 1556. who being
challenged for this by some others of that side, added this further to give
them better satisfaction. Cum videre^ non necessarium, ut statuamus Sanctos
intelligere nostras preces; credebam ad calumnias nonnullorum repellendas satis
esse si dicamus per modu^ desiderij eas inter pellationes explicari posse: quod
minus habet absurditatis, and divinarum literarum exemplis congruit. Si quis
autem hujusmodi compellationes pro intimatione quoque desiderij, and directa
(ut ita loquamur) alloquutione haberi velit; non repugno. Crediderim tamen
hujusmodi intimationi tacitam conditionem subesse debere; qualem Gregorius
Nazianzenus in oratione funebri sororis Gorgoniae exprimit, cum ait. Proinde si
nostri sermones vel parumper tibi curae sint, honorque talis sanctis a D^o
debetur animabus, ut talia resciscant; suscipe and tu sermonem nostrum. Id.
epist. 19. ad Io. Molinaeum. page 1109.
When I did see that it was not necessary, that we should hold that the Saints
do understand our prayers; I thought it was sufficient to put back the
calumnies of some, if we should say that these interpellations might be
expounded by way of wishing or desiring: which has less absurdity in it, and
is agreeable to the examples of the holy Scriptures. But if any man would have
such compellations as these to be taken also for an intimation of the desire,
and a direct speaking unto them; I do not gainesay it. Notwithstanding I would
think that a tacit condition ought to be understood in such an intimation:
such as Gregory Nazianzen does express in the funeral oration of his sister
Gorgonia, when he says. If thou have any care at all of our speeches, and holy
souls receive this honor from God that they have notice of such things as
these; do thou accept this Oration of ours.

Yea in the very darkest times of the Papacy there wanted not some, who for
certain reasons (recited by Guilielmus Altissi dorensis and Gabriel Biel)
resolved that neither the Saints do pray for us, neither are we to pray unto
them. His and similibus rationibus decepti sunt dicti hae^etici. Decipiuntur
and nunc nonnulli nostro te^pore Christiani. Gabr. Biel, in Canon. Miss. lect.
30.
With these and such like reasons, says Biel, were the heretics deceaved:
and some Christians in our time are now deceaved. Propter istas rations and
consimiles dicunt multi, quod nec nos oramus Sanctos, nec ipsi orant pro nobis,
nisi improprie: ideo sc. quia oramus Deum ut Sanctorum merita nos juve^t unde:
Adjuvent nos eorum merita. etc. Guillerm. Altissiodor. in Sum. part. 4 lib. 3.
tract. 7. cap. de Orat. quaest. 6.
For these and the like reasons, says Altissiodorensis, MANY do say, that
neither we pray unto the Saints, nor they pray for us, but improperly: in
respect we pray unto God, that the merits of the Saints may help us. according
to that: Adjuvent nos eorum merita, etc. where if any poison do remain hidden
under the name of merits, (of which we are to consider in his proper place:)
the Breviarie of the Praemonstratersian Order ministers unto us this antidote
against it. Breviar Praemo. str^teus. in Ommum Sanctorum officio. Vid. Poemata
De corr^pto Ecclesiae statu, edit. Basil. an. 155^ page 28.29. and Catalog.
test. veritat. edit. ibid. an. 1562. page 390.
Adjuvent nos eorum merita,
Quos propria impediunt scelera?
Excuset eorum intercessio,
Quos propria accusat actio?
At tu qui eis tribuisti
Coelestis palmam triumphi,
Nobis veniam non deneges peccati.
Can their merits help us, whom their own sins hinder? Can their
intercession excuse us, whose own action does accuse themselves? But thou, who
have bestowed upon them the palm of the heavenly triumph, deny not unto us the
pardon of our sin. And this many serve to make a.

Fourth difference betwixt the Popish prayers and the Interpellations used in
the ancient time. for by the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome, the
Saints in heaven are not only made joint petitioners with us (as the Saints are
upon earth) but also our Atturneyes and Advocates: who carry the suit for us,
not by the pleading of Christ's merits alone, but by bringing in their own
merits likewise; upon the consideration of the dignity or condignitie whereof
it is believed, that God yields to the motions they make unto him in our
behalf. Oramus Sanctos, ut intercedant pro nobis, id est, ut merita eo^um
nobis suffragentur, and ut ipsi velint bonum nostrum: quia eis volentibus Deus
vult, and ita fiet. Petr. Lombard. Sentent. lib. 4. distinct. 45. and Iacobus
de Vitriaco, in Litania maiori.
We pray unto the Saints (says the Master of the Sentences) that they may
intercede for us, that is to say, that their merits may help us, and that they
may will our good: for they willing it God does will it, and so it will be
effected. Rogare debemus Apostolos and omnes Sanctos in omni necessitate
nostra: quia ipsi sunt advocati nostri, and medij inter nos and Deum, per quos
Deus ordinavit nobis omnia largiri. Hug. Prate^s. sermon. 35.
We ought to entreat the Apostles and all the Saints (says Hugo Pratensis) in
all our necessities: because they are our advocates, and the means betwixt us
and God, by whom God has ordained to bestow all things upon us. Qui congruum
est beatum esse coadjutorem Dei in procurando salutem electi, eo modo quo hoc
sibi potest co^petere; and ad iflud requiritur sibi revela^i orationes nostras
specialiter, quae sibi offeruntur, quia illae specialiter innituntur meritis
ejus tanquam mediatoris perducentis ad salutem, quae petitur: ideo probabile
est, quod Deus beatis revelat de orationibus sibi, vel Deo in nomine ejus
oblatis. Io. Scot. in 4. Sent. d^st. 45. quaest. 4.
Because it is a thing fitting (says Scotus) that he that is in bliss should
be a coadjutor of God in procuring the salvation of the elect, according to
such manner as this may agree unto him; and to this it is requisite, that our
prayers which are offered unto him should specially be revealed unto him,
because they lean specially upon the merits of him as of a mediator bringing
us to the salvation which is sought for: therefore it is probable that God does
specially reveal unto him that is in bliss such of our prayers as are offered
unto him, or unto God in his name. But this is an open derogation to the high
prerogative of our Saviors meritorious Intercession, and a manifest
incroachment upon the great office of Mediation, which the most religious and
learned among those Fathers, who desired to be recommended unto the prayers of
the Saints, were so careful to preserve entire unto him. Quid enim tam
proprium Christi, quam advocatum apud Deum patrem adstare populorum? Ambros. in
Psalm. 39.
For what is so proper to Christ, says S. Ambrose, as to stand by God the
Father for an advocate of the people? Ipse Sacerdos est, qui nunc ingressus in
interiora veli, solus ibi ex his qui carnem gestaverunt interpellat pro nobis.
In cujus rei figura in illo primo populo, and in illo primo templo unus
sacerdos intiabat in sancta sanctorum, populus omnis for as stabat. August. in
Psam. 64.
He is the Priest, says S. Augustine, who being now entered within the veil,
ALONE there of them that have been partakers of flesh, does make intercession
for us. In figure of which thing, in that first people and in that first Temple
the Priest only did enter into the Holy of holyes, and all the people stood
without. And therefore where S. John says; These things write I unto you,
that ye sin not: and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous. (1. John. 2.1.) S. Augustine in his exposition upon
that place makes this observation thereupon: that S. John being so great a man
as he was, Non dixit, habetis, nec me habetis dixit, nec ip^um Christu^
habetis, dixit: sed and Christum posuit, non se, and habemus dixit, non
habetis. Maluit se ponere in numero peccatorum, ut haberet advocatum Christum:
quam ponere se pro Christo advocatum, and inveniri inter damnandos superbos.
Augustine. tractat. 1. in 1. epist. Johan. cap. 2.
did not say, YE have, nor Ye have ME, nor YE have Christ himself: but did
both put in Christ, not himself; and also said, WE have, not YE have.
because he had rather put himself in the number of sinners, that he might have
Christ to be his advocate: than put himself for an advocate in steed of
Christ, and be found among the proud that should be damned. and from thence
draws this conclusion against Parmenian the Donatist. Si ita diceret; Hoc
scripsi vobis ut non peccetis, and si quis peccaverit, mediatore^ me habetis
apud Patrem, ego exoro pro peccatis vestris: (sicut Parmenianus quodam loco
mediatorem posuit Episcopum inter populum and Deum:) quis eum ferret bonorum
atque fidelium Christianorum? Quis sicut Apostolum Christi, and non sicut
Antichristum intueretur? Id. lib. 2. contr. epist. Parmenian. cap. 8.
If he had said thus; I have written this unto you, that you sin not, and if
any man sin, you have me a mediator with the Father, I make intercession for
your sins: (as Parmenian in one place does make the Bishop a mediator betwixt
the people and God:) what good and faithful Christian would endure him? who
would look upon him as the Apostle of Christ, and not as Antichrist rather?
The doctrine therefore and practice of the Church of Rome in this point, by
this learned Fathers judgment, must needs be held to be ungodly and
Antichristian.

Fifthly, the recommendation of men's selves unto the prayers of the Saints
deceased, which was at first admitted in the ancient Church, did no way impeach
^he confidence and boldness which we have gotten in Christ, to make our
immediate approach unto the throne of grace: which by the Invocation of Saints
now taught in the Church of Rome, is very much impaired. For to induce men to
the practice of this, the great Majesty of God and the severity of his Justice
is propounded unto poor sinners on the one hand, and the consideration of
their own baseness and unworthiness on the other. whereupon it is inferred,
that as well for the manifesting of their reverence to Gods Majesty, as the
testifying of their submissenesse and Humility, they should seek to God by
the mediation of his Saints; like as men do seek to the King by the mediation
of his servants. which motives can have no more force to encourage men to the
Invocation of Saints, then they have to discourage them from the immediate
Invocation of God and his Christ. So among the causes alleged by Alexander of
Hales, why we ought to pray unto the Saints: one is, Vlterius propter nostram
inopiam in contempla^do: ut qui non possumus summa^ lucem in se aspicere, eam
in suis Sanctis contemplemur. Tertio, propter inopiam in amando: quia nos
miserabiles homines, vel plerique nostrum magis afficimur circa Sanctum aliquem
aliquando, quam etia^ circa Dominu^; and ideo Dominus eompastus nostrae
miseriae, vult quod oremus Sanctos suos. Alexand. de Hales, Sum. part. 4.
quaest. 26. memb. 3. artic. 5.
in respect of our want in contemplating; that we who are not able to behold
the highest light in it self, may contemplate it in his Saints. another, in
respect of our want in loving: because we miserable men (miserable men indeed
that do so) or some of us at least are more affected sometimes unto some
Saint, than unto our Lord himself: and therefore God having compassion on our
misery, is pleased that we should pray unto his Saints. and a third, Propter
Dei reverentiam: ut peccator, qui Deum offendit, quia non audet in propria
persona adire, recurrat ad Sanctos, eorum patrocinia implorando. Id. ibid.
in respect of the reverence of God: that a sinner who has offended God,
because he dares not to come unto him in his own person, may have recourse
unto the Saints, by imploring their patronage. The like we read in Gabriel
Biel, handling the same argument. Peccatoribus singularis est consolatio, qui
ad Sanctorum interpellationem quandoque magis animantur quam Iudicis: quorum
etiam sanctitatis defectum supplere potest probitas aliena. Gabr. Biel in
Can^n. M^ss lect. 30.
This is a singular consolation (says he) to sinners, who have oftentimes more
mind to the interpellation of the Saints then of the Judge: whose defect of
holiness also other men's goodness is able to supply. and it makes Propter
Dei reverentiam: ut sc. peccator qui Deum offendit, quasi non audens in persona
propria, propter peccati scoria^, coram majestate altissima pariter and
tremenda apparere, recurreret ad Sanctos purissimos and Deo gratos; qui
peccatoris pr^ces altissimo praesen^^^ent, easqu suis adjunctis meritis and
precibus magis redderent ex^udib les, placidas. atque gratas. Ibid. lect. 31.
for the reverence of God: that a sinner who has offended God, as it were not
daring for the dross of his sin to appear in his proper person, before the
most high and dreadful majesty. should have recourse unto the Saints who are
most pure and grateful to God: who may present the sinners prayers unto the
most High, and by adjoining their merits and prayers thereunto, might make the
same more fit for audience, more pleasing and more grateful. Therefore
Salmeron the Jesuit sticks not to deliver his opinion plainly; that the
praying unto God by the Saints seems to be better then the praying unto him
immediately, as for other reasons, Tertio, quia Ecclesia quae Christi Spiritum
ha^er, f^equent^ssime pe^ Sanctos recurrit ad Deum, rarius per se ad Deum
accedit Quarto, precatio Dei per invocationem Sanctorum arguit majorem
humilitatem; sicut videre est in Centurione. Alph. Salmer. in 1. Timoth. 2.
d^spu^. 7. sect. ult.
so because the Church, which has the Spirit of Christ, (though S. Augustine
surely would have judged such a Church to be led by the spirit of Antichrist
rather then of Christ) most frequently has recourse unto God by the Saints,
but comes more rarely unto God by it self: and also, because the praying of
God by the invocations of Saints does argue greater humility; as may be seen
in the Centurion, Luc. 7.6, 7. whereunto he applies also the saying of David,
Psalm. 102.17.
He has had respect to the prayer of the humble, and did not despise their
prayers. and of Judith: Judith ^.16.
The prayer of the humble and meek has always pleased thee.

Thus in the days of the Apostles themselves, under the pretense of Coloss.
2.18.
Humility some labored to bring into the Church the worshipping of Angels:
which carried with it Ibid. verse. 23.
a show of wisdom, (as S. Paul speaks of it) and such a show as was not
far unlike unto that wherewith our Romish Doctors do cozen simple people now
a days. For (...). ^heodoret. in Coloss. cap. 2.
this (says Theodoret) did they counsel should be done, (namely, that men
should pray unto Angels) pretending humility, and saying, that the God of all
things was invisible, and inaccessible, and incomprehensible* and that it was
fit we should procure G^ds favor by the means of Angels. whereas S
Chrysostom treating of Christian hum^litie ^heweth that the faithful who are
furnished with that grace do notwithstanding (...). Ch^ysostom. in Matthew.
homil. 65 edit. Graec. 66 Latin.
ascend beyond the highest tops of heaven, and passing by the Angels, p^esent
themselves before the Regal throne it self. yea (...). Id in Psalm ^.
by earning thus to speak with God in prayer, he shows that the man himself
is made a kind of an Angel the soul is so set loos^ from the bonds of the
body; the reasoning is raised up so high; he is so translated into heaven, he
does so overl^oke these worldly things, he is so placed by the Regal thr^ne it
self: although he be a poor man, although a servant, although a simple man,
although an unlearned Neither is it to be forgotten, that the heathen Idolaters
also, to cover Solent tamen pudorem passi neglecti Dei, misera uti excusatione,
dicentes per istos posse ire ad Deum, sicut per comites pervenitur ad Regem,
Ambros. in Romans cap. 1.
the shame of their neglecting of God, were wont to use this miserable excuse;
that by these they might go to God, as by officers we go to the King: which
is the very self same ragg our Romanists have borrowed from them to cover
their superstition with, that the nakedness thereof might not appear. But S.
Ambrose (or who ever else was author of those commentaries upon S. Paul's
epistles that are found among his works) has met well with them, and
sufficiently discovered the vanity of these gross and carnal imaginations.
Age, nunquid tam demens est aliquis, aut salutis suae immemor, ut
honorificentiam Regis vindicet comiti; cum de hac re si qui etiam tractare
fuerint inventi, jure ut rei damnentur majestatis? Et isti se non putant reos,
qui honorem nominis D^i deferunt creaturae, and relicto Domino conservos
adorant; quasi sit aliquid plus quod servetur Deo. Nam and ideo ad Regem per
tribunos aut comites itur, quia homo utique est Rex, and nescit quibus debeat
Re^publicam credere. Ad Deum ante (quem utique nihil latet, omnium enim merita
novit) promerendum suffragatore non opus est, sed mente devota. Vbieunque enim
talis locutus fuerit ei, respondebit illi. Ibid.
Go too, (says he) is there any man so mad, or so unmindfull of his salvation,
as to give the Kings honor to an officer: whereas if any shall be found but to
treat of such a matter, they are justly condemned as guilty of high treason?
And yet these men think themselves not guilty, who give the honor of Gods
name to a creature, and leaving the Lord adore their fellow servants; as though
there were any thing more, that could be reserved to God. For therefore do men
go to the King by Tribunes or officers, because the King is but a man, and
knows not to whom he may commit the state of the commonwealth. But to procure
the favor of God, from whom nothing is hid (for he knows the merits or
works of all men) we need no spokes-man, but a devoute mind. For wheresoever
such a one shall speak unto him, he will answer him.

But of all others, S. Chrysostom is most plentiful in setting out the
difference of the access which we may have to God and to the great ones in
this world. (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. citat. a Theodoro Daphnopat. in Eclogis
(tom. 7. edit. Savil. page 768.) Maximo, in loc. commun. sermon. 14. and Io
Damasceno in Parallel. lib 2. cap. 15. ubi ab editore Pontificio ad marginem
appositum est hoc pharmacum: Haec (...) dicuntur non (...).
When we have suit unto men (says he in one place) we have need of cost and
money, and servile adulation, and much going up and down and great ado. For
it falls out oftentimes that we cannot go straight unto the Lords themselves
and present our gift unto them and speak with them; but it is necessary for
us first to procure the favor of their ministers and stewards and officers,
both with paying and praying and using all other means unto them, and then by
their mediation to obtain our request. But with God it is not thus. For there
is no need of intercessors for the petitioners: neither is he so ready to give
a gracious answer being entreated by others, as by our own selves praying unto
him. (...). Chrysostom. sermon. 7. de Poenitent. tom. 6. edit. Savil. page 802. qui
in alijs editionib. est sermon. 4. de Poenitent.
When thou have need to sue unto men, (says he in another place) thou art
forced first to deal with d^ore-keepers, and to entreat parasites and
flatterers, and to go a long way. But with God there is no such matter:
without an intercessor he is entreated, without money without cost he yields
unto thy prayer. It suffices only that thou cry in thine heart, and bring
tears with thee; and entering in straightway thou may draw him unto thee.
(...). Id. in Psalm. 4.
Amongst men (says he in a third place) it behooves him that comes unto one,
to be a man of speech, and it is required that he should flatter all those that
are about the Prince, and to think upon many other things, that he may find
acceptance. But here there is need of nothing, save of a watchful mind only:
and there is nothing that hinders us from being near to God. So in his
sermon upon the woman of Canaan, which he made in his latter days, after his
return from his first banishment: (...). Id. in d^mission. Chananaeae. tom 5.
edit. Savil. page 195.
God is always near, says he. If thou will entreat man; thou ask what he
is a doing, and he is asleep, he is not at leisure, or the servant gives thee
no answer. But with God there is none of these things. Whithersoever thou go
and call, he hears: there is no want of leisure, nor a mediator, nor a
servant that keeps thee off. Say, Have mercy upon me; and presently God is
with thee. For while thou art yet a speaking, says he, I will say; Behold here
I am. (Esai. 58.9.) And therefore he bids us to (...). Ibid page 190.
mark the philosophy (as he terms it) or the wisdom of the woman of
Canaan. She entreats not James (says he) she beseeches not John, neither
does she come to Peter, but brake through the whole company of them; saying. I
have no need of a mediator, but taking repentance with me for a spoakes-man, I
come to the fountain it self. For this cause did he descend, for this cause
did he take flesh; that I might have the boldness to speak unto him. I have
no need of a mediator: have thou mercy upon me. Hitherto S. Chrysostom.

Sixthly, the Romanists repose such confidence in the intercession of the
Saints; that they look to receive far greater benefit by them, then by their
own prayers. Which conceit how distastefull it was unto the ancient Doctors, S.
Chrysostom may be a sufficient witness: who labored exceedingly to root out
this erroneous opinion, when it first began to show it self in his time. And
therefore he is bold to affirm, not only that (...). Chrysostom. in Act. 16.
homil. 36.
we have no such need of others, that we may entreat by them; but also that
God (...). Id. ibid.
then does most, when we do not use the entreaty of others. For as a kind
friend, (says he) then blames he us most, as not daring to trust his love,
when we entreat others to pray unto him for us. Thus use we to do with those
that seek to us: then we gratify them most, when they come unto us by
themselves, and not by others. But, thou will say, what if I have offended
him? Cease offending, and shedd tears, and so come; and thou shall quickly
make him appeased for the things that are past. Say only; I have offended: say
it from thy soul and a sincere mind; and all is loosed. Thou do not so much
desire to thy sins to be forgiven thee, as he does desire to forgive thy
sins unto thee. Thus does S. Chrysostom write upon the 16. of the Acts: and
upon the fourth Psalm, to the same effect. (...). Id, in Psalm. 4.
Thou may always and continually solicit him, and thou shall meet with no
difficulty. For thou shall have no need of any doore-keepers to bring thee in,
nor stewards, nor procurators, nor keepers, nor friends: but when thou thy
self come by thy self, then will he most of all hear thee, even then,
when thou intreatest no man. We do not therefore so pacify him when we entreat
him by others, as when we do it by our own selves. For by reason he loves our
friendship, and does all things that we may put our confidence in him: when he
beh^ldeth us to do this by our selves, then does he most yield unto our suites.
Thus did he deal with the woman of Canaan: when Peter and James came for her,
he did not yield; but when she her self did remain, he presently gave that
which was desired.

The same lesson does he repeat in his 44. homily upon Genesis: that (...). Id.
in Genes cap. 19. homil. 44.
our Lord being merciful, does not so yield when he is entreated for us by
others, as he does when he is by our own selves. and for proof thereof tells
us again of the woman of Canaan; that (...). Id ibid.
having the disciples petitioning for her, she could obtain nothing, until
she by her self being instant drew forth the clemency of the Lord: to the end
we might thereby learn, that we do not so prevayle when we entreat by others,
as when by our selves; if we come with fervor and with a vigilant mind. The
like observation is made by him and by Theophylact in their expositions upon
that part of the Gospel wherein this history is related. (...). ^d. in Matthew
15. homil. 52. edit. Graec. vel 53. Latin.
Mark me, (says the one) how the Apostles being put down and not prevayling,
she her self prevayled: of so great force is the assiduity of prayer. For God
would be petitioned unto by us that are guilty, in our own cause, rather then
by others for us. And (...). Theophylact. in Matthew. cap. 15.
observe (says the other) that although the Saints do pray for us, as the
Apostles did for her; yet we praying for our selves, do prevayle much more. One
place more I will yet lay down out of Chrysostoms sermon of the profiting of
the Gospel: and so make an end of this observation. (...). Chrysostom. sermon.
in Philip. 18. de p^ofectu Euangel. tom. 5. edit. Savil. page 416.
With God (says he) thou have need of no intercessours, nor of much running
about, nor to flatter others: but although thou be alone, and have no patron,
thou by thy self praying unto God shall certainly obtain thy request. He
uses not to yield so soon, being prayed unto by others for us, as when we our
selves do pray unto him, although we be replenished with a thousand evils. And
to prove that (...). Ibid. page 416. and paulo post. (...); page 417.
praying by our own selves we prevayle more with God, then praying unto him by
others: he brings in again the history of the woman of Canaan, and wishes
us to observe, (...); Ibid. page 417.
how, when others entreated, he put her back: but when she her self cried out
praying for the gift, he yielded. and at last concludes with this exhortation.
(...). Ibid.
Seeing then we have learned all these things, although we be in sin and
unworthy to receive, let us not despair; knowing that by perseverance and
constancy of mind we may obtain our request. although we be solitary and
without any patrones, let us not be d^scouraged; knowing that this is a great
patronage, that thou by thine own self may come to God with much alacrity.

Seventhly, and principally it is to be considered, that Invocation is
attributed to Saints in the Church of Rome as a part of the worship due unto
them: yea as eximium adorationis genus (for so does Cardinal Bellarmin.
Praefat. in controvers de Eccles triumphant. in Ord^ne disputat.
Bellarmin pronounce it to be) an eminent kind of adoration. For Sanctos non
solum honoramus eo cultu, quo viros virtute, sapientia, potentia, aut qualibet
alia dignitate praestantes; sed etiam Divino cultu, and honor, qui est
religionis actus nam ille cultus, qui viris primarij^ defertur, non est
religionis; sed alterius long inferioris virtutis, quae observantia vocatur,
actus and officium. Sed divinos cultus and honores Sanctis non damus propter
ipsos; sed propter Deum, qui eos Sanctos effecit. Io. Azor. Institut. Moral.
tom. 1. lib. 9. cap. 10.
we do not honor the Saints (says Azorius the Jesuit) with that worship
only, wherewith we do men that excel in virtue, wisdom, power, or any other
dignity; but also with DIVINE worship and honor, which is an act of Religion.
for that worship which is given to men of excellency, is an act and office,
not of Religion, but of another inferior virtue, which is called Observance.
And whereas it is as clear as the noone day, that the giving of divine honor
and worship unto any creature is flat Idolatry: the poor man weeneth that he
and his fellows may be excused from being Idolaters; because they do not give
divine worship and honor unto the Saints for themselves, but for God who has
made them Saints: as if God, who cannot endure that his Esai. 428. and 48.11.
glory should be given unto another, wou^d be mocked with such toys as these.
Indeed they were wont heretofore to delude men commonly with an idle
distinction of Dulia and Latria* but now Quid si and una religionis virtus sit,
quae latriam, duliamque contineat? Certe plurimis atque sapientissimis ea est
opinio. Nicol. Serarius, in Litaneutico 2. Quaest. 27. in fine
it is the opinion of the most and the wisest of them, that it is one and the
self same virtue of Religion, which contains both Latria and Dulia. Whereas
it has been the constant doctrine of the ancient Church, that all religious
worship (whereof Prayer by the judgment of all men, as well Virgil. Aeneid. 3.
Iunonis magnae primum prece numen adora. Ovid. T^ist. lib. 1. eleg. 3. Hac
prece adoravi superos ego, pluribus uxor. D^natus in ^eren^ij Phormion. act. 2.
scen. 1. ad il^ud: At ego Deos penate^^ hinc salutatum domum D^vortar
Salutatum.] Adoratum prima post reditum prece.
Heathen as Christian, has been always esteemed to be an especial part) is
so properly due unto God alone, that without committing of Idolatry it cannot
be communicated unto any creature. For Ideoque divine ac singulariter in
Ecclesia catholica traditur, nullam creaturam colendam esse animae (libentius
enim loquor his verbis quibus mihi haec insinuata sunt) sed ipsum tantummodo
rerum quae sunt omnium creatorem Augustine. lib. de Quantitate animae, cap. 34.
Vid. eund. de morib. Eccles. Catholicae and Manich. lib. 1. cap. 30.
in the Catholic Church it is divinely and singularly delivered, that no
creature is to be worshipped by the soul, but he only who is the creator of
all things: says S. Augustine. And therefore the ancient Doctors who thought it
not amiss, that men should recommend themselves unto the prayers of the Saints
departed; held it a thing intolerable notwithstanding, to impart unto any man
or Angel the worship of Invocation. for to request the help of the prayers of
our fellow servants, is one thing, and to worship them with the service of
Invocation is another* as may be seen in the case of our brethren upon earth,
who may not refuse the former without the violation of charity, nor accept the
latter at our hands without an open breach of piety.

Now that the Fathers judged no otherwise of Prayer, then as has been said,
this may be one good argument; that when they define it, they do it with
express reference to God, and no other: as may be seen in those five several
definitions thereof which Bellarm. de bonis operib. in particular. lib. 1. cap.
1.
Bellarmine himself repeateth out of them. the first whereof is that of Basil:
(...). Basil. orat. in Iu^itiam martyr.
Prayer is a request of some good thing, which is made by pious men unto GOD.
The second, of Gregory Nyssen: (...) Gregor. Nyssen. orat. 1. de Oratione.
Prayer is a conversing or a conference with GOD. The third, of the same
Father: (...). Id. orat. 2. de Orat. Dominic. vel, (...) Id. tractat 2. de
inscriptionib. Psalmor. cap. 3.
Prayer is a request of good things, which is offered with supplication unto
GOD. The fourth, of John Chrysostom: (...). Chrysostom. in Genes. homil. 30. Vid.
eiusd. lib. 1^ de Orando Deu^, tom. 6 edit. Savil. page 754.
Prayer is a colloquy or discourse with GOD. The fifth, of John Damascen:
(...). Damascen. de fide Orthodox. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Prayer is an ascension of the mind unto GOD, or a request of things that are
fit from GOD. Therefore where Ad quod sacrificium, sicut homines Dei, qui
mundum in ejus confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine nominantur: non tamen
a sacerdote, qui sacrificat, invocantur. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 10.
the names of the Martyrs were solemnly rehearsed in the public Liturgy of
the Church, S. Augustine interprets it to be done for an honorable
remembrance of them: but utterly denies, that the Church therein had any
intention to invocate them. So for other particular prayers: Sed tame^ tu
solus, Domine, invoca^dus es; tu roga^dus, ut eu^ in filijs repraesentes. Ambr.
de obit. Theodos.
Thou alone art to be invocated O Lord, says S. Ambrose in his funeral
oration upon Theodosius the Emperor; thou art to be requested, to supply the
miss of him in his sons. and; Cui alteri praeter te cla mabo? August.
Confess. lib. 1. cap. 5.
To whom else should I cry, besides thee? says S. Augustine, and it is Gods
pleasure, Esse nihil prorsus se praeter ubique rogandum, that nothing beside
himself should every where be prayed unto: says Dracontius in his book of the
Creation, revised by Eugenius Bishop of Toledo at the command of Chindasuindus
King of Spain. Hereupon S. Chrysostom, upon those words of the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 1.2. With all that call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; gives
this exposition. (...). Ch^ysost. in 1 Corinthians. homil. 1.
Not of this man and that man, but upon the name of the Lord. and he elsewhere
tells us, that it was the DEVILS doing to draw men unto the calling upon
Angels; as envying them the honor of their immediate access and admittance
unto Gods own presence. (...); Jd. in Coloss. 3. homil. 9.
For this cause (says he) did the Devil bring in this of the Angels; envying
us this honor. These be the enchantments of Devils. Though he be an Angel,
though an Archangel, though they be Cherubims; endure it not. For neither will
these Powers themselves admit it, but reject it; when they see their Lord
dishonored. I have honored thee, says he, and have said; Call upon me, and
do thou dishonor him? And therefore did the Fathers in the Council of
Laodicea directly conclude that this Invocation of Angels was a secret kind of
Idolatry, by the practice whereof the communion both of Christ and of his
Church was forsaken. (...). Council. Laodicen. can. 35.
For Christians (say they) ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart
aside, and invocate Angels, and make meetings: which are things forbidden. If
any man therefore be found to give himself to this privy Idolatry; let him be
accursed. Because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
and betaken himself to Idolatry.

Pope Adrian, in the Epitome of the Canons which he delivered to Charles the
great at Rome in the year of our Lord DCCLXXIII. does thus abridge this
decree: ut anathema sit, quicunque relicta Ecclesia, Angelos colere, vel
congregationes facere praesumpserit. that whosoever, leaving the Church, did
presume to worship Angels, or to make meetings, should be accursed. Where
Henricus Canisius, who was the first publisher of this Abbridgement in the 6.
tome of his Ancient reading, fearing belike that the curse not only of the
Fathers of Laodicea, but (which was more dreadful) of Pope Adrian also might
light upon him and his companions, who acknowledge themselves to be of the
number of those that wo^ship Angels: gives us warning in his margent, that in
steed of angelos here Angulos forte legendu^. page 424. tom. 6. Antiquae
lectionis Henr. Canisij. SS. Canonum in A^adem Ingolstad. professoris primarij.
peradventure should be read, angulos; that is to say, corners in steed of
angels* which although it be a no^e that evil beseems a man who would be
thought to be conversant in ancient reading, and such a one especially as
professes himself to be a chief professor of the Canons: yet in that he
leaves the text untouched, and contenteth himself with a peradventure too in
his marginall annotation, he is more to be excused then his fellows before
him, Carranza, Sagittarius, and Ioverius, who setting forth the Canons of the
Counsels, without all peradventure corrupted the text it self, removing the
angels out of their place, and hiding them in corners. Notwithstanding this
also may be alleged in some part of their excuse too, that they were not the
first authors of this corruption of the Canon: that blame must light either
upon Isidorous Mercator (the crafty merchant, with whose dealings I acquainted
you Supr. page 12.
before) or upon James Merlin the Popish Doctor, who first caused his Tom. 1.
Council. edit. Colon. an. 1530. and Paris. an. 1535.
Collection of Decrees to be printed. But Friar Crabb deserves no excuse at
all: who having store of good copies to direct him, did not only content
himself with the retayning of angulos in the text of Isidorus, as he found it
printed before him; but plucked out angelos, and chopped in Tom. 1. Council. edit.
Colon. an. 1538.
angulos into the old translation of Dionysius Exiguus also, which affoorded no
room for any such corners as these. For howsoever in that version, or
perversion rather of the Canon which is extant in the text of Isidorus it might
stand with some reason to read: Non oportet Christianos derelicta ecclesia
abire, and ad angulos idolatriae abominandae congregationes facere. It is not
lawful for Christians, forsaking the Church, to go and make assemblies of
abominable idolatry in corners. yet in the old translation of Dionysius, where
the Canon was rightly rendered; Quod non oporteat ecclesiam Dei relinquere, and
abire, atque angelos nominare, and congregationes facere: it was contrary to
all sense to thrust this reading upon us. It is now lawful for Christians to
forsake the Church of God, and go and nominate or invocate CORNERS (a wise
speech no doubt) and make meetings.

But, veritas non quaerit angulos: the truth will admit none of these corners.
For the Greek verity (as well in all the editions of the Canons that have come
forth by themselves, as in the Collections of Harmenopulus, Zonaras and
Balsamon likewise) expressly reads (...), which in that tongue has no
affinity at all with corners: and the ancient Collectors of the Canons among
the Latins, De his qui Angelos co^u^t. Cres^on. Breviar. Canon. sect. 90.
Dionys. Exig. in Codice Canonu^, number 138.
Cresconius and Dionysius and Vt nullus ad Angelos congregationem faciat.
Fulgent. Ferra^d. Breviat. Canon. sect. 184.
Fulgentius Ferrandus, have Angelos: and Theodoret in his exposition of the
epistle to the Colossians, does twice make mention and declare the meaning of
this Canon. once, upon those words of the Apostle in the third chapter:
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him. (...). Theodoret. in Coloss. 3.
for because they commanded men to worship Angels, (says Theodoret) he
injoyneth the contrary; that they should adorn their words and their deeds
with the commemoration of our Lord Christ* and send up thankesgiving to God and
the Father by him, says he, and not by the Angels. The Synod of Laodicea also
following this rule, and desiring to heal that old disease, made a law that
they should not pray unto Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. and
again, upon the second chapter of the same epistle. (...). Id. in Coloss. 2.
This vice continued in Phrygia and Pisidia for a long time. for which cause
also the Synod assembled in Laodicea the chief city of Phrygia, forbad them by
a Law to pray unto Angels. And even to this day among them and their borderers,
there are Oratories of S. Michael to be seen. The like has Oecumenius after
him, upon the same place. (...). Oecumen. MS. in Coloss. 2. ab Hoeschelio
citatus in notis ad Origenis libros contra Celsum, page 483.
This custom continued in Phrygia: insomuch that the Council of Laodicea did
by a Law forbid to come unto Angels and to pray unto them. from whence it is
also, that there be many Churches of Michael, the chief captain of Gods
host, among them. This Canon of the Laodicean Fathers, Photius does note to
have been made against the (...). Phot. Nomocanon tit. 12. cap. 9.
Angelites: or the Angelickes rather. for so does S. Augustine name those
heretics that were Angelici, in angelorum cultu inclinati. Augustine. de
haeresi ca. 39.
inclined to the worship of Angels: being from thence Angelici vocati, quia an
gelos colunt. Isido^. Or^gin. lib. 8 cap. 5.
called Angelici, as Isidorus notes, because they did worship Angels.

To transcribe here at large the several testimonies of the Fathers, which
condemn this worshipping of Angels or any other creature whatsoever, would be
an endless work. Gregory Nyssen in the beginning of his fourth (or fifth book
rather) against Eunomius, lays this down for an undoubted principle. (...).
Gregor. Nyssen. con^r. Eunom. oras. 4. tom 2 edit. Graecolaetin. page 144.
That none of those things which have their being by creation is to be
worshipped by men, the word of God has by law ordained: as almost out of all
the holy Scripture we may learn. Moses, the Tables, the Law, the Prophets
afterward, the Gospels, the determinations of all the Apostles, do equally
forbid the looking unto the creature. Then having showed that the neglect of
this was the cause of the bringing in of a multitude of Gods among the Heathen:
(...). Id. ibid. page 146.
least the same things should happen unto us, says he, who are instructed by
the Scripture to look unto the true Deity; we are taught to understand that
whatsoever is created is a different thing from the divine nature, and that we
are to worship and adore that nature only which is uncreated; whose character
and mark is, that it neither at any time began to be nor ever shall cease to
be. But our Romanists have long since overthrown this principle: and so altered
Moses, and the Tables, and the Law; that of the Hieronym. Zanctinus, de foro
conscientiae and cont^ntioso, sect. 1^8.
24. mortal sins, whereby they say the first Commandment is broken, they
reckon the first to be committed by him, Qui colit extra Deum vel Sanctos
quodque creatum, who worshippeth any created thing beside God and the Saints.
And whereas A^ton. Meliss. lib. 1. sermon 1.
Antonius in his Melissa had set down the foresaid sentence of Nyssen; that
we have learned to worship and adore that nature ONLY which is uncreated: the
Spanish Inquisitors have taken order, that a piece of his tongue should be cut
off; and given commandment, that Deleatur dictio, SOLUMMODO. Index Expurgator.
Gasp Quiroga Ca^dinalis iussis editus; de consilio supremi Senatus Generalis
Iniquisit. Madrit. an. 1584.
the word ONLY should be blotted out of his writing. not considering that this
was the principal word, upon which the whole sentence of Nyssen mainely did
depend: and that Nyssen was not the only man that had taught us this lesson.

Athanasius before him had used the very same argument against the Arrians, to
prove that the Son of God was of an uncreated nature. (...). Athanas. orat.
3. contra Arrian.
For Peter the Apostle (says he) did forbid Cornelius, when he would have
worshipped him, saying; Because I my self also am a man. (Act. 10.26.) The
Angel also did forbid John, when he would have worshipped him in the
Revelation, saying: See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow servant, and of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book:
worship God. (Revel. 22.9.) Wherefore it appertains to God only to be
worshipped. and this do the Angels themselves know well: that although they
do surpass others in glory, yet they are all but creatures; and are in the
number, not of those that are to be adored, but of them that adore the Lord. So
we have heard S. Ambrose Ambros. in Romans cap. 1. supr. page 414.
before reprehending those that do adore their fellow servants. And Epiphanius
refuting the heresy of the Collyridians, concludes, that (...), etc. (...);
Epiphan. haeres. 79. page 448.
neither Elias, nor John, nor Thecla, nor any of the Saints is to be
worshipped. For that ancient error (says he) shall not prevayle over us, to
forsake the living God, and to worship the things that are made by him. for
they served and worshipped the creature above the Creator, and became fools.
For if he will not have the Angels to be worshipped; how much more would he
not have her that was borne of Anna? (...). Id. ibid page 450.
Let Mary then be had in honor: but let the Lord be worshipped. Lastly S.
Augustine (to omit all others) in the book which he wrote of true religion,
delivers this for one of the maine grounds thereof; that Non sit nobis
religio cultus hominum mortuorum: quia si pie vixerunt, non sic habentur ut
tales quaerant honores; sed illum a nobis coli volunt, quo illuminante
laetantur meriti sui nos esse consortes. Honorandi ergo sunt propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem. Augustine. de vera relig. cap. 55.
the worshipping of men that are dead should be no part of our religion.
because (says he) if they did live piously, they are not held to be such as
would seek that kind of honor; but would have him to be worshipped of us, by
whose enlightening they do rejoice that we are made partners of their merit.
They are to be honored therefore for imitation, not to be adored for religion.
The same does he also there say of Angels: that Quare honoramus eos charitate,
non servitute. Nec eis templa construimus. Nolunt enim ^^ sic honorari a nobis;
quia nosipsos cum boni sumus, templa summi Dei este noverunt. Recte itaque
scribitur, hominem ab angelo prohibitum ne se adorar^t, sed unum Deum sub quo
ei esset and ille conservus. Id. ibid.
we do honor them with love, not with service; neither do we build temples
unto them. For it is not their desire, that they should be so honored by us:
because they know that we our selves, if we be good, are the temples of the
high God. and therefore it is rightly written, that a man was forbidden by an
Angel, that he should nor worship him, but God alone under whom he was his
fellow servant. (Revel. 22.9.)

But, what says Cardinal Bellarmine now, think you, unto these testimonies
of the Fathers? Dico eos loqui contra errores Gentiliu^, qui ex hominibus
sceleratis veros Deos faciebant; eisque sacrificia offerebant. B^llarm. de
Eccles. triumphant. lib. 1. fine. cap. 14. collat. cum fine cap. 11.
I say (says he, not knowing indeed what he says, nor whereof he affirms)
that they do speak against the errors of the Gentiles, who of wicked men did
make true Gods; and did offer sacrifices unto them. wherein you may discern
the just hand of God, confounding the man's wits, that would thus abuse his
learning to the upholding of Idolatry. For had he been here his own man, and
not been strangely overtaken with the spirit of slumber, he could no possibly
have failed so fowly, as to reckon the Angels and the Saints, and the very
mother of God her self (of whom these Fathers do expressly speak) in the
number of those wicked persons whom the Gentiles did take for their Gods. And
here also out of Epiphanius we may further observe, who were the masters, or
the mistresses rather (for this was (...). Epiphan. haeres. 79. page 445.
(...); Ibid. page 446.
the women's heresy) from whom our Romanists did first learn their Hyperdulia,
or that transcendent kind of service wherewith they worship the Virgin Mary.
namely, the Collyridians: Id. in Anacephalaeosi, page 529. (...), (hoc
vocabulum enim ibi addendum) (...).
so called from the Collyrides or cakes, which at a certain time of the year
they used to offer unto the blessed Virgin. against whom Epiphanius does thus
oppose himself. (...). Id. haeres. 1^. page 448.
What Scripture has delivered any thing, concerning this? Which of the
Prophets have permitted a man to be worshipped, that I may not say a woman? For
a choice vessel she is indeed; but yet a woman. (...). Id. ibid. page 449.
Let Mary be in honor; but let the Father and the Son and the holy Ghost be
worshipped: let no man worship Mary. This mystery is appointed, I do not say
for a woman, nor yet for a man neither, but for God: the Angels themselves are
not capable of such kind of glorifying. (...). Id. ibid.
Let none eat of this error touching holy Mary. for although the tree be
beautiful, yet is it not for meat: and although Mary be most excellent, and
holy, and to be honored, yet is she not to be worshipped. (...). Id. ibid.
page 447.
The body of Mary was holy indeed, but not God: the Virgin indeed was a virgin
and honorable; but not given unto us for adoration, but one that did her self
worship him who was borne of her in the flesh and came from heaven out of the
bosom of his Father.

Thus did this learned Father labor to (...). Id. ibid. page 446.
cut the roots of this Idolatrous heresy, when it first began to take hold of
the feminine sex: animating all that were of masculine spirits to the
extirpatio^ thereof, in this manner. (...). Id. ibid.
Go to then, ye servants of God, let us put on a manlike mind, and beat down
the madness of these women. But when this disease afterward had gotten a
farther spredd, and had once thoroughly seized upon men as well as women: it is a
most wonderful thing to consider, into what extremity this frenzy brake out;
after the time of Satan's loosing especially. For then De cujus Imperij ad
similes effectus aequalitate cum filio, non desunt, qui construant illud ab
Angelo ipsi praenunciatu^; Ave gratia plena, Dominus tecum. id est, Sicut and
ipse, ita and tu eadem dominandi excellentissima dignitate perfiueris. Emanuel
de Valle de Moura, Doct. Theol. ac Inquisitionis Deputa^us Lusitan. Opusc. 1.
de Incantationib. seu Ensalmis, sect. 1. cap. 1. number. 46.
there wanted not such as would interpret that speech of the Angel unto the
holy Virgin, Hail full of grace, the Lord is with thee; of the equality of her
Empire with her Sons. as if it had been said. Even as he, so thou also do
enjoy the same most excellent dignity of ruling. Ad quem sensum facile
accommodari possunt praecitata Angeli verba; Dominus tecum, gratia plena. Id
est, in gratiae plenitudine redundantiae, and effusione in creaturas, ita
Domini potentia ac voluntas ad tuam acco^modatur, ut tu prior in eo, and
diademate, and tribunali esse videaris. Dominus tecum: non tam tu cum Domino,
quam tecum Dominus in eo munere. Ibid.
In the redundance and effusion of grace upon the creatures, the Lords power
and will is so accommodated unto thine, that thou may seem to be the first
in that, both diadem, and tribunal. The Lord is with thee: not so much thou
with the Lord, as the Lord with thee, in that function. Then it was taught for
good Divinity, that A tempore enim quo Virgo matter concepit in utero Verbum
Dei, quandam (ut sic dicam) jurisdictionem seu auctoritatem obtinuit in omni
Spiritus sancti processione temporali; ita quod nulla creatura aliquam a Deo
obtinuit gratiam vel virtutem, nisi secundum ipsius piae matris dispensationem.
Bernardin. Senens sermon. 61. artic. 1. cap. 8.
from the time wherein the Virgin mother did conceive in her womb the Word of
God, she has obtained such a kind of jurisdiction (so to speak) or authority
in all the temporal procession of the holy Ghost; that no creature has
obtained any grace or virtue from God, but according to the dispensation of his
holy mother. that, Et quia talis est matter filij Dei qui producit Spiritum
sanctum; ideo omnia dona, virtutes and gratiae ipsius Spiritus sancti quibus
vult, quando vult, quomodo vult, and quantum vult, per manus ipsius
administrantur. Id. ibid.
because she is the mother of the son of God who does produce the holy Ghost;
therefore all the gifts, virtues, and graces of the holy Ghost are by her hands
administered, to whom she pleases, when she pleases, how she pleases, and as
much as she pleases. That Nulla gratia de coelo nisi ea dispensante ad nos
descendit. Hoc enim singulariter officium divinitus ab aeterno adepta est*
sicut Proverb. 8. ipsa testatur, dicens. Ab aeterno ordinata sum; sc.
dispensatrix coelestiu^ gratiarum. Id. ibid. artic. 3. cap. 3.
she has singularly obtained of God this office from eternity; as her self
does testify Proverb. 8.23. I was ordained from everlasting, namely, a
dispenser of celestial graces; and that In Christo fuit plenitudo gratiae,
sicut in capite in flue^te; in Maria vero sicut in collo transfundente. Vnde
Cantic 7. de Virgin ad Christum Solomon ait: Collum tuum sicut turris eburnea.
Nam sicut per collu^ vitales spiritus a capite descendunt in corpus; sic per
^irgine^ a capite Christo vitales gratiae in ejus corpus mysticum
transfunduntur. Id. ibid. artic. 1. cap. 8. and artic. 2. cap. 10. ex Pse^d.
Hieronymi sermon de assump^. Ma^iae. Sicut enim a capite, mediante collo,
descendunt omnia nutrimenta corporis: sic a Christo per beata^ Virginem in nos
veniunt omnia bona, and beneficia, quae Deus nobis confert. Nam ipsa est
dispensatrix gratiatu^ and beneficiorum Dei. Joan Herolt. in Sermon. Discipuli
de Tempore, sermon. 16^. Per Collum, Virginis apud Deum gratia, and intercessio
intelligitur: ita ut ejus intercessio sit veluti collu^, per quod a Deo omnes
gratiae, praesidiaque in homines transfunduntur Blas. Viegas in Apo^al^ps cap.
12 comment. 2. s^ct. 10. number. 1. Collu^ enim dicitur; quia per Virgine^
universa in nos a Deo tanqua^ a capite beneficia derivantur Id. ibid. number. 2.
in this respect, Cantic. 7.4. it is said of her: Thy neck is as a tower of
Yvorie. because that as by the neck the vital spirits do descend from the head
into the body; so by the Virgin the vital graces are transmitted from Christ
the head into his mystical body: the fullness of grace being in him as in the
head from whence the influence comes, and in her as in the neck through
which it is transfused unto us. so that Quasi sublato Virginis patrocinio,
perinde a^que halitu intercluso, peccator vivere diutius non possit. Viegas
ibid. sect. 2. number. 6.
take away the patronage of the Virgin, you stop as i^ were the sinners breath,
that he is not able to live any longer.

Then men stuck not to teach, that unto her Data est tibi omnis potestas in
coelo and in terra. Petr. Dami^n sermon. 1. de nativit. B. Mariae. tom. 5. Surij,
September. 8.
all power was given in heaven and in earth. So that for heaven, when our
Savior ascended thither, this might be assigned for one reason (among others)
why he left his mother behind him: Fortassis Domine, ne tuae coelesti Curiae
veniret in dubiu^, cuj potiu^ occurreret; tibi videlicet Domino suo, regnu^
tuu^ in assumpta carne petenti, an ipsi Dominae suae, ipsum regnu^ jam suu^
materno jure effectu^ ascendenti. Anse^^. Cantuar. de excellentia B. Virginis,
cap. 7. and eum secuti, Bernard. de Busti in Mariali, part 11. sermon. 1. part.
3. and Sebast. Barrad. Jesuit. Concord. Euangel lib. 6. cap. 11.
least perhaps the court of Heaven might have been in a doubt, whom they
should rather go to meet, their Lord or their Lady. and for earth, O igitur
Regina nostra serenissima, profecto tu dicere potes illud, 1. Esdrae 1. Omnia
regna terrae dedit mihi Dominus. Et nos tibi dicere possumus illud Tobi 13 In
omnia secula regnu^ tuu^. and Psalm 144. Regnu^ tuu^ regnu^ omniu^ seculorum
etc. and. Dan. 2. Regnu^ quod in aeternu^ non dissipabitur. Veni ergo, and
super nos regnum accipe, Iudic. 9. De regno enim tuo dici potest illud, Psalm.
103. Et regnum ipsius omnibus domi^abitur. and Luc. 1. Et regni eju^ non erit
finis. Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 12. sermon. 1. part. 1.
she may rightly apply unto her self that in the first of Ezra; All the
kingdoms of the earth has the Lord given unto me. and we may say unto her
again, that in Tobi 14. Thy kingdom endures for all ages: and in the 144. or
145 Psalm; Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages. That howsoever she was
Quamvis autem benedicta Virgo fuerit nobilior persona quae fuerit vel futura
sit in orb terrarum, tantaeque perfectionis, quod etiamsi non fuisset matter
Dei, nihilominus debuisset esse Domina mundi: tamen secundum leges quibus
regitur mundus, jure haereditario omnem mundi hujus meruit principatum and
regnum. Bernardin. Senens. se^m 61. artic. 1. cap. 7.
the noblest person that was or ever should be in the world, and of so great
perfection, that although she had not been the mother of God, she ought
nevertheless to have been the Lady of the world: yet according to the laws
whereby the world is governed, by the right of inheritance she did deserve the
principality and kingdom of this world. That De monarchia autem universi
nunquam Christus testatus est: eo quod sine matris pra judicio nequaquam fieri
poterat. Insuper noverat, quod potest matter filij irritare testamentum, si in
sui praejudicium sit confectum. Ex his omnibus apertissime claret, quod matter
Jesus Maria haereditario jure omnium qui sunt infra Deum habet regale dominium
and inclytum obtinet principatum Id ibid.
Christ never made any legacy of this Monarchy: because that could not be done
without the prejudice of his mother; and he knew besides, that the mother could
make void the Testament of the son, if it were made unto her prejudice. And
therefore that by all this it appears most evidently, that Mary the mother of
Jesus, by right of inheritance has the regal dominion over all that be under
God. That Tot creaturae serviunt gloriosae Virgini Mariae, quot serviunt
Trinitati. Omnes nempe creaturae, quemcunque gradum teneant in creatis, sive
spirituales ut Angeli, sive rationales ut homines, sive corporales ut corpora
coelestia vel elementa, and omnia quae sunt in coelo and in terra, sive damnati
sive beati, quae omnia sunt divino imperio subjugata, gloriosae Virgini sunt
subjecta. Ille enim qui Dei filius est and Virginis benedictae, volens (ut sic
dicam) paterno principatui quodammodo principatum aequiparare maternum; ipse
qui Deus erat matri famulabatur in terra. Vnde Lucae 2. scriptum est de Virgin
and glorioso Joseph: Erat subditus illis. Praeterea haec est vera: Divino
imperio omnia famulantur and Virgo. and iterum haec est vera: Imperio Virginis
omnia famulantur and Deus. Id. ibid. cap. 6.
as many creatures do serve the glorious Virgin Mary, as serve the Trinity.
namely all creatures, whatsoever degree they hold among the things created
(whether they be spiritual as Angels, or rational as men, or corporal as the
Heavenly bodies or the Elements) and all things that are in Heaven and in
Earth, whether they be the damned or the blessed: all which being brought under
the government of God, are subject likewise unto the glorious Virgin. for
as much as he who is the son of God and of the blessed Virgin, being willing
as it were to equal in some sort his Mothers soveraigntie unto the sovereignty
of his Father; even he who was God, did serve his mother upon earth. Whence
Luke 2.51. it is written of the Virgin and glorious Joseph: He was subject unto
them. that as this proposition is true; All things are subject to Gods command,
even the Virgin her self: so this again is true also; All things are subject
to the command of the Virgin, even God himself. that, Cum beata Virgo sit
matter Dei, and Deus filius ejus; and omnis filius sit naturaliter inferior
matre and subditus ejus, and matter praelata and superior filio: sequitur quod
ipsa benedicta Virgo sit superior Deo, and ipse Deus sit subditus ejus ratione
humanitatis ab ea assumptae. Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 9. sermon. 2.
considering the blessed Virgin is the mother of God and God is her son, and
every son is naturally inferior to his mother and subject unto her, and the
mother has preeminence and is superior to her son; it therefore follows
that the blessed Virgin is superior to God, and God himself is subject unto
her, in respect of the manhood which he assumed from her. that Ipsa benedicta
Virgo, licet sit subjecta Deo inquantu^ creatura; superior tamen illi dicitur
and praelata, inquantu^ est ejus matter. Vnde Luc. 2. de Christo Daeo and homine
scriptu^ est, quod erat subditus illi. O ineffabilis dignitas Mariae, quae
imperatori omnium meruit imperare. Id. part. 12. sermon. 2.
howsoever she be subject unto God inasmuch as she is a creature; yet is she
said to be superior and preferred before him, inasmuch as she is his mother.

Then men were put in mind, that Peccando post Baptismum videntur contemnere
and despicere passionem Christi: and sic nullus peccator meretur quod Christus
amplius intercedat pro ipso apud Patrem; sine cujus intercessione nemo potest
liberari a poena aeterna, nec temporali, nec culpa quam ipse voluntary
perpetravit. Et ideo fuit necesse ut Christus constitueret matrem suam
praedilectam mediatricem inter nos and ipsum. Jacob. de Valentia episc.
Christopolitan. in exposit. ^antic. virg. Mariae. Magnificat.
by sinning after Baptism they seemed to contemn and despise the passion of
Christ: and so that no sinner does deserve that Christ should any more make
intercession for him to the Father; without whose intercession none can be
delivered either from the eternal punishment or the temporal, nor from the
fault which he has voluntarily committed. And therefore that it was necessary,
that Christ should constitute his welbeloved Mother a Mediatrix betwixt us and
him. Et sic in hac peregrinatione non relinquitur nobis aliud refugium in
nostris tribulationibus and adversitatibus; nisi recurrere ad virginem Mariam
mediatricem, ut velit placare ira^ Filij. Id. ibid.
and so in this our pilgrimage, there is no other refuge left unto us in our
tribulations and adversities, but to have recourse unto the Virgin Mary our
mediatrix; that she would appease the wrath of her Son. That Sicut ille ibi
ascendit ut continue appareat vultui Dei pro hominibus; Hebr. 9 it^ ego debeo
ibi ascendere, ut appaream vultui ipsius filij pro peccatoribus: and sic
humanum genus habeat semper ante faciem Dei adjutorium simile Christo ad
procurandam suam salutem. Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 11. sermon. 2. membr.
1.
as He is ascended into heaven, to appear in the sight of God for men; (Hebr.
9.24.) so She ought to ascend thither, to appear in the sight of her Son
for sinners: that so mankind might have always before the face of God a Help
like unto Christ for the procuring of his salvation. That Tantae aute^
auctoritatis in coelesti palatio est ista Imperatrix, quod omnibus alijs
Sanctis intermedijs omissis, ad ipsam licet ab omni gravamine appellare. Licet
enim secundum jura civilia debitum medium servetur in appellationibus: ( l.
Imperatores ff. de appel. reci.) tame^ in ipsa servatur stylus juris Canonici,
quo omisso quolibet medio appellatur ad summu^ Pontificem. ( C. si duobus.
extra. de appel) Id. part. 3. sermon. 3. in excellent. 4.
this Empress is of so great authority in the palace of Heaven, that it is
lawful to appeal unto her from any grievance, all other intermediall Saints
omitted. for howsoever according to the Civil law the due mean must be
observed in Appeals: yet in her the style of the Canon law is observed,
wherein the Pope is appealed unto, any intermediall whatsoever omitted. That
Nos autem dicere possumus, quod beatissima Virgo est Cancellaria in coelesti
curia. Nam videmus quod in Cancellaria Domini Papae conceduntur tria genera
literaru^. etc. Istas aute^ literas misericordiae dat (B. Virgo) solum in
praesenti vita. Nam animabus decede^tibus quibusda^ dat literas purae gratiae:
alijs vero simplicis justitiae, and quibusda^ mixtas, sc. justitiae and
gratiae. Quida^ enim fuerunt sibi valde devoti: and istis dat literas purae
gratiae, per quas mandat ut detur eis gloria sine aliqua Purgatorij poena. Alij
autem fuerunt miseri peccatores and ejus indevoti: and istis dat literas
simplicis justitiae, per quas mandat ut eis fiat condigna vindicta. Alij vero
fuerunt in devotione tepidi and remissi: and istis dat literas justitiae and
gratiae simul; per quas mandat ut and gratia eis fiat, and tamen illis
infera^ur aliqua Purgatorij poena propter negligentia^ and torpore^. Et ista
significantur in Hester regina, quae (ut habetur Hest. 8.) scripsit li^eras ut
Iudaei salvare^tur, and hosts interficerentur, and pauperibus munuscula
darentur. Id. part. 12. sermon. 2. membr. 1. in excellent. 12.
she is a Chancellor in the Court of heaven: and gives letters of mercy only
in this present life; but for the souls that depart from hence, unto some
letters of pure gra^e, unto others of simple justice, and unto some mixed of
justice and grace. For some (say they) were much devoted unto her: and unto
them she gives letters of pure grace, whereby she commands glory to be
given them without any pain of Purgatory. Others were miserable sinners and
not devoted to her: and unto them she gives letters of simple justice, whereby
she commands that condign punishment be taken of them. Others were
lukewarm and remiss in devotion: and unto them she gives letters of justice
and grace together; whereby she commands that both favor be done unto them,
and yet some pain of Purgatory be inflicted upon them for their negligence
and sluggishnesse. And these things they say are signified in Queen Esther;
who wrote letters that the Jews should be saved, and the enemies should be
killed, and to the poor small gifts should be given. Yea further also,
Confugimus autem primo ad beatissima^ Virginem coelorum Regina^: cui Rex regu^,
pater coelestis, dimidiu^ regni sui dedit. Quod significatu^ est in Hester
regina: quae cum ad placandum Assuerum rege^ accessisset, dixit ei Rex; Etiam
si dimidiam partem regni mei petieris, dabitur tibi. Sic pater coelestis, cum
habeat justitiam and misericordiam tanqua^ potiora regni sui bona; justitia
sibi retenta, misericordiam matri Virgini concessit Gabr. Biel in Canon Missae,
lect. 80. Vide Johan. Gerson. tract. 4. super Magnificat.
where King Assuerus did profer unto the said Esther even the half of his
Kingdom: (Esth* 5.3.) thereby they say was signified that God bestowed half
of his kingdom upon the blessed Virgin. that having Justice and Mercy as the
chiefest goods of his Kingdom, he retained Justice unto himself, and granted
mercy unto her. and Ista imperatrix figuravit imperatricem coelorum, cum qua
Deus ^egnum suum divisit. Cum enim Deus habeat justitiam and misericordiam:
justitiam sibi in ^oc mundo exercendam retinuit, and misericordiam matri
concessit. Et ideo si quis sentit se gra^a^i a foro justitiae Dei, appellet ad
forum misericordiae matris ejus. Bernar^in. de Bust. Marial part. 3. sermon. 3.
in excellent. 4.
therefore that if a man do find himself aggrieved in the court of Gods
justice, he may appeal to the court of mercy of his mother: (she being that
Id. ibid. excellent. 5. and part. 5. sermon. 7 in fine.
throne of grace, whereof the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 4.16. Let us go boldly
unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need.

They tell us, that Ad orname^tum regni terren^ est, quod habeat Regem and
Regina^. Et propter hoc quando aliquis rex non habet uxorem, ejus subditi
plerumque ei supplicant ut eam accipiat. Supernum ergo coelorum regnum volens
Rex aeternus and Imperator omnipotens decorare; fabricavit hanc beatissimam
Virgine^, ut illam regni and imperij sui faceret Dominam and Imperatricem: ut
verificaretur prophetia David, Psalm 44. ei dicentis; Astitit regina a dextris
tuis in vestitu deaurato, circundatavarietate Jd. part. 9. sermon. 2.
it is for the ornament of an earthly kingdom, that it should have both a King
and a Queen: and therefore when any King has not a wife his subjects often
do request him to take one. Hereupon they say, that the eternal King and
omnipotent Emperor minding to adorn the kingdom of heaven above, did frame
this blessed Virgin, to the end he might make her the Lady and Empress of his
kingdom and empire: that the prophecy of David might be verified, saying unto
her in the Psalm; Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in clothing of
gold. That Est etiam Imperatrix, quia aeterni Imperatoris est sponsa; de quo
dicitur Johan. 3. cap. Qui habet sponsam, sponsus est. Quando vero Deus illi
tradidit imperium orbis and omnium conte^toru^ in eo: dixit ei illud quod
habetur 1. Aeneid. Id. part. 3. sermon. 3. in excellent 4.
she is an Empress, because she is the spouse of the eternal Emperor; of who^
it is said, Ioh. 3.29. He that has the bride is the bridegroom. and that when
God did deliver unto her the empire of the world and all the things contained
therein; he said unto her that which we read in the first of the Aeneids: His
ego nec metas rerum nec tempora pono;
Imperium sine sine dedi.
That she is Beata Virgo est imperatrix coeli and terrae: quia ipsa genuit
coelestem Imperatorem. et ideo potest ab eo petere quicquid vult et obtinere.
quod figuratum fuit 3. Reg. 2. ubi matter Salomonis dixit ei: Petitionem unam
pero a te; ne confundas faciem meam. tunc enim faciem suam confunderet, quando
illud quod peteret denegaret. Si ergo imperat filio ratione maternalis
jurisdictionis, qui fuit subditus illi (ut habetur Luc. 2.) multo magis imperat
omnibus creaturis filio suo subjectis. Id. ibid.
the Empress also of heaven and earth, because she did bear the heavenly
Emperor: and therefore that she can ask of him what she will and obtain it.
that this was figured in the history of the Kings, where the mother of Solomon
said unto him: I desire one petition of thee, do not confound my face: for
then should he confound her face, if he did deny that which she requested.
and that if in respect of her maternall jurisdicton she has command of her
Son, who was subject unto her: (as we read, Luke 2.51.) then much more
has she command over all the creatures that are subject to her Son. That
this Matrem quippe suam praepotens ille Deus divinae majestatis potestatisque
sociam, quatenus licuit, adscivit. Huic olim coelestium, mortaliumque
principatum detulit: ad hujus arbitrium (quoad hominum tutela postulat) terras,
maria, ^oelum, naturamque moderatur: hac annuente, et per hanc divinos
thesauros mortalibus, et coelestia dona largitur. Vt omnes intelligant,
quicquid ab eaterno illo augustoque bonorum font in terras profluat, fluere
per MARIAM. Horat. Tursellin. Jesuit. in epist. dedicator. Historiae Lauretanae
ad Cardinalem Aldobrandinum.
mighty God did (as far as he might) make his Mother partner of his divine
majesty and power: giving unto her of old the soveraignetie both of celestial
things and mortal: ordering at her pleasure (as the patronage of men did
require) the earth, the seas, heaven, and nature: at her liking, and by her,
bestowing upon mortal men his divine treasures and heavenly gifts. So as all
might understand, that whatsoever does flow into the earth from that eternal
and glorious fountain of good things, does flow by MARIE. That Constituta
quippe est super omnem creaturam; and quicumque Jesus curvat genu, matri quoque
pronus supplicat: and filij gloriam cum matre non tam communem judico, quam
eandem. Arnold. Carnotens tract. de laudib. Virginis.
she is constituted over every creature, and whosoever boweth his knee unto
Jesus, does fall down also and supplicate unto his mother: so that the glory
of the Son may be judged not so much to be common with the Mother, as to be
the very same. That Tanta est gloria Virginis matris Dei; quod tantum excedit
in gloria naturam angelicam and humanam simul junctam, quantum circumferentia
firmamenti excedit in magnitudine suum centrum: cum intelligat in filio suo se
quasi alterum ipsum Deitate vestitam. Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 12.
sermon. 2. in excellent. 21.
so great is her glory, that she exceeds the nature of Angels and Men,
joined together, as far in glory, as the circumference of the firmament
exceeds his center in magnitude: when she understands her self in her
Son to be, as his other self, clothed with the Deity. That she being Qui
enim alicui rei innititur, virtutem ejus sibi assumit, and ea sicut vult
utitur. Et similiter ipsa Dei matter de omnipotentia filij sui cui ^st innixa,
quantum vult sibi assumit. Id. part. 12. sermon. 2. in excellent. 28.
the mother of God, does assume unto her self o^ the omnipotency of her Son
(upon which she leans) as much as she pleases. and that she Accedis ante
illud aurei^ humanae reconciliationi^ altar, non solum rogans, sed imperans;
Domina, non ancilla. Petr. Damian se^m. 1. de nativit. B. Mariae.
does come before the golden altar of humane reconciliation, not entreating
only, but commanding; a Mistress, not a maid.

They tell us, that the blessed Virgin her self appeared once unto Thomas
Becket, and used this speech unto him. Gaude and laetare, ac exulta mecum; quia
gloria mea excellit dignitatem and laetitiam omnium sanctorum and cunctorum
spirituum beatorum, and majorem gloriam habeo ipsa sola quam omnes simul Angeli
and Sancti. Gaude. quia sicut Sol illuminat diem ac mundum, sic claritas mea
illuminat totu^ orbem coeleste^. Gaude, quia tota militia coeli mihi obedit, me
veneratur and honorat. Gaude, quia filius meus mihi semper est obediens, and
meam voluntatem, and cunctas preces meas semper exaudit. Gaude, quia Deus
semper ad beneplacitum meu^ remunerat servitores meos in hoc seculo and in
futuro. Gaude, quia proxima sedeo sanctae Trinitati, and vestita sum corpore
meo glorificato. Gaude, quia certa sum and secura, quod haec mea gaudia semper
stabunt and nunquam finientur vel deficient. Et quicumque cum his gaudijs
spiritualibus laetando in hoc seculo me venerabitur, in exitu animae suae de
corpore praesentiam meam obtinebit; and ipsam animam ab hostibus malignis
liberabo, and in conspectu filij mei ut meeum gaudia possideat praesentabo.
Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 10 sermon. 2. sect. ult.
Rejoice and be glad, and be joyful with me: because my glory does excel
the dignity and joy of all the Saints and all the blessed spirits; and I alone
have greater glory than all the Angels and Saints together. Rejoice, because
that as the Sun does inlighten the day and the world, so my brightness does
inlighten the whole celestial world. Rejoice, because the whole hoaste of
heaven obeys me, reverenceth and honors me. Rejoice, because my Son is
always obedient unto me, and my will, and all my prayers he always hears.
(or as others do relate it: Quod summae Trinitatis and mea est una voluntas;
and quodcunque mihi placuerit, tota Trinitas ineffabili favore consentit.
Promptuar. Discipuli, de miraculi B. Mari^, exempl. 14. ( page 8. edit. Mogunt.
ann. 1612.)
The will of the blessed Trinity and mine is one and the same; and whatsoever
does please me, the whole Trinity with unspeakeable favor does give consent
unto.) Rejoice, because God does always at my pleasure reward my servitors in
this world and in the world to come. Rejoice, because I fit next to the holy
Trinity, and am clothed with my body glorified. Rejoice, because I am
certain and sure, that these my joys shall always stand and never be
finished or ^ayle. And whosoever by rejoicing with these spiritual joys shall
wo^ship me in this world, at the time of the dep^rture of his soul out of the
body he shall obtain my presence: and I will deliver his soul from the
malignant enemies, and present it in the sight of my Son, that it may
possess joys with me. They tell us, that many ( M^ltae meretri^es in die
Sabbati^on pecca^ent propter reverentia^ Virginis Et multi videntur beatam
Virginem in majori veneratione habere, quam Ch^istum filiu^ ejus; magis ex
simplicitate moti quam scientia. Sed quia honor matris redundat in filium,
Prove. 17. patientiam habet filius Dei, de hac quorundam viroru^ and mulie^um
simplicitate. Bernardin. de Bust. part. 6. sermon. 2. memb. 3.
many whoores for example, that would not sin on Saturday, for the reverence
of the Virgin; whatsoever they did on the Lords day) seem to have the blessed
Virgin in greater veneration than Christ her son; moved thereunto out of
simplicity more than out of knowledge. Yet that the Son of God does bear
with the simplicity of these men and women: because he is not ignorant, that
the honor of the mother does redound to the child (Prove. 17.6.) They argue
further, that Si hoc privilegium habet Cardinalis, quod si ponat pileum sive
cape^lum suum super^caput illius qui ducitur ad justitiam, liberatur: (secundum
Baldu^ and Paulu^ de Castro, in ^addictos. C. de appel.) a fortiori, pallium
beatae. Virginis potest nos ab omnibus malis liberare. Tam lata enim est ejus
misericordia, quod si aliquem devote facientem Coronam suam viderit in medio
millium daemonu^ trahi ad supplicium; eum protinus liberabit: nec permittet
aliquem male finiri, qui ejus Corona^ reverenter studuerit facere. Id. part.
12. sermon. 1. mem^r. 3.
if a Cardinal have this privilege, that if he put his cap upon the head of
one that is ledd unto justice, he is freed thereby: then by an argument drawn
from the stronger, the cloak of the blessed Virgin is able to deliver us from
all evil. her mercy being so large, that if she should see any man who did
devoutly make her Crown (that is to say, repeat the Rosarie or Chaplet of
prayers made for her worship) to be drawn unto punishment in the midst of a
thousand Devils; she would presently rescue him, and not permit that any one
should have an evil end, who did study revere^tly to make her Crown. They add
moreover, that Sic in summa erunt ducenta septuaginta tria millia septingenti
quinquaginta octo dies indulgentiae pro qualibet corona. Felicis aute^
recordationis Sixtus Papa quartus, omnibus dice^tibus in statu gratiae
infrascripta^ oratione^ sive salutatione^ ipsius Virginis, quae a multis
dicitur in Corona, concessit indulgentia^ duodecim millium annoru^ pro qualibet
vice qua dicitur. Ave sanctissima Maria, matter Dei, regina coeli, porta para
disi, domina mundi. Singularis and pura tu es virgo. Tu concepisti Christu^
sine peccato. Tu peperisti creatore^ and salvatorem mundi, in quo non dubito,
Libera me ab omni malo; and orapro peccatis mei^ Amen. Jbid.
for every of these Crowns a man shall obtain 273758. days of Indulgence: and
that Pope Sixtus the fourth granted an indulgence of twelve thousand years for
every time that a man in the state of grace should repeat this short orizon or
salutation of the Virgin, which by many is inserted into her Crown. Hayle
most holy Mary, the mother of God, the Queen of heaven, the gate of Paradise,
the Lady of the world. Thou art a singular and pure virgin: thou did
conceive Christ without sin: thou did bear the creator and savior of the
world, in whom I do not doubt. Deliver me from all evil, and pray for my
sins. Amen.

In the Crown composed by Bonaventure, this is one of the orizons that is
prescribed to be said. Imperatrix and Domina nostra benignissima, iure matris
impera tuo dilectissimo Filio Domino nostro Jesus Christo, ut mentes nostras ab
amore terrestrium ad coelestia desideria erigere dignetur. Bonaventur. Corona B
Mariae Virginis, Operum tomo 6. edit. Romans an. 1588.
O. Empress and our most kind Lady, by the authority of a mother command
thy most beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would vouchsafe to lift
up our minds from the love of earthly things unto heavenly desires. which is
suitable unto that versicle which we read in the 35. Psalm, of his Ladies
Psalter. Inclina vultum Dei super nos: coge illu^ peccatoribus misereri. Id. in
Psalterio B. Mariae Virg. ibid.
Incline the countenance of God upon us: compel him to have mercy upon
sinners. the harshenesse whereof our Romanists have a little qualified in some
of their editions, reading thus, Inclina vultum filij tui super nos: coge illum
precibus nobis peccatoribus misereri Psalt^r. Bonaventur seorsim. edit.
Parisijs, an. 1596. in Capeleto Dominicae 2.
Incline the countenance of thy Son upon us: compel him by thy prayers to
have mercy upon us sinners. The psalms of this Psalter do all of them begin
as David's do: but with this maine difference, that where the Prophet in the
one aymeth at the advancement of the honor of our Lord, the Friar in the other
applies all to the magnifying of the power and goodness of our Lady. So in
the first Psalm: Beatus vir qui diligit nomen tuu^ Maria virgo: gratia tua
animam ejus confortabit. Psalm. 1.
Blessed is the man (quoth Bonaventure) that loves thy name, O Virgin Marie:
thy grace shall comfort his soul. and in the others following. Domina, quid
multiplicati sunt qui tribulant me? in tempestate tua persequeri^ and
dissipabis eos. Psalm. 3.
Lady, how are they multiplied that trouble me? with thy tempest shall thou
persecute and scatter them. Domina, ne in furore Dei sinas corripi me: neque in
ira ejus judicari. Psalm. 6.
Lady, suffer me not to be rebuked in the fury of God; nor to be judged in
his wrath. Domina mea, in te speravi: de inimicis meis libera me Domina. Psalm
7.
My Lady, in thee have I put my trust: deliver me from mine enemies, O Lady.
In Domina confido; propter dulcedine^ misericordiae nominis sui. Psalm. 10.
In our Lady put I my trust; for the sweetness of the mercy of her name.
Vsquequo Domina oblivisceris me; and non liberas me in die tribulationis? Psalm.
12.
How long will thou forget me, O Lady, and not deliver me in the day of
tribulation? Conserva me Domina, quoniam speravi in te: mihique tuae
stillicidia gratiae impartire. Psalm. 15.
Preserve me, O Lady, for in thee have I put my trust: and imparte unto me the
drops of thy grace. Diligam te, Domina coeli and terrae: and in gentibus
nomen tuu^ invocabo. Psalm. 17.
I will love thee, O Lady of heaven and earth: and I will call upon thy name
among the nations. Coeli enarrant gloriam tuam: and unguentorum tuorum
fragrantia in gentibus est dispersa. Psalm. 18.
The heavens declare thy glory: and the fragrance of thine ointments is spread
among the nations. Exaudias nos Domina in die tribulationis: and precibus
nostris converte clementem faciem tua^. Psalm. ^9.
Hear us, Lady, in the day of trouble: and turn thy merciful face unto our
prayers. Ad te Domina levavi anima^ mea^: in judicio Dei, tuis precibus non
erubescam. Psalm. 24.
Unto thee, O Lady, have I lifted up my soul: in the judgment of God, by thy
prayers, I shall not be ashamed. Iudica me Domina, quonia^ ab innocentia mea
digressus sum: sed quia sperabo in te, non infirmabor. Psalm. 25.
Judge me, Lady, for I have departed from mine innocence: but because I will
trust in thee, I shall not be weakened. In te Domina speravi, non co^fundar in
aeternum: in gratia tua suscipe me. Psalm. 30.
In thee, O Lady, have I put my trust, let me never be confounded: in thy
favor receive me Beati quorum corda te diligunt, virgo Maria: peccata ipsorum
a te misericorditer diluentur. Psalm. 31.
Blessed are they whose hearts do love thee, o virgin Marie: their sins by
thee shall mercifully be washed away. Iudica Domina nocentes me: and contra eos
exurge, and vindica causam meam, Psalm. 34.
Lady, judge those that hurt me: and rise up against them, and plead my cause.
Expectans expectavi gratiam tuam: and fecisti mihi secundum multitudinem
misericodiae nominis tui. Psalm. 39.
Waiting have I waited for thy grace: and thou have done unto me according to
the multitude of the mercy of thy name. Domina refugium nostru^ tu es in omni
necessitate nostra; and virtus potentior conterens inimicu^. Psalm. 45.
Lady, thou art our refuge in all our necessities; and the powerful strength
treading down the enemy. Miserere mei Domina, quae matter misericordia^
nuncuparis: and secundum viscera misericordiarum tuarum, munda me ab omnibus
iniquitatibus meis. Psalm. 50.
Have mercy upon me, O Lady, who art called the mother of mercy; and
according to the bowels of thy mercies, cleanse me from all mine iniquities.
Domina in nomine tuo^ salvum me fac: and ab in^ustitijs meis libera me. Psalm.
53.
Save me, Lady, by thy name; and deliver me from mine unrighteousness.
Miserere mei Domina, miserere mei: quia paratu^ est cor meu^ exquirere
voluntate^ tua^: and in umbra alaru^ tuarum requiesca^. Ps. 56.
Have mercy upon me, O Lady, have mercy upon me: because my heart is
prepared to search out thy will; and in the shadow of thy wings will I rest.
Exurgat Maria, and dissipentur inimici ejus: conterantur omnes sub pedibus
ejus. Psalm. 67.
Let Marie arise, and let her enemies be scattered: let them all be troaden
down under her feet. In te Domina speravi, non cnfundar in aeternum: in tua
misericordia libera me, and eripe me. Psalm. 70.
In thee, O Lady, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion:
deliver me in thy mercy, and cause me to escape. Deus judicium tuum Regida;
and misericordiam tuam Reginae matri ejus. Psalm. 71.
Give the King thy judgment, O God, and thy mercy to the Queen his mother.
Domina, venerunt gentes in haereditatem Dei: quas tu meritis tuis Christo
confoederasti. Psalm. 78.
Lady, the gentiles are come into the inheritance of God: whom thou by thy
merits have confederated unto Christ. Misericordias tuas, Domina, in
sempiternum decantabo. Psalm. 88.
Thy mercies, O Lady, will I sing for ever. Deus ultionum Dominus: sed tu Matter
misericordiae ad miserandum inflectis. Psalm ^93.
God is the Lord of revenges: but thou the mother of mercy do bow him to
take pity. Venite, exultemus Dominae nostrae: jubilemus salutiferae Mariae
Reginae nostrae. Psalm. 94.
O come, let us sing unto our Lady: let us make a joyful noise to Mary our
Queen that brings salvation. Cantate Dominae nostrae canticu^ novu^: quia
mirabilia fecit. Psalm. 97.
O sing unto our Lady a new song: for she has done marveilous things.
Confitemini Domino, quonia^ bonus: co^fitemini matri ejus, quonia^ in saeculu^
misericordia ejus. Ps. 106. and 117.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: give thanks unto his mother,
for her mercy endures for ever. Domina, laudem mea^ ne despexeris: and hoc
dedicatum tibi Psalterium digneris acceptare. Psalm. 108.
Lady, despise not my praise: and vouchsafe to accept this Psalter which is
dedicated unto thee. Dixit Dominus Dominae nostrae: sede matter mea a dextris
meis. Psalm. 109.
The Lord said unto our Lady: sit thou, my mother, at my right hand. Qui
confidunt in te, matter Dei, non timebunt a facie inimici. Psalm. 124.
They that trust in thee, O mother of God, shall not fear from the face of the
enemy. Nisi Domina aedificaverit domum cordis nostri: non permanebit
aedificium ejus. Psalm. 126.
Except our Lady build the house of our heart: the building thereof will not
continue. Beati omnes qui timent Dominam nost^a^: and beati omnes qui sciunt
facere voluntatem tuam, and beneplacitum tuu^. Psalm. 127.
Blessed are all they who fear our Lady: and blessed are all they who know to
do thy will, and thy good pleasure. De profundis clamavi ad te Domina: Domina
exaudi vocem meam. Psalm. 129
Out of the deep have I cried unto thee, O Lady: Lady, hear my voice.
Memento Domina David; and omnium invocantium nomen tuum. Psalm. 131.
Lady, remember David, and all that call upon thy name. Confitemini Domino
quo^iam bonus est: quoniam per suam dulcissimam matrem Virginem Mariam datur
misericordia ejus. Psalm. 135.
O give thanks unto the Lord, because he is good: because by his most sweet
mother the virgin Mary is his mercy given. Benedicta si^ Domina, quae instruis
servos tuos ad praelium: and eos roboras contra inimicum. Ps. 143.
Blessed be thou, O Lady, which teach thy servants to war; and
strengthenest them against the enemy. and so the last Psalm is begun with,
Laudate Domina^ in sanctis ejus: laudate eam in virtutibus and miraculis ejus.
Psalm. 150.
Praise our Lady in her Saints; praise her in her virtues and miracles: and
ended accordingly, with, Omnis spiritus laudet Dominam nostram. Let every
spirit (or, every thing that has breath) praise our Lady.

To this we may adioyne the Psal^erium meditationum B. Mariae, vocatur a Io
Pithio, de illustr. An^l. Scriptorib. page 380.
Psalter of the salutations of the Virgin, framed by John Peckham archbishop of
Canterbury, which is not yet printed. His preface he begins thus: Mente
concipio lauds perscribere
Sanctae Virginis; quae nos a carcere
Solvit per filium, genus in genere
Miri vivificans effectus opere.
and ends with a prayer to the blessed Virgin, that she would release the
sins of all those for whom he prayed, and cause both his own name and
theirs to be written in the book of life. Nec non and omnibus relaxes crimina,
Pro quibus supplicans fundo precamina:
Nostrumque pariter and horum nomina
Conscribi facias in vitae pagina.
Then follows his first Psalm; wherein he prays, that she would make us to
meditate often Gods Law, and afterward to be made blessed in the glory of
Gods kingdom. Ave Virgo virginum parens absque pari,
Sine viri semine digna foecundari:
Fac nos legem Domini crebro meditari:
Et in regni gloria beatificari.
His other 149. Psalms (which are fraught with the same kind of stuff) I
pass over. But Bernardinus de Senis his boldness may not be forgotten: who
thinks that Sola benedicta virgo Maria plus fecit Deo vel tantum (ut sic
dicam) quam fecit Deus toti generi humano. C^edo etenim certe quod mihi
indulgebit Deus, si nunc pro Virgin loquar. Congregemus in unum quae Deus
homini fecit: and consideremus quae Maria virgo Domino satisfecit etc. Reddendo
ergo singula singulis, sc. quae fecit Deus homini, and quae fecit Deo beata
Virgo; videbis quod plus fecit Maria Deo, quam homini Deus: ut sic pro solatio
dicere liceat, quod propter beatam Virginem, quam tamen ipse fecit, Deus
quodammodo plus obligetur nobis, quam nos sibi. Bernardin. Senens. sermon. 61.
artic. 1. cap. 11.
God will give him leave to maintain, that the Virgin Marie did more unto him,
or at least as much, as he himself did unto all mankind; and that we may say
for our comfort (forsooth) that in respect of the blessed Virgin (whom God
himself did make notwithstanding) God after a sort is more bound unto us, than
we are unto him. With which absurd and wretched speculation Bernardinus de
Busti after him was so well pleased: that he dares to revive again this most
odious comparison, and propose it a fresh in this saucy manner. Sed o virgo
gratissima, nunquid tu aliquid ^ecisti Deo? Nunquid vicem ei reddidis^i?
Profecto (si fas est dicere) tu secundum quid majora fecisti Deo, quam ipse
Deus tibi and universo generi humano. Volo ergo ego dicere, quod tu
exhumilitate reticuisti. Tu enim solum cecinisti; Quia fecit mihi magna qui
potens est: ego vero cano and dico; Quia tu fecisti majora ei qui potens est.
Bernardin. de Bust. Marial. part. 6. sermon. 2. membr. 3.
But O most grateful Virgin, did not thou something to God? Did not thou
make him any recompense? Truly (if it be Lawful to speak it) thou in some
respect did greater things to God, than God himself did to thee and to all
mankind. I will therefore speak that, which thou out of thy humility have
past in silence. For thou only did sing: He that is mighty has done to me
great things. but I do sing and say: that thou have done greater things to him
that is mighty. Neither is that vision much better, which the Id. part. 9.
sermon. 2. assimilat. 2.
same author recites as showed to S. Francis, or (as Speculum vitae Francisci
and fociorum eius: part. 2. c. 45. edit. Guilielmi Spoelberch. Item, Speculum
Exemplorum, did. 7. exempl. 41.
others would have it) to his companion Friar Lion; touching the two ladders
that reached from earth unto heaven. the one redd, upon which Christ leaned:
from whence many fell backward, and could not ascend. the other white, upon
which the holy Virgin leaned: the help whereof such as used, were by her
received with a cheerful countenance, and so with facility ascended into
heaven. Neither yet that sentence, which came first from Anselme, and was after
him used by Ludolphus Saxo the Carthusian, and Chrysostomus a Visitatione the
Cistercian Monk: that Velocior est nonnunquam salus memorato nomine Mariae,
quam invocato nomine Domini Jesus unici Filij sui. Anselm de excellentia B.
Virginis, cap. 6. Ludolph. Carthusian de Vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 68. and
Chrysostom. a Visitatione, de Verbis Dominae, tom. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2.
more present relief is sometimes found by commemorating the name of Mary,
then by calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus her only Son. which one of
Henr. Fitz-Simon, of the Mass. lib. 2. part. 2. chap. 3.
our Jesuits is so far from being ashamed to defend, that he dares to
extend it further to the mediation of other Saints also: telling us very
peremptorily, that as our Lord Jesus works greater miracles by his Saints
then by himself (John. 14.12) so often he shows the force of their
intercession more then of his own.

All which I do lay down thus largely, not because I take any delight in
rehearsing those things, which deserve rather to be buried in everlasting
oblivion: but first, that the world may take notice, what kind of monster is
nourished in the Papacy under that strange name of Hyperdulia: the bare
discovery whereof, I am persuaded, will prevail as much with a mind that is
touched with any zeal of Gods honor, as all other arguments and authorities
whatsoever. secondly, that such unstable souls as look back unto Sodom, and
have a lust to return unto Egypt again, may be advised to look a little into
this sink, and consider with themselves whether the steame that arises from
thence be not so noisome, that it is not to be endured by one that has any
sense left in him of pierie. and thirdly, that such as be established in the
present truth, may be thankful to God for this great mercy vouchsafed unto
them, and mak^ this still one part of their prayers. From all Romish Dulia and
Hyperdulia, good Lord deliver us.

OF IMAGES.
WIth prayer to Saints our Challenger joyneth the use of holy Images: which
what it has been and still is in the Church of Rome, seeing he has not
been pleased to declare unto us in particular, I hope he will give us leave to
learn from others. Doctrina ost Romanae Ecclesiae, Christi and Sanctorum
Imagines pia Religione a Christianis colendas esse. Zac. Bo^erius, in Orthodoxa
Consultat, de ratione verae Fidei and Religionis ample^tenda. part. 2. Regul.
1. page 189. edit. Matrit. an. 1623.
It is the doctrine then of the Roman Church, that the Images of Christ and
the Saints should with pious Religion be worshipped by Christians: says
Zacharias Boverius the Spanish friar, in his late Consultation directed to our
most noble Prince Charles, Serenissime Carole, spes Anglicanae Ecclesiae. Id.
part. 1. Regul. 4. page 58.
the Hope of the Church of England, and Princeps futura orbis foelicitas Id
part. 2. Regul. 2. page 196.
the future felicity of the World; as even this Balaam himself does style him.
The representations of God, and of Christ, and of Angels, and of Saints, Non
solum pinguntur, ut ostendantur, sicut Cherubim olim in templo, sed ut
adorentur: ut frequens usus Ecclesiae testatur. Caietan in 3. part. Thomae,
quaest. 25. artic. 3.
are not only painted that they may be showed, as the Cherubims were of old in
the Temple, but that they may be adored; as the frequent use of the Church does
testify: says Cardinal Cajetan. So Thomas Arundell archbishop of Canterbury,
in his Provincial Council held at Oxford in the year 1408. established this
Constitution following. * From henceforth let it be taught commonly and
preached by all, that the Cross and the Image of the Crucifixe and the rest of
the Images of the Saints, in memory and honor of them whom they figure, as
also their places and Relickes, ought to be worshipped with processions,
bendings of the knee, bowings of the body, incensings, kissings, offerings,
lighting of candles, and pilgrimages; together with all other manners and forms
whatsoever, as has been accustomed to be done in our or our predecessors
times. And in the Roman Catechism set out by the appointment of the Council
of Trent, non solum autem licere in Ecclesia imagines habere, and illis honorem
and cultum adhibere, ostendet Parochus (cum honos qui illis exhibetur,
referatur ad prototypa) verum etiam maximo fidelium bono ad hanc usque diem
factum declarabit. Catechism. Roman. part. 3. cap. 2. sect. 14.
the Parish priest is required to declare unto his parishioners, not only that
it is lawful to have images in the Church, and to give honor and worship unto
them, (for as much as the honor which is done unto them, is referred unto the
things which they represent) but also that this has still been done to the
great good of the faithful. and that Sanctorum quoq, imagines in templis
positas demonstrabit; ut and colantur, and exemplo moniti, ad eorum vitam ac
mores nos ipsos conformemus Ibid.
the Images of the Saints are put in Churches, as well that they may be
worshipped, as that we being admonished by their example, might conform our
selves unto their life and manners.

Now for the manner of this worship, we are told by one of their Bishops; that
Ergo non solum fatendu^ est, fideles in Ecclesia adorare coram imagine, ut
nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquuntur, sed et adorare imaginem, sine quo
volueris scrupulo quin and eo illam venerantur cultu, quo and prototypon ejus:
propter quod, si illud habet adorari latria, and illa latria; si dulia vel
hyperdulia, and illa pariter, ejusmodi cultu adoranda est. Jacob. Nactantius,
in epist. ad Roman. cap. 1 f^l 42. edit. Venet. an. 1557.
it must not only be confessed, that the faithful in the Church do adore
before the Images (as some peradventure would cautelously speak) but also
adore the Image it self, without what scruple you will: yea they do reverence
it with the same worship, wherewith they do the thing that is represented
thereby. Wherefore (says he) if that ought to be adored with Latria (or,
divine worship) this also is to be adored with Latria; if with Dulia or
Hyperdulia, this likewise is to be adored with the same kind of worship. And
so we see that Thomas Aquinas does directly conclude; that Sic sequitur, quod
eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini Christi and ipsi Christo Cum ergo Christus
adoretur adoratione latriae; consequens est, quod ejus imago sit adoratione
latriae adoranda. Thom Sum. part. 3. quaest. 25. artic. 3.
the same reverence is to be given unto the Image of Christ and to Christ
himself: and by consequence, seeing Christ is adored with the adoration of
Latria (or, divine worship) that his image it to be adored with the adoration
of Latria. Upon which place of Thomas, Friar Pedro de Cabrera, a great Master
of Divinity in Spain, does lay down these conclusions. I. Simpliciter and
absolute dicendum est, sacras imagines esse venerandas in templis, and extra
templa: and contrarium est dogma haereticum. Hoc est, imaginibus exhibenda esse
signa servitutis and submissionis, amplexu, luminaribus, oblatione suffituum,
capitis nudatione, etc. Ilaec conclusio est dogma fidei collectum ex Sancta
Scriptura, ex qua constat, res creatas etia^ inanimes, dummodo Deo sint
sacratae, esse adorandas. Petr. de Cabrera, in 3. part. Thom. quaest. 25, ^rt.
3. disput. 2. number. 15.
It is simply and absolutely to be said, that holy Images are to be worshipped,
in Churches and ^ut of Churches: and the contrary is an heretical doctrine.
for explication whereof he declares, that by this worshipping he means; that
signs of service and submission are to be exhibited unto Images, by embracing,
lights, oblation of incense, uncovering of the head, etc. and that this
conclusion is a doctrine of faith collected out of the holy Scripture; by which
it appears, that things created yea although they be senseless, so that they
be consecrated unto God, are to be adored. II. Imagines sunt vere and proprie
adorandae, and ex intention ipsas adorandi, and non tantum exemplaria in ipsis
repraesentata. Haec conclusio est contra Durandum and sectatores illius; quorum
sententia a recentioribus censetur periculosa, temeraria, and sapiens haeresim:
and M. Medina hic refert, Magistru^ Victoriam reputasse il^am haereticam. Sed
nostra conclusio est communis Theologorum. Ibid. number. 32.
Images are truly and properly to be adored; and out of an intention to adore
themselves, and not only the samplers that are represented in them. This
conclusion (which he makes to be the common resolution of the Divines of that
side) he opposes against Durand and his followers: who held that Images are
adored only improperly, because they put men in mind of the persons
represented by them; who are then adored before the images, as if they had
been there really present. But this opinion he says is censured by the latter
Divines to be dangerous, rash, and savouring of heresy: yea and by Fr.
Victoria to be plainly heretical. For Si imagines improprie tan tum
adorantur; simpliciter and absolute non ado^antur, neque sunt adorandae: quod
est haeresis manifesta Ibid. number. 34.
if Images be adored only improperly, they are not to be adored simply and
absolutely: which is a manifest heresy; says Cabrera. And Si imagines solum
adorantur rememorative, and recordative, quia recordari nos faciunt
exempla^ium; quae ita adoramus, ac si essent praesentia ^equeretur eadem
adoratione, qua colimus Deum, esse adorandas omnes c^eaturas; cum omnes in Dei
cognitionem and recordationem nos dacant, and Deus sit in omnibus rebus. Sed
consequens est absurdum. Ergo. Ibid. number. 35.
if Images were only to be worshipped by way of rememoration and recordation,
because they make us remember the samplers, which we do so worship, as if they
had been then present: it would follow that all creatures should be adored
with the same adoration, wherewith we worship God; seeing all of them do lead
us unto the knowledge and remembrance of God, and God is present in all things.
III. Sententia Divi Thomae, quatenus docet eodem actu adorationis coli
Imaginem, and exemplar per illam representatum; est verissima, pijssima, and
fidei decretis admodum consona. Ibid. disput. 3. number. 56.
The doctrine delivered by Thomas, that the Image and the sampler represented
by it is to be worshipped with the same act of adoration; is most true, most
pious, and very consonant to the decrees of Faith. This he Id ibid. number. 30.
says is the doctrine not only of Thomas, and of all his disciples, but also
of all the old Schoolmen almost. and particularly he quoteth for it, Cajetan,
Capreolus, Paludanus, Ferrariensis, Antonius, Soto, Alexander of Hales,
Albertus Magnus, Bonaventura, Richardus de Mediavilla, Dionysius Carthusianus,
Major, Masilius, Thomas Waldensis, Turrecremata, Angestus, Clichtoveus, Turrian
and Vazquez. In a word; Constans est Theologorum sententia; Imaginem eodem
honor and cultu honorari and coli, quo coli tur id cujus est Imago Io. Azor.
Institut. moral. tom. 1 lib. 9. cap. 6.
it is the constant judgment of Divines, (says Azorius the Jesuit) that the
Image is to be honored and worshipped with the same honor and worship,
wherewith that is worshipped whereof it is an image.

Against this use, or rather horrible abuse of Images, to what purpose should
we heap up any testimonies of holy Scripture; if the words of the second
commandment, uttered with Gods own mouth with thundering and lightning upon
mount Sinai, may not be heard? Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, or in the water under the earth: Thou shall not bow down to them,
nor worship them. Which thunderclap from heaven the guides of the Romish Church
discerning to threaten sore that fearful Idolatry which daily they commit;
thought fit in wisdom, first to conceal the knowledge of this from the
people, by excluding those words out of the Decalogue that went abroad for
common use, under pretense (forsooth) of including it in the first
Commandment: and then afterward to put this conceit into men's heads, that
this first commandment was so far from condemning the veneration of Images,
that it commanded the same, and condemned the contrary neglect thereof. And
therefore Laurence Vaux in his Catechism, unto this Question; Who breaks the
first Commandment of God by unreverence of God? frames this Answer. Vaux
Catechism. chap. 3.
They that do not give due reverence to God, and his Saints, or to their
Relickes and IMAGES. and Iacobus de Graffijs in his explication of the same
Commandment specifieth the due reverence here required, more particularly.
namely, Vt unamquamque imaginem eodem cultu, quo ille, cujus imago est,
venetemur. id est, ut imagini Dei, vel Christi, vel etia^ Crucis signo, prout
Dominicam passionem ad mentem revocat, atriam impartiamur: ad sacrae Virginis
imaginem hyperduliae, aliorum vero Sanctorum duliae adoratione adoremus. Jacob.
de Graff^s, Decision, aure. casuu^ cons^ient. part. 1 lib. 2. cap. 2. s^ct.
penult.
that we should reverence every Image with the same worship that we do him
whose image it is. that is to say, that we impart Latria (or, divine worship)
to the Image of God; or of Christ, or to the sign of the Cross also, in
as much as it brings the Passion of our Lord unto our mind: and that we use
the adoration of Hyperdulia at the Image of the holy Virgin, but of Dulia at
the Images of other Saints. And can there be found (think you) among men, a
more desperate impudency then this? that not only the practice of this
wretched Idolatry should be maintained against the express commandment of
almighty God; but also that he himself should be made the author and
commander of it, even in that very place where he does so severely forbid it,
and Romans 1.18.
reveal his wrath from heaven against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, which withhold the truth in unrighteousness. The miserable shifts and
silly evasions, whereby they labor to obscure the light of this truth, have
been detected by others to the full, and touched also in some part by my self
in an Sermon. at Westminst. before the house of Commons.
other place: where I have showed out of Deuteronom. 4.15, 16. and Romans 1.23.
that the adoring of the very true God himself in or by an Image, comes
within the compass of that Idolatry which the word of God condemns. And to
this truth do the Fathers of the ancient Church give plentiful testimony: in
what great account soever our Challenger would have us think that the use of
Images was with them.

Indeed in so great account was the use of Images among them; that in the
ancientest and best times, Christians would by no means permit them to be
brought into their Churches; nay some of them would not so much as admit the
art it self of making them: so jealous were they of the danger, and careful
of the prevention of the deceit, whereby the simple might any way be drawn
on to the adoring of them. (...). Clem. Alexand^^ Prophetie. ad Gentes.
We are plainly forbidden, says Clemens Alexandrinus, to exercise that
deceitful art. For the Prophet says; Thou shall not make the likeness of
any thing, either in the heaven or in the earth beneath. (...). Id Paedagog.
lib. 3. cap. 2.
Moses commands men, to make no Image, that should represent God by art.
(...). Id. in Prophetic.
For in truth an Image is a dead matter, formed by the hand of an artificer.
But we have no sensible Image made of any sensible matter, but such an Image as
is to be conceived with the understanding. So his scholar Origin, writing
against Celsus the philosopher: (...). Origin. contra Cells. lib. 7. page 373.
Who having his right wits (says he) will not laugh at him, who after such
great philosophical discourses of God or Gods, does look on Images; and
either presents his prayer to them, or by the sight thereof offers it to
him who is conceived thereby, unto whom he imagines that he ought to ascend
from that which is seen and is but a sign or symbol of him? And whereas
Celsus had brought in that speech of Heraclitus; (...) Hera^li^. Ephesians. ibid.
page 384. et apud Clem. Alexandr. in Prophetic. ad Gent. page 25. edit.
Graecolat. ubi statim subiungitur: (...); An non enim sunt prodigiosi qui
lapides adorant?
They pray unto these Images, as if a man should enter into conference with his
house: and demanded; (...). Celsus, apud Origin. ut supr. page 384.
Whether any man unless he were a very child, did think these things to be
Gods, and not monuments and images of the Gods? Origin replyeth, that (...).
Origin. ibid. page 386.
it is not a thing possible, that one should know God, and pray to Images: and
that Christians (...) ( lege, (...): ut in verbis Celsi, page 384. lin. 24.)
(...). Id. ibid. page 387.
did not esteem these to be divine Images, who used not to describe any figure
of God who was invisible and without all bodily shape; (...). hoc est, (ut ex
verbis subseque^tib. intelliigitur) (...). Id. ibid. page 385.
nor could endure to worship God with any such kind of service as this was.
In like manner, when the Gentiles demanded of the ancient Christians, Cur nullas
aras habent, templa nulla, nulla nota simulacra? Minut. Feli^ in Octavio.
why they had no known Images? Minutius Felix returns them for answer
again. Quod enim simulacrum Deo fingam; cum si recte existimes, sit Dei homo
ipse simulacrum? Ibid.
What Image shall I make to God; when man himself, if thou rightly judge, is
Gods Image? Ipsae imagines sacrae, quibus inanissimi homines, serviunt, omni
sensu carent, quia terra sunt. Quis autem non intelligat, nefas esse rectum
animal curvari, ut adoret terram? quae id circo pedibus nostris subjecta est,
ut calcanda nobis, non adoranda sit. Lactant. divin. I^stitut. lib. 2. cap. 17.
These holy Images (says Lactantius) which vain men serve, want all sense;
because they are earth. Now who is there that understands not, that it is
unfit for an upright creature to be bowed down, that he may worship the earth?
which for this cause is put under our feet, that it may be trodden upon, not
worshipped by us. Quare non est dubiu^, quin religio nulla sit, ubicunque
simulacrum est. Nam si religio ex divinis rebus est; divini aute^ nihil est
nisi in coelestibus rebus: carent ergo religione simulacra; quia nihil potest
esse coeleste in ea re, quae fit ex terra. Ib. cap. 18.
Wherefore there is no doubt, that there is no religion, wheresoever there is
an Image. For seeing Religion consists of divine things; and nothing divine
is to be found but in heavenly things: Images therefore are void of religion;
because nothing that is heavenly can be in that thing, which is made of earth.

When Alexander Imp. Christo templum facere voluit, eumque inter Deos recipere.
Quod and Adrianus cogitasse fertur, qui templa in omnibus civitatibus sine
simulacris jusserat fieri; quae hodie id circo quai non habent numina, dicuntur
Adriani: quae ille ad hoc paraffe dicebatur. sed prohibitus est ab ijs qui
consulentes sacra, repererant omnes Christianos futuro^ si id optato evenisset,
and templa reliqua desere^da. Lamprid. in Alexandro.
Adrian the Emperor had commanded that temples should be made in all cities
without Images; it was presently conceived, that he did prepare those temples
for Christ: as Aelius Lampridius notes in the life of Alexander Severus. which
is an evident argument, that it was not the use of Christians in those days to
have any Images in their Churches. And for keeping of Pictures out of the
Church, the Canon of the Eliberine or Illiberitane Council (held in Spain,
about the time of Constantine the great) is most plain. Placuit, picturas in
Ecclesia esse non debere; ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus
depingatur. ^oncil El b^r. cap. ^6.
It is our mind, that pictures ought not to be in the Church; lest that which
is worshipped or adored, should be painted on walls. which has so troubled
the minds of our latter Romanistes; that Melchior Canus sticks not to charge
the Council Illa ( lex) non imprudenter modo, verumetiam impie, a Concilio
Elibertino lata est de tollendis imaginibus. Canus. loc. Theologic. lib. 5.
cap. 4. conclus 4.
not only with imprudencie, but also with impiety, for making such a law as
this, Gentiles lignum adorant, quia Dei imaginem putant: sed invisibilis Dei
imago non in eo est quod videtur, sed in eo utique quod non videtur. Ambros. in
Psalm. 118. octo^ar. 10.
The Gentiles (says S. Ambrose) worship wood, because they think it to be
the image of God: but the image of the invisible God is not in that which is
seen, but in that which is not seen. Non vult se Deus in lapidibus coli. Id.
epist. 31. ad Valen^inianum Imp.
God would not have himself worshipped in stones: says the same Father in
another place. and, Ecclesia inanes ideas and varias nescit simulacrorum
figuras; sed veram novit Trinitatis substantiam. Id. de fuga saecui^, ca, 5
The Church knows no vain ideaes and diverse figures of Images; but knows
the true substance of the Trinity. So S. Hierome: Nos unum habemus viru^, and
unam veneramur imaginem, quae est imago invisibilis and omnipotentis Dei.
Hieronym. lib. 4. in Ezech. cap. 16.
We worship one Image, which is the image of the invisible and omnipotent God.
and S. Augustine: In primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in figme^tis
hominum Dei similitudo: non quia non habet imagine^ Deus, sed quia nulla imago
ejus coli debet, nisi illa quae hoc est quod ipse; nec ipsa pro illo, sed cum
illo. Augustine. epist. 119. ad Ianuar. cap. 11.
In the first commandment, any similitude of God in the figments of men is
forbidden to be worshipped. not because God has not an image; but because no
image of him ought to be worshipped, but that which is the same thing that he
is, (Coloss. 1.15. Hebr. 1.3.) nor yet that for him, but with him. As for the
representing of God in the similitude of a man: he resolves, that Tale
simulacrum Deo nefas est Christiano in templo collocare. Id. de Fide and
Symbol. cap. 7.
it is utterly unlawful to erect any such image to God in a Christian Church.
and touching the danger of Images in general, and the practice of the Church
in this matter, thus he writteth. Hoc enim venerantur, quod ipsi ex auro
argentoque fecerunt. Sed enim and no^ pleraque instrumenta and vasa ex
hujusmodi materia vel metallo habemus in usum celebrandoru^ sacramentoru^; quae
ipso ministerio consecrata sancta dicuntur, in ejus honore^ cui pro salute
nostra inde servitur. Et sunt profecto etia^ ista instrumenta vel vasa, quid
aliud quam opera manu^ hominu^? Veruntamen nunquid os habent, and non
loquentur? Nunquid oculos habent, and non videbunt? Nunquid eis supplicamus,
quia per ea supplicamus Deo? Illa caussa est maxima impietatis insanae, quod
plus valet in affectibus miseroru^ similis viventi forma quae sibi efficit
supplicari, quam quod eam manifestu^ est non esse vivente^, ut debeat a vivente
contemni. Plus enim valent simulacra ad curvanda^ infelice^ anima^, quod os
habent, oculos habent, aures habe^t, nares habe^t, manus habent, pedes habe^t;
quam ad corrigenda^, quod non loquentur, non videbunt, non audient, non
odorabunt, non contrectabunt, non ^^bulabunt. Id, in Psalm. 113. cons. 2.
The Gentiles worship that, which they themselves have made of Gold and silver.
But even we also have diverse instruments and vessels of the same matter or
metal, for the use of celebrating the sacraments: which being consecrated by
this very ministry are called holy, in honor of him who for our salvation is
served thereby. And these instruments and vessels also, what are they else but
the work of men's hands. Yet have these any mouth, and will not speak? have
they eyes, and will not see? Do we supplicate unto these, because by these we
supplicate unto God? That is the greatest cause of this madd impiety, that the
form like unto one living which makes it to be supplicated unto, does more
prevail in the affections of miserable men; than that it is manifest it does
not live at all, that it ought to be contemned by him who is indeed living. For
Images prevayle more to bow down the unhappy soul, in that they have a
mouth, they have eyes, they have ears, they have nosthrilles, they have hands,
they have feet; than to correct it, that they will not speak, they will not
see, they will not hear, they will not smell, they will not handle, they will
not walk. Thus far S. Augustine.

The speech of Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium to this purpose is memorable:
(...). Amphiloch. citatus a Patrib Concilij Constantinop. an. 754.
We have no care to figure by colors the bodily visages of the Saints in
tables, because we have no need of such things; but by virtue to imitate their
conversation. but the fact of Epiphanius, rending the veil that hung in the
Church of Anablatha, is much more memorable: which he himself in his epistle
to John Bishop of Jerusalem (translated by S. Hierome out of Greek into Latin)
does thus recount. Inveni ibi velum pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae
tinctum atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi, vel Sancti cujusda^:
non enim satis memini, cujus imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem, in Ecclesia
Christi contra auctoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud;
and magis dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo
obvolverent and efferrent. Epiph^n. epist ad Ioann* Hierosolym. tomo 1. oper.
Hieronym. epist. 60.
I found there a veil hanging at the door of the Church dyed and painted, and
having the image as it were of Christ or some Saint: for I do not well
remember, whose image it was. When therefore I saw this; that contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures the image of a man was hanged up in the Church of
Christ: I cut it, and gave counsel to the keepers of the place, that they
should rather wrappe and bury some poor dead man in it. and afterward he
entreats the Bishop of Jerusalem (under whose government this Church was)
Deinceps praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi istiusmodi vela, quae contra
religione^ nostra^ veniunt, non appe^di. Id. ibid.
to give charge hereafter, that such vayles as these which are repugnant to our
religion, should not be hanged up in the Church of Christ. Which agrees very
well with the sentence attributed to the same Father in the Council of
Constantinople: (...). Epiphan. citat a Council. Constantinop. in Act. 6. tom.
5. Council N^caen. II.
Have this in mind beloved sons, not to bring Images into the Church, nor
into the Coemiteries of the Saints, no not into an ordinary house: but always
carry about the remembrance of God in your hearts. For it is not lawful for a
Christian man to be carried in suspense by his eyes and the wanderings of his
mind. and with his discourse against the heresy of the Collyridians, which
made an Idol of the Virgin Mary (as in the former question has more largely
been declared.) to which he opposes himself in this manner. (...). Epiphan.
in Panar. haeres 79. page 447.
How is not this course Idolatrous, and a Divelish practice? For the Devil
stealing always into the mind of men under pretense of righteousness,
deifying the mortal nature in the eyes of men, by variety of arts framed
Images like unto men. And they truly who are worshipped are dead, but their
Images that never yet were alive (for they cannot be said to be dead that never
were alive) they bring in to be worshipped, by a mind going awhoring from the
one and only God: as a common harlot, stirred with a wicked desire of
promiscuous mixture, and rejecting the sobriety of the lawful marriage of one
man.

If it be inquired who they were that first brought in this use of Images into
the Church: it may well be answered, that they were partly lewd Heretics,
partly simple Christians newly converted from Paganism, the customs whereof
they had not as yet so fully unlearned. Of the former kind the Gnostique
heretics were the principal: who Imagines quasdam quide^ depictas, quasdam
aute^ and de reliqua materia fabricatas habent: dicentes formam Christi factam
a Pilato, illo in tempore quo fuit Jesus cum hominibus. Irenaeus, lib. 1.
adve^s. haeres. cap. 24. (...) ( vel (...) potiu^) (...). Epiphan. in Panar.
haeres. 27 page 52.
had Images, some painted in colors, others framed of gold and silver and
other matter; which they said were the representations of Christ, made under
Pontius Pilate, when he was conversant here among men. Whence Carpocrates, and
Marcellina his disciple (who brought this Idolatrous heresy first to Rome in
the days of Pope Anicetus) Id. Epiphan in Anacephalaeosi, page 525. de
Carpocrate. (...). Sectae ipsius fuisse traditur socia quaedam Marcellina; quae
colebat imagines Jesus, and Pauli, and Homeri, and Pythagorae, adorando
incensumque ponendo Augustine. de haeres. cap. 7.
having privily made Images of Jesus, and Paul, and Homer, and Pythagoras, did
cense them, and worship them: as Epiphanius and Augustine do report. To the
latter that observation of Eusebius may be referred concerning the Image of
Christ, thought to be erected by the woman that was cured of the bloody issue.
(...). Eusebius. lib. 7. histor. Ecclesiastic. cap. 18.
It is no marvel (says he) that those of the Heathen who of old were cured by
our Savior should do such things: seeing we have seen the Images of his
Apostles Paul and Peter, yea and of Christ himself, kept painted with colors,
in tables: for that of old they have been wont by a Heathenish custom thus to
honor them whom they counted to be their Benefactors or Saviors.

But by whomsoever they were first brought in, certain it is that they proved
a dangerous snare unto the simple people, who quickly went a whooring after
them: contrary to the doctrine which the Fathers and Doctors of the Church did
deliver unto them. And therefore S. Augustine writing of the manners of the
Catholic Church against the Manichees, directly severeth the case of such men
from the common cause, and approved practice of the Catholic Church. Nolite
mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, nec professionis suae vim aut
scientes aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa
vera religione superstitiosi sunt, vel ita libidinibus dediti, ut obliti sint
quic quid promiserint Deo Novi multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum
adoratores. etc. Nunc vos illud admoneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae catholicae
maledicere desinatis, vituperando mores homnum, quos and ipsa condemnat, and
quos quotidie tanquam malos filios corrigere studet. Augustine. de moribus
Ecclesiae Catholicae, cap. 34.
Do not collect unto me (says he) such professors of the name of Christ, as
either know not or keep not the force of their profession. Do not bring in
the companies of rude men, which either in the true religion it self are
superstitious, or so given unto their lusts that they have forgotten what they
did promise unto God. Then for an instance of the first, he alleges that he
himself did know many which were worshippers of graves and Pictures: and at
last concludes. Now this I advise you, that you cease to speak evil of the
Catholic Church, by upbrayding it with the manners of those men, whom she her
self condemns, and seeks every day to correct as naughty children. This
also gave occasion to Serenus Bishop of Marsiles 200. years after, to break
down the Images in his Church, when he found them to be thus abused: which
fact of his though Pope Gregory disliked, because he thought that Images might
profitably be retained as laymens books; yet in this he commended his zeal,
that he would by no means suffer them to be worshipped. Praeterea indico dudu^
ad nos pervenisse, quod fraternitas vestra quosda^ imaginu^ adoratores
aspiciens, easde^ Ecclesiae imagines confregit, atque projecit. Et quide^ zelu^
vos, ne quid manufactu^ adorari possit, habuisse laudavimus: sed srangere
easde^ imagines non debuisse, judicamus Id circo enim pictura in Ecclesi^s
adhibetur, ut hi qui literas nes^iunt, saltem in parietibus videndo legant quae
legere in codicibus non valent. Tua ergo fraternitas and illas servare, and ab
earu^ adoratu populu^ prohibere debuit: quantenus and literaru^ nescij haberent
unde scientia^ historiae colligerent; and po^ulus in picturae adoratione minime
pecc^ret. Gregor. Registr. lib. 7. epist. 109. ad Serenum. Vide ^^am lib. 9.
epist. 9. ad eundem.
I certify you (says he) that it came of late to our hearing, that your
brotherhood, seeing certain worshippers of Images, did break the said
Church-images and threw them away. And surely we commended you that you had
that zeal, that nothing made with hands should be worshipped: but yet we judge
that you should not have broken those images. For painting is therefore used in
Churches, that they which are unlearned, may yet by sight read those things
upon the walls, which they cannot read in books. Therefore your brotherhood
ought, both to preserve the images, and to restrain the people from
worshipping of them: that both the ignorant might have had, whence to gather
the knowledge of the history; and the people might not sin in worshipping
the picture.

There would be no end, if we should lay down at large the fierce contentions
that afterward arose in the Church touching this matter of Images: the Greek
Emperors, Leo Isaurus, Constantinus Caballinus, Nicephorus, Stauratius, Leo
Armenus, Michael Balbus, Theophilus, and others, opposing them in the East; and
on the other side, Gregory the second and third, Paul the first, Stephen the
fourth, Adrian the first and second, Leo the third, Nicholas the first, and
other Popes of Rome as stiffely upholding them in the West. In a Council of
CCCXXXVIII. Bishops held at Constantinople in the year of our Lord 754. they
were solemnly condemned: in another Council of CCCL. Bishops held at Nice in
the year 787. they were advanced again, and the veneration of them as much
commended. This base decree of the second Nicene Council, touching the
adoration of Images, although it were not by the hundredth part so gross, as
that which was afterward invented by the Popish Schoolmen: yet was it rejected
as repugnant to the doctrine of the Church of God; by the Princes and Bishops
of England first, about the year 792. and by Charles the great afterward, and
the Bishops of Italy, France and Germany, which by his appointment were
gathered together in the Council of Frankford, the year of our Lord. 794.

The four books, which by his authority were published against that Nicene
Synod, and the adoration of Images defended therein, are yet to be seen: as
the Resolution also of the Doctors of France assembled at Paris by the command
of his son Ludovicus Pius, in the year 824. and the book of Agobardus
Bishop of Lions concerning Pictures and Images, written about the same time;
the argument whereof is thus delivered by Papirius Massonus the setter out of
it. Graecorum errores de imaginibus and picturis manifestissime detegens, negat
eas adorari debere: quam sententiam omnes Catholici probamus, Gregorijque Magni
testimoniu^ de illis sequimur. Papir. Masson. Praefat. in Agobardi Opera, edit.
Paris. an. 1605.
Detecting most manifestly the errors of the Grecians touching images and
pictures, he denies that they ought to be worshipped: which opinion all we
Catholics do allow; and follow the testimony of Gregory the great
concerning them. This passage, together with the larger view of Expungantur
omnia, quae sub hoe titulo ( De Imaginibu^) continentur. Jndex librorum
expurgatorum. Bernardi de Sandoval and Roxas Card. de consilio senatus
generalis Inquisit. Hispan. excus. Madriti, an. 1612.
the contents of this Treatise following afterward, the Spanish Inquisitors in
their Index Expurgatorius command to be blotted out: which we find to be
accordingly performed by the Divines of Cullen, in their late corrupt edition
of the Magn. Bibliothec. Veter. Patrum, tom. 9. part. 1. edit. Colon. ann.
1618. page 548. and 551.
great Bibliothecke of the ancient Fathers. Gretser professes, that he
Vehementer profecto hoc judicium de libro. Agobardi ab homine Catholico
profectu^. miratus sum. nam Agobardus toto libello, nihil aliud facit, quam
quod demonstrare nititur (quamvis casso conatu) imagines non esse adorandas.
Jac. Gretser. lib. 1. de Cruc^. ^ap. 58.
extremely vvondereth, that this judgment of the book of Agobardus should
proceed from a Catholic man. For Agobardus (says he) in that w^ole book
does nothing else, but endeavor to demonstrate (although with a vain labor)
that images are not to be worshipped. Et quinam sunt Graeci, quoru^ de
imaginibus er^ore Agobardus refellit, ut Editor ait? Nimirum Graeci isti sunt
Petres Nicaeni Concilij; qui sanxerunt, imagines adorandas and colenda^ esse.
Contra quos qui disputat, is ab orthodoxis toto coelo discordat. Ibid.
And who be these Grecians, whose errors touching images Agobardus does refell,
as this Publisher says? Surely these Grecians are the Fathers of the Nicene
Council, who decreed that Images should be adored and worshipped. Against whom
whosoever disputes, does mainely dissent from right believers. To which blind
censure of the Jesuit we may oppose, not only the general judgment of the
ancient (...). Nicet. Choniat. Annal. lib. 2.
Almaines his own countriemen, who within these four or five hundred years
did flatly disclayme this Image Worship (as by Nicetas Choniates is witnessed:)
but also the testimony of the Divines and Historians of England, France, and
Germany touching the Nicene Council in particular; rejecting it as a Hincmar.
Rhemens. lib. contr. Hincmar. Laudunens. cap. 20. Egolismens. monach. in vita
Caroli Magni. Annal. Fuldens. Ado, Regino, and Hermann, Contract. in Chronic.
an. 794.
Pseudo-synode, because it concluded Imagines adorari debere: quod omnino
Ecclesia Dei execratur, Simeon Dunelmens. Roger. Hoveden. and Matthew.
Westmonaster. histor. ann 792. vel 793.
that Images should be worshipped: which thing (say our Chroniclers) the Church
of God does utterly detest. And yet for all that, we have news lately brought
us from Rome: that Ecclesiam porro Christianam, etiam Antiquissimam, Totam, ac
Vniversalem, summo consensu, absque ulla oppositione, aut contradictione,
Statuas ac imagines veneratam esse, est certissimum ac probatissimum. M. Anton.
de Dominis, De consilio sui reditus, sect. 23.
it is most certain, and most assured, that the Christian Church, even the
most Ancient, the Whole, and the Universal Church, did with wonderful
consent, without any opposition or contradiction, worship statues and images.
Which if the cauterized conscience of a wretched Apostata would give him leave
to utter: yet the extreme shamelessenesse of the assertion might have
withhelde their wisdoms whom he sought to please thereby, from giving him
leave to publish it.

But it may be I seek for shamefastness, in a place where it is not be
found: and therefore leaving them to their Images, like to like, (for Psalm.
115.8. and 135.18.
they that make them are like unto them; and so is every one that trusts in
them) I proceed from this point unto that which follows.

OF FREE WILL.
THat man has Free Will, is not by us gainesayd: though we dare not give him
so large a freedom as the Jesuits presume to do. Freedom of will we know
does as essentially belong unto a man, as reason it self: and he that spoyleth
him of that power, does in effect make him a very beast. For this is the
difference betwixt reasonable and unreasonable creatures: as Damascen rightly
notes. (...). Io. Damascen. Orthodox. fid. lib. 2. cap. 27. edit. Graec. vel.
44. Latin.
The unreasonable are rather ledd by nature, then themselves leaders of it: and
therefore do they never contradict their natural appetite, but as soon as
they affect any thing, they rush to the prosecution of it. But man, being
endued with reason, does rather lead nature, then is ledd by it: and therefore
being moved with appetite, if he will, he has power to restrain his appetite,
or to follow it. Hereby he is enabled to do the things which he does, neither
by a brute instinct of nature not ye^ by any compulsion, but by advise and
deliberation: the Mind first taking into consideration the grounds and
circumstances of each action, and freely debating on either side what in this
case were best to be done or not done; and then the Will inclining it self to
put in execution the last and conclusive judgment of the practical
Understanding. This liberty we acknowledge a man may exercise in all actions
that are within his power to do: whether they be lawful, unlawful, or
indifferent; whether done by the strength of nature or of grace. for even in
doing the works of grace, our free will suspendeth not her action, but being
moved and guided by grace, does that which is fit for her to do: grace not
taking away the liberty, which comes by Gods creation, but the pravitie of
the Will, which arises from Man's corruption. In a word, as we condemn (...).
Pho^. Bibliothec. number. 179.
Agapius and the rest of that mad sect of the Manichees, for bringing in such a
kind of necessity of sinning, whereby men were made to offend against their
wills: so likewise with Polychronius and other men of understanding we defend,
that (...). Polychron. in Cantic. page 93. edit. Meursij.
virtue is a voluntary thing, and free from all necessity; and with the
author of the books De vocatione Gentium (attributed unto Prosper) Hanc quippe
abundantiorem gratiam ita credimu^ atque experimur potentem, ut nullo modo
arbitremur esse violentam. Prosp. de vocat. Gent. li. 2. cap 26
we both believe and feel by experience that Grace is so powerful, that yet
we conceive it no way to be violent.

But it is one thing to inquire of the nature, another to dispute of the
strength and ability of Free Will. We say with Adamantius (in the Dialogues
collected out of Maximus against the Marcionites) that (...) Orig. Dial. 3.
contr. Marcion.
God made Angels and Men (...), but not (...): he endued them with freedom of
Will, but not with ability to do all things. And now since the fall of Adam
we say further, that freedom of Will remains still among men; but the
ability which once it had, to perform spiritual duties and things pertaining
to salvation, is quite lost and extinguished. For Quis autem nostrum dicat,
quod primi hominis peccato perierit liberu^ arbitrium de humano genere?
Libertas quide^ perijt per peccatu^; sed illa quae in Paradiso fuit, habe^di
plena^ cu^ immortalitate justitiam: propter quod natura humana divina indiget
gratia, dicente Domino; Si vos Filius liberaverit, tunc vere liberi critis;
utique liberi ad been justeque vivendu^ Nam liberu^ a^b^triu^ usque adeo in
peccatore non perijt; ut per illud pecce^t, maxim omnes qui cum delectatione
pecca^t, and amore peccati, hoc eis placet quod eis libet. Aug. contr, duas
e^ist. Pelagian. li. 1. cap. ^.
who is there of us (says S. Augustine) which would say, that by the sin of
the first Man Free Will is utterly perished from mankind? Freedom indeed is
perished by sin: but that freedom which was in Paradise, of having full
righteousness with immortality. for which cause Man's nature stands in
need of Gods grace, according to the saying of our Lord; If the Son shall
free you, then ye shall be free indeed: namely free to live well and
righteously. For free will is so far from having perished in the sinner; that
by it they sin, all they especially who sin with delight, and for the love
of sin, that pleases them which likes them. When we deny therefore that a
natural man has any free will unto good: by a natural man, we understand
one that is without Christ, and destitute of his renewing grace; by free will,
that which the Philosophers call (...), a thing that is in our own power to
do; and by good, a Theological not a Philosophical good, bonu^ vere
spirituale and salutare, a spiritual good and tending to salvation. This then
is the difference which Gods word teaches us to put, betwixt a regenerate and
an unregenerate man. The one is Romans 6. verse. 11.
alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; and so enabled to ibid. verse.
13.
yield himself unto God, as one that is alive from the dead, and his members
as instruments of righteousness unto God: ibid. verse. 22.
having his fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. The other is a
mere Eph^s. 4.18.
stranger from the life of God, Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
dead in trespasses and sins; and so no more able to lead a holy life
acceptable unto God, then a dead man is to perform the actions of him which is
alive.

He may live indeed the life of a natural and a moral man, and so exercise
the freedom of his Will, not only in natural and civil, but also in moral
actions, so far as concerns external conformity unto those notions of
good and evil that remain in his mind: (in respect whereof the very Romans
2.1^.
Gentiles themselves which have not the Law, are said to do by nature the
things contained in the Law:) he may have such fruit, as not only common
honesty and civilitie, but common gifts of Gods spirit likewise will yield,
and in regard thereof he may obtain of God temporal rewards appertayning to
this transitory life, and a lesser measure of punishment in the world to come:
yet until he be quickened with the life of grace, and Romans 7.4.
married to him who is raised from the dead, he cannot bring forth fruit unto
God, nor be accepted for one of his servants. This is the doctrine of our
Savior himself, John. 15.4, 5. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me: I am the
Vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do NOTHING, that is,
nothing truly good and acceptable unto God. This is the lesson that S. Paul
does every where inculcate. Romans 7.18.
I know, that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing. 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he understand them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Hebr. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Tit. 1.15.
Unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving is nothing pure: but even their
mind and conscience is defiled. Now seeing 1. Tim. 1.5.
the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned; seeing the first beginning, from whence
every good action should proceed, is a sanctified heart, the last end the
seeking of Gods glory, and faith working by love must intercurre betwixt both:
the moral works of the unregenerate failing so fowly both in the beginning,
middle and end, are to be accounted breaches rather of the Commandment then
observances, depravations of good works rather then performances. For
howsoever these actions be in their own kind good and commanded of God, yet
are they marred in the carriage, that which is bonum being not done been: and
so though in regard of their matter they may be accounted good, yet for the
manner they must be esteemed vicious.

The Pelagian heretics were wont here to object unto our forefathers (as the
Romanistes do now a days unto us) both the examples of the Heathen, Sed
acerbissimi gratiae hujus inimici, exempla nobis opponitis impiorum, quos
dicitis alienos a fide abundare virtutibus. Aug. contr. Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3.
who being strangers from the faith, did notwithstanding (as they said) abound
with virtues: and S. Paul's testimony also concerning them, Romans 2.14, 15. by
which they labored to prove, Per hos enim probare conatus es, etiam alienos a
fide Christi, veram posse habere justitiam; eo quod isti, test Apostolo,
naturaliter quae legis sunt faciunt. Ibid.
that even such as were strangers from the faith of Christ, might yet have true
righteousness; because that these, as the Apostle witnessed, naturally did the
things of the Law. But will you hear how S. Augustine took up Julian the
Pelagian, for making this ob^ection? Vbi quidem dogma vestru^ quo estis inimici
gratiae Dei, quae datur per Iesum Christum Dominum nostru^, qui tollit peccatum
mundi, evidentius expressisti; intro ducens hominum genus, quod Deo placere
possit sine Christi fide, lege naturae. Hoc est unde vos maxim Christiana
detestatur Ecclesia. Ibid.
Herein have thou expressed more evidently that doctrine of yours, wherein you
are enemies unto the grace of God which is given by Jesus Christ our Lord, who
takes away the sin of the world: bringing in a kind of men, which may
please God without the faith of Christ, by the law of nature. This is it, for
which the Christian Church does most of all detest you: and again. Sed absit,
ut sit in aliquo vera virtus, nisi fuerit justus. Absit aute^ ut sit justus
vere, nisi vivat ex fide: Iustus enim ex fide vivit. Quis porro eoru^, qui se
Christianos habe^i volunt, nisi soli Pelagiani, aut in ipsis etia^ forte tu
solus, justu^ dixerit infidele^ justu^ dixerit impiu^, justu^ dixerit Diabolo
mancipatu^? sit licet ille Fabricius, sit licet Fabius, sit licet Scipio, sit
licet Regulus. I^id.
Be it far from us to think, that true virtue should be in any one, unless
he were righteous. And as far, that one should be truly righteous, unless he
did live by faith: for the just does live by faith. Now which of them, that
would have themselves accounted Christians, but the Pelagians alone, or even
among them, perhaps thou thy self alone, would say that an infidel were
righteous, would say that an ungodly man were righteous, would say that a man
mancipated to the Devil were righteous? although he were Fabricius, although
he were Fabius, although he were Scipio, although he were Regulus. And
whereas Julian had further demanded: Si gentili^ (inquis) nudum operuerit,
nunquid quia non est ex fide, peccatum est? Prorsus in quantum non est ex fide
peccatum est: non quia per seipsum factum, quod est nudum operire, peccatum
est; sed de tali opere non in ^omino gloriari, solus impius negat esse
peccatum. Ibid.
If a Heathen man do cloth the naked, because it is not of faith, is it
therefore sin? Saint Augustine answers absolutely, in as much as it is not
of faith, it is sin: not because the fact considered in it self, which is to
cloth the naked, is a sin; but of such a work not to glory in the Lord,
none but an impious man will deny to be a sin. For howsoever, Quod si and
ipsa (misericordia) per seipsam naturali compassione opus est bonum; etiam isto
bono male utitur qui infideliter utitur, and hoc bonum male facit qui
infideliter facit: qui autem male facit aliquid, profecto peccat. Ex quo
colligitur, etiam ipsa bona opera quae faciunt infideles, non ipsorum esse, sed
illius qui been utitur malis. Ipso^um autem esse peccata, quibus and bona male
faciunt; quia ea non fideli, sed infideli, hoc est, stulta and noxia faciunt
voluntate. qualis voluntas, nullo Christiano dubitante, arbor est mala, quae
facere non potest nisi fructus malos, id est, sola peccata. Omne enim, velis
nolis, quod non est ex fide, peccatum est. Ibid.
in it self, this natural compassion be a good work; yet he uses this good
work amiss, that uses it unbeleevingly, and does this good work amiss, that
does it unbeleevingly: but who so does any thing amiss, sins surely. From
whence it is to be gathered, that even those good works which unbeleevers do,
are not theirs, but his who makes good use of evil men: but that the sins
are theirs, whereby they do good things amiss; because they do them not with
a faithful, but with an unfaithful, that is, with a foolish and naughty
will. Which kind of will no Christian doubts to be an evil tree, which
cannot bring forth but evil fruits, that is to say, sins only. For all that
is not of faith, whether thou will or no, is sin. This and much more to the
same purpose, does Saint Augustine urge against the Heretic Julian:
prosecuting at large that conclusion which he lays down in his book of the
Acts of the Palestine Council against Pelagius. Quantumlibet opera infidelium
praedicentur: Apostoli sententiam veram novimus and invictam; Omne quod non est
ex fide, peccatum est. Id. de gestis c^ntra Pelag^um, cap. 14.
How much soever the works of unbeleevers be magnified, we know the sentence of
the Apostle to be true and invincible; Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Which makes him also in his Retractations to correct himself, for saying in
one place, Quod Philosophos non vera pietate praeditos, dixi virtutis lu^e
fulsisse. Id. R^tract. l^b. 1. cap. 3.
That the Philosophers shined with the light of virtue, who were not endued
with true piety.

The like sentence does Saint Hierome pronounce against those, Sententiam
proferamus adversus eos, qui in Christu^ non credentes, fortes and sapientes,
temperantes se putant esse and justos: ut sciant nullum absque Christo vivere,
sine quo omnis virtus in vitio est. Hieronym. in Galat. cap. 3.
who not believing in Christ, did yet think themselves to be valiant and wise,
temperate or just: that they might know that no man does live without Christ,
without whom all virtue is accounted vice. And Prosper against Cassianus, a
Patron of the free will of the Semipelagians: Manifestissime patet, in impiorum
animis nullam habitare virtutem: sed omnia opera eorum immunda esse atque
polluta; habentium sapientiam non spiritualem sed animalem, non coelestem sed
terrenam, non Christianam sed Diabolicam, non a Patre luminum, sed a Principe
tenebrarum; dum per ea ipsa quae non haberent nisi dante Deo, subduntur ei qu^
primus recessit a Deo. Prosper. contra Collator. cap. 13.
It appears (says he) most manifestly, that there dwells no virtue in the
minds of the ungodly, but that all their works be unclean and polluted; who
have wisdom not spiritual, but animal, not heavenly but earthly, not
Christian, but Diabolical, not from the Father of light, but from the Prince
of darkness; while by those very things which they should not have had but by
Gods giving, they are made subject to him, who did first fall from God. Nec
ideo existima^e debemus, in naturalibus thesauris principia esse virtutum, quia
multa laudanda reperiuntur etiam in ingenijs impiorum: quae ex natura quidem
prodeunt; sed quoniam ab eo qui naturam condidit recesserunt, virtutes esse non
possunt. Quod enim vero illuminatum est lumine, lume^ est; and quod eodem
lumine caret, nox est: Quia sapientia hujus mundi stultitia est apud Deum. Ac
sic vitium est quod putatur esse virtus: quandoquidem stultitia est, quod
putatur esse sapientia. Ibid.
Neither ought we therefore to imagine, that the beginnings of virtues be in
the treasures of nature, because many commendable things are found in the
minds of ungodly men, which do proceed indeed from nature; but because they
have departed from him that made nature, can not be accounted virtues. For that
which is illuminated with the true light, is light; and that which wants that
light, is night: because the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.
And so that is vice, which is thought to be virtue: as that is foolishness,
which is thought to be wisdom. Hitherto also pertains that sentence,
produced by him out of S. Augustines works: Omnis infideliu^ vita peccatum
est: and nihil est bonum sine summo bono. Vbi enim deest agnitio aeternae and
incommutabilis veritatis, falsa virtus est, etiam in optimis moribus. Id. ex
Augustino Sentent. 106. and Epigram. 81.
The whole life of unbeleevers is sin; and there is nothing good without the
chiefest good. For where there is wanting the acknowledgement of the eternal
and unchangeable truth, there is false virtue even in the best manners. Which
he elegantly expresses in verse, as well in his 81. Epigramme, as in his Poem
against the Pelagians, wherein of natural wisdom he writes thus: Id. de
Ingratis, cap. 16.
Et licet eximias studeat pollere per arts,
Ingeniumque bonum generosis moribus ornet:
Coeca tamen finem ad mortis per deuia currit,
Nec vitae aeternae veros acquirere fructus
De falsa virtute potest; unamque decoris
Occidui speciem mortali perdit in aevo.
Omne etenim probitatis opus, nisi semine verae
Exoritur fidei, peccatum est, inque reatum
Vertitur, and sterilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam.


The Author of the book De Vocatione Gentium (by some wrongly attributed to S.
Ambrose, to Prosper by others) delivers the same doctrine in these words:

Etsi fuit qui naturali intellectu conatus sit vitijs reluctari; hujus tantum
temporis vitam steriliter ornavit, ad veras autem virtutes aeterna^que
beatitudinem non profecit. Sine cultu enim very Dei, etia^ quod virtus videtur
esse, peccatu^ est: nec placere ullus Deo sine Deo potest. Qui vero Deo non
placet, cui nisi sibi and Diabolo placet? A quo cum homo spoliaretur; no^
voluntate, sed voluntatis sanitate privatus est. Prosp. de Vocatione Gent. lib.
1. cap. 7.
Although there have been some who by their natural understanding have
endeavored to resist vices; yet have they only barrenly adorned this temporal
life, but not profited at all unto true virtues and everlasting bliss. For
without the worship of the true God, even that which seems to be virtue is
sin: neither can any man please God, without God. And he that does not please
God, whom does he please but himself and the Devil? By whom when man was
spoiled, he was deprived not of his will, but of the sanitie of his will. Qui
si non operatur in nobis, nullius possumus esse participes virtutis. Si^ noe
quippe bono, nihil est bonum: sine hac luce, nihil est lucidum: sine hac
sapientia, nihil sanum; fine hac justitia, nihil rectum. Ibid. cap. 8.
Therefore if God do not work in us, we can be partakers of no virtue. For
without this good, there is nothing good; without this light, there is nothing
lightsome; without this wisdom, there is nothing sound; without this
righteousness, there is nothing right. So Fulgentius, in his book of the
Incarnation and Grace of Christ. Quod si quibusdam cognoscentibus Deum, nec
tamen sicut Deum glorificantibus, cognitio illa nihil profuit ad salutem:
quomodo hi potuerunt justi esse apud Deum, qui sic in suis moribus atque
operibus bonitatis aliquid servant, ut hoc ad finem Christianae fidei
charitatisque non referant? Quibus aliqua quidem bona, quae ad societatis
humanae pertinent aequitatem, inesse possunt: sed quia non charitate Dei fiunt,
prodesse non possunt. Fulg. de Incarn. and Great. Christi, c. 26.
If unto some who did know God, and yet did not glorify him as God, that
knowledge did profit nothing unto salvation: how could they be just with God,
which do so keep some goodness in their manners and works, that yet they
refer it not unto the end of Christian faith and charity? In whom there may
be indeed some good things that appertain to the equity of humane society:
but because they are not done by the love of God, profit they cannot. And
Maxentius in the Confession of his Faith: Liberum natural arbitrium ad nihil
aliud valere credimus, nisi ad discernenda tantum and desideranda carnalia sive
secularia; quae non apud Deum, sed apud homines possunt fortassis videri
gloriosa. Ad ea vero quae ad vitam aeternam pertinent, nec cogitare, nec velle,
nec defiderare, nec perficere posse, nisi per infusionem and inoperationem
intrinsecus Spiritus Sancti. Io. Maxent. in Confessione suae fidei.
We believe that natural Free Will has ability to nothing else, but to
discern and desire carnal or secular things only; which not with God, but
with m^n peradventure may seem glorious: but for the things that pertain to
everlasting life, that it can neither think, nor will, nor desire, nor effect,
but by the infusion and inward operation of the Holy Ghost. and Cassiodorus, in
his exposition of the Psalms. Est quidem in mala part^ execrabilis libertas
arbitrij, ut praevaricator creatorem deserat, and ad vitia se nefanda
convertat: in bona vero part arbitrium liberu^, Ada^ peccante, perdidimus; ad
quod nisi per Christi gratiam redire non possumus: dicente Apostolo; Deus est
enim qui operatur in vobis, and velle, and perficere, pro bona voluntate.
Cassiodor. in Psalm. 117.
On the evil part indeed there is an execrable freedom of the will, that the
sinner may forsake his Creator, and convert himself to wicked vices: but on
the good part, by Adams sinning, we have lost free will, unto which otherwise
than by the grace of Christ we cannot return: according to the saying of the
Apostle; It is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure. (Philip. 2.13.)

The first presumptuous advancer of free will, contrary to the doctrine
anciently received in the Church, is by Vicentius Lirinensis noted to be
Pelagius the heretic. For Quis unqua^ ante profanum illum Pelagium tantam
virtute^ liberi praesumpsit arbitrij; ut ad hoc in bonis rebus per actus
singulos adjuvandum, necessariam Dei gratiam non putaret? Vincent. Lirinens.
Commonitor. 1. advers. haeres. cap. 34.
who ever (says he) before that profane Pelagius, presumed the virtue of
free will to be so great; that he did not think the grace of God to be
necessary for the helping of it in good things at every act? For maintaining
of which ungodly opinion, both he and his disciple Celestius were condemned by
the censure of the CCXLIII. Bishops assembled in the great Council of Carthage
(anno Dom. 418.) Donec apertissima confessione fateantur, Gratia Dei per Iesum
Christum Dominum nostrum, non solum ad cognoscendam verumetiam ad faciendam
justitiam, nos per actus singulos adjuvari; ita ut sine ea nihil verae
sanctaeque pietatis habere, cogitare, dicere, agere valeamus. Synod. African.
Epist. ad Zosimum Pap. apud Prosperum contra Collator. cap. 5. and Respons. ad
object. 8. Gallorum: ubi addit hanc constitutionem contra inimicos gratiae Dei
totum mundum amplexum esse.
until they should acknowledge by a most open confession, that by the grace of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, we are helped not only to know but also to
do righteousness at every act: so that without it we can have, think, say,
do, nothing that belongs to true and holy piety. Wherewith Pelagius being
pressed, stuck not to make this profession: Anathema qui vel sentit vel dicit,
gratiam Dei, qua Christus venit in hunc mundum peccatores s^lvos facere, non
solum per singulas horas aut per singula momenta, sed etiam per singulos actus
nostros non esse necessariam: and qui hanc conantur auferre, poenas so^tiuntur
aeternas. Pelag. apud Augustine. lib. 1. de gratia Christi, con^r. Pelag. and
Celest. cap. 2.
Anathema to him, who either thinks or says, that the grace of God, whereby
Christ came into this world to save sinners, is not necessary, not only at
every hour or every moment, but also at every act of ours: and they who go
about to take away this, are worthy to suffer everlasting punishment. Four
books also did he publish in defense of Freewill; to which he thus refers
his adversaries, for further satisfaction in this matter: Legant etiam recens
meum opusculu^, quod pro libero nuper arbitrio edere compulsi sumus; and
agnoscent quaminique nos negatione gratiae infamare gestierint; qui per tutom
pene ipsius textum operis perfect atque integre and liberum arbitrium
confitemur and gratiam. Id. ibid. cap. 41.
Let them read the late work, which we were forced to set out the other day
for Free Will; and they shall perceive how uniustly they go about to defame us
with the denial of Grace, who thorowout the whole context almost of that work
do perfectly and entirely confess both Free Will and Grace. Yet for all this
he did but equivocate in the name of Grace: Sub ambigua generalitate quid
sentiret abscondens; gratiae tamen vocabulo frangens invidiam, offensionemque
declinans. Augustine. ibid. cap. 37.
under an ambiguous generality hiding what he thought, but by the term of
Grace breaking the envy, and declining the offense which might be taken at his
doctrine, as S. Augustine well observes. For, by Grace, he did not understand,
as the Church did in this question, the infusion of a new quality of holiness
into the soul, whereby it was regenerated, and the will of evil made good:
but first, Pelag. apud Augustine. de gostis contra Pelag. cap. 10. and in epist.
95. Vid. eund. Augustine. de great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 13. and sermon. 11. de
verbis Apostoli.
the possibility of nature, that is to say, the natural freedom of will
which every one has received from God by virtue of the first creation. Against
which S. Augustine thus opposes himself: Quid tantum de naturae possibilitate
praesumitur? Vulnerata, sauciata, vexata, perdita est. Vera confessione, non
falsa defensione opus habet. Augustine. de nature. and great. cap. 53.
Why is there so much presumed of the possibility of nature? It is wounded, it
is maimed, it is vexed, it is lost. It has need of a true confession, not of a
false defense. And Prosper, speaking of the state of man's free will after Adams
fall; -- Prosp. de Ingratis, cap. 27.
hinc arbitrium per devia lapsum
Claudicat, and caecis conatibus inque ligatis
Motus inest, non error abest. manet ergo voluntas
Semper amans aliquid quo se ferat; and labyrintho
Fallitur, ambages dubiarum ingressa viarum.
Vana cupit, vanis tumet and timet: omnimodaque
Mobilitate ruens, in vulnera vulnere surgit.


Secondly, by grace he understood the grace of doctrine and instruction,
whereby the mind was informed in the truth out of the word of God. Which by
Prosper is thus objected to his followers: -- Id. ibid. cap. 20. Vid. eund. in
epist. ad Ruffinum, non procul ab initio: and Augustine. de haeres. cap. 88. and
lib. 1. de gratia Christi contra Pelag. cap. 8, 9, 10.
aliud non est vobiscum gratia, quam lex,
Quamque Propheta monens, and quam doctrina ministri.
Unto whom S. Augustine therefore says well: Legant ergo and intelligant,
intueantur atque fateantur, non lege atque doctrina insonante forinsecus, sed
interna atque occulta, mirabili ac ineffabili potestate operari Deum in
cordibus hominum, non solum veras revelationes, sed etiam bonas voluntates.
Augustine. ibid. cap. 24.
Let them read and understand, let them behold and confess, that not by the
law and doctrine sounding outwardly, but by an inward and hidden, by a
wonderful and unspeakable power, God does work in the hearts of men, not only
true revelations, but good wills also. And thereupon the African Fathers in the
Council of Carthage, enacted this Canon. Quisquis dixerit gratiam Dei per
Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, propter hoc tantum nos adjuvare ad non
peccandum, quia per ipsam nobis revelatur and aperitur intelligentia
mandatorum, ut sciamus quid appetere, quid vitare debeamus; non autem per illam
nobis praestari, ut quod faciendum cognoverimus, etiam facere diligamus atque
valeamus: anathema sit. African. Patr. in Synod. Carthagin. can. 4.
Whosoever shall say, that the grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord, does for
this cause only help us not to sin, because by it the understanding of the
commandments is revealed and opened unto us, that we may know what we ought to
affect, what to shun; and that by it there is not wrought in us, that we may
also love and be enabled to do that, which we know should be done; let him be
anathema. Thirdly, under this grace he comprehended not only the external
revelation by the word, but also the Augustine. lib. 1. de great. Christ. contr.
Pelag. cap. 7. and 41.
internal by the illumination of Gods Spirit. Whereupon he thus rises up
against his adversary. Quam (gratiam) nos non, ut tu putas, in lege
tantummodo, sed and in Dei esse adjutorio confitemur. Adjuvat enim nos Deus per
doctrinam and revelatione^ suam, dum cordis nostri oculos aperit; dum nobis, ne
praesentibus occupemur, futura demonstrat; dum Diaboli pandit insidias; dum nos
multiformi and ineffabili dono gratiae coelestis^ illuminat. Qui haec dicit,
gratiam tibi videtur neg^re? An and liberum hominis arbitrium, and Dei gratiam
confitetur? Pelag. ibid. cap. 7.
We confess that this grace is, not (as thou think) in the Law only, but in
the help of God also. For God does help us by his doctrine and revelation,
whilst he opens the eyes of our hearts; whilst he shows us things to
come, that we be not holden with things present; whilst he discovers the
snares of the Devil; whilst he enlightneth us with the manifold and
unspeakable gift of his heavenly grace. He that says these things, does he
seem unto thee to deny grace? or does he confess, both the free will of man,
and the grace of God too? And yet in all this (as S. Augustine rightly notes)
Hinc itaque apparet, hanc eum gratiam confiteri, qua demonstrat and revelat
Deus quid agere debeamus; non qua donat atque adjuvat ut agamus; cum ad hoc
potius valeat legis agnitio, si gratiae desit opitulatio, ut fiat mandati
praevaricatio. Augustine. ibid. cap. 8.
he does but confess that grace, whereby God does show and reveal what we
ought to do; not that, whereby he does grant and help that we may do. And
therefore, Ipsas quoque orationes (ut in scriptis suis apertissime affirmat) ad
nihil aliud adhibendas opinatur, nisi ut nobis doctrina etiam divina
revelatione aperiatur; non ut adjuvetur men's hominis, ut id, quod faciendum
esse didicerit, etiam dilectione and action perficiat. Id. ibid. cap. 41.
in other places of his writings he plainly affirms, that our very prayers
are to be used for nothing but this, that the doctrine may be opened unto us by
divine revelation; not that the mind of man may be helped, that he may also
accomplish by love and action that which he has learned should be done.
Fourthly, to these he further added the grace of remission of sins. For the
Pelagians said, Ut non pec^emus, impleamusque justitiam, posse sufficere
naturam humanam quae condita est cum libero arbitrio: eamque esse Dei gratiam,
quia sic conditi sumus, ut hoc voluntate possimus; and quod adjutorium Legis
mandatorumque suorum dedit; and quod ad se conversis peccata praeterita
ignoscit: in his solis esse Dei gratiam deputandam, non in adjutorio nostroru^
actuum singulorum. Id. de gestis contra Pelagium, cap. 35.
that man's nature which was made with free will, might be sufficient to enable
us, that we might not sin, and that we might fulfill righteousness: and that
this is the grace of God, that we were so made that we might do this by our
will, and that he has given us the help of his law and commandments, and
that he does pardon the sins past to those that are converted unto him: that
in these things only the grace of God was to be acknowledged, and not in the
help given unto all our singular actions. And so they Dicunt gratiam Dei quae
data est per fidem Jesus Christi, quae neque lex est neque natura, ad hoc tantum
valere, ut peccata praeterita dimittantur, non ut futura vitentur, vel
repugnantia superentur. Id. de gratia and libero arbitrio, cap. 13. Vid. eiusd.
lib. 1. de great. Christi contr. Pelag. cap. 2.
said, that that grace of God which is given by the faith of Jesus Christ,
which is neither law nor nature, is effectual only to his, that sins past
may be remitted, not that sins to come may be avoided, or when they make
resistance may be vanquished. Whereupon S. Augustine thus encountreth Julian
the Pelagian heretic. Tu vest^o more, qui de vestro descendit errore, non
agnoscis gratiam, nisi in dimissione peccatorum; ut jam de caetero per liberum
arbitrium ipse homo se ipsum fabricet justum. Sed non hoc dicit Ecclesia, quae
clamat ^ota, quod didicit a Magistro bono: Ne nos inferas in tentationem. Id.
lib. 2. postremi operis contra Iulianum; a Claud. Menardo edit. non procul a
fine.
Thou (according to your custom, which descends from your error) do not
acknowledge grace, but in the remission of sins; that now from henceforth a
man himself by his free will may make himself righteous. But so says not the
Church, which all cries that which it has learned from a good master: Lead us
not into temptation.

Lastly, this was the common doctrine of the Id. De dono Perseverant. cap. 2.
and 20 De gratia and lib. arbitr. cap. 5. De haeresib. cap. 88. etc.
Pelagians, and accounted to be one of the principal Ex his una est
blasphemia, nequissimum and subtilissimum germen aliarum, qua dicunt, Gratiam
Dei secundum merita hominum dari. Prosper. in epist. de great. and lib. arbitr.
ad Ruffinum.
blasphemies of that sect: that they held the grace of God to be given
according to men's merits. Which was Quod sic alienu^ est a Catholica doctrina,
and inimicum gratiae Christi; ut nisi hoc objectu^ sibi anathematizasset, ipse
inde anathematizatus exisset. Sed fallaciter eum anathematizasse posteriores
ejus indicant libri; in quibus omnino nihil aliud defendit, quam gratiam Dei
secundum merita nostra dari. Augustine. de great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 5.
so abhorring from the Catholic doctrine, and opposite to the grace of
Christ, that when it was objected to Pelagius in the Diospolitan Synod, held in
Palaestina by the Bishops of the East, he durst not avow it; but was forced to
accurse it, lest otherwise he should have been accursed himself. But that he
deceitfully cursed it, the books wri^ten by him afterward do show; wherein he
defends nothing else, but that the grace of God is given according to our
merits. which Prosper treading in S. Augustines steps, does thus express:
Prosp. de Ingratis, cap. 9.
Objectum est aliud; ipsum dixisse magistrum
Quod meritis hominum tribuatur gratia Christi,
Quantum quisque Dei donis se fecerit aptum.
Sed nimis adversum hoc fidei, nimiumque repugnans
Esse videns, dixit se non ita credere, and illos
Damnari dignos quorum men's ista teneret.
Quo cernis, cum Iudicibus damnantibus ista
Consensisse reum: nec quenquam haec posse tueri.
Quae tamen ipse suis rursum excoluisse libellis
Detegitur, reprobum in sensum fallendo reversus.
And in this also did the Pelagians betake themselves unto their old coverts of
the grace of nature, the grace of mercy in forgiving of sins, the grace of
instruction and revelation, and such other shifts. For Cum ab istis quaeritur,
qua^ gratiam Pelagius cogitaret sine ullis praecedentibus meritis dari, quando
anathematizabat eos, qui dicunt gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari:
respondent, sine ullis praecedentibus meritis gratiam, ipsam humanam esse
naturam, in qua conditi sumus. Neque enim antequam essemus, mereri aliquid
poteramus, ut essemus. Augustine. epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
when it is demanded of them (says S. Augustine) what grace Pelagius did
think was given without any precedent merits: when he anathematized those, who
say that the grace of God is given according to our merits: they answer, that
the grace which is without any precedent merits, is the humane nature it self
wherein we are created. forasmuch as before we were, we could not deserve any
thing, that we might be. Then afterward perceiving what an idle thing it was to
confound grace and nature thus together; Dicunt Pelagiani, hanc esse solam non
secundum merita nostra gratiam, qua homini peccata dimittuntur. Id. de great.
and lib. arbitr. cap. 6.
they said, that the only grace which was not according to our merits, was that
whereby a man had his sins forgiven him. for they did not think, that a
sinner could rightly be said to merit any thing save Gods displeasure.

But that at which they all aimed in general was this, Intellectum est enim,
saluberrimeque perspectum, hoc tantum eos de gratia co^fiteri, quod quaedam
libero arbitrio sit magistra; seque per cohor^ationes, per legem, per
doctrinam, per creaturam, per contemplationem, per miracula, perque terrores
extrinsecus judicio ejus ostendat: quo unusquisque secundum voluntatis suae
motum, si quaesierit, inveniat; si petierit, recipiat; si pulsaverit, introcat.
Prosper. in epist. ad Ruffin. de great. and lib. arbitr.
that Grace was only a kind of Mistress to Free Will; and that by
exhortations, by the law, by doctrine, by the creatures, by contemplation, by
miracles, and by terrors outwardly, it showed it self to the judgment
thereof: whereby every man according to the motion of his will, if he did
seek, might find; if he did ask, might receive; if he did knock, might
enter in. And thus (says Pelagius) does God Operatur in nobis velle quod bonum
est, velle quod sanctum est; dum nos terrenis cupiditatibus deditos, and
mutorum more animalium tantummudo praesentia diligentes, futurae gloriae
magnitudine and praemiorum pollicitatione succendit; dum revelatione sapientiae
in desiderium Dei stupentem suscitat voluntatem; dum nobis suadet omne, quod
bonum est. Pelag. apud Augustine. lib. 1. de great. Christi contra Pelag. cap. 10.
work in us to will that which is good, to will that which is holy; whilst
finding us given to earthly lusts, and like bruit beasts affecting only present
things, he inflameth us with the greatness of the glory to come, and with
promise of rewards; whilst by the revelation of his wisdom he raises up our
stupefied will to the desire of God; whilst he persuades us to all that good
is. To this instructing and persuading grace does Pelagius attribute the
exciting of the Will: but the converting of it unto God (which follows
afterward) he ascribes wholly to the freedom of the will it self. Qui
currit ad Deum, and a Deo se regi cupit, id est, voluntatem suam ex ejus
voluntate suspendit; qui ei adhaerendo jugiter, unus, secundum Apostolum, cum
eo fit spiritus; non hoc nisi de arbitrij efficit liberate. Q^a qui been
utitur, ita se totum tradit Deo, omnemque suam mortificat voluntatem, ut cum
Apostolo possit dicere; Vivo autem jam non ego, vivit autem in me Christus:
ponitque cor suum in manu Dei, ut illud quo voluerit Deus ipse declinet.
Pelagius, apud Augustine. de gratia Christi, lib. 1. cap. 22, 23.
He that runs unto God, (says he) and desires to be ruled by God, hanging
his will upon Gods will; he who by adhering unto him continually, is made,
according to the Apostle, one spirit with him: does not this but out of the
freedom of his will. Which freedom who so uses aright, does so commit
himself wholly to God, and mortifieth all his own will, that he may say with
the Apostle; I live now, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and does put his
heart into Gods hand, that God may incline it whither it shall please him. Here
have you the full platform laid down of Pelagius his doctrine touching the
conversion of a sinner. First, he supposes a possibility in nature; whereby a
man may will and do good. secondly, a corruption in act; whereby a man does
will and do the contrary. thirdly, an exciting grace from God; whereby the
mind is enlightened, and the will persuaded (upon consideration of the promises
and threats propounded) to forsake that lewd course of life, and to will and
do the things that are good and holy. fourthly, an act of the free will, thus
prepared by Gods exciting grace: whereby a man (without any further help from
God) does voluntarily yield unto these good motions; and so runs unto God,
desires to be ruled by him, hangs his will upon Gods will, and by adhering
unto him is made one spirit with him. fifthly, an assisting grace; whereby God
guides the will thus converted, and inclines the heart whither it pleases
him.

We see three kinds of Grace here commended unto us by Pelagius. the first, a
natural grace (as he fondly termed it) bringing with it a bare possibility
only to will and do good: which he said was not given according to merits,
because he held it to be given at the very beginning of man's being, before
which he could not possibly merit any thing. the second, an ex^iting or
persuading grace, imparted unto such as were given to earthly lusts, and like
bruit beasts affected only present things; who being in that case, were far
from meriting any good thing at Gods hands: and in that regard he affirmed,
that this grace likewise was given without any respect to precedent merits. the
third, an assisting grace, by which God does guide and incline the heart of the
converted sinner, to the doing of all good: and this he maintained to be given
as a reward to that act of the free will, whereby it yielded to the persuasions
of the former exciting grace, and so did actually convert it self to God. Now
this is N^hil sic evertit hominum praesumptionem dicentium; Nos facimus, ut
mereamur cum quibus faciat Deus. Augustine. c^ntra duas epist. Pel^gian. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
the presumption which S. Augustine condemns so much in these men; that they
durst say: We work to merit that God may work with us. that they Priores
volunt dare Deo, ut retribuatur eis: priores utique dare quodlibet ex libero
arbitrio, ut sit gratia retrib^enda pro praemio. Ibid.
would first give to God, that it might be recompensed to them again: namely,
they first give somewhat out of their free will, that grace might be rendered to
them again for a reward. that they were of opinion; Meritum nostrum in eo
esse, quod sumus cum Deo: ejus autem gratiam secundum hoc meritum da^i, ut sit
and ipse nobiscum. Item meritum nostrum in eo esse, quod quaerimus: and
secundum hoc meritum dari ejus gratiam, ut inveniamus eum. Id. de great. and
libero arbitr. cap. 5.
that our merit consisted in this, that we were with God, and that his grace
was given according to this merit, that he should also be with us: that our
merit should be in this, that we do seek him; and according to this merit his
grace was given that we should find him. For they that followed Pelagius,
(refining herein a little the doctrine of their Master, and delivering it in
somewhat a more plausible manner) declared that Ibi enim vos ut video, ponere
jam coepistis merita gratiam praecedentia, quod est petere, quaerere, pulsare;
ut his meritis debita illa reddatur, ac sic gratia inaniter nuncupetur. Id.
contra Julian. Pelagian. lib. 4. cap. 8.
the merits which they held to go before grace and to procure grace, were,
asking, seeking, and knocking: and that Dicunt enim, etsi non datur gratia
secundum me^ita bonorum ope^um, quia per ipsam been operamur, tamen secundum
meritum bonae voluntatis datur. quia bona voluntas (inquiunt) praecedit
orantis, quam praecessit voluntas credentis; ut secundum haec merita gratia
sequatur exaudientis Dei. Id. de great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 14.
grace was given, not according to the merit of our good works, (which they
did acknowledge to be an effect, and not a cause of this grace) but of our good
will only. because (said they) the good will of man praying went before, and
the will of man believing went before that: that according to these merits the
grace of God hearing might follow after. And all this they did under color of
maintaining free will against the Manichees: for which they urged much that
testimony of the Prophet, Esa. 1.19, 20. If ye be willing and hearken unto me,
ye shall eat the good things of the land: but if ye refuse and will not
hearken unto me, the sword shall consume them. But Quid eis hoc prodest? quando
quidem non tam contra Manichaeos defendunt, quam contra Catholicos extollunt
liberum arbitrium. Sic enim volunt intelligi quod dictum est; Si volueritis and
audiveritis me: tanquam in ipsa praecedente voluntate sit consequentis meritum
gratiae; ac si gratia jam non sit gratia, quae non est gratuita, cum redditur
debita. Si autem sic intelligerent quod dictum est, Si volueritis; ut etiam
ipsam bonam voluntatem illum praeparare confiterentur, de quo scriptum est,
Praeparatur voluntas a Domino: tanquam Catholici ute^entur hoc testimonio; and
non solum haeresim veterem Manichaeorum vincerent, sed novam Pelagianorum
contererent. Id. contr. duas epist. Pelagian. lib. 4. cap. 6.
what does this profit them? (says S. Augustine) seeing they do not so much
defend free will against the Manichees, as extol it against the Catholics.
For so would they have that understood which is said; If ye be willing and
hearken unto me: as if in that very precedent will there should be the meriting
of the subsequent grace; and so grace should be now no grace, which is no
gratuitie, when it is rendered as due. But if they would so understand that
which is said, If ye be willing; that they would also confess that he does
prepare that good will, of whom it is written, The will is prepared by the
Lord: they should use this testimony like Catholics; and not only vanquish
the old heresy of the Manichees, but also crush the new of the Pelagians.

Beside the professed Pelagians, who directly did deny Original sin; there
arose others in the Church in S. Augustines days, that were tainted not a
little with their errors in this point of Grace and Free Will; as namely one
Vitalis in Carthage, and the Semi-pelagians (as they are commonly called) in
France. For the first held, that Per legem suam, per Scripturas suas Deum
operari ut velimus quas vel legimus vel audimus: sed eis consentire vel non
consentire ita nostrum est, ut si velimus fiat; si ^utem noli^us, nihil in
nobis operationem Dei valere facia^u^. Operatur quippe ille, dicis, quantum in
ipso est ut velimus, cum nobis nota siunt ejus eloquia: sed si eis acquiescere
nolumus, nos ut operatio ejus nihil in nobis prosit efficimus. Id. epist. 107.
ad Vital^m.
God did work in us to will by his Scriptures either read or heard by us: but
that to consent unto them or not consent is so in our power, that if we will it
may be done, if we will not, we may make the operation of God to be of no force
in us. For God does work (said he) as much as in him is that we may will, when
his word is made known unto us: but if we will not yield unto it, we make that
his operation shall have no profit in us. Against him S. Augustine disputes
largely in his 107. Epistle; where he makes ^his to be the state of the
question betwixt them; Utrum praecedat haec gratia an subsequatur hominis
voluntatem, hoc est, (ut planius id eloquar) utrum ideo nobis detur, quia
volumus, an per ipsam Deus etiam hoc efficiat ut velimus. Ibid.
Whether Grace does go before or follow after the Will of man, that is to say,
(as he further explaineth it) Whether it be therefore given us, because we
will; or by it God does work even this also, that we do will. The worthy
Doctor maintains that Grace goes before, and works the will unto good:
which he strongly proves, both by the word of God and by the continual
practice of the Church, in her prayers and thanksgivings for the conversion of
unbeleevers. Si fateris pro eis orandum, id utique orandum fateris, ut
doctrinae divinae arbitrio liberato a tenebrarum potestate consentiant. Ita fit
ut neque fideles fiant nisi libero arbitrio; and tamen illius gratia fideles
fiant, qui eorum a potestate tenebrarum liberavit arbitrium. Sic and Dei gratia
non negatur, sed sine ullis humanis praecedentibus meritis vera monstratur: and
liberum ita defenditur, ut humilitate solidetur, non elatione praecipitetur
arbitrium; and qui gloriatur, non in homine, vel quolibet alio vel seipso, sed
in Domino glorietur. Ibid.
For if thou do confess (says he) that we are to pray for them, surely thou
do pray that they may consent to the doctrine of God, with their will freed
from the power of darkness. And thus it will come to pass, that neither men
shall be made to be believers but by their free will; and yet shall be made
believers by his grace, who has freed their will from the power of darkness.
Thus both Gods grace is not denied, but is showed to be true without any humane
merits going before it: and free will is so defended, that it is made solid
with humility, and not thrown down headlong by being lifted up; that he that
rejoices, may not rejoice in man, either any other or yet himself, but in the
Lord. and again: Quomodo Deus expectat voluntates hominum, ut praeveniant eum,
quibusdet gratiam: cum gratias ei non immerito agamus de ijs quibus non ei
credentibus, and ejus doctrinam voluntate impia persequentibus misericordiam
praerogavit; eosque ad seipsum omnipotentissima facilitate convertit, ac
volentes ex nolentibus fecit? ut quid ei inde gratias agimus, si hoc ipse non
fecit? Ibid.
How does God expect the wills of men that they should prevent him, to whom he
might give grace: when we do give him thanks not undeservedly in the behalf
of them, whom not believing, and persecuting his doctrine with an ungodly will,
he has prevented with his mercy, and with a most omnipotent facility
converted them unto himself, and made them willing of unwilling? Why do we
give him thanks for this, if he himself did not this? Prorsus non oramus Deum,
sed orare nos fingimus; si nos ipsos non illum credimus facere quod oramus.
Prorsus non gratias Deo agimus, sed nos agere fingimus; si unde illi gratia^
agimus, ipsum facere non putamus. Labia dolosa si in hominum quibus^unque
sermonibus sunt, saltem in orationibus non sint. Absit, ut quod facere Deum
rogamus oribus and vocibus nostris, eum facere negemus cordibus nostris: and,
quod est gravius ad alios decipiendos, hoc non taceamu^ disputationibus
nostris: and dum volumus apud homines defendere liberum arbitrium, apud Deum
perdamus orationis auxilium, and gratiarum actionem non habeamus veram, dum
veram non agnoscimus gratiam. Si vere volumus defendere liberum arbitri^m; non
oppugnemus unde fit liberum. Nam qui oppugnat gratiam, qua nostrum ad
declinandum a malo, and faciendum bonum liberatur arbitrium, ipse arbit^ium
suum adhuc vult esse captivum. Ibid.
Questionless we do not pray to God, but feign that we do pray, if we
believe that not he, but our selves be the doers of that which we pray for.
Questionless we do not give thanks to God, but feign that we give thanks; if
we do not think that he does the thing, for which we give him thanks. If
deceitful lips be found in any other speeches of men, at leastwise let them
not be found in prayers. Far be it from us, that what we do beseech God to
do with our mouths and voices, we should deny that he does it in our hearts:
and, which is more grievous, to the deceiving of others also, not conceal the
same in our disputations; and whilst we will needs defend free will before
men, we should leese the help of prayer with God, and not have true giving of
thanks, whilst we do not acknowledge true grace. If we will truly defend
free will, let us not oppugn that by which it is made free. For who so
oppugneth grace, whereby our will is made free to decline from evil and to do
good; he will have his will to be still captive. Thus does S. Augustine deal
with Vitalis: to whom he says, Ego haereticum quidem Pelagianum te esse non
credo: sed ita esse volo, ut nihil illius ad te transeat, vel in te relinquatur
erroris. Ibid.
I do not believe indeed that thou art a Pelagian heretic; but so I would
have thee to be, that no part of that error may pass unto thee, or be left in
thee.

The doctrine of the Semi-pelagians in France is related by Prosper Aquitanicus
and Hilarious Arelatensis, in their several epistles written to S. Augustine of
this argument. Consentiunt omnem hominem in Adam periisse, nec inde quenquam
posse proprio arbitrio liberari: sed id conveniens asserunt veritati, vel
congruum praedicationi, ut cum prostratis and nunquam suis viribus surrecturis
annunciatur obtinendae salutis occasio; eo merito, quo voluerint and
crediderint a suo morbo se posse sanari, and ipsius fidei augmentum, and totius
sanitatis suae consequantur effectum. Hilar. epist. ad Augustine.
They do agree (says Hilarious) that all men were lost in Adam, and that from
thence no man by his proper will can be freed: but this they say is agreeable
to the truth, or answerable to the preaching of the word; that when the means
of obtaining salvation is declared to such as are cast down and would never
rise again by their own strength, they by that merit, whereby they do will
and believe that they can be healed from their disease, may obtain both the
increase of that faith, and the effecting of their whole health. And Nec negari
gratiam, si praecedere dicatur talis voluntas, quae tantum medicum quaerat; non
autem quicquam ipsa jam valeat. Nam illa testimonia, ut est illud, Sicut
unicuique partitus est mensuram fidei, and similia, ad id volunt valere, ut
adjuvetur qui coeperit velle; non ut etiam donetur, ut velit. Ibid.
that grace is not denied, when such a will as this is said to go before it,
which seeks only a Physician, but is not of it self otherwise able to do
any thing. For as touching that place, As he has distributed to every one the
measure of faith; and other like testimonies: they would have them make for
this, that he should be helped that has begun to will; but not that this also
should be given unto him, that he might will. Prosper in his Poems does thus
deliver it. Prosp. de Ingratis, cap. 10.
Gratia qua Christi populus sumus, hoc cohibetur
Limite vobiscum, and formam hanc asseribitis illi:
Ut cunctos vocet illa quidem, invitetque nec ullum
Praeteriens, studeat communem adferre salutem
Omnibus, and totum peccato absolvere mundum.
Sed proprio quemque arbitrio parere vocanti,
Iudicioque suo, mota se extendere mente
Ad lucem oblatam; quae se non subtrahat ulli,
Sed cupidos recti iuvet, illustretque volentes.
Hinc adjutoris Domini bonitate magistra
Crescere virtutum studia; ut quod quisque petendum
Mandatis didicit, jugi sectetur amore.
Esse autem edoctis istam communiter aequam
Libertatem animis, ut cursum explere beatum
Persistendo queant: finem effectumque petitum
Dante Deo, ingenijs qui nunquam desit honestis.
Sed quia non idem est cunctis vigor, and variarum
Illecebris rerum trahitur dispersa voluntas:
Sponte aliquos vitijs succumbere, qui potuissent
A lapsu re vocare pedem, stabilesque manner.


Against these opinions, S. Augustine wrote his two books, of the
Predestination of the Saints, and of the gift of Perseverance: in the former
whereof he has this memorable passage among diverse others. Multi audiunt
verbum veritatis; sed alij credunt, alij contradicunt. Volunt ergo isti
credere, nolunt autem illi. Quis hoc ignoret? quis hoc neget? Sed cum alijs
praeparetur, alijs non praeparetur voluntas a Domino: discernendum est utique
quid veniat de mise^icordia ejus, quid de judicio. Quod quaerebat Israel, ait
Apostostolus, hoc non est consecutu^: electio autem consecuta est, caeteri vero
excoecati sunt, etc. Ecce misericordia and judicium; misericordia in electione
quae consecuta est justitiam Dei, judicium vero in caeteros qui excoecati sunt:
and tamen illi quia voluerunt, crediderunt; illi quia noluerunt, non
crediderunt. Misericordia igitur and judicium in ipsis voluntatibus facta sunt.
Augustine. d^ Praedestinat. Sanctor. cap. 6.
Many hear the word of truth; but some do believe, others do contradict.
Therefore these have a will to believe, the others have not. Who is ignorant of
this? who would deny it? But seeing the will is to some prepared by the Lord,
to others not, we are to discern what does proceed from his mercy, and what
from his judgment. That which Israel did seek (says the Apostle) he obtained
not: but the election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded, (Romans 11.7.)
Behold mercy and judgment; mercy in the election which has obtained the
righteousness of God, but judgment upon the rest that were blinded: and yet
the one because they would, did believe; the others because they would not, did
not believe. Mercy therefore and judgment were executed even upon the wills
themselves. Against the same opinions diverse treatises were published by
Prosper also; who charge these men with In istis Pelagianae pravitatis
reliquijs non mediocris virulentiae fibra nutritur, si principium salutis male
in homine collocatur; si divinae voluntati impie voluntas humana praefe^tur, ut
ideo quis adjuvetur quia voluit, non ideo quia adjuvatur velit; si originaliter
malus receptionem boni non a summo bono, sed a semetipso inchoare
male-creditur; si aliunde Deo placetur, nisi ex eo quod ipse donaverit. Prosp.
in epist. ad Augustine.
nourishing the poison of the Pelagian pravitie, by their positions: inasmuch
as 1. the beginning of salvation is naughtily placed in man by them. 2. the
will of man is impiously preferred before the will of God: as if therefore one
should be helped because he did will, and did not therefore will because he was
helped. 3. a man originally evil is naughtily believed to begin his receiving
of good, not from the highest good, but from himself. 4. it is thought that
God may otherwise be pleased, than out of that which he himself has bestowed.
But he maintains constantly, that both the beginning and ending of a man's
conversion is wholly to be ascribed unto grace: and that God effects this
grace in us, not by way of counsel and persuasion only, but by an inward
change and reformation of the mind; making up a new vessel of a broken one,
by a creating virtue. Id. de Ingratis, cap. 14.
Non hoc consilio tantum hortatuque benigno
Suadens atque docens, quasi normam legis haberet
Gratia: sed mutans intus mentem, atque reformans,
Vasque novum ex fracto fingens, virtute creandi.


The Writers of principal esteem on the other side, were Opuscula Cassiani,
Presbyteri Galliarum, apocrypha. Opuscula Fausti Rhegiensis Galliarum,
apocrypha. Council. Roman. 1. sub Gelasio.
Johannes Cassianus, and Faustus Regiensis or Reiensis: the former of which was
encountered by Prosper (in his book Contra Collatorem) the latter by
Fulgentius, Ioh. Maxentius, Facundus, Caesarius, Johannes Antiochenus: as also
by Gelasius and his Roman Synod of LXX. Bishops, the writings of them both
were rejected amongst the books Apocryphal. And lastly by the joint
authority both of the Sea of Rome, and of the French Bishops assembled in the
second Council of Orange, in the year of our Lord DXXIX. sentence was given
against the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians in general, that their opinions
touching Grace and Free Will, were not agreeable to the rule of the Catholic
faith: and these conclusions following, among sundry others, determined in
particular.

Si quis invocatione humana gratiam Dei dicit posse conferri; non autem ipsam
gratiam facere, ut invocetur a nobis: contradicit Esaiae Prophetae, vel
Apostolo idem dicenti; Inventus sum a non quaerentibus me, palam apparui ijs
qui me non interrogabant. Council. A^ausican. 11. Can. 3.
If any does say, that by man's prayer the grace of God may be conferred; and
that it is not grace it self which makes, that God is prayed unto by us: he
contradicts the Prophet Esaias, or the Apostle saying the same thing; I was
found of them that sought me not, and have been made manifest to them that
asked not after me, (Esai. 65.1. Romans 10.20.)

Si quis, ut a peccato purgemur, voluntatem nostram Deum expectare contendit;
non autem ut etiam purgari velimus per sancti Spiritus infusionem and
operationem in nobis fieri confitetur: resistit ipsi Spiritui sancto, per
Salomonem dicenti; Praeparatur voluntas a Domino. et Apostolo salubriter
praedicanti; Deus est qui operatur in nobis and velle and perficere pro bona
voluntate. Ibid. can. 4.
If any man defend, that God does expect our will, that we may be purged from
sin; and does not confess, that this will of ours to be purged, is wrought
in us by the infusion and operation of the holy Ghost: he resists the holy
Ghost, saying by Solomon; The will is prepared by the Lord, (Prove. 8.35.
according to the LXX.) and the Apostle preaching wholesomely; It is God which
works in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure: (Phil. 2.13.)

Si quis sine gratia Dei, credentibus, vole^tibus, desidera^tibus, conantibus,
laborantibus, vigilantibus, stude^tibus, pete^tibus, quaerentibus, pulsantibus
nobis misericordiam dicit co^ferri divinitus; non aute^ ut credamus, velimus,
vel haec omnia sicut oportet agere valeamus, per infusione^ and inspirationem
sancti Spiritus in nobis fieri confitetur; and aut humilitati aut obedientiae
humanae subjungit gratiae adjutorium, nec ut obedientes and humiles simus
ipsius gratiae donum esse consentit: resistit Apostolo dicenti; Quid habes,
quod non accepisti? et, Gratia Dei sum id quod sum. Can. 6.
If any man say, that to us, without grace, believing, willing, desiring,
endeavoring, laboring, watching, studying, asking, seeking, knocking, mercy
is conferred by God; and does not confess, that it is wrought in us by the
infusion and inspiration of the holy Ghost, that we may believe, will, or do
all these things as we ought; and does make the help of grace to follow after
man's either humility or obedience, neither does yield that it is the gift of
grace it self, that we are obedient and humble: he resists the Apostle,
saying; What have thou, that thou have not received? (1 Cor. 4.7.) and, By the
grace of God I am that I am, (1 Cor. 15.10.)

Divini est muneris, cum and recte cogitamus, and pedes nostros a falsitate and
injustitia tenemus, Quoties enim bona agimus, Deus in nobis atque nobiscum, ut
operemur, operatur, Can. 9.
It is of Gods gift, both when we do think aright, and when we hold our feet
from falsehood and unrighteousness. For as often as we do good things, God
works in us, and with us, that we may work.

Multa in homine bona fiunt, quae non facit homo. Nulla vero facit homo bona,
quae non Deus praestet, ut faciat homo. Can. 20.
There are many good things done in man, which man does not. But man does no
good things, which God does not make man to do.

Hoc etiam salubriter profitemur and credimus, quod in omni opere bono non nos
incipimus, and postea per Dei misericordiam adjuvamur; sed ipse nobis, nullis
praecedentibus bonis meritis, and fidem and amorem sui prius inspirat, ut and
baptismi sacramenta fideliter ^equiramus, and post baptismum ^um ipsius
adjutorio ea quae sibi sunt placita implere possimus. Can. ult.
This also do we wholesomely profess and believe, that in every good work we
do not begin, and are helped afterward by the mercy of God; but he first
of all, no good merits of ours going before, inspireth into us both faith and
the love of him: that we may both faithfully seek the Sacrament of Baptism,
and after Baptism with his help, we way fulfill the things that are pleasing
unto him.

Touching which last Canon we may note: First for the reading, that in the
Tomes of the Councels set out by Binius, it is most notoriously corrupted. For
where the Council has, Nullis praecedentibus bonis meritis, No good merits
going before; there we read, Council. tom. 2. part. 1. page 639. edit. Colon.
an. 1618.
Multis praecedentibus bonis meritis, Many good merits going before. Secondly,
for the meaning, that Gratiam secundum merita nostra dari intelligunt Patres,
cum aliquid fit proprijs viribus, ratione cujus datur gratia, etiamsi non sit
illud meritum de condigno. Bellarm. de Great. and l^b. Arbitr. lib. 6. cap. 5.
the Fathers understand grace to be given according to merits; when any thing
is done by our own strength, in respect whereof grace is given, although it be
no merit of condignitie: as both Bellarmine him self does acknowledge in the
explication of the determination of the Palaestine Synod against Pelagius; and
in the case of the Semi-Pelagians, as it is delivered by Cassianus, is most
evident. For Ita semper gratia Dei nostro in bonam partem cooperatur arbitrio,
atque in omnibus illud adjuvat, protegit ac defendit, ut nonnunquam etiam ab eo
quosdam conatus bonae voluntatis vel exigat, vel expectet; ne penitus dormienti
aut inerti otio dissoluto, sua dona co^ferre videatur: occasiones quodammodo
quaerens, quibus humanae segnitiei torpore discusso, non irrationabilis
munificentiae suae largitas videatur, dum eam sub color cujusdam desiderij ac
laboris impartit. and nihilominus gratia Dei semper gratuita perseveret; dum
exiguis quibusdam parvisque conatibus tantam immortalitatis gloriam, tanta
perennis beatitudinis dona, inaestimabili tribuit largitate. Io. Cassian.
Collat. 13. cap. 13.
the grace of God (says he) does always so cooperate to the good part with
our Free Will, and in all things help, protect and defend it, that sometime it
either requires, or expects from it some endeavors of a good will; that it
may not seem to confer its gifts upon one that is altogether sleeping, and
given to sluggish idleness: seeking occasions after a sort, whereby the
dullness of humane slothfulness being shaken off, the bargenesse of its
bounty may not seem to be unreasonable, while it imparteth the same under the
color of a kind of desire and labor. Yet so notwithstanding that grace may
always continue to be gracious and free; while to such kind of small and
little endeavors, with an inestimable largess it gives so great glory of
immortality, so great gifts of everlasting bliss. Quantumlibet ergo enisa
fuerit humana fragilitas, futurae retributioni par esse non poterit; nec ita
laboribus suis divinam imminuit gratiam, ut non semper gratuita perseveret.
Ibid.
Let humane frailty therefore endeavor as much as it will, it cannot be equal
to the retribution that is to come; neither by the labors thereof does it so
diminish Gods grace, that it does not always continue to be given freely.

Where you may observe, from what fountain the Schoolmen did derive their
doctrine of works preparatorie, meriting grace by way of congruitie, though
not of condignitie. For Cassianus (whom Prosp. cont^. Collator. cap. 3. and 17.
Tom. 7. Op^r. Augustini.
Prosper charge, notwithst^nding all this qualifying of the matter, to be a
maintainer in very deed of that damned point of Pelagianisme; that the grace of
God was given according to our merits) Cassianus, I say, was a man that bare
great sway in our Monasteries, where his writings were accounted as the Monks
general Rules: and until the other day, Faustus him self (who of all others
most cunningly opposed the doctrine of S. Augustine touching grace and
free will) was accepted in the Popish Schools for a reverend Doctor and a
Catholic Bishop. Yea the works of Pelagius himself were had in such account,
that some of them (as his Epistle ad Demetriadem for example, and his
Exposition upon S. Paul's Epistles, which are fraught with his heretical
opinion^) have passed from hand to hand, as if they had been written by S.
Hierome; and as such, have been alleged against us by some of our Adversaries
in this very question of Free Will. The less is it to be wondered, that three
hundred years ago in the midnight of Popery, the profound Doctor Thomas
Bradwardin (then Chancellor of London, and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury)
should begin his Disputations, Of the cause of God against Pelagius with this
lamentable complaint. Ecce enim (quod non nisi tactus dolor cordis intrinsecus
refero) sicut olim contra unicum Dei Prophetam octingenti and quinquaginta
Prophetae Baal, and similes sunt reperti, quibus and innumerabilis populus
adhaerebat: ita and hodie in hac caussa; quot, Domine, hodie cum Pelagio pro
libero Arbitrio contra gratuitam Gratiam tuam pugnant, and contra Paulum
pugilem gratiae spiritualem? Tho. Bradwardin Praefat. in libros de Caussa Dei
contra Pelag.
Behold, (I speak it, with grief of heart touched inwardly) as in old time
against one Prophet of God, there were found eight hundred and fifty Prophets
of Baal; unto whom an innumerable company of people did adhere: s^ at this day,
in this cause, how many (O Lord) do now fight with Pelagius for Free Will
against thy free grace, and against Paul, the spiritual Champion of grace?
Totus etenim pene mundus post Pelagium abijt in errorem. Exurge igitur Domine,
judica caussam tuam; and sustinentem te sustine, protege, robora, consolare.
Ibid.
For the whole world almost is gone after Pelagius into error. Arise therefore,
O Lord, judge thine own cause; and him that defends thee, defend, protect,
strengthen, comfort. To whose judgment I also now leave these Liberi arbitrij
defensores, imo deceptores quia inflatores, and inflatores quia praesumptores.
August^n. Epist. 105. ad Sixtum. Vani, non defensores, sed inflatores liberi
arbitrij. Id. in opere postremo c^ntra Julian. Pelagian. lib. 2. Non
defensores, sed inflatores and praecipitatores liberi arbitrij. Id. de Great.
and lib. arbitr. cap. 14.
Vain defenders, or (as S. Augustine rightly censureth them) deceivers, and
puffers up, and presumptuous extollers of Free Will.

OF MERITS.
IN the last place we are told, that the Fathers of the unspotted Church of
Rome did ^each, Tha^ man for his meritorious works receives, through the
assistance of Gods grace, the bliss of everlasting happiness. But our
Challenger, I suppose, will hardly find one Father either of the spotted or
unspotted Church of Rome, that ever spoke so babishly herein, as he makes them
all to do. That man, by the assistance of Gods grace, may do meritorious
works, we have read in diverse Authors, and in diverse meanings. But after these
works done, that a man should receive through the assistance of Gods grace the
bliss of everlasting happiness, is such a piece of gibbrish, as I do not
remember that before now I have ever met withal even in Babel it self. For
with them that understand what they speak, assistance has reference to the
doing of the work, not to the receiving of the reward: and simply to say, that
a man for his meritorious works (taking merit here as the Romanists in this
question would have it taken) receives through Gods grace the bliss of
everlasting happiness; is to speak flat contrarieties, and to conjoine those
things, that cannot possibly be coupled together. For that conclusion of
Bernard is most certain: Non est in quo gratia intret, ubi jam meritum
occupavit. Bernard. in Cantic. Ser. 67.
There is no place for grace to enter, where merit has taken possession.
because it is grounded upon the Apostles determination, Romans 11.6. If it be of
grace, it is no more of works: or else were grace no more grace.

Neither do we therefore take away the reward, because we deny the merit of
good works. We know, that in the keeping of Gods Commandments there is great
reward; Psalm. 19.11. and that unto him who sows righteousness, there shall
be a sure reward; Prove. 11.18. But the question is, whence he that sows in
this manner, must expect to reap so great and so sure a harvest? Whether from
Gods justice; which he must do if he stand as the Jesuits would have him do
upon merit: or from his mercy; as a recompense freely bestowed out of Gods
gracious bounty, and not in justice due for the worth of the work performed.
Which question, we think, the Prophet Hosea has sufficiently resolved; when
he bids us sow to our selves in righteousness, and reap in MERCY, Hose.
10.12. Neither do we hereby any whit detract from the truth of that axiom,
That God will give every man acccording to his works: for still the question
remains the very same; whether God may not judge a man according to his
works, when he sits upon the throne of grace, as well as when he sits
upon the throne of justice? and we think here, that the Prophet David has
fully cleared the case, in that one sentence, Psalm. 62.12. With thee, O Lord,
is MERCY: for thou rewardest every one according to his work.

Originally therefore, and in it self, we hold that this reward proceeds
merely from Gods free bounty and mercy: but accidentally, in regard that God
has tied himself by his word and promise to confer such a reward, we grant
that it now proves in a sort to be an act of justice. even as in forgiving of
our sins (which in it self all men know to be an act of mercy) he is said to
be faithful and just, 1 Ioh. 1.9. namely, in regard of the faithful
performance of his promise. For promise, we see, amongst honest men is counted
a due debt. but the thing promised being free, and on our part altogether
undeserved, if the promiser did not perform, and proved not to be so good as
his word; he could not properly be said to do me wrong, but rather to wrong
himself, by impairing his own credit. And therefore Aquinas himself confesses,
Non sequitur, quod Deus efficiatur simpliciter debtor nobis, sed sibi ipsi; in
quantum debitum est, ut sua ordinatio impleatur. Thom. 1.2. Quaest. 14. art. 1.
ad 3.
that God is not hereby simply made a debtor to us, but to himself; in as much
as it is requisite that his own ordinance should be fulfilled. Thus was Moses
careful to put the children of Israel in mind touching the Land of Canaan
(which was a type of our eternal habitation in Heaven) that it was a Land of
promise, and not of merit: which God did give them to possess, not for their
righteousness, or for their upright beart, but that he might perform the word
which he swear unto their Fathers, Abraham, Izhak, and Jacob, (Deuteronomy. 9.5.)
Whereupon the Levites say, in their prayer unto God, Nehem. 9.8. Thou made a
covenant with Abraham, to give unto his seed the Land of the Canaanites; and
have performed thy word, because thou art JUST. Now because the Lord had made a
like promise of the Crown of life to them that love him: (Iam. 1.12.)
therefore S. Paul does not stick in like manner to attribute this also to Gods
justice. Henceforth (says he, 2 Timothy 4.8.) is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day:
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. Upon which
place, Bernard, in his book of Grace and Free Will, says most sweetly. Est
ergo qua^ Paulus expectat, corona justitiae, sed justitiae Dei, non suae.
Iustum quippe est ut reddat quod debet; debet autem quod pollicitus est. Et
haec est justitia Dei, de qua praesumit Apostolus, promissio Dei. Bern. li. de
Gratia, and libero arbitrio.
That therefore which Paul expects, is a crown of righteousness, but of
Gods righteousness, not his own. For it is just that he should give what he
owes, and he owes what he has promised: and this is the right^^usnesse of
God, of which the Apostle presumes, the promise of God.

But this will not content our Jesuits, unless we yield unto them; Nos tam
proprie ac vere cum gratia Dei been agentes praemia mereri, quam sine illa male
agentes supplicia meremur. Io. Maldonat. in Ezech. 18.20.
that we do as properly and truly merit rewards, when with the grace of God
we do well, as we do merit punishments, when without grace we do evil. So
says Maldonat. that is to say, unless we maintain, Opera bona justorum
meritoria esse vitae aeternae ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti and
acceptationis, sed etiam ratione operis; ita ut in opere bono ex gratia
procedente, sit quaedam proportio and aequalitas ad praemium vitae aeternae.
Bellar. de Justice. l. 5. c. 17.
that the good works of just persons do merit eternal life condignely, not
only by reason of Gods covenant and acceptance, but also by reason of the
work it self: so that in a good work proceeding from grace, there may be a
certain proportion and equality unto the reward of eternal life. So says
Cardinal Bellarmine. For the further opening whereof, Vasquez takes upon him
to prove in order these three distinct Propositions. First, Opera bona justo^um
ex seipsis, absque ullo pacto and acceptatione, digna esse remuneratione vitae
aeternae; and aequalem valorem condignitatis habere ad consequendam aeternam
gloriam. Gabr. Vasquez. Commentar. in 1am. 2 ae. qu. 114 disp. 214 ca. 5. ^nit.
that the good works of just persons are of themselves, without any covenant
and acceptance, worthy of the reward of eternal life; and have an equal
value of condignitie to the obtaining of eternal glory. Secondly, Operibus
justorum nullum dignitatis accrementum provenire ex meritis aut persona
Christi, quod alias eadem non haberent, si fierent ex eadem gratia a solo Deo
liberaliter sine Christo collata. Ibid. init. cap. 7.
That no accession of dignity does come to the works of the just by the
merits or person of Christ; which the same should not have otherwise, if they
had been done by the same grace bestowed liberally by God alone without
Christ. Thirdly, Operibus justorum accessisse quidem divinam promissionem: eam
tamen nullo modo pertinere ad rationem meriti; sed potius advenire operibus,
non tantum jam dignis, sed etiam jam meritorijs. Ibid. init. cap. 8.
That Gods promise is annexed indeed to the works of just men, yet it
belongs no way to the reason of the merit; but comes rather to the works,
which are already not worthy only, but also meritorious. Unto all which he
adds afterward this Corollary. Cum opera justi condign mereantur vitam
aeternam, tanquam aequalem mercedem, and praemium: non opus est interventu
alterius meriti condigni, quale est meritum Christi, ut eis reddatur vita
aeterna. quinimo aliquid habet peculiare meritum cujuscunque justi respectu
ipsius hominis justi, quod non habet meritum Christi: nempe reddere ipsum
hominem justum, and dignum aeterna vita, ut eam digne consequatur. meritum
autem Christi lice^ dignissimum sit, quod obtine at a Deo gloriam pro nobis;
tamen non habet hanc efficaciam and virtutem, ut reddat nos formaliter justos,
and dignos aeterna vita: sed per virtutem ab ipso derivatam hunc consequuntur
effectum homines in seipsis. Et ita nunquam petimus a Deo per merita Christi,
ut nostris dignis operibus and meritorijs reddatur merces aeternae vitae: sed
ut per Christum detur nobis gratia, qua possimus digne hanc mercedem promereri.
Id. ibid. disput. 222. cap. 3. number. 30.31.
Seeing the works of a just man do condignely merit eternal life, as an
equal recompense and reward: there is no need that any other condign merit,
such as is the merit of Christ, should come between, that eternal life might
be rendered unto them. Yea the merit of every just man has somewhat peculiar in
respect of the just man himself, which the merit of Christ has not: namely,
to make the man himself just, and worthy of eternal life, that he may
worthily obtain the same. But the merit of Christ, although it be most worthy
to obtain glory of God for us, yet it has not this efficacy and virtue, to
make us formally just, and worthy of eternal life: but men by virtue derived
from him, attain this effect in themselves. And so we never request of God by
the merits of Christ, that the reward of eternal life may be given to our
worthy and meritorious works: but that by Christ grace may be given unto us,
whereby we may be enabled worthily to merit this reward. In a word: Merita
nostra in nobis hanc vim habent, ut reddant nos formaliter digno^ v^^a aeterna:
merita autem Christi non reddunt no^ dignos formaliter; sed Christus dignus
est, qui propter illa nobis impetret quicquid ipse pro nobis petierit. Ibid.
number. 32.
Our merits (says he) have this force in us, that they make us formally
worthy of eternal life: the merits of Christ do not make us worthy formally;
but Christ is worthy, in regard of them, to impetrate unto us whatsoever he
requesteth for us.

Thus does Vasquez the Jesuit discover unto us to the full the mystery of
this iniquity: with whom (for the better information of the English Reader)
we join our Rhemists, who deliver this as their Catholic doctrine. Rhem.
annotat. in 2 Timothy 4.8.
that all good works done by Gods grace after the first justification, be
truly and properly meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life: and that
thereupon heaven is the due and just stipend, crown, or recompense, which God
by his justice owes to the person so working by his grace. (For he renders or
repayeth heaven, say they, as a just Judge, and not only as a merciful giver:
and the crown which he pays, is not only of mercy, or favor, or grace, but
also of justice.) And again. Iidem in Luc. 20.35.
that man's works done by Christ's grace, do condignely or worthily deserve
eternal joy: so as Iid. in 1. Corinthians. 3.8.
works can be none other but the value, desert, price, worth, and merit of the
same. Whereupon they put us in mind, Ibid.
that the word, Reward, which in our English tongue may signify a voluntary
or bountiful gift, does not here so well express the nature of the Latin
word, Merces, or the Greek (...): which are rather the very stipend that the
hired workman or journey-man covenanteth to have of him whose work he-doth;
and is a thing equally and justly answering to the time and weight of his
travels and works, rather than a free gift.

This is that doctrine of merits, which from our very hearts we detest and
abhor; as utterly repugnant to the truth of God, and the common sense of all
true-hearted Christians. The lesson which our Savior taught his disciples, is
far different from this, Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things which
are commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which
was our duty to do. And Si inutilis est, qui fecit omnia: quid de illo
dicendum est, qui explere non potuit? Hieronym. ad Ctesipho^t. contr. Pelag.
if he be unprofitable (says S. Hierome) who has done all: what is to be said
of him, who could not fulfill them? So likewise the Romans themselves might
remember, that they were taught by S. Paul at the beginning: that there is no
proportion of condignitie to be found betwixt not the actions only but the
passions also of the Saints, and the reward that is reserved for us in the
world to come. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us: says he,
Romans 8.18. and Bernard thereupon: De aete^na vita scimus, quia non sunt
condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam; nec, si unus omnes
sustineat. Neque enim talia sunt ^ominum merita, ut propter ea vita aeterna
deberetur ex jure; aut Deus injuriam aliquam faceret, nisi eam donaret. Nam, ut
taceam quod merita omnia dona Deis sunt, and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo
debtor est, quam Deus homini: quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam?
Bernard. sermon. 1. in Annuntiat. B. Mariae.
Concerning the life eternal we know, that the sufferings of this time are not
worthy to be compared with the future glory; no, not if one man did sustain
them all. For the merits of men are not such, that for them eternal life
should be due of right; or God should do any injury, if he did not give it.
For, to let pass that all merits are Gods gifts, and in that respect a man is
for them made a debtor to God, more than God to man: what are all merits in
comparison of so great a glory? and S. Ambrose long before him: Omnia quae
patimur minora sunt and indigna quorum pro laboribus tanta rependaturfuturorum
merces bonorum, quae revelabitur in nobis, cum ad Dei imaginem reformati
gloriam ejus facie ad faciem aspicere meruerimus. Ambros. ^pist. 22.
All those things which we suffer, are too little and unworthy, fot the pains
whereof there should be rendered unto us so great reward of good things to come,
as shall be revealed in us, when being reformed according to the image of God
we shall merit (or obtain) to see his glory face to face.

Where for the better understanding of the meaning of the Fathers in this
point, we may further observe, that merits in their writings do ordinarily
signify nothing but works (as in the alleged place of Bernard:) and Verum
quidem est, neque id me fugit, usurpari nonnunquam nomen meriti, ubi nulla est
ratio meriti, neque ex congruo, neque de condigno. Andr. Vega defens. Council.
Tridentin. de Iustificat. lib. 8. cap. 8. Si aliquis vocabulo promerendi usus
est; aliter non intellexit, quam consecutionem de facto. Stapleton. Promptuar.
Catholic. fer. 5. post Dominic. Passion. Vocabulum merendi apud veteres
Ecclesiasticos scriptores fere idem valet quod consequi, seu aptum idoneumque
fieri ad consequendum. G^org. Cassand. Schol. in Hymnos Ecclesiastic. page 179.
Oper. Vid. Cochlaeum in Discuss. ^onfess. and Apolog. artic. 20.
to merit, simply to procure or to attain, without any relation at all to the
dignity either of the person or the work; as in the last words of Ambrose is
plainly to be seen. And therefore as Tacitus writes of Agricola, that Iis
virtutibus iram Caij Caesaris meritus. Tacit. in vit. Iul. Agricolae.
by his virtues he merited (that is to say, incurred) the anger of Caius
Caesar: so S. Augustine says, that he and his fellows for their good doings
at the hands of the Donatists, Pro action gratiarum flammas meruimus odiorum.
Augustine. contr. liter. Petilian. lib. 3. cap. 6.
in stead of thanks merited (that is, incurred) the flames of hatred. On the
other side the same Father affirms, that S. Paul Pro persecutionibus and
blasphemijs vas electionis meruit nominari. Id. de Praedestinat. and gratia.
for his persecutions and blasphemies merited (that is, found the grace) to be
named a vessel of election; having reference to that in 1 Timoth. 1.13. Who
was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious; but I obtained mercy.
where in stead of (...), which the vulgar Latin translateth Misericordiam
consecutus sum; Cypri. epist. 73. sect. 11. Augustine. de Bapt^sm. contr.
Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 5.
S. Cyprian reads, Misericordiam merui, I merited mercy. Whereunto we may
add that saying which is found also among the works of S. Augustine: that Ut
omnis ^eccator propterea de se non desperet, quia Paulus meruit indulgentiam.
Augustine. se^m. 49. de Tempore.
no sinner should despair of himself, seeing Paul has merited pardon. and
that of Gregory: Quid quod Paulus, cum Redemptoris nomen in ter^a conaretur
extinguere, ejus v^rba de coelo meruit audire? Greg. Moral. in Job. lib. 9.
cap. 17.
Paul when he went about to extinguish the name of our Redeemer upon earth,
merited to hear his words from heaven. as also that other strain of his
concerning the sin of Adam; which is sung in the Church of Rome at the blessing
of the Taper: O felix cu^pa, quae talem ac tantum meruit habere Redemptorem.
Vid. Iodoc. Cl^cthovei lib. de duab. propositionib. Cer^i Pas^halis.
O happy sin, that merited (that is, found the favor) to have such and so
great a Redeemer. Howsoever therefore the ancient Doctors may seem unto those
that are not well acquainted with their language, to speak of merits as the
Romanists do: yet have they nothing common with them but the bare word; in the
thing it self they differ as much from them every way, as our Church does.

Vix mihi suadeo quod possit ullum opus esse, quod ex debito remunerationem Dei
deposcat: cum etiam hoc ipsum, quod agere aliquid possumus, vel cogitare, vel
proloqui, ipsius dono and largitione faciamus. Origin. lib. 4. in ^pist. ad
Romans cap. 4.
I can hardly be persuaded, says Origin, that there can be any work, which
may require the reward of God by way of debt: seeing this very thing it self,
that we can do or think or speak any thing, we do it by his gift and
largess. Merces quidem ex dono nulla est, quia debetur ex opere: sed gratuitam
Deus omnibus ex fidei justificatione donavit. Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 20.
Wages indeed, says Saint Hilary, there is none of gift, because it is due by
work: but God has given the same free to all men, by the justification of
faith. Unde mihi tantum meriti, cui indulgentia pro corona est? Ambros. in
Exhortat ad Virgins.
Whence should I have so great merit, seeing mercy is my Crown? says S.
Ambrose. and again, Quis nostrum fine divina potest miseratione subsistere?
Quid possumus dignum praemijs facere coelestibus? Quis nostrum ita assurgit in
hoc corpore, ut animum suum clevet, quo jugiter adhaereat Christo? Quo tandem
hominum merito defertur, ut haec corruptibilis caro induat incorruptionem, and
mortale hoc indua^ immortalitate^? Quibus laboribus, quibus injuriis possumus
nostra levare peccata? Indignae sunt passiones hujus temporis ad superventuram
gloriam. Non ergo secundum merita nostra, sed secundum misericordiam Dei,
coelestium decretorum in homines forma procedit. Id. in Psalm. 118. oct^nar. 20.
Vid. eund. de bono mortis, cap. 11.
Which of us can subsist, without the mercy of God? What can we do worthy of
the heavenly rewards? Which of us does so rise up in this body, that he does
elevate his mind, in such sort as he may continually adhere unto Christ? By
what merit of man is it granted, that this corruptible flesh should put on
incorruption, and this mortal should put on immortality? By what labors, or
by what enduring of injuries, can we abate our sins? The sufferings of this
time are unworthy for the glory that is to come. Therefore the form of
heavenly decrees does proceed with men, not according to our merits, but
according to Gods mercy. S. Basil expounding those words of the Psalmist,
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him; upon them that hope in
his mercy, (Psalm. 33.18.) says, that he does hope in his mercy, (...). Basil.
in Psalm. ^2.
who not trusting in his own good deeds, nor looking to be justified by
works, has the hope of his salvation only in the mercies of God. and in his
explication of those other words, Psalm. 116.7. Return unto thy rest, O my
soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. (...). Id. in Psalm. 114.
and apud Anton. Meliss. part. 2. sermon. 93.
Everlasting rest (says he) is laid up for them that strive lawfully in this
life; not to be rendered according to the debt of works, but exhibited by the
grace of the bountiful God to them that trust in him. Si nostra consideremus
merita, desperandum est. Hieronym. lib. 17. in Esai. cap. 64.
If we consider our own merits, we must despair, says S. Hierome. and, Cum
dies judicij vel dormitionis advenerit, omnes manus dissolventur, etc. quia
nullum opus dignum Dei justitia reperietur. Id. lib. 6. in Esai. cap. 13.
When the day of judgment or death shall come, all hands will fail; because
no work shall be found worthy of the justice of God. Macarius the Egyptian
Eremite in his 15. homily writes thus. (...). Macar. homil. 15.
Touching the gift which Christians shall inherit, this a man may rightly say;
that if any one from the time wherein Adam was created unto the very end of the
world, did fight against Satan, and undergo afflictions, he should do no
great matter in respect of the glory that he shall inherit. for he shall reign
together with Christ world without end. His 37. homily is in the Paris edition
of the works of Marc. erenit. edit. Paris. an. 1563. Nam in Micropr^sbytico
Prooemium illud non habetur: quippe quod Maca^i^ constel. esse, non Marci.
Marcus the Eremite set out as the Prooeme of his book of Paradise and the
spiritual law. There Macarius exhorts us, that (...). Macar. homil. 37.
believing in almighty God, we should with a simple heart and void of
scrupulositie come unto him who bestows the communion of the spirit according
to faith, and not according to the proportion of the works of faith. Where
Ioannes Picus the Popish interpreter of Marcus, gives us warning in his
margent, that this clause is to be understood of a lively faith: but concealeth
his own faithlesnesse in corrupting of the text, by turning the works of
faith into the works of nature. for (...), is by his Latin translation (which
is to be seen in B^blioth^c. Patr. tom 4. page 935. B. ^dit. Colon.
Bibliotheca Patrum) as much to say as, Non ex proportione operum naturae.

There is a treatise extant of the said Marcus; (...), touching those who
think to be justified by their works: where he makes two sorts of men,
(...). Marc. Eromit. de his qui putant ex operib. justificari, cap. 17. and ex
eo Anastasius Sinaita, vel Nicaenus, quaest. 1. page 16. edit. Ingolstad.
that miss both of them the kingdom of heaven. the one, such as do not keep
the commandments, and yet imagine that they believe aright: the other, such as
keeping the commandments, do expect the kingdom as a wages due unto them.
For (...). Id. ibid. cap. 2.
the Lord (says he) willing to show, that all the comm^ndements are of duty
to be performed, and that the adoption of children is freely given to men by
his blood, says; When you have done a^l things that are commanded you, then
say; We are unprofitable servants, and we have done that which was our duty to
do. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is not the hire of works, but the grace
of the Lord prepared for his faithful servants. This sentence is repeated in
the very self same words, by Hesyc. Presb. in (...), Centur. 1. s^ct. 79.
Hesychius in his book of Sentences written to Thalassius. The like sayings
also has S. Chrysostom. (...). Ch^ysost. in epist. ad Colos^. homil. 2.
No man shows such a conversation of life, that he may be worthy of the
kingdom; but this is wholly of the gift of God. Therefore he says; When ye
have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants; for what we ought to do, we
have done. (...). Id. de compunctione, ad Stelech^um, tom. 6. edit. Savil. page
157.
Although we did die a thousand deaths, although we did perform all virtuous
actions; yet should we come short by far of rendering any thing worthy of
those honors which are conferred upon us by God. (...). Id. in Psalm. 4.
Although we should do innumerable good deeds, it is of Gods pity and
benignity that we are heard. although we should come unto the very top of
virtue, it is of mercy that we are saved. (...). Id. in Matthew. Homil. 79. edit.
Graec. vel 80. Latin.
for although we did innumerable works of mercy, yet would it be of the
benignity of grace, that for such small and mean matters should be given so
great a heaven and a kingdom, and such an honor: (...). Id. in Psalm 5.
whereunto nothing we do can have equal correspondence. Sit licet excellens
hominum meritum, sit naturae jura conservans, sit legum jussisobtemperans;
impleat fidem, justitiam teneat, virtutes exerceat, damnet vitia, peccata
repellat, semet exemplum imitantibus praebeat: si quid gesserit, paru^ est;
quicquid fecerit, minus: omne enim meritum breve est. Numera beneficia, si
potes; and tunc considera quid mereris. Cum beneficijs caelestibus tua facta
perpe^de, cu^ divinis muneribus actus proprios meditare: nec dignu^ te
judicabis eo quod fueris, si intelligas quid mereris. Sermon. de primo homine
praelato omni creaturae; tom. 1. oper. Chrysostom.
Let the merit of men be excellent, let him observe the rights of nature, let
him be obedient to the commandments of the Laws; let him fulfill his faith,
keep justice, exercise virtues, condemn vice, repel sins, show himself an
example for others to imitate: if he have performed any thing, it is little;
whatsoever he has done is small: for all merit is short. Number Gods benefits,
if thou can: and then consider what thou do merit. Weigh thine own deeds
with the heavenly benefits, ponder thine own acts with the divine gifts: and
thou will not judge thy self worthy of that which thou art, if thou
understandest what thou do merit. Whereunto we may add the exhortation made
by S. Antony to his Monks in Egypt. (...). etc. (...). Athanas. Vit. Antonij,
page 25.
The life of man is most short, being measured with the world to come: so that
all our time is even nothing, in comparison of everlasting life. And every
thing in this world is sold for that which it is worth, and one gives equal
in exchange of equal: but the promise of everlasting life is bought for a very
little matter. Wherefore, my sons, let us not wax weary; nor think that we
stay long, or perform some great thing: for the sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed on
us. Neither when we look upon the world, let us think that we have forsaken
any great matters. For all this earth is but a very little thing, in comparison
of the whole heaven. Therefore although we had been lords of the whole earth,
and did forsake the whole earth; that would be nothing worthy to be compared
with the kingdom of heaven. For as if one would neglect one piece of brass,
that he might gain a hundred pieces of gold: so he who is lord of the whole
earth and forsakes it, should but forgo a little, and receive a hundred fold.

Such an other exhortation does S. Augustine also make unto his hearers. Cum
attenderis quid sic accepturus; omnia tibi erunt vilia quae pateris, nec digna
aestimabis pro quibus illud accipias. Miraberis tantum dari pro tanto labor.
Nam utique fratres, pro aeterna requie labor aeternus subeundus erat. Aeternam
felicitatem accepturus, aeternas passiones sustinere deberes. Sed si aeternum
sustineres laborem; quando venires ad aeternam felicitatem? Ita fit, ut
necessario temporalis sit tribulatio tua, qua sinita venias ad felicitatem
infinitam. Sed plane, fratres, posset esse longa tribulatio pro aeterna
felicitate. Verbi gratia, ut quoniam felicitas nostra finem non habebit;
miseria nostra, and labor noster, and tribulationes nostrae diuturnae essent.
Nam etsi mill annorum essent, appende mill annos contra aeternitatem. Quid
appendis cum infinito quantumcunque finitum? december millia annorum, decies
centena millia, si dicendum est, and millia millium, quae finem habent, cum
aeternitate comparari non possunt. Huc accedit, quia non solum temporalem
voluit laborem tuum Deus, sed etiam brevem. August. in Psalm. 36. Conc. 2.
When thou do consider (says he) what thou art to receive; all the things
that thou suffer will be vile unto thee, neither will thou esteem them
worthy for which thou should receive it. Thou will wonder, that so much is
given, for so small a labor. For indeed, brethren, for everlasting rest
everlasting labor should be undergone: being to receive everlasting felicity,
thou ought to sustain everlasting sufferings. But if thou should sustain
everlasting labor; when should thou come to everlasting felicity? So it
comes to pass, that thy tribulation must of necessity be temporal; that it
being finished, thou may come to infinite felicity. But yet, brethren, there
might have been long tribulation for eternal felicity. that, for example,
because our felicity shall have no end; our misery, and our labor, and our
tribulations should be of long continuance. For admit they should continue a
thousand year: weigh a thousand years with eternity. Why do thou weigh
that which is finite, be it never so great, with that which is infinite? Ten
thousand years, ten hundred thousand, if we should say, and a thousand
thousand, which have an end, cannot be compared with eternity. This then thou
have, that God would have thy labor to be not only temporal, but short also.
And therefore does the same Father every where put us in mind, that God is
become our debtor, not by our deservings, but by his own gracious promise.
Fidelis homo est credens promittenti Deo; fidelis Deus est exhibens quod
promisit homini. Teneamus fidelissimum debitorem, quia tenemus
misericordissimum promissorem. Neque enim aliquid ei commodavimus, ^ut mutuum
commendavimus, ut teneamus eum debitorem: cum ab illo habeamus quicquid illi
offerimus, and ex illo sit quicquid boni sumus. Id. in Psalm. 32. Conc. 1.
Man (says he) is faithful, when he believes God promising: God is
faithful, when he performs that which he has promised unto man. Let us hold
him a most faithful debtor, because we have him a most merciful promiser. For
we have not done him any pleasure, or leant any thing to him that we should
hold him a debtor; seeing we have from himself whatsoever we do offer unto
him, and it is from him whatsoever good we are. Ergo non ei al quid dedimus:
and tenemus debitorem. Unde debitorem? Quia promissor est Non dicimus Deo;
Domine read quod accepisti, sed read quod promisisti. Id. ibid. and in Psalm.
83.
We have not given any thing therefore unto him; and yet we hold him a debtor.
Whence a debtor? because he is a promiser. We say not unto God; Lord, pay that
which thou have received, but, pay that which thou have promised. Secu^us ergo
esto. Tene debitorem, quia credidisti in promissorem. Id. in Psalm. 83. circa
finem.
Be thou secure therefore. Hold him as a debtor, because thou have believed in
him as a promiser. Fidelis Deus qui se nostrum debitore^ fecit: non aliquid a
nobis accipiendo, sed tanta nobis promittendo, etc. Promisit enim hominibus
divinitatem, mortalibus immortalitatem, peccatoribus justificationem, abjectis
glorificatione^. Quicquid promisit, indignis promisit; ut non quasi operibus
merces promitteretur, sed gratia a nomine suo gratis daretur: quia and hoc
ipsum quod just vivit, inquantu^ homo potest just vivere, non merit^ h^mani,
sed beneficij est divini. Id. in Psalm. 109. circa init:
God is faithful, who has made himself our debtor; not by receiving any
thing from us, but by promising so great things to us. For to men has he
promised divinity, to those that are mortal immortality, to sinners
justification, to abjects glorification. Whatsoever he promised, he promised to
them that were unworthy; that it might not be promised as wa^es for works, but
being grace, might according to the name be graciously and freely given:
because that even this very thing, that one does live justly (so far as a man
can live justly) is not a matter of man's merit, but of the gift of God.
Therefore, In his quae jam habemus, laudemus Deum la^gitorem: in his quae
nondum habemus, teneamus debitorem. Debtor enim factus est, non aliquid a
nobis accipiendo, sed quod ei placuit promittendo. Aliter enim dicimus homini,
Debes mihi quia dedi tibi: and aliter dicimus, Debes mihi quia promisisti mihi.
Qua^do dicis, Debes mihi quia dedi tibi; a te processit beneficium, sed
mutuatum non donatum. Quando autem dicis, Debes mihi quia promisisti mihi; tu
nihil dedisti, and tamen exigis. Bonitas enim ejus qui promisit dabit, etc. Id.
de Verbis Apostoli, Sermon. 16.
in those things which we have already, let us praise God as the giver: in
those things which as yet we have not, let us hold him our debtor. For he is
become our debtor, not by receiving any thing from us, but by promising what it
pleased him. For it is one thing to say to a man, Thou art debtor to me,
because I have given to thee: and another thing to say, Thou art debtor to me,
because thou have promised me. When thou say. Thou art debtor to me, because
I have given to thee: a benefit has proceeded from thee, though lent, not
given. But when thou say, Thou art debtor to me, because thou have promised
me: thou gave nothing to him, and yet requirest of him. For the goodness of
him that has promised, will give it, etc.

Hominum salus ex sola Dei misericordia pendet. neque enim hanc adipiscimur
praemium and mercedem justitiae: sed Dei bonitatis donum est. Theodoret. in
Sophoni. cap. 3.
The salvation of men depends upon the sole mercy of God: says Theodoret. for
we do not obtain it as the reward and wages of our righteousness: but it is the
gift of Gods goodness. Superant certamina coronae, non comparantur cum
laboribus remunerationes: labor enim parvus est, sed magnum lucrum speratur. Et
p^opte^ea non mercedem sed gloriam vocavit ea quae expectantur. Id. in Roman.
8.18.
The crowns do excel the fights, the rewards are not to be compared with the
labors: for the labor is small, but great is the gain that is hoped for. And
therefore the Apostle, Romans 8.18. called those things that are looked for, not
wages, but glory. and Romans 6.23. Hic non dicit mercedeni, sed gratiam. Etsi
quis enim summam and absolutam justitiam praestiterit: temporali^us laboribus
aeterna in aequilibrio non respondent. Id. in Roman. 6. ult.
not wages, but grace. For although a man should perform the greatest and most
absolute righteousness: things eternal do not answer temporal labors in
equal poise. The same for this point is taught by S. Cyrill of Alexandria:
that (...). Cyril. Alexandrin. homil. Paschal. 4.
the crown which we are to receive, does much surpass the pains which we
take for it. And the Author of the book of the calling of the Gentiles
(attributed unto Prosper) observes out of the Parable, Matthew. 20.9. that God
bestows eternal life on those that are called at the end of their days, as
well as upon them that had labored longer: Non labori pretiu^ solvens, sed
divitias bonitatis suae in eos, quos sine operibus elegit, effundens: ut etiam
hi^ qui in multo labor sudarunt, nec amplius quam novissimi acceperunt;
intelligant donum se gratiae, non operum accepisse mercedem. Prosp. de Vocat.
Gent. lib. 1. cap. 17.
not as paying a price to their labor, but pouring out the riches of his
goodness upon them whom he had chosen without works; that even they also who
have sweat with much labor, and have received no more than the last, might
understand, that they did receive a gift of grace, and not a due wages for
their works.

This was the doctrine taught in the Church for the first five hundred years
after Christ: which we find maintained also in the next five hundred. Meritum
meum regnator coelestis si attenderet, aut exigua bona adipisce^er, aut magna
supplicia; and mei idoneus aestimator, quo meritis pervenire non poteram, voto
non tendere^. Sed gratias illi, qui delicta nostra sic ne extollamur resecat,
utspem ad laetiora ( al. latiora) perducat. Enned. Ticinens. l. 2. ep. 10. ad
Faust.
If the King of heaven should regard my merit (says Ennodius, Bishop of Pavia)
either I should get little good, or great punishments; and judging of my self
rightly, whither I could not come by merits, I would not tend in desire. But
thanks be to him, who, that we may not be extolled, does so cut off our
offenses, that he brings our hope unto better things. Our glorification,
says Fulgentius, Gratia autem etia^ ipsa ideo no^ injuste dicitur, quia no^
solum donis suis Deus dona sua reddit: sed quia tantu^ etia^ ibi gratia divinae
retributionis exuberat, ut inco^parabiliter atque ineffabiliter omne meritu^,
quamvis bonae and ex Deo datae, humanae voluntatis atque operationis excedat.
Fulg. ad Monimum, l. 1. c. 10.
is not unjustly called Grace: not only because God does bestow his own gifts
upon his own gifts; but also because the grace of Gods reward does so much
there abound, as that it exceeds incomparably and unspeakably all the merit
of the will and work of man, though good, and given from God. For Totis licet
and animae and corporis laboribus desudemus, totis licet obedientiae viribus
exerceamur: nihil tamen condignum merito pro coelestibus bonis compensare and
offerre valebimus. Non valent vitae praesentis obsequia aeternae vitae gaudijs
comparari. Lassescant licet membra vigilijs; pallescant licet ora jejunijs: non
erunt tamen condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae
revelabitur in nobis. Pulsemus ergo, charissimi, in quantum possumus; quia non
possumus quantu^ debemus: futura beatitudo acquiri potest, aestimari non
potest. Eusebius. Emiss. vel. Gallican. ad Monachos, ser. 3
although we did sweat (says he who bears the name of Eusebius Emissenus, or
Gallicanus) with all the labors of our soul and body, although we were
exercised with all the strength of obedience: yet shall not we be able to
recompense and offer any thing worthy in merit for the heavenly good things.
The offices of this present life cannot be compared with the joys of the life
eternal. Although our members be wearied with watchings; although our faces
wax pale with fastings: yet the sufferings of this time will not be worthy to
be compared with the future glory which shall be revealed in us. Let us knock
therefore, dearly beloved, as much as we can, because we cannot as much as we
ought: the future bliss may be acquired, but estimated it cannot be.

(...). Agap^t. Diacon. Paraenes. ad Justinian. sect. 43.
Albeit thou had good deeds equal in number to the stars, (says Agapetus
the Deacon, to the Emperor Justinian) yet shall thou never go beyond the
goodness of God. For whatsoever any man shall bring unto God, he does but
offer unto him his own things, out of his own store. and as one cannot
outstrip his own shadow in the Sun, (which preventeth him always, although
he make never so much speed:) so neither can men by their good doings, outstrip
the unmatchable bounty of God. Ut enim saepe diximus: Omnis humana justitia,
injustitia esse co^vincitur, si districte judicetur. Prece ergo post justitiam
indiget; ut quae succumbere discussa poterat, ex sola judicis pietate
co^valescat. etc. Dicat ergo: Qui etiamsi habuero quippiam justum, non
respondebo, sed meum judicem deprecabor. Velut, si apertius fateatur, dicens:
Etsi ad opus virtutis excrevero, ad vitam non ex meritis, sed ex venia
convalesco. Gregor. Moral. in Job. lib. 9. cap. 14.
All the righteousness of man, says Gregory, is convicted to be
unrighteousness, if it be strictly judged. It needs therefore prayer after
righteousness; that that which being sifted might fail, by the mere pity of
the Judge might stand for good. Let him therefore say: Although I had any
righteous thing, I would not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge.
(Job 9.15) as if he should more plainly confess, and say: Albeit I did grow up
unto the work of virtue, I should be enabled unto life, not by merits, but by
pardon. But you will say, Quod s^illa sanctorum felicitas misericordia est, and
non meritis acquiritur: ubi erit quod scriptum est; Et tu reddes unicuique
secundum opera sua? Si secundum opera redditur; quomodo misericordia
a^stimabitur? Sed aliud est secundum opera reddere, and aliud propter ipsa
opera reddere. In eo enim quod secundum opera dicitur, ipsa operum qualitas
intelligitur; ut cujus appa^uerint bona opera, ejus sit and retributio
glo^iosa. Illi namque beatae vitae in qua cum Deo, and de Deo vivitur, nullus
potest aequari labor, nulla opera comparati: praesertim cum. Apostolus dicat;
Non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam quae revelabitur
in nobis. Id. in Psalm. Poenitent. 7. verse. 9.
If this bliss of the Saints be mercy, and is not obtained by merits; how
shall that stand which is written: And thou shall render unto every one
according to his works? If it be rendered according to works; how shall it be
accounted mercy? But it is one thing to render according to works; and
another thing to render for the works themselves. For when it is said,
According to works; the quality it self of the work is understood: that
whose works appear good, his reward way be glorious. For unto that blessed
life, wherein we are to live with God, and by God, no labor can be equalled,
no works compared: seeing the Apostle says, The sufferings of this present
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in
us. Per justitiam factorum nullus salvabitur, sed per solam justitiam fidei.
Bed. in Psalm. 77.
By the righteousness of works no man shall be saved, but only by the
righteousness of faith: says Bid. and therefore Instruit videlicet, ut nemo
vel libertatem arbitrij, vel merita sua sufficere sibi ad beatitudinem credat;
sed sola gratia Dei se salvari posse intelligat. Id. in Psalm. 31.
no man should believe, that either his freedom of will, or his merits, are
sufficient to bring him unto bliss; but understand, that he can be saved by
the grace of God only. The same Author, writing upon those words of David,
Psalm. 24.5 He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from
the God of his salvation: expounds the blessing to be this; Accipiet
benedictionem, id est, multiplicationem a Domino; hanc scilicet; ut in
praesenti been promereatur, and in futuro been remuneretur. Et hoc non ex
meritis, sed ex sola gratia. Id. in Psalm. 23.
that for the present time he shall merit (or work) well, and for the future
shall be rewarded well. and that, not by merits, but by grace only.

To the same purpose Elias Cretensis, the interpreter of Gregory Nazianzen,
writes thus. Debemus per misericordiam intelligere mercedem illam, quam nobis
Deus rependit. Nos enim tanquam servi, virtutem debemus, ut optima quaeque Deo
and grata tanquam debitum quoddam exsolvamus ac offeramus: quippe quum nihil
habeamus, quod non ab ipso acceperimu^. Deus autem velut Dominus and herus
noster miseretur, nobisque potius dona^, quam rependit. Elias in Nazianzeni
Orat. habit. in elect. Eulalij.
By mercy we ought to understand that reward, which God does repay unto us. For
we as servants do owe virtue, that the best things, and such as are
grateful, we should pay and offer unto God as a certain debt: considering
that we have nothing, which we have not received from him: and God on the
other side, as our Lord and Master, has pity on us, and does bestow rather,
than repay unto us. (...). Anastas quaest. 135.
This therefore is true humility, (says Anastasius Sinaita or Nicaenus) to
do good works, but to account ones self unclean and unworthy of Gods
favor, thinking to be saved by his goodness alone. For whatsoever good things
we do; we answer not God for the very air alone which we do breathe. And
when we have offered unto him all the things that we have, he does not owe us
any reward for all things are his: and none receiving the things that are his
own, is bound to give a reward unto them that bring the same unto him. In the
book set out by the authority of Charles the Great against Images; Arca
foederis secundum quosdam Dominum and Salvatorem nostrum, in quo solo foedus
pacis apud Patrem habemus, designat, etc. Cui propitiatorium superponitur, quia
scilicet legalibus sive euangelicis praeceptis, quae in eo fundata sunt,
supereminet misericordia ejusdem mediatoris; per quam non ex operibus legis
quae fe^imus nos, neque volentes, neque currentes, sed ejus miseratione
salvamur. Opus Carolin. de Imaginib. lib. 1. cap. 15.^
the Arc of the Covenant is said to signify our Lord and Savior, in whom
alone we have the Covenant of peace with the Father. Over which the
Propitiatory is said to be placed: because above the Commandments either of
the Law, or of the Gospel, which are founded in him, the mercy of the said
Mediator takes place; by which, not by the works of the Law which we have
done, neither willing, nor running, but by his having mercy upon us, we are
saved. So Ambrosius Ansbertus, expounding that place, Rev. 19.7. Let us be glad
and rejoice, and give glory to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and
his wife has made her self ready. In eo autem damus illi gloriam, quo nullis
praecedentibus bonorum actuum meritis, sed sola nos ejus misericordia, ad
tantam dignitate^ pervenisse fateamur. A^bros. Ansbert. lib. 8. in Apocaly^s.
c. 19.
In this, says he, do we give glory to him; when we do confess, that by no
precedent merits of our good deeds, but by his mercy only, we have attained
unto so great a dignity. And Rabanus in his Commentaries upon the Lament. of
Jeremy: Ne dicerent, Patres nostri suo merito placuerunt, ideo tanta sunt a
Domino consecuti: intulit non meritis d^tum, sed quia ita sit Deo pl^citum;
cujus est gratuitum omne quod praesta^. R^b^n. in Ierem. lib. 18. cap. 2.
Lest they should say, Our Fathers were accepted for their merit, and therefore
they obtained such great things at the hand of the Lord; he adjoyneth, that
this was not given to their merits, but because it so pleased God, whose free
gift is whatsoever he bestows. Haymo writing upon those words, Psalm. 132.10.
For thy servant David's sake refuse not the face of thine Anointed, says that,
Propter David servum tuum, id est, propter meritu^ ipsius Christi. and hi^
datur plane intelligi, nullum de meritis suis debere praesumere; sed omnem
salvationem ex Christi meritis expectare. Haymo in Psalm. 131.
For thy servant David's sake, is as much to say as, For the merit of Christ
himself: and from thence collecteth this doctrine; that none ought to presume
of his own merits, but expect all his salvation from the merits of Christ. So
in another place: Sed and nos agentes poenitentiam, sciamus nihil nos dignum
dare posse ad placandum Deum; sed solummodo in sanguine imm^culati and
singularis Ag^i nos posse salvari. Id. in Micheae cap. 6.
When we perform our repentance, (says he) let us know that we can give
nothing that is worthy for the a^peasing of God; but that only in the blood of
that immaculate and singular Lamb we can be saved. And again, Vita aeterna
nulli per debitum redditur; sed per gratuitam misericordiam datur. Id. Homil.
in Dominic. Septuagesimae.
Eternal life is rendered to none by debt; but given by free mercy. Necesse
est sola fide Christi salvari credentes. Smaragd. in Galat. cap. 3.
It is of necessity that believers should be saved only by the faith of
Christ: says Smaragdus the Abbot. Gratia, non meritis, salvati sumus a Deo.
Comment^r. in Marc. cap. 14. inter (...) Hieronym.
By grace, not by merits, are we saved of God: says the Author of the
Commentaries upon S. Mark, falsely attributed to S. Hierome.

That this doctrine was by Gods great mercy preserved in the Church the next
500. years also, as well as in those middle times: appears most evidently by
those Instructions and Consolations, which were prescribed to be used unto such
as were ready to depart out of this life. Formula illa infirmos jam animam
agentes interrogandi, in Bibliothecis passim obvia; qu^e and separatim Anselmo
Cantuariensi inscribitur, and operi Epistolarum inserta reperitur. Georg.
Cassand. in Appendic. ad Opusc. Io. Roffens. de fiducia and miseric^rd. a Dei.
This form of preparing men for their death, was commonly to be had in all
Libraries, and particularly was found inserted among the Epistles of Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury; who was commonly accounted to be the Author of it.
The substance thereof may be seen (for the copies vary, some being shorter,
and some larger than others) in a Tractate written by a Cistercian Monk, of
the Art of dying well (which I have in written hand, and have seen also
printed in the year 1483. and 1504.) in the book called, Hortulus animae; in
Cassanders Appendix to the book of John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, de
fiducia and misericordia Dei; (edit. Colon. An. 1556.) Caspar Vlenbergius his
Motives; (cause. 14. page 462.463. edit. Colon. An. 1589.) in the Roman
Sacerdotall (part. 1. tract. 5. cap. 13. fol. 116. edit. Venet. An. 1585.) in
the book entitled, Sacra institutio Baptizandi juxta ritum Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae, ex decreto Concilij Tridentini restituta, etc. printed at Paris, in
the year 1575. and in a like book entitled Ordo Baptizandi, cum Modo
visitandi, printed at Venice the same year. out of which the Spanish
Inquisitors, as well in their New, as in their Old Expurgatory Index (the one
set out by Cardinal Quiroga in the year 1584. the other by the Cardinal of
Sandoval and Roxas, in the year 1612.) command these interrogatories to be
blotted out. SACERDOS. Credis non proprijs meritis, sed passionis Domini nostri
Jesus Christi virtute and me^ito, ad gloriam pervenire? R^spond^at infirmus:
Credo. SACERDOS. Credis, quod Dominus noster Jesus Christus pro nostra Salute
mortuus sit: and quod ex proprijs meritis, vel alio modo nullus possit salvari,
nisi in merito passionis ejus? Respondeat infirmus: Credo. Ordo baptizandi, and
visitandi, edit. Venet. an. 1575. fol. 34. and Institut. Baptiz^ndi, edit.
Paris. an. 1575. fol. 35. a. and Sacerdotal. Romans edit. Venet. an. 1585. fol.
116. b.
Do thou believe to come to glory, not by thine own merits, but by the
virtue and merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ? and, Do thou
believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ did die for our salvation: and that none
can be saved by his own merits, or by any other means, but by the merit of
his passion? Whereby we may observe how late it is, since our Romanists in this
maine and most substantial point (which is the very foundation of all our
comfort) have most shamefully departed from the faith of their forefathers. In
other copies of this same Instruction (which are followed by Cassander,
Vlenbergius, and Cardinal Hosius himself) Sed and Anselmus Archiepiscopus
Cantuari^nsis inte^rogationes quasdam praescripsisse d^citur infi^mis in
extremis constitutis: inter quas extrema est. Credis te non posse nisi per
mortem Christi salvari? Respondet infirmus: Etiam. Tum illi dicitur. Age ergo,
dum superest in ^e anima, in hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue; in nulla
alia re fiduciam h^be: huic morti te totum commit, hac sola te totum contege,
totum immisce te in hac morte, totum confige; in hac morte te totum involve. Et
si Dominus Deus voluerit te judicare, dic: Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi objicio inter me and tuum judicium: aliter tecum non contendo. Et si
tibi dixerit, quia peccator es, dic: Domine, mortem Domini Jesus Christi pono
inter te and peccata mea. Si dixe^it tibi, quod meruisti damnationem, dic:
Domine, mo^tem Domini nostri Jesus Christi obtendo inter me, and mala merita
mea; ipsiusque meritum offero pro me^ito, quod ego debuissem habere nec habeo.
Si dixerit, quod tibi ^st iratus, dic: Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesus
Christi oppono inter me and iram tuam. Hosius in Confessione P^tricoviens. cap.
73.
the last question propounded to the sick man is this. Do thou believe that
thou can not be saved, but by the death of Christ? Whereunto when he has
made answer affirmatively: he is presently directed to make use thereof, in
this manner. Go too therefore, as long as thy soul remains in thee, place
thy whole confidence in this death only; have confidence in no other thing:
commit thy self wholly to this death, with this alone cover thy self wholly,
intermingle thy self wholly in this death, fasten thy self wholly; wrap thy
whole self in this death. And if the Lord God will judge thee, say: Lord, I
oppose the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and thy judgment: no
otherwise do I contend with thee. And if he say unto thee, that thou art a
sinner, say: Lord, I put the death of the Lord Jesus Christ betwixt thee and my
sins. If he say unto thee, that thou have deserved damnation, say: Lord, I
set the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and my bad merits; and I
offer his merit in stead of the merit which I ought to have, but yet have not.
If he say, that he is angry with thee, say: Lord, I interpose the death of our
Lord Jesus Christ betwixt me and thine anger.

Add hereunto the following sentences of the Doctors of these latter ages.
(...). O^cum^n in Roman. 8. page 312.
We cannot suffer or bring in any thing worthy of the reward that shall be:
says Oecumenius. So Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bathe. Nihil moleste potest
sustineri in hac morte vitali, quod coelestibus gaud^js ex aequo respondere
sufficiat. Petr. Blesens. in Job, cap. ult.
No trouble can be endured in this vital death, which is able equally to
answer the joys of heaven. and Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury more fully,
before him. Si homo mill annis serviret Deo, etiam ferventissime; non
mereretur ex condigno, dimidiam diem esse in regno coelorum. Ans^lm. in lib. de
Mensuratione Crucis.
If a man should serve God a thousand years, and that most fervently; he
should not deserve of condignitie to be half a day in the Kingdom of heaven.
Radulphus Ardens, expounding those words of the Parable, Matthew. 20.13. Did
not thou agree with me for a penny? Nemo, fratres, ex his verbis putet Deum
quasi ex conventione astrictum esse ad reddendum promissum. Sicut enim Deus est
liber ad promittendum, ita est liber ad reddendum: praesertim cum tam merita
quam praemia sint gratia sua. Nihil enim aliud quam gratiam suam coronat in
nobis Deus: qui si vellet in nobis agere districte, non justificaretur in
conspectu ejus omnis vivens. Unde Apostolus qui plus omnibus laboravit, dicit:
Existimo quod non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam
quae revelabitur in nobis. Ergo haec conventio nihil aliud est, quam voluntaria
Dei promissio. Rad. Ardens. Dominic. in Septuagesima, Homil. 2.
Let no man out of these words, says he, think that God is, as it were, tied
by agreement to pay that which he has promised. For as God is free to promise,
so is he free to pay: especially seeing as well merits as rewards are his
grace. For God does crown nothing else in us but his own grace: who if he
would deal strictly with us, no man living should be justified in his sight.
Whereupon the Apostle, who labored more than all, says: I reckon that the
sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall be revealed in us. Therefore this agreement is nothing else, but Gods
voluntary promise. And Ne miremini, f^atres, si merita justorum gratias voco:
test enim Apostolo, nihil habemus quod non a Deo and gratis accepimus. Sed
quoniam per unam gratiam pervenimus ad aliam, merita dicuntur and improprie.
Test enim Augustino, solam gratiam suam coronat in nobis Deus. Id. Dominic. 18
post Trinitat. Homil. 1.
do not wonder (says he, in another Sermon) if I call the merits of the just
graces. for as the Apostle witnesses, we have nothing which we have not
received from God, and that freely. But because by one grace we come unto
another; they are called merits, but improperly. For as Augustine witnesses:
God crowns only his own grace in us. So Rupertus Tuitiensis: Res est non
meriti, sed gratiae, magnitudo vel aetern^tas coelestis glo^iae R^pert Tuit. in
Johan. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The greatness or the eternity of the heavenly glory, is not a matter of
merit, but of grace. The same does Bernard. Cl^niacens. de Contemptu mundi,
lib. 1.
Bernardus Morlanensis express in these rhythmicall verses of his: Vrbs Sion
inclyta, al. turris and edita.
patria condita littore tuto;
Te peto, te colo, te flagro, te volo, canto, saluto.
Nec meritis peto, nam meritis meto morte perire:
Nec reticens tego, quod meritis ego filius irae.
Vita quidem mea, vita nimis rea, mortua vita:
Quippe reatibus exitialibus obruta, trita.
Spe tamen ambulo, praemia postulo speque fideque:
Illa perennia postulo praemia nocte dieque.


But Bernard of Claraevalle above others delivers this doctrine most sweetly.
Necesse est primo omnium credere, quod remissionem peccatorum habere non
possis, nisi per indulgentiam Dei: deinde quod nihil p^orsus habere queas
operis boni, nisi and hoc dederit ipse: postremo quod aeternam vitam nullis
potes operibus promereri, nisi gratis detur and illa. Bernard. S^rm. 1. in
Annuntiat. B. Mariae.
It is necessary (says he) that first of all thou should believe, that
thou can not have remission of sins, but by the mercy of God: then, that
thou can not at all have any whit of a good work, unless he likewise give
it thee: lastly, that by no works thou can merit eternal life, unless that
also be freely given unto thee. Alioquin si proprie appellentur ea quae dicimus
nostra merita: spei quaedam sunt seminaria, charitatis incentiva, occultae
praedestinationis indicia, futurae felicitaris praesagia, via regni, no^ caussa
regnandi. Id. in fine libri de Gra^. and lib. Arb.
Otherwise, if we will properly name those which we call our merits: they be
certain seminaries of hope, incitements of love, signs of secret
predestination, foretokens of future happiness, the way to the kingdom, not
the cause of reigning. Periculosa habitatio eorum qui in meritis suis sperant:
periculosa, quia ruinosa. Id. in Psalm. Qui habitat. Sermon. 1.
Dangerous is the dwelling of them that trust in their merits: dangerous,
because ruinous. Hoc enim totum hominis meritum, si totam spem suam ponat in eo
qui totu^ hominem salvum facit. Ibid. Sermon. 15.
For this is the whole merit of man, if he put all his trust in him who saves
the whole man. Meum proinde meritum, miseratio Domini. Non plane sum meriti
inops, quandiu ille miserationum non fuerit. Quod si misericordiae Domini
multae, multis nihilo minus ego in meritis sum. Id. in Cant. sermon. 61.
Therefore my merit is the mercy of the Lord. I am not poor in merit, so long
as he is not poor in mercy: and if the mercies of the Lord be many, my merits
also are many. With which that passage of the Manual, falsely fathered upon S.
Augustine, does accord so justly; that the one appears to be plainly borrowed
from the other. Tota spes mea est in morte Domini mei. Mors ejus meritum meum,
refugium meum, salus, vita and resurrectio mea. Meritum meum miseratio Domini.
Non sum meriti inops, quamdiu ille miserationum Dominus non defuerit: and
misericordiae Domini multae, multus ego sum in meritis. Manual. cap. 22. tom.
9. Operum Augustini.
All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit, my refuge, my
salvation, life and resurrection. My merit is the mercy of the Lord. I am not
poor in merit, so long as that Lord of mercies shall not fail: and as long as
his mercies are much, much am I in merits.

Neither are the testimonies of the Schoolmen wanting in this cause. For where
Nota quod cum dicitur, Deus pro bonis meritis dabit vitam aeternam; Pro, primo
notat signum, vel viam; vel occasionem aliquam: sed si dicatur, Propter bona
merita dabit vitam aeternam; Propter, notat caussam efficientem. Ideo non
recipitur a quibusdam: sed hanc recipient, Pro bonis meritis, and consimiles
earum; assignantes differentiam inter Pro, and Propter. Georg. Cassander,
epist. 19. ad Io. Molinaeum (Oper. page 1109.) ex libro MS. vetusti cujusdam
Scholastici.
God is affirmed to give the kingdom of heaven for good merits or good works:
some made here a difference betwixt pro bonis meritis and propter bona merita.
The former, they said, did note, a sign, or a way, or some occasion: and in
that sense they admitted the proposition. But according to the latter
expression, they would not receive it; because propter did note an efficient
cause. And yet for the salving of that also, the Cardinal of Cambraye, Petrus
de Alliaco delivers us this distinction: Haec dictio Prop^er quandoque
capitur consecutive; and tunc denotat ordinem consecutionis unius ^ei ad alia^:
ut cum dicitur, Praemium datur propter meritum. Nihil enim aliud signifa^atur,
nisi quod post meritum datur praemium, and non nisi post meritum: sicut alia,
patebit in materia de merito. Quandoque vera capitur caussaliter. Pet.
Cameracens. in 1. Sentent. did. 1. quaest. 2. DD.
This word Propter is sometimes taken by way of consequence; and then it notes
the order of the following of one thing upon another: as when it is said, The
reward is given for the merit. For nothing else is signified thereby, but that
the reward is given after the merit, and not but after the merit. Sometimes
again it is taken causally. And Qu^a enim caussa est illud ad cujus esse
sequitur aliud; dupliciter potest al^quid dici Caussa. Uno modo proprie; quando
ad praesentiam esse unius, virtute ejus and ex natura rei sequitur esse
alterius: and sic ignis est caussa caloris. Alio modo improprie; quando ad
praesentiam esse unius sequitur esse alterius, non tamen virtute ejus nec ex
natura rei, sed ex sola voluntate alterius: and sic actus meritorius dicitur
caussa respectu praemij. Sic etiam caussa sine qua non dicitur caussa. Ex quo
sequitur, quod caussa sine qua non, non debet absolute and simpli^iter dici
caussa: quia proprie non est caussa. Id. in 4 Sent^quaest. 1. ^ctic. 1. D.
forasmuch as a cause also is accounted that, upon the being whereof another
thing does follow: a thing may be said to be a cause two manner of ways. One
way properly; when upon the presence of the being of the one, by the virtue
thereof and out of the nature of the thing there follows the being of the
other: and thus is fire the cause of heat. Another way improperly; when upon
the presence of the being of the one there fo^loweth the being of the other,
yet not by the virtue thereof nor out of the nature of the thing, but only out
of the will of another: and so a meritorious ^ot is said to be a cause in
respect of the reward; as caussa sine qua non also is said to be a cause,
though it be none properly.

Among those famous Clearkes that lived in the family of Richard Angervill
Bishop of Durham in the days of Edward the third; Thomas Bradwardin who was
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Fitzraufe afterward Archbishop of
Armagh, and Robert Holeot the Dominican, were of special note. The first of
these, in his Defense of the cause of God against the Pelagians of his time,
disputes this point at large: showing, Is in laudatissima illa Summa contra
Pelagianos copiose and erudite disputat, Meritum non esse caussam aeterni
praemij: cumque Scriptura and Doctores confirment, Deum praemiaturum bonos
propter merita sua bona; propter, non significare caussam proprie, sed
improprie, vel caussam congnoscendi, vel ordinem, vel denique dispositionem
subjecti. Georg. Cassand. epist. 19. ut supra. Vid. ipsum Bradwardini opus,
edit. Land. an. 1618. a page 350. ad 353.
that Merit is not the cause of everlasting reward; and that when the
Scriptures and Doctors do affirm, that God will reward the good for their
good merits (or works,) Propter did not signify the cause properly; but
improperly, either the cause of knowing it, or the order, or the disposition of
the subject thereunto. Richard of Armagh (whom my countrymen commonly do call
S. Richard of Dundalke, because he was there borne and buried) intimates this
to be his mind; that the reward is here rendered, Non propter condignitatem
operis, sed propter promissionem and sic propter justitiam praemiantis.
Armachan. in Quaest. Armenorum, lib. 12. cap. 21.
not for the condignitie of the work, but for the promise and so for the
justice of the rewarder: as heretofore we have heard out of Bernard. Holcot,
though in words he maintain the merit of condignitie; yet he confesses with
the Master of the Sentences, that God is hereby made our debtor, ex. natura sui
promissi, non ex natura nostri commissi, out of the nature of his own promise,
not out of the nature of our doing: and that our works have this value in
them, not naturally, as if there were so great goodness in the nature or
substance of the merit that everlasting life should be due unto it, but
legally, in regard of Gods ordinance and appointment. even Sicut parva pecunia
cupri, ex natura sua sive naturali vigore; non valet tantum, sicut unus panis;
sed ex institutione principis tantum valet. Rob. Holcot. in lib. Sapient. cap.
3. lect. 36.
as a little piece of copper, of it own nature or natural value, is not worth
so much as a loaf of bread; but by the institution of the Prince is worth so
much. And in this manner Possumus dicere, quod opera nostra sunt condigna vitae
aete^nae ex gratia, non ex substantia actus. Statuit enim Deus quod been
operans in gratia habebit vitam aeternam. Et ergo per legem and gratiam
principis nostri Christi meremur de condigno vitam aeternam. Ibid.
we may say (says he) that our works are worthy of life everlasting by grace,
and not by the substance of the act. For God has ordained, that he that
works well in grace should have life everlasting: and therefore by the law
and grace of Christ our Prince we merit condignely everlasting life. Whereby we
may see, how rightly it has been observed by Vasquez; Contingere enim potest,
ut si veram caussam and rationem meriti non assignemus; verbis solum ab
haereticis dissidentes reipsa cum eis conveniamus, atque in eorum sententiam
velimus nolimus, consentire cogamur: quod sane aliquibus Catholicis in hac
controversia accidisse, non obscure inferius patebit. Gabr. Vasquez, in 1am. 2.
ae. quaest. 114 disput. 214. cap. 1.
that diverse of those whom he accounts Catholics, do differ from us only
in words, but agree in deed. Of which number he names Guilielm. Parisiens.
tract. de Meritis.
Willielmus Parisiensis, Scotus in 1. Sont. did. 17. quaest. 3. sect. Hic
potest dici. Id. in 4. distinct. 49. quaest. 6. Loquendo de stricta justitia,
Deus nulli nostrum propter quaecunque merita est debtor perfectionis
reddendae, tam intense; propter immoderatum excessum illius perfectionis ultra
illa merita.
Scotus, Guilielm. Ockam, in 1. Sent. distinct. 17. quaest. 2. sect. Ideo dico
aliter.
Ockam, Gregor, in 1. Sent. distinct. 17. quaest. 1. artic. 2. in
confirmationibus secundae conclusion^s and solutione quarto argumenti contra
eand.
Gregorius Ariminensis, Gabriel. in 1. Sent. did. 17. quaest. 3. artic. 3.
dub. 2. and in 2. did. 27. quaest. 3. arti. 3. dub. 2.
Gabriel Biel with his Supplement. Gabriel. in 4. distinct. 49. quaest. 4.
artic. 2. conclus. 3.
Supplement, the Chanons of Culleyn in their Antididagm. Coloniens. cap. 12. de
praemio and retribut. bonorum operum.
Antididagma and Enchirid. addit. Concilio Coloniensi, tit. de Iustific. sect.
Et ut semel hunc articulum.
Enchiridion, Io. Bunder. Compend. Concertationis, tit. 6. artic. 5.
Ioh. Bunderius, Alphons. contr. haeres. lib. 10. tit. Meritum, and lib. 7.
tit. Gratia.
Alphonsus de Castro, and Vega in Opusc. de Iustif. quaest. 5. ad. 1. and 3.
Andreas Vega who was present at the handling of these matters in the last
Tridentine Council.

All these, and sundry others beside them, hold that the dignity of the good
works done by Gods children does not proceed from the value of the works
themselves, but only from the gracious promise and acceptance of God. Yea
Gregorius Ariminensis, Valens ille Gregorius Ariminensis, maximus and
studiosissimus Divi Augustini propugnator. Id. ibid. quaest. 6.
that most able and careful defender of S. Augustine (as Vega styles him)
concludes peremptorily, Ex hoc ulterius infero; quod nedum vitae aeternae, sed
nec alicujus alterius praemij aeterni vel temporalis, aliquis actus hominis ex
quacunque charitate elicitus, est de condigno meritorius apud Deum. Gregor. in
1. did. 17. quaest. 1. art. 2.
that no act of man, though issuing from never so great charity, meriteth of
condignitie from God, either eternal life, or yet any other reward whether
eternal or temporal. The same conclusion is by Durand the most resolate
Doctor (as Durandus utique resolutissimus. Jo. Gerson. epist. ad students
Collegij Navarrae.
Gerson terms him) thus confirmed: Quod redditur potius ex liberalitate
dantis quam ex debito operis; non cadit sub merito de condigno stricte and
proprie accepto, ut expositum est. Sed quicquid a Deo accipimus, sive sit
gratia, sive sit gloria, sive bonum temporale vel spirituale, praecedente in
nobis propter hoc quocunque bono opere; potius and principalius accipimus ex
liberalitate Dei, quam reddatur ex debito operis. Ergo nihil penitus cadit sub
merito de condigno sic accepto. Durand. in 2. distinct. 27. quaest. 2. sect. 12.
That which is conferred rather out of the liberality of the giver than out of
the due of the work, does not fall within the compass of the merit of
condignitie, strictly and properly taken. But whatsoever we receive of God,
whether it be grace or whether it be glory, whether temporal or spiritual
good, whatsoever good work we have before done for it, yet we receive the same
rather and more principally out of Gods liberality, than out of the due of the
work. Therefore nothing at all falls within the compass of the merit of
condignitie, so taken. And Caussa autem hujus est, quia and illud quod sumus,
and quod habemus, sive sunt boni actus, sive boni habitus seu usus; totum est
in nobis ex liberalitate divina gratis dante and conservante. Et quia ex dono
gratuito nullus obligatur ad dandum amplius, sed potius recipiens magis
obligatur danti: ideo ex bonis habitibus, and ex bonis actibus sive usibus
nobis a Deo datis, Deus non obligatur nobis ex aliquo debito justitiae ad
aliquid amplius dandum, ita quod si non dederit sit injustus; sed potius nos
sumus Deo obligati. Et sentire, seu dicere oppositum, est temerarium seu
blasphemum. Ibid. sect. 13.14.
the cause hereof is, (says he) because both that which we are and that which
we have, whether they be good acts or good habits, or the use of them, is
wholly in us by Gods liberality freely giving and preserving the same. Now
because none is bound by his own free gift to give more, but the receiver
rather is more bound to him that gives: therefore by the good habits, and by
the good acts or uses which God has given us, God is not bound to us by any
debt of justice to give any thing more, so as if he did not give it he should
be unjust; but we are rather bound to God. And to think or say the contrary,
is rashness or blasphemy.

Of the same judgment with Durand, was Iacobus de Everbaco, as Marsilius
witnesses, who delivers his own opinion touching this matter in these three
conclusions. I. Considerando opera nostra secundum se, vel etiam prout sunt ex
gratia cooperante; non sunt opera meritoria vitae aeternae de condigno. Ma^sil.
de I^ghen, in 2. Sent. quaest. 18. art. 4.
If we consider our works in themselves, or as they proceed also from
cooperating grace, they are not such works as deserve eternal life of
condignitie. for proof whereof he brings in many reasons; and that of
Durands for one. Si de condigno ex operibus gratia and libero arbitrio e^iam
quantumlibet magnis operatis deberetur vita aeterna: tunc Deus illi injuriam
faceret, si sibi vitam aeternam non tribueret. and sic Deus ex magnis datis
bonis cogeretur sub justit^a addere ampliora: quod ratio non capit. Ibid.
If for the works wrought by grace and free will although never so great,
eternal life should be due unto any by condignitie: then God should do him
injury, if he did not give eternal life unto him. and so God by those great
good things which he had given, should be constrained in way of justice to add
more great thereunto; which reason does not comprehend. II. Hujusmodi opera
poss^nt dici vitae aeternae meritoria de condigno; ^x acceptatione divina
originaliter procedente ex merito passionis Christi. Ibid.
Such works as these may be said to merit eternal life of condignitie, by
divine acceptance, originally proceeding from the merit of the passion of
Christ. III. Opera facta ex gratia merentur vitam a^ternam de congruo ex
liberali Dei dispositione, qua disposuit ea sic praemiare. Ibid.
Works done by grace do merit eternal life by way of congruitie; in respect
of Gods liberal disposition, who has so purposed to reward them. Afterward
he proves out of the Apostle, Romans 6.23. that Non ex nostra justitia sed ex
Dei gratia datur vita aeterna: juxta illud ad Romans 6. Gratia Dei vita aeterna.
Ibid.
eternal life is given out of Gods grace, not out of our righteousness, and
that God in thus rewarding us, does neither exercise commutative justice, Cum
in operibus nostris bonis nihil Deo demus, pro quo per commutationem debeatur
nobis praemium. Ibid.
because in our good works we give nothing unto God, for which by way of
commutation the reward should be due unto us; nor yet distributive, Cum nullus
been operando se^undum se and secundum statum aliquid de condigno me^eatu^, s^d
pot^us Deo majori obligatione astringitu^, q^ia majora bona recep^^ Ib^d.
because no man by working well, in regard of himself and in regard of the
state wherein he is, does merit any thing of condignitie, but is bound to God
rather by a greater obligation, because he has received greater good things
from him. And Ex quibus concluditur, quod justus sic in remunerando: quia justa
dispositione sua disposuit ex gratia a^ceptationis minus meritum majori praemio
coronare; non justitia debiti, sed g^atia and dispositione beneplaciti d^vini.
Ibid.
thereupon at last concludes, that God is just in rewarding, because by his
just disposition he has ordained by the grace of acceptance to crown the
lesser merit with the greater reward; not by the justice of debt, but by the
grace and disposition of the divine good pleasure.

But the sentence of the Chancellor and the Theological faculty of Paris in
the year 1354. against one Guido an Austin Friar, that then defended the merit
of condignitie, is not to be overpassed. For by their order, this form of
recantation was prescribed unto him. Dixi contra Bacchalarium Praedicatorum
conferendo cum ipso; quod homo meretur vitam aeternam de condigno; id est,
quod, si non daretur, o^ si^ret injuria. Et scripsr quod Deus faceret sibi
injuriam: and hanc probavi. Istam revoco tanquam falsam, haereticam and
blasphemam. Guide. Revocat. errorum fact. Paris. an. 1354. tom. 14. Bibliothec.
Pa^^. edit. Colon. page 347.
I said against a Bachelour of the order of the Friars Preachers in conference
with him, that a man does merit everlasting life of condignitie, that is to
say, that in case it were not given, there should injury be done unto him. I
wrote likewise, that God should do him injury: and approved it. This I revoke
as FALSE, HERETICAL, and BLASPHEMOVS. Yet now the times are so changed, and
men in them that our new Divines of Rhemes stick not to tell us, that it Rhem.
annotat. in Hebr. 6.10.
is most clear to all not blinded in pride and contention, that good works be
meritorious, and the very cause of salvation, so far that God should be unjust,
if he rendered not heaven for the same. where to the judgment of the
indifferent Reader I refer it, whether side in this case is more likely to
have been blinded in pride: (we who abase our selves before Gods footstool,
and utterly disclaim all our own merits; or they who have so high a conceit
of them, that they dare in this presumptuous manner to challenge God of
injustice, if he should judge them to deserve a less reward than Heaven it
self:) and whether that sentence of our Savior Christ be not fulfilled in
them, as well as in the proud and blind Pharisees their predecessors. Ioh.
9.39.
For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see,
and that they which see might be made blind. And so leaving these blind
leaders of the blind, who say they Ioh. 9.41.
see (by that means making their sin to remain) and say they Revel. 3.17.
are rich and increased with goods (not knowing that they are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:) I proceed, and out of the
fifteenth Century or Hundred of years after Christ produce other two witnesses
of this truth. The one is Paulus Burgensis; who expounding those words of
David, Psalm. 36.5. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in heaven, (or, reaches unto the
heavens) writes thus: Gloriam coelestem nullus de condigno secundum legem
communem meretur. unde Apostolus ad Romans 8. Non sunt condignae passiones hujus
seculi ad futuram gloriam, quae revelabitur in nobis. and sic manifestum est,
quod in coelo maxim relucet misericordia Dei in beatis. Paul. Burg^ns. addit.
ad Lyran. in Psa. 35.
No man according to the common law can merit by condignitie the glory of
heaven. whence the Apostle says in the 8. to the Romans, that the sufferings
of this time are not worthy to be compared with the future glory which shall be
revealed in us. and so it is manifest that in heaven most of all the mercy of
God shines forth in the blessed. The other is Thomas Walden, who living in
England the same time that the other did in Spain, professes plainly his
dislike of that saying; Quod homo ex meritis est dignus regno coelorum, aut hac
gratia vel illa gloria. quamvis quidam Scholastici invenerunt ad hoc dicendum
terminos de condigno and congruo. Waldens. tom. 3. de Sacramentalib. tit. 1.
cap. 7.
that a man by his merits is worthy of the kingdom of heaven, or this grace or
that glory: howsoever certain Schoolmen, that they might so speak, had
invented the terms of Condignitie and Congruitie. But Reputo igitur saniorem
Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum, and Scripturis sanctis mag^s concordem; qui
tale meritum simpliciter abnegat, and cum modificatione Apostoli and
Scripturarum concedit quia simpliciter quis non meretur regnum coelorum, sed ex
gratia Dei aut voluntate largitoris. Ibid.
I repute him (says he) the sounder Divine, the more faithful Catholic, and
more consonant with the holy Scriptures, who does simply deny such merit, and
with the qualification of the Apostle and of the Scriptures confesses, that
simply no man meriteth the kingdom of heaven, but by the grace of God or will
of the giver. Sicut omnes sancti priores usque ad recentes Scholasticos and
communis scripsit Ecclesia. Ibid.
as all the former Saints, until the late Schoolmen, and the universal
Church has written.

Out of which words of his you may further observe both the time when, and the
persons by whom this innovation was made in these latter days of the Church:
namely, that the late Schoolmen were they, that corrupted the ancient doctrine
of the Church, and to that end devised their new terms of the merit of
congruitie and condignitie. I say, in these latter days: because if we look
unto higher times, Walden himself in that same place does affirm that it was
a branch of the Pelagiana est haeresis quod Deus secundum mensuram operum
meritorioru^ praemiabit hominem sic merentem. Ibid.
Pelagian heresy to hold, that according to the measure of meritorious works
God will reward a man so meriting. Neither indeed can this proud generation of
Merit-mongers be derived from a more proper stock, than from the old either
Pelagians or Catharists. For as these do now adays maintain, that they do
R^em^s^s an not. in Romans 9.1.
work by their own free will, and thereby deserve their salvation: so was
this wont to be a part of Pelagius his song; Mihi nullus auferre poteri^ liberi
arbitrij potestatem: ne si in operibus meis Deus adjutor extiterit, non mihi
debeatur merces, sed ei qui in me operatus. Pelag. apud Hieronym. in Dialog.
advers. Pelag. lib. 1
No man shall take away from me the power of free will: lest if God be my
helper in my works, the reward be not due to me, but to him that did work in
me. And to Gloriantes de suis m^ritis. Isidor. lib. 8. Origin. cap. 5. de
Catharis.
glory of their merits, was a special property noted in the Catharists or
ancient Puritans: who standing thus upon their own purity, Et memoria
reconde, quod Ecclesia dic^t pro part membrorum, copiosa sua esse peccat: ut
qui se praedicant esse mundos (si^ut Ca^h^ristae) intelligant se portionem cum
sancta Ecclesia no^ h^bere. Cass. in Ps. ^4
do thereby declare (as Cassiodorus notes) that they have no portion with the
holy Church, which professes that her sins are many. Nay, (...). Epiph.
haeres 59. pa^. 216, 2^7.
while these men call themselves Puritans, (says Epiphanius) by this very
ground they prove themselves to be impure. for whosoever pronounces himself
to be pure, does therein absolutely condemn himself to be impure. For, as S.
Hierome in this case disputes against the Pelagians (and so against the
Puritan and Pelagian Romanists) Tunc ergo justi sumus, quand^ nos peccatores
fatemu^: and justiti^ nostra non ex proprio merito, se ex Dei consistit
miseri^ord^a. Hieron. Dialog. adve^s. Pelag. lib. 1.
then are we righteous, when we confess our selves to be sinners; and our
righteousness consists not in our own merits, but in Gods mercy. with whose
resolution against them, we will now conclude this point against their new
offspring; that P^o n^^^lo (inquit) salvos faciet eos: h^ud dubium quin j^st^s,
qui non prop^io meri^o, sed Dei salvantur cle^en^^a Id. ib^d. l^b. 2.
the righteous are saved, not by their own merit, but by Gods clemency.

And thus have I gone over all the particular articles propounded by our
Challenger: and performed therein more a great deal, than he required at my
hands. That which he desired in the name of his fello^es, was; that we would
allege but any one Text of Scripture, which condemns any of the above
written points. He has now presented unto him not texts of Scripture only, but
testimonies of the Fathers also, justifying our diss^nt from them not in one
but in all those points, wherein he was so confident, that they of our side
that had read the Fathers could well testify, that all antiquity did in
judgment concur with the now Church of Rome. And if he look into every one
of them more nearly; he may perhaps find, that we are not such strangers to
the original and first breedings of these Romish errors, as he did imagine. It
now remains on his part, that he make good what he has undertaken: namely,
that for the confirmation of all the above mentioned points of his Religion, he
produce both good and certain grounds out of the sacred Scriptures, and the
general consent likewise of the Saints and Fathers of the Primitive Church.
Wherein, as I advise him to spare his pains in laboring to prove those
things, which he sees me before hand readily to have yielded unto: so I wish
him also not to forget his own motion, made in the percloase of his Challenge;
that all may be done with Christian charity and sincerity, to the glory of God,
and instruction of them that are astray.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 10. line 15. for once read one. p. 18. l. 8. (as also p. 19. l. 1. and
113. l. 2.) Radbertus. p. 30. l. 9. Canonical. p. 63. l. 28. bread and wine.
p. 67. l. 9. or. p. 71. l. 12. for wine. read blood. ibid l. 21. for second
read third. p. 77. in the marg^nt, at the very beginning, add x. Lanfranc.
lib. de Sacram. Eucharist. contra Berengar. page 85. lin. 15. for he read God.
p. 103. l. 20. set. p. 163. lin. 12, 13. cross out those words: then in any
of the rest. page 271. in the margent, lin. 16. for Id. put Hieronym. page 326.
in the margent, lin. 17. Marcellam. page 341. lin. 5. Christian. page 352. l.
5. cross out (...). page 405. l. 20. put out the word Jesuit: and in the last
line of the margent, aft^r quaest. 12. add, artic. 10. disput. 7. conclus. 6.
p^g. 444. lin. ul^. Pitsio. page 449. in marg. l. 35. Naclantus. page 448. at
the ast^risc *. lin. 14. add in the margent. Ab omnibus deinceps doceatur
communiter atque praedicetur, Crucem and Imaginem Crucifixi ceterasque Imagines
Sanctorum, in ipsorum memoriam and honorem quo^ figurant, ac ipsorum loca and
reliquias processionibus, gen^ flexionibus, inclinationibus, thurificationibus,
deosculationibus, oblationibus, luminarium accensionibus, and
peregrinationibus, nec non alijs quibuscunque modis and formis quibus nostris
and predecessorum nostrorum temporibus fieri consuevit, venerari debere.
Gu^lh^lm. Lyndewode Provincial. lib. 5. de Haeretic. cap. Nullus quoque. page
451. l. 12. M^rsilius. page 453. in the margent. lin. 12. and 26. and page 454.
l. 9. for Pr^phetic. read Protreptic. page 456. marg. lin. 38. manuum. page
463. marg. lin. 9. Patres.

A CATALOGVE OF THE AVTHORS HERE alleged; disposed according to the order of
the times, wherein they are accounted to have lived.
Anno Domini:
40 NIcodemus. The author of the counterfeit Gospel, attributed unto him,
lived within the first 600. years: being cited by Gregorius Turonensis. 43.
Thaddaeus; vouched by Eusebius. 70. Clemens I. Romanus episc. Counted the
author of the Apostolical Constitutions. 70. Dionysius Areopagita. The books
that bear his name, seem to be written in the fourth or fifth age after
Christ. 100. Ignatius Antiochenus. 120. Hermes. 163. Justinius Martyr. 170.
Theophilus Antiochenus. 180. Irenaeus Lugdunensis. 180. Tatianus. 190. Maximus.
out of whom the Dialogues against the Marcionists, attributed to Origin, are
collected: as appears by the large fragment cited out of him by Eusebius in
the end of the seventh book de Praeparatione Euangelica. 200. Clemens
Alexandrinus. 200. Tertullianus. 210. Caius. 220. Hippolytus Martyr. 230.
Origenes. 230. Ammonius. 230. Minutius Felix. 240. Novatianus. 250. Gregorius
Neocaesareensis. 250. Cyprianus. 260. Zeno Veronensis. 270. Victorinus
Pictaviensis. 290. Pamphilus Martyr. 300. Arnobius. 300. Lactantius. 303.
Concilium Sinuessanum, supposititium. 310. Concilium Eliberinum, seu
Illiberitanum. 325. Concilium Romanum sub Silvestro, supposititium. 325.
Concilium Nicaenum, univ^rsale I. 325. Macarius Hierosolymitanus. 330. Eusebius
Caesareensis. 330. Juvencus. 340. Eusebius Emesenus. 340. Athanasius
Alexandrinus. 350. Eustathius Antiochenus. 350. Julius Firmicus Maternus. 350.
Acacius Caesareensis. 359. Conciliabula Arrianorum, Nicaen. Constantinop.
Sirmiens. and Ariminens. 360. Didymus. 360. Hilarious Pictaviensis. 360. Titus
Bostrensis. 364. Concilium Laodicenum. 370. Macarius Aegyptius. 370. Cyrillus
Hierosolymitanus. 370. Asterius Amaseae episc. 370. Optatus. 370. Ambrosius
Mediolanensis episc. 370. Basilius Caesareensis. 370. Gregorius Nazianzenus.
370. Aerius haereticus. 380. Caesarius. 380. Gregorius Nyssenus. 380.
Nectarius. 380. Pacianus. 380. Prudentius. 380. Philastrius. 380. Euagrius
Ponticus. 380. Amphilochius. 381. Concilium Constantinopolitanum, universale
II. 390. Hieronymus. 390. Paula and Eustochium, apud eund. 390. Epiphanius.
390. Ruffinus. 390. Coelius Sedulius. 390. Paulinus Mediolanensis. 400. Io.
Chrysostomus. cujus epistolam ad Caesarium monachum (quam in quaestionem vocant
pontificij) citatam invenio in Collectaneis contra Severianos, quae ex Fr.
Turriani versione habentur in 4. tomo Antiquae lectionis Henr. Canisij, page
238. and in fine libri Io. Damasceni contra Acephalos; ibid. page 211. ubi
postrema verba testimonij a nobis citati (page 64.65.) Turrianus ita
transtulit: Sic etiam hic, divina natura in ipso insidente, unum Filium, unam
Personam utrumque constituit. 400. Marcus eremita. 400. Polychronius. 400.
Hesychius presbyter. 410. Palladius, Lausiacae histostoriae author. 410.
Pelagius haereticus. 410. Augustinus. 410. Philo Carpathius. 410. Synesius.
414. Theodorus Daphnopatus. by Henr. Oraeus referred to this year: I know not
by what warrant. 418. Concilium Africanum universale Carthagine habitum contra
Pelagium. 420. Maximus Taurinensis. 424. Hilarious Arelatensis. 430. Io.
Cassianus. 430. Vincentius Lirinensis. 430. Author Operis imperfecti in
Matthaeum. 430. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. 430. Synodus Alexandrina, contra
Nestorium. 430. Theodoretus. 430. Proclus Cyzicenus. 431. Concilium Ephesinum,
universale III. 440. Prosper Aquitanicus. 440. Socrates historicus. 440.
Sozomenus. 440. Eucherius Lugdunensis. 440. Petrus C^rysologus. 450. Leo. I.
450. Primasius. 451. Concilium Chalcedonense, universale IIII. 460. Basilius
Seleuciensis. 460. Victor Antiochenus. 460 Salvianus Massiliensis. 476.
Gelasius Cyzicenus. 490. Faustus Regiensis, seu Reiensis. 490. Gennadius
Massiliensis. 490. Gelasius Papa I. 494. Concilium Romanum I. sub Gelasio. 500.
Paschasius Romanae ecclesiae diaconus. 500. Olympiodorus. 500. Andreas
Caesareensis. Stephanus Gobarus haereticus. 507. Laurentius Novariensis. 510.
Ennodius Ticinensis. 520. Aurelius Cassiodorus. 520. Eusebius Gallicanus. 520.
Caesari^s Arelatensis. 520. Fulgentius Ruspensis episc. 520. Johannes
Maxentius. 527. Ephraem Antiochenus. 527. Agapetus diaconus. 529. Concilium
Arausican. II. 530. Fulgentius Ferrandus. 530. Dionysius Exiguus. 530.
Benedictus Monachus. 530. Procopius Gazaeus. 540. Arator. 553. Concilium
Constantinopolitanum, universale. V. 560. Andreas Hierosolymitanus, Cretensis
archiepisc. 560. Dracontius. 570. Cresconius. 580. Venantius Fortunatus. 580.
Johannes Climacus. 589. Council. Toletan. III. 600. Gregorius I. 600. Johan.
Nesteuta. Agapius Manichaeus. 610. Eustratius Constantinopolitanus. 630.
Isidorus Hispalensis. 633. Conciliu^ Toletanu^. IIII. 640. Maximus Monachus.
640. Jonas. 640. Anastasius Sinaita. 660. Eligius Noviomensis. 680. Iulianus
Toletanus. 690. Theodorus Cantuar. archiepisc. 700. Liber Canonum Ecclesiae
Anglo-Saxonicae; MS. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana. Nico. 710. Isidorus Mercator.
720. Beda. 720. Germanus Constantinop. 730. Bonifacius Moguntinus. 740.
Gregorius III. 740. Io. Damascenus. 740. Antonius author Melissae 745. Synodus
Romana sub Zacharia. 750. Ambrosius Ansbertus. 754. Constantinopolitanum
Concilium contra Imagines. 773. Hadrianus I. 780. Johannes Hierosolymitanus.
785. Etherius and Beatus. 787. Concilium Nicaenu^ II. 787. Epiphanius Diaconus.
790. Elias Cretensis. 790. Alcuinus. 794. Conciliu^ Francofurtense. 800.
Carolus Magnus. 813. Conciliu^ Arelatense IIII. 813. Council. Cabilonense II.
816. Council. Aquisgranense sub Ludovico Pio. 824. Synodus Parifiensis, de
Imaginibus. 830. Christianus Druthmarus. 840. Amalarius Lugdunensis. 840.
Paschasius Radbertus. 840. Rabanus Maurus. 840. Haymo Halberstattensis. 840.
Agobardus Lugdun. episc. 840. Walafridus Strabus. 842. Council. Aquisgranense
sub Pipino. 850. Synodus Carisiac. 850. Johannes Scotus. 850. Ecclesia
Lugdunens. contra eund. 850. Grimoldus. 850. Hincmarus Rhemensis. 860. Photius,
860. Johannes Diaconus. 870. Otfridus Wissenburgensis. 876. Ratrannus, vulg.
Bertramus. 890. Leo Imperator. 890. Michael Syncellus. 890. Ado Viennensis.
890. Nicetas Serronius. Gregorius Cerameus. 920. Regino Prumiensis. 950.
Smaragdus. 975. Aelfrick. 1000. Fulbertus Carnotensis. 1020. Burchardus. 1030.
Simeon Metaphrastes. 1050. Petrus Damiani. 1050. Oecumenius. 1050. Berengarius.
1058. Hermannus Contractus. 1060. Radulphus Ardens. 1060. Lanfrancus
Cantuariensis archiepisc. 1060. Algerus. 1070. Osbernus. 1070. Theophylactus.
1080. Euthymius Zigabenus. 1080. Anselmus Cantuariensis archiepisc. 1090.
Waltramus Naumbergensis. 1100. Sigebertus Gemblacensis. 1100. Conradus
Bruwilerensis. 1100. Zacharias Chrysopolitanus. 1100. Ivo Carnotensis. 1110.
Anselmus Laudunensis. 1120. Eadmerus. 1120. Michael Glycas. 1120. Johannes
Zonaras. 1120. Rupertus Tuitiensis. 1130. Hugo de S. Victore. 1130. Guilielmus
Malmesburiensis. 1130. Innocentius II. 1130. Bernardus Claraevallensis. 1140.
Petrus Lombardus. 1140. Gilbertus Porretanus. 1146. Otto Frisingensis. 1150.
Petrus Cluniacensis. 1150. Constantinus Harmenopulus. 1150. Bernardus
Morlanensis. 1154. Leo Thuscus. 1160. Arnaldus Carnotensis, abbas Bonaevallis.
Opus de Cardinalibus Christi operib. Cypriano perperam adscriptum, huic authori
in exemplaribus MSS. tribuitur: quorum duo Oxonij ipsi vidimus; in Bo^lci^na
Bibliotheca unum, in Collegij Omnium Animarum Biblioth. alterum. 1160. Petrus
Blesen^is. 1160. Johannes Tzetzes. 1170. Hugo Etherianus. 1170. Gratianus.
1180. Theodorus Balsamon. 1180. Simeon Dunelmensis. 1200. Cyrus Theodorus
Prodromus. 1200. Innocentius III. 1204. Rogerus Hoveden. 1206. Guillermus
Altissiodorensis. 1210. Nicetas Choniates. 1215. Concilium Lateranense. 1220
Jacobus de Vitriaco. 1230. Guilielmus Aluernus, Parisiensis episc. 1240.
Alexand. de Hales. 1240. Albertus Magnus. 1250. Matthaeus Parisiensis. 1250.
Hugo Cardinalis. 1252. Dominicani contra Graecos. 1260. Thomas Aquinas. 1260.
Bonaventura. 1270. Jo. Semeca. 1280. Richardus de Media villa. 1280 Aegidius
Romanus, a Trithemio author fuisse dicitur Compendij Theologicae veritatis,
quod page 179. Alberti Magni nomine citavimus. Idem opus Bonaventurae nomine
legitur in Appendice septimi tomi operum ejus Romae edit. 1283. Johan. Peckham
Cantuar. archiepisc. 1300. Johannes Duns, Scotus. 1300. Georgius Pachymeres.
1300. Athanasius Constantinopolitanus. 1300. Nicolaus Cabasilas. Matthaeus
Quaestor. 1310. Hugo de Prato. 1310. Guilielmus Nangiacus. 1320. Guilielmus
Ockam. 1320. Durandus de S. Porciano. 1320. Petrus Paludanus. 1320. Theodorus
Metochita. 1320. Nicolaus Lyranus. 1327. Andronicus. 1330. Alvarus Pelagius.
1340. Thomas Bradwardin. 1340. Nicephorus Gregoras. 1350. Richardus Armachanus.
1350. Robertus Holcot. 1350. Thomas de Argentina. 1354. Guido Augustinianus.
Germanus Patriarcha Constantinop. 1370. Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis. 1370.
Henricus de Iota vel Huecta. 1386. Gregorius Ariminensis. 1390. Michael
Angrianus de Bononia. 1400. Petrus de Alliaco, Cameracensis. Johannes Herolt,
author Sermonum Discipuli. Iacobus de Everbaco. 1410. Johannes Gerson. 1414.
Constantiense Concilium. 1420. Theodoricus de Niem. 1430. Paulus Burgensis.
1430. Alphonsus Tostatus Abulensis episc. 1430. Thomas Walden. 1430.
Bernardinus Senensis. 1438. Graecorum Apologia ad Basileense Council. de igne
Purgatorio. 1438. Concilium Ferrariense. 1439. Concilium Florentinum. 1439.
Eugenij IIII. Bulla Unionis. 1440. Nicolaus Tudeschius, Abbas Panormitanus.
1440. Marcus Eugenicus, Ephesius. 1450. Gennadius Scholarius. 1460. Aeneas
Sylvius. 1460. Dionysius Carthusianus. 1479. Congregatio Complutensis. 1480.
Bernardinus de Busti. 1480. Johannes Capgravius. 1480 Gabriel Biel. 1490.
Marsilius de Inghen. 1490. Iacobus Perez de Valentia. 1500. Johannes Major.
1500. Raphael Volaterranus. 1500. Johannes de Selva.
Erasmus, Adrian the sixth, Cardinal Cajetan, and the other writers of this
last age, I pass over; as also the Hebrews and Heathen writers, cited in the
question of the Descent into Hell: because the designing of the precise time
wherein they lived, serves to little use. Only I think it not amiss to add
here a list of the Liturgies and Rituall books, which I have had here occasion
to make use of.

Liturgiae. Graecae, nomen praeferentes Iacobi. Petri. Marci. Clementis.
Basilij. Chrysostomi. Gregorij Romani; a Codino Graece reddita.
Liturgia Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae, Latin a Leone Thusco edita.
Graecorum Euchologium. Menaea. Octoechum Anastasimum. Pentecostarium.
Novum Anthologium Graece editum Romae an. 1598. Basilij Anaphora Syriaca, ab
Andr. Masio conversa. Missa Angamallensis, Christianorum S. Thomae, ex Syriaco
conversa. in Itinerario Alex^j Menesij. Armenorum Liturgia, ab Andrea
Lubelczyck Latin conversa. Liturgiae Aegyptiacae Basilij a Victorino Scialach
ex Arabico conversae. Gregorij Nazianzeni a Victorino Scialach ex Arabico
conversae. Cyrilli Alexandrini a Victorino Scialach ex Arabico conversae.

Missa Ambrosiana. Gregorij I. Antiphonarium and Sacramentarium. Officium
Muzarabum in Hispania. Missale Gotthicu^; tomo 6. Bibliothec. Patr. edit.
Paris. an. 1589 and 15. edit. Colon. an. 1622. Ordo Romanus antiquus. Missa
Latina antiqua, edit. Argentinae an. 1557. Baptizatorum and Confi^entium
Ceremoniae antiquae: una cum praefationibus vetustis, edit. Colon. an. 1530.
Alcuini Sacramentorum liber; and Officium per ferias. Grimoldi Sacramentoru^
liber. Preces Ecclesiasticae v^ter^s, a Georgio Cassandro editae. Pontificale
Romanum vetus, edit. Venet. an. 1572. and reformatum, Clementis VIII. jussu
Romae edit. an. 1595. Missale Romanum vetus, edit. Paris. an. 1529. and jussu
Pij V. and Clementis VIII. reformatum, edit. Romae an. 1604. Breviarium
Romanum. Sacerdotale Romanum, edit. Venet. an. 1585. Caeremoniale Romanum,
edit. Colon. an. 1574. Ordo Baptizandi, cum modo visitandi infirmos. Vener.
1575. Sacra institutio Baptizandi juxta ritum S. Romanae Ecclesiae, ex decreto
Concilij Tridentini restitur. Paris. 1575. Breviarium Praemonstratensiu^.
FJNJS.

