IONAH'S CONTESTATION ABOUT HIS GOVRD.

IN A SERMON DELIVERED AT Paul's Cross. September. 19. 1624.

By R. V. Preacher of Gods Word.

JONAH 4. verse. 9. And God said to JONAH, Do thou well to be angry for the
gourd? and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Bible in Cheape-side. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. THOMAS AVDLEY ESQVIER.
SIR, Considering with my self the overflowing fancies of these days, the
desire being grown common unto each man almost, to see himself in Print
(wherein is observable much vanity under the Sun) it was not my purpose from
the beginning, to make public, further then by publishing with open voice,
these my poor indigested labors: and if by adventuring into the light, I be
equally censured to fall under the same taxation which I have laid upon the
times, it would prove but an addition to my vain attempts to lay the
imputation upon other men's persuasions.

Thus far notwithstanding in this last particular, I must not dissemble; that
reading the counsel of a faithful friend, who has iudiciously censured the
Diseases of the time, and in the first place does note such who love to write
every thing, and such who affect to write nothing, thing, I inclined to his
reasons, and then overcome well-nigh with a self conceit and love of my own
inventions, I began to persuade with my self, that the purpose
halfe-conceived, might be produced really into effect.

This one thing in serious wise, yet faintingly under the silent langvage of my
pen, I do pronounce, how full of Interiections, the study of this Theme was
which Sermon-wise I have unfolded: so why may I not again without suspicion of
self flattery presume, that in the same, I have not traveled altogether in
vain? but as I discovered some sparkle of new light to the settling of the
peace of my own soul, so I trust the perusal hereof shall not prove
ungrateful to others, who study after patience, and to please the Lord with
uprightness in the land of the living.

Why with you Sir, rather then others, I have desired to leave this simple gage
of my hearty regard and sincere affection, I must confess, that friendly usage
and kind respect continued since the time you first had sight of me beyond my
merit, and the ordinary use to strangers, has made me not only hold in
reverence your liberal disposition this way; but also to advance my thoughts
higher in a special regard unto Divine providence, with patience to expect the
issue in this and other occurrents, whereof unto my promised content in
private, I have made particular application, and under this name do crave
pardon for my boldness if I have erred.

When Rachel had borne Naphtali, she expressed the travel of her soul, by
the name she bestowed upon the fruit of her body; she had wrastled with much
pain in her inward desires before she could bring forth, therefore she gave
the childs name from wrestling, she called him Naphtali. Jacob wrastled with
God and prevailed; and thence is the name bestowed upon all Gods Elect; he is
no child of Israel that is no wrastler.

Whither it be with our flesh and blood, or in an higher kind, with
Principalities and Powers, or in the highest degree with God himself, with
tears and prayers and strong cries, and other whiles with pangs and terrors,
with grief, with anger, anguish, and bitterness of spirit, we must all that
look for the blessing wrestle the wrastlings of God.

Thus Abraham wrastled a long time before he obtained Isaac; Isaac wrastled
twenty years before he obtained Jacob, and Jacob by his wrestling got the
name of Israel: Rachel was a woman-wrastler when she brought forth Naphtali, an
example to instruct her weaker Sex in the like trade of wrestling, and Hanna
did sustain a long and grievous wrestling; yet in the end she had power with
God, and brought forth Samuel.

Lastly, Jonah was a wrastler, and so am I: Further to express which, then to
the common Reader I do forbear, for whose sake chiefly, I have enlarged
those Meditations, which were uttered lately in a great assembly, have
collected them into one form, and do now make humble offer of them to your
gentle intertainment. The which kind of testimony of my sincere meaning and
dutious love professed to you, I have rather made choice of, then as the usual
manner now adays is, to prefixe a large Encomium of titles, honors, words of
Worship and of Worth, terms of the highest elevation, and strains of the
lowest and most prostrate submission, with many other superlative peerless,
comparisons, and far fetched commendations, and to place it in the front of
their writings in a form Dedicatory, to give luster to all the pages
following, whether to the Lords or Ladies, Patrones or Patronesses.

Which kind of writing, as it was never practiced by me, so Sir I hope, you
do presume, the same not to be affected by you; whose retired integrity and
unshaken constancy, in the strictest course of mortification does well
witness, that you more respect the praises of God then of men. For which cause
I have the more heartily desired an increase of your good opinion toward me,
and an happy confirmation of that bond of mutual good liking, whereof I have
seen some fair beginnings.

Accept Sir then of this my kindness, the fruits of a ready mind, the pledge
of my love and true observance only as it respects you; a testification of my
good will to Sion, and the building up unto further holiness, as it resptcteth
others not yet grown, but groaning under their imperfections; a fruit of my
inward labors and strivings, my Naphtali, my Benoni, pained as I was in the
conception, grieved in the production, and after, as respecte^th my self and
halting yet hopeful endeavors in the vineyard of his Church. And so I commend
it and my self once more to your friendly acceptance, and your counsels,
wishes, and whole self to his happy guydance, who is God of all true comfort
and consolation to his chosen Israel, and rest,

An unfeigned lover of your Person, a studious observer of your Worship: R. V.

Ionah's Meditation under his Arbor.
TOss't by Sea, by Land distressed,
Jonah here has found some rest,
When others live in houses seel'd
My bed and boade is in the field.
What care I then? so I may have
The comfort which of God I crave.
Hear Lord, O hear now my request,
Then is thy servant Jonah Blessed.
Advice to Jonah.
What though with wealth some do abound;
Content, it springs not from the ground,
A little to the just is blessed,
When great revenewes are accursed:
And Nineveh shall be consumed
Which of her glory has presumed.
But Jonah thou art ignorant,
A selfe-will'd man and malcontent,
Who measurest the Lords decree
According to thy fantasy.
Therefore thou art now sad, now glad,
Whence is this mutabilitie?
The Lord the same, our nature's bad
He changes not, though changed be we:
Then do thy office, but consider
The Gourd that spring's from'th ground will wither.
IONAH'S CONTESTATION ABOUT HIS GOVRD. IN A SERMON DELIVERED AT Paul's Cross.
September. 19. 1624.
JONAH 4. verse. 9. And God said to JONAH, Do thou well to be angry for the
gourd? and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.


THIS whole Prophecy or Book of Jonah, may well for the state thereof be so
conceived, as to be borne forth by way of Dialogue or Interlocution between
the Lord and Him: the Argument maintained sometimes directly, sometimes
indirectly; by Word, by Sign, by Practice, by Example.

The Lord begins: The word of the Lord came unto Jonah, the son of Amittai,
etc. Jonah answers disobediently. The Lords sends him to one place, he goes
to another. Then the Lord speaks again, but by his creatures, opposing his
practice against Ionah's, and maintains his Argument by the Winds, the
Mariners, the Whale-fish; and so the controvesie descends into the bottom
of the Sea.

At the third Chapter; Behold, A new Scaene of trouble begins. The word of
the Lord came unto Jonah the second time; saying, Arise, Go unto Nineveh that
great City, and Preach unto it, the preaching that I bid thee.

Here Jonah answers like an obedient servant, conforming his practice to the
Lords command.

But soon after (his Message, according to the tenor thereof, not taking
effect) he shows his discontented mind; and the same expressed in angry
terms, inwardly conceived, by way of expostulation, in the beginning of the
fourth Chapter.

Then the Lord enters parley with Jonah, after a friendly manner, Do thou
well to be angry? the Lord replies upon Jonah by a loving sign, and the Lord
prepared a gourd, etc. and thereof Jonah was exceeding glad.

But now, Iterum saeuiunt irae; Anger breaks out again: The gourd withers,
Jonah frets; the Lord speaks, Jonah answers; the one friendly as before, the
other frowardly: Jonah, Do thou well to be angry? yea says Jonah, I do
well to be angry, even unto death. The next words conclude the prophefie and
whole disputation directly against Jonah: And thus may be conceived the frame
and structure of the whole Book.

This Text is a plain part of the Dialogue, disputation, contestation, or
contention (which you will); and herein more particularly are obserueable, the
parties contending, the Lord and Jonah: the manner how the contention or
controversy is carried, and it is by word, or saying: God said to Jonah, and
again Jonah said to God.

The matter in question is expressed in the word, angry, and therein I shall
speak of anger somewhat largely: the question in special, is concerning Jonah
his anger, and therein I shall deal more strictly. And thus far on the Lords
part.

The answer of Jonah has likewise in it these three specialties, answerable
to the three parts of the former Quere, which may easily be apprehended in the
question by the Lord, specially directed to Jonah.

First, here is a simple affirmation on Ionah's part, the Lords question first
implying thus much, Jonah, art thou angry? yea, says Jonah, I am angry:
Secondly, a peremptory affirmation or justification, Do thou well to be
angry Jonah? yea, I do well to be angry. Thirdly, a deep aggravation, Do
thou well to be angry for the gourd? yea, I do well to be angry unto death.

The first Circumstance.
The parties contending are the Lord, and Jonah. Impar congressus, a most
unequal match: and yet Jonah far the weaker, has also the weaker cause in
hand.

Tu domine fundasticaelos, Thou Lord in the beginning have established the
heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth, and formed the spirit of man
within him. Great is our God, and great is his power, his wisdom is infinite.

Now look upon Jonah, and who or what is he? at the best, but a weak and
mortal creature, a man borne of a woman, of few days and full of misery; he
comes up and is cut down like a flower, he flees as a shadow and abides
not. And do thou open thine eyes upon such an one, bring such one into
judgment with thee, says Job in the same place? Here is instruction for all
in places of Superiority; let them learn from this one example of the Lord
here, how to carry themselves toward their inferiors.

Does the Lord vouchsafe to reason with Jonah, and give him account of his
doings? who then art thou that do swell against thy brother, and disdainest
to answer thy fellow-seruant?

Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies power down
righteousness. Woe be to him that striveth with his maker. For we may not
search into the Lords counsel, further then he has revealed (it is far more
dangerous then to meddle in man's matters) but there admire where he has
concealed. Howbeit, we see (to the shame of our pride and scorn of our
haughty stomachs) the Lord full often does not refuse to commit himself to
the trial; the Judge to be judged by us his vassals: Therefore has he
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness; and the
consciences of wicked men, who refuse his judgments now, shall be made to
acknowledge his justice then. Thus speaks the Apostle: and he alleges it
out of the Psalms, that thou might be instified in thy sayings, and
overcome when thou art judged.

Let then all petty gods, take example from this great God, whether they be
Kings or Rulers, or Magistrates, or Officers, or Masters, or Fathers of
Families; since God is equal toward us, (and that the heavens will one day
declare) let us learn equity and fair dealing one toward another. This
lesson had Job learnt Chap. 3.13. If I did despise the cause of Man-seruant, or
Maide-seruant when they contended with me, what shall I do when God rises
up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?

Thus shall we walk worthy the title of Gods; otherwise, break the teeth of
the ungodly and malicious, smite out the Iaw-bones of the Lions, O Lord.

For such, who walk not according to this rule, retain no longer the image of
their Maker; but are degenerated into Lions, Bears, Tigers, evening Woolues,
and so are they called in Scripture.

The second Circumstance.
Here the question is, how the saying came to Jonah, again how Jonah spoke to
the Lord. Was it facie ad faciem, face to face? not so. It was a Privilege of
Moses alone, Exodus 12. That the Lord would speak to him face to face, and this
but in a figure too; there being intended thereby, but only a more familiar
kind of presence or dealing with Moses, then with any other the Prophets,
until Christ came: for when Moses desired to see the glory of God, and his
very countenance, it was permitted to him only, to have a sight of his
Backe-parts while his glory passed by. This being a received truth: That no man
can see God and live, I mean the life of Nature; more then the wax can endure
the heat of the fire without melting.

And for this cause, neither was it the voice of the Lord proceeding
immediately from his spirit, which spoke to Jonah here, or to any of his
Prophets elsewhere: For as no man has seen his shape, so neither has any man
heard his voice at any time, as says our Savior, Ioh. 5.37.

The voice of the Lord (says David) is powerful, the voice of the Lord is
full of majesty, etc. but in his Temple does every man speak of his glory.
And truly, unless we first take comfort in hearing the Lords voice in his
Temple, and that by the Ministry of man daily delivered, we shall take little
pleasure in hearing the Lords own voice which shall shake both heaven and
earth, much more the consciences of all sinners, when he shall show himself in
far more dreadful manner then once he did upon Mount Sinai.

But how came the voice to Jonah? I have showen you negatively how not; was it
then in audible manner from without? audible or rather intelligible it was to
Jonah, but in secret and from within, like that still small voice that came to
Eliah. The Lord spoke unto Job, but out of the whirl-winde, and Job therewith
grew humbled, before a man most daring.

And I think, had there to this voice, in what kind soever it came to Jonah,
been joined, but some powerful sign of the Lords presence, Jonah durst not
then have carried himself so petulantly, if the Lord had spoken to him;
whither out of the whirlewinde, as to Job; or out of the flaming bush, as to
Moses; or out of the storm, as to Eliah; or in a more excelling vision as unto
Daniel, as unto John. Rev. 1. He durst not then have replied as he does, much
less (if, as he is, in his own ineffable existency had God spoken) durst he
once to have muttered.

It is true, the Lord does sometimes speak audibly, striking the outward
sense of man; as by the Trumpet which called unto John. Revel. 4.

Again, sometimes he has revealed himself visibly to the eye of man's body;
and so he did to the young man, with Elisha the Prophet. 2. Kings 6.17. and to
Paul. Acts the 9.3.

Sometimes again, and that very usually under the time of the old Law, he has
revealed his will to the fantasy, or imagination, and that by a dream in the
night.

Lastly, and that most specially, and most inwardly, of all has the Lord made
known his purpose to the mind of man; his intellective or understanding part,
as the most essential part of man, and most capable of Divine revelation. But
this last has not happened always after one kind and manner, but sometimes
after a more abstracting and ravishing sort; the man for the present being so
disposed, that he knows not whether his spirit be in or out of his body, at
the lestwise, the spirit being for the time deprived, the use of any the
senses, that it may attend the better to heavenly visions.

Thus was Ezekiel carried out of himself into the valley of dry bones, Paul
into the third heavens, thus fell Peter into his trance.

Sometimes again (to come to the question in hand) and this most commonly to
his Servants the Prophets, the Lord has given his word or his sign by a
secret instinct or inspiration.

Thus was the manner of old, and that thus it was with Jonah in this place may
appear by the context, in comparing this speech with the precedent verse,
where is set down that Jonah fainting, wished in himself to die, and said, it
was better for him to die then live.

This wish or speech of Jonah was secret within himself, no ear heard it but
the Lord, and so the Lord in secret again does answer him, and he again
answers to the Lord. The Lord said to Jonah, and Jonah said to the Lord: the
manner and carriage of which saying, and interchange of speech, as it was
secret and silent, so no thoughts could understand but the heart of Jonah, and
the Lord only.

Shall we now apply this? the Author to the Hebrews, has done it in these
words; God who did in times past at diverse times and sundry ways speak unto
the Fathers, the Prophets have in these last days spoken to us by his own
Son whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom he made the worlds.

Now which kind of speakings had you rather choose? whither by servants in the
house, or him that has made the house and is heir of all. Some there be who
say, O that we had lived in the days of the Prophets, or the Prophets now in
our days, for then should we be vifited with new revelations and visions from
the Lord.

Hence spring up, almost in all ages, those Anabaptisticall spirits pretending
daily, new revelations, but inspired from hell, to lead away unstable souls,
which will not content themselves with the sound doctrine of the Gospel,
delivered by Christ Jesus the only Son of God.

To this end also have the Ministers of Antichrist devised new traditions and
unwritten verities to feed the humor of such men, that they all might be
damned says Saint Paul, who believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness: in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians.

O remember the saying before, that God spoke diverse times and diversely to the
Fathers, the Prophets; none of them, for the time, being able to deliver an
absolute form of doctrine, but as expecting daily somethings yet to be added,
they waited for further revelations or inspirations from above.

And shall we expect that doctrine, which they left imperfect, to be made up or
perfected, by the giddy spirits or furious fantasies, of such who come like
the old Prophets; I have dreamed, I have dreamed?

O no, God has spoken to us in these last days by his Son, the heir of
all, who came out of his Fathers bosom, and therefore has revealed his whole
will concerning our salvation and the means thereof; and the same to remain
without any addition, alteration, or change, to the end of the world: he has
also sealed the same by the witness of his spirit in the hearts of all
believers, so that we may say with Peter, whether shall we go from thee? for
thou have the word of Life, etc.

To conclude, since Saint John wrote his revelation which he received from
Christ, there is to be looked for no other Revelation whether from Angels or
men, but cursed is he that adds or takes away from the words of the Book of
this Prophecy, or from the writing of any other the Prophets, Evangelists,
Apostles.

This word of God says, S. Paul to Timothy, is able to make the man of God
perfect; what need then any other help and furtherance, perfection being by
this word to be attained unto; a perfection greater then that the fathers,
before Christ, saw, a perfection so far as is convenient, during the state of
our mortal life and Pilgrimage here, until that glorious day in full strength
break out, and the shadows clearly be chaced away.

3. Particular.
Anger in general may be defined, a commotion of the mind for some supposed
evil, joined with an appetite of revenge.

Let the parts be examined. I say, first a commotion for that it is not a
simple affection but compounded of hate or mislike, and hope; hate for some
conceived injury, and hope to be revenged upon the iniurer: yea it draws the
whole man into commotion; the head devises, the hand acts, the feet cannot
abide in one place but run the paths of destruction; all the inward powers
are like wise troubled: our love perplexed, fear confused, desires inflamed,
our reason perverted; and the whole man does suffer pain together with the
passion and is disordered. Therefore not unfitly do I call it a commotion.

So also is it a commotion of the mind not of the humor, or complexions
principal; it being the judgment of Divines so likewise of true Phylosopy,
that the passions may be occasioned from the diverse temperatures of the body,
but do proceed principally from the disposition of the divine soul;
according to the truth of this principle, that the soul is the prime moover in
the body, and it were a thing monstrous and absurd to affirm that the humors
of the body have any power over the soul to work upon it contrary to its
immortal and impassible nature, impassible of any power save only from that
hand which made and infused it.

Besides many arguments tending to which purpose, receive this one for all,
namely, that two the most principal affections governing in this life, love
and joy are not determined together with the ending of the story of our days,
but do accompany the soul, and are inherent in the same after, as without the
expression of which two there can be no happiness; a clear evidence that
both the soul was the prime moover while it dwelt in the body, so that it does
retain the same power and that in a more noble kind, when it is without the
body.

I add this moreover, that it arises from some supposed evil. For there is
not always a real and subsisting cause of our anger. The Pope was angry for
his Peacocke, the Pope was angry for his Porke, and we are often angry with
our very shadows.

And lastly I say, joined with an appetite of revenge, and therefore we see
commonly at the first apprehension of any wrong, that the blood does recoyle
unto the heart, and by and by into the face; as a Blood-hound or Mastiffe, to
fly into the face of the iniurer.

Among all the passions, by God planted in the nature of man, there is none
more violent then that of anger; and for this cause truly, because we are by
nature more impatient of evil, then we are coveting of good, made senseless
sometimes through the cloying excess of present delights, but too quick and
sensible enough, even of the least supposed evil, where against anger does
chiefly bend its force.

It is nourished with the most bitter humor; a bag of gall has angers food,
it feeds on the same with greedines, yet without all delight, and thirsts
after humane blood.

It is a Serpent that eats out her own bowels; a wild beast that scorneth
to be tamed; a sack full of poison; a fire pent up within the bones; a flame
when it breaks out to consume others.

It is a sickness of the Soul, a Frenzy, a Fury, a Madness.

Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae:
Lumina Gorgonia saevius angue micant.
The lips swell, the blood turns black within the veins; The eyes more fiery
red, then are Gorgonian Snakes.

What, have not Poets and heathen Moralists, written in the reproach and
dispraise of anger? Let him that is angry, before he strike his fellow, behold
his own countenance in the glass, and then let him bear his anger first,
which has thus transformed and disfigured him.

Notwithstanding, he who has placed the sand a bound for the sea, that
intractible and foming Element, who has taught the Unicorn to abide by his
crib; he does nurture Bears, and teach young Lions to seek unto him for
their prey; Woolues, and Badgers, are his obedient slaves.

Yea the poison of Aspes, Scorpions, and Toades, are tempered by his great
hand, to the common good of the general body; his hand has also tempered the
passion of anger, to the good of the lesser body mankind.

I hold not with the Stoickes, who hold a vacuitie of passions; Christ our
righteousness was angry, sometimes when he lived upon earth, as also he wanted
not any other the affections, grief, joy, etc.

In heaven there shall be perfect peace, and joy without interruption; and I
see there no cause of anger. As the intrailes therefore of the beasts under the
Law, were exempted from the sacrifice: so the spleen and gall of our natures,
which serve here only to feed our male contented passions, shall be exempted,
it may be, or left at the bottom of the hill; when we ascend that holy
Mount, which reaches above the clouds, and the City which is the mother of
us all.

But in the terrene condition of ours, so thoroughly seasoned with evils, the
only true objects of anger; God has seated it among the other affections of
the mind, as not only useful, but necessary in this life; and it is that to
the soul, which the Nerve is to the body, a whetstone of fortitude, a spur
to virtue, and honorable actions.

Among all the other parts therefore, before mentioned in angers description,
let us take into a little further view, the object whereupon it is bent, and
concerning which it is to be directed.

The only object of anger is evil, whether real, or apparent, but most
truly real; and therefore Jonah here was much mistaken, in that he made God
the object of his anger, who is goodness it self.

Others have divided anger according to the objects, into anger inhumane, as to
be savage against kind and kindred; mad, as that of Balaams, to be angry
with his Ass senseless; as that of Xerxes, to be angry with the Mountain
Aethos, to be angry with the River Hellespont.

I affirm, that evil is the only object of anger, and is in our selves or
others.

First for our selves, for there is a time, when we ought to be angry with our
selves.

An old man there was once heard chiding, he was asked with whom? with a
certain old man quoth he, who wears gray-haires, but wants understanding.
And so Plato upon a time, went in have to beat his servant, and taking the
scourge of correction in his hand, he stood still for a good space, with his
hand lifted up, and in the end spoke thus; exigo paenas ab irato, I chastise
quoth he, my own anger.

Thus anger rightly bestowed against our selves, the Apostle does commend in
the 7. Chap. the 2 Epistle to the Corinthians, as a noble branch of repentance,
or godly sorrow. For the same, that ye sorrowed after a godly sorrow, says
he, (among other fruits) what indignation or anger has it wrought? Yea what
revenge? What anger will you say? Why, be angry says Saint Basil, against your
sins, the devil, lies, vanities, your selves.

What revenge? Be revenged upon your sins, the devil lies, vanities, your
selves.

Oh, when will the edge of our anger, of our revenge be turned this ways!
This is a noble anger, to be angry with what God is angry; a worthy revenge,
when virtue does chastise vice. Behold says the Apostle, he speaks it with
an Ecce, the same that ye sorrowed as ye ought, what anger? what revenge, etc.
This is a victory most acceptable unto God, and shall be crowned of him, with a
crown of glory.

There is a time also, wherein we may be angry with our brethren, but with
greater caution ought this to be tempered.

For we are but seldom angry with our selves; but often with our brethren; but
a very little angry with our selves; very much with our brethren, making that
to be but a mote in our own eyes, which is a beam in our brothers.

The Apostle has a very apt, and wholesome admonition to this purpose, in the
first verse of his fourth Chapter to the Galatians, each word containing a
secret argument to innocent anger: Brethren, if a man be overtaken with a
fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted.

More specially, in our anger to others, observe we these two, the manner, the
measure: for the manner, walk according to the old rule well known, little
practiced; hate the offense, love the person.

How can this be? I answer, how is the father angry with his child? Even so,
that though he chastise the fault, he loves the child; so be angry with thy
brother, that yet thou be in charity with him.

This is an hard lesson, may some say, both to hate, and love, at the same
time: but in other matters of less weight, thou know wisely enough, how to
distinguish.

For if thou have a garment that is bespotted, thou know how to take out the
spot from thy garment, not to reject the garment for the spot: even so take out
the moth that is in thy brothers eye, but preserve and do not destroy the eye,
because of the mote in the eye.

So for the measure of our anger, I shall not need in many words to prescribe.

It was prohibited to the Jews, in correction to their brethren, that they
should not exceed the number of forty stripes; we being for the most part in
cases of private revenge culpable of that which was objected against the
Israelites by the Prophet Obed, in their dealing against their brethren of
Judah, under the reign of Ahaz, viz. that they persecuted them with a rage
that reached up unto heaven.

Our Savior in the 5. of Saint Matthew does mention three degrees (besides
actual murder, which is to be punished with death by man's law) of unlawful
anger.

The first in thought, he that is angry with his brother, the second in gesture
or sign, he that says to his brother Racha, which word signifies anger, and
in the speech of our Savior does forbid all signification of our anger to our
brethren, either in look or countenance, or by any other sign or gesture.

The third sort of unlawful anger there mentioned, is expressed by word, or
tongue; he that says thou fool, or gives any other reproachful provoking
terms, or speeches to his brother.

The whole text runs thus, Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the Counsel; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hell fire.

Then beware of offending in the first kind, being angry in thy secret thought
against thy brethren, take heed more especially, it be not manifested by some
outward sign, take heed most of all these, it break not out into intemperate
language.

If thou fear not the Judgment, fear an assembly, or counsel; if you fear
not the counsel, stand in awe and tremble at hell fire.

But here now a very necessary question does arise; If anger be so strictly
forbidden as we see; what course or remedy is then left unto us in all just
provocations of wrath, and concerning the manifold injuries, which are daily
offered to our persons, how are we to behave our selves?

A question truly well worthy to be discussed, and the same very apt and
pertinent to the Treatise of Anger.

Wherefore I answer, that we ought at all times abstain from anger, even to
our very thoughts, saving in the manner as is before spoken to be angry with
the sin, not with the person.

Howbeit, we are not debarred the use of lawful courses, in the remedying of
wrongs, and preventing further damages, when we are justly thereunto provoked,
and cannot otherwise maintain peace.

But will thou know wherein? tread not the path of revenge, and go not in the
way which thy intemperate anger would lead thee: But follow the counsel of
thy blessed Savior; whose words in this cause are so plain; I wonder any man
should mistake, whose advise is so wholesome, I wonder all men do not more
regard it. Matthew. 18.15. These be his words, If thy brother shall trespass
against thee, go and tell him of his fault between thee and him alone, if he
shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee,
then take with thee one or two more; that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word may be established; and if he shall neglect them, tell
it unto the Church, but if he neglect the Church let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man or Publican.

Where you see, all means by Christians lawful to be used, to be expressed
by our Savior; the first private, the second more open, the third most
public; all friendly, but if all will not serve, he is no longer to be
esteemed as a friend, with whom we are to deal.

The two first are well known, but how little used; therefore the right use of
the last is unknown or most abused: By which last, the Church, I do
understand; such as are deputed in the stead of Christ for well ordering
causes, called by some the Church representiue.

For our Savior here speaks from the manner of the Jews Commonwealth, who
had Elders in every City, the first beginning whereof was from Iethro, whose
office was to hear and judge of controversies, and end suits in law:
Answerable whereto in our Commonwealth (comparable, I think I may boldly say
to that of theirs, and inferior at this day to no other, for matters of
Policy and Church Government, if as truly executed) for Ecclesiastical
matters, are the spiritualitie, and such as study the Civil laws: in matters
temporal, the Magistrate, and they who study the Common laws, for the
maintenance of outward peace, and tranquillity, in this our Church and
Commonwealth. Let this be the Church then in this sense: Tell the Church, (not
a Presbytery compacted of I know not who, as the Reformists of our time would)
the Governors in this our Church and Kingdom, appointed for the outward
preservation of peace and tranquillity.

And this is the way, the order; every man ought to use in particular, to work
his peace and agreement with his adversary.

Not first to run to the Church, to tell the Church, as the usual manner now
adays is; falling at first to suits in law, open contentious, branglings and
ianglings in Courts Ecclesiastical and Temporal, whereof their is no end; God
justly punishing contentions minds, because they love not peace, with
dissentions, all the days of their life's.

But this is the course we ought to use, if we mean to be directed by Christ
his advise and counsel.

First, go to thy brother, and admonish him of his fault between thy self
and him alone in friendly manner. What hurt can come unto thee by doing so? for
if thou gain him to a better mind, then blessed shall thou be of the Lord,
and he will also bless God for thee, this is to love thine enemy according to
the perfect rule of charity.

If he regard not this, then take with thee one or two more according to the
rule in the second place prescribed; thou have cast him before God, so before
men also; if hereby he prove not bettered; thou thy self thus bridling thine
anger, have freed thy own soul from the danger of Judgment, and Counsel,
and have brought him within the compass of both, that God in due time may
revenge as a Judge, and men may witness his justice against thy adversary.

But lastly, continuing still obstinate to be thine enemy without a cause,
thou may then complain to the Church of him, Dic Ecclesiae; Tell the Church
of him, bring him to the Bench, or to the Bar before the Judge, whether
Spiritual or Temporal; that he may be openly convicted in Law, and then if
still he remain refractory, let him be to thee as an Heathen or Publican, as
a man excommunicate.

Thus it ought to be my brethren, this is the right order of proceeding; Peace
be upon them and upon the Israel of God, peace shall be upon them, and upon the
Israel of God, who walk according to this rule.

But what shall I say, the case being far otherwise? I will take up my
complaint with the Prophet Isaiah: Judgment is far from us, neither does
justice overtake us, we weight for light, but behold obscurity; for
brightness, but we walk in darkness.

We roar all like Bears, and mourn like Doves; City and Country cry out
for Justice, Justice; City nor Country do take the right course, proceeding
in that order our Savior has left us, therefore are many overthrown in a
rightful cause.

Hence springs that general clamor against Lawyers, (which howsoever God will
not overpasse, and a fearful woe there is belonging to the unjust nourishers
of debate; to thee also do I say, whose office it is to determine
controversies, if thou hold them longer in suspense, if thou pervertest the
cause in judgment, howsoever God may use thee as an instrument, to vex the
contentious and troublesome spirits of some, yet this thy rapine and
covetousness, shall in the end sink thee lower into hell).

Yet I am persuaded many should have more happy success in their suits, if
they did not begin in so rough manner at the first. But as I have showed; or if
it succeed well enough with them for the present, yet it shall increase their
judgment with God, to a greater measure afterward.

The men of this age, if they sustain the least wrong, breath out nothing but
law, law; whereas they ought to remember that the right use of the law is never
separated from charity, and to fall to open pleadings, before private
admonitions, in Gods sight is a plain breach of the sixth commandment whereby
such an one does show his hatred to his brother.

Let us use all courses before we fall to Law-courses, for this is the last
mean which Christ has left for the quieting and ordering of his Church, to
go lastly (all other ways first tried, to such whom God has set in public
office in his Church, which order because many do pervert, being carried away,
rather with a spirit of malice and rancour, then of unity and love,) God does
suffer to wind themselves into many, and in inextricable Laberinths of trouble.

And thus much for anger in general, occasioned from the text, rather then
intended, and how to order and preserve the same within convenient bounds.

4. Particular.
The question in special does concern Ionah's anger and the cause thereof
according to these words, Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the Gourd?

And here first the manner of correction in this form of speech which the Lord
uses, deserves to be noted. For a man would rather have looked for burning
coals to have proceeded from his lips; here is no more but thus, Do thou
well to be angry?

Bow the heavens O Lord, and come down, says David, Touch the mountains and
they shall smoke: cast forth hightnings and scatter them, shoot out arrows
and destroy them.

Let Peter be Judge, and he will call for fire from heaven to consume an whole
City, much rather upon one sinful man, that dares to contest with the Lord
of glory. What? shall the pot contend with the Potter, or the thing formed, say
to the Former, Why have thou made me thus?

Note the great clemency of the Lord to Jonah herein, but not without
application to our selves: For does he not in as mild and loving manner deal
with us, sending his Prophets rising early and sending them, in his name to
deal with us by exhortations, invitations, promises of love, and protestations
to receive us if we will convert and turn unto him.

We beseech you by the tender mercies of God, says Sait Paul; We entreat you
as his Ambassadors to be reconciled unto God, when we are fallen out with him
as Jonah here. Hear what God himself says by his servant Moses, so often as
we decline his precepts; Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? is not he thy Father that has bought thee? has he not made thee, and
established thee? O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I
do unto thee? my bowels are turned within me, my repentings are kindled within
me? wash thee from thy sins, O England, cleanse thy self from thy
pollutions, O London, when will it be?

Is not our God a consuming fire? are not the sinners in Sion afraid of him?
who shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

When the offer of mercy will not serve, he speaks in the person of revenge
and fury (for what are we but briars and thorns to that consuming flame?) and
who would, says he, set the briars and thorns against me in the day of
battle? I would go through them; I would burn them together. Behold I am
pressed under you, says he by another Prophet, as a cart is pressed that is
full of sheaves. Therefore also he says in another place, ah, I will ease me
of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.

And again, if I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment;
I will render vengeance to mine enemies and repay them that hate me.

But yet he speaks peace unto his people, mercy and loving kindness all the
day long: why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? I desire not the death of a
sinner; why art thou all so angry, O Jonah, I have given thee no just cause,
Do thou well to be angry thus against thy Maker? be not so perverse in thy
fury, but judge righteous judgment.

The same I say to thee, and every one else in particular (for the Lords words
are both particularly universal and universally particular) that which at
first was delivered to one Tribe, is applyable to all Tribes and kindreds of
the earth, and the word preached to an whole City, is brought home to some few
private consciences, and is to be brought home to thine.

Propound this that has been said, as thine own cause, and admiring not so
much the Lords patience toward Jonah, as toward thy self; ask these
questions of thine own soul.

Whether thou do well to defer thy repentance, and turning unto God so long,
whether thou do well at any time to be angry with thy God, or with thy
brother, say oftentimes to thy self in thy passion and distemper of mind, do
I well to be thus impatient, thus fretfull, do I well to be thus unthankful
to my God, to provoke him, to grieve his holy Spirit?

Is it better for me to enjoy God as my Father, or as a Judge, a gracious
Redeemer; or terrible revenger? to have my part in his blessed promises, by
listening unto his loving admonitions, or in those fearful comminations
before mentioned by continuing obstinate?

An admirable clemency was it in the Lord, in such fair terms, to treat
with Jonah his servant, his creature; but far greater his love under this form
of reasoning, to make Jonah his own Judge in the cause; by this means to
reduce him to a more sober mind, when as he says to this effect; if thou
think that thou art hardly dealt withal Jonah at my hand, and that I the Lord
am no equal Judge in thy behalf, I refer the cause to thine own censure,
lay aside wrath, and speak out of a more serious consideration, whether thou
do well to be angry, Angry with me about the Gourd?

Thus if we were wise, to take the whole benefit of this example, we should
not only admire his clemency, but also avoid his judgments, and procure his
favor, we being made our own Judge as before, for if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, as says the Apostle to the
Corinthians.

The cause of Ionahs anger.
It is expressed here in the text, the Gourd; Do thou well to be angry for
the Gourd?

A silly matter to be angry for, yea to be angry with the great God in this
regard only: But this undoubtedly is not the only cause, but many things
besides, as upon this ground, do offer themselves to the mind of Jonah, as
the spark to the tinder, the match to the spark.

Yea indeed, Jonah was as an hot oven damm'd up, seeking vent, for he was
angry before, as may appear from the second verse of this Chapter, he was not
well pleased at first, now this Gourd does both increase the heat and makes
passage.

Let us put upon us the person of Jonah, and reason the whole matter, so far
as by circumstance we are able to collect in his behalf.

And first look we unto the office of Jonah; He was a Prophet, a name of
honor, so of great labor and molestation; pride looks contemptuously at the
function, envy weaves many subtle disgraces, to bring down the honor of it,
all the armies of vices do bandon against it, and he who has undertaken this
office, must show himself a professed enemy to the times iniquities, Jonah was
a Prophet.

So he was a Prophet to those revolting Tribes of Israel, of whose
incorrigiblenesse all the other Prophets have complained.

And now after that he has wearied and spent himself among these, he is sent
unto a stout-hearted people the Ninevites.

And what hope of better fruit and success of his labors amongst an
unbelieving nation? Or if perchance they prove believing and repent, then is
the credit of his message called in question; this made him at the first to
fly to Tarshish.

Now after so many iournyings by land, and tossings by sea, he takes up his
lodging in the belly of a Whale-fish.

He is out of that nastie place delivered, as out of the mouth of hell, and now
is commanded the second time for Nineveh.

And now Jonah must put on a firm resolution, either to be slain, or else
derided, if the fear of God be not in the place, then Jonah has spoken words,
the land is not able to bear; Flee oh thou seer and escape for thy life.

Or if the fear of God do work in their hearts to repentance and amendment;
then hark to Jonah, I pray thee O Lord, says he, was not this my saying,
when I was yet in my own country? therefore I fled before unto Tarshish, for
I knew that thou art a gracious God, etc.

Now after all these labors, after all these dolours, some poor refreshment
springs up to Jonah, a Gourd from the ground to comfort Ionah's head in this
great disquiet, and pain of Ionah's heart.

The Lord prepared a Gourd to overshadow Ionah's head, and therewith he was
content to forget his present myserie (for now thinks he, the Lord begins to
remember my affliction,) and flatters himself from this conceit, that the Lord
will proceed to add further consolation, and herein Jonah was exceeding glad
of the Gourd.

But behold, on the sudden all his mirth is marred; Ionah's rejoicing lasts
but for a night; Jonah awakes in the morning, and finds the Gourd quite
decayed, and all his pleasure therewith vanished.

Thus am I crossed says Jonah every way thus am I mocked, thus deceived; thus
am I altogether, and on all sides vexed.

And it came to pass says the text, when the Sun did arise, that God prepared
a vehement East-winde, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he
fainted, and wished in himself to dye and said: It is better for me to dye
then to live.

Now says God to Jonah (thus many reasons no doubt, and many more in his
thoughts being amassed together) Jonah, Do thou well to be angry, or art
thou exceeding angry? yea says Jonah, I am exceeding angry, yea I do well to
be angry to the death?

You see the cause or rather causes of Ionah's anger? (to content my self with
one only observation, let us learn from hence, thus much for our instruction.

Namely, from the orderly, or rather disorderly working of Ionah's passions
(the present being used as an instrument to rake up the embers of all his
former discontents) how to carry our selves in trials of this nature, to
prevent or defeat Satan's wiles and policies herein.

For we have to deal with a subtle adversary, who works upon the advantage
of our distempered weakness.

He perceived Jonah much out of patience before, and now he does use the helps
of the Gourd, to work him quite besides himself: so if he at any time find
us to have delivered up the hold of reason, or to be upon the tide of our
impotent passions, he plyes the advantage with diligence, and though we sail
too fast of our selves, he will not stick to add both wind and water to our
Ships.

He says to the angry man, besides the present occasion of his anger,
remember wrongs of old done unto thee; he has trespassed against me seven
times; yea, though his brother come and humble himself in presence, he will
not admit of the counsel of our Savior, the power of temptation does
prevail more strongly, and flesh and blood cannot withstand.

To the furious man, he likewise says strike him; the second time, strike him
to the ground; the third time, strike him sure; for revenge is a sweet thing,
there is glory in the killing of a man, and to put on the girdle of blood upon
thy loins, it is sure, an act of generositie.

To the adulterer, when he perceives him inclining to that sin, he
insinuates himself by many goodly reasons, and says; the good man is gone
from home, the darkness shall cover thee, none eye shall see thee; stolen
waters are sweet, and bread of deceit eaten in secret is pleasant; but he
tells him not, that his mouth in the end shall be filled with gravel.

To the woman, and lascivious person, he presents besides the object; which
for the present pleases the eye, the pleasure of actual inioying; she has
costly and gay hangings, whom I make the mistress of my delight.

I have decked my bed, speaks she, with coverings of Tapistrie, with carved
works, with fine linen of Egypt; I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes,
and Cinnamon.

Yea, she is a religious Strumpet too, this day have I paid my vows; she goes
to Church, but more to entangle simple ones in her eyelids, then to hear a
Sermon: Oh, she rides in her Coach like a Queen of beauty. Thus the wanton
is taken, with these and many the like; with ditties, and daunces, with
rose-beds, and garlands, and crowns of roses.

Thus also does our tempter deal with us, by temptations on the left hand.

If he perceive our minds doubtful, and wavering from Godward; he calls to
our remembrance, how many good deeds of ours have passed unregarded; how often
we have prayed, and have returned without success in our prayers, that it is
in vain to serve God; and thus he tempts to infidelity.

When he sees us troubled with some present mishap, he calls to mind all
the crosses we have borne heretofore; that God does still load us with daily
aflictions, without relief, without release, and thus he tempts us to
impaciencie; even as he deals with Jonah here, finding him troubled about the
gourd, he awakens also his former discontents, the molestations of his calling,
his travels by Land, and tempests by Sea; and makes him in the end to fall out,
and be at plain difference with God.

Wherefore happy is that man, that can prudently discern, and discerning hold
out the shield of Faith, to quench all the fiery darts of Satan.

The air is not oftener visited with winds of all qualities, gentle, or rough,
bringing, or chasing away rain, blasting or blessing the fruits of the earth;
then is the mind of man with the contrary blasts or breathings from two
contrary spirits from above, and from below.

Happy is that man, who is wise to discern the times and seasons of
spiritual moovings, who (though he know not whence the wind arises) does
open the windows and doors of his souls garden, to let in those heavenly
inspirations and breathings from above the spices of his garden shall flow out,
or if he set to sea, he shall arrive unto pleasant harbor.

But woeful is his mistake, who hoyseth sail when the Devil keeps his
quarter, whether must he be carried, unless into the unfortunate Islands,
unless before his tacklings rent, his Ship do split, and his hopes be sinked
into the bottom of the Ocean.

Wherefore I conclude again, observe the times, and the first beginnings, if
they appear inticements, provocations, temptations unto evil unto sin.

For if we be once upon the tide of our headstrong affections, a great measure
of grace is required to stay us, and if once we begin to tumble, the weight of
our natures will not easily be let from the bottom of the hill, and we be
mainely bruised or everlastingly perished.

And thus much for the cause of Ionahs anger which is not only the Gourd,
though it only by the Lord be mentioned in the text.

It was for this end, not to make Jonah more impacient but an argument used by
the Lord to confute his former great impaciencie as in the next words, the
conclusion of the book is made plain. And thus far on the Lords part: the
first general part have we proceeded; The next maine part now in order
follows.

The Answer of Jonah.
And he said, yea, I do well to be angry even unto death.

I should little have expected such an answer from the mouth of Jonah,
especially having been so mainely schooled but a little before. What? to the
third degree? yea, I am angry; I do well to be angry; I do well to be angry
unto death?

Jonah is now got out of the deep upon the firm land, he no longer fears the
wiudes, the rattling tempest, the Mariners, nor the Whale. But God is the same
God both by sea and land; think on this Jonah, that he is not as thou
supposest.

But as he has the Leviathan and Whirle-poole of the deep, so has his hand
formed the crooked Serpent of the land, yea he can make these contemptible
vermin, with whom thou daily conversest to bite thee; as he made Balaams Ass
to reproove the madness of the Prophet.

Whom do thou provoke Jonah? art thou able to contend? Cloth now thy self
with thunder, and scatter lightnings over the face of the earth.

Gird up thy loins like a man and speak, for God himself demands of thee;
where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth, when I laid the
measures thereof, and stretched the line upon it, when I laid the cornerstone,
the morning Stars then sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy?

Who shut up the sea with doors, and made the cloud a garment, and thick
darkness a swaddling band for it?

Mighty Jonah, powerful Jonah, dreadful Jonah, lift up now thy voice to the
clouds, and cause abundance of waters to cover thee; have thou an arm like
God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him? Deck thy self now with
Majesty and excellency, cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, behold every one
that is high and abase him.

Fretfull Jonah, angry Jonah, pettish Jonah, foolish Jonah, whom do thou
provoke, stand now to thy cause, and consider wisely what argument thou take
in hand, and do not darken counsel by words without knowledge, which was Jobs
fault before thee, and ought of thee more advisedly to be confidered, now that
it comes to be thy case.

But it fares with Jonah, as with a man borne down with a violent stream, the
law of his members is at this time so powerful in him, that there is little
and no appearance of the life of grace. Consider the degrees, and first:

His affirmation.
Yea, says Jonah; he does not conceal his inward heat, as if it would burn
his heart out if he should.

Jonah had but little time to confider between the question by the Lord put
unto him, and the answer by him to be made, and the fury of his inward
passions, the while raging; no great marvel if some distempered heat
appear, and he answer out of reason.

A man who is in a tempest at the sea, has not (while the tempest lasts) the
government either of himself, or any thing about him: and thus is Jonah the
second time losed in the surging seas of his own passions.

The which may teach us therefore to do nothing, while the heat of the
passion lasts, but upon premeditated terms.

For what? when it flies in the face of God, what will not anger dare to do?
Occiderem te, says one, ni iratus sim, I would kill thee, but that I am angry
with thee; whereas we know not how to fight in other temper, and never strike
but in our anger, like the Emperor Justinian the second, who being deprived
of his nose by Leoncius his predecessor, upon every remembrance of that
injury, caused some friend or other of that Emperor to loose a nose or be
slain.

But I list not to stand upon this, since Jonah contents not himself with one
poor word, yea, nor with a simple expression, but proceeds to a justification,
a deep aggravation of his anger according to the division before remembered.

Yet truly thus far can I not choose but take notice, that albeit this very
one word, ought not once to have been conceived in the breast of Jonah, yet
more tolerable had bin his fault, if here he had rested and suppress't all
further commotion of his unguided spirit.

And therefore here (by way of passage unto the next point) learn we that
advice of Solomon, Chap. 30. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy
self, or if thou have thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and stop
thine anger before it proceed too far.

For as follows in the same place, the much churning of milk, changes it
into an other nature, and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, so the
forcing of wrath in the end commonly brings forth strife, strife bloodshed,
bloodshed death oftentimes and peril of eternal destruction to the name,
person, or posterity of such, who give themselves over to the government of
this fury.

A choleric man for this cause, or he that gives easy passage to his anger,
is not unfitly compared to a man dwelling in a thatcht house, who being therein
rich in the morning, sets it all on a light fire before the evening; for Anger
slaies the foolish, says Solomon.

Therefore once again, quench it while it is a spark, which is not so easily
done, after it has got head; shut the floodgates before the stream grow too
violent, and bear down all before it.

But what should Jonah do? must he not answer to the Lords question? for the
Lord does ask him, if he do well to be angry, and since that so he is, and so
thinks, as good speak it as dissemble.

I find the same question before in the fourth verse, put unto Jonah by the
Lord in the same manner, yet I meet not there with any word of Jonah by way of
answer expressed.

Belike (as there he was sullen and would not) so now being thoroughly heated
with this fire, he cannot refrain any longer, but must out with it.

He continued (as should seem) from that time to this, saving only a little
Interim for one nights rest, like unto a green piece of wood or chubbed block
which lies over a few coals smoking and smouldring; but now the moisture
being well sucked out, he breaks into a light flame, and spits and spartles
fire against the Lord: note his manner in the second specialtie of his speech.

2. His peremptory Asseveration or Justification.
I do well to be angry. It was a mild saying of Augustus the Emperor to one
of his soldiers desirous to be dismissed his army, but wanting a just and
honest excuse to his friends at his return home, say, says the Emperor, that
I have angried thee.

But what shall I say to thee Jonah, who art angry not in show, but in deed?
who undertake to justify thy anger, and that not against an earthly
Emperor, but against such a great King, who casts out the glory of all
earthly Kingdoms and Empires like the clay in the streets?

I know not surely well what to say to it: yet this I am sure of, that mighty
Cedars I see sometimes to be mightily shaken, that he who thinks he stands
may look better to his standing.

We have a pregnant example in Jonah here, a chosen man in Israel, and one of
the worthies of God.

I Will speak no more then what I know: yet my knowledge herein I must confess
is led into a wonderment, when I consider, as I find it.

Now, in that heavenly Chorus, next unto those glorious Cherubins and Seraphins
who continually do cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, we shall do well to rank the
glorious company of the Apostles; and after them the goodly fellowship of the
Prophets; and next to these, the noble Armies of the Martyrs.

And why say I this thing? that you may also wonder together with me, when I
have shown unto you, what I have observed from the great weakness in this
kind of the holy and most honored Prophets of God.

When you shall behold, such who have commanded the waters, had power over
fire, who have traveled the sea, rode in the air, subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, been renowned in their times, and left the glory of their
names unto posterities; these I say to have been conquering and prevailing
over all outward force, yet of their own unruly appetites to be brought into
subjection, or of their inward passions to have been mainely foiled.

Yea, I have not yet discovered the whole truth: for I must needs say that I
have found none, as comparable to the Prophets in the abovesaid respects: so
like them none, to have been transported in the like measure, or carried with
such disordered violence as these, and those, who have received the best
testimonies from, and been graced with the greatest honor from his hand.

Let us cast our eyes from Jonah, the most clear example of all others upon
Moses that man of God, and Prophet likewise, greater then whom none did rise
till Christ came.

He is reported for the meekest man upon the earth then living, yet cannot be
excused for speaking unadvisedly with his lips at the waters of Meribah. Or
if we could be content to pass by this, what shall we say to that which fell
out a little after the consumption at Taberah?

What great reason had Moses there to grow weary of his charge? so weary, that
he desired to dye? so desirous of death that he prays the Lord to slay him?
as plainly appears in the 11. Chapter of Numbers.

Is this the meek man spoken of? yea, let him be so accounted secundum partem
saniorem, so that yet we suffer not Jonah to want a companion in his
impaciencie, and my text receive confirmation from his example in like manner.

Come we to Eliah, one that rode up to heaven in a fiery Chariot, called by a
Father a Waggoner in the air, a man ordained for reproves, says Syrach.

Yet a man subject to the same passions with others, and not void of reproof
himself.

It proceeded from the heat of his spirit, when he fell into that mistake, as
if there were none righteous but he alone.

But whereas he says, O Lord, take away my life, he sympathiseth directly with
the words of Jonah before my text, who wished in himself to dye, and said it
is better for me to dye then live.

And however, I cannot be bold to say, that he would have returned the same
answer with this of Jonah in the defense of his anger; yet sure God might well
at that time have put the same question to him which is to Jonah; Do thou
well to be angry Eliah?

I need not to say much of Job; nor do I find him ranked among the Prophets,
yet sure he is well worthy to be honored with the title.

You have heard of the patience of Job, says James, it is true, and of his great
impatience too; who knows not that, who is but meanly converst in his story;
or the substance of reasoning by his own hand left in writing?

Now come we to Jeremy, of whom, and to whom, I find the Lord himself thus
speaking.

See, says he, I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the
kingdoms; to root out and to pull down, and to destroy and to throw down,
to build and to plant.

But how much grief and vexation this cost him, you may behold. In the
fifteenth Chapter, I hear him pleading thus, woe is me, my mother, that thou
have borne me; a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth.

In the twentieth Chap. thus, O Lord thou have deceived me, and I was
deceived; thou art stronger then I, and have prevailed; I am in derision daily,
every one mocketh me.

Who says that Jeremy had not just cause to be angry? sure, unless himself
had thought and been persuaded so, he would never have broken out into these
terms of heat and displeasure against the Almighty.

But toward the end of the same Chapter he grows horne-madde, and then he
falls to cursing: Jobs fit has taken him, and thus he takes on, Cursed be the
day wherein I was borne, says he, let not the day wherein my mother bare me
be blessed; Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, a
man-child is borne unto thee, making him very glad. And let that man be as
the Cities which God overthrew and repented not, and let him hear the cry in
the morning, and the shouting at noonetyde.

And why Jeremy? and why? because he slew me not from the womb, says he, or
that my mother might have bin my grave, and her womb to be always great with
me.

Behold, a man even drunk with sorrow; and thus he reeles, and thus he
staggers, yet; an holy Prophet, a man sanctified from the womb.

Take but one example more, and in a word; let Ezechiel be the man prophesying
at the same time, and perplexed with the like vexations in his calling.

He was most unwilling to go amongst them of the captivity, howbeit, when
needs he must, in this manner does he express it.

The spirit lifted me up and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the
heat of my spirit or hot anger, but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me,
Chapter 3.

What now then shall we say to these things? since such sturdy oaks, Jonah,
Jeremy, Job, Eliah, Moses, by the violent blasts of temptations are laid flat
upon the ground, what shall we say to these things?

1. First, as before I said, again I say, let him that thinks he stands,
take heed least he fall.

If it were so, that we could command the winds from blowing, or beat down
the foming sea: if we could restrain the bottles of heaven or repeal the
crackes of thunder, then happily we might square out the limits and appoint the
measure of our most wished peacefulnesse, and drink down pleasures as Leuia
than the river Jordan.

But when I hear the groans of dying men, do see the gaspings (as it were)
of many after breath, when I hear the horrible rage and rushing of the
billows, mighty flawes renting down the tackling.

When strong men fall down wounded the valiant ones cry bitterly, and the
shield of the mighty be broken, alas for me then think I; how shall I be
able to stand in the day of battle?

David was not well advised when he said in his posterity, I shall never be
moved; thou Lord of thy favor had made my hill so strong. What follows
upon the same? thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

The place is remarkable concerning Hezekiah in the history of the Kings of
Judah, where it is said that in such a business, the Lord left him to try him,
that he might know all that was in his heart.

Alas; what virtue is in us, and what power, to vanquish evil, is all from
heaven, whose influence if it descend not into our frail souls, we presently
send forth cries as from the depth of hell.

Adam left unto himself in Paradise fell, so did Hezekiah, so did Solomon the
most glorious King that ever swayed a scepter.

And hence proceed even all those bitter words of the holiest Saints that ever
lived, to show that their holiness was not inherent properly in their own
persons, for which cause the most sanctified have ever retained the most sober
and humble conceits, in themselves, of themselves.

And therefore away with all proud and swelling thoughts of the flesh; and
again, I say let him that thus thinks he stands, take heed, least he fall.

Secondly. So again in the second place to comfort weak ones in their
manifold slippes and falls, this doctrine may not unfitly be applied.

For why? I am not a Moses, I am not an Eliah, a Job, a Jonah, or a Jeremy; a
meaner portion of grace shall content me: Howbeit, by the grace of God I am
that I am, and without the grace of God assisting, the perfectest that ever
were among the sons of men (Christ only excepted) had not power of themselves
one hour to subsist.

In this then let me cheer up my heart, that if I fall into drunkenness I
have a Noah, to raise me when I am truly grieved; if into adultery I have a
David to support me, when my heart is truly affected with his penitential
Psalm; if into pride of heart, I have an Hezekiah to restore me when the same
heart is with godly sorrow truly humbled.

If I fall into plain impaciencie, murmr and repining, I have a Moses, a
Job, a Jeremy, a Jonah to direct me, when unto a more sober and settled spirit
with them I am returned.

Let this use be made of the Saints faylings to comfort us in our infirmities,
not to animate us in any wilful impieties. Children they are not of God, but
of Belial who do this latter.

Thirdly, In the third place, since it is a Prophet that here complains, and
we have observed the like complaints of sundry the Prophets in the examination
of this doctrine more then of any other kinds and professions of men whatsoever.

Let the Prophets and Ministers of God from hence learn somewhat to their
instruction, at leastwise a right judgment of the calling and business they
take in hand.

Qui desiderat Episcopatum, etc. says the Apostle, he that desires the office
of Bishop or of some inferior Pastor and Teacher in the Church, he desires a
good work.

But now work has painfulnesse, and this by few, I am sure, is desired; and
if the calling may be honorable, yet sure, it is not easefull; Cursed is that
man, especially in this high and holy function, that divides what God has
joined together, honor and labor, or that joins what God has separated,
ease and honor.

The Angels of God the higher in nature, the more quick and diligent are they
in their service to God and to his Church, and the Prophets of God are called
Angels, and the Angels Ministers, and fellow servants with them.

He that shall with Atlas vnder-proppe the heavens, or with David (who was a
Prophet) bear up the pillars of the earth, no marveile if he groan sometimes.

And think not, that it was not for nothing, that Jonah here was thus besides
himself; and so judge of the former complaints of those good Prophets
mentioned, that they did proceed from the grievous pressures and weight of
those burdens, which in the weighty charge of their callings they have
sustained.

The names wherewith I find the calling named, may partly instruct us herein.

Seers are they called, and o how long will thou cause me to behold or see
grievance, says one of them? Hab. 1.

Shepherds they are called, and well may say with Jacob, Thus was it with me
in the day time, the heat consumed me, and the frost by night, and my sleep
departed from mine eyes, Genesis 31.

Are they not also called Watchmen? and to them the voice calls, Watchman
what of the night? Watchman what of the night? A Lion my Lord, a Lion; the
roaring Lion that goes about seeking whom he may devour; Watch ye, stand ye
fast, quit your selves like men: I stand, I stand continually upon the
Watchtower says the Prophet Isaiah, in the day time, and I am set in my Ward
whole nights: and you know to what end, to foresee dangers.

Lastly, they are called Fishers, Matthew. 4. and here they must resolve to
grapple with many an hideous storm. If Peter and Andrew will follow Christ,
they shall catch souls; but withal must look to find a sea of trouble of
it, when once they have launched out into the deep.

O that this were considered of at Naioth in Ramah, and in the Schools of the
Prophets!

The Lacedaemonians had their Palastram or place of exercise for the youth,
that afterward they might make choice of tried soldiers against the times of
needful war.

What are those houses before named in the right intendment, but improovements
unto noble fortitude? that with the Priests of God, who sounded the trumpets of
old, the Priests of these days may prove incouragers to the Lords people, in
the Lords battles against sin and wickedness.

Diogenes upon a time coming into the tent of Philip King of Macedon, was asked
by him, if he came as a spy? yea quoth he, for I come to spy out thy folly
and madness, who being not constrained by any necessity; do set as it were
upon the dicing board both thy life and kingdom.

Are not we according to the best acception, in as high honor as ever was the
Macedonian Philip? does not the neglect of our office draw with it as great
danger as his folly?

How is it then that we, who should be leaders to the Lords people have
clothed our selves with the fashions and humors of the times? in stead of the
complete Armor commended by Saint Paul to the Ephesians, have put on the
sword of infidelity, the girdle of licentiousness, the breastplate of
unrighteousness, the shield of infidelity?

Whooredome and wine, and new wine, take away the heart, was the complaint of
old.

We have not lessoned but added to the account, chambering and wantonness,
Tobacco too and drunkenness are the sins of these days, and which is worst of
all (I would not speak it) the Prophets do eat up the sins of the people.

O that my head were a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night
for the sins of the Prophets?

For the leaders of my people cause them to err, says the Lord, leading them
into blind paths and crooked ways, and they shall stumble and fall together,
and none shall raise them up, says the Lord.

The case indeed must needs prove desperate, when they who should support do
stand in need of supportation, and they who should be raisers unto others, are
themselves down.

Awake for shame, oh ye of the stock and stem of Levi, and let Aarons rod
flourish in your hands, or else resolve to burn eternally: Break forth into
thunder, o ye sons of thunder, and let the trumpet yet sound louder.

Are not we the men who are now, even now to prepare a people against our
Masters second coming? and is the spirit of Eliah think you sufficient for
us? now is the time to be zealous, or never, or never.

O let the people of God, pray for the Priests of God, O let the Priests of God
whose office calls for more zeal now then did the former days, look well
into their office (if not so far as to distaste the same with Jonah) yet to
have a more considerate regard, and to be more sensible of so sacred and
Angelical a function, and not to prepare thereto (as the most do) with mirth
and Ioviality.

Neither is my speech wholly to these, a word of exhortation would not do
amiss to the Prophets of God in earnest, who having in sincerity undertaken
the calling, do find truly the burden of it.

Let them not faint nor be discouraged, an end shall be, and their expectation
shall not perish for ever, though in the mean time they bear the heat and
burden of the day, and the harvest be great, and Laborers few.

Let them take courage and grow yet bolder, to oppose against the face of all
such who cast dirt and dishonor into the profession.

Let them not grow impatient with Jonah, though with him tossed by sea and
land; the time is at hand wherein Michael our Archangel shall descend, causing
them who have slept in the graves to awake, and they who have converted souls
shall shine as the Stars in glory; but they who have subverted souls shall
be turned into the darkness of Gehenna.

Thus far have I been bold with my brethren of the same profession. I would
be loath so to determine my application (since the case of Jonah in the
justification of his anger against God, is not particular only to him, but may
well be applied as more general and common.)

Fourthly, Give me leave in the fourth place therefore to examine his words in
a larger sense, whether ever, either thee, or I, or any of us have not been in
the excess of this passion so far mis-carryed that in our persons this
speech of Jonah be not too truly verified, I do well to be angry against the
Lord.

It is to be wished, that we were all in grace so well confirmed, that Saint
James doctrine were well grounded in us; my brethren, count it all joy when ye
fall into diverse temptations.

But (as it is with us) the exhortation of Saint Peter is not needless:
Beloved think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some new thing
were happened to you.

For judgment must begin at the house of God; and hereat the righteous full
oft-times prove dismayed.

Whether it be his own sins the weight whereof press heavy, and he cries,
yea roares and cannot be heard.

Whether it be the iniquities of the times, as a man borne down with a violent
stream; whether oppression in judgment and violent perverting of justice,
able to make a wise man mad.

Whether the scourge of tongues and malediction of sinners, whether the secure
estate of such as fear not God, and the flourishing of scorns, a shrewd
temptation, whether his own neglected innocence or meekness trampled under,
by the feet of the wealthy.

Whether dereliction of friends, loss in estate, poverty, sickness, or what
other disease of the time.

Or lastly, Jonah his plague to sustain continual molestation in his calling,
and to be tossed up and down.

I doubt not but I have touched the grievances of many one, who hears me this
day: Hence come those dolorous pangs, fearful distempers, despairing cries,
those fighes, those groans, that beating of the breast, that stamping with the
foot, Ezekiels signs of mourning.

In brief, that cursing of the day of our nativities, and why were we borne
to such hard conditions? O that the grave had been my womb, or the womb
always great with me. Non est dolor, sicut dolor meus, No man ever so
plagued, so troubled, so crossed as I am, and I see no reason, no cause for all
this, nor end of all my sufferings.

This to be the case of every of us, who can deny sometime or other? and all
this heat to be discharged, directly or indirectly against the face of God?

The Lord does send us troubles many times to see how we will bear his yoke:
but we are like a young Heifer or Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, how often
have we been offended with our state, our calling or condition?

Behold Israel after the flesh; why came we into the wilderness say they? why
here is no water to drink, why dyed we not in Egypt? here is no bread to eat,
no clothes to put on, and now must we live upon the bread of providence only
say we?

We know God can provide such things as are needful in this life for his
children, but why does he not?

He has promised that no good thing shall be wanting to such as fear before
him, and seek the righteousness of his kingdom.

But we see the contrary full often, wherefore is Lazarus laid at the rich
man's door to be releeved with his crummes? and Job the richest man in the
East, and one that fears God too become poor even to a Proverb?

Why is Naboth most unjustly stoned and his field given away to an other? why
is Joseph a good man cast into prison? and Jeremy an holy Prophet into the
dungeon, and Daniel into the Lions den?

Are these things done in a well ordered Commonwealth? now God seems to take
less care in the behalf of his people, then an indifferent King for his
subjects.

Sure, oppression makes a wise man mad, says Solomon, and is not here just
cause of anger or else of Atheism?

For is there not a God judging the world? or if there be, why are not matters
ordered in better fashion then as we see?

Cast we now our eyes upon the wealthy ones of this world, and such who care
not for God; their eyes stare out with fatnes, and they do even what they list
says David, their Tabernacles are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them says Job, their Bull gendreth and fails not, their Cow calveth and
casts not her Calfe, they send forth their little ones like a flock, and
their children dance, they take the timbrell and harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the Organe.

This made David, to have been almost of the same mind, as they, and to have
cast in his lot amongst them. This very consideration made Job astonished very
much.

And Jeremy could not forbear, but he says, Righteous art thou O Lord when I
plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments. Wherefore does
the way of the wicked prosper, wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously?

Thou have planted them, yea they have taken root: they grow, they bring forth
fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.

Shall I proceed yet farther (to say nothing of the common broils, which at
this day, eat into the bowels of Christendom, the adversaries of Zion
prevailing and setting up their banners for tokens.)

How infinite might I be to reckon up particulars wherein each man finds
himself aggrieved? for from him that wears the purple and the crown, to him
that is clothed with a linen frocke, tribulation and distress and anguish is
upon all the sons of Adam says the son of Syrach.

Why was I borne blind says one, and I borne deaf, and I borne lame says a
second and a third, to be a creeple, a scorn and derision to the world?

No man content with his state, but why was it so with me? why is it not
otherwise with me? a company of wrangling pots are we thus to reason with the
great Potter, thus to cavil with our Maker, why have thou made me thus? I
like this fashion better then this, and why have thou not made me so? and do
we not oftentimes break in the marring while we seek to mend Gods making?

O but the times are very badde, wherein we live, who can be patient to
consider well on it?

We live in dogged days the last and worst of times, we seek peace, but
cannot obtain it: O thou false tongue, what reward shall be given or done unto
thee thou false tongue? Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and
among the tents of Kedar? O that I had the wings of a Dove? I would fly away,
I would be gone. I said I would make have to escape, because of the storms,
wind and tempest, but because I cannot, therefore is my soul vexed within me,
and my heart within me is desolate.

Now besides and beyond all this, what is our hope, what is our consolation?

The Lord has promised to bring us unto an everlasting rest, an heavenly
Canaan, but how shall we do if he slay us before we get thither? the sea is
before us, the enemy behind us with manifold discouraging impediments in this
our journey, Ogge the king of Basan, the devil with his infernal legions, and
gates and bars of brass to keep us out.

Why does he lead us about by the wilderness, a long tedious and dangerous
journey, since there is a far more ready way from Kadesh Barnea, unto the
confines of Canaan the land of promise.

Thus he works by contraries still. Why could not the Lord take us presently
unto his rest without all this ado, thinks flesh and blood? unless he send
us into the sea again, where already we have hardly escaped drowning.

The billows, o the roaring billows! the waters of the sea rage horribly, and
we are horribly afraid, save Master, or we perish.

Thus he works by contraries, we have here no continuing City, but seek one
to come; we look for walls and bulwarks, but here are exposed to all kinds
of injurious sufferings.

We look for joy, but here is more cause of grief; we look for peace, but
here is pain; we look for rest, but here is none, for crowns and garlands,
but behold, for the present, thorns and tribulations.

In a word, hereafter we look for an incorruptible body, a glorious body, a
shining body; in the mean time we languish, we pine, we fret, we grieve, we
consume, we dye, rotte in the grave, come to nothing; where is now our hope,
where is now our consolation?

What? thinks carnal reason, is this the way to light a candle, to put it
out? is this way to attain life, through death? to climb heaven by descending
first into hell? Jonah, why art thou angry? is there not cause? even of very
deep anger?

For lay now all these things, or take but half into consideration, has not
the valiantest hearted Christian in these regards, cause to be offended, to
prove impatient, and say with Jonah, yea, I do well to be angry?

So long as we be at rest, and not tried by temptations, there is no great
need of patience, no great discovery of impatience, until we be emptied from
vessel to vessel, we settle upon our lees.

But empty the vessel, shake the glass, the lees or dregs which before were
settled at the bottom do now in great plenty show themselves.

So when we are shaken by temptations, O then how great infidelity, how
little faith, how much intemperancie, how little true zeal, how much anger,
impatience and repining is discovered which before lay hidden in the bottom of
our deceitful hearts?

For conclusion then of the doctrine, ask we the question, so many as have
felt the power of religion, this question of our own souls, whether ever in
this sense we have been angry with God, (a proud conceit) yea I say again,
whether ever in this sense we have been angry with God or no.

Jonah did not in plain terms express so much, until the Lord, with whom
is no dissembling, did urge and wring it from him.

That whereby we are given to conjecture his disposition before the Lord spoke,
is in the words preceding, where it is said, that Jonah fainted and wished in
himself to dye, and said it is better for me to dye then to live.

So that if at any time we faint and grow weary in the cause of Religion, or
otherwise desire and wish within our selves to be dissolved only in regard of
our present miseries, which we endure whatsoever they be, then take heed we
fall not into the same guiltiness with Jonah here.

Yea indeed we are already fallen too far. For even these secret wishes of
the soul, though not expressed outwardly, they have a kind of language which
God understands well enough, and we are conscious to our selves at the same
time against God, of a certain concealed anger: wherein whether we do well
or ill, we are for the present most unfit Judges, condemning the Lord for the
most part of injustice or wrong to our persons and prayers, in our most secret
imaginations.

Yea we are angry with that friend (though we say not so much) in whom we
have reposed any trust, if he have in any point dealt unkindly with us, if he
have broken promise, deceived us, separated from our distress, much more if
he have wrought against us, we take it then most hainously: so when God, to
our seeming, does forget our misery and troubles, to hide his face, and be
regardlesse of us, though we have sought him with many tears.

When troubles daily do arise, and of long continuance, yea and God himself
our only friend does seem to arm himself against us, to make us as a mark
or Butte for his arrows to aim at, (as Job in his passion thought).

Should God then (while the violence of the inward distemper lasts) in the
same manner ask the question as to Jonah, we would then go near hand to
answer in the same manner as he, yea I do well to be angry, angry even to
death. And so I descend unto the third or last specialty in Ionahs answer.

3. His aggrauation.
I do well to be angry even unto death.

Here Jonah exceedes the just measure of the question formerly considered.

Indeed in no part of his answer he keeps good correspondency with the Lord;
for though his speech be answerable to the parts of the demand, yet in no sort
is it agreeable with the will of the Demander.

But here in this clause he shows himself irregular not only to Gods pleasure
or will, but also to the form of the words from the Lord proposed.

For why else, as to the other parts of the demand (as when the Lord asks if
he be angry, he says, yea I am angry: Do thou well to be angry? I do well
to be angry) so does he not answer to the last part accordingly? Do thou
well to be angry for the Gourd, I do well to be angry for the Gourd?

Which plainly shows (as before is noted) that there were other far greater
causes then the Gourd, which forced these words from him, viz. whereas he
says, I do well to be angry, even unto death.

However, it is a most intemperate speech; and for the meaning thereof,
respecting either the intention or effect of Ionah's anger.

If we expound it of the intention, it then imports thus much, that Jonah was
exceeding angry, so angry that he was full big with anger, so big that he
was ready to break with anger; And if so, then fix this Epitaph upon his
grave stone.

Here lies the man, who did both raging Sea and Whale disdain:
His anger, worse then Sea or Whale, his anger has him slain.
And why, yea why, should not that anger which has destroyed many, in justice
turn the point sometimes upon that breast which bred it?

Truly, the anger of Jonah in this place conceived, yea expressed against the
Almighty, must needs be very great.

For we are not angry with our superiors, but for causes extraordinary,
suppressing commonly those motions provoking to this passion toward them,
which toward inferiors is presently expressed.

For example; that is tolerable in an equal, which is not to be borne with in
a servant; that in a Lord, which not in a Knight; that in a Prince, which not
in a Lord; that in a King, which not in a Prince; and lastly, that is to be
borne with patience from God Almighty, which is not to be brooked from any
mortal creature besides.

O then, when the heat of our anger ascends thus high as to be angry not
with Kings and Princes, and Potentates of the earth, but with the God of
heaven, King of kings, and Lord over all lords; this is a fire that eats into
the bones consuming the marrow and the moisture, and must we not either burn
in our own cinders, or else daring to break out, be incountred and consumed
with that all devouring fire, that flame of Gods displeasure, of his
unquenchable anger?

Admire and wonder, that Jonah is angry with the great God, exceeding angry
with the most puissant Lord, he tells this God and Lord so to his face; yet is
not consumed; admire and wonder.

But I do rather understand it for the effect of Ionah's anger, the effect
conceived in a manner and ready for the birth, yet strangled in the womb,
which had it been brought forth, would unto Jonah have brought most certain
death.

In the old Law, he that cursed father or mother was to be put to death, much
more he that should curse the Father of spirits, and great Creator of mankind;
this was expressly charged with present death, Levit. 24.

Therefore we read, Naboth has cursed God and the King, let him be stoned;
therefore did Jobs wife tempt her husband to this sin; Curse God and dye
says she.

This I conceive to be Ionah's case. He is come almost to the actual sin of
blasphemy against the second Person in the Trinity, the which in thought he
has committed already.

For he says, he has just cause to be angry, and if he do well to be angry,
then sure, God has done him great wrong, and if so, why should he not hear of
it? yea though I dye for it, I will speak my mind says Jonah; For I do well
to be angry.

We may supply the fuller meaning of Ionah's mind, partly out of Job, and
partly out of Jeremy, men subject to the same passions, and wrestling with the
same assaults as here.

They were both carried away with this mis-conceit, that God did use his power
as a law, exercising herein, little better then a Tyrannical government, and
therefore says Job in one place, is it good for thee that thou should
oppress, etc? and Jeremy says plainly, that the Lord by his great might or
strength did overbeare him, as is to be seen in the place before cited.

Thus thinks Jonah, and to this effect, he reasons in his over-cast
imaginations.

My soul is even full of anxietie, and I want utterance of my complaint. Thy
hand is over powerful for me, thy counsels are unsearchable, I know not what
to say to it, this is the sum; I am weary of my life, for I see no fruit, no
end of all my vexing labors.

O yet, that God would grant me this request (before I open my lips against
the Holy one, and reproach my Maker, and by man's law deserve to be stoned) that
he would cut me off and destroy me, or hide me in the grave. For sure, I
have most just cause to be offended, yea sure, I do well to be angry, angry
even to death, death to me is better far then life.

I have touched (I suppose) upon the highest string of Saints impatiencie,
whereunto the perfectest of men, during yet their mortal condition, are most
subject; and beyond which is no remission, but to fall into that sin
unpardonable, which holds no concord with Gods mercy.

Let us now but make a cord to draw Jonah out of the pit, and preserve all
Ionasses from sinking in this mire and mudde, and I will make the uses and
general conclusion of the whole matter, specially this second general part of
Ionah's answer, and herein, the last specially in this general; the point yet
in hand, Ionah's anger unto death.

The floods are risen, O God, the floods are risen might Jonah well here say,
and all else brought unto the same brinke of despair or desperate fury with
Jonah here; O God, the floods are risen, the floods O God have lift up the
waves.

And this not so much in regard of the tide of ungodliness flowing from without
as the violent streams of enraged anger from within: Save me, O God, for the
waters are come in even into my soul.

These, these are the waters which drown the soul, to be feared more then
those waters which swallow up the bodies of men.

Now, two things there be which support Jonah, and the one implies the other:
one thing which the Lord does overpasse, the other which he does work, the
one proceeding from his Mercy, the other from his Love.

First, His Mercy it is which does cover Ionah's imperfections, which at this
time were risen to a very great height. For how if the Lord should have entered
contention with thee Jonah? and set his anger against thine? what would have
become of thee?

The like may we say to Job, to Jeremy; what Job? does the Lord oppress? Is
it without reason, the Lords dealing so, and so with thee Jeremy? and do
thou well indeed to be angry Jonah? dare we thus to challenge the Holy one
of Israel?

O no; Take Jonah in his right temper, and he is of another mind, so is Job,
so is Jeremy: I said I will no more make mention of thy name within my lips
said Jeremy, in his heat he spoke it, but a contrary stronger heat expelled
that by and by, thy word was a fire shut up within my bones, and I was weary
with forbearing immediately after says he.

So Job, Chap. 40. once have I spoken, yea twice, but I will say no more, I
abhor my self in dust and ashes.

But what marvel, if while the fit lasts, the yet unmortified flesh take
on? this being the beast which is to be sacrificed, until we be quite dead
unto our own natural desires, reason and perverse judgment.

This is that which the Lord in mercy passes over, putting a difference here
between Jonah and his anger, and between the sins of his children and his
graces in them.

So the words here according to the original, are not to be read, Do thou
well to be angry? but thus, is it well that anger is with thee? according to
the saying of the Apostle; It is not I that sin, but sin that dwells in
me. This, as one day to be cast out and quite abolished from our natures, the
Lord does pass by, for the present accepting our persons, not regarding the
works of our own hands, but as we are his workmanship in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, And this is the second thing that preserves and vpholdeth Jonah,
and with Jonah all Gods Elect in the most bitter conflicts from sinking into
the pit and final perishing, namely, the hand and power of grace, which has
stated them in the covenant of Gods free Election, and does sustain them in
the same condition to their lives ends.

For first, there is semen immanens, an abiding seed as John calls it,
whereof whosoever be quickened, never totally lose the life thereof, but the
virtue thereof at all times remains, though not so evidently at all times
discerned: even as the Stars in a dark night, are not seen to the eye; yet
both the eye retains the power of seeing, and the Stars also are visible in
themselves and abide fixed in the firmament, which the succession of an other
night plainly does discover.

So in this case again, and in this particular of anger, a Christian is
compared to a Philosopher in a tempest at the Sea. While there is tumultus
multus and clamor magnus, Much tumult and clamor, the Philosopher, though he
be grounded in the Principles of his Art, at that time has no ability of
manifestation, neither himself being at all disposed, nor his hearers capable
of instructions; so while the fury and strength of temptation lasts, the
Christian is not his own man in appearance: wait then a while longer, the
tempest will be over, the Stars shine clear, and the eye of faith, shall be
comforted with the light of Gods countenance.

Now as there is evermore an habit of grace, and seed of God remaining in the
soul of every true servant of God and faithful member of Christ Jesus, and
ever shall remain in spite of all the malice of Satan, and the gates of hell,
and our own corruptions too, and the rage of wicked men; so (for the operation
of the same) it is at all times stirring, the power thereof, being never wholly
buried, even in the greatest agony of the souls vexation, there is a
resistance unto evil, and a secret hand of grace running along with our
impotent and tumultuous passions, keeping those waving storms of the soul
within some compass, which else would swell above the banks, to the fearful
inundation of the souls tranquillity.

And therefore is it (howsoever may arise rebelling commotions from within) yet
never shall we find that they have in direct terms of blasphemy broken out
contrary to divine light, inkindled in their breasts, in despite against the
Holy Redeemer; which too often falls out in Cast-awaies.

Consider the example before mentioned, whether Moses, or Eliah, or Job, or
Jeremy. It is true they were exceedingly and beyond measure transported to wish
for death: and to curse the day of their nativity does argue a great distemper
of spirit; but it is but a distemper, and does not forbid but they might (as
soon after they were) be brought to a more sober mood, and better mind.

Eliah wished to dye, so Moses, so Jonah here, wishes directly against
themselves, howsoever their anger, or a great part thereof might be against the
Lord.

Job and Jeremy they cursed, but whom? the Lord? no, they durst not, they could
not, therefore it breaks out another way, and is discharged upon the day, the
night wherein they were conceived and borne, the pappes that suckled, knees
that dandled them, the man that brought tidings; they shot at random bitter
words, yet none fly upward against their Maker, this caution still has been
remembered; and the secret power that has curbed those swelling motions has at
no time been wanting to them.

Two cases there be wherein I observe the holiest of Saints living, to be
injurious in the highest measure against their own felicity, but never
directly against God: the one is in extremity of their own sufferings, which
has now been handled, the other an excess of their zeal to Gods glory. Thus
Moses wished to be wiped out of the book of life, rather then that people
should have been consumed, to whom the Lord had made promise of entering Canaan.

What would the nations have said, thought he? either that the God of Israel
was unjust of his word, or unable of power to bring and plant, that people in
the land of the possession: O let me never see good day says Moses, rather
then God should suffer this dishonor. With the same affectionate zeal was
Paul moved partly to his contrymen, the Jews of the same flesh with him,
chiefly in regard of Gods honor, who had sworn and bound himself in an
everlasting covenant to Abraham and his seed for ever, that rather then that
people should absolutely be cast off and forsaken, he himself might become
Anathema and accursed for ever.

Do you see by these examples, how jealous of Gods glory the Saints have
been; though no man's zeal can be too great, to Godward, yet in the ardour
thereof working with their dim faith, to have discovered manifest impotency?

The same effect, well nigh (to return to the present purpose) after a
contrary manner of working in the violence of their own extremities most
commonly has been produced.

There can no such causes happen, wherein a man with Jonah ought to wish for
death, the time by God appointed yet not come. Jonah, truly herein did
transgress, so did Moses, and Eliah too.

Yea, but to be angry with God in express terms, or to fall into this
hopeless exigent of cursing, can it any ways be excused, or made tolerable in
the sight of God or course of sanctity?

What then shall we say for Job and Jeremy, or yet for Jonah the occasion of
this whole dispute?

Yea there is none so mad (I do suppose) who will offer the excuse or
purgation of Jonah in this his mad teasty combat and quarrel against the
Lord his Maker, yet in this, will I exempt Jonah from the everlasting curse, in
that he fell not into express terms of cursing.

For the other two, O what just, what holy men! Job I mean and the other good
Jeremy, whether went ye down? down unto the sides of the pit? or how fell ye
down? down into the bottom of the gulf?

For I am astonished with Jobs three friends, when I behold his misery, and I
cannot but judge him, as one shut up in the pit, when I hear his words.

How come thou out of the deep O Job? who led thee out of darkness into
light o Jeremy? can a man live again being once dead? even so are the fruits
of your hopes, whose blasted blossoms do again flourish, and your broken
branches do again shoot out.

O, the pit (I now well perceive, had not wholly shut her mouth upon you, nor
was the life of your hopes utterly lost, I must in this recall my self) for
then (as the fire does resist the water, the water the fire, as the devil is
an enemy to our salvation, and heaven is opposite to hell) so they whom the
God of heaven does cast out as his adversaries, and they themselves do so
judge of themselves to be perpetually rejected and abhorred of their Maker, the
estate of these men will you know? or their condition, what it is?

They are no longer men, but have put on the shapes of devils; for the image is
quite changed from purity and holiness which was in the creation, thus has
God lost them, and they have lost their part in God, God is now contrary to
them, and they to God; as heat is to cold, as light is to darkness, life to
death, fire to water.

Thus God hates them, thus they hate God, thus God fights against them, they
fight against God, Michael and his Saints and Angels, against the Devil his
members and angels; and the enmity it is immortal and never to be reconciled.

They began first to persecute God in his members, God in his turn powers the
vial of his wrath upon their heads, and they blaspheme.

God plagues them, they curse God, and cursing are plagued, and plagued do
curse continualy; this is the state of the damned in hell, and this is all
their spite against heaven.

These are sunk down irrecoverably into the pit, the pit of fire and
brimstone has shut her mouth upon them, they are closed up in the pit for ever
and ever.

But who will affirm, who dare to avouch, that thus it was with Job, or his
companyon Jeremy, or that to any of Gods Saints truly quickened by his grace in
any of these measures it has happened or can thus happen?

No, For they never are at direct enmity with God, howbeit they may be brought
to this point, through the force of continued grievances, to be confounded at
Gods judgments, to stagger in their minds, and to incline to this suggestion,
that it had been better for them (whatever God may work out of it, for his
unsearchable ends) yet for them and their parts, it had been better not to
have been borne at all, then to be ordained to such present wretchedness;
thereupon have they been moved to curse not God, but their day, the night,
the light and Stars (as before you have heard) any thing save only God, whose
counsels they admire, though his judgments prove distasteful.

The matter will prove yet more clear, if we consider and compare, but a
little the contrary disposition of such, whom God has given over to this
fearful sin.

First, These do resist that light which for the present does convince their
judgments; it fares with the judgments of the Saints for the time, as with
troubled waters, neither pleasant to drink, nor apt to render the true form
or proportion of any object thereunto presented, their imaginations are
distempered, and their minds like the Sun with a cloud of error overcast.

Secondly, the outrage is discharged directly in the face of God, they disgorge
blasphemies against heaven, as Julian the Apostate threw his blood into the
air against Christ; or the Thracians, who shot their arrows up to heaven in
thunder and lightning, but the Saints divert the bent of their fury another way.

Again, those do it out of a despite and malice to the spirit of grace, in
these it proceeds from an impotency or infirmity of their natures.

Lastly, the Saints do evermore end with fairer lightnings, howsoever it may
go with them for the present, and they hang their harpes upon the willow
trees, they shall not always live in Babylon, they shall return to Sion, and
their mouth shall be filled with laughter, and their tongues with Praise, in
the mean time subject to manifold alterations, as is the state of all things
in this world besides.

Now it shines, anon it is overcast and clouded, now it is night, and now it is
day, the seasons of the year do alter, there is Summer and Winter, Spring
time and Autumn, so there is fair Weather, and foul Weather in the heart of
a Christian.

For now it is health and then it is sickness, now it is prosperity and then
adversity, now he sings and then he sighs, praise the Lord, sing unto the
Lord faith Jeremy, cursed be the day wherein I was borne, immediately after
says the same Jeremy, Jonah is exceeding glad for the gourd, for one night,
and is very weary of his life, the next morning.

But consider the upright, and mark the end of the just man says David; for
sure the end of such a man is peace at the last.

Even as you may find many complaints, and bitter cries mixed in the book of
Psalms, what is the conclusion, or how end the last Psalms of that book?
their beginning commonly and ending is this, praise the Lord, praise ye the
name of the Lord.

But what is the end of sinners more specially of such sinners? wounds and
death, and bloodshed, knives and rackes and halters, snares, fire and
brimstone, storm and tempest, horrors and terrors, death and damnation.

For these are they that blaspheme God, and really curse his holy name, upon
these he powers the vials of his wrath, and they gnaw their tongues, and
blaspheme and repent not.

There is a word clothed about with death says Syrach, but it is not found in
the habitations of Jacob, there is a sin unto death says Saint John, I say
not that ye should pray for it says he, but this he says, we know that every
one that is borne of God sins not, that sin, but he that is begotten of
God, keeps himself pure, and that wicked one touches him not, albeit with
Jonah he may be angry, albeit in the strength of his malady, he may curse
life, and wish death, yea never to fall into that sin of death.

Thus have we performed a work of love, to draw Jonah out of the ditch, and
have preserved all Ionasses from the like danger of sinking.

What remains but the conclusion only? and it shall be briefly folded up in
a few conclusions or general uses, deduced from this which has been said.

1. And the First shall be a point of exhortation, and this to the Saints of
God, molested in this their mortal condition with variety of temptations, and
of passions, that they may learn the way to peace, and when they find by the
pulse of their affections, a strong inclination to Ionah's disease, they may
use these remedies to allay the fury, and settle the tranquillity of their
own souls.

First, let them consider against whom they do oppose in their anger, is it
not against the great and mighrie God? The Thistle in Lebanon, sent to the
Cedar in Lebanon, saying, give thy daughter to my son to wife, or take thou
my daughter to thy son to wife, and there passed by a wild beast that was in
Lebanon, and trod down the Thistle: Thus said Joash King of Israel to Amaziah
King of Judah, when he sent this message, let us look one another in the face,
and this is the least of a thousand that I can say, when we dare provoke the
God of heaven to his face.

Can we throw down mountains by our might, or dry up the sea at our rebuke?
Can the Toade (as the Fable has it) equal the Elephant in bigness, though
she swell, and swell, and swell again, and burst in swelling?

O then let us remember that arrows shot up into the air, return upon the
head of the shooters, and pierce downwards.

Again, consider thine own deserving, for sure thou have good cause to be
angry with God and why? thou have from time to time so well deserved at his
hands.

It is the mercy of the Lord that we are not all consumed says Jeremy, and
truly we are less then the least of all his mercies, therefore the use is
sovereign which the same Prophet makes, Lament. 3. Wherefore does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again to the Lord; Let us lift up our heart with our
hands, unto God in the heavens, etc.

Thirdly, (to pass from this) judge not of Gods favor to thee, or his
righteous proceedings in thy cause or person, from the sense of thy present
sufferings, but from the end and issue which commonly God makes of his Saints
afflictions: and therefore whereas now thou art under, and thy feet stick
fast in mire and clay, pray unto God with David, that he would advance thy
head, and set thee upon the rock which is higher then thou; so shall thou be
able to look about thee round, and with comfort behold the hills, and dales,
spacious forests and groves, thou shall then (with correction of thy passed
folly) perceive plainly the causes, the reasons, the end, issue of Gods wise
and gracious proceeding with thee, and perceiving shall praise and magnify his
name for it.

The Warre-like Soldier, while the heat of the battle lasteh, hears and
sees nothing but confused noise and garments rolled in blood, the pransing of
strong horses, the rattling spears, Bellonaes rage with the clashing arms, and
clanging trumpe, does astonne his sense for the present, and he has no
leisure so long, to think of the country of Peace, the Ensigns of Honor,
the Garlands of Victory. Victorious when he does return from the spoil of his
enemies, then he rides in the Chariot of Triumph; Trophies are erected, he does
with joy recount his dangers passed, glory in his wounds received, when all
tongurs do sound his praises: Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten
thousand.

Even so when the Warre-fare appointed for us, is accomplished, we shall stand
upon Mount Sion, Victorious, beholding the Egyptians dead upon the shoore, and
shall sing the song of Moses, the Horse and his ryder are thrown into the Sea;
Principalities, and Powers are vanquished and subdued, and we shall reign for
evermore.

Secondly, My second use shall be also of exhortation, but this to the
troublers of Sions peace, and Edoms children who insult upon her desolations.

It is necessary says our Savior, that offenses come, but woe be to them who
are the causers, and grieve the souls of Gods children, for they do not
always labor of their own inward griefs, and private distresses of their
own souls from within, Eliah flies from the face of Iezabel, and grows weary
of his life, woe be to Iezabel therefore, who is the cause of it.

In the mean time the Saints groan and cry out for the wrongs done unto them,
and grow impatient of spirit, because the Lord does not work the deliverance,
shall we say (howsoever their impatiencie is not to be excused) that the world
who has procured their unrest, shall escape unpunished? or that the souls
shall not be heard, who to this day cry from under the Altar, how long o Lord,
holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth?

Remember the parable of the widow, and unjust Judge, avenge me of mine
adversary says she, avenge me of mine adversary, and still she cries,
avenge me of mine adversary, he would not for the justness of her cause hear
her, but her importunity prevailed.

What Is the use our Savior makes thereof? the answer arises by a gradation,
shall not God much more Judge and revenge, who is a just Judge, and in a most
just and rightful cause, and that in the behalf of his children, his children
which do not only call, but cry, and cry, day and night? shall not God avenge
his own elect, says he, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear
long with them? As who would say, there is no sense nor reason to the contrary,
and therefore he says plainly, I tell you, he will avenge them speedily, Luke
18.

Thirdly, In the third place; Let us learn to be advised of this one thing,
how we spend our judgments upon any whom we yet see laboring under the
cross; least prooving uncharitable in our censure, it prove to be our turn
next to undergo the same trials, under which we see our ^^other with some
bitterness of spirit wrestling for the present.

Alas, If we judge only from the outward behavior and external effects,
which for the present affect our senses, Jonah then is already condemned by our
doom, and how hardly must it go with all those famous Worthies before named?

Rather, Let us enter into this account with our selves, and say, good God, if
Jonah endued with a far greater measure of holiness then poor I, did prove
thus fretfull and impatient under the hand of God, how less able should I have
been to have borne but half the burden he sustained?

If Eliah, Moses, Jeremy, Job, had not the power to master their unruly
passions, sure then, if Ibe not conscious to my self of the like weakness, I
never came unto the trial, or how weakly should I resist in the day of evil?

A man that lies grovelling on the ground, and sends forth lamentable groans,
we know not well the anguish of his spirit, yet this we know, that he is
terribly indisposed, yet for all this (though the sight of all men, and in his
own thinking too, he be as a man most desperately forlorn and miserable) he
may notwithstanding by the help of some cunning Physician and Surgeon be
recovered and set upon his legs again.

This comes to pass more ordinarily in the diseases of the soul, then in the
distempers of the body.

The more bitter be the words of Jeremy, and the more extremely we hear
Jonah to take on, the more deeply let us judge of them, that they have drunk
of the cup of affliction, the bitter cup of worme-wood and gall.

And this I find God himself to have taken notice of, and in a tender regard
and compassionate feeling of her sorrows, thus to comfort his poor distressed
Church by the Prophet Isaiah.

Awake, awake, stand up O Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the Lord,
the cup of his fury, thou have drunk the dregs of the cup of trembling and
wrung them out.

A man in drink (we use to say) is not himself, and therefore I find added
in the same place, and with it I conclude the point.

Hear now this, thou afflicted and drunken but not with wine, thus says the
Lord, the Lord and thy God, that pleads the cause of his people, Behold, I
have taken out of thine hand, the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the
cup of my fury; thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put it into
the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said to thy soul, bow down
that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street to them that go over.

Fourthly, But now lastly, let me add the conclusion of the whole matter,
what is the conclusion of this whole dispute, contention or contestation
between the Lord and Jonah? A Song of praise, a Meditation of due
thankfulness, Bless the Lord o my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy name.

Bless the Lord o my soul and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, might Jonah well say, and crowns thee with loving kindness and
tender mercies, let every one, who has tasted the same cup with Jonah,
consesse.

O Jonah, how great was thy offense! how heavy Jonah was thy anger? wherefore
came not thy saying to pass? or why did not death prevent thy wish, since thou
thoughtest it no sin to be angry with God? had it not been too light a
recompense for this thy rebellion, to have sent thee hastily quick into the
grave with thy sins upon thy head?

Behold, death even called for, does not appear, the Lord is more merciful
to Jonah, then Jonah to himself; man is angry with God, God is not angry with
man. What shall we say?

The case is not Ionah's alone, O David, how troubled does the course of many
of thy Psalms run? why do thou forget me o God? why art thou absent from
the the words of my complaint o God? Awake o Lord, stand up and judge my
quarrel.

Thus speaks David, and much more, as a man not well pleased with his God, and
as though the Lord were asleep or deaf, or blind, or forgetful, as if he
would not or could not regard the cause that was equal.

Yea but this same David at other times has recollected himself from this
error, and has as plainly noted the reason of the Lords more gracious and
loving dealing both with himself and all Gods childrenels.

For he knows whereof we be made says he in the Psalm before cited, he
well understands our frame, he remembers that we are but dust, therefore like
as a father pittieth his own children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear
him, and shall set our sins as far as the East is from the West.

Therefore also says another Prophet speaking in the person of God, I will not
contend for ever neither will I be always wroth: For the spirit should fail
before me and the souls which I have made.

For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote him, I hid me and
was wroth and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.

I have seen his ways and will heal him, I will lead him also and restore
comforts unto him and to his mourners, Isay. 57.

Here is the goodness of our God and the whole work of our salvation; this is
his glory which he will not impart to others, nor to our merits or any desert
in us, (for we are a froward and most untoward generation in our selves).

And this is the whole benefit he expects at our hands the calves of our
lips, and hereunto he has ordained us in his beloved before the foundation
of the world, that we should render unto him the sacrifice of praise, a
thankful acknowledgement from the ground of our hearts: Bless ye the Lord, as
before.

For this cause is it that the Saints in glory (whose felicity in part is
shadowed by those four and twenty elders. Reu. 4) fall down before him that
sirs on the throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast
their crowns before the throne, (as acknowledging their own unworthiness)
but thus they say.

Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power; for thou have
created all things and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

Sing we unto the Lord a new song, for old things are forgotten and all things
are made new, a new heaven and a new earth, a new Jerusalem from above.

And old things are clean passed away, for there shall be no more sorrow nor
crying nor pain says S. John, there shall be likewise no longer infirmity nor
disease of mind nor body, there shall not be those vexations nor yet those
vexing causes which here we both meet and carry about with us.

The tempter cannot reach us there, temptations shall be banished for ever.
Anger has no place in heaven: Jonah, thy branch shall flourish and thy gourd
it shall not wither, the Sea shall not toss thee, the whale shall not eat
thee, the Sun shall not smite thee, the fire shall not burn thee.

Who then can be angry or evil affected when God shall show himself most
willing to please us? when he shall make all things, work for our contentment?

O Lord I am ashamed now says Jonah, when I consider this thy most wonderful
goodness, I do repent of this my foolish anger and begin to wax exceeding
angry, that ever I was moved to anger against so good so merciful so gracious
a redeemer, who do not only pass by our offenses when we have most
hainously provoked thy just displeasure, but have also reserved and laid up in
store for us most undeserving wretches, such good things as pass man's
imagination to conceive.

O Lord God merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in goodness and
truth, accomplish thy good word unto thy servants and show us thy glory, that
we may live and never die that we may live and praise thee eternally. Amen.

NOw, to call thee back a little, friendly Reader, to the matter of my text,
and withal, if I may persume to communicate my self unto thy good nature, I
would entreat thee for the Author thus to judge.

That he fell not by his hap-hazard upon his text, or that he has not had a
feeling of the same. What learning call you that which does carry in her bosom
a sense or feeling of her known principles? It has the name of knowledge
experimental, which cannot be attained by all the search of mere study, and
is to be preferred before all humane learning acquired by the documents and
precepts of men.

Who can describe the image of God the father, or pourtray out the shape of the
holy Ghost, or express the glory of the blessed Trinity? The meanest Christian
who has God in his heart does retain a sounder knowledge of his maker by
those hidden operations felt within, then the stoutest Philosopher in the
height and sublimity of his soring speculation, or those better learned
clearkes; who can dispute subtly above the Trinity, yet want power to please
the holy Trinity.

O but that knowledge is full of danger my text speaks of, and who would wish
to be possessed with such a feeling as Jonah, was? not I, not thou, nor any
man; yet take heed, thou may be over-rash in judging. For why? anger does
sometimes and that ordinarily presuppose love. O fearful case, is Jonah angry
with God, say thou? an other is of this mind, is it possible in a frail
man, to conceive anger against the great God? whence springs this familiarity
between heaven and earth? aut quam nuper e coelo descendisti Jonah, how lately
came thou out of heaven O Jonah? yea sure, by the very nature of the speech
must be employed a certain intercourse of favor and loving commerce between
the heavenly God and us. Why else is any man angry with his fellow, but in a
conceyt that he has bin requited evil for good, and the fruits of hate where
he looked for the effects of love?

Why then, even hence in like manner arise those manifold heart-burnings and
great disturbances of the Saints quiet; since they have bin assured of Gods
love, but want all signs thereof in their distresses. Is this the part of a
loving father think his misbeleeving children, to neglect their suites who call
day and night unto him? what is become of his promises and those mervailous
works our forefathers have told us of wherefore does he not arise and help us
and that early? O my God, I cry in the day time and thou hear not, and and
in the night season also my soul refuses comfort. Here our faith begins to
stagger, for what? has God forgotten to be gracious, and will he be no more
entreated, and is his mercy clean gone for evermore?

Then the spirit is almost tired with waiting, and the flesh grows monstrous
unruly. God is not so good as his word, for he has promised, if in trouble we
call upon him, he will help us, but he regards neither our calling, nor cries,
nor tears. O now the spirit waxes hot, and the blood does boil within the
veins: and thus our anger arises against God, a thing not impossible, as you
see, nor yet allowable, to the Saints most incident, and to the best of Saints,
more ordinarily then to the worst of hypocrites, or any other to the state of
grace not yet called.

Indeed, for these, I do not read of many, or any examples in this kind, to
have entered Contestation with the Lord, as Jonah here has done, nor is it the
Nabals of the world, but the David's who mourn in their prayer, and are vexed.
For upon what grounds can they challenge God of his promise, and expostulate?
where has God bound himself unto these with an oath, that he will be their
God, and of their seed for ever? how often have they called upon him in faith,
and wept unto him in zeal? what love to his ordinances, what trust to his
Word, what assurance of his mercies, what consolation in his promises, has
been at any time in their hearts residing?

I am not angry with the Sun when it shines to the Antipodes, nor with the
Stars, because they run round; I am not angry with the Winds at Sea, when
my house by fire is burnt at home; or lastly, why should the Malefactor, who
cries guilty at the Bar, be angry with the Judge, who gives sentence
according to the law upon his offense?

Even so truly, the wicked foolish, who say in their hearts there is no God,
and do impute their good and bad hap to blind chance or fortune, who are men
of an other world, and strangers to godliness: I see no reason their anger
should reach, whether their belief does not. Yea truly when they are haled
before Gods judgment Seat, as Malefactors arraigned, their guilty consciences
proclaim woe immediately; but then begins their anger and desperate rage, when
the scalding plagues of Gods wrath do begin to torment their bodies, and the
horror of deadly darkness does cease upon their souls for their wilful
blindness and folly, and their rage is not only against God, but in a
remarkable kind of justice, against their own members, they gnawed their
tongues and blasphemed, Rev. 16.

But if their malice break out against God or his Saints sooner (as often it
does) it is then a fearful preparation to these eternal woes mentioned, and
has more properly the name of malice then of anger. For what difference is
there between the anger of Gods Saints, and of his enemies? even such as I
have showed, as is the anger between two friends, and two most contrary
enemies.

These things (gentle Reader) I have more deeply searched into by occasion of
my Text, not that I presume herein to commend unto thee any rare point of
skill: for that which may fall out to be rare in the course of my studies may
have been more soundly noted in the labors of other men, and perhaps is not
new unto thy judgment; nor to this end do I it, to commend the feeling of
this knowledge unto any, not so far experimented in this kind of learning
which we have from Jonah; but to this end rather, that we may be wise to put
a difference, and be suspended from rash judgment concerning the state of
diverse Gods Elect, wrestling here in this vale of misery, falling and rising,
foiled, and sometimes foyling like prevailers, and that herein we study true
thankfulness to the sole-worker of our salvation, who preserves the souls of
his Saints from going down into the pit of desperation.

For my self (Christian Reader) I was angry with my God, and knewit not; very
angry but did not well consider it. How manifold are thy trials? O how various
and wonderful art thou in the exercising of us thy frail creatures? Vsque quo
Domine, vsque quo, shall not my griefs and groans, my deep sighings and often
tears, and strong cries, be full effectual in thy fight, to manifest thy
power within, to utter thy praise abroad? O those hills of peace, where are
they? why have thou caused me to hope in thy word and have nor furnished me unto
the battle? why was I called --? but return now unto thy rest, O my soul, and
hope yet confidently. I was angry and mourned in my prayer and was vexed: was
it not in thy temple, O God, in thy temple that my soul was exceedingly cast
down and troubled? in thy temple therefore will I praise thee, because there
thou spakest peace unto my troubled soul, and did allay the heat of all my
discontented passions, saying as sometime thou did unto thy servant Jonah,
Do thou well to be angry? Thus, even thus thou rebukedst the winds and the
waves of all my inward commotions, and there followed immediately a great
calm, praise the Lord O my soul and all that is within me praise his holy
name. For it was not flesh nor blood then which then was in the strength of
impariency and stamped with the foot, it was not flesh and blood that did
reveal, that did put this good motion into my breast, but my father in heaven,
therefore praise the Lord O my soul.

At this time I was assigned to the Cross, and had not yet chosen the Text I
meant to treat of: the choice was soon made; For what more acceptable service
to our God, more pleasing to his Church, more effectual for the preachers of
his word to deal in, then to express their minds upon those Themes, the power
whereof having first subdued their own affections does with greater force from
them flow forth unto others, and procure more ample glory to his name, unto
whom the whole action and efficacy of the work is in special wise to be
referred.

Thus have I made my self a fool in glorying, but it is in my infirmityes,
and if for this I be disdained of the Michals of the world, I will study to
become yet viler in their eyes, that Gods power by my weakness may be exalted.
Is not this the end of all our beings? and ought we not by all means whether
by precept or example or however labor here unto? whether we be besides our
selves says S. Paul to the Corinthians it is to God, or whether we be sober
it is for your cause and he is no follower of Paul as he followed Christ in
this, who will not thus endeavor to become all things to all men, that of all
sorts he may gain some to God and he that respects his own credit private
opinion and speeches of others, before the winning of souls, he is ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ; a shame of all others most shameful and one most
unworthy to be a minister of the new Testament.

Thus Christian and friendly Reader and one of the household of faith whose love
I do only embrace, have I not made my self strange unto thee, and for this
cause desire the fruit of thy prays to be assistant unto me that I may open my
mouth with boldness in the cause of the Gospel whereunto I have traviled and am
yet in pain. I believed and therefore did I speak says David, but I was sore
greived. I also believed, the same have I preached, the same again have I
penned. Now to all those who love the Lord Jesus, I conclude, Grace be unto
them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

FINIS.

