A TALE OF TWO Swannes.

Wherein is comprehended the original and increase of the river Lee ^ommonly
called Ware-riuer: together, with the antiquity of sundry places and towns
seated upon the same.

PLEASANT TO BE READ, and not altogether unprofitable to be understood by W. V.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON.

Printed by Roger Ward, for John Sheldrake. 1590.

TO THE READER
THe reasons be manifold (good reader) that moved me to publish this present
Tale. First, that I might (in what I was able) illustrate or make better known
to ye world, my country or place of birth: to which (as Cicero says) each man
does ow the third part of his life, and for which there is no good man, but will
ieopard his life, adventure his safety, and hazard the dearest things he
does possess: neither yet was there ever any man so brutish, but rejoices to
hear his country commended, and is delighted when he hears the same well
spoken off and praised: such is the affection that every man bears to it:
that Ovid expressing the same, said, he could not tell how it came to pass,
nor whence it should proceed. His words be these: Nescio qua natale solum
dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, nec
Hence it came to pass that antiquity gave divine honor to such as had
deserved well of their country: either in peace, by inuenting something to the
profit or wealth thereof: or in war, by aduentring their bodies in defense
thereof.

Another reason was, that albeit neither my writing, nor other endeavor
whatsoever, be able to perfourm any thing that might either beautify or adorn
the places I speak of: Yet hereby I would animate, or encourage those worthy
Poets, who have written Epithalamion Thamesis, to publish the same: I have seen
it in Latene verse (in my judgment) well done, but the Author I know not for
what reason does suppress it: That which is written in English, though long
since it was promised, yet is it not performed: so as it seems, some unhappy
Star enuieth ye sight of so good a work: which once set abroad, such trifles as
these would vanish, and be ouershadowed, much like the Moon and other stars,
which after the appearing of the Sun are not to be seen at all.

Thirdly, being fully resolved to leave my country, I held best before my
departure Cigneum aliquid canere: not unlike the Swans, who before their death
do sing as Ovid, Uirgil, Martial, Horace with all the poets do constantly
affirm. The Philosophers say, it is because of the spirit laboring to pass
through the long and small passage of her neck, makes a noise as if she did
sing. Pithagoras did think their souls were immortal, and says, how before
their death, they rejoice and sing as going to a better life. The manner of
their singing M. Thomas Watson in his Odes expresses thus: Qualis vbi longo
moerore Castrius ales confectus senio graui. etc.
Which verses A. F. has englished on this wise.

Like to the silver Swan, who seeing death to be coming,
Wandreth alone for a while through streams of lovely Caister:
Then to the flowring banks all faint at last he repairth,
Singing there sweet bird, his dieng song to Caister:
Giving there sweet bird, his last farewell to Caister:
Yielding up, sweet bird, his breath and song to Caister.
The last, and not the least motive was my friends request, whose importunate
demand without breach of amity, I could not gainsay: to whom, as also to thy
favorable construction (curtcous and friendly reader) I commit the same.

JOHN TVRNER of the work.
TO tell a Tale, and tell the truth withal,
To write of waters, and with them of land.
To tell of Rivers, where they rise and fall*
To tell where Cities, Towns and Castles stand.
To tell their names both old and new,
with other things that be most true.
Argues a Tale that tends to some good.
Argues a Tale that has in it some reason.
Argues a Tale, if it be understood,
As look the like, and you shall find it geason.
If when you read, you find it so,
Commend the work and let it go.
I. T.

A TALE OF TWO SWANNES.
WHen nature nurse of every living thing,
Had clad her charge in brave and new array:
The hills reioyst to see themselves so fine:
The fields, and woods grew proud thereof also:
The medovves with their party colored coats,
Like to the Rainebow in the azur'd sky,
Gave just occasion to the cheerful birds,
With sweetest note, to sing their nurses praise*
Among the which, the merry Nightingale
With svvete and svvete, (her breast against a thorn)
Ringes out all night the never ceasing lands
of God, the author of her nursse and all.
About this time, the Lady Uenus viewd,
The fruitful fields of Hartfordshire:
And savv the river, and the meades thereof
Fit for to breed her birds of greatest prise.
She calls in haste for vvinged Mercury,
And sendes him to Cayster, silver stream:
Fetch me (says he) two Cignets of the best,
And in the Laund, hard by the park of Ware,
Where Fanshawe buildes for his succeeding race,
Thy speedy coming I will there avvait.
The messenger of all the heavenly court,
Makes haste away to do his mistress quest:
And from the brood two Cignets of esteem
He sleely takes, unseen of any Svvannes,
Which in that river be so plentiful.
To Ware he comes, and to the Launde he flies,
Where Uenus, like the Goddess of great Love,
Sat lovely by the running river side,
Tuning her Lute unto the waters fall,
Wherewith she did record the love and arms
Of mighty Mars, the God of dreadful war.
The present come, she lays down her Lute,
And takes these Cignets of so great esteem,
Throwing them both into her river Lee:
And posted straight up, to the throne of Jove,
Where lovely, like to very love it self,
She set her self, upon her yielding knee,
And craves of him but only this request,
That her two Swannes might prosper in the stream,
And rule the rest, as worthy King and Queen.
The mighty Jove, unwilling to deny
His daughters suit, for fear of further ill,
Graunts her request: and more to pleasure her,
Says, that these two so fruitful shall become,
That all the Swannes, yea, the very Thames
Shall be replenisht with their princely race.
Uenus yeeldes thanks, and hastes her self away,
To mount Troclya, where she took her rest.
Long lived these Swannes in Lee, with great increase
Of honor, royalty, and in high estate:
Inricht with issue of the fairest breed,
That lives in Seuerne, Humber or in Trent,
The chiefest floudes that water English ground.
Three times had Venus used them for to draw
Her Iuory Chariot, through the lofty air.
A special favor (as the Poets say)
Granted to such, as she holds in account.
Now as these Swannes began to waxen old,
As time out wears each creature that does live:
It pleased them to send throughout their realm,
For all their subjects of the highest blood:
With full intent to make a progress clean,
Throughout their land to see the bounds thereof,
And every brook that harbors any Swanne,
With all the Isles that unto them belong.
No sooner was this message known abroad,
But there resorted to their being place,
Such troops of milke-vvhite Svvannes, as well beseem'd
The royal state of two such princes great.
Among which troops, the King and Queen made choice
Of forty Svvannes of high and royal blood,
For to attend upon their Majesty's.
Then look how Cynthia with her silver rays,
Exceedes the brightness of the lesser stars,
When in her chiefest pomp she hastes down,
To steal a kiss from drousie Endymion:
So do these princes far excel in state,
The Svvannes that breed within Europaes bounds.
And in this pomp, they hie them to the head,
Whence Lee does spring, not far from Kempton town,
And svviftly coming down through Brooke-hall park,
Leaves Whethamsted, so called of the corn:
By Bishops-Hatfield then they come along,
Seated not far from ancient Verolane:
His City, that first did spend his blessed life,
In just maintaining of our Christian faith.
When they had past Harting fordbury town, The first arm of increase.

A quite contrary course they do find out:
And though it were some labor against the stream,
To trace this River, feeding crystal Lee:
Yet vvorthily they hold their first resolve,
And up by Tewing, vvide of Butlers house,
To Digswell haste, where Horsley dwelled of late:
And then to Welwine, passing well beknovvne,
And noted for a vvorthie stratagem:
I meame the Danes, who on S. Bryces night,
Were stoughtly murdered by their women foes:
To Whitwell short, whereof does burbling rise
The spring; that makes this little river run.
Thence back again unto the chiefest town;
Of all the shire, and greatest of account,
Defended with a Castle of some strength,
Well walled, dyched, and amended late,
By her, the only mirror of the world,
Our gracious Queen and Prince ELIZABETH.
Not far from hence, stands many a milkewhite Swanne,
Attending for to entertain their Prince:
Among the which, was one of chief account,
That busked up his wings in greatest pride,
And so salutes this worthy company:
And with a speech that well did him beseem,
He tells how that near Walkhorne Capels seat,
The Been does rise, and gives his proper name The second.

To B^gton, and so to Watton runs:
And then by Staplef^rd, to Beneghoo here,
Where we, with all the Svvannes and Cignets both,
That live in Been, do rest at your command.
Right graciously the Princes took his speech:
And so departed toward Edwardes Ware,
But ere they come unto the Mead^ or Laund,
Where Venus first did put them in estate,
They passed up a river of good depth, The third.

The greatest branch that feeds crystal Lee:
With speedy pace (as Svvannes do use to svvimme)
They pass to Wadesmill, and to Thundrich Church,
And so to Standon, honored with the house
Of vvorthie Sadler Knight, and Counselor
To all the children of King Henry seventh:
Whose son suruiuing, holds the very path,
That leads to virtue and to honors throne.
By Puckhridge likewise they do svvif^y pass:
And so to Horne-meade more and less, and then
To With^hall, to Buckland and to Barckway both,
Where is the head and very utmost bound
Of this surpassing clear and goodly stream.
Returning back again, the company
Were (...)?
And this was done least that (...)
They should pass by the guested town of (...)*
Thus ordered, they come by (...) house,
That vvhilom was the ^rothers (...)place.
Then by the Crown, and all the (...) of Ware.
And so approaching to the late built bridge,
They see the barges lading malt (...)*
And people wondering at so great a troop:
Among the which, a man whose (...) hears
Seemed to excel the whiteness of the rest,
Bespake them thus.
Long have I lived, and by this bridge was bo^e,
Yet never saw I such a company:
So well beseene, so ordered, and so fair:
Nay (as I think) the age that is by past,
Nor yet the same that after shall in^
Never beheld, nor looked upon the like,
The people listened to this aged man,
As one they loved, and held in (...). A ri^ let or rill.

And as they stood, behold a sudden (...)*
From South Side of the bridge, hard by the same,
Two goodly Swannes, with Cignets full fifteen
Presents themselves, and theirs unto the Prince:
Excusing well their slackenesse, and offense
In not appearing at their first command.
The Queen beholding such a goodly brood,
Received them all, and pardoned every miss:
Demanding where they used* and all their state,
After a beck in sign of humble thanks,
The Cock made answer with a modest grace.
A place there is, not far from hence (O king)
A chalkie hill, beneath the same a hole,
Called Chadwell head, whence issues out (...) strea^e,
That runs behind broad Meade that you see here:
A little rill, yet great enough for us,
And these our breed, yet (gracious Prince) (...)
A tale there is delivered unto us
From hand to hand, how that a hunted ducke,
Diuing within this Chalk-well head or hole,
Was forced underneath the hollow ground
To swim along by ways that be unknown:
And afterward at Amwell spring (they say)
Was taken up all fetherlesse and bare.
The King and Lords took pleasure at the tale:
And so made haste quite through the arched bridge,
To Amwell, when they easily did epsy
The spring and rill that comes out of the hill: The fifth.

And is supposed to rise at Chadwell head.
Beneath the same comes down a little stream
That fosters Svvannes, and comes from Haddam small:
And so by Haddam, where the Bishops house
Has been of long, and so to Wydford town: The sixth.

And here at Amwell falls into the river Lee.
Then troops this train to Stanstead, called Le Thele,
And Stanstead where as Bashe did lately build,
Whose son yeeldes hope of virtue worth the place,
And liuinges which his father purchased him.
And here again out of the kingly stream
They pass by Raydon through little Estwyke quite: The seventh.

Then they salute Hunsdon the nurserie
And foster house of thrice renowned Svvannes:
Whose honor, and whose noble progeny
Gives glory to that honorable house:
Lord, how they live all glorious as the sun,
With tipes, and titles fit for their degree,
As kinsmen to our most redoubted Queen,
And men of high desert unto the state.
From hence to Sapsford, and to Starford, called
The Bishops: then to Farnam and to Maundes,
And so to Clauering, where it rises first,
And then comes down again into the Lee.
From S^sted unto Hodsden go these Svvannes,
From (...) to Broxborne, and to Wormley vvood
And so salute the holy house of Nuns,
That late belongd to captain Edward Dennie,
A knight in Ireland of the best account
Who late made execution on our foes, 1588.

I mean of Spanyardes, that with open arms
Attempted both against our Queen and us:
There now lord Talbot keeps a noble house:
Now see these Svvannes the new and vvorthie seat
Of famous Cicill, treasoror of the land, Thebals.

Whose wisdom, counsel, skill of Princes state
The world admires, then Svvannes may do the same:
The house it self does shevve the owners wit,
And may for bevvtie, state, and every thing,
Compared be with most within the land.
Down all along through Waltham street they pass,
And vvonder at the ruins of the Abbay,
Late suppressed, the wales, the walks, the monumentes,
And every thing that there is to be seen:
Among them all a rare devise they see,
But newly made, a vvatervvorke: the lock
Through which the boats of Ware do pass with malt,
This lock contains two double doors of vvood,
Within the same a Cesterne all of Plancke,
Which only fills when boats come there to pass
By opening any of these mighty doors with slight,
And strange devise, but now decayed sore.
And as they stayed here, thy chaunst to see
The stately cross of Elnor, Henry's wife.
Then Enfield house that longes unto our Queen,
They all behold, and with due reueuerence
Salute the same.
From hence by Hackney, Leyton, and old-Foord,
They come to Stratford, called also the Bow:
And underneath the bridge that thvvartes the stream
And parts the shires of Middle sex, and E^^^^ both*
At last (though long and weary was the (...)
They come unto the mouth of river Lee
Where all the Svvannes of that part of the Th^^^
Attend to see this royal company:
So that from Woolwich to Blackwall was seen
Nor water, nor the meadows thereabout*
For look how in a frostie night or day.
When Snow has fallen thick upon the ground,
Each gasing eye is daseled with the sight,
So Lillie-white was land and strand beseene
With these fair Svvannes, the birds of lovely love.
After a noise in sign of passing joy,
A Svvane of Thames inuites the King and Queen
Upon a day prefixed, to see and celebrate
The marriage of two Rivers of great name.
Which granted, every one departes his way,
The King and Queen again into their Lee:
Where yet they live (...) and happy state,
Or if not so, they die(...)ate.
FINIS.
A COMMENTARY OR EXPOsition of certain proper names used in this Tale.
HArtfoord-shire: so called of the town. Hartfoord.
King Alfred was the first that divided this Land into Shires, Hundreds, (...)
Te^, ^hereby he repressed the ^ges and ^s which the English men (following
therein the Danes) committed one upon another. He appointed that every man
should (...) in some hundred or tenthe, and if he were accused of any offense,
if he found not in his hundred or tenth a sucr^ie or pledge for hunself, he was
grievously punished: hereby he brought to pass, that hanging golden bracelets
by cros-waies, there was none du^st steal or take them away. This Shire
abounds in p^enty of corn, pasture, meadows, water and woods: and has (...)
120 Parishes.

Lee, called also Lygan, Lygean and Luy. Lee. Caister.


Caister. A river in Boetia, where is supposed the ^airest and largest Swannes
do breed.

Fanshaw. One of the remembrancers of her Majesty's court (...).
of ^er (...)^er, and one that especially tendereth the (...) of Ware, whereof
he has purchased the Lordship.

Ware. ^ded in the year of our Lo^d 914. by R. Edward Ware.
the son of R. Alred. This town since the (...) the^eof, has greatly
increased, and by procuring to themselves the free passage of their bridge,
greatly hindered the Shire-towne of Hartford: For in old time the bridge was
chained and kept by the Bailiefe of Hartford, but in the time of King John,
when the Barons warred one against another, and against the King himself. The
townsmen trusting to their Lord Wake, brake the chain, and have ever since
enjoyed their passage, whereby it is greatly increased, and is likely still to
do as well, for that by means of the Lord Treasaurer, the river is made
passable for boats and barges, as also through the diligence of the Townsmen,
who, with help of M. Fanshaw have erected a new markette house, with intent
to procure certain Fayres to be held there yearly. The Bridge was reedified
lately, and the arches made of stone at the charges, viz. 140. pounds given by
her Majesty. The rest by the town and Country.

Thames, the chiefest river of England: the name is derived Thames.
of Tame and Isis, which rising in Gloucestershire, runs to the town of
Ta^e, where joining together, they make the Thames, whereof read Leland or M.
Harison in his description of Britain.

Seuerne, a river that arriseth in Wales, passes by Mountgomery, Seuerne,
Shrewsburie, Brydgenorth, Bewdly, Worcester* Gloucester, and Bristoll: it
parts Wales and the West country, and falls into the sea betwyxt Mylford
haven and Padstow: The course of this River, as also the rest require a
special treatise,

Humber, or rather Hull, falls into the Sea at Rauenspur, Hum^er,
and arises out of sundry Rivers, whose confluence make a mighty water* etc.

Trent is one of the most excellent rivers in England, and Trent.
as M. Harison says, increased with so many Waters, as it seems, it may
becompared with Seuerne or Owse^, of which River, whosoever is desirous to see
or read more, may find the same in M. Harisons works, and therefore I omit to
speak further of it.

Cynthia, the Moon.

Endymion, a shepherd, who (as the Poets feign) was cast Cynthia,
a sleep upon the hill Latmos an hundred years by the Moon, to the intent
she might enjoy his love.

Uerolane, called by Antonine, Uerolanium, of Tacitus, Uerulanium, of Ptolomy,
Uerolanium: The Sarons called it Verolane.
Watlingchester of the highway called Watlingstreete, and Werlanchester of the
river Werlam that ran by it. And yet it is called Verulam, albeit there be
nothing left but the ruins and rubbish of the walls. It has been a city in
old time of great and especial account, well walled, and defended with a
great fishing pond, which well near did compass it. There is yet to be seen
(as M. Camden says) ancient coin with this inscription, Tasc Verul: which
Doctor Powell interprets to be Tributum Verulamij for Tasc in walsh
signifies tribute, and Tascia a tribute penie. This city was greatly
distressed in the time of Nero the Emperor, by the wars which Bundwica the
Queen made against the Romans, as may easily appear to such as be any thing
at all conversant in reading the Roman histories: yet did it flourish again,
and continued in good estate, and among other things famous, for bringing
forth to the world, Albon the Prothomartir, or first martyr of this land, of
whom M. Gerard Leigh in his accidence of armorie writes. Albon was knight of
the Bath, and Lord of Uerolane, now called Saint Albons: who in his youth, for
the honor of this realm made a royal challenge of Iustes at Rome, and did
there other Knightly disportes in Armor, where he had only the prise, and
was made Knight by Dyoclesian then Emperor of Rome, who had this Realm then
in subjection.

This Albon was Prince of Knights, and sovereign Steward of Britains: and
after was converted to the faith of Christ by Amphybalus that holy Knight, who
went to Rome with Bassianus the Son of Seuerus in the company of 1500 of the
chief Lords sons of Britain and Cornwall, where Zepherinus then Bishop,
privily instructed him in the faith of Christ, which, at his return, he taught
to Albon in such sort, that openly professing the same, they were in the time
of the (...) D^sian ^th martired. Whereof you may read in G^ldas and Bid.
After this, the City was yet in good estate, until the time of the (...),
when Oct^ and Oesa taking it for their refuge, were besieged by Other
Pendragon, w^ brake the ^es and defaced it. After this, by L^tle and Little it
lang^shed, so that it became a deane or harbor of thieves and (...) until
King Offa, about the year of our Lord 793. ^ded an A^ey in honor of S. A bon,
in a place called (...): hencefo^rth the old city decayed, and S. A^bons
flourished. And Alfricke the seventh Abbot of the house, bought the fishing
pond of the King: and for that the Fishermen daily endo^aged the religious
people, it was with great ^st dray^ed, and made dry. There remains at this
day a street in S. Albons, called Fishpo^le street: and for that there has
been found about the City, AAnchors keles of beats, old nails and such
trash, some have supposed the Thames to have run that way, which error grew
by corruption of Gyldas book, where he mentions of S. Albons death: but it
is not so: but hear what ancient records do testify concerning the same.

In the tune of King Edgar, when Aegelred was Abbot, he caused the ruins of
Verolane to be searched, the vaultes to be uncovered, and the pauements to be
dug up: where he found Pillars, pieces of antique work, thresholds,
door-frames, pillars for windows of fine masonrie work, some of Porphyrte,
some Touch, some Alablaster, all which were verte convenient for his purpose:
besides, he found sockets of Lattyn, and of brass, with diverse other things
which he reserved toward the foundation of a new abbey, which he intended to
build. But being prevented by death, Edmerus his successor dug again, and
found Idols, Altars richly covered, Iugs and cruses wi^h puts, some of wood,
some stone, and some gold, artificially wr^ught and ca^ed. And proceeding
farther, he found pots of gold, silver, and some of brass, some with coin,
and some with bones and ashes of such as have been burned or buried: all which
were reseru^d, and the mettels melted, and kept for this new* (...) which (...)
at last (...) was (...)great store of ^ges and ^old p^leges, and the new town
of S. Albons daily more and more increased, famous as well for the (...), as
also for two not^ble (...)fought there, (...)the (...) betwixt the two great
h^uses of York^ and (...): Thus much of Vero^ne whereof more might be said,
which for (...) sa^ (...).

Bishop^ Hatfield or Hethfield. John Morton bishop of Ely Bishops Hatfield, o^
Hethfield H^don.
builded th^re a house which now belongs to her (...). (...) (...) as
Leland* (...) belonged once to the (...) (...) Ber^yers from the^ to the
Howards, The. (...) (...), (...) suspect^g that a tow^ of the house would ^all
by reason of the height, took down a part thereof. And king Henry the eight
making an exchange with the Duke, newly reed^ed the house sinc^ whose time it
is hon^red with the title of a Bar^, which Henry Carry, Lord Chamberlain of her
Muest^ household, ^efetenant of Northfolke and Suffolk, and Captain of Barwike
at this day enjoys.

Hartford called by Antonine and the Romans, Durocobriuas, Hartfoord.
the (...) or Wel^en call^ed wa^er Du^ Co^, and Briua, (...)them as also (...)
the (...)signifies over the water, as Briua Odera, Briua I^ara which signify
passages over rivers of the same name. The Saxons called it Herudford as in one
book remaining with John Stowe (a diligent ^earcher and ^reseruer of
anti^ties, it is written H^ford. Bed^ in the fourth book of his (...) history
^neth how Theodorus Archbishop of Canterb^ held (...)or pro^ciall counsel at
Herudford, Anno. 670. but now it is corruptly (as I think) called Hartford,
which Leland interprets Cer^ vad^ the toord of (...) it has (...) in old
time of good account, as well by (...) of the (...) also, of the (...) the
Castle was (...) first by Ed^ard (...) in the ninth year of his raige as Henry
Hun^gton says, whose words (...), (...) Anno. (...) sui construx^ H^refordium
castrum no^ (...) sed pulcheri^um tamen inter (...), (...), and (...)sed
clarissima tamen. This castle has (...) (...) by the Clares, and then by the
Dukes of Lancaster, for Roger de Clare in Henry the second his time was created
Earl of Hartford. And Robert Fitzwalter that came of the same house in king
Steuens time did boldly affirm that the keeping of the Castle did of right
belong unto him: Henry the third gave the Castle with the honor belonging to
it to William Ualence Earl of Penbroke, Anno. 1247. After it fell to the Dukes
of Lancaster, who used to lodge at it very often. In the year of our Lord
1357, the Queen of Scotts, sister to king Edward the third departed this
life, lying at Hartford with her sister in law, the Queen of England, and in
the year 1458 for a fray made in Fleetestreet in London, the king sent the
principals of Clifford, Furniuall, and Barnardes In, as prisoners to Hartford
castle. King Henry the sixth used often to keep his Christmas there: and to
conclude, king Edward the sixth was nursed and schooled there.

The priorie was builded by Ralfe Lord Lymesoy, who came into England with
William the Conqueror, and was (as the Monks reported) his sisters son.

The townsmen of late have procured to themselves a new corporation, and have
on the Saturday a good market and every year three faires. In Edward the 3.
time, as I have seen in an old record, they had two markets in the week and
but two fayres.

In the time of Henry the eight viz. 1507 there was a paper Mill at Hartford,
and belonged to John Tate, whose father was Mayor of London.

Waltham, a market town: the Abbay was builded by king Harold, who shortly
after he had built it was slain by Waltham
William the conqueror, his mother with great and earnest si^e obtained his
body, and intoumbed the same in the Abbay.

Aelners Cross commonly called Waltham cross. K. Henry the first set it up in
memory of his wife (who died in Lincolnshire) A^lnors Cross.
and wheresoever her body was carried, there he erected a cross with the arms
of England, Castile and Pontoys, given ^n the same, of which the cross in
Chepe, and Charing cross be two of the fairest.

TO HIS BELOVED FATHER JOHN Valans, W. U. wishes the grace of God with health
and prosperity.
THe duty (dear Father) I owe unto you, the regard of my promise, together
with the remembrance of your reasonable request, do not a little move me to
write a few words concerning the matter whereof, at my being with you last,
we^th certain of our friends talked, A^ (...) am well assured that you
re^member what a styr N. B. kept, when I said that shippe^ had been at Ware,
affyrming, how it was impossible that that river which but of late was scarce
able to bear a small whyrrie, should in times past bear: big and mighty ships.
Truly his words were many and great, but his reasons were small. And since
that, at that time I promised to send you in a letter a plain and evident
prooffe of those words which there I uttered, I doubt not but in these few
lines fully to satisfy, not only your request, but also your mind, and
confirm you in that opinion which few men (unless such as be altogether
ignorant of the matter, and of the place) will deny. And for so much as the
cause for which the ships went thither, and what they did there, then will I
plainly prove both by auchoritie and examples, that it is likey that they were
there. Lastly, I will (as my promise was) show you about what time and by whom
Ware was builded.

That Ships have been at Ware
THe Danes (who as Polidor Virgill says) dwelled in old time beyond Ister,
but now be they inhabitants of the Germane Ocean or Denmark, perceiving how
that their Country was overmuch pressed with the great multitude of people yt
in habited ye same, determined to subdue the land, to drive out ye Englishmen,
and to plant themselves and their posterity for ever (...) the same: for
perfourming and accomplishing. whereof, they armed great store of chosen
soldiers: who about the year 832. in 34. ships entered the river of Thames,
landed by great force, spoiled, fired, and wasted the country so far, that
Egbert who then was king of the more part of England, was fame with an host of
men to succor and relieve h^s d^stressed subjects. But such was the will of
God for the punishment of sin that then was rise, that the king ioining
battle with the Danes, was by them discomfited and put to flight. After this
batt^ile, the Danes were so encouraged, that they (...) out of the^e country
like f^armes of Bees, (...) that if (...) one week there were five thousand of
their (...), yet in the work following there would come eight thousand more to
supply their rooms. They were oftentime discomfited, and the greater part of
them driven b^ke by diverse ^akant kings and princes, bu^ yet by reason of
their often arrival, therr force was still increased and maintained. One while
they arrived in one place, and then in another, spoiling, burning, and killing
all they could come by. I^ were too long to tell, and very grievous it is to
think how religion was decayed, learning forgotten, all parts and quarters of
the Realm wasted and spoiled: how cities, towns, churches, abbe^s and
religious ^ouses were consumed with fire and flame, how miserably the Commons
were afflicted, how pitifully men, women and children, and all fortes of people
went to wrack, how wonderfully the kings themselves were amassed, the con^ing
of their enemies being both sudden and violent: how cr^elly fire and sword,
famine and death raged through out the land heaven and earth intending as it
were the fatal destruction and utter dcay of the realm. This misery
continued the space of 300 and ddde years, within which years, namely about
the year of our Lord 217 the 23 year of King* Alfreds r^ns a great army of
Danes having re^eiued an overthrow at a place ca^ed Bu^tington beside Seuethe,
fled into east England, and there wintered, and prepared a great host again
out of Northumberland and other places, leaving there their wives and children,
together with their money, ships and munition, in east England, and with
great speed got to the City of (...) (which at that ^e was de^late, the
inhab^tes having for fear of the Danes forsa^en it) or ever king Alfred and
Ethered the under king with their armies could overtake the^. And yet such was
the (...) that king Alfred (...)this purs^, that or ever his enem^es had (...)
the (...), he with h^s company took a great deal of their c^riage with all
the booties of (...) and other things that they in their journey by robbing
and spoiling had obtained and driven away. He also besieged the city two or
three days, but perce^uing it would finally avail, he was fa^ne (a grievous
thing to hear) to burn up the greatest pate of the corn that grew there
aboutes and bestow the rest amongst his horses, least his enemies should have
the fruit and commodity thereof. The Danes perceiving that, and seeing there
was nothing left whereof they might live in those parts, departed from thence,
and in great has^e got them to north Wales, where they spoiled and hartied the
country far and near, driving away great booties of Cartel, and carrieng
with them rich spoils. From hence they departed And because for fear of the
Mercians they durst not traueile that way, they coasted along the country till
they came to Northumberland, and so through middle England, taking the^ ships
their w^ues and children out of cast England with them, they arrived at a
little Island sc^uate in the Sea, in the east part of Essex called Merseyge.
From thence they departed and came into the river of Thames, and seeing that
Winter was now at hand, they drew or rowed their ships up the river Lygean.
And twenty miles from London they began to build a Fort, which being
finished, they tarried there all that winter, spoiling, robbing and burning
those quarters without mercy. When Winter was past, a great part of the
Citizens of London, with those that inhabited near thereaboutes traueiled
thither, and by force minded to break down the Fort or munition which they
had there builded. But the Danes stoutlye resisted them, and not far from the
place gave them a sharp battle, where the Christians were put to flight, and
four of King Alfreds men were slain.

Thus the pagane or heathen Danes remained Lords or masters of those
quarters, compelling the husbandmen to ear and till the ground, meaning
themselves to reap the commodity of it. But the good King Alfred, who always
was careful for the welfare of his subjects, gathered an army, and before
harvest time pitched his tents near to the place of their abode. By whose
coming, the enemies were so afraid, that they durst not once peep out of
their hold to fetch either cattle or corn out of the fields by force. In this
space, it happened on a time, as the King rode along by the river side, he
viewed the water, and perceived how that in some places of it, the channel
might easily be stopped, and the stream made less. Whereupon he (as
Huntington writes) caused it to be cut into three several branches or
arms: but howsoever it was, he so weakened the stream, that the Danes could
not bring back their ships the same way they came. Which thing the Danes
perceiving, and knowing well it was in vain for them to abide any longer
there, they left their Ships, and fled by land as fast as they could to
Quatbridge, sending their wives and children again into east England. After
this the king departed, and the Londoners and Countrymen seeing the Danes were
gone, burst down their Holde^, and got some of their ships back again to
London, and the rest they burned and brake all to pieces.

But here peradventure you will ask me, how I should come by the knowledge
of these things, being done so many hundred years ago. To this I answer,
that in things that were done long before any man that is now living can
remember, we must credit that our Fathers have committed to writing concerning
the same. And in my opinion, the nearer the reporter lives to those times in
which the things he speaks or writes of were done, the more credit is to
be given to him.

And as concerning this matter, it is confirmed by the report of a very
ancient, reverent and and learned Writer, namely Asserus Meneuensis, Bishop of
Saint Dauies, that lived in the very self same time when these things were
done, and Maryanus Scotus who lived and wrote a chronicle at least 500. years
ago, as Florentinus a Monk of Worcester, who continued it, does witness and
declare. Besides diverse others of great antiquity and credit as Henry of
Huntington, Matthew of Westminster, and many more, who d^e all confirm that
which is before declared. Besides there remains yet the ruins of an old
Castle or Fort between Hartford Castle and the Mill, which I do undoubtedly
believe was the very self same Fort that the Danes builded.

Moreover, O. Cross did credibly en^rine me that at ye building of Stansted
bridge, there were found within the river, pieces of broken ships or Craets,
nails and other things which seemed to belong to some great ships or
vessels. All which things considered, together with the parting of the stream
before remembered, me thinks should be sufficient to confirm your mind, and
cause you to believe that there have been ships at Ware and Hartford.

Hereunto may be added that it was a common use of the Danes to row or draw
up their ships into some smaller creek or river where that they might ride all
winter with least danger. And time works some alteration both by water and by
land, yt where great rivers did sometimes run, now it is utterly dry, and in
stead of maine waters we have goodly and flourishing Meades. And in like sort,
where goodly cities and castles some times did stand, there now grows corn.
For examples of this we need not seek far, since yt in London not above 277.
years ago namely in the year of our Lord 1300. when Henry Waleys was Mayor of
the city there ran a river through Walbrook with two bridges over it, whereof
William Jordan and John de Beuer were masters and governors. What is become
of the river Were. that ran by S. Albons of which the great city that in old
time stood there, took the name and was called Werlamchester, whereof Leland in
his commentaries makes mention, concerning cities the diligent reader of
chronicles shall meet with ye names of many, of which there is at this day no
rubbish nor ruin to be seen, as Andres Chester* yt stood in Sussex on ye edge
of the great wood called Andreds weal of I^hancester, yt stood in the (...)
Panta i^ Essex; (...) of in^nite ^e, of which as I said, ther^ is left n^
taken, but as the Poet says Est (...) vb^ (...). Thus have you heard (dear
father) both the doings of the Danes not only in Engl* ^ut ^lso what they made
in those (...) of the ^d whereof ^e talked, and where you dwell. There (...) now
to write (...) ^ou as (...)(...), how k^g (...) is (...) Ware was built, and in
what ^ges d^ies the same was ^e, of which I (...) to say no more then that
which has been already written by such as have in their histories and
chro^les made mention o^ s^h (...) as were builded by king Edward (...)
aboute^; (...)I cannot but much mislik^ (...)that affirm that the town of
Hartford was (...) by king Edward the ^rst before the conquesh: Seem^ (...) by
the very words of Huntington it appears that it was ^ut the Castle that he
builded, for we read in Beda his histo^y (...) a counsel of Bishops that was b^
at Hartford l^g bef^ Edwardes time, this castle I mean of Hartford was builded
(...) the year of our Lord ^12, by Edward the s^e of king Al^, and two years
after he builded a tow^e ^n the North (...) of Lee which is the same that I
do take (...) be Ware and was in hand when Witham in Essex was also beg^
(...)ye^res since. Thus much (father) for this time. I thoug^ (...)unto you
concerning this matter; ^thing doub^ bu^ (...) herereafter when all things be
finished that by (...) of the Lord Treasurer, master Fanshaw and other (...)
m^ (...) in hard for the amendment and sc^ing (...) river, you and I both
shall see, though not ships, yet (...) b^g boats and vessels pass too and
fro betw^xt London (...) Ware to the commodity and profit of the whole
country, wh^h God grant.

Your obedient son W. Vallans,

FINIS.

