THE Run-awyaes Answer, To a Book called, A Rod for Runne-awayes. IN WHICH
Are set down a Defense for their Running, with some Reasons persuading some of
them never to come back.

The usage of LONDONERS by the Country* People; drawn in a Picture,
artificially looking two ways, (foorth-right, and a-squint:) With an other
Picture done in Lant-skipp, in which the Londoners and Contrymen dance a
Morris together.

LASTLY, A Runne-awaies Speech to his Fellow Run-awaies, Arming them to meet
Death within the Listes, and not to shun him.

Printed MDCXXV.

TO OUR MVCH RESPECTED AND VEry worthy Friend, Mr. H. CONDELL at his
Countrey-house in FVLLAM.
SIR,
AT our parting from London to undertake our sad Peregrination into the
Country, (amongst our Friends who are hard to be found) It pleased you to
bestow upon us a free and Noble Farewell. We remember it with thanks, which
cuts off the sin of Ingratitude; yet because Thanks, is but one word, and
that your love cannot receive a Requital but in many, we send you a little
bundle of Papers, full. For being Abusde in a Book Printed at London, in which
we were called Runne-awayes, We in this our Defense request you to be an
Arbiter, to Judge, whether we have not just cause, to stand (...) then
promisde. Bid him therefore send all his Paper-Kites flying from his Stall,
quite through the City, and from one Eude to the other to give notice of this
our Answer. Bid him likewise to tell all Stationers, who have any of those
Books (called A Rod for Run-awayes) that it were good for 'em to sell them
away as fast as they can, for when we come to Town, they shall be All callde
in.

Farewell.
The Runn-awayes Answer.
THere has of late come forth a Three-sheete-printed-Pamphlet (as if the
Rod had but three Twigges only) written (as the Title seems to promise) by
some Schoole-maister, for he calls it, A ROD FOR RVNNE-AWAIES. But We, upon
whom those poor and wretched Names are pinned, no way enduring so to be lashed
over the face in scorn, snatch the Rod out of his hand; and to make him
smart a little, thus print we our Answer to those bold affronts, by which he
does challenge us, utterly disdayning to be called Runne-awaies: and utterly
disclayming those offenses, for which that London Whipper is so ready to punish
us.

First then for the Name.
HE is a Runne-away, who rather then he will learn a Trade (with some pains)
under a careful Master, Who are Run-awaies.
turns Rogue, runs into the Country a Padding* keeps company with
Gipseys, and strowling Pedlers, A Runaway from his Master.
fatting himself with the lazy bread of Summer, tumbling (during that Season)
in a Hay-cock with his Dell; and in Winter, lying snug in a Brick-k^ll with his
Doxy: If you wonder how we came by this Language? you must think, that in our
Travails we could not choose but meet with Canters.

Again: He is a Runne-away, that being pressed for a Soldier, A Runaway from his
Captain.
runs away from his Captain ere he be sent a Ship-bord, or from his Colors,
before he comes to the Fight.

He is a Runne-away, who having got loose from a Sergeant, A Runaway from a
Sergeant.
takes his heels, and runs away from him.

Roaring Run-awayes.
They are Runne-awaies, who in a Tavern Roaring in for more Wine then they are
able to pay, give a slip out at the back door, and so pawn a Drawer to the
Bar for the Reckoning.

Good night Landlord Run-awayes.
Lastly, they are Runne-awaies, who lay the Key under the door, and cry, Good
night Landlord.

None of these base Ginges are we: we scorn to sail in such stinking
Dung-boates. So much therefore for the Name of Runne-awaies.

Now for the Matter.
THe very Beginning of the Book is able to make any Coward Run away, for
there is a Sett-Battaile, a Field appointed, the Van coming up, and London
leading it: then Shires and Counties pressed to martch in the Rear; the General
busy, Trompets sounding the Alarm, our Enemies about us, and the Weapons
brandished over our heads, which threaten to cut our throats.

He would make us believe he has been a Soldado by his terms of War: He has
seen Finsbury fields Mustering.
In the Field dialect we tell him, that true it is, when the Armada of Gods
anger was preparing against us, when the Pestilence beat at our City Gates,
and the Arrows of Infection flew into our Howses, when in the heat of the day
the Mayne-battayle gave ground, and that many (or most) of our Commanders left
the Field; what should we do but fly? Flight not for fear, but safety, nor
for safty, but on policy.
It was not out of base fear, but safety: It was not out of a desire to safety
only, but fear, least so many dropping down every hour before our faces,
there would be found not Officers nor Ministers enough to fetch off the wounded,
or bury the Dead: Had we not reason to fly?

A rough March turned to a weeping April.
Before this tempestious weather beat us, O! what glorious Sunbeams of
Exultations, Reioycings, Hopes, and Comforts were rising to shine upon us? We
swallowed up nothing but the East and West Indies in our Imaginations; the
Golden-Age was coming in again: All these Castles were built in the Air.
Our English Almanacks seemed to speak of none but Holy Days: Great-Brittaine
stood on the top of her white Cliffes triumphing; London on tiptoe,
ouerlooking all other Cities in the swelling pride of her approaching Fortunes:
For no sooner was the old King dead, but our gloomy Noone was changed into the
cleerest Evening that ever our living Eyes beheld.

A golden Sun (within a few hours) lifted up his head to revive us; a new
King was proclaimed, a James was lost, but a Charles was found: A Queen was to
come from France, and that Queen arrived in England: A Parliament was at hand,
the Term not far off, Triumphs approaching, Pageants setting forward to
meet our King and Queen going to their Coronation. No People could be fuller
of joy, no City prowder of happiness: When lo! a volley of Thunder shootes,
Earth leuels out the ground, but Heaven deuides the Acres.
and batters down all these sumptuous Buildings: And was it not time to fly?
Heaven saw us boasting in our own strengths, and growing angry at it, has
turned it into weakness: Mirth has shaken hands with Mourning, Riches with
Misery, Bravery with a Winding sheet, Prosperity with the Pestilence, Health
with Sickness, and Life with Death: And what is He would encounter with These?

Hereupon, the City fled the City, and shunned that Enemy which fallowed her,
and has since met her in every corner: Folly to run from that we can not
shun.
London was great with Child, and (with a fright) falling in Labor (her own
time being misreckoned) was delivered of none but Still-borne Children.

Never was such a sudden Joy changed into so sudden a Lamentation: Those Belles
which were ready to clean the Air with echoes at King Charles his Coronation,
did nothing presently but ring out Knelles for his Subjects; by which means,
Church-Musick, best and worst.
as there is no Music so sweet as that of the Churches, none for days and
nights together has bin so iarring, so that in 13 weeks more then 33000.
have fallen dead to the ground at their doleful tunes: And who would (if he
could choose) make one in such dangerous Peales? Had we not just cause
therefore given us to fly?

Be not you then (good Master Runne-away-Beater) so sharp, spare your Rod a
little, and whippe us not for going to see our They were gone abroad ere we came.
Friends in the Country, we do not think but You yourselfe (could you have
got a Horse) would have bin one of the Tribe of Gad, with one of your
Comerades; for there is no Dancing now to your Theatrian Poetical Piping:
Neither your Frierians, If there were, you would give over your Trade of
Pamphletts.
nor Cock pitterians, can for love or money help you to a Plaudity, we wish
for their own sakes (and yours) they could: But many of them (that could get
Wings) have kept company with us in our flight; neither are We or They to be
condemned; Flesh and Blood naturally abhorres dissolution: All desire to begett
Children, but none love to see them buried: so mortally do we hate the name of
Death, that though we lie in our last Sheet, save one (which must wind us,)
we hardly endure the Name of Dying. The very Scriuener who makes our Wills, as
he is cunning in other things, so is he crafty in that Conueyance, and knowing
what Word will fright us, he goes about the Bush, and Writes thus: When it
shall please God to call Us out of this transitory Life: To flatter sick Men's
Bodies may Fool away their Souls.
We must here the string twang out Life still, albeit Deaths cold fingers pull
us by the Noses.

Again, (to add one handful more of Corn to this Sheafe of Defense, made up
by the Run-awayes,) Know, that many of us that have shut up Shoppes and are
gone, are yonger-Brothers; and are assur'de, that even own Fathers, ( Knights
by Degrees, and great Men in Possessions,) have for six or seven years
together, suffered (nay at this very hour do suffer) their own Sons, (yea
their only and Eldest Sons) miserably to languish in Coumpters, and other
Prisons, upon two shillings a week maintenance: This is good policy to tame
an Unthrift, but little charity to murder a Man's own Child: It Is a safe Lock
to tie to a Runne-awayes Leg, but there is too much Iron in it: At this Ward we
have no great stomachs to lie; Young Cocks love no coopes.
we find our Fathers hard enough here, and are loath to tempt their
affections, whether they will come to London, and cry to a Iaylor, Fellow turn
the Key, let me see in what nasty Chamber lies my Son. We are better as we
are, and therefore fling away your Rod, and do not whippe us for flying.

The more that run away when a Field is lost, the fewer fall.
Besides, had we all tarried at home that are fled, in what miserable cases
(according to humane reason, not diuing into the deep and insearchable
Judgments of God) had we all bin? If the Country loves us not now that are
amongst them in perfect health, how would they have hated the City in her
populous Thronges, when (perhaps) four times the number now departed, had then
bin smitten down by the Contagion? What Markets would you have had then? Where
had Meat bin found to fill so many millions of mouths? The casting out
sometimes of Merchandise into the Sea in a Storm saues the rich Venture, and
Our being driven from the Fleet in so hideous a tempest, has (we hope) given
the rest of the Wether-beaten Navy more sea-roome, and so advantage to meet
less danger.

Was it not hie time to take our heels and be gone, when the Doctors themselves
played the Runne-awayes? Doctors for the Soul, and Doctors for the Body, they
both fled: When the Leaders Fly, shall the Soldiers stand*
Many of them that stood the Battle, (and being worthy Commanders, fought
bravely,) we hear are fallen, and in their places (who were to look to the
Sick and Wounded Soldier,) are crept into your City, a crew of prating
Emperickes, cogging Mowntibanckes, and cheating Quacksaluers, who if they cure
one, kill twenty; it being more danger for an infected Man to fall into their
hands, then for a sound Person to live two days fasting in an infected House.

But what talk we of the flight of these? for Physic and Surgery, Physic
and Surgerie at a Non plus in this Sickness.
(those two divine Sisters sent from Heaven) are both of them puzzelld in their
Readings, and driven a to stand in their own Practice. This Sickness turns
Knowledge into Ignorance, for experimented Salues and Medicines forfet their
wonted Virtues to astonishment and admiration. Our Flight then you see is
Warranted by Ecclesiastical, Martial, Polyticall, and Physical Authority:
Let us not therefore here-after be termed Runne-awayes; for though many of our
Fellow- Londoners are in our absence turned into Pine-trees, our hopes are at
our Coming home, If there fall good showers of Money, else not.
to begett a new and prosperous Plantation.

Well did the Rodde-maker indeed condemn us for not leaving our Armor behind
us when we ran from the Army, (some pieces of Silver to mainteyne the Poor:
All our Money in the Cuntry is turned into Quick silver.
) But whole Troops of Us have bin so beaten in this Country-Leaguer, that we
have Silver little enough to mainteyne our selves: Beside, Numbers (we are in
fear) will be so blind with the Country dust flying up into their eyes, they
will hardly find the right Keyhole whilst they live (as they should do) to
open Shoppes again; the Wards of the Locks (if not well Oyld before) will by
that time (it is thought) grow rusty. Let the Rich miserly Runne-awaies, If the
Poor pine for all, let the Rich pay for all.
who fl^do^ to save their Lives for their Moneys sake, and to save their Golden
Idols for their own sake, let them (in Gods name) pay soundly for their Horse
race; who have too much Juice may endure a squesing.

Great-Men, Little-House-keepers.
If we left our Houses, and No body to keep them, it is but the fashion of
Great-men, who rear up Huge Buildings, in which well Rattes and Spiders more
often then Hospitable Tennants.

Now whereas your Qui mihi Discipulus, (with his Birchen Septer in his hand)
^hreatens to fetch Blood from us, by telling what terrible Frightes we are like
to be put into at our coming back: Alas! He draws a Bow too big for his
strength, and shootes that Arrow without any aim.

Jobs Estate.
What did Job, who had seven Sons and three Daughters, 7000. Sheep, and 3000.
Camells, 500. yoke of Oxen, and 500 she Asses: His Losses.
to him one Messenger came, and told him the Sabaeans had took away his Oxen
from the Plough, and the Asses, killing his Servants: An other came and said,
that Fire from Heaven had burned up his Sheep and Shepherds: An other that
the Caldeans had seizd upon his Cammells, and slew the Men: An other that all
his Children were slain by the fall of the House, as they were Banqueting at
their eldest Brothers. His Patience.
But what said Job? Naked I came, and Naked I must hence: The Lord has Given,
and the Lord has Taken.

No Cast-awaies, though Run-awaies.
Do you think we are Cast-awaies, because counted Run-awaies? What should we
fear? Say at our Return to London, our Friends be departed, our Kindred lost,
or Servants dead, and our Goods spent upon Whores in Tauernes; Or say, that
coming out of the fresh Air, and falling sick, none of you will come near
us, because we Fled from you: Nay, say that Ludgate or the Compters must be our
Innes, where if Infection setts her Marks upon us, neither Creditor,
Physician, Surgion nor Apothecary will resort to comfort us: Yet have we a
help in all this extremity; there is one Anchor to ride at in the fowlest
Weather: One Friend has promised to stick to us all; Well fare an old friend
in a Corner.
and that Friend, is the Dear, Loving and Beloved Earth: When Son nor
Daughter will come near our Coffin, but shun our Carcas as loathsome Carrion,
yet even then, that good Grandame (the aged Earth) will open her Arms and
Hug us, and lay us in Beds, to take our everlasting Sleeps, And shall we
be affrayd to come back to London?

No: for albeit your Whip-deedle was so bold to tell us, that Londoners in the
en^ of the last great S^cknes, coming nere the City, looked pale, like men
going to Execution, that comparison frights not us; we, ^n plain and merry
English bid the Twigger, not ^o be in such fear of our coming back: for an
order will be taken for some of us, never to call at the Counter for a
Freemans Horse, to carry him on foot to Ludgate. We have set up our staff
already.
A many of our Iouiall Fraternity are glad they have this vnpolitike
advantage. They must have been driven to study for a cleanly excuse, which
heer^ of it self (without teaching) is grown very mannerly.

There be men that dare eat Spiders: Monkeyes swallow them, and by them get
sweet breaths; why then should not many Limbs of our Estates be made the
sounder by this Infectious fracture?

There is an Ireland to fly to, O for a good Wind!
and a Low Countries to roar in, and a Wales, to keep the wind of Lawyers
from us with her Mountains: We can be Bankerupts on this side, and Gentlemen
of a Company Beyond Sea: be burst at London, It Is but changing our Copy
and piec'd up in Rotterdam. The Sea is a Purger, and at Sea must our Fortunes
take Physic.

Amongst many other evils, which might terrify men from repayring to London,
the griping hands of Clerks of Churches, and their Sextons, and the villainous
doggednesse of uncharitable Bearers, are two maine ones. Too many cry out upon
their cruelty; they flea the living, and dishonor the dead, These Bearers are
worse then Beare-wards.
by tearing money out of poor peoples throats, at the burial of Husbands,
Wives, or Children, when it were greater alms, to abate from such Vulturous
Deuourers (those currish Coffin-Tossers) their unconscionable racking demands,
and to give it to the suruiuing distressed Creatures. A Londoners money in the
Country is brass.
We fare better in the Country; for there we pay neither for Belles nor
Bearers, neither Minister, Vicar, Sir Domine, nor his Clarke will take a penie
for any of us.

And they deal noblier, then we hear a Citizen was dealt with, in a Town
not above two miles from London, whose Mayd-seruant there ending her life, the
Hatches of a Ship are not so close, as the doors and windows of that
infidelian Village were; 16.s for four London Bearers.
not one durst for money, dig a grave, no reward bribe the Clunnicors to
carry the body to Church: insomuch that the Master of this Servant was
compelled with sixteen shillings (for under they would not go) to hire four
London-Bearers, to carry her to her grave, whose casting up likewise cost a
price extraordinary.

This dreadful season of so many ghastly apparitions, should (as we think)
fright all wickedness out of the City: but we hear it does not. For all the
distance of miles between you and us, the swearing and cursing amongst some of
you, leaves a tingling in our ears. For, one woman having left Eggs in a
room at her going forth, Badd Eggs hatch no good Chickens.
and missing them (as forgetting where she laid them) at her coming in,
wished that the Plague might consume them that eat them. Yet after her anger
was past, A Curse rebounded.
and forgetting her curse, they were dressed, and eaten by her children, all of
them dying the next day after. You know this better then we, and are near to
Blacke-Friers where the Curse fell; if you have a mind to examine the truth.

This was a Rod for a Curser: but this that is held up next, was a Rod to whip
Presumption.

A young man having some place in a Parish Church in London, being (as to us it
was reported) to lock up the Churchyard, called to a man, who stood amazed at
the deep graves; and looking into one that was not filled up, No Jesting with
God.
the other called to him to Come away, and (after a scoffing manner) told him,
he were best stay there all night, and take up his lodging. No, quoth the
other, you may lie here (for ought I know) before me. I lie here (said he:)
see, I can lie here at my pleasure; and so leaping into the grave, and
spreading his body upon the dead, out he came presently in a jesting manner:
None but Doves in the Country.
But going home, sickened that night, and lay there the next day in earnest.

We have no such foule-mouthed women near the Villages we incampe in: no such
desperate youths so to tempt Fate. We Londoners dare swear so much.
No, no, give the Country people their due, and there are none like them
living upon the face of the earth.

The true picture of the Country people.
IT is reported, that the gates of Innes, and doors of Victualling-houses are
locked against us, and that we are used like Dogs. We stand up for the
Country: This is false: And peep out at loope-holes. Have they not reason?

Exceeding dear.


It Is an arrant lie: for all the Country people take their houses of purpose
for Londoners: and for usage, they make more of us, then they can of their own
kin.

Most dear are they to the worst Citizen that comes within their doors: Marry
we must tell you, those are not very many; and the reason is, they will not
(in a dangerous time) pester men together.

So well-giuen are they, that continually they pray for us To be gone.
: and when (in the open fields, for air sake, or under a hedge for
coolness) we sit down to eat or drink, they (good souls) will not touch
so much as a bit of our Bread; For fear it chokes 'em.
it shall not be said, They turned us out like staruelings.

So mannerly are they (now) grown, A murren on their manners when they have
any.
that if two or three Citizens walk through a Town, all the Country people
step presently in at doors, only in modesty to give them the Wall.

And so cleanly are they in every paltry Village, that if there be but ten
straggling houses, you shall not for your heart see a foul pair of sheets in
any one of 'em. Nor cleanes ones neither.


It Is reported in London, that we are lodged in Barnes, in Hay-lofts,
Hay-cocks, and Stackes of Straw: it is true, but why? Alas! when Londoners that
have trauaild hard, scramble to a Town (all faint and weary) the honest
Country people, point to such places, to the end they may there lie soft, Can
any man wish more?
till their chambers be providing. O! they are the louingest worms Earth ever
sent forth: offer them money, they scorn to touch it: It Is pity they should.
neither (having so many Goldsmiths amongst them) do they weigh Gold. Never,
unless it be at football.
Reach to take 'em by the hand, they will not do it for an hundred pound. And
why? Shall they and we be Haile-fellow well met?

How grossly do they wrong them, that report, how they stop their noses at
us, and would make Bonfires in their Towns to be ridd of us? This is another
lie: They never come near any of us, but they are ready (Kind whorsons) to
fall down at our feet: and for ridding us away; why, take your leave of them
never so often, any Townesman thinks himself half undone, Nay halfe-hangd.
if he but see a Londoner Departing.

Much more could we speak in their praises, but we are afraid they will be
angry at this; for they love not to have their good deeds proclaimed to the
World. Who can proclaim them?
We will therefore conceal, what they would have hidden. And albeit we
cannot glue up Men's lips, We should be sorry else.
we know what we know of these People, and a good many of us are sure to be
Bound to them for ever.

Leave Them, and now to our Selves.
NOw shall you understand what we do, and how we live* or, though your Beadle
who Whippes Runne-awaies says, that we are merry in our Country houses, and
sit safe (as we think) from the gun-shotte of this Contagion, in our
Orchards and Gardens: Where the Treasure is the heart dwells.
Yet we would have him know, that we look back upon our Disconsolate Mother
(the City,) we sigh at her sorrows, weep for her distress, and are heavy in
Soul, but to remember her Lamentations. Far though She be from us, yet do
her Miseries fly into our Bosoms: And albeit (out of humane frailety) we left
her hoping thereby not to fall into Deaths hands, (O wretched and deceiaued
Men that we are!) Death has with his long Arm, reached us and our Families;
Death is a nimble Footeman and has overtaken us.
and therefore, scithence there is no Corner in the Kingdom (were it as vast
as the World) to hide us from his Face, thus do we Arm one an other against
him.

In these and the like Speeches (now following) does the Absent Londoner give
his fellow Citizen a little Consolation.

A Run-awaies Speech to his Fellow Run-awaies, Arming them (though flying from
Death) to meet Death bravely, and face to face.
O My dear Brothers, and Copartners in misery! Death is a cruel Creditor, and
will have all that we owe him. A Run-awaies Armor to be worn against Death.
Man is an imperfect Garden, and to keep it from being ouer-run with Weeds,
it must be turned into a Grave. As our Birth brings the beginning of all
things, so our Death shows us the end of all things: For if thou have lived
but one day, thou have seen all that All Men before in the World ever saw; the
same Light, the same Night; they came in as thou did, and went out as thou
must.

Death then being a Part of our Selves, why should we fly our Selves? Men, nor
their Lives are measured by the Ell, but by the Spanne: No matter how long Life
is, but how Good: No matter how Short, so the End be sweet: It is but Once, and
what happens but once can not be grievous.

Nothing makes Death dreadful, but that which follows Death: The
After-Reckoning troubles all our Arithmetic how to Cast it up: If nothing were
to be hoped for after this Life, the basest Creature were more happy then Man.

One entreated Caesar that he might be put to death, An old Soldiers suit to
Caesar.
because he was Old* and Lame and C^^zed: But (quoth Caesar) Ar't sure to be
dead Then? Let us all be Caesar's: Whether we live or dye, let us be like
Belles which at Coronations and Funerals are one and the same Ring: In Health
or Sickness, Crosses or Comforts, Men should be like Bells.
Calmes or Tempests, in Country or in City, so Tune our Souls, that all the
Notes may be Set for Heaven.

For Death has his A B. C. printed on every thing we look upon. Death's A. B.
C.
To behold Sheets turned down (at bedde-time) puts us in mind, that that is
the last Garment which we shall ever wear. If a Cloth be but laid on a Table,
think on a Coarse, and (in feeding) say to thy self; I fatten this Body for
Worms, which one day (how soon J know not) will fatten themselves on me. Our
Last Day is the Maister-day, The last Scaene crowns the Play.
look to that well, and the Calender of thy life goes well.

As thus we were Fortifying our selves against the Batteries of Death, A
Hot-spurre Londoner.
into our company rushes a Londoner, (ore that fights under our Country
Colors,) and He in a passionate Exclamation, cries out, Are you sending an
Answer to The Rod for Runne-awayes? And have you written so fully in praise
of our Countrey-Landlords; I am a Tennant as you are, let me pay them my Rent
too, and so entreated that in our Packet, his Letters of Commendations might be
enclosed, which begin thus.

An other manner of Picture, drawn in Lant-skip, of the Country, showing as
well as the other, and (as some say that are trauaild into those places) trewer.
Here the Morris begins Here Is plain dealing.
VT que erat impatiens irae -- O (quoth he!) We that have left London, ran
from a Storm to fall upon a Shipwreck; to save our throats from cutting
amongst Lambs, we have been bitten by Serpents, stung by Adders, worried by
Wolves, and set upon by Lions.

The Name of Londoner hateful,
That Name (of Londoner) which had wont to draw out a whole Town to stare upon
him, and a Church-yeard full of People (after Service) to gape upon his fine
Clothes, spruce silke-Stockins, and neat steeletto-fied Beard: That Name, to
be Called by which, all the Land (from one end to the other) sends her Sons,
here to Sow their Clownary, and to Reap Wit, out of that Wit, to Thrash
Wealth, and by that Wealth to climb to Honor: That Name is now so ill, that he
is half hanged in the Country that has it: Ninnio in Spanish is a boy.
As Spanish Women (in Sir Francis Drakes time) had wont to still their Ninnios
(their little Children,) with crying out, Hush, the Drake comes: So now, A
Londoner a Bugbeare.
Men, Women and Children, cry out, Away, Fly, a Londoner comes.

In Rufus his Reign, an Englishman durst not in his own Country say he was
an Englishman; a Londoner now is at the same pass.

Be a Londoner never so reverend for Age, never so Gallant, never so full of
Gold and Silver, never so sweet in behavior, so bewitching in Language, and
but once come to be examined by (those Russet Images of Authority) the Country
Bill-men, he speaks to the North wind, courts a Porpose at Sea, To Bayte one
of these Bears in Smithfield would make good sport.
seeks to soften a Rock, and strokes a Bear in the Bayting: Every one of
these Tytiries is a Case of Rapiers to a single Poniard.

It is no Tickling the^ like Troutes, to make 'em turn up their Bellies; No,
he that makes himself a Lamb amongst them is worried: Feed a Fool so long as
he will cramme, Subtle Gudgeons.
and he bursts his Belly: The more you fawn on them, the sooner they fly in
your face: As Heat makes a flea to skippe, A Hay-gee Gentleman.
so the warm breath of a Londoners mouth is able to make a Hay-Gee Gentleman
ready to leap out of his skin through fear.

Silly Creatures! their Country Spirits go but with Wherries, Oars would
drown them; but miserable Animals are they to be so cowardly, for Fear is a
terrible Hangman, and his Halters do they tie about their Own Necks. What
can be more Noble then to do Good? and what more Good then not to do ill? But
here in the Country (amongst the Barbarous sort) he is counted a Varlet that
dares be merciful, and he a good Townse-man that dares turn Devil.

To go Brave here, and for a Clown not to care a Straw for you: Nay, No
disgrace in the Country to have a Horse-Fly play with your nose.
in a Drincking-schoole to have him in his Sweat sit above you, and give you
base language, which you dare not for your guts but put up, is no more
disgrace then to stand Bare to a Constable in England, go Lowzy in Ireland, or
to Fare hard in Spain.

To stand and Ieere a Londoner in scorn, as he passes along, This Fashion will
not hold long we trow.
is the Country Posture: To walk by, with an insinuating face, lifting up the
Beauer, and crindging to a Carter is our City-Posture.

If now you demand how amongst these Heluetians, we wear out our wearisome
time; Here Is one of the Bottoms. Of the Kings of Macedon, who succeeded
Alexander the Great, some were afterward glad to become Ioyners, Scriueners,
Painters and such like: So Dionisius King of Sicily, kept a School in Corinth:
So Aelfrede a Saxon, King of England, One King a a Schoole-Maister, an other a
Cow-Heard.
was forced in extremity to dwell with a Cow-herd in Summerset-shire: And so,
many Citizens that have been brauer Fellows then Whifflers on Simon and Iudes
Day, are feign (in a number of Shires through England) to turn Hay-makers,
Cock Barley, and sweat with Pitching the Cart with Corn, thereby to win the
hearts of those, He must needs go whom the Devil drives.
whose loves by no alurements can be won to them: For as Pity amongst the
Stoickes was held a vicious Passion; So our Country Gnoffes (Hob, Dick, and
Hick) are turned Stoickes, and hate Pity worse then a Lawyer does a Clyent in
Forma-Pauperis,

These are the sower Plummes with which we have been fed in the Country; We
hope for better winter-Fruite.
we send them to you for Samples; but if you should after dinner have all these
sorts of Raw Fruict set before you, which were gathred for us, and that you
were constrained to eat them, as we were, it is impossible but to drive you
into Consumptions, for many of us here are fallen into that Languishing Disease
and we fear it will follow us to London.

We will st^ale in by Owle-light but we will see her.
To London! O Best-beloued of Cities, what sorrows do feel when we name thee,
because even then we can not see thee? As Children long banished from Parents,
at their first sight of them, Tears on eythers side (of Joy) will seal up all
utterance of Language, so will it fare with us when we behold Thee.

Astonished shall we stand, too hear thee relate the Tragical Overthrows of
thy Sons and Daughters, (our Brothers and Sisters:) And as sadly will thou
sit, listening to the Stories of our Peregrinations, in this Wilderness of
English Wilde-men.

And they reward thee well for it.
Nights and days have thou opened thy Gates to receive them into thy
buildings: How often have thou nourished them with the Milk of thy Breasts?
How often have thou emptied thy Coffers, to furnish them with Money? How many
of their Sons have thou taken from the Plough, and from their Poor and
Rusticall Parents, and placed those Sons (after thou had Tutord them) on
the Pinacles of Honor? not only to stand there with commanding Eyes over thy
Inhabitants (O now dejected London!) but from thence, thou have preferred them,
to ride in more glorious Chariots, and to attend as Counselors, on many of our
English Kings.

Yet (ungrateful as they are!) Us have they in our sorest extremities, thrust
out of Doors, denied us house-roome, even in their Stables amongst their
Horses, refuzde for Money to throw us Meat, (as Hunters do to their Dogs:)
and using us, our Wives and Children, (numbers of us being their own natural
Children) with a more then Turkish cruelty; As if none else in this Kingdom
had deserved punishment from Heaven, but thou only (dearest Mother,) and that
God were the God of a City alone, and not of the Country.

But stay, whither are we carried? why does this torrent of mourning and
complaining break in to ouerwhelme us, when an Arm from heaven has stuck up
a Land-marke to save us from drowning? The weekly Bills are come down (like
the Dove out of Noah's Arc, with her Oliue-branch, The Bills decreasing, are
Joys increasing.
a blessed sign that the waters are fallen!) O excellent Music! See
fellow-Citizens, Death has not cut off so many as he did in his four last
Battails, by 3000. persons and odd. God begins to repent him of his anger,
albeit numbers of us repent not of our sins. Celestial harmony played upon
3000 strings; the Bells have a desire to lessen their Consort, they have
wearied themselves with playing sad lessons, and deafned the Air to stay day
and night to hear them. These are Bankets unlooked for (therefore the sweeter;
these are comforts undeserved, (and therefore the welcomer.) Our hearts being
not a little (but wonderfully) revived, we will with some Tales of our own
misfortunes here in the Country, bestow upon you one half hours recreation.

A Londoner of great Estate, riding at the beginning of the Contagion, with his
wife and two only children (having no more) was for his money well receiud
into a Town, lodged in a fair house, the country-neighbors resorted to him,
and were glad of welcomes, for their stomachs were not so subject to Qualmes,
and watery spittings, as since they are fallen into. But in the end, God (to
show how far-soeuer we fly, has wings to ouer-take us) laid his hand upon
this Londoners two children, struck them with sickness first, and in a few
days after with Death.

Being dead, the Londoner (struck in years) fell into consideration of his
leaving the City, A Caveat for Run-awayes.
and (full of sorrow) much lamented his departing from it, most peremptorily
condemning him self, as guilty of pulling down the wrath of heaven upon his
two sweet Babes, for his hasty flying (like Adam) out of Gods reach, when at
the holding up of a finger, he would find him out. This added some heavy
weights to his sorrow, yet this seemed nothing, to what was laid upon him
afterward. For his two children lying dead upon a table, A rich Father Sexton
to his own Children.
the Minister would not come near him to bury them; no Clarke (to get a
Parsons living) would venture to Church with them; there was none to dig a
grave for as much ground as the whole town stood upon; and for Coffins! had he
bin owner of coffers filld with gold, he could not with them have hired a
fellow to make one. Then came into his mind the happiness of Londoners at
home: for all their miseries, for all the tedious marchings of threescore or
fourscore in a day to one Churchyard, yet there was a Comfort, a blessing, a
rejoicing, to see those bodies receive decent Christian Burial. Had his
children bin snatchd from him in London, I could, said he (his heart strings
being ready to crack with sighing) have had friends and kindred, to accompany
them to their graves: no Ceremonies should have been wanting due to the dead:
But now! and then he brake off; recollecting his spirits, and resolving to make
a virtue of necessity, He determined (seeing no other remedy) to bury his
children himself. A grave hereupon he dug in the handsomest fashion he
could, and then fetching first one child, and after, the other (his Wife being
a partner in this tragical passage) he read Service over them; the Mother,
when he came to these words, Earth to earth, Ashes to ashes, performing that
duty.

A Mother and her Son.
This is too sad; here is one more merry. A Prentice of London being handsomely
attired in one fair suit, and carrying another down with him, went to see his
mother in the country 45 miles from London; with fetching a compass (for he
knew what danger it was to fall into the hands of that English-Spanish
Inquisition, (the Muster of Billmen) he gat into the backside of his Mothers
house; to her, notice being given, that her son was come from London, she
was ready to fall into a swound; she could not hold a joint; her cheeks lookd
pale, and her eyes with fear almost settled in her head: In the end, Affection
conquering Passion, she ventured to see him. He, as she was approaching, falling
on his knees for her blessing, the first word she uttered was this, God bless
thee, and God bless me from coming near thy company. And so charging him as
yet not to come into the house, but to keep himself in an out Wood-pile,
whither a Bed should be sent him, with which the young man was content, only it
grieved him, that his mother (all the time that she talked with him) stood not
only a great distance from him, but held her nose between her fingers.

My young Master had brought a Comrade with him, who was to leave him the next
morning: that night therefore they would be merry: good drink was sent them by
a Maid, who set it a far off, and they must fetch it: The Conditions had been
good in a dear year.
then had they a joint of Meat laid to the fire, which was likewise sent them,
but with this condition, They were to eat it up every bit; for not so much as
the bones they left, should be given to any dog in the house or town. Night
being come, and our travailing Caualiers having a desire to drink Tobacco,
which they brought with them: a clown of the house (when the mother was in
bed) plucked up a good heart, rubbd his cheeks and forehead, gave half a score
hemmes, to fetch up his spirit, which ran to his heels, and lighting a candle,
swore, Come life, come death, A valiant Coward.
he would to his young Master, he had but a breath to lose, knew he was grass
and hay; but (how mortal soever) he would to Master John, and drink a whiffe
with him. The valiant Desper-view did so: but the Watch walking the Round (when
the Pipes were discharging) the candle played the Tel-tale, and told them; More
feared then hurt.
two Londoners were there. Upon this, the Town was instantly in a Hoobbub, the
house beset with Browne-Bills, and Authority in a Base-Organ-pipe-voice
commanded the two dangerous Londoners to be tredging, there was no staying for
them there. The mother arose, cursd Tobacco that ere it came to light, stood
stoutly for her son awhile; yet the town-bullets of threats and persuasions
thumping about her ears, in the end she yielded, they should raise the siege,
and depart with Bag and baggage the next morning.

In show they did so, and marchd both away with small dishonor; but the son
secretly returned again at night, was lodged in some remote room (good for
nothing but a Londoner) and there kept till a new Suit was made him; which
done, he was washed naked twice or thrice, his other clothes ayrd in a oven,
yet being smelt out, his mothers house was shut up for a month after.

In another place, a poor man dying in the fields (as hundreds round about the
Country have done the like) none would come near the body, A Man's bowels eaten
out by Dogs or Hoggs.
none give it Christian (nay any) burial: so that it lay so long above ground,
that Hounds or Hoggs had eaten out his bowels, and so was left that beasts
might end as they had begun, to make their bellies serve for his grave. And
this happened within few miles of Kiddermaster.

We could tell you 500 dismal events happening in the country, and put by the
people upon us, and all others that travel: so wretchedly have they handled
men in some places, that when a shilling has bin offered for a can of fair
water, it could not be had for money, because they durst not come near the
parties; and in one poor village, a Horse-smith, who never in his life was
worth half a Bar of Iron, swore he would not shoe a Londoners Horse for ten
pound.

We could give you a full Picture of many others, drawn with infinite
absurdities about them of their own natural committing. But in doing so, we
shall but disgrace our own Nation, and leave a discovery to the world how
weakly Manned their Souls are with Faith, and a confident resolution, in the
Omnipotent mercy of God.

It is fit to Fly, and withstand this Pestiferous Enemy by all fair and
lawful means, but These Country people run backward (with too much fear, but
no wit) so that at every footes removing, they are in danger to break their
own necks.

O London! how we hunger and thirst to be within thy walls: Would to Heaven
the City and Country were diuorc'd, and we parted from them, Away we
determine to come, yet with many Arguments are frighted from setting forward:
We lay several Plots, but build upon none: Sound every little Creek, and
River, and find the water in some places too shallow, and in some too deep,
therefore too perrillous.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria Vulgus. We Londoners a thousand
Questions make,
Which way to go, yet know not which to take.
If we put not in at London, God prosper us in our next voyage, which is, that
we may all meet in Heaven.

FINIS.

