The Casket of Jewels: Contaynynge a plain description of Moral Philophie,
diligently and after a very easy Method declared by the well learned and
famous Author Cornelius Valerius: Lately turned out of Latin into English, by
I. C.

Inuidia factum premit. Imprinted at London, by William How, for Richard
Johnes. 1571.

blazon or coat of arms G C
^RTVS MEA VITA MEA.

To the Right worshipful sir Ceruis Clyfton Knight, his daily Orator I. C.
vvissheth long health with increase of much Worship and Vettu.
IF we shall consider which thing I do oftentimes with my self, (right
worshipful Sir) of what dexterity and sharpness of wit, the ancient
Sages, and perelesse Philophers have been, with what industry and paynefull
toil they have sweated in boltynge out the secret, and perplexed mysteries of
Nature, we have doubtless an unspeakable occasion to rejoice, because
through such their most excellent workinges we are allured to the knowledge of
sundry sciences: and yet we must, or at least we should more bewail our
selves, that contemplatynge such worthy documentes and infallible principles
co^ducing to the manifold kinds of Godliness and Virtue, we do little or
nothing provide for our wealth and commodity, but rather unto our great shame
and reproach confess our selves wretched bondmen, and miserable captives to
the scepter and detestable servitude of Ignorance. For among all such
benefits which we so bountifully at their hands have receiuued, no one seems
so excellent, so precious, and so highli to be praised, and yet of us less
followed and embraced, as is Moral philosophy, a matter comprehending the
perfect trade how to live among men soberly and honestly, and so directly
stakinge out the undeceivable bounds to the castle of Virtue, that none can
be more apparent only Apostolical doctrine excepted. Of which when I pondered
with my self how greatly the members of the Weal Public even at these our
days have need of, though the cancred infirmity of a cowardly mind, had
welnie suppressed my conceived purpose, yet aduauncinge against the ensign of
dastardly courage, and calli^g to my mind the bening cleme^cy that so brightly
casts her beams from your countenance, and the prone, ready and willing
mind, zeal and fervent desire toward all Godly and virtuous learning, which
all men consider, and I my self assuredly understand, I concluded forthwith
to finish this my Translation, that under the safeward of your Worships
protection it may creep alonge to the behoof of my Country, and the better
be fensed and fortified against the encountering, and wilful reprehention of
shameless tongues.

Doubtless (right worshipful sir) among so many your renowned deeds of
Godliness, this may not be the least, if you shall accept this my industry
and travel (such as it is) as a token of my hearty goodwill, very desirous
hereby to show my self zealous of a friend of so worthy a vocation. And
whereas larger matters cannot be compassed, these simple (such is my
confidence) shall not be repelled and rejected: which if I shall perceive to take
a prosperous success, henceforth more serious endeavor shall be bestowed to
atchiue greater if ability, thereunto be correspondent.

For I reckon all this my labor very feeble, and sclenderly, or nothing able
to prevail, without your worship were the Fortress hereof, which with all my
good will and endeavor I dutifully exhibit, not as to learn you any precept in
which already you are not exactly seen, but by your famous reputation, such is
my desire, to procure it the better credit with others. For when our English
youth shall contemplate Moral Disciplyne to be ratified by so prudent and
grave a Gentelman void of all troublesome moodes of mind, polished with such
excellent understanding, adorned with precious virtues, and practiced
profoundly in the experience of politik affairs annexed with Marciall
Exploytes, no doubt they and all others will more lovingly regard the cause,
as it is behoueable for them to do, and more speedely will they settle the^
selves to pursue those fruictfull instructions chiefly to be desired in a
Commonwealth orderly, and discretly to be stablished. For herein is comprised a
mean to procure rest and peasiblenesse in private life, to purchase estimacion
and dignity in bearing of office, in every degree to dismou^t unruliness,
and conte^cious sturres to surprise al moodinesse of mind to extirpat
incestuous concupiscence, and finally to reenforce, strengthen and support an
impregnable rule of usage, and laudable behavior. This book is evidently the
Glass of intelligence: the Theater of comely conversation: The Stage of honest
demenour: the Treasure house of Civility: the Conduite to true Pleasure, and
eternal Felicity. It is the Casket of Jewels: the Maystresse of Prudence:
the Bulvvarke of equity: the Palace of Fortitude: the Nurse of Soberness: the
Parent of Comeliness.

Which my attempt (howsoever done) I have presumed upon hope of full remission
for my boldness to dedecate the same unto your worship, although far unworthy
and over base to be received, the which trustinge you will none otherwise
accept than did Artoexerxes the Apple of the poor man, I close up my matter,
humbly besechinge Almighty God perfectly to guide you in the steps of his most
holy will, mercifully to graffe in you the light of true godliness, ardently to
cause that Virtuous Lady of yours to burn in the pefect works of
Christianity, abundantly to replenish you both with much worlds worship,
wealth and prosp^ritie, and after this trans^^orie life to inaugure you both
with the Blisfull joys of celestial felicity. Amen.

Your daily Orator I. C.

The Preface of the Translatour to the Reader.
TErence the worthy writer of Comedies, when as he had once ended his works and
determined with him self to publish the same, doubtless he feared nothing
more than the maleuolous reprehencion of carping tounges. For he knevv
assuredly, that at those days (as evermore hitherto it has been) the common
people as they polluted their bodies with voluptuous and ill favored manners,
so did they defile and contaminate their minds with the furious darts of
ZOYLVS Spirit. And to say the truth, he wrought him self this suspicion not
without a cause: for as soon as he had disclosed the secrettes of his study
which not without great toil and paineful labor he had vvrapped together,
there vvanted not some who wear ready bente and prepared to be wreake the
spiteful malice of their cancred hearts, and without just cause of
controlment to manifest the privy stinges of their venomous conscience. This
(gentle Reader) when I considered with my felfe, I must needs confess that I
was greatly dismaide, and meruailouslie terrified from mine enterprise, and
already, as it were through sundry conclusions to my self, allured and
persuaded rather to retire, than hardilie and stoutly to adventure my journey.
Yet contrariwise I ponderinge in my mind the contrariety of humane Nature,
and the maruailous diversity of disposicion wherewith it is embrewed, and then
again understanding that all are not enemies unto the Crown of Virtue, ne
Foes to the Scepter of Godliness, I thought it more expedient by my simple
labor and industry to gratify and please the good, than by suppressing my
attempt cowardly to flee the busy brains of the naughty and reprobate.
Certes the wicked are to be abandoned with their wickedness, but the good are
to be loved and cherished for their godliness. The studious sercher of wisdom
will more seriously pursue the holsom and necessary instructions for life,
then the exquisite situation of words. and will rather covet fruitful lessons,
and good admonicions, than sugared sentences, oratorial tricks, and outlandish
terms. But the unsteadfast and unstable mind of the vicious person (I will
speak of a thing manifestly and commonly known) had leiffer to espy some
frivolous doubt to cauell and Question upon, than to follow any seemly
aduertisment, perfectly staking out the way to laudable Virtue. Such a Reader
as has his good will fully addicted to pastaunces and unhappy delites had
rather I dare say both to see and read the brutish books of VENUS plays,
than to spend his time and busy his brain in such a Treatise which may
instruct and teach him to live Prudentlie, justly, valiantly, and soberlie:
with the honest Reader I trust I shall purchase favor and just commendation,
and to the other this little work shall be sufficient to teach him for to
vanquish and bridle his vnfauorie delight in bourding, to mittigate his furious
braide of reprehencion, to assuage the comb of his insolente Arrogancy, to
appease the rage of his skornefull spirit, and finally to make him not only
a fit Disciple or hearer, but also a profitable follower of Moral
Philosophy. Verelie all estates, all degrees, all ages, have presently laid
before their Eyes to look on the Glass of all Virtue: for as in a Glass they
may easelie contemplate what is decent, or else unseemly in their parsonage,
and apparel, so by fastening their minds and understandings hereupon they
may with no less facilitee ma^ke consider, and bear away what is to be
followed in their whole course of life, or what is to be eschewed, what to be
retained, as good and profitable, or what to be rejected as vnco^modious and
hurtefull. Such whether they be noble or base, rich or poor, old or young, as
have al their delices, and corporal delites as fleshfondinges, and
paumperinges of the vital portion subject to the renowned and victorious
bondage of REASON, such I say have here to gather aduisements and instructions
profitable and expediente to ratify and confirm their lives: and others who
like EPICVRTENS are vanquished with gorgious fare and overwhelmed, buried,
and drowned, in the bottomless Gulffes of innumerable vanities, have hereby
to reform their insestuous conuersacions, to amend their notorious faults, to
banish their toublesome woods of mind, to expel and put away their
accustomed doings, and by adorninge them selves with the flourishinge
Branches of Virtue by little and little to creep to the Fountain of that
greatest Soueraintie For assure thy self (gentle Reader) that no man living
can attain unto the vtterest good (as ARISTOTLE the Prince of al Philosophers
does say) unless he shall first subdue his apetites, bridell his desires,
Imprison his lusts, and confound his mad and bestiall affections, through which
nature is enfeebled, and he withdrawn from the fellowship of goodness and
honesty. And that I may not borowe thy patience any longer, I do instantly
request, that if any part of this my Transacion shall offend thine ears, thou will courtously deal with me, rather considering the proper worthiness and
sense of the Aucthor which is most excellence, then my baseness and tennitie
of Style, for the default of Eloquence.

Fare well.
Wholesome Counsel for a Christian man.
Give alms to the poor daily.
Endure affliction quietly.
Remember thy end steadfastly.
Utter Gods word manfully.
In all things work rightfully.
Serve God and thy Prince duly.
Call for grace howerly.
Love thy neighbors freendly.
Yield to the truth meekely.
Favor learning earnestly.
Trust in Christ's mercy faithfully.
Obtain thou friendship perfectly.
No man oppress Wrongfully.
Cornelius Valerius his Moral Description lately Englisshed.
Of the end and Parts of Moral Science. Cap. i.
EThica Philosophia, which in Latin is called De Moribus and Moralis, the
philosophy of maniers and Moral, is a mean to live well: either a Science to
judge uprightly of conditions, and of the Actions and duties of common life.
The Philosophers only imitatyng the light of Nature and Reason as their Guide,
have delivered it unto us diligently adorned: whose whole industry especially
either is conuersaunt in the boultynge out, and unfolding the perplexity of
Nature, or else in the Doctrine of life and conditions.

(...). 1. ^d.
Albeit perdy, as CICERO writes, incontinent after a three parted kind of
Philosophy was received of PLATO: the one of life and Facions, the other of
Natural and diffuse things: the third of reasonyng and adiudgyng both what is
true, and what is false, what is honest in talk, or evil, what is consonant,
what disagreable: yet they have pursued no member of Philosophy more exactly (
SOCRATES being the Author and Counselor) than that, than which nothing was
more behoueable to pass human life delectably, which traineth and fashioneth
the properties of men, and righteth all the operacions of life by the Squire of
Virtue: that the way to live honestly may be embraced: that the opinions of men
might be uprightly infourmed of commodious and hurtful things, honest and
filthy, of matters to be desired and avoided, of things profitable and
unprofitable: who oftentimes geuyng Sentence of these peruersly, do preise good
and evil not according to their valuacion. An upright judgment of divine and
humain matters is the very gorgious reward of God For God both reising up the
brightness of our mind, and also the power of understanding darkened through
the infectiue sickness of the body, does polish it with a new light eake
redresseth our will through his clemency erst piteously depraved. We being
armed with these proppes may assaie to atchiue unto the knowledge and
intelligence of truth. There be some who deem that the best proporcion of
living ought rather to be gathered out of sacred Scriptures, VV^ Phil^phy i^ be
m^tated christ men ^
than out of profane Philosophy: which we like wise would suppose to be more
sure and certain, if those things were comprehended in those celestial
learninges vttred by the mouth of the Omnipotent, which are descriued of
Ethnical writers touching the Civil associacion of men among them selves, and
the mainteining of the weal public, without which, they who obey the
precepts of God, and the holy men are not of power to lead a peasible life.
Wherefore because ye Philosophers ignorant verily of Christian Religion, yet
very studious of humain wisdom, imitating that law of Nature engraven from
above in all men's minds, have given laws profitable to lead the life
uprightly, and right excellent documents concerning manners with a constant and
perpetual sentence of just and wrongful doings, and have left us grave
sayings by which we may be encouraged to Virtue, and terrified from vices, and
may understand that we ought to live well and honestly self Nature being our
leader, eake discern the rewards which are prepared of God for the good, and
punishments for the reprobate, and that conscience bearing witness, by which
every wight is either accused, or excused: why should we be afraid to use
these, especially which nothing impugn Christian Religion, and profit not a
little? we therefore borowing of the very best Philosophers the conuenientest
rules to live ordinately ought to measure them according to the precepte of
holy Scriptures. The sum of all Philosophy Moral consists in these three
points: that the end of man and felicity may be understood, that troublesome
moodes may be assuaged, that virtues and contrarious to these may be diligently
considered, that them we may embrace, and eschew these, and may govern our
life with virtue, godly, and justly: less we should conceive a perverse
opinion of Catholic religion, or less we would charge another with that,
which we would not our selves. For that is the chiefest regard of well minded
Philosophers, that the will of men may be shaped to virtue, and to all
humanity, and amiable concord, that the life may be guided both privately and
openly, and be obedient unto the determinacion of nature. This discipline of
life trinely to be instituted although it be one, and the same notwithstanding
being severed in three parts, after a diverse consideration, it is distributed
into Monasticen, into Oeconomicen, and into Politicen: that is to wit into
solitary, Domestical and Civil: of which the first apperteineth to fashion
the conditions of singular men: the other to govern the Family well: The third
rightly to rule the common Wealth. The first furnishes every man's mind, and
allureth it to virtue, and is the seedplot of an householde, as the multitude
of households be the fundacion of a City. And first and foremost verily that
shall be made apparent which bewtifieth the guises and mind of each person, with
ye lessons of honest living. For first of all others he is to be learned who
may be able to trade either the family, or else the City well. Afterward
compendiously the householde providence, eke the politic shall be touched,
which perhaps it shall be lawful to comprehend under that place of the solitary
member of philosophy, by which Prudencie is handled, except any one had rather
to wrest it unto common Justice, that there may be an equity domestical and
civil. Because then the mattier in which all this Philosophy of Manners is
busied, are human actions, which she teaches to order discretli (for all they
are adiected to some final scope) I think it convenient we say nothing in
this place, before that briefly we debate of the end and greatest good, unto
which the operations are directed.

Which being understood, immediately we shall dispute somewhat more
abundantly of Actions, by which an entrance may be made unto that soueraintie.

Of the end of man, and the Sovereign good. Cap. ij.
Only men by reason they are endewed with knowledge do not only somewhat for
some end, but also purpose some utmost mark of all their labors, and hit most
commodious for them selves: But all other living creatures are carried to that
only which is present thorough the blind sweigh of Nature. Because every end
verily, if it be to be wished for of a man, is good the latter end shall be the
sovereign good, and to be desired of it self, for whose sake all things are
constituted, and through adeption of which men are made Fortunate and blessed:
Yet what manner of thing that is, which may seem to be accounted last and one
alone, eke the greatest good it is doubted of philosophers, and a long time
inquired for in vain, and after sundry facions called in Question: of which
some have placed felicity in pleasure, others in knowledge, some in honor others
in other matters. Plato more divine then the rest collocated the same in using
the contemplacion of the chiefest goodness, either of the good Idaea or else of
God and heavenly wisdom: Unto whom by how much any man may be made more like,
by so much he thought him more happy, and the rather a copartner of be atitude:
But this felicity not to chance in this life, because no man may be said happy
before his dying day. Aristotle in his first book Ad Nicomachum, esteemed
felicity to be situated in a perfect action answerable to perfect virtue, that
is to wit which may be framed by the rule of wisdom: because she did appear
to transporte very commendable and suffycient perfection to man: Whereas also
the Peripatetikes do commonstrate a blessed life to be concluded by virtue:
Which yet if it be garnyshed with the gooddes of body and Fortune, should be
most blessed: for he granted blessedness to consist of a tryple sort of
goods: but in his tenth Book he did suppose it to be pytched in delectation
contemplative: that although that active felicyty may be referred to this
contemplative, yet in her proper kind she may be the final end. As who say
truly, that which is one sovereign good, may be double.

Plato more better, and more agreeable unto christian religion, and without
doubt more truly did define it thus, that according to his opinion also a
soueraintie should be appointed for us very co^modiously, The ^rayn^ for m^ God
(...) thro^ him (...) lastin^
an eternal pleasure of seeing and having ye fruition of God, to be wyshed for
of it self: the which who that obtay^eth is rightly named blessed: who now
wants nothing unto perfect felicity, and so deliteth therein, that he may
request no whit more, since he is dispatched from all calamities, and enriched
with everlasting life: which no man can compass but through the benefit and
gift of god, less any one should glory in his own opinion. For that is not of
him that is willing, nor yet purueying, but of God having compassyon, and the
peculiar dowry of the Holy Ghost granted through Christ our Lord: unto whom
no man can attain, unless the heavenly father shall draw him, the Author of
all felicity, in whom, known by the Son, the confidence of immortality is
reposed for us: which are borne for no other intent, then that we should
acknowledge him to be the builder, that we should attribute all glory unto him,
that we should love him with all our mind, and should worship him as he
has given in commandment. Because we must pass unto this mark by the
operacions of virtue, it follows that first of all we reason of these. But
where as the Actions are voluntary, and good will it self is ingrassed in the
mind of man, which being subject to God only has a free original of doing,
but is so disturbed with diverse mocions that humane operacions most commonly do
roue from the straight pathe of virtue: We will in few words comprise the
beginning of affections, and of vices, and virtues. The soul of man locked in
a mortal corpse is as it were sundred in two parts, of which one is heavenly,
like a certain beam glistering with divine excellency, as the mind.

The other is yoked to the body, as ap^etite, or desire, and anger. The higher
^s a receauer of Reason: The lower is ^gnorant: it is her part to rule, and it
^elonges unto this to obey. But this oftentimes as an Horse waryng fierce, not
regarding the will of the Carter, is whirled with a violent brayde unto those
things which him likes, whether they be honest or filthy, yeldyng a deaf
ear to reason, and not hearing the mind and intelligence, which is a
copartner of those knowledges, which by nature are planted in us, or rather
engendered of God: and at all times incourageth unto honest mattiers, whether
they be pleasant, or lamentable. For there is a triple good: Honest,
profitable, and pleasant. Honest is, which agrees with the straight sentence
of Reason: Profitable is, which succoureth nature and life. Pleasant is, which
deliteth natural appetite, as the drink the thyrsty. And out of these
Fountaynes proceed all actions. It is the duty of the mind and Intelligence
to determyne: but to the other part it belongs to execute the commandment
of the mind, and to labor. The mind has two principal Intelligences
entalied of nature: the one of debatinge truth and falshoode, the other of
discerning good and evil. For all men through a certain secret sense do
discern what things are just, and wrongful (so that this light of nature be
not pesterd) for nature has given to us as it were little sparks and seeds,
and a certain procliuitie of mind, and faculty to labor. This affection
does stir: Operacion succeeds the affection, and by often operacions there
is gotten a perfectnes, either of virtue, if it be trained unto a ^ood end, or
else of vice, if unto an evil. and this is the ground of all human ^ctions.

Of Affections. Cap. iij.
Since perdie every form of virtues and vices does spring as it were out ^f
these Fountains, hability, affection, operation, and perfection: we will
compendiously manifest these: And certes those few things which are said
concerning faculty shall suffice. And let that difference be observed betwixt
the native readiness of the mind, and the braide or affection of this
procliuity. As choler does move the nature of an ireful man, so does the
coveting of glory force the covetous of honor. Henceforth then we have to
break our mind of affections. Affection, is a commocion of the mind,
disquieting the tranquillity thereof, which in Greek is called (...) and of
Cicero Perturbatio, a Perturbation, and it is defined, a troublesome and a
violent mood of the soul, bended from reason, an enemy to the mind, and
quiet life. The Stoikes when as they saw a man to be turmoyled hither and
thither with many and wicked desires, and falsely supposed the very nature of
man to be uncorrupted, and not defloure, dthey gainsaid affections to be
natural, but granted them to be only opinions either of good or ill, and in
their kind every one to be vicious, and to be rooted out of the nature of
men, from which they would a wise man to be fre: yet they are easily
convicted of error. For first of all that they are Native and engendered, by yt
it is lightly confirmed, because motions and certain inclinations are
ingraffed in living creatures by nature, as the Zeal of parents toward
their Children. And who sees not some men to be more inclined to anger or love,
to ioyfulnesse or heaviness than other some. Farthermore that all are not
faultye thereby it is apparent enough, by reason the very law of God gives us
in charge to bear love toward him, toward all men, toward our wife,
children, and parents: And enioyneth us mercy, hope, confidence, joy, and
some other affections very profitable and expedient to encourage the mind. For
what is more commodious for the life of man than the hope of glory, and
rewards, and the fear of rebuke and punishments. And so doubtless affctions
may be handsomely divided that some may be called good by nature, which agree with
reason or else with the prescript of nature, as good will, compassion. Some
evil, which do disagree, as Hatred, Envy, Pride, Dispere. Some betwixt both,
as anger, hope, boldness, fear, desire, love, merinesse, sorrow: which that they
may not swerve from ^ertue, they are to be ruled by the bri^ell of reason, and
to be Judged by mediocrity. But neither is that to be commended, which some
construed, that affections are natural, not also voluntary. For whereas our
will only subject to God may apppeare to have a free Original to work, it is
to be thought, the very readiness perdie unto these or them, and likewise the
first motion to be natural; but their vexacions to be voluntary, and able to
be chastised by the authority of reason, less they should run headling, and be
plucked with violence, eake enforce a man immediately welny unwilling unto
naughtiness. Albeit truly at that time the will coveting does range at
liberty, and by some means may retain it if so she would invoke God the
helper. For put case it be feeble, yet there is some liberty which when shame
and fear are set out to the show may be of power to bridle the affections. And
that they can be corrected by discipline, those words delivered of God do
manifestly denounce. Sub te erit appetitus tuus, and tu Dominaberis illi:
Under thee shall be thine apetite, and thou shall bear rule over it. Whereas also
a man consists of two parts, a Soul and a body, and there is a double
force of the soul, one a copartner of reason, the other void: she is steadfast
and quiet, this wandering, and tormented with affections, which most commonly
does disquiet her: where by it insueth that a man, if he does pursue the advice
of reason and intelligence he may want perturbacion: But if he had rather to
become Subject unto the concupiscence of the body, he may be diversely
provoked. The Fountain then of affections is that part of the Soul void of
reason: and that is double (...) waryng angry, and (...)very desirous of a
thing. The which if refusinge the Empire and Yoke of the mind and reason, it
be carried with his proper vehemency, it is needful that forthwith one or
other of the perturbations be incensed, and plucked through the opinion or
similytude of good or ill, sometimes bither and sometimes thither, eke now and
then be brought all out of frame with pleasure or lust, and one while with
timidity or hatred. For unto these two sorts it appears that any one of the
affections may be referred, because all mocions proceed from a suspicion of
good or evil, whether it be present, or absent. Out of the Judgment of good
flows pleasure, and out of the conceit of evil comes sorrow. Unto pleasure
are referred, love, desire, gladness, which succoure nature, and among these
especially joy: Unto sorrow appertain, anger, hatred, fear, sadness, which
discommoditie Nature most painfully. The Harbourough forsouthe of them all is
featelie disposed in the heart, to whom there is a great familyarity with
will, which either may covet, or else eschew, if any thing be objected, which
may seem either to pleasure, or damage nature.

Of Love. Cap. iiij.
Love is an inclination of will, prone to that which is thought good. For when
as any thing is proffered, which either is good in deed, or else deliteth with
a certain likelihood of good, through that opinion, the greedy faculti of the
Soul is vehemently enticed to enjoy and possess the same. And of the goods,
which are sought for of men, we told that there were three kinds: Honest,
Profitable and Pleasant, which commonly are coupled together, because one
thing both may be honest, and profitable, and pleasant: yet not by and by that
which is either profitable, or pleasant, is honest: whereas these now and than
may appear to contend with honesty. But for all this nothing is in deed
either profitable, or pleasant, which same is not honest. Certes what is honest
that is only required for the proper behoof, no consideration had neither of
commodity, nor of delectation. How great the power of love is, the verses of
Poets do bear witness, and we deem that there be very few which can quite
them selves clear of all love. Plato constituted a threefolde love, the first
which embraces and cherishes only Virtue, but this is exempted from the
number of affections, he appears rather to be reckned among virtues, because
he uses the judgment of upright Reason: The other filthy which cloueth to
the pleasure of body: The third which minds the Soul and Body. Nothing is
more noble than the first, nothing more foul than the other: The third truly
is a companion of both, but yet he rometh abroad no less than the other: By
reason he reuerenceth the personage of the body, and ardenly esteems it.
Unless we repine this love resortyng amorously, and strokyng the mind with
sugared words and except this love sike soul brought unto another bayte: Feats
of Physic should be practiced in vain, when as now the love shall grow in
use, eake shall have taken deeper roots.

Of Desire and Hope. Cap. v.
DEsire is a lust to enjoy that good, which as yet is not present: If so
that be in place, it is loved, but if it be out of sight, it is coueited. Out
of this Fountain (if the sentence of reason be neglected, and the desire be
immoderate, and exceed the bounds and Limits of Nature who is apaid with few
things) many vices do arise: as Niggardlines, Ambicion, Sensuality, Riot and
such other. Hope is defined of Cicero, an expectation of good, to whom despair
is contrary, a supposed difficultye and mistrust of a good thing to be
atchiued, the which shall be Recapitulated heareafter among the fourmes of
sadness.

It is the guise of a wise man, to hope for those things, which he may
attain, neither rashly to despair, whither he may atchiue through travail.
And this hope verily by which we wish for good, either true or shadowed,
differs from that which is termed Theological, and it is a virtue, eke is
depainted to be a waytinge for eternal felicity: Unto whom in like case the
repugnant vice is, Desperatio, despeire.

Of Gladness. Cap. vi.
Gladness is an affection which is stirred with the opinion of some present
goodness, wherewith the mind is delited. Cicero does distynguish Gaudiu^ and
Laetitiam, joy and gladness in this wise, that the mind should be moved
with joy patiently, and constantly, but with gladness vainly and prodigally.
With this affection ye Nature is merueilously delighted, and the heart enlarged,
and as it were embracing that which is apparent good, does stir the mind
sweetly and delectably, and faustreth life in the heart, which sorrow the
contrary passion, does oppress. And this pleasantness and delectacion for
the amplitude of ye good which is propounded, may be greater or lesser, and
either honest or filthy. It shabe honest if it be answerable to the mean of
nature, and unto reason: what one is gotten through the contemplation and
studies of commendable things. But filthy if it be immoderate, and dissonant
to reason: what one is received of corporal delites of perverse exercises, and
of ill will: as if any man should be delited with another man's harm, than
which vice nothing ought to be more abrogate from a man, especially a Christian.

Of Hatred and anger and like affections. Cap. vij.
Contrary to Love is hatred: which is defined of Cicero, Ira inueterata, a
long festred Anger, that is to wit of long continuance. This affection is
engendered of ye discontenting of the mind, detestinge the harm which is
understood, and damaged either with the deed or saying of some man, or
deming him self hurted: and sometimes abhorring from another freendship
through a privy instinct of nature. Even as perdie by Love all all men are
accorded, so by hatred they are vnyoked, than which nothing is more
pernicious to human society, which also by so much is more irkesom, by how
much more secretly it inuadeth. To contempne vices it profits but to love a
man Christian charity commands, and to forgive him which offends: But to
hate a man for no cause, is very obsurde, and most dissonant from upright
judgment. Unto hatred are ascribed many affection which are to be avoided of
a godly man: As dispight, as anger, as Hostility. Despite whereby any man
thinks another more base then himself: Whereas truly there is no cause why
any one should suppose himself to be preferred before his fellow, by reason
that he cannot commonstrate any thing of himself, which he has not received
else where, as it ought to be most evident unto the Christians by holy
Scriptures. Anger is defined, a lust to punish him who may seem to have hurted
with injury. This affection appears to be mingled with sorrow and a
greediness of reuengeme^t, which grievously racketh a man, and sharply
kindles against him, of whom he is thought to be displeasured, the most
troublesome of all the affections: by which not only the mind, but also the
whole body is brought into such a perplexity that for anger a man can uneath
see, and moderate his senses, and scarcely speak. Hereto does Hostility
belong, which is defined an anger of punishing observing opportunity. And
hither discord the destruction of the common weal, and hither all hatred is
referred. Iracundia does differ from Ira, because Iracundia is a native
faculty, by which any man is made prone to anger But Ira is a commocion of this
virtue, and a rage bended from reason: Whereby now and than the mind is so
turmoyled, that the angry man does very little disagree from the Frantike. And
truly it may be verified of Horace, Ira fu^or breuis, anger is a short fury:
and of Ennius, Insaniae principium, the original of Madness. The blood is
incensed with this passion, and waxes hot in the body, and the Spirits
suddenly disquieted do so trouble a man, and cause him so vnagreable to him
self, that he is said to be out of his Wits, neither to become his own man
before that the hot brayned mood shall assuage, and the vehemency
relinquisht. But not every anger is like contentious: for one is easier, eake
sooner provoked, and haleth a man unawares, but abides not long: Another is
more gentell truly, yet more bitter, and of greater induraunce, and cleuyng to
hatred, and seeking auengement. Neither ought every anger appear vicious, sith
in sacred Scriptures we may read in this wise: Irascimini, and nollite
peccare: Become you angry and sin not. Neither vncommodiously of Aristotle
the mediocritie of anger betwixt excess and defect is renowned, and moderate
anger linked as a companion of worthy prowess unto fortitude, which the
ancient Academikes (Cicero bearing record) reported to be as it wear the
Whetstone of valiant courage, that is to wit, the assistaunte: which Seneca
gives in precept to use, not as a Capitain but as a soldier. We must then be
agreeued with ungodliness, wrong, and other vices: and our mind must be
advanced when need is, when time and place do require, but rest reigned, if no
such occasion be ministered of anger. And by how much more grievously the mind
is solicitated, by so much more painfully we shall bridle Choler, we shall
master the brayde, and with all mean and might shall oppress it forthwith
the dominion of reason revoked, and that dismounted which kendled the wrath, we
shall extinguish the feruency, or else the punishment differred till another
season, we shall extenuate the passion.

Of Sadness. Cap. viij.
Sadness, or heaviness, is a perturbacion, drawinge together and oppressynge
the mind, which is defined of Cicero, a fresh opinion of present evil,
whereupon it may seem leifull the mind to be enlarged, and contracted. And after
a breefer way. Heaviness is a shrincking of the mind reason repining. This
takes beginning through the contemplacion of some evil, or else through the
want of some good thing. From this Fountain proceed sundry passions which
Cicero numbreth in the end of ye third book of Tusculans Questions, and in the
fourth, when as he had constituted four sorts of perturbacions, and had
explaned them, he recompteth them being reckned in these words: But unto each
disturbance more parts of the same sect are adiected, as unto sadness, envy,
emulation, backbiting, compassion (but this we suppose to be a good affection,
not a greef of ye mind) vexacion, wailing, sorrow, infelicity, woefulness,
lamentacion, pensiveness, disquietnesse, affliction, dispeire, of which below
we shall debate, and if any more be of the same stock. Hitherto Cicero, whom
read you your self defining every of the fourmes. As every pleasure is not
said to be vicyous, so neither every sadness. And as it is a laudable thing
to triumph at virtue: so to be sorrowful for vice, to restreigne the mind
immoderatly deliting, is profitable: neither seems it an unhonest thing
measurably to bewail our wives children, or Parents.

Of Fear. Cap. ix.
Fear is a waiting of evil, either a careful remembrance of pensiveness
about to ensew, as Cicero records, and it is repugnant to hope.

Fear is engendered of the haling together of the heart through an opinion of
imminent peril. Moderate fear is profitable, assenting to the counsel of
reason: But the unmeasurable or over small is discommended. Some are more
timorous, some more bold, which the Phisicions deem to be attributed to the
Complexion of body: but yet in this place their Judgment is of no simple
importance, by which timidity either is increased, or diminished. This
perturbacion does very sore disprofite Nature, and cheefely so tormenteth a man
^n sudden cases, that who is horribly ^stonished may appear no less to fall
^t of his right wits, than he which is ^reeuously displeased. Under fear be
many fourmes comprehended, of which all there is one cause; the end perdie and
opinion of evil is diverse: Sloth, terror, shame, fear, quaking, dismaiyng,
trouble, dread, whose definitions you shall eftsoon find with Cicero in the
same fourth book of Tusculans questions. To these been adjoined flattery,
which also is termed Timorous inticement: Suspicion a fear through a
consideracion of mischief at hand: dispeyre a low abashement of ye mind:
Pensiveness a prickinge care through the expectation of evil, and some other
mo fourmes. Cicero has descriued shame, and has not defined it. The
definicion may be absolved, that shame may be a fear of dishonesty, whom
blushing does follow, whereof hereafter we will debate more at large in Chapter
of Sober mood.

Of Boldness. Cap. x.
Boldness is gaged against fear, that we may in this place understand a
moderate virtue of aduenturing and a confidence of the mind, and a certain
mediocrity betwixt to much and to little either between timiditie and
unmeasurable hope, by which any one neither dreadyng mischief like to chance,
nor present, does aduenturously icoperde his ioynctes. This is engendered
otherwise than fear, through the extending of the heart, the Spirits
augmenting the heat thereof: through whose force by reason that the mind is
governed more often than by reason and counsel, the appellacion of boldness is
welme taken in the worse part. It is disagreeable unto true Fortitude, which
when as prudently the danger is thoroughly examined aduentureth the same with a
manly courage. And doubtless hitherto of affections: whose moderation is very
requisite for such as contend to the wished end by virtues, that also we may
enjoy a certain tranquilitye of mind in the Earth which in Greek is called
(...), which Democritus defined the bound of good things, and the ^igure and
semblaunce of that unfeigned Beatitude to come: The which without the benefit
of Christ, who only is of power to appease the moodes of men through the
confidence of life which shall happen, no wight at any season has obtained.

Of Virtue and her division and Original. Cap. xi.
Unto the end purposed in the beginning all the actions of men are directed:
to the which they aspire virtue being the guide, which very breefely may be
defined.

A perfection by which the will is pricked to do agreably to right reason. For
under the appellacion of right reason we understand the law of Nature, and the
knowledges of those things which are engendered with us, and ingraffed from
above in our minds, that we may justly determine of things good and bad, honest
and filthy: as, that God is to be worshipped, that no man is to be hurted, and
such like, the which shall gaily be called the Squire of virtue, unto which
the operation of the whole life may be directed: with whom less it does
consent it can not be nominated a virtue. Virtue is defined of Saint
Augustine, Ars been re^^eque viuendi: A science to live well and perfectly. Of
Cicero it is termed sometimes Recta ratio, a right reason, sometimes Animi
Habitus, a custom of the mind, aunswerable unto humane nature, mean, and
reason: sometimes Affectio animi constans conueniensque a steadfast and a
convenient affection, of the mind, making them commendable in whom it
persisteth. But of Aristotle it is defined Habitus animi iudicio susceptus in
mediocritate positus, A custom of the mind enterprised through reason
situated in mediocritie. In these definitions this word Constans expounds
what manner of thing Habitus is, that we understand him to be procured
through use, and exercise. That it is said, Ratione susceptus, enterprised, or
received through reason, that is to wit through election or advise: that
signifies that the operation of virtue is voluntary. That it is called
Habitus animi, a custom of the mind, that does commonstrate the habitacle of
virtue. That it is, in mediocritate positus, placed in a competent degree, that
is expressed in these words of Horace.

Virtue is a mean in mids degree
Closde in both sides as thou may see.
That we may conceive all virtues to be made moderated by a certain measurable
rate, which should be approved of wise persons, and skillful in many cases, and
good. But when we affirm that the operacion of virtue is voluntary, either
taken in hand through a free Judgment: that is to be considered, that we
being furthered by the secret benefit of God, and succoure of the holy Ghost,
without whom we are of strength to work nothing, obaying the right sentence
of the mind, indeuoring with voluntary will, may procure the perfection of
virtue through diligence and frequent use. For these be the two principal
efficient causes of virtue, a mind iudgyng rightly, and a will obeiyng him
which judges and commands not amiss: Which yet are very much succored
through learning, the which may make brightsom the understanding of those
sentences, who are within us by nature, and the light given of God oftentimes
obscured through wonderful darkness, as the book of holy Scripture
containing the.x. Commandments, and through an encouragyng of native
procliuitie, and through Discipline or obseruacion of manners, and peinfulnesse
in gouernynge operacions, as the shu^ning of Idleness, and of these things
which minister an occasion of offending. Plato writes in his book Meno,
virtue to be given of God, not to be engendered in us of nature (as ye Stoikes
would) neither to consist only by practice, as the Peripatetikes reported.

Certes it is to be thought that true virtues do not chance unless through a
celestial benefit: True ve^ is the b^fite of (...)
that also there be other some with less peines to be mollified of nature,
notwithstanding to be ratified by reason and custom.

Touching viciousness there is no doubt that it is voluntary. Very aptly
then it seems to be granted that human operations are without compulsion
and that all virtues and vices are voluntary. For what is done by coaction,
that meriteth neither praise, nor disprayse: but is esteemed worthy of
forgiveness. Virtue is sundred of others into two parts: Justice and
Fortitude, and of others into un Prudence Justice, Fortitude, and Temperaunce.
Some suppose virtue, as the whole to consist of members, which being applied
to sundry actions, may be of efficacy to constitute diverse fourmes, whereas of
all, one perfect virtue may be absolved: neither is there any one of them four
virtues which may want the fellowship of the residew. Aristotle in only
prudencie supporteth all virtues to be knitted together. We approuynge the
division of old Philosophers, will distribute virtue into them four braunces,
which even now we have placed: of whom the first does govern the
intelligence, the rest the will: to which may be annected whatsoever virtue else
where may be traced out. And first and foremost we will minister talk of
Prudencie, in whose rehersall also Domestical and Politic affairs shall
compendiouslye be remembered, which hereafter (if we shall think good) shall be
debated more at large. Plato of these four virtues, does name some perfect,
who have fired there resting places in the mind: of which such is the
society emonge them, that one being taken away, all do fall unto corruption:
but some imperfect, of which certain, others being exempted, notwithstanding
may be able to remain. There is an other particion of Virtues, by which they
are divided, into politic, Purgatory, and of the soul cleansed, and into them
as are like Paternes, and examples: which Macrobius does copiously depainte in
the eight Chapter of his former book of Commentaries on the dream of Scipio.
The first Solomon teaches in his Proverbs, the others we read in
Ecclesiastes, the third in the Ballets, the fourth in God. The politic do
rule humayn life, eke maintain the outward society of life: The Purgatory do
scour the spots of the souls, and do contend unto victory. But the virtues of
the soul cleansed are collocated in him, which (the vices now quite trodden
under foot) does constantly persevere in ye love of virtues: which S.
Augustine, when as he confirmed the other three, did not allow. They are
commonly termed Exemplares paterus and examples, which are as it were Ideae (as
the Greeks do call them) or else fourms and figures in the divine mind, since
God is the counterpaine of all good things. Virtue is defined of Cicero, as it
is declared, sometimes Recta racio a right reason, sometimes Natura in se
perfecta, and ad sumum perducta, a nature sound in it self, and brought unto
the utmost: Otherwhiles Rationis perfectio, a perfection of reason, which
definition Seneca imitatinge, doth^ record: Virtue is none other than an
upright reason, unto which as a rule all the doings of life are directed. And
feately every Original of virtue proceeds from perfect reason, neither is
virtue any other thing, then (as Cicero minionly descriueth) a right affection
of the mind, from whom as it were from some Fountain all undefiled operations,
which are nominated duties, do proceed, of which Cicero has excellently
written. And thus I suppose it be understood (because many have affirmed
that there is one only virtue) that perdie there is one office either an action
appointed to every man of vprighte reason, which (according to the
multiplicity of the matter which it handles, inclined to sundry affairs,) may
procreat these four virtues, which we have remembered above. For there is in
very deed, only one perfect affection of the mind, the mother of all
virtues: whose chaungeable appellations be, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude,
Temperaunce, of which we will reason in order: if first we shall geeue this
in Lesson, not only these which are called the gifts of the holy Ghost, but
likewise all true virtues (as Plato deuoutely supposed in that Dialogue which I
have recited before) to chance unto us by no means, unless by an heavenly
benefit: undoubtedly if we embrace the goodnesses of God, and labor to
attain to the end, he being our guide.

Of Prudencie. Cap. xij.
PRudencie, as it wear the Maistresse and judge of other virtues, of which
none can be destitute, is fitly placed in the first degree, as the Captain of
operacions, and the science of living: which is defined of Cicero, the
experience of desiring, and eschewinge things: that is to wit a right
affection of the mind, by which it is perceived what is to be done or shunned
in humayn actions. Of Cornificius in books of Rhetorik unto Herennius, it is
termed Calliditas a s^ines, which through a certain reason may obtain a
choice both of good and badde, because all the faculty of wisdom is ap^rooued
in the election of good and evil ^^ings, and of them as be neither good nor
^^^ll. He understands a wiliness, not (...) vicious, who often times boroweth
(...) same appellacion, but that subtility ^ch priuyly undermines with a
cer^ne honest, and profitable dissimula^n. Unto the which, crafty sayings, ^d
deceiptfull doings, which in war^ are called Stratagemes, are refer^ Of the
same writer also prudencie ^ermed Multarum rerum memoria, (...) memory of many
matters, and the (...) of plentiful affairs. Although per^ ^isdom as other
virtues, is conuer^nte in human actions. Notwith^nding especially troth is
Subject ^erto, as the mattier, which it hand^h. And certes the inquisicion and
^arche of soothe, seems to be peculiar (...) man. Unto the out finding of
verity ^ue virtues comprehended under In^elligence are adioygned of Aristotle:
Science, Art, Prudence, Sapience, understanding of which, Science, Sapience
and understanding require a a definite knowledge, cake an absolute virtue: Art
and prudencie a probable one. Science is defined, a sure and an established
knowledge and learning of some matter through the cause, which is perceived
without any aid by natural motions of the mind, or else it is atchiued
through demonstration of arguments: and it is of those things which may not
otherwise exist, or else be transfigured, as divinity. Art is said a perfection
to dispatche those things by reason which otherwise may be: as all human
crafts. Prudency is defined, A quality to perform those things by reason
which are either commodious or hurtful to man. Sapience verily, is a most
exquisit knowledge of those matters, which are able to be learned of man, who
compriseth the experience of divine and human affairs. Understanding is called
a quality, perceauing the principles, out of which confirmations are deducted.
Unto Prudency he annected Art, Science, Intelligence and Sapience; that
although verily he gainesaieth Virtue to be a Science, yet he supposes that
she is not of power to persevere without this. For although only goodness is
purposed to virtues, and troth unto Disciplines: yet whereas to the search
hereof a greediness of good is coupled. Science, Sapience, Art, and
Intelligence, appear that they may not absurdely be nominated virtues, if they
serve for the operations of Prudence, and succoure the outfindinge of that
which is good. They ought not attend verelye to the contemplacion of causes
only, since all the commendacion of Virtue consists in dooinge, and in
governing the life vndefiledly. Prudency then may take unto her as waiting
mates, understanding, for to know matters: Science truly to conceive them: Art
for the general use of life: Sapience for the out tracting of diverse things
that by these props she may pass to the knowledge of troth, and may
comprehend the very Sovereign good, and the lively Fountain of all wisdom
flowing with Heavenly waters, and rushinge forth most swiftly into eternal
life. Now whereas unto every virtue certain seats in the soul, from whence they
issue, are attributed: A place is granted to Prudencie in the mind, to the
remnaunt in the will: since it belongs to prudencie to bolt out what is
honest, or wicked in matters to be handled and to debate of the same with
iustful sentence. Which thing doubtless is adepted not only by wit, although
sharp, but by a great knowledge of sundry matters. And very pretely it is
said, Longo prudentia surgit ab vsu, Prudence arises through long practice:
that we understand the perfection of ye mind, whence creeps this dexterity
of triynge out the truth, to be termed prudencie, who desires a long life,
and the handlynge, and memory of diverse matters, and the science of present
cases to leuel uprightly the interchaungeable operation of men. Moreover it is
requisite that a prudent man be polished with a certain native faculty of
through seeing and adiudgyng the troth: by which he may contemplate things
present, and diligently discuss them, may call to remembrance matters past,
and may foresee sequels: through which he may excel in taking advise, and in
outfindyng wittily: through which he may pass in perceauyng clearly what is
true in each matter, and what is to be attempted: through which he may flourish
in proposinge sentence iustfully, eake in ratifiyng subtely and wisyly what is
decent, what filthy, what profitable. For there are three parts contained
under wisdom, (...) a faculty of ministrynge holsom counsel, good advise:
(...), a perfect sight and cunnyng in finishinge of that which is excogitated
through profitable counsel: and Gnome, a sentence and just verdit of matters
to be performed, and a steadfastness in that which is leyfull. It is the duty
than of a prudente wighte (that I may drive my tale at his mark in few words)
to remember those things which are past, to be skillful in many matters, to
flow in counsel, to be quick witted, and to Judge well: and farthermore to
lead not only an undefiled conversation, but also, as place and opportunity in
this common life shall crave, to become somewhat more charie and circumspecte.
And truly concerning the charge of Prudencie, who should be kept in humain
operacions, we have treated hitherto. And by reason the variety of doings
apperteining to men is seuored in three sorts, that some should be of peculiar
persons, which be Coincident to every one, and general: some Domestical, which
serve to the order of Family: others civil which we must put in ure, for the
preseruacion of the Public fellowship of men: a three parted force of
wisdom likewise may be gathered: the one common to all sorts, which is named
Monastica solitary, the second Oeconomica belongyng to householde: the third
Politica, which is thought to be the excellentest of all others, because first
and foremost it is busied in common utility, unto which yet we must clime by
degree. For he shall not well govern either a family or else a weal public,
who is not a good man, and informed with the rules of conditions and fashioned
unto every virtue, and shall come prepared to the common wealth, and shall wit
perfectly to nurtur an householde. The two latter of these three members of
Moral Philosophy: Although they be severally debated of Aristotle, yet in
this place likewise, because they are ruled of prudencie, which (as Cicero
tells in his particions oratoriall) in her proper affairs is accustomed to
be termed domestical, and in common cases politic, we shall descriue.

Of Domestical goueruernance. Cap. xiij.
We have spoken of that part of wisdom which is tried in the operacions of
every man: Now we must entreat of that which is comprehended in the
houshoulde duties whom the Greeks term (...), that is to wit, consideracion
well to trade the fa^ily, either which is touching the preseruacion of
housewifery affair. This respect is busied verily in the household, as in the
mattier which it handles: to whom that scope is propounded, that it be
wittelye governed for the worthiness of every parson. Every Family consists
of two parts, the man, and the substance. The man compriseth the Husband, or
the Master, the wife, the Children, the servants: But the substance
conteyneth the house and worldly pealthe. Let us briefly reason of these
orderly, and let us take beginning of the duty of the good man of the house,
because he is the first Original of a Family to be ordained. The Lord of the
place then, whom we understand by nature studious of freendship and affinity,
and getting children, ought both to know, and be able to protecte the society
of his wife and Children, and gently and courteously to rule over his, both
Children and Servants: of which they oftentimes are of a more honest nature,
these commonly of a more vile. The family now constituted, nourishment is to be
sought for, sustenance, apparel and harborough which may defend us from
storms, and inrodes of Beasts. Groundtilthe, Huntinge, Hawking, Fishinge,
labor shall minister Food. Now whereas the goodman and wife are the cheifest
and effeciente causes of Household, and the Children, and Servants, as it
wear certain Instruments, and every one are conuersaunt in the house and
substance as the mattier: we in this place first and foremost will utter a few
words of them: and then we shall express the Offices of the persons a little
before nominated. Before all others a mansion place is to be sought for, which
the necessity of life compelled men to Build, that they might have whether to
trudge, as birds into their Nestes, Beasts, into their couerts: In the
beginning houses were erected for a serviceable use, forth with by littel and
littel Ornaments approached thereto. Especially a confideracion is to be had of
the profit and commodity, and next of each ones dignity. Ouermuche cost and
hurtful sumptuousnes, it not to be admitted in building, and that the house,
as he counseled, want not ground. The holesomnesse and fitness of place is to
be viewed, and many more, which Victrunius and Philosophers, who have written,
de re familiari, diligently have expressed. And hitherto recheth the discourse
of the house: henceforth we ought to dispute of affairs apperteining to
Family. That is either natural, and the worthieste, of all: as Husbandry,
Hunting, Fishing, Or else artificious, which considers gain: as traueiles and
trades through which the living is adepted. Besides there are others partly
liberal, partly servile, as the craft of Painting, as the drawinge of
similitudes, as the science of buildinge, which are brought to perfection both
by wit and travail. Of these Arts (which are many and chaungeable, invented
for the diverse wantes of men) the good man of the house ought to put that in
practice in which he shall have skill, and should provide sustenaunce honestly
for him and his without pillinge and pollinge of any man: He ought to avoid
incommodious and hateful trades, and ought to search for the profitable. The
lucre of Usurers, and of Escheters, or of such as do self any manner of thing
for a forfaiture is odious. Likewise the gain of those Merchants who are
enriched with forged tales is filthy, which be the servants of Delyces. The
master of the house ought to preserve such things which are gotten, and ought
to use them temperatly, and ought to understand that it is not lesser cunninge
to save them than to procure them. And these things have we compendiously
made manifest touching the house and household provision: Now we will pursue
the charges or offices of household dwellers, and first of the good man, of whom
before we began to treat of. His cheefeste regard shall be, to marry a wife,
which is a companion and a copartner of life and goods, honest, prudent, welny
as rich as him self, not proud, nor more curious then needs, or else
waywarde, which may both be loved, and love. He shall entreat her no
otherwise than him self a Leagfellow and a partener as of Service and
Domestical toil, so likewise of all casualties and affairs: And perdie he
shall love her only ioigned unto him with a bond not able to be dissolved, and
as becomes a free woman, he shall not withhold her over rigorously, if so
that no just fear of Chastity does interrupte. Neither shall he handle her
vnciuily, but honestly, godly, comely, courteously, gentelly, that he remember
how he is a Christian man, the head perdie of his wife, but whom he ought to
tender as the half part of him self, and permit her also to use her certain
peculier right. He shall train up the Children begotten of his wife
diligently, he shall fashion them to virtue and godliness being as yet tender,
and shall provide them to be instituted with wholesome and expedient trades: he
shall seek his pelth by his own travel and industry virtuously, and without
envy: and he shall keep a commendable trade of clodding substance, either by
making of Contractes, either by doing of works, or else through more honest and
better means to epsy out riches and promocions (which are ver^ many) he
shall minister food both to himself and his, if necessity shall urge him to
seek. If so be the wealth is not to be gotten with pains taking, but is left
of the parents, he shall protecte the same hedely, and he shall employ costs
wisely and moderatly, an advise being had of the place and condition, that
neither he may be accounted a greedy gut, nor an outrageous spender, and had
leiffer at al season both to be recitened, and also to be more liberal, than
covetous. If the master has servants, he shall know to use them well, and he
shall instruct them, and shall freendly entreat them. But if they being hired
for meed do faithfully serve, he shall consider their pains, and shall exercise
them in convenient travel, he shall not fatigate them: and he shall nourish them
as it becomes, he shall see unto them as the necessary instruments of the
house, and he shall keep them in awe, nor shall permit them to be advanced
arrogantly. He shall pay them gentely their covenant at due time. If there
shall be many servants, they are to be preferre^ either to a more excellent or
vyler office as each ones capacity requires. The wife ought to respect the
house painefully and daily, and ought to be present at domestical doings, she
ought to mark the chayres of her servants: she ought to reverence her
husband, not cursed and snappish, but pudique, and she ought to keep cleanly
both her maids and children, and all the rest pliant and peasible in their
office: She ought not to be stately, not sumptuous, nor yet beastly, but
appareled with decent attier according to ability. Her chiefest regard ought
to be in bringyng up her children honestly. She ought to deuyse to increase her
goods, and ought to keep that with soberness, which is gotten with the toil
of her husband. The children ought to reverence their parents they ought to
love them and (as God him self has commanded) they ought to honor them,
they ought willingly to execute their commandments, they ought to be obedient
to them in all respects, they ought likewise to obey their schole masters,
which are the instructours of the mind, and as it were second parents, For
they both are charged with one thing, to train up youth virtuously. They ought
to apply the studies appointed them, they should eschew idleness and pleasure
before the rest as pernicious plagues: they ought to reverence their elders,
and magistrates as well spiritual as temporal, and the honest persons and
discreet: But they ought to esteem those with a certain principal good will
of whom both their vtteraunce and heart are decked with right excellent
sciences unto all humanity. The servants ought to be obedient and faithful
to their masters, herkenyng to their precept, and always bent to finish their
commandment: they ought to have in reverence, and love their masters as
their parents; they ought to be thriftie, appayde with a moderate living, and
requisite apparel, they ought willyngly to enlarge the riches of their
masters, they ought to steal nothing privily: They ought patiently to suffer
their master, if he shall be more curious than needs; if he shall be more easy
to please, they may not neglecte him.

Whether it be leiful for Christians, to have bondemen, and whether any may be
bondmen by nature (which thing Aristotle allows) I leave to be discussed of
others.

Of Politic governance. Cap. xiiij.
EVen as a Family consists of particular men, so does a City of many
Families, of which presently we will debate. In a common weal well to be
governed, Prudencie is cheefely tried, without which no society of man can be
ruled. Politic governance, or else a weal Public is defined of Plutarchus in
his book De tribus Reipub. generibus, a state and order of a City, to be
observed in ruling of matters. This Civil wisdom prescribes the actions of
Citizens: eke is altogether occupied in defendinge the society of man, as in
the matter which it has taken in hand to be reasoned upon: and has that scope
propounded unto her self, that the weal publik may be discretly handled, and
that provision may be made for the sauegard of the inhabitants. Aristotle gave
this difference betwixt a Family and a common wealth, that in the common
wealth there should be an equality of prerogative, by which ye highest
should be valued with the low: But in the household the Master should have
the Empire of a King over his children and Servants, as his Subjects among
whom the like equality can not be. Of commonweals six fourmes are recited:
three good, which the prince, the Nobility and the commens do minister
iustfully, and conveniently for for the general profit of the whole City: and
so many wicked, which the Tiraunte, and the band of a few, and the ^eane
people do govern as their own ^st impelleth them, haling all things ^o their
proper behoof. There appea^eth no City of any nation, which may ^ot be
referred to some of these. That Common weal which consists of them three
which are esteemed good, Cicero in his books De Repub: supposes to be best,
by reason it is more excelent, more profitable, and of longer perpetuity than
the rest. Among the Romans, after the kings expelled out of their Realms,
even unto Julius and Augustus Respub: Democratica, the form of the common
wealth where the people had authority without any other state seems to have been so tempred with a certain moderation of the kingdom of Aristocratia
which is a state of a Weal public, where many rule that are most worthy in
virtue, and prowess, that a certain Princely majesty did excel in the
Consuls Aristocraria in the senators, Democratia in the Tribunes of the common
sort, but the cheifest power was in the possession of the people. Now a
princely Monarchy ratified by the advice of prudente Peers, and Sauced with
vnremoouable decrees appears worthelie to be advanced before al others for
commodity and quietness especialy since not by election, but through a
certain Heavenly providence Realms are transported to the Children of Kings
and Princes generated through the Law of blood being the successors of their
Parents, or unto the next of aliaunce. Because perdy a City consists of the
multitude of Citizens leadinge their lives uprightly, let us manifest what
ones they ought to be. He is to be named a good Citizen of his country, who
being trimmed with civil virtues, and espicially with Justice and Fortitude,
whom Prudence, and Temperaunce, do moderate, may be able to perform very well
not only Domestical and familier offices, but also Public both at home, and in
war. There is need of common Schoolemaisters both honest and learned to
declare virtues, through whose travel Children gaily instituted from their
youth, may depart exquisite in honesty and Godliness, and through the
knowledge of most excellent matters, become profitable members to their
country. If so be the riches of the Parents may not bear, that their
Children by leisure may be enriched with liberal studies: the next remedy is
that they be learned some kind of occupacion, whereby they may get their
living. Idleness and pleasure verily are diligently to be shunned of all men:
Always study, and an honest and commodious exercise both of the mind and
body is to be required. By all means possible it is to be labored of all good
citizens, but principally of the Parents and instructours, that by reason
children, and youthstate can easily imitate any thing, they may lighten them
in the purity of life, and may be a pattern of virtue to their younger: Let
every occasion of trespassyng, as much as ability will give leave, be taken
away: Let the enticementes of concupiscence and wantonness be removed: Let
obedience be exhibited to the magistrate, if he be good. As to the father of
the country, unto whom authority is given from above: But if he be ill, let
him pacienly be suffered, and without sedicion modestly and meekely be
admonished of his duty. Let the Laws be observed: Let Religion cheefely be
reverenced: Let peace and concord be kept among the Citizens. Let every cause
of discord be eschewed. Let every manne have a respect to his own business:
Neither let any man give him self to bear Office in the common weal unless
he be called: Let rest always be sought for: Let pencions be paid: Let the
country be most dear to every man, for whom a good Citezen shall not fear to
die, if need shall require. For the cheifest love next unto God is due to the
Country, and to the Magistrate: the next to the Parents and kinsfulke, the
third to the Citizens linked or united together through the commonnesse of
Law. Let Foriners or Strangers peruse their business, nor let them be over
inqisitiue in other men's affairs. Let them behave them elues modestly. It is
the charge of a magistrate, to govern the weal public wittily: to use them
moderately and warily, over whom he bears rule (which he cannot absolve,
unless he be of an honest mind and good judgment, as a wise and prudent man)
to mainteyne the laws, that they may be observed, to the which also he
himself shall obey: To behave himself decently according to the dignity of
state, which he has put on, courteously, modestly, justly, not filthely, not
couetously, not proudely, not waiwardly, not cruelly: to give upright sentence
to al men: to minister no rigorousnesse or parcialitie: to extend clemency,
sharpness, and equity in castigations and punishments: less he should
chastise some more sharply, others more softly which are accused of one matter,
except any thing interrupt, that may enforce him so to work against his will:
After one fashion to care for all the Citezens both rich and poor, noble and
base: to think himself to be the father of the common wealth: to purney
things behoueable for the City, as Corn, if by chance scarcity and dearth
of grain should be feared, as other things of which there shall be need in
the extremities of the common wealth: And then next to have an especial
regard of the poor, when as necessity greatly oppresses, chiefly a common
penury, what? one is the poverty of corn. It shall be his part to intertayne
strangers, and alians, and pilgrims freendly and favorably, less the city
should be il spoken of among foren Nations: To conclude, it lies in him to
refer all his cogitations to the sauegard of the common wealth: to attend
upon her profits and vtilities, especially to cherish every where the dignity
and reputation thereof. And because ^ne cannot sustain all the duties, it is
expedient that diverse magistrates undertake diverse offices: of which al
notwithstanding there ought to be the like study, to tender the profits of the
citezens, and more earnestly to seek for the commodity and safeguard of them,
than their own. If so fortune serve that battle is to be waged (whereas
nothing more pernicious than it can ^e inspired of God into the common
^ealth.) Let that of Terence be borne ^way. Consilio omnia prius experiri,
^uain armis, saprentem decet. It becomes a wise man first to assault all
things with advise, than with dent of sword. If the danger cannot be with
holden which is threatened all men, we must give the onset prudently, and we
must repel it valiauntly, yet no battle is to be enterprised but that which
is just: to execute the which well, an ear^est preparacion is to be taken in
hand: stout Champions are to be sought for and skilful of Marcial feats, nor
strong men only, but also witty and Politic: Souldiars must be sought out
speedely, and a choice is to be gathered of them: Argent is to be Coined, which
truly is termed Nemus belli the sinew of warfare: The Souldiars are to be kept
in office, unto whom (that he may appear to ^ear the maistry) wage is to be
attributed at due time: And chary heed is to be had that they spoil not them
whom they are hired to protect: which is sufficiently and more than enough
experimented by the old complaynt, both of country men and Citizens, what a
cruel and loathsome a thing it is to the miserable comminaltie. It is not
meet that a Magistrate be altogether rude and unskillful of chiualry. And
although at these days there is a far contrary facion of waging Battle than in
ancient times, by reason of the new inuencion of Hellish fire, yet the book
of Marcial policy shall avail very greatly, as of Flanius vegetius, Julius
Frontinus, Ali^nus, and such like, through perusing of which a great
knowledge of warfare shall be procured: the which is to be confirmed by the
experience of old and sturdy Souldiars which have been present at sundry
Skirmishes, and of stout and Prudente Capitaines which have learned warlike
prowess through long practice: who would doubt it to become most absolute?
Neither does this science appear less conducible to the City, than Sage
wisdom, or whatsoever craft there is commodious for life.

For whereas there be three sorts of men in the common wealth: as officers,
which should rule well and justly: as Capitaines and Souldioures which should
faithfully and valiauntly defend: as artificers both of comlie and vndecente
disciplines, which should aid the necessary and profitable trades: Yet unto al
them ought there to be a like endeavor to maintain the weal Public with
amiable agreement. And thus much in Politic Prudence to be considered.

Of Vices contrary to wisdom. Cap. xv.
Ignorance is a vice contrary to wisdom, who likewise after a contrary sort
may be defined: An unskillfulness to discern good and evil things, or else to
out find the truth, or to determine what is to be done, or what is to be left
of. This is a common plague to all vices, as prudencie to virtues, because no
virtue can want the advice of wisdom: and every unjust, and sluggish and
intemperate person, the same ought to be called unwise. The companions of
imprudence be, the error of the mind, and temeritie repugnant to perfect
judgment: and the foolysh person attributes much unto Fortune, whom he
reuerenceth as a Goddess where as he uses not reason and counsel: and
yelding his good will to affections does commonly admit those things, of
which afterward he repents: or else co^trarywise through cowardlynesse and
negligence neither regards his children nor wife, and keeps no instruction
in his householde, and no kind of authority. If such a Magistrate shall be in
the weal public the wicked will suppose that a license is ministered unto them
to tread amiss: if there be such a Captain the Soldiers will become
dastardes, yea and they whom he retained valiant, what manner of fellows
Scipio Amilianus found before the destruction of Numantia, whom he reduced to
their antique manliness Marciall discipline restored, and ouerslipped no
occasion of any worthy feate to be practiced.

Wiliness verily is a vice, which with a certain cloak of virtue deludeth the
uncircumspect: which since it purposes not to travel for the truth, it can
not be called wisdom, but a suttell and a Foxlike counterfaiter of Prudencie:
who yet somewhiles is compted a virtue, if it be wrested unto a commodious
end. But the parts and operations of Prudence being perceived, it shall not
be a perplexed business to undermine the contrary: Notwithstanding we must
be very wary that vices do not deceive us, which appear to counterfeit virtue.
Doubtless virtue her self is a mediocritie welnie betwixt two extremes, but
of which the one is a manifest dice, and is apertly perceived: as when ignorance
is set against wisdom, wrong against Justice, cowardnesse against Fortitude,
Intemperance, against Temperaunce, Covetousness, against Liberality. But the
other because he is a vice, cousin germain to Virtue is not so easily espied,
as when craftiness or subtlety is gaiged against wisdom, cruelty against
Justice, lewdhardinesse against manliness, an outragiousnesse in despising of
pleasures against temperance, Prodigality against liberality, Obstinacy
against perseverance. For as Ouide says.

And mischiefs are of kin to good,
for under that deceiptfull weed,
Virtue oftetimes has borne the check,
for vices roots who bring the seed.
Of Justice. Cap. xvi.
CIcero calls Justice Dominam ommum and reginam virtutum, The Lady and
Princess of al virtues: and defines it, a perfection of the mind, which the
common utility being maintened, yeldeth to every one his stateliness: and he
calls it, an affection of the mind, which gives to each one his due, and
defends the society of humain fellowship bountifully and egally. Moreover it
is discribed of the same author: An euenesse, geuynge every one his right
according to the dignity and desert of every person: Aristotle calls it, an
affection of the mind, whereby men are fit to work iustfully, and by which
both they will and do such things as be rightful: and after the same sort we
may manifest injustice, by which men exercise wrong, and are voluntarily
enforced to unlawful matters. The Lawiers term it, a constant and a
perpetual will ministryng to every man his right. For Justice is conversant in
distribution of equity, as in the mattier, that the equality, which the law
does procreate, may be preserved. There be vices repugnant to every one, to
this injustice, to the other injury: To Fortitude and Temperance more. Nothing
is more expedient than this virtue to mainteyne the society of human kind,
nothing more agreeable to nature who has fashioned us unto al humanity and
natural benevolence. If so be we are borne for this fellowship (as mini-only
Cicero confirms in his first bake De legibus) we must confess that we in
like case are engendered for Justice with out which that society and fellowship
cannot consiste: and that the same is naturally engraffed in us as a Torche
carried before one to work rightful matters, and to eschew the contrary,
through the opinion of undeceivable reason, given by the consent and benefit of
God: which if it be ratified with the use of operation, then at length a
custom and a perfection of virtue shall be procured, whereof Nature has given as
it were little sparks. Touching that which is called in question concerning the
mediocritie of Justice, she is verily (as Aristotle deemeth) a mean: but she
is placed betwixt both extremities after another sort than ye residue of the
virtues Moral, who is referred unto right and evenness: in preseruacion of
which she is conuersante, even as injustice and injury the disquieter of egall
dealing and rightfulnesse is busied in inequality.

Of the parts of Justice. Cap. xvij.
THE parts of Justice be two: the one common and universal, which is occupied
in preseruacion of the right of humane society, and it considers a common
good, and learneth us to reverence right and equity: the other private, which
is verified in restoring to every man what is duetiful. And this is double: One
which reteineth equality in fourmes of choppinge and changing together, and in
affairs, which usually is called Commutatiua: Another which is occupied in
distribution of honors according to each man's worthiness, which they term
Distributiuam. The charge of common Justice is to maintain law, and equity,
whereupon he is called a just manne, who shows him self obedient to all
customs. Law is defined of Cicero, a reason engraffed of nature, which
commands those things which are to be taken in hand, and forbids the
contrary: And in like sort, a right reason, and derived from the might of the
Gods, charging such matters as are honest, disanulling the contrary. Hither all
decrees may be referred, statutes, manners, ordinances, expedient for the
sauegarde of the weal public in observing of which Justice is tried, in
violating of which injustice. Equity coupleth her self to the law, who
folowinge the right sentence of reason, does govern the law written, and as
the worthiest interpretoure of al laws, does wittily assuage rigorous
sharpness according to the place, opportunity, and dispositions of men. That
member of private Justice which is Tituled, Distributiua, perteaneth chiefly
unto magistrates: who not only is occupied in grauntinge Offices and rewards,
but also in appointinge punishments, that with an equal law the citizens may
be ruled, both the virtuous beneficed, and the naughty corrected. This perdie
is the charge of a Magistrate: but the intelligence of this virtue is
necessary for all men, that every man may understand his place which he
should keep in the common wealth, and the duty which he should execute: and
should attribute and leave unto every one both place and duty, and should
know him self, nor should glory over much in his proper conceit. This virtue
by reason especially it studieth to succor equality, is compared to
Geometrical proporcion, in which a like consideration is had of greater and
lesser numbers. But that parcel which they term Commutatiuam is occupied in
bargaininges of men, and teaches to yield unto every man his own, that ware
for ware, the value for the chaffer be geeuen, perfect equality being kept:
and this has a care rather to render home debte, than to distribute promocion
to the worthier: Wherefore in like case it is clogged with Arithmeticall
proporcion, because in this the numbers, in the other an indifferency of reason
is respected. This is conuersaunt in contractes which the Lawyers do display:
the other in Dignities and penalties, which are appointed of Magistrates. And
hitherto of al kind of Justice, and her parts. But because unto these other
six members are subuected defined of Cicero in his books De Inuentione:
Religion, Piety, Reverence, Troth, Revenging, Thank: to which shall be
adjoined liberality, magnificence, friendship, and vices disagreeable to every
one: of these also we must express our opinion. These virtues by reason, they
consist through the equality of reason, they seem to be adiected unto
distributing Justice, like as every varitye of bargains to the exchaunging.

Of the six parts of Justice constituted of Cicero, and their vices, and of
some other which be vvelnie of the same nature. Cap. xviij.
CIcero in his second book De Inuentione has rehearsed three parts of
Justice: the law natural, usual, and the law leiful. And the law natural he
defines, which opinion may not bring to us, but a certain instruction
natural, whereof he nu^breth six members, which even now I have declared.
Religion is one, a rightfulnesse toward God, either a piety whereby we adore
him: so called as Lactantius writes in his fourth book. A religando, of sure
binding, by reason for this cause we are engendered, that we may exhibit just
and dutiful seruyces unto God begetting us, yt we should him only acknowledge,
that him we should follow. We are linked and fastened unto God with this bond of
godliness. Plutarchus does interpreate Religion, Scientiam rerum Dominarum, a
science of divine matters: we term it Virtutem a Virtue, by which a just and
a true worship is given to God. The which (as of all virtues) so likewise we
shall well call it the ground, and doubtless the Parente and Mother of Justice.
Nothing is more necessary than this virtue to preserve the common wealth and
to lead the life egally, and without couine among the Citizens: sith no
strength may rather bannish men from all unthriftiness, than if they shall
perceive that theare is affliction prepared of God for the transgressoures, and
a path made open unto Heaven and unto ^ternal felicity for such as lead their
^ues godly and justly. There has been ^et never any Nation so Barbarous which
has not favored some Religion although it were false, and forbidden from
working of injury through ye fear of some God, whereas an Oath was accounted a
most straight band to wring their faith together. What is it expediente that
Christians do? to whom ^aithfulnesse is given the ground of al ^eligion of
Jesus Christ our Lord and ^auiour, and the holy Apostles and his ^uccessours,
so ratified that neither by any humayne force, nor yet infernal rage it may be
overthrown: I say, what is it meet for them to do, unto whom leading their
lives with virtue God himself has proposed a sure hope of blisful and
sempiternal life: through the confidence of whose promise, what true godly man
for sanctified religion will stagger to lose his breathe, if need shall
require? How easily might all injury be put to flight if that precept of God
our savior and master were deeply graven in all men's minds. Quod tibi fieri
nolis, alteri nefeceris, What thou will not to be committed against thy self,
thou shall not do to another. Which sentence wise fellows also dissenting from
our religion have so merueiled at, that they esteemed nothing more divine,
that nothing could be delivered more auayleable to maynteyne the fellowship of
men. Contrarious to Religion is supersticion, a scrupulositie of holiness,
which honors the Heavenly power not as it ought, either a vain and a
foolish honor of God: than which vice impiety toward God and the contempt
of reuerente dread is surely a more detestable mischief: by which all faith
is turned vpside down, by which perjury, by which Sacrilegies are established.

Of Godliness. Cap. xix.
IN the second place Piety is rehearsed of Cicero, which although it be
defined some whiles of him, a Justice toward the Gods that it should be the
same which Religion is: yet most commonly it is taken for Justice toward our
progenitors, or else for a thankful good will toward our Parents. But in
his books of Rhetorike, Piety is more absolutely defi^ed, through which
duty, and an earnest reverence is given unto Aliaunce, and to them which are
well willinge to their country. And in like sort in another place. Piety is,
which gives in charge to observe duty toward our country, our parents and
others our kynsefolke. This last virtue is well coupled to Religion, because
the chiefest worship is to be given to God, the next to the Parents, and next
of kin, and especially to the country, which one, Cicero says
comprehends all charity. Impiety is a contrary vice to Godliness, toward
such to whom benevolence and love is due. Against this so detestable a
wickedness, when as yet the title of murder was unknown, it was not necessary
to establish a law: but afterward when they began, who violatyng the law of
nature, and more brutish than brute beasts, did murder and despoyle them of
whom they had received life, a most rigorous law was ratified, of which
declaration is made in the digestes under the title, Ad L. Pompeiam, de
patricidus.

Of Reverence. Cap. xx.
Reverence is, by which we honor and worship the^ who excel us in age, either
in wisdom, either in dignity, or in any estimacio^. For that God him self
gives in commaundment by the law of nature, that with due obeysaunce and
honor we should reverence our parents and the Magistrates whom he would to
rule over us. This virtue of obedience is so necessary, that without it
neither a house, neither a City, nor any fellowship can remain. How
pernicious the vice repugnaunte to obedience is, the grievous ruin of the
first parents of al mankind, which has tormented every mothers Son, has
given a lesson to us. This enormitye springs of Pride, and arrogancye and of
(...) through which any man by ouerweening in him self to well, and fauouringe
his person, makes him self another cousin to God almighty. Nothing verily is
more odious than pride both to God and men. For at all seasons, as the Latin
Tragical writer records, Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus, God that
takes vengeance follows the lofty behind their backs. The fall of wicked
Angels which cannot be repaired, and than the which none has bin more grievous
at any time does witness the same.

Of Troth. Cap. xxi.
Troth is (says Cicero) through which those things are said to be
unchanged which are, or have been, or else are about to come: Either a right
perfection of the mind whereby any man both tells the truth, either in
affyrmyng, or else in deniyng, and also pretends no subteltie: whereof he may
be called a true speaker. It is a necessary virtue to make bargaynes, in whom
faith ought to bear rule, which is defined, a constancy and a soothe of
sayings and doings: neither is truth any other thing in contractes and
accomptes, than faith: which if it be diligently observed, the proper office
of duty shall be fulfilled: which is to yield unto every man his own. A lie is
a vice contrary to verity, and in like manner the malicious inuencions of
Sophismes, and all deceipte and dissimulacion and counterfaityng, and also
arrogancy. A forged devise is mischeuous and pernicious unto the common wealth
for it wresteth a man from God which is true, and the welspryng of al verity,
and purchases him freendship with the Devil, and brings everlasting death
to the soul: and violateth human society with a false Merchaundise, and
incenseth hatreds and discordes through a leasyng tongue. That bostinge,
especially foolish of some that are too glorious in their own estate, is
irksome to the learned. Certes an alteration to be abandoned. Clokyng also is
unseemly for an honest man, who speaks no otherwise then he thinks: he
does not commend him in presence, whom he disprayseth in absence: he
counterfaiteth and works wilily not with male ingine, but wittily, if need
should enforce.

Of Reuengement. Cap. xxij.
REuengement is (says Cicero) by which violence, and injury, and whatsoever
at any time is like to discommodite, may be repelled by defending or auengyng.
And it is defined a taking of punishment, by which we put of from us a dispight
either by shunning hit, or by repaying the like. But this latter definition for
this cause appears to us littel commodious, because it contains private
reuengement, likewise allowed of him in his first book of Deuties: which we
know to be reproved not only of Christians, but also of profane Philosophers,
and ignorant of our Religion, who imitatynge the rule of nature did judge it
better to suffer, than to commit injury: because that may be done justly, and
this cannot be accomplished without injustice, as Aristotle also learneth in
his.v. book of Ethikes. That likewise may be attributed to patience,
doubtless an excellent virtue: this perdie to the contrary vice. Neither
truly ought any man to think that any other talk is ministered, than that he
may repel force by force, if it may not be eschewed: and that for to defend,
not to damage or else to revenge: for a mind to discommodite breaks justice
the leiful reuengement is committed of God unto the Magistrates, which be the
ministers of laws: but withholden from private persons, unto whom no title of
punishinge is attributed.

Of Thank. Cap. xxiij.
Thank which usually is called gratitudo, kindness, is (says Cicero) in
which the memory of the frendshippes and friendly tournes of another man, and
a good will to repay another is comprehended. The same man tells: Thank is
which ought to use obseruaunce in the remembrance and recompense of duties, and
honors, and frendships. It is more compendiously descriued, A faithful memory
of a thankful mind, Or else a desire mindful to do one good turn and
pleasure for another: and perhaps it is defined more fitly: by reason this
virtue is conversant in receauynge, rather than in geuynge. For to give, is a
point of liberality: To receive with a good will, and to be willinge to
repay, is the property of thank. It is his part to forget the benefit
bestowed, nor to wait for a recompense. And to this man it belongs to
remember hit, and where opportunity gives occasion with an overplus also, if he
may, and he ought to think the reward well to be placed, and to be willing to
render the same redily and yet to retain a perpetual report of the pleasure
exhibited. On both the parts heed is to be taken that the thing which either
is given, or restored be profitable and commodious for him to whom it is given
or restored, and just fully gotten, less we should be liberal and grateful on
another ma^s purse.

The vice repugnant to kindness is commonly termed ingratitude: which may be
defined, a forgetfulness of a good turn received: and either an unwilling
thank, or none, or else (which is worst of all) a displeasure requited: which
is the cheifest injustice, than which nothing can be more hateful to all men.

Of Compassion. Cap. xxiiij.
COmpassion, a most acceptable virtue to God, is thought good aptely to be
annected unto these. For as we do owe Love, truth and faith to al men
godliness to few, reuengement to such as do wrong, kindness to them as
deserve well, so are we bound to show mercy unto them which suffer
afflictions. I call not compassion verily in this place. Agritudinem a
heaviness, or else as Seneca, a vice of the minds over much fauouringe
wretchedness, but a virtue through which the mind is pricked with the miseries
and calamities of another man to succor the oppressed.

Compassion is defined of Cicero, a greef through another adversity: Of Seneca
in his books De Clemencia, a smart of the mind, or else a sorowfulnesse
con^eyued by other men's harms, which ^e deemeth to chance to ye undeserving.
^ut he indeuoreth to prove that this is ^vice in these words: Then the wise
^an shall not have compassion but shall ^de, but shall profit borne for a
com^on help, and a public vtility, wher^f he shall reach a portion unto
every ^ne. Yet we, as it is declared, do vn^erstande compassion a virtue, unto
which Christ encourages us after the example of his heavenly father, and his
^wne in the.6. of Luke, which can be re^owned sufficiently with no praises at
any season: and truly is highly commended to us in holy Scriptures. For what
earthly wight can at the least conceive in mind, much less depaint in oracion
the infinite mercy of God the father, and Christ our Savior? This virtue
exalts a man to blessedness. Christ calls the merciful Beatos, blessed,
because they shall receive mercy, in the.5.9. and.12. of Matthew, of whom Cap.
25. six duties of mercy breefely are propounded.

Of liberality, and vices contrary to this, Avarice and Prodigality. Cap. xxv.
CIcero in his first book of offices makes liberality the other branch of
Justice, the which same he terms both bountifulnes, and also benignity, the
which seems not vnhandesomly in this place to be annected to the former
parts of Justice. For although this virtue is placed in giving, not as they in
restoring what is due (which same seems to be proper unto Justice) yet
because it spreads abroad her self unto others, as Justice does, eke
considers the vtility of men, it shall be leiful to situate it among the
members of Justice. Liberality may be defined, a beneficial good will to
gratify, or else a liberal desire to merit well of some person. This is
conuersaunte (as Cicero tells) in the use of Money, the which to bestow
honestly, and as it ought with a free and godly mind, is proper to
liberality. For first of all a frank consent of the geuer is required, less
through an opinion of profit the mind be restreigned from doing good.

Therefore we must give, by reason we know it to be acceptable unto God,
waiting for no reward. We must deal wittely when the cause and time shall
postulate, to him on whom the gift is worthily bestowed, which will not abuse
the same unto destruction, either his own, or else of others: and we must give
part of our proper goods, not of another man's. For liberality ought to
discommodity no man, but profit them as are worthy of a benefit: And we must
give according to the worthiness of each one, and deserte, and rather to a
needy creature, than a rich Carle: not as much as perchance thou would, but
so much as thou may, least liberality turn into the vice of outrageous
spendinge, and thou afterward begin to want, and be troblesom to thy
friends: and lose pleasure, who is the companion of virtue, and contrariwise
reteyne sorrow the leaguefellow of viciousnes. And albeit rich men can with
less travail perfourm the duty of liberality, yet the less hability may also
become liberal: whose bountious good will ought more to be considered, than the
benefit it self. Cicero in his second book of duties does ratify two sorts
of liberality. One through which any man succoureth him who needs with
Argente: The other by which he aideth with travel or counsel. There be two
vices unlike to liberality, covetousness and niggardship, and prodigality and
riotousnes: of which she is the defecte of liberality, but this ye excess,
bexwixt which vices liberality is situated. Avarice is defined, a superfluus
gredinesse of money, which being coldded together carefully for their avail ye
insatiable persons do pleasure neither ^hemselues nor others: which very well ^s
termed in the sanctified Scriptures, Omnium malorum radix, the root of al
mischiefs, out of which, felonies, robberies, despoilinges, deceipts,
bewrayinges, discords, hurly burlyes do spring. Et quid non mortalia pectora
cogis auri sacrafames? and what do not thou detestable hunger of gold
enforce men's hearts to do? The desire of money is insatiable, and a cruel
Dropsy: of whom the more that the waters are supped up the more they are
thristed for, Nam crescit amor numini quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, for the
love of money increases, as much as money her self does increase. This
bondage is altogether most wretched, and most vile, always careful, at all
times fearful, never quiet, at no time content. Contrary to the vice of
Avarice is excess which commonly they term prodigality: which same likewise
is a vice, and resists liberality. For as the covetous man is over gredy in
receiving and reteyning, so contrary wise the prodigal person passes a mean
in geuinge. Therefore prodigality may be defined, an immoderate largess, and
committed upon no just cause. This perdy is vicious, yet may be revoked more
easily unto liberality, than avarice: by reason she is accustomed to profit
others, this no man, and not so much truly the very posses^our: unto this
oftimes youth is hurtful to the other old age. Moderate expense in like manner,
as liberality is placed between two vices, unmeasurable riot and
covetousness. Herehence a pinchpeny, or else a thrifty fellow, neither is
called prodigal, nor yet a niggard.

Saving is defyned, a diligent laying up of those things which are gotten, and
a guidinge of expenses. Whereof there springes a Proverb, Magnum Vectigal
parsimonia, Sparinge is a great reuenew.

Of Magnificence. Cap. xxvi.
MAgnificence seems to be united to liberality, which is no other thing,
than a certaone larger bountuousnesse, which is defined of Cicero, an handlyng
or administration of great and excellent mat^ers with a certain honorable,
and fa^us intent: Herehence comes a sump^uous a notable man, and he who
works wounderous feats. This virtue is not belonging unto poor men, which
can not perform mighty and miraculous matters, but unto rich men, as to kings
and Princes: of whom yet it is to be taken heed of, that they be not incensed
more through the desire of vain glory than virtue, neither principally
regarding the good will of God, nor passing for the commodity of men, less
they wade beyond measure with their cost and administracion in enterprising
gorgious acts. For also there be two vices repugnant to this virtue, the one
which is called (...), a work of a base courage: and a beggarly magnificence,
which is of kin to avarice: the other (...) that is to wit an unruly
sumptuousness, and riot, which accords with prodigality.

Of Freendship. Cap. xxvij.
Among the parts of Justice, Freendship also is to be nu^bred: whereof since
Aristotle, and after him Cicero copiously have disputed, we will here briefly
touch those things which appear necessary. Therefore, as Cicero tells, in
his first book De Legibus, all the force of Freendship is in the agreement of
wills, studies and opinions: and in Laelius: Freendship (says he) is no other
thing than a perfect accord of all divine and humain affairs, with
benevolence and favor: which he calls the aid of virtues given of Nature,
not a companion of vices: And the same nominated of love, and begun of Natute
her self: That we may understand love to be natural, by which men are
united together among them ^elues. And because (as also we have known by ye
holy scriptures, by which the law of nature is approved in this cause) one man
owes good will and love ^o another, whereas also al other living Creatures may
appear to maintain freendship in their kind, or else surely to preserve
benevolence: it can not be ^oubted, but that freendeship is to be re^erred
unto Justice, which also is very ^ecessary for the use of life, and conteyneth
the common wealth. What benevolence does differ from friendship. Aristotle
teaches in the.v Chapter of his.ix. book that also we may be united in good
will with them, whom we do not know, and that the same may be secret, that it
cannot be freendeship: and that benevolence is the Original and Fountain of
amity. By whose Sentence freendship is thus defyned. That it be an evident
benevolence. Freendship is double. One true and sincere, and proceeding of
virtue, which is emonge good men. The other forged, and vulger which is two
fold, for either it is procured through profit, or else through good will.
The end than of true freendship is, Honesty, of the counterfayted, profit or
pleasure. Pleasure ioigneth together children and young folks.

Profit yoketh together merchants and such like: but virtue binds good
men, who be friends indeed, and also do persist after death, but they love
for a time. True friendship than because it arises out of virtue, can not be
emonge wicked persons, as betwixt^ thieves, robbers, spoylers, traitors,
conspiratours: albeit somewhiles they may appear fettered together with a
most straighte bond, neither also is it sure inoughe among them, who are
equal neither in manners, nor in exercise, nor in will nor in opinions, nor in
riches (although these do not always hinder amity, like as nether the age)
nor yet in statelines. Among Princes and their friends the glosing of certain
Courtiers does welnie extinguishe amity, approuinge all matters of their
governors, both sayings and doings although they be foolish, whiles they get
gain, promotion, and favor. The freendship then among equals is stronger,
and more sincere, united together through consent of minds, both willinge and
nillinge, one thing, whom also a like study does delight. But this freendeship
cannot be betwixt many: that narrow bond is appertaining to few: what manner
of one we read to have flourished emongste them, of which scarcelye four or
five parts are reckened, and perhaps it should be a difficult matter to
trace out more, of whom truly it may be verified Amicus alter idem, a freende
an other same, or one as like as it were the self same person, of which two
there ought to be one mind. Although verily good men often times have many
friends, and wish well unto those, of whom they the^ selves likewise are
entirely beloved yet they communicate that cheifest consent of minds and good
wills, and studies only with one or two, or else surely with very few. That true
friendship is very seldom, what one was betwixt those few copartners of
unfeigned friends, and so many times renowned. Because perdie freendship
issues of love, and the degrees of Love are diverse, likewise more degrees of
freendship are to be appointed. Of which the first is, of Parents, and
Children: the second, of brothers and Kinsfolk, the third of beneficial
persons and Citizens: the last of all men. Yet somewhiles that sincere
friendship which is of a few, does far exceed all the amities of al men, yea
of the very parents and children, what love that was betwixt Pylades and
Orestes, D^mon and Pythias: concerning whom read Valerius Maximus the.iiii.
book and vii. Chapter. This true friendship surely is not suddenly made
perfect, but she has her degrees: till at length through long use of love
sittinge in the secret Cabane of the heart, and through great acquaintance,
and amiable fellowshippe it be confirmed. Wherefore they say that he is to be
elected, whom thou will love: giving to wit thereby, that we entertain not any
one hastily into freendship without election, whom afterward we may forsake
with like foolehardines for a trifle, less we apere rather with a certain
rage of love, then with good advise to have been brought unto freendship. That
such a vice may be eschewed, we ought to be slow to ioigne in amity, and
constant to retain it. Therefore all these things are to be taken heed of,
which are wont to weaken freendships: as contentions, bitter brawlinges,
despites, waywardness, wrath, envy, emulacion, and such like.

But to admonish without sharpness, and to be admonished, is proper to
friendship. Neither truly is it to be thought, that those friends any where
be found among men, which although there be one like consent of wills and
studies for the most part) may not some whiles seem to be put in remembrance,
if they shall any whit offend: and also it ought to be denied these, if they
ask any thing, which can not be accomplished honestly and godly. For honest
matters are to be requested of friends, and honest causes are to be don for
the friends sake. Rather perdy then being desired we should commit filthy
things, we shall permit the friendship, which presentely cease to be true,
by little and little through slacknesse of use to be minished, and to vanish
away. For that which is suddenly broken of, appears never to have been true.
But yet this same seperacion is to be avoided as much as may be. For neither
must any man so love, as though sometimes he should be at a defiaunce. Hearty
love that which the sacred Scriptures do approve, commends perfect
friendship, by which we are willed to love our neighbor no less than our
selves. There ought then to be an indifferent benevolence of each others mind.
Neither is it to be required, that the one should more fancy the other than
him self. And of friendship surely hitherto. Enmite resistethe this, the most
grievous plague of humayn kind, and which makes men worse then beasts, and
despoileth them of all humanity.

For a man ought to be dear unto a man, since he may see beasts of one sort to
be coupled together among themselves. And as friendship makes men courteous
and grateful, so does hatred cause them cruel and odious: and as she does very
much recreate the sprites, so is this not a little troublesome both to her
self, and others, and the cause of many mischiefs. Herehence spryng
slaughters, herehence proceed Murders, herehence comes all cruelty. For
whom any man hates, he wishes destroyed, and the caytife does woefully
crucify himself through a lust to revenge, and a desire to hurt, the mind a
tormentour brandisshynge a secret whip, as Iuuenall says: where as in holy
Scriptures it is manifest, Homicidam esse quisquis fratrem suu^ oderit: That be
is a man killer, whosoever shall hate his brother. Wherefore all enmity is to
be avoided, cake diligently it is to be taken heed, that we minister not a
cause of contempt to any man and if an occasion be given, it is to be labored
by all possibility that he be reconciled to us, who was estraunged or fallen
from us. If so be that by chance we shall hate any one, who may seem to have
injured us, yet we ought to bear in mind that we are Christians, that we
forgive, and put away anger and hatred, waytyng for the like facility of
remission at Gods hand, which so many times we have experimented. No
hostility truly is more grievous, than battle: no greater alienation, and
seperacion of minds, none more pernicious none more fierce, and through which
more may break forth violently with more bitter hatreds into mutual
destruction, and so furiously somewhiles may be incensed that not only Citizens
but also very brothers and kinsemen are brought in contencious turmoyles among
themselves, fighting for life and death, ignorant of their aliaunce, inflamed
with common madness, and now puttyng aparte al humanity clad them selves with
the cruelty of beasts. And albeit battle of it self, neither ought properly
to be said good, nor evil, since it may justly be used, and ought also
necessarily to be taken in hand sometimes, especially if it be attempted in
such sort upon lawful occasion, that it be a defense of Justice, and be
referred to that part which is termed Vindicatio, reuengement: Yet whereas
the contention of both enemies may not be a like iustfull, it appears not
that any battle can be executed, unto whom on the one part Injustice may not
be annected.

Wherefore it is not to be enterprised rashly of potentates to whom the title
of Warfare is committed, nor yet, unless for a right and a necessary cause:
as if the things vniustfully taken from us should be fetched again, if
injury were to be wreaked, or violence to be repressed: let it be proclaimed,
and let it be referred unto that end, that nothing else appear to have been
mente through battle, than peace sought for, or enquired. We must chiefly
beware, as much as may be, that we wax not cruel toward innocents, and the
feeble sort, and suppliaunt people: that all things be not wasted with sword
and fire: That more damage be not done to our friends, than to our enemies:
That battle be not wittingly and greedely taken in hand, which cannot be
perpetrated without cruelty. There be also other vices contrary to
friendship, as testifnesse of mind, as Flattery a grievous pestilence to
amity, unmeet for a liberal disposicion, not much hurtful and dangerous
to the wary, and to the glorious and simple, because it is a privy enmity,
which disprofiteth with a flatteryng grace, seruily commendinge him who is
present, and wrongfully carping and deridyng him which is absent: whom Terence
does elegantly and feately set out in colors in the second Act and second
Scene in Eunuchus. Unto ^oth is flattery alike miserable, both unto him which
speaks al things for another pleasure, and also to him which admits
this ill favored sugared speech of one that vpholdeth his yea and nay in every
cause: but that he is a most vile bondeslaue, and this a Nodgecocke, who
perceives not him self to be a laughing stock. And of Justice, and of her
branches sufficiently it is re^oned.

Of Injustice. Cap. xxviij.
Injustice is contrary to Justice, which being adioygned perdy to al ye
parts of Justice, now shall be debated somewhat more at large

As Justice yeldeth to every man his own, so does Injustice hale unto her
self, what is due unto others. And as before we have divided Justice, so shall
it be leifull, also to seuour Injustice.

First and formoste into common and private, and this into distributinge and
changing: Secondly, as we have told the parts of Justice, religion, godlynes
and others: so may the members of injustice be repeted supersticion, impiety,
and more which briefly we have descriued: Only in presence we will make manifest
the percels and common and private wrong. Common Injustice compriseth two
forms: One which resists ordinance: the other which repungneth equity:
the laws are violated, when as either through niggardlines, or the contempt of
men, or else for some other occasion holsom decrees, and statutes are inuerted,
or abrogated, or vnrightfulye wrested, and weakened with counterfeit
interpretacions.

Equity is defiled, when as not only the words of law are recited and writhed
subtly, but the understanding and evenness the very soul of the law is
neglected, and the Proverb wins place Sumu^ ius, summa iniuria, extreme law,
extreme wrong: as if the Judges, or Lawyers should be corrupted with gifts, or
distempered with the affections of love or hatred. These matters also are debated
of Rhetoricians in the Chapter De statu scripti et voluntatis. There are two
parts of private justice: against whom likewise two may be laid. ^niuste
distribuens and unjust commu^ns, wrongfully distributinge and vn^ustly
exchaunging. Wrongfully distributing does favor the wicked, does not defend
the good, them she exalts, these she presses down: she prefers
flatterers and lewd persons before the simple and honest: she more esteems
nobility and riches, than virtue and sapience. Unjustly exchaunging does not
restore what is due, she deceives them with whom she ioigneth in byinge,
selling, and in concluding other contractes especially in guage and
confederacy: she deuiseth titles of possessions: she takes pleasure by long
practice in things procured by couine: she trauaileth to ^minish common and
public commo^ies, and out of these to add somewhat her self: To conclude, she
leaves ^t unto every man his own. Doubt^e of all these parts of Injustice
Injury is the mother, which is don, either to the common wealth, or else to al
men, either in violatinge the laws, or else either in distributinge, or
exchaunginge unjustly.

Of Fortitude. Cap. xxix.
WE have disputed of wisdom and Justice: it ensues that mention be made of
Fortitude. Fortitude may be defined. A custom, or else an affection of the
mind, which takes in hand premeditated dangers, and labors, and
susteineth what ever inco^modities do chance, repelling timidity and anger. Of
Cicero it is defined an affection of the mind, pacient in aduenturinge peril,
and in travel and sorrow whose principal duties he will that there be two, a
contempt of death and sorrow: because all valiante courage is tried, either in
woefulness, or in labor, or in danger, and in the vndertakinge and putting to
flight of dreadefull matters. The Stoikes define Fortitude, a virtue contending
for equity. Chrisippus an affection of the mind, in sufferinge and susteyning,
yelding unto extreme law without fear. Manly courage seems to be engendered
partly of will, partly of the faculty of the angry soul, because the
operacion of Fortitude requires some commocion hereof: who notwithstanding her
self is voluntary and is busied in the suffering of sorrow, and in aduenturing
of perilles: and the will ought to rule, but that rage ought to be obeysant
unto desire and counsel. Fortitude is conversant in restreining of fearful
matters, both causing timi^itie of some danger about to hurt, and also the
expectation of peril, as it were in the matter wherein she is exercised,
whether it be in Marcial prowes, or else in Domestical troubles, that at last
she may obtain that vtterest good: This virtue (as likewise the residew) is a
mediocrity betwixt overmuch and to little that is to wit, between timidity
and boldness, which vices after what fashion they may be eschewed. Horace
expounds in these Verses.

In need appear stout and strong: be thou wise
To shrink in thy sails beginning to rise.
The duty of Fortitude is double, to adventure, and to sustain dangers and
adversities with that mind yt it may content God, and obey his
commandments, for whose sake all things ought to be done, and doubtless to
enter on them, and to abide them not only courageously and manfully, but also
prude^tly is the part of a valiant man: for neither should he take in hand
any thing unadvisedly and harebraynly, and with no consideration, less he may
seem rather to be allured with violent mood, than with perfect reason. Unto
Fortitude true and sincere, and adorned with other virtues. Aristotle has
annected in his third book Ad Nicomachu^ other five fourmes not absolute, yet
as of kin. The first of Citizens fighting for their country: The second of
Soldiers who by Marciall policy do adventure perils: the third of them
which trust unto experience: the fourth of them which travel through an hope
to win: the fifte of such as have al their affiaunce in Fortune, neither
sufficiently examininge the dangers, whom ignorance causes sturdie. Verily it
is no less the part of Fortitude to suffer calamity, to sustain injury, to
bridell the moodes of mind with an upright and constant courage, than to
hazard the life, to contempne death, and doubtless with heart and will to
die, if so he shall purpose to please God. And because Fortitude is conversant
either in the receiuyng of dangers, or else in the enduring: unto this virtue
four fourmes are subnected, Confidence and magnaminitie which perteine unto
recei^ing. Patience and Perseverance who ^e referred unto enduring: The two ^t
belong as it were to the first mo^n of Fortitude, the latter to the suf^ance,
and stablenesse and constancy of evils. Of all these perfect manliness does
consist.

Of Confidence and Magnanimity. Cap. xxx.
COnfidence (says Cicero) is a sure trust of mind: either by which ye mind
has planted in her self much belief in weighty and honest matters, with a
sure hope. And unto this Boldness appears to be of aliance, and yet it is a
vice: since it is led not with counsel and judgment, as Fortitude, unto whom
Prudency is a perpetual companion, but with violence and temeritie: not taking
sufficient advise, before it give the assault on dangers, whether it may
overcome: and how it may, and whether it be honest to undertake the same. But
confidence does not adventure ieoperdies stoutely and with a great trust,
unless diligently premeditated before. For they are not to be judged strong
men who dare to adventure less, but they which commonstrate a moderate virtue
of mind, whom reason ought to rule, and make agreeable to virtue. Contarie to
confidence is mistrust, a low abashmente of the mind, the same which dispeire
is, which above we have compendiously touched in the chapter of desire and
hope. Magnanimity is an amplenesse of a noble, and an unconquerable stomach,
and a might and stoutnesse to commit valiant acts. This supporteth
confidence, and as an helper does fortify her being of kin. Understand you a
noble courage, not a proud, neither an arrogant, but a modest, and keepinge
under foot insolencye, very noble, and contemninge worldely vanities. For this
virtue is principallye tried in the contempt both of those great matters
which the greedy common people has in wonderful admiration: and also in the
repressing of perturbations, that all ambicion, niggardliness, and
concupiscence may be resisted with a triu^phing courage, that al adversities
may be constantely endured. Cicero in his first book of duties, does teach
that there are two parts of the greatness of courage; of the which one is
tried in prosperity, the other in adversity: because neither tribulation is of
strength to discourage a noble stomach, nor the riches of fortune of power to
make him presu^tuous. Contrary unto Magnanimity be two vices, (...)
superfluous hautines, either a proud and swelling mind: and (...), a want or
defect of courage. In the first vice is contained an auaunting, extolling it
self insolentely and foolyshly, and a mind strouting out unwisely: what one
is of Thraso in Terence a vain and peevish person, and blind with overmuch
love of him self, than which nothing can be excogitated more foolish, whom no
good and modest man may be able to abide. This sect of companions is odious
unto all sorts, save only unto parasites. Repugnant to this vice is that other
which is called Demissio animi, lack of courage, usually termed Pusillanimitas
cowardice, that is to say, a foul and an unseemly faintnes of courage,
fleeing imminent danger, and vilainously languishing in large and wonderful
exploits, what one has been of Effemynate persons, as of Sardanapalus, who
verelye not resistinge, bannished from his Empire, concluded hs own
destruction through a prevented despeire: as of Heliogabalus, as of others, who
being enfeebled with pleasures have led a slothful and a beastly life. To
them which went before may be adjoined, a desire of good estimacion, of which
in like manner theare are two vices: the one inordinate suit, the other a
contempt of Fame and reputacion.

Of Patience and Perseueraunce. Cap. xxxi.
Patience Cicero defines, a voluntary, and a long permission of hard and
difficulte matters for honesties sake or profit: that is to wit, a stable
and a constante sufferaunce of humian things, through which we sustain what
ever adversity shall chance unto us with a pacient mind. He called it
voluntary, because this virtue, as also Magnanimity, is situated in will, which
that angry faculty of the Soul does help.

That it is added of him, for honesties sake: he propounds the end of this
virtue, which also is apperteining unto all the rest. For if labors be
sustained not for Virtue, but either by reason of hatred, or riches, or
honors, he terms it an horrible asperity, which imitateth patience. But of
us at al seasons ye mark is to be appointed, yt our doing please God, unto
whom virtue is acceptable. The charge of patience is double: One in abidyng
Injuries received: The other in suffringe all casualities of Fortune with an
upright mind. He overcomes who bears Injury, by reason both he
vanquisheth him self, and his adversary, sith he repelleth the affection: He
is brought in bondage, who does injury, because he yields unto affections,
and is surmounted of anger and greediness. He is just, this fellow unjust.
It is the part then of a pacie^t man, both to conquer injury by contemninge,
and not to take reuengement of it to him self, but to commit it unto God, unto
whom it belongs to chastise Iniquities, and to receive all chance with an
egall mind, to endure poverty, bannishment, barrennes, weeping, and wailing,
reproach, despite, servitude, grievous diseases, blindness, and if any thing
also be more wretched; never to despeire, never to be discouraged through
calamities. For whereas the life of man is full of miseries, and distresses, who
had not some whiles rather to leave his life (as, certain cursed Imphs and
dastardes have dun) eake at one time to close up all his cares, then always to
lead a peineful life: except he being Haruaised with the breast plate of
patience, would valiauntly gaineset a ready and an invincible courage to abide
all things to the end, and would reckon any life well to be passed over,
virtue being his guide? Some have falsely supposed them to be strong, who in
desperate cases have wilfully murdered them selves, eschewing either beggary,
or ignominy, or captivity, or bondage, or not sustaining love, or else auoydinge
any other calamity: whom Aristotle more rightfully judged to be nise and
womannish: since it is the guise of a steadfast and a valiant person to take
any Fortune in good worth: but the property of a timorous and a sluggish to
mistruste, and to be dismaide with labors, and shamefully to faint in
courage. Impacience may be said a vice repugnaunt to patience, an eschewinge
of an honest peine and sorrow: whose nature it is not a perplexed matter to
understand by those things which presently are declared. There are some
insufferable who fear travels, others who flee wofullnesse: and think them
intolerable which patience learneth to be sustained.

They do yield unto turmoiles, these are crucified with passions, and cares,
and do abide injury hardly and grievously.

There be some likewise who are not able moderatly enough to use their
prosperity, whose minds are to much puffed up with the insolency of their
good estate: as much to be discommended as they, because it is a thing, no
less unseemly to be discomfited, then peeuishly to triumph. Perseueraunce is
defined of Cicero, a stable, and a perpetual abode in reason uprightly
examined.

This is a faithful companion for patience, and an aid in bearing adversity,
and in moderatinge prosperity with equality, and in brideling all the surges
of the mind, and bringing them in subjection to the discourse of reason. For a
puissaunt stomach, as he says, without constancy and honest moderacion of
mind, is nothing worth, waueringe or lightness and an unstable gouerme^t of
human affairs is a Vice contrary unto perseueraunce: which either for a
womanlines of mind does unadvisedly give place unto difficulties, nor is of
efficacy to endure vexacions: or else by reason of an obstinacy continues
in his opinion arrogantely and stubburnely, which reason commands to change.

Of the Vices betvveene which Fortitude is placed. Cap. xxxij.
FOrtitude is the mean betwixt two vices, boldness and timidity. Boldness is
an unadvised enterprise of perils, or else a rash confidence, by which any man
not paysing his hability does adventure danger with a blind invasion, either
through the ignorance of the difficulty, or through the loftines of stomach
and desire of renown, or through despair, or else doutles through a
dastardlinesse and madness ransacking the mind. This vice is far dissonant
from Fortitude, because it gives not reason and counsel. This also is reposed
above among the affections; by reason it stirs up the rage of the mind to
work Hairebrainely and aduenturously. To this mischief the repugnaunt vice is
Timidity, through which any one without occasion is perced with terror, and
feared with any creaking, and dreadeth those things which are valiantly to be
enterprised for virtue: A dastarde, an effeminate person, and one not able to
abide honest toil: who whiles he is over careful for his life, he shunneth
not shame, and disworshippe, which especially is to be avoided. Of either vice
otherwise it is debated in the explicacion of affections, tha^ in this place,
in which not the affection, but a vicious property contrarious to manliness is
to be understood.

Of Temperaunce. Cap. xxxiii.
TEmperaunce is a virtue which subdueth plesures unto the dominion of reason.
The same is defined of Cicero, a firm and a temperate rule of reason over
lust, and other evil braides of the mind. It is also termed a moderation of
desires, obedient to reason: and in another place, the gouernesse of all
commocions, it is conuersaunt in refusing of pleasures, as the same Aucthor
agrees with Plato and Aristotle. In Greek, (...), which our countryman
calls both Temperaunce, and Modesty, and also Frugalitie. For it is occupied
in refraynynge delices, and desiers, as in the matter, whereof it entreats:
And because some pleasures are natural, and common to all living creatures:
others consisting in opinion: and they both either of the mind or of the
body: of which some are good, which are referred unto a good end: others
vicious, which are directed to an ill: this virtue is familiar with good and
honest men: it absteyneth from the contrary: verily it bridleth al
concupiscencies with the judgment of reason: which Seneca confirms in these
words: Temperance rules pleasures: some it hates and drives away, with
others it dispenses, and trayneth to an holsom fashion. By which words it is
to be understood that this is a virtue very well acquainted with Prudencie.
Since than Temperaunce is busied in measurynge of appetites, her first charge
is, to contemplate, what the necessity of nature may postulate for to pass
the life commodiously, that she may satisfy her, who is contented with few
things, whereby the superfluous use of things natural may be eschewed, and
may be retained within the bound of Nature, The other is, that when as now she
^ath vnquisshed the delights of the body, she conquer also the passions of
the mind struggling against reason, that she keep under arrogancy, that she
know her self, that she stifely repine sensuality, and endeavor by little and
little to bring it in servitude to Reason. Three parts are annected of Cicero
unto Temperance: Continence, Clemency, and Modesty. Of which the first does
govern Lust through the rule of Counsel: The other remitteth Hatred: The
third preserves honest shamefastness, and demureness, without which
nothing can be accounted ^ight.

Of Continence and Abstinence. Cap. xxxiiij.
BEtwixt Continence and abstinence that appears properly to be the
difference, that Continence does guide affections, and keeps a mean in all
order of living and trimming, and especially (as Cicero bears witness) in
ouerslippinge of pleasures: unto whom Incontinence is repugnant. Abstinence
represseth the hands from other men's goods, unto whom Rauenie is apposite.
This is in an innocent man, the in a te^perate: Continence is defined of him, a
virtue by which the greediness is ruled through the government of counsel. It
is contrary to desire, to pleasure, to lust. For the charge hereof is, to
moderate all appetites, lust, riotte, drunkenness, gluttuous, deuouringe of
meats, and to cause all senses and delices obedient to reason. This virtue not
only makes men commendable, and rulers of desires, but also uncorrupted, and
iocant, and also neat to conclude very excellent^ matters: But contrariwise
of intemperancie grow many kinds of diseases, the paunche burdened with
overmuch meat and drink, does both pester the mind and darken the reason.

But yet that scope evermore ought to be proposed unto all men, that they
restrain them selves therefore, because they ought to know by so doing to
please God, whom they must serve, not by reason it aduauntageth the health.
For if any man does avoid incontinencie only for health, or else for vtilities
sake, be meriteth not guardon: unto contine^ce may be referred al those
virtues, whatsoever appellatio^ they may have, which do moderate pleasures,
apparel, living, meat, drink: which make chaste modest, and sober persons:
which bridle those abominable destructions, superfluity, vnleyfull appetite,
greedynesse, drunckennesse, and such like, through which voluptuous,
Lecherous, effeminate gourmanders, drunken men, and worse than beasts are made.
Through Continence we come unto the praise of Temperaunce. She is perdie rather
an imperfect virtue than an absolute, as likes Aristotle: yet very necessary
for the duty of Temperaunce, a virtue fully accomplished. Celius Calcaguinus
has entitled in his inquisicions, that Aristotle does declare in his Ethikes,
and Plutarchus in his Commentary of Moral Virtue, what difference there is
betwixt the continent man and vncontynent, Temperate and intemperate. For the
Continent person contendeth with affections, and vanquisheth them: the
vncontinent perdie does repine, but being ouercommed does lament. Contrariwise
the temperate has no struglyng: but uses appeased affections, as the calm
Sea, which is tossed with no wind. But the intemperate without resistynge
grants unto perturbacions, take professes himself willingly consenting to
all delices. The contrary vice unto Continence, is incontinence, spreadyng
abroad her branches egally. She may be defined, An immoderate desire of
pleasures, which is not governed with the Empire of Reason: either it is a
superfluous use, and repugnant to reason, of lust, gluttony, drunknesse, and
other unseemly pleasures. Nothing is more filthy and vile than this vice,
which makes a man a bound seruante, and despoyleth him of al liberty: whom
it delivers in bondage to most wanton rulers, as to Desiers, Lusts,
Fleshfondynges, Wrath, avarice, and such other stewardes of reproach and
deformity: as elegantly it is disputed of Cicero in his first Paradox.

Of Clemency. Cap. xxxv.
EVen as Continence is tried in the restreigninge and moderating of desiers, so
is Clemency in the bridlyng of an^er. For there are two parts of the Soul,
as before it is declared, the desi^ing, and the angry: out of which all
af^ections do proceed: Clemency is defi^ed of Cicero, through which the minds
^naduisedly enforced to hate one, are ^epressed with gentleness. Seneca
alleging sundry definitions of the same Virtue says, Clemency is a
temperance of the mind in power to revenge: either, a gentleness of the
superior toward the inferior, in ordering of punishementes: either, a
bendinge of the mind unto fauourablenesse, in exaction of punishment. For it
is called the same pleasantness, or meekness, and Clemency, by which the
braide of anger is repelled with reason, and a modesty is showed in reuenginge,
and chastising. But wisdom does so rule her, that neither all should be
pardoned, nor any man corrected. For both of them rather does answer unto
cruelty, than Clemency: yet notwithstanding it is better to offend in the more
freendly point, than in the contrary: unless perhaps they who bear office
in the common wealth, shall suppose an example needeful to be practiced on some,
whom Cicero wishes to be like unto ye laws, who are trained to punish, not
through anger, but equity. It is the part of Clemency to search out the
causes of favoring. Certes no private person ought to fear to bend him
self to the more Courtious part, nether ought to devise at any time how to
requite the Injury inferred to him: but ought to bear under foot the
incensinges of choler, and ought to understand this to be the excellentest
victory of all others, and cheefely convenient for a Christian man. Cruelty,
and fiersnesse, or else stoutnesse of the mind in revenging, and punishing, is
repugnaunte to Clemency, whose companion is Brutishness: that is to wit a
besticall hostility. Than which two vices nothing is more diverse from the
nature of man, unto whom appertains Humanity and Clemency: and compassion
joined hereto with an amiable bond, which makes men gentle and courteous:
than which no virtue may be more acceptable to God, whose mercy is
unmeasurable and inestimable. Softness seems to be of kin to Clemency,
but it is a vice: which is belonginge to an ^iotte, not to a man favorable.

Of Modestye. Cap. xxxvi.
MOdestia, Modesty, so called, because it keeps a certain mean and
moderation. Cicero defines it in his second book De Inuencione, through
which honest shame does get a worthy and a stable authority, and in his
first book of Offices, of all things which are done, and which are said,
an order and a mean, and a knowledge of an opportunity of fit seasones to
accomplish a thing. The Stoykes, a Science of settinge those things which
shall be done or said, in their proper places. The first definition commends
unto us Honest shamefastness which Cicero terms a certain natural
Timiditie, and a bashfulnesse, which is a certain reverend ^eare toward
men: whose property ^s to offend no man: as it belongs to Justice, to
violate no man which is ^efined of him in Particions Oratorye, the ward of al
virtues, eschewing disworship, and chiefly seeking for praise.

And Aristotle calls it a fear of reproach and infamy. And these
definitions verily seem not to declare one certain virtue shamefastness, but
a certain general united together with all virtues, which by another
appellacion is called Decorum Comlynesse. Shame is rehearsed of us among the
affections: where we covet a sudden commocion to be understood, through
which any man is troubled unawares: but in this place an affection limited to
virtue, confirmed by use, which through the fear of reproach and infamy
calls us back from vices, if we acknowledge it, not as Virtue her self, yet
verily yoked with Virtue. Diogenes named the redness, engendered of this
affection, Virtutis colorem the color of Virtue, declaringe that kind of
shame to proceed from a good disposicion, which yet in this place we will to
be moderate: that it be a mediocrity, which is proper to virtues, betwixt
overmuch shame and timiditie a counterfayter of bashfulnesse and impudency. Of
shame a shamefaste or a bashful man is called by the title of virtue: unto whom
is contrarious an impudent, and an unshamefast person.

This fear of dishoneste matters is commendable, and in the younger sort it
signifies a towardness of Virtue, and besides the especial ornamente of
women. But Impudency is a detestable Vice, by which the comeliness, and all
the honesty of life is neglected: and an entrance unto vices is opened,
because they are not feared. The other definitions of Cicero, which even now
we have put, do sufficiently declare, what Modesty is: that there be an
order, and mean conningly to be observed of those things which are don, and
said, whereby every matter may be excecuted in his proper place and time, and
decently.

For the duty hereof is, so to assuage the troublesome moodes, that a certain
harmony of all doings be observed: That nothing which is foolish, and scarce
seemly, either be done or said, that nothing be committed couetously through
Envy, Love, Lust, Arrogancy, Ambicion, and other unlawful appetites. Under
Modesty be placed Lowliness of mind, a desire to learn, pleasantness,
either delectablenesse, or civility of talk, and furniture of body.
Lowliness of mind, which they call Humility, is the very notable virtue of
Christian men: by which any man does so press down the malipertnesse of
courage, that by how much the higher he is, by so much the more lowly he should
behave himself. Christ himself would that we learn this virtue of him, who
called himself meek, and of an humble and low spirit: that we likewise
according to his example should extenuate our goods, if there be any: whereas
we can obtain no good thing, which is not given us by the will and gift of
God: that there should be no occasion to any man of braggyng of himself, since
every perfect gift comes by inspiration from God the Father, who lighteneth
the minds of men, through Jesus Christ our Savior, through whom men have
received perfect wisdom authorized by the benefit of ye holy ghost. Therefore
this virtue teaches that especially, which in times past was said to fall
down from Heaven Nosce te ipsu^, know thy self: that no man perdy should
attribute overmuch to himself, since he has nothing, which he has not
received. This also is the charge of a prudent person whereby you shall
understand Modesty and Temperance at al seasons to be very straightly joined
to Prudencie: whereof also she is termed of the Greeks (...), as it were the
Fortress of wisdom. The contrary vice is arrogancy, through which any man
blinded with the love of him self, faineth many notable things to be in him,
which are not in him, and greater than may be in him: either an insolent and
vain bostinge, and wantynge the judgment of the mind. This vice of foolish
persons by ouerweening in them selves to well, is hateful both to God and men.
The other part of Modesty is coupled to the former with great affinity, the
desire of learning, by which any man acknowledgyng his ignorance is holden with
the love of Science, to the procuring of which he frames his mind. He does
easily learn many things, who is studious of wisdom, and understands that
he is ignorant in many matters: what fellows were the Philosophers, whose
whole life has been nothing else than a certain perpetual study of knowledge
and wisdom. Contrary unto these be such, who might attain to great
learning unless they did suppose themselves already to have stored their
Pouches: the which chiefly repugneth this virtue, which proceeds from
Modesty and confession of proper ignorance. This virtue is situated betwixt
two vices, Curiosity and carelessness, either negligence of learning, and
knowledge. Curiosity is a superfluous pain, or an immoderate greedines to
know things either pernicious or vain, and littel auayleable: contrary to the
laudable and native, and vehement desire and endeavor to learn engendered in all
men naturally. For the search and inquisicion of truth is proper to man. And
as over much industrious labor is worthily dispraysed, so is negligence, and
the contempt of Science, which is apperteyninge to blockish and dull persons,
who appear more like unto brute creatures, then to men. The third branch of
Modesty is Merinesse or Pleasantness, and delectablenesse, and also
Humanity, and courtesy of talk, which who that shall use prudently, he
shall be pleasant to all men, and for that also the better accepted. Merinesse is
which ascribes a certain mean to sportes and pastimes: and uses these same
in time and place with them, unto whom they are thankful, to stur up honest
mirth, and to wipe away the anguishes of the mind with a certain delight.
This also is a mean betwixt two vices, as Aristotle bears witness in his
second book Ad Nicomachum, dishonest skoffing, and carterlike vnsauournesse. He
that keeps a mean of pleasantness applied to sport, is reckened merry and
civil: He that passes degree, is compted a rayler, what manner of fellows are
the Parasites, and stage Players, and other light and foolish men. But he which
altogether abhors Maygames is judged beastly, and vplandishe. But we must
diligently take heed, less through our bourdyng we offend any man: that
there be not immoderate co^ceites, not filthy, not foolish. The work of
Apothegmes collected of Erasmus shall minister many merry toys. And as
concerning that pleasantness of life which is remnant: who that shows
himself delectable in such sort, as reason requires, he is called easy,
gentell, courtise: and Facility is reckened Mediocritie. He which passes the
mean, if he be led with no occasion, is to be compted over easy, and
pliant: but if for his own profit, he is to be esteemed a flatterer. But he
which altogether dissenteth and departs from mean and reason, and shows
himself sad in all respects, he is to be thought testif, and churlish, and
worthy of al men's hatred, with that vncourteise sadness, and rude gravity,
and unthankful to wise men. A certain sad sagenesse in countenance seems
to be ingraffed in certain, what one is given to that Crito of Terence: which
if it be natural, surely it can neither be called properly good, nor evil. It
shall be reckened good, if it agree to right reason. But there is a certain
sect of men which cloak foolishness in their face and countenance, and
also in their iesture, ietting and communication. Whose affectate gravity
ratified by lewd custom, is wont to appear very foolish unto witty men, and
more rightly informed unto humanity. The last member of sober mood does
teach that the paumpering and apparelling of the carcass is to be moderated,
and seemelinesse to be kept in it as in other matters, less either over
curious care and riotte, or else carterlye and unnatural slouenry and
vncleanlinesse be reproved. For this virtue which consists of adourning
agreeable for the commodity of the body, and necessity of nature is a mean
betwixt superfluity and filth. Let the apparel than be moderate, clean, fit
for the body: and conueniente for use, not for foolishness, and rediculous
ostentacion, what one the barbarous and outlandish is wont to be; let it be
applied to the persons according to their dignity and riches: and to kind, to
age, to place, to time, and to honest custom. One be^eemeth noble and rich
men, another the base and poor: one men, another women: one old fathers,
another the galant youth.

Of Intemperance and her two parts. Cap. xxxvij.
INtemperancie, is a readiness conseting to desiers against reason: which
Cicero in his fourth book Tusculanaru^ questionum does define, a swaruing from
al understanding, and from right reason, so bended from the ^rescript of
reason, that by no means the appetites sensual neither can be ruled nor yet
repressed. The parts of this vice are two. One which verily addicteth her self
unto pleasures: the other which does nothing at all. Through her men do rush
hedlong after the usage of beasts into al delices, the Empire of Reason thrown
away. Through this, by the rudeness of mind some (as it were with a certain
abashmente) are made dull unto all pastaunces, and also do reject and contempne
honest and necessary delighte without occasion. But these I judge a man may
seek, and find a few, which through a certain Brutishness would so abhor
all pastime, wherewith Nature is cheefely delited, that they may be entreated
with no delectation. The better sort by a great deal are wont to go astray in
the other part, and to geeue to much scope unto pleasure, which temperaunce
does bridel by the Squire of reason: who being collocated between those two
vices, does always lay claim to that precious and peculier Mediocritie of
Virtue.

Of the conjunction of Virtues among them selves, the difference and
excellency. Cap. xxxviij.
ALl Virtues, which now are absolute, and brought unto the perfection of
reason, are so connected together among them selves with a certain mutual
copulation, as the members of our body: they do so agree in amible concord as
musical Harmony. This is that manifold order of Ringes, which Plato writes
to be drawn unto of the Lodestone.

For you shall not call him perfectly and truly a prudent man, which same is not
both just, and valiant, and temperate: neither just, who wants the rest: nor
valiaunte, nor Temperate, who is not ^urnished with the fellowship of the
residue, although he be conuersaunt more commonly in one Virtue, than in
another. But the imperfect virtues are not so yoked together that they may
make as it wear a consent and agreement. We have heard that Socrates was
Temperate and Modest: yet that bourding which is said to have been peculiar
unto him, when as he would reprehende the unskillfulness of others so
greedely, can not escape the check of arrogancy. But truly that great
patience and Temperaunce of Job published in holy Scriptures was most perfet of
all others. But not so many examples are alleged of this absolute Virtue: yet
many may be disclosed of the imperfect. Some virtues excel others in
excellency and operation: as Prudencie whose Harboroughe is placed in the
mind, and is occupied in the out findinge of truth, she is preferred before
Temperaunce which moderateth delices, and appoynteth a mean unto all things,
unto whom a place is assigned in the desiringe facultye of the soul. Justice
passes Fortitude because she preserves the equality of humayne society, and
has no certain habitation, but is indifferently spread abroad unto all parts
of the Soul: this ought to be busied in despising of perils, and ought to be
situated in the Virtue of the angry Soul: what soever verily be subject unto
these chief Virtues, as they are lower in order, so be they in stateliness,
by reason that some of them are under others: neither forthwith should be
referred unto the greateste good, which those principal Fountaynes do next
consider, but every one to their proper beginninges, and should have regard of
us rather then of felicity: since not they of their own power, but by those
four Capitalles may be straightned unto God him self, who is the end of all
good things. To this wished mark, and eternal felicity we attain, by the
operation of Virtue verily (as in the beginning it is expressed) yet the which
God him self may make prosperous unto us, through his Clemency: to whom be
due all praise, honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
This book translated by John Charlton, late fellow of Exetre College, in
Oxford, and now Schole master of Wyrksop, in the county of Nottingham.

Mors vltima Linea rerum. The Table.
OF the end and parts of Moral Science. Cap. i. Of the end of man, and the
Sovereign good. Cap. ii. Of Affections. Cap. iii Of Love. Cap. iiii. Of desire
and hope. Cap. v. Of Gladness. Cap. vi, Of hatred and anger and like
affections, Cap. vii. Of Sadness. Cap. viii. Of Fear. Cap. ix. Of Boldness.
Cap. x. Of Virtue and her division and Original. Cap. xi Of Prudencie Cap.
xii. Of Domestical governance. Cap. xiii, Of Politic governance Cap. xiiii.
O Vices contrary to wisdom Cap xv. Of Justice Cap xvi. Of the parts of
Justice Cap xvii. Of the six parts of Justice constituted of Cicero, and their
Vices, and of some other which be vvelnie of the same nature cap, xviii Of
Godliness cap. xix. Of Reverence, Cap. xx Of Troth, cap. xxi Of Reuengement,
Cap. xxii Of Thank, cap. xxiii Of compassion, Cap. xxiiii Of Liberality and
vices contrary to this, Avarice and Prodigality, cap. xxv Of Magnificence Cap.
xxvi Of Friendship cap. xxvii Of Injustice Cap. xxviii Of Fortitude cap. xxix Of
Confidence and Magnanimity Cap. xxx Of patience and perseverance, cap xxxi Of
the Vices betvveene which Fortitude is placed cap. xxxii Of Temperaunce cap.
xxxiii Of Continence and abstinence cap. xxxiiii Of Clemency. Cap. xxxv Of
Modesty Cap. xxxvi Of Intemperaunce and her two parts, cap. xxxvii Of the
conjunction of Virtues among them selves the difference and excel^encie. Cap.
xxxviii
FINIS.
printer's device of William How (McKerrow 142)

These are to be sold, at the Southwest door of Poules Church.


