THE HUNDRED AND TEN CONSIDERATIONS OF SIGNIOR JOHN VALDESSO: TREATING OF THOSE
things which are most profitable, most necessary, and most perfect in our
Christian Profession.

WRITTEN IN SPANISH, Brought out of Italy by Vergerius, and first set forth in
Italianat Basil by Coelius Secundus Curio, ANNO 1550.

Afterward translated into French, and Printed at Lions 1563. and again at
Paris 1565.

And now translated out of the Italian Copy into English, with notes.

Whereunto is added an Epistle of the Authors, or a Preface to his Divine
Commentary upon the Romans.

1. COR. 2.

Howbeit we s^eak wisdom amongst them that are perfect, ^et not the wisdom of
this world.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. Ann. Dom.
1638.

The Publisher to the READER.
THese truly Divine Meditations or Considerations of Signior JOHN VALDESSO, a
noble man of Spain, (who died almost an hundred years ago) having been so
acceptable to pious Vergerius, to learned Coelius Secundus Curio, and to many
other both French and Italian Protestants, that they have been translated out
of the original Spanish Copy, and printed three or four times in those
languages; It seems to me a reasonable and charitable desire to print them
now in English, without any alteration at all from the Italian copy; the
Spanish being either not at all extant, or not easy to be found. It is certain
that the book contains many very worthy discourses of experimental and
practical Divinity, well expressed and elegantly illustrated; especially
concerning the Do^trine of justification and mortification: and yet
^otwithstanding there be some few expressions ^d similitudes in it, at which
not only the weak ^der may stumble, and the curious quarrel, but ^o the wise
and charitable reader may justly ^lame. To have removed these few stumbling
blocks, or offensive passages, by leaving them out, or by altering them, had
not been the work of a Translator, but of an Author; besides the ill example
of altering ancient Authors, which is one of the greatest causes of the
corruption of truth and learning. Therefore it has been thought fit to print
the Book, according to the Authors own Copy, but withal to give particular
notice of some suspicious places, and of some manifest errors, which follow
particularly expressed in the ensuing folios; referring the rest (if any there
be) to the judgment of the reader. He lived where the Scriptures were in no
reputation, and therefore no marveil that he should speak so slightly of them;
but rather on the contrary, it may seem a marveilous thing in our eyes, to have
a Statesman in those parts, at that time, so far illuminated and taught of
God as he was. May it please the Divine goodness, that every reader may reap
the like comfort and profit to his soul by it, as the Translator and Publisher
humbly and thankfully acknowledge that they have done, and they have their main
scope and aim in publishing it.

Glory be to God on high!
BRIEF NOTES RELATING TO THE DVBIOVS AND OFFENSIVE places in the following
CONSIDERATIONS.
To the 3 CONSID. upon these words, Not for thy speech! Other Law and other
Doctrine have we.
THese words about the H. Scripture suite with what he writes elsewhere,
especially Consid. 32. But I like none of it, for it slights the Scripture too
much: holy Scriptures have not only an Elementary use, but a use of perfection,
and are able to make the man of God perfect 1. Tim. 4. And David (though David)
studied all the day long in it: And Joshua was to meditate therein Day and
Night. Josh. the 1.

To the 3 CONSID. upon those words, As they also make use of the Scriptures to
conserve the health of their minds.
All the Saints of God may be said in some sense to have put confidence in
Scripture, but not as a naked Word severed from God, but as the Word of God:
And in so doing they do not sever there trust from God. But by trusting in the
word of God they trust in God. He that trusts in the Kings word for any thing
trusts in the King.

To the 5 CONSID. Upon these words. God regards not how pious, or impious we be.
This place together with many other, a^ namely Consid. 71. upon Our Father;
and Consid. 94. upon these words* God does no^ hold them for good, or for evil
for that they observe, or not observe etc. though it were the Authors opinion,
yet the truth of it would be examined. See the note upon Consid. 36

To the 6 CONSID.
The Doctrine of the last passage must be warily understood. First that it is
not to be understood of actual sins, but habitual, for I can no more free
my self from actual sins after Baptism, then I could of Original before,
and without Baptism. The exemption from both, is by the Grace of God.
Secondly, among Habits some oppose Theological virtues, as Vncharitablene^e
oppos^ Charity, Infidelity, Faith; Distrust Hope: Of these none can free
themselves of themselves, but only by the Grace of God: Other Habits oppose
moral virtues, as Prodigality opposes Moderation; and Pusillanimity,
Magnanimity: Of these the heathen freed themselves, only by the general
Providence of God, as Socrates and Aristides, etc. Where he says the
Inflammation of the natural* he says aptly, so it be understood with the
former distinction, for Fomes is not taken away, ^t Accensio Fomitis; the
natural concupiscence is not quite extinguished, but the hea^e of it af^waged.

To the 11 CONSID.
He often uses this manner of speech ^leeving by Revelation, not by relation,
whereby I understand he means, Only the effectual operation or illumination
of the holy spirit, testifying, and applying the revealed truth of the Gospel;
and not any private Enthusiasmes, or Revelations: As if he should say; a
general apprehension, or assent to the promises of the Gospel by hearsay,
or relation from others, is not that which fills the heart with joy and peace
in believing; but the spirits bearing witness which our spirit revealing and
applying the general promises to every one in particular with such syncerity,
and efficacy, that it makes him godly, righteous, and sober all his life long;
this I call believing by Revelation, and not by Relation.

To the 32 CONSID.
I much mislike the Comparison of the Images, and H. Scripture, as if they were
both but Alphabets and after a time to be left. The H. Scripture^ (as I wrote
before) have not only an Elementary use, but a use of perfection, neither can
they ever be exhausted, (as Pictures may be by a plenarie circumspection) but
still even to the most learned and perfect in them, there is somewhat to be
learned more: Therefore David desires God in the ^19 Psalm, to open his eyes
that he might see the wondrous things of his Laws, and that he would make them
his study. Although by other words of the same Psalm it is evident, that he
was not meanly conversant in them. Indeed he that shall so attend to the bark
of the letter, as to neglect the Consideration of Gods Work in his heart
through the Word, does amiss; both are to be done the Scriptures still used,
and Gods work within us still observed, who works by his Word, and ever in
the reading of it. As for the Text, They shall be all t^ught of God, it being
Scripture cannot be spoken to the disparagement of Scripture; but the meaning
is this, That God in the days of the Gospel will not give an outward Law of
Ceremonies as of old, bu^ such a one as shall still have the assistance of the
holy spirit applying it to our hearts, and ever outrunning the Teacher, as it
did when Peter taught Cornelius: there the case i^ plain, Cornelius had
revelation, yet Peter was to be sent for, and those that have inspirations must
still use Peter, Gods Word: if we make another sen^e of that Text; we shall
overthrow all means, save catechizing, and set up Enthusiasmes.

In the Scripture are Doctrines, these ever teach more and more. Promises,
these ever comfort more and more To. 15. 4.

To the 33 CONSID.
The Doctrine of this Consideration clears that of the precedent. For as the
servant leaves not the letter when he has read it, but keeps it by him, and
reads it again and again, and the more the promise is delayed, the more he
reads it, and ^ortifies himself with it; so are we to do with the Scriptures
and this is the use of the promises of the Scriptures. But the use of the
Doctrinall part i^ more, in regard it presents us not with the same thing only
when it is read as the promises do, but enlightens us with new Considerations
the more we read i^.

Much more might be said, but this suffices, he himself allows it for a holy
conversation and refreshment.

To the 36 CONSID. On these words, Neither fearing chastisement for
transgressiion; nor hoping for reward, for observation, etc.
All the discourse from this line till the end of this Chapter may seem
strange, but it is suitable to what the Author holds elsewhere, for he
maintains that it is Faiith and Infidelity that shall judge us now since the
Gospel, and that no other sin or virtue has any thing to do with us; if we
believe, no sin shall hurt us; if we believe not, no virtue shall help us.
Therefore he says here we shall not be punished (which word I like here better
then chastizement, because even the godly are chastized but not punished) for
evil doing nor rewarded for weldoing or living, for all the point lies in
believing or not believing. And with this exposition the Chapter is clear
enough, but the truth of the Doctrine would be examined, however it may pass
for his opinion, in the Church of God there is one fundamental, but else
variety.

To the XXXVII. CONSID. On these words; That God is so delicate and sensitive
etc.
The Apostle says that the wages of Sin is death, and therefore This note is
the French Translators.
there is no sin so small, that merits not death, and that does not provoke
God, who is a jealous God.

To the 46 CONSID. On these words, Exercise not thy self in anything
pretending Justification.
He means (I suppose) that a man presume not to merit, that is, to oblige
God, or justify himself before God, by any acts or exercises of Religion; but
that he ought to pray God affection^tely, and fervently to send him the light
of his spirit, which may be unto him as the sun to a Travellour in his
journey, he in the mean while applying himself to the duties of true Piety,
and sincere Religion, such as are Prayer, Fasting, Alme^-deedes, etc. after the
example of devout Cornelius

To the 49 CONSID. On these words, Remaining quiet when they perceive no
motion, etc.
In indifferent things there is room for motions and expecting of them; but in
things good, as to relieve my Neighbor, God has already revealed, his Will
about it. Therefore we ought to proceed, except there be a restraining motion
(as S. Paul had) when he would have preached in Asia, and I conceive the
restraining motions are much more frequent to the godly, then inviting motions;
because the Scripture invites enough, for it invites us to all good, according
to that singular place, Phil. 4. 8. A man is to embrace all good, but because
he cannot do all, God often chooses which he shall do, and that by
restraining him from what he would not have him do.

To the same CONSID. Upon these words, A man's free will does consist, etc.
He means a man's fre-will is only in outward, not in spiritual things.

To the same CONSID. On these words, Neithor Pharaoh, nor Judas etc. could
cease to be such.
This doctrine however true in substance, yet needs discre^t, and wary
explaining

To the LVIII. CONSID. Upon the seventh difference.
By occasions (I suppose) he means the ordinary, or necessary duties, and
occasions of our calling and condition of life; and not those which are in
themselves occasions of sin; such as are all vain conversations: For as for
these, pious persons ought always to avoid them: but in those other occasions,
Gods Spirit will mortify and try them as gold in the fire.

To the LIX. CONSID. Upon these words, And with doubtfulnesse I see he prayed
in the Garden.
To say our Savior prayed with doubtfulnesse, is more then I can or dare say;
But with condition, or conditionally he prayed as man, though as God he knew
the event. Fear is given to Christ, but not doubt, and upon good ground.

To the LXII. CONSID.
This Chapter is considerable, the intent of it, that the world pierces not
godly men's actions no more then Gods, is in some sort true because they are
spiritually discerned. 1. Cor. 2. 14. So likewise are the godly in some sort
exempt from Laws, for Lex iusto non est pofita: But when he enlarges them
hegoes too far. For first concerning Abraham and Sara, I ever took that for
a weakness in the great Pat^k: And that the best of Gods Se^vants should have
weaknesses is no way repugnant to the way. of Gods Spirit in them, or to the
Scriptures, or to themselves being still men, though godly men. Nay they are
purposely accorded in holy Writ. Wherefore as David's Adultery cannot be
excused, so need not Abraham's Equivocation, nor Paul's neither, when he
professed himself a Pharisee, which strictly he was not, though in the point
of Resurrection he agreed with them, and they with him. The reviling also of
A^anias seems by his own recalling, an oversight; yet I remember the Fathers
forbid us to judge of the doubtful actions of Saints in the Scriptures; which
is a modest admonition. But it is one thing not to judge, another to defend
them. Secondly, when he uses the Word Jurisdiction allowing no Jurisdiction
over the godly, this cannot stand, and it is ill Doctrine in a commonwealth.
The godly are punishable as others, when they do amiss, and they are to be
judged according to the outward fact, unless it be evident to others, as well
as to themselves that God moved them. For otherwise any Malefactor may pretend
motions, which is unsufferable in a Commonwealth. Neither do I doubt but if
Abraham had lived in our Kingdom under government, and had killed his son
Isaac, but he might have been justly put to death for it by the Magistrate,
unleffe he could have made (...) appear, that it was done by Gods immediate
precept. He had done justly, and yet he had been punished justly, that is in
huma^ foro and secundum praesumptionem legalem. So may a war be just on both
sides, and was just in the Canaanites and Israelites both. How the godly are
exempt from Laws is a known point among Divines, but when he says they are
equally exempt with God, that is dangerous and too far.

The best salve for the whole Chapter, is to distinguish Judgments There is a
judgment of authority (upon a fact) and there is a judgment of the Learned; for
as a Magistrate judges in his tribunal, so a Scholar judges in his study,
and censureth this or that; whence come so many Books of several men's
opinions: perhaps he meant all of this later not of the former. Worldly learned
men cannot judge spiritual me^ actions, but the Magistrate may.

To the LXIII. CONSID.
The Author does still discover too slight a regard of the Scriptures, as if
it were but childrens meat, whereas there is not only milk there, but strong
meat also. HEB. 5. 14. Things hard to be understood. 2. PFT. 3. 16. Things
needing great Consideration. MAT. 24. 15. Besides he opposes the teaching of
the spirit to the teaching of the scripture, which the holy spirit wrote.
Although the holy spirit apply the scripture, yet what the scripture teaches,
the spirit teaches, the holy spirit indeed sometime doubly teaching both in
penning and in applying. I wonder how this opinion could befall so good a man
as it seems Valdesso was, since the Saints of God in all ages have ever held in
so precious esteem the word of God, as their Joy, and Crown, and their
Treasure on earth. Yet his own practice seems to confute his opinion, for the
most of his Considerations being grounded upon some text of scripture, shows
that he was continually conversant in it, and not used it for a time only, and
then cast it away, as he says strangely.

There is no more to be said of this Chapter but that his opinion of the
scripture is unsufferable. As for the text of S. PFT. 2. Ep. 1. 19. which he
makes the ground of his Consideration, building it all upon the word uutill the
day star arise, it is nothing. How many places do the Fathers bring about
Until against the Heretics who disputed against the Virginity of the blessed
Virgin out of that text MAT. 1. 25. where it is said, Joseph knew her not,
until she had brought forth her first borne Son, as if afterward he had
known her: and indeed in common sense, if I bid a man stay in a place until I
come, I do not then bid him go away but rather stay longer, that I may ^peak
with him or do some thing ^e when I do come; so (...). Peter bidding the
dispersed Hebrews at^end to the word till the day da^, does not bid them then
cast away the word, or leave it off: but however he would have them attend to
it till that time, and then afterward they will attend it of themselves without
his exhortation. Nay it is observeable that in that very place he preferres the
Word before the sight of the Transfiguration of Christ. So that the Word has
the precedence even of Revelations and Visions. And so his whole discourse and
sevenfold observation falls to the ground.

To the 65. CONSID. on these words,
Acknowledging the benefit received by Jesus Christ our Lord; like as it
betides unto a thirsty Travellour, to whom and^.

This comparison is infinitely too base, there is none of the references, which
we have had with our Lord Jesus Christ, dissolved but This note is the French
Translators.
infinitely perfected, and he shall ever continue our glorious head, and all
the influences of our happiness shall ever descend from him, and the chief our
glory shall (a^ I conceive) consist in that which he says amongst the last
words that he spoke in the 17. John. v. 24. Father I will that they also whom
thou have given me ^ee with me, where I am, that they also may behold the glory
which thou have given me before the foundation of the world. To which agrees
that which S. Paul writes, 2. THESE. 1. chap. v. 9.

To the 69. CONSID. upon these words, So much faith, as thereby to remove
Mountains.
Divines hold, that justifying faith, and the faith of miracles are diverse
gifts, and of a different nature, the one being gratia gratis da^a, the other
gratia gratum faciens, this being given only to the godly, and the other
sometimes to the wicked. Yet doubtless the best faith in us is defective, and
arrives not to the point it should, which if it did, it would do more, then it
does. And miracle-working as it may be severed from justifying faith, so it may
be a fruit of it, and an exaltation. 1. JOHN. 5. 14.

To the 94. CONSID.
By Hebrew piety, he means not the very C^remonies of the Jews, which no
Christian observes now, but an analogat observation of Ecclesiastical, and
Canonical laws, supe^duced to the scriptures, like to that of Jews, which
they added to their divine law. This being well weighed, will make the
Consideration easy, and very observeable: For at least, some of the Papist^ are
come no^, to what the Pharisees were come in our Saviors time.

CELIO SECVNDO CVRIONE, A SERVANT OF JESUS CHRIST, to all those, that are
Sanctified by God the Father, and saved, and called by Jesus Christ our Lord,
The Mercy, the Peace, and the love of God be multiplied unto you.
SEE here (Brethren) we make tender unto you, not of Boccace his Hundred
Novelties, but of the Hundred and ten Considerations of Valdesso; the great
importance whereof I shall declare unto you. Many both Ancient and Modern, have
written, of Christian afsayres, and of them, some better then others; but who
he is, next the Apostles of our Lord, and the Evangelists, that has written
more substantially, and Divinelike, then John Valdesso, would perhaps be hard
to find. There be some of them that have left indeed many great and laborious
Books; but amongst them there are also many of little importance, and that are
not much necessary to a Christian life, being fraught with unprofitable
Questions, and Philosophical dtsputations, from whence has sprung a thousand
inconveniences in the Church of Christ. And to give a proof that I say the
truth in this matter, I set down some of these inconveniences, whereby
Judgment may easily be given of the rest.

First therefore, in a^ much as they have written huge Books, they could not
avoid many falsities, follies, and vanities: For as the wise man testifies,
many words cannot want much vanity.

Next, these great Writers have drawn all the Sriptures to Questions, and
Disputations, and made as it were an Academy thereof, raising such doubts in
every thing as they have made the Doctrine of the Son of God, and of his
Apostles, and our most certain, and infallible hope of Eternal life to become
a matter altogether doubtful. And this which I shall now add, is not of less
importance, then the other inconveniences; and that is, that with their ample,
and infinite volumes they have withdrawn, and estranged men from the study of
the truly holy Scriptures, and from the Contemplation of simple verity, and
instead of Christ's Disciples have made them men's Scholars; So that we are come
to that pass, as more and greater credit is given to those which are termed
Doctors (as if so be Christ and his Apostles were not the true, and Eternal
Doctors and masters of the Church) then to the simple Doctrine of Christ
himself.

This is the benefit and the edification that the Church has reaped from these
huge volumes; which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ seeing, (the safety of
his Church being more dear unto him, then his own life) he has stirred, and
raised up some, and opened their eyes, to the intent, that they should by little
and little reduce his sheep to the green and healthful pastures of holy
Scripture, and to the pure, clear, and sweet Fountains of God's Word. And
herein every one has busied himself according to his talent, that is, the
gift which he has received. But to me it seems, and I hope it will do so
likewise to a^ that have a true relish of Christ's Doctrine, that this our
Author in these divine Considerations, and some other writings of his, has so
well considered and propounded to all our Considerations the duties of a
Christian man, that there are but a few, very few, that can go before him. He
has not indeed writ so huge a Volume, nor scribled so much paper: No, the
Books which he has written, are little, and few, but pure, clear, and truly
Divine.

Many have written of the virtues, manners, and duties of a wise and good man,
as Aristotle, Panetius, and Cicero, and amongst Christians, Ambrose; and in our
age, Thomas Venatorius: But none of all these has entreated with such
sublimity, nor made such effectual demonstration, nor discoursed with such
sweetness, nor with such Majesty, nor with such authority, nor with such
grace, as our Valdesso.

This, this is that which truly deserves to be entitled the Book of Christian
duties, the Book of Christian demon^rations, and of truly divine speculations.

Herein is showed the Original, the Cause, the Progress, and the End of every
motion, of every action, of every event, that is done under heaven, either by
God or the Devil, or by the godly, or by the wicked man; and all this from
clear, certain, and unquestionable Principles of holy Scripture, accompanied
with so good, and proper examples, and similitudes, and compassions, and
divisions, and definitions, that unless we will be too too obstinate, and out
of common sense, we must needs come to agreement touching that which a man owes
unto God, to himself, and to his Neighbor. And further, what the benefit of
Christ is, and to whom it is profitable, what the infirmity, and what the Power
of Christ is, his abasement, an^ his exaltation, our own Mortification, and
our Vivification, Election, and Reprobation, and a thousand other like good and
profitable heads are here to be clearly learned in such manner, as growing
practique in this Book you shall come to understand all things necessary to
holy Scripture better then by the great and many Commentaries of many others.

Now for this great, and heavenly treasure we are all debtors to M. Peter Paul
Vergerius, as the instrument of the divine Providence in causing it to be
printed for the view, and enioyment of every one. He coming from Italy, and
leaving his feigned Bishopric to come unto a true Apostleshippe, whereunto he
was called by Christ, brought with him many excellent compositions, doing
herein, as men use to do, when their houses are on fire, or their City sacked,
and ruined; every one endeavors to escape away with the best, and most
precious things that he has: so our Vergerius esteeming nothing more dear
then the glory of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, brought away with him
those things, which might best serve to the illustration and enlargement
thereof. He abandoned therefore the earthly treasures, and brought away with
him the heavenly, and divine treasures, amongst which this is one of the best,
and most rare that can be imagined. And knowing that good, and excellent things
become so much greater, better, and more praiseworthy, as they become more
common, he left unto me these hundred and ten Considerations, that I should
cause them to be put in print, which I have, as you see accordingly performed
with as much diligence as I have known, or been able to use.

These Considerations, as many well know, were first written by the Author in
the Spanish language, but afterward by a certain pious and worthy person
translated into Italian. Yet have they not been able altogether to quit those
forms of speech which are proper to Spain. And besides there are some words,
though not many, of the language of the Author For John Valdesso was by Nation
a Spaniard of noble kindred of an honorable degree, and a resplendent
Chevali^r of the Emperor, but a much more honorable and resplendent Chevalier
of Christ. True it is, he did not much follow the Court, after that Christ had
revealed himself unto him, but abode in Italy, spending the greatest part of
his life at Naples, where with the sweetness of his Doctrine, and the sanctity
of his life he gained many Disciples unto Christ; and especially among the
gentlemen, and Cavaliers, and some Ladies: he was very eminent, and most
praiseworthy in all kind of praise. It seemed that he was appointed by God
for a Teacher, and Pastor of noble and illustrious Personages: Although he was
of such benignity, and charity, that he accounted himself debtor of his
Talent to every me ane and rude person, and became all things to all men, that
he might gain all to Christ. And not this alone, but he gave light to some of
the most famous Preachers of Italy, which I very well know, having conversed
with them themselves.

He never had wife, but lived most continently, nor did he attend to ought
else, as much as he could, then unto tru^ Mortification, in which death
overtaking him, he became perfectly mortified, so to b^ perfectly quickened in
the Resurrection of the Just, and to enjoy our Lord Christ. He died in Naples
about the year 1540. He has left behind him also certain other good, and
pious Compositions, which as I hope shall by Vergerius his means be
communicated unto you.

Go to then, Brethren, and Sisters, in the Love of God, and in the precious
blood of Christ Jesus, take this Treasure, and think withal, that the benefit
lies not in having, and possessing it, but in the use and fruit, that is thence
to be gathered. He has made Consideration of these good things not to give
nourishment to the imagination only, but likewise to put in execution that
which has been considered, and resolved on. It is necessary indeed, that we
should have the knowledge, but it is necessary like wise to accompany the
practice therewith, in as much as the commendacommendation of every v^rtue* and
art consists in the practice, and in the performance of action agreeable to
that virtue and Art.

And you that wast all your time idly in reading of Boccace his hundred
Novelties, and the like, lay them a while aside, and read these Considerations
of Valdesso, which are indeed tru^ Novelties. For in them is treated of that
great Divine, and joyful new and gladsome tidings of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, of the great Pardon for sins, of the Reconciliation made with God by
the death of the Son of God. Here you shall find the true and holy
Enamourments of God, and of Christ with mankind. Here you shall understand the
true Embraces, and the true Kisses given by means of the holy Spirit. And last
of all you shall here find where the true delights and pleasures of those
souls are, which are enamoured of God and of Christ, and disenamoured of the
world.

And if happily the language se^me not so spruce and dainty, as that of
Boccace, call to mind that which great Paul the Apostle of Christ Jesus has
said, that the Kingdom of God stands in the power of the Spirit, and not in
excellency of speech. Howbeit to say truth, neither is this manner of speech to
be slighted: For I verily find it exceeding proper, and good to express that
which is intended; and that is the chief virtue of every Writer.

But I will here put an end to my discourse, that I may no longer deprive you
of the sacred reading of these divine Considerations, which you also reading,
and that with diligence, and prayers to God for me and all others, shall take
into due Consideration: To the end, that we may came all to be enamoured of
Christ, and incorporated in him, as he is incorporated in us; To whom be
Honor and Glory everlasting!

From Basil the 1 of MAY, 1550.
A TABLE OF THE HUNDRED AND TEN CONSIDERATIONS.
HOw it is to be understood, That man was created after the Image, and
Likeness of God. 2 That man's happiness consists in knowing God, and that
we cannot know God, except we first know Christ. 3 In what the Sons of God
differ from the Sons of Adam. 4 From whence the revengefull affection
proceeds in men: And what effects the long sufferance causes, wherewith God
goes deferring the revenge of those injuries which men do unto him. 5 The
difficulty that is to enter into the Kingdom of God, how it is to be entered,
and in what it consists. 6 Two Depravations of man, the one natural, the ^ther
acquisite. 7 That God will that we should remit unto him the execution of all
our desires. 8 The Covenant which Jesus Christ our Lord made between God and
man. 9 An excellent Privilege of Piety. 10 In what manner the estate of the
Christian person, that believes with difficulty is better then of that person,
that believes with ease. 11 In what manner Gods being Just does r^dound to the
profit of them that by Revelation believe in Christ. 12 In what manner the
reason of our inward man serves us to that which the eyes of our outward man.
13 A Comparison which shows in what the benefit, which the Regeneration of
mankind has received from God by Christ Jesus does consist. 14 Amongst the
things which Christian piety obliges us to believe what that is which is
believed with greatest difficulty. 15 How Christian persons ought to govern
themselve, in their tribulations, afflictions, and troubles. 16 That the
promises of God belong to them who believe them. 17 In what manner a man ought
to resolve himself touching the world, and touching himself, that he may
become a true Christian. 18 In what things that person ought to be exercised
who pretends, and desires to enter, and to persevere in the Kingdom of God;
and what a man puts of his own thereunto. 19 That the Christian life
consists in this, that a man esteem himself dead to the world, and pretend
to live to God. 20 That in the infirmity, amendment, and health of the mind men
ought to govern themselves as in those of the body. 21 The difference of
sins, and sinners. The obligatio^s of piety. The signs of piety and impiety.
22 For what reason God gives a child unto a pious person, and suddenly takes
him away. 23 That in him whom God disenamours of the world, and enamours of
himself, the self same things be fall, as do to him that disenamours
himself of one woman, and emours himself of another. 24 That those persons,
who are governed by the holy Spirit, in their serving of God pretend to
increase in the love of God. 25 In what sort pious persons are moved to put in
execution the Justice of God. 26 That the flesh, whilst it is unregenerated
flesh, is the enemy of God, and that Regeneration is properly the work of the
holy Spirit. 27 That by Mortification a Christian man maintains himself in
his resolution, and by reduoing of his mind to God, he maintains himself in
the certainty of Gods Providence* 28 For a man to assure himself of his
Vocation. 29 That to believe with difficulty is a sign of Uocation. 30 That
God in communicating spiritual things unto us, deals as in giving us the
fruits of the earth. 31 That the liveliness of affections is more dammageable,
then that of the Appetites; and that it is necessary, that both the one, and
the other should be mortified. 32 In what consists the abuse, and in what
consists the use of Images, and of the holy Scriptures. 33 In what manner
through the patience, and through the consolation of the Scriptures we
maintain our selves in hope. 34 In what does consist the benefit which men
have obtatned from God by Christ. 35 Whence it is, that that difficulty comes
which pious persons have to continue in that which appertains to piety, and
justification. 36 In what the Christian liberty does consist; ho^ it is known;
and how it is exercised. 37 That they that know God by men's relation, have a
false opinion of him, and they that know him by the holy spirit, have a good.
38 By a comparison is showed in what the error of false Christians does
consist; and what thing that is, which true Christians do. 39 That quickening
answers to mortification, and the glory of the resurrection answers to
quickening. 40 Two wills in God, one mediate, and another immediate. 41 That
God will, that pious persons should know, that all things are to come from him,
and that they should pretend to have them all of him. 42 In what sort a pious
person ought to govern himself in the state of prosperity, and in inward
adversities. 43 How a pious person may assure himself to have obtained piety,
and justification by the spirit, and not by humane wisdom. 44 In what manner a
man shall know what fr^it he^ has made in mortification: and what is the
cause, that they who apply themselves to piety, are solicited by affections,
and appetites, with which they were never before solicited. 45 When^e the
fear of death proceeds in pious persons; and that it is a sign of
Predestination for a man to content himself that there should be another life.
46 That they, who walk through the Christian path without the inward light of
the holy spirit, are like unto them that walk in the night without the light
of the Sun. 47 Four Countersignes to know them by, who pretend piety, and the
spirit* not having either the one, or the other. 48 That he who prays, and
works,. and understands, does then pray, work, and understand as he ought,
when he is inspired to pray, to work, and to understand. 49 Whence it
proceeds, that humane wisdom will not attribute all things to God; and in what
manner they ought to be attributed to him. 50 In what the depravation of man
does consist, and in what his reparation does consist. In what Christian
perfection does consist. 51 In what manner God makes himself to be felt, and
in what manner God makes himself to be seen. 52 That a Christian ought to put
an end to the affection of ambition, which does consist in growing; and also to
that, which does consist in conserving. 53 In what matter the men of the world
attending unto honor, are less vi^ious, then attending unto conscience. 54
That prayer, and consideration are two books, or interpreters, very sure ones
to understand holy Scripture: and how a man ought to serve himself of them. 55
Against curiosity; and how the holy Scriptures ought to be read without
curiosity. 56 Which is the most certain, and most secure way to obtain
perfect mortification. 56 Whence it comes to pass, that by the knowledge, and
sense of the things of God the flesh is mortified. 58 Eight differences between
them who pretend, and procure to mortify themselves with their proper industry,
and them, who are mortified by the holy spirit. 59 That in the motives to pray
the spirit does certify a man, that he shall obtain that which he demands. 60
Whence it proceeds, that the superstitious are severe, and the true Christians
are merciful and pitiful. 61 In what manner a pious person governes himself
in those things that befall him. 62 That humane wisdom has no more
Jurisdiction in the judgment of their works who are Sons of God, then in the
judgment of the proper works of God. 63 That the holy Scripture is like a
candle in a dark place, and that the holy spirit is like the Sun: this
showed by seven conformities. 64 In what manner Jesus Christ our Lord will be
followed and imitated. 65 How that is to be understood, which S. Paul says,
that Christ reigns, and shall reign, until the resurrection of the just be
made, when he does consigne his kingdom to his Eternal Father. 66 In what
manner the malignant spirit is more Impetuous, then the holy spirit. 67 That in
the regenerate only by the holy spirit there being experience of the things of
God, there is also certification of them. 68 That the desire of knowledge is an
imperfection in a man, contrary to the judgment of humane wisdom. 69 That a
man ought always to acknowledge himself incredulous, and defective in faith:
and that there is so much faith in a man as there is knowledge of God and
Christ. 70 In what those three gifts of God, faith, hope, and charity do
consist, and in what their eminency amongst other gifts does consist: and the
eminency of charity amongst the thee gifts. 71 Upon the most holy prayer of
Our Father. 72 That man pretending that part of the image of God which did not
appertain unto him, lost that part which did appertain to him. 73 That the
Union between God and man is made by love: that love grows from knowledge:
what a kind of thing knowledge, love, and Union is. 74 That it betides to
pious persons in spiritual things, as it befalls in outward things ^o him, who
having been blind begins to see. 75 How it is understood, that God
coummunicates unto us his divine treasures by Christ: how God reigns by
Christ, and how Christ is the head of the Church. 76 What thing scandal is,
and in what manner Christian persons ought to govern themselves in the
scandal. 77 Two contrarities between them that live according to the flesh,
and them that live according to the spirit. 78 Two griefs, one according to
the world, and the other according to God: and two weaknesses, one according
to the flesh, and the other according to the spirit. 79 How perilous the
errors be which men do pretending piety. 80 What Gods intent is demanding of
m^n that which of themselves alone they cannot give him: and why he gives them
not at once all that which he will give them. 81 Two weaknesses in Christ, and
his members, and Two Powers in him and them. 82 In what properly consists
that Agony which Jesus Christ our Lord felt in his Passion, and in his death.
83 Five considerations in the resurrection of Christ. 84 That only the
incoporation in Christ is that which mortifies. 85 Four manners by which a
christian knows God by means of Christ. 86 To know the inward motions, when
they are of the holy, when they are of the malignant spirit, and when of a man's
proper spirit. 87 That all the creatures were spoiled in man's depravation, and
that they shall be restored in man's reparation. 88 What the cause may be, that
God commanded man that he should not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil. 89 Six causes, for which it seems necessary that the Son of God
should live in that manner and that form of life, wherein he did live. 90 In
what the christian perfection, the duty, and d^corum do consist. 91 That only
the Sons of God have certain satisfaction in every thing. 92 In what manner
mortification is the proper countersigne, by which we know our selves the
Sons of God. 93 That that suffering is most christian and most acceptable to
God, in which he that suffers, finds least of his own will. 94 Three sorts of
conscience, one by the law natural, and the other by the written laws, and
the other by the Gospel. 95 That men are incapable of the divine generation of
the Son of God; and of the spiritual regeneration of the ^onnes of God. 96
That then a man knows himself a Pilgrim in this world, when because God loves
him, the world persecutes him. 97 Whether justification be a fruit of piety,
and whether piety be a fruit of justification. 98 How that is to be understood,
that the holy Scripture says, attributing condemnation sometimes to
infidelity, and sometimes to evil works, and salvation sometimes to faith,
sometimes to good works. 99 Whence it proceeds, that men believe not that all
our sins were chastized in Christ, or they believe it with difficulty. 100
That the fruits, which in christian persons in the beginning of their
incorporation in Christ seem of the spirit, are of the flesh. 101 Whence it
proceeds, that the impious cannot believe, that the superstitious believe with
ease, and that the pious believe with difficulty. 102 That christian faith has
necessity to be confirmed with experience; of what kind the experience is, and
how it i^ obtained. 103 Against the imagination with which our christian faith
is troubled. 104 That Baptism through the faith of the Gospel is efficacious
even in children who dye before they come to the age to be able to approve
their being baptized. 105 Three Principles whence the ignorances arise, with
which men err against God. 106 That that which the Scripture calls the
knowledge of good and evil the wise men of the world have called, and do call
natural light, prudence, and humane reason. 107 In what manner from a man's not
knowing himself, nor God, there is caused in him an impossibility in accepting
the grace of the Gospel. 108 In what manner the evil of Adams disobedience
appertains to us all: And the good of Christ's obedience reaches unto us all.
109 The conceit, which as a christian I have at present of Christ, and of them
who are the members of Christ. 110 That the spiritual gifts are not
understood, until they be possessed.
BEing desired by Mr Vicechancelor Dr Baylie to peruse this Book, entitled
[The Hundred and ten Considerations of JOHN VALDESSO,] and to give a censure of
it; I cannot but much approve and commend the greatest part of it, as very
worthy of the Press, and a Christians reading. There be some passages obscure,
dubious, and offensive, wherein notwithstanding, the Publisher has given me
satisfaction, and I doubt not but his Annotations in the Preface together with
M. Herberts Apology for the offensive places will do the like to every
unpreiudicate and unpartiall Christian Reader.

THOM. IACKSON CCC. Pres.

A Copy of a letter written by Mc George Herbert to his friend the Translator
of this Book.
MY dear and deserving Brother, your Valdess^ I now return with many thanks,
and some notes, in which perhaps you will discover some care, which I forbear
not in the midst of my griefs; First for your sake, because I would do
nothing negligently that you commit unto me; Secondly for the Authors sake,
whom I conceive to have been a true serv^nt of God; and to such, and all that
is theirs, I owe diligence; Thirdly for the Churches sake, to whom by Printing
it I would have you consecrate it. You owe the Church a debt, and God has put
this into your hands (as he sent the fish with money to S. Peter,) to discharge
it: happily also with this (as his thoughts are fruitful) intending the honor
of his servant the Author, who being obscured in his own country he would have
to flourish in this land of light, and region of the Gospel, among his chosen.
It is true, there are some things which I like not in him, as my fragments will
express, when you read them; nevertheless I wish you by all means to publish
it, for these three eminent things observable therein: First, that God in the
midst of Popery should open the eyes of one to understand and express so
clearly, and excellently the intent of the Gospel in the acceptance of
Christ's righteousness (as he shows through all his Considertions) a thing
strangely buried, and darkened by the Adversaries, and their great
stumbling block. Secondly the great honor and reverence, which he every where
bears toward our dear Master and Lord, concluding every Consideration almost
with his holy Name, and setting his merit forth so piously, for which I do so
love him, that were there nothing else, I would Print it, that with it the
honor of my Lord might be published. Thirdly, the many pious r^les of ordering
our life, about mortification, and observation of Gods Kingdom within us, and
the working thereof, of which he was a very diligent observer. These three
things are very eminent in the Author, and overweigh the defects (as I
conceive) toward the publishing thereof, etc.

Bemmorton Sept. 29.
THE HUNDRED AND TEN CONSIDERATIONS OF VALDESSO. Translated out of the Italian
Language into English.
CONSIDERATION I. How it is to be understood, that man was created after the
Image and Likeness of God.
MANY times have I deliberated to understand, in what that Image, and Likeness
of God, after which the holy Scripture says Man was created, does properly
consist; and whilst I have endeavored to understand by reading, I have not
profitted at all: For reading drew me now to one opinion, and by and by to
another, until at last endeavoring to do it, by Consideration it seemed to
me to understand, or at least to have begun to understand it. The self same
God that has given me that which I have attained, shall (I am assured) give me
that, which I yet want.

The Image, and Likeness of God, as I understand, consists in his proper
essence, in as much as he is impassible, and immortal; and as much as he is
benign, merciful, just, faithful, and true. With these Qualities, and with
these perfections I understand that God created man in earthly Paradise, where,
before he became disobedient to God, he was impassible, and immortal, he was
good, merciful, just, faithful, and true.

This Image, and likeness of God, as I understand, the first man lost for his
disobedience to God, and so he remained passible, mortal; he remained wicked,
cruel, impious, unfaithful, and a liar.

After that I have understood this by Consideration, willing to confront it
with the holy Scripture, I find it does much, and well agree with that, which
S. Paul says Ephesians. 4. and Colos. 3. and by so much the more am confirmed in
my Consideration.

And passing on farther I understand that this Image of God was in the person
of Christ, as much as belongs to the soul, before his death; so that he was
benign, merciful, just, faithful, and true: And after his resurrection, as
much as belongs both to soul and body, in as much as over and above benignity,
mercifulness, justice, truth, and faithfulness, he also does possess
immortality, and impassibility.

And farther then this I understand, that they, who being called, and drawn by
God unto the grace of the Gospel make the justice of Christ to become their
own, and are incorporated in Christ, do in this present life recover, in part,
that part of the Image of God, which appertains to the soul; and in the life
everlasting, they recover that part also which appertains to the body. And by
this means we shall all come through Christ, to be like unto God, as Christ
is; every one in his own degree, Christ as the Head, and we as the Members.

And verily it shall be a marveilous happiness, to see goodness,
mercifulness, justice, faithfulness, and truth in men; and to see them also
impassible, and immortal, to see them much like to Christ, and to see them
much like to God: and to see, that together with this happiness of men, the
glory of God increases, and the glory of the son of God increases; by whose
means we shall all acknowledge to have obtained our happiness, acknowledging
all of us for our Head the self same Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. II. That man's happiness consists in knowing God, and that we cannot
know God, except we first know Christ.
MAny men have labored much, desiring to understand in what a man's happiness
does properly consist: and having endeavored this, as men by humane wisdom,
have all of them erred in their imaginations, as they likewise err almost in
all other things, which they endeavor to know by the self same means.

This matter, which I say, so many have with much l^bour desired to understand,
Jesus Christ our Lord teaches us in one word, saying, This is eternal life,
that they may know thee, the only true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ! As if he should have said, herein consists men's happiness, That they
should know God and Christ.

But how ever Christ teach it, none understand it, but they that leave to be
men, that is, they which leave the image of Adam, and take the image of Christ:
for these only know Christ, and in Christ, and through Christ they know God.

Men, whilst they remain still men, come indeed to a certain knowledge of God*
by the contemplation of the creatures, but they find not happiness in this
knowledge. For in truth happiness does not consist therein, consisting only in
that knowledge of God, which they get that leave to be men, and know God, as
they are incorporated in Christ, first knowing Christ. And to them, as I
understand the reading of holy Scripture, and the contemplation of the
creatures, serves to increase, and augment in them that knowledge of God, in
which happiness, and eternal life are found.

That knowledge of God, which they get, who know him by the creatures, as I
understand, is like to that know ledge which an ill Painter gets of a most
perfect Painter, by seeing the things which he has depainted. And that
knowledge of God, which they get, who know him by the holy Scriptures, as I
understand, is like to that knowledge which an ignorant man, and unlearned gets
of a most famous learned man, by reading the things which he has written And
that knowledge of God, which they get, who know Christ, and are incorporated in
Christ, as I understand, is like to that knowledge which I have of the
Emperor, by having seen his image, and by having had very particular
information of all his usages, by the relation of persons, who are very inward
with the Emperor. And they that know God after this manner, as I understand,
know God in the reading of holy Scripture, as a learned man knows one that is
very highly learned, by reading of his works. And the self same, as I
understand, knew God by contemplation of the creatures, as a good painter
knows a most perfect painter, by viewing the things which he has depainted.

Having understood this, I understand in what the happiness of man does
consist: and I find my self to be happy; and I understand much better then I
did before, the great obligation that men have to God, and to the Son of God
our Lord.

CONSID. III. In what the Sons of God differ from the Sons of Adam.
IN as much as we suffer our selves to be ruled, and governed of God, in so
much are we ^e sons of God: so says S. Paul, They which are led by the
spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

And certainly so it is, that he that is the son of God suffers himself to
be ruled, and governed of God; and that he, who suffers himself to be ruled,
and governed of God, is the son of God. And on the contrary, they who rule
and govern themselves by humane wisdom, they are the sons of Adam: and the
sons of Adam rule and govern themselves by humane wisdom, neither knowing,
nor feeling any other regiment, or government: I understand this regiment, and
government, as well touching that which belongs to the body, as touching that,
which appertains to the soul.

The sons of Adam ruling, and governing themselves by their own humane
wisdom, have certain Rules, and Medicines to conserve themselves, and to
maintain themselves healthful, and they have others to regain health when they
are infirm, having, as they have, Herbs, and Boots, and many other things,
that serve to this effect. But the point lies, that they know at what time,
and season to make use of these things, which is almost impossible.

The self same sons of Adam have to conserve, and maintain their souls in
Purity and simplicity, the Law of God, and they have the Doctrine of Christ,
and his Apostles. The point lies, that they know how to understand this Law,
and this Doctrine, and that they know how to make use of it; which I hold to
be much more impossible. And in case that both the one, and the other were
possible, I should peradventure say, that as if they knew how to make use of
the creatures, they should conserve themselves, and maintain themselves
healthful; so likewise if they knew how to make use of the holy Scriptures,
they should conserve, and maintain themselves healthful. But holding both the
one, and the other for impossible, I do equally hold it impossible, that a
son of Adam should maintain himself with bodily health, or with spiritual
health.

The Sons of God as they go mortifying their humane wisdom, go equally
renouncing the utility of the medicine, with all other things conjoined, and
pertaining thereunto, holding only for Physician the selfsame God, who is to
them a Father, by whom they are immediately governed, and maintained in corporal
health; if not as much as they themselves would, at least as much as is
sufficient, and may serve for their spiritual health, which is the principal
in them.

God suffers them to fall into infirmity, but sometimes to mortify them,
sometimes to try them, and sometimes that they may know him for their Father,
and Lord: And when they are infirm, he often times heales them without using
the medicines, which the sons of Adam use.

These self same sons of God as they go approaching to God, they go
becoming like unto them of Samaria, that said unto the woman, Not for thy
speech: they also saying unto holy Scripture, Not for thy speech: Other law,
and other Doctrine have we, that maintains and conserves us in holiness, and
justice. This is the Spirit of God which abides in us, which rules, and
governes us in such manner, that no need have we of other regiment, nor of
other government, so long as we shall not sever our selves from our heavenly
Father.

And as it is possible that a man may be the son of God, and suffer himself to
be ruled, and governed of God: so is it possible, that a son of God should
conserve, and maintain himself in bodily and spiritual health.

The sons of God will make use of the Physicians, and of the physic to
conserve the health of the body, as they also make use of the Scripture to
conserve the health of their minds: but they do it without putting confidence
either in this, or in that; for all their trust stands put in God.

They make use likewise, to conserve the health of their bodies, of the
observation of times, and places, as they make use of some ceremonies to
co^lerve the health of their souls. This they do rather to conform
themselves in the outward with the sons of Adam, then because they feel
themselves needing of such observations: forasmuch as they being governed by
God alone, observe the will of God, and wholly depend on it.

These truths they understand that prove them, the others find in them many
intricacies. For the natural man perceives not the things that are of the
spirit of God: always he blames them, and condemns them.

That I may be the better understood, I put this Example: There are two men
would pass a great river by wading; there comes to them one that is
experienced in the river, and says unto them in this manner; If you will pass
of your selves alone, you are to enter here-away, and when you are entered, you
are to govern your selves thus, and thus: and if so be you will that I should
pass you over, come after me, and have no fear.

Of these two men, one confident in his own wisdom, upon that which has been
told him, puts himself alone into the water: by him I mean the sons of Adam.
The other having confidence in him, that is experienced in the river, goes
after him: by him I understand the sons of God.

And as I hold for certain, that the presumption, and error of the sons of
Adam, is much greater folly, then then that of him, who when he might pass
the river with a Guide, and safely, puts himself to the hazard to pass it
alone so I hold it for certain, that the prudence, and discretion of the
Sons of God, that suffer themselves to be ruled, and governed by the spirit
of Christ, is much greater then that of that man, that chooses rather to pass
the river with a Guide, then alone.

And it is to be understood, that in as much as we are Incorporated in Jesus
Christ our Lord, in so much are we the Sons of God.

CONSID. IV. From whence the revengefull affection proceeds in men^ And what
effects the long sufferance causes, wherewith God goes deferring the revenge
of those injuries, which men do unto him.
PVtting on one part all the offenses that from the beginning of the world
until this present day, have been done by men one toward another; and putting
on the other part only those, which one man inone day only does to God; It
seems to me to behold beyond all comparison a greater Quality and Quantity of
these, then of them.

Passing on further, and considering the Revengefull affections in men so
extreme, that there are very few injured, who being able to revenge themselves
do not take revenge: And considering in God, that he being able with one beck
to anihilate all those that offend him, he does not anihilate them, but rather
tolerates them, and comports, and gives unto them of his good things; I have
set my self to examine, whence this revengefull affection in men proceeds? And
what effects the Patience of God does work? And I hold for certain, that the
revengefull affection in men proceeds from the depravation of the first man:
confirming my self in this, that if humane nature had not been depraved, men
would have been most estranged from all revenge. For the first man being
created unto the Image, and likeness of God, it is a manifest thing he was
created with an affection estranged from revenge, as we know it to be in God.
This is for that which belongs to men. From the patience, with which God
suffers the injuries, which are ordinarily done him, I consider, that all these
effects proceed worthy (according to my judgment) of great consideration.

The first is, that many of the injurers, and impious, become servants, and
pious, which would not come to pass, if they be punished in their injuring.

The second, that if God should suddenly punish the wicked, in a short space
all the wicked that are in the world would be consumed; And there being no
wicked, the pious would not have the means to exercise their piety, the which
is necessary should be exercised, to the intent, that being purified it may
shine out to the glory of God.

The third is, that pious men considering how God is estranged from revenge,
and remembering themselves, that that which belongs to them in this present
life, is to recover the Image of God, with which the first man was created,
they should reduce their minds to leave all affection of wrath, and of
revenge; saying, when they are assaulted, these, and other like words, My
intent is to recover the Image, and likeness of God, with which the first man
was created. This was altogether estranged from revenge, for as much as God
being able to revenge himself does not revenge himself: And therefore it
belongs not to me to revenge my self, but to do that which my God does, to
whom I procure to liken my self.

These three effects I find redound to the gain of the pious: And I find
other two, which redound to the damage of the impious.

The first of which is, that by how much they live the longer, by so much the
more do they offend, and do injuries: And in this manner they go
accumulating, and increasing eternal condemnation.

The second is, that with the unquietness, and travail that they suffer in
their own consciences, they begin to feel in this life that which they are to
suffer in the other. They desire to dye, supposing to be free from their
punishment: And on the other fide they would not dye, doubting that it should
be augmented unto them. In so much, that through the patience, wherewith God
suffers, and deferres the revenge of the injuries, which men do unto him, I
find three profits of the pious, and in the selfsame I find two damages of
the wicked. Whereupon it seems to me, that even as the good redounds to the
damage of the wicked; so also that which seems evil, redounds to the profit of
the pious, that do hold, and embrace that piety, which is obtained by faith in
Jesus Christ our Lord.

I will here add three things, the first, that God commanding me, that I
should pardon them that do me injury, it is the self same as to command me,
that I should be like unto him, and that I should do as he does. Secondly,
that the affection of revenge proceeds from a base mind, and that the
inclination to pardon proceeds from a generous. Thirdly, that a Christian man
seeing that he can with greater ease pardon an injury, then revenge it, he
knows that God will have from him that, which is very easy for him to do,
and that which is more convenient for him, and more profitable to him. And by
this means I know how great the love is which God bears unto men, for whom he
has executed the rigor of his justice in his only begotten son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. V. The difficulty that is to enter into the kingdom of God; how it is
to be entered, and in what it consists.
NAturally man trusts not himself of another man, but in that which he
cannot do of himself: nor also does he put confidence in God, except in that,
which he knows, and sees, that he is not able to obtain by means of any
creature: so great is the impiety of man's mind And hence it proceeds, that he
who has greater favor of the creatures, does bring himself with greater
difficulty to have confidence in God.

That this is true, we may from hence understand, that of infirm people they
are only brought to remit themselves to the will of God, that have not the
means to pay Physicians, nor physique, and they who although they have means,
are come to those terms, that they have no more hope at all neither in the
one, or other of these things.

From whence I consider the perversity of man, and I also consider the
goodness of God, in as much as he does help, and favor them, who when they
can do no otherwise, remit themselves to his divine will; and for the rest he
regards not how pious, or how impious we be, but only has respect to this that
he has promised his help to them, that shall remit themselves to him, and that
it belongs to him to maintain his promise.

That this is true, we have the proof every hour, not only in that which we
have of sickness, but also in all other things, that befall men in this
present life.

This self same thing which we see by experience in outward things, I hold for
certain, that we may also see in inward things, forasmuch as a man is never
brought to remit to God his justification, nor his resurrection, nor his
eternal life, until he see, and know, that this cannot be obtained by means
of the creatures.

Now considering that as well for outward, as for the inward things the rich
man has the means, according to his own opinion, to be able to serve
himself of the creatures, without remitting himself to the will of God, that
he should do with him according as it seems to him, I know the cause why
Christ says, that a rich man enters with difficulty into the kingdom of
Heaven, that is, comes to remit himself unto the will of God, and to suffer
himself to be ruled, and governed by God, renou^cing the regiment, and
government of humane wisdom; and renouncing the favor of the creatures.

Whereupon I gather, that he whom God will set in his kingdom, whether he be
rich, or whether he be poor first he opens his eyes, that he may see his own
impossibility, and the impossibility that all creatures have to be able to
give him that which he pretends, and would have.

And I consider, that the difference, that is between the Pious, and the
wicked, when they recommend themselves to God, consists in this, that the
wicked remits himself to God, because he can do no otherwise, and the Pious
remits himself to God, even when he might help and serve himself of the
creatures, and this, as well in the outward things, as also in the inward. And
I suppose that a man may come to know, when he trusts in God for inward
things, by that which he shall find in himself touching his trusting in God
for external things.

They which are in the kingdom of God after this manner, which I have spoken
of, are the poor in spirit, which Christ commends. And such a one did David
feel himself, when he called himself poor, and a beggar; And they, as I
understand; have impart obtained that which is demanded, when we say, Thy
Kingdom come.

And considering the felicity that does consist in the being, and persevering
in this kingdom, I understand the cause, why Saint John began his preaching
from this kingdom, and the cause, why Christ began from the self same, and the
cause why he sent his Apostles for the self-same effect.

Whence I gather, that the beginning, the middle, and end of Christian
preaching ought to be to preach the kingdom of God, and to enforce men that
they should enter thereinto, renouncing the kingdom of the world, and all that
appertains thereunto.

The men that are as it were native in this kingdom, I consider, that they are
planted in God, as a Tree is planted in the earth: And as the tree maintains
it self, and produces Flowers, and Fruits by the virtue which the earth
communicates unto it; So he also, that stands in the kingdom of God,
maintains himself, and produces flowers, and fruits by the spirit of God,
which governs, and rules him. And he that is such, is the son of God, is
just, and shall arrive glorious, and have everlasting life. For he is
conformable to Jesus Christ the son of God. And he that is such a one, does
(as it were for vantage) enjoy of the things of this present life little, or
much, according as it appertains to the glory of God.

Between that which they, that are without this kingdom of God, know, and
understand of it, by that which they read, and by that which they hear; and
that which they, who are in it understand, and know of this selfsame
kingdom, by that which they feel, and that which they prove in themselves, I
know a much greater difference, then between that which they know, and
understa^d of the regiment, and government of a most perfect King, by that which
they read, and by that which they hear, being themselves out of the same; and
that which they know, and understand of the selfsame regiment, and government,
by that which they see and prove, being themselves under the same.

I will add this, which in my judgment is to the purpose, that according as
the qualities of the herbs that are in the self same meadow, are different, so
they do diversely participate of the virtue of the earth, some more, some
less, and some in one manner, and some in another: Even so, as the
constitutions of them, who are in the kingdom of God, are different, so does
God diversely communicate unto them of his spirit, to him more, to him less, to
him after one manner, and to him after another; and all are in the same
kingdom, and all participate of the self same spirit, even as all the herbs
in the same meadow do all participate of the self same virtue of the earth.
And as the herbs, if they had sense, would affirm, that what has been said
of them, is true; so also they that appertain to the kingdom of God, because
they have the spirit, do affirm that which is said of them, to be true,
acknowledging it altogether from the favor of God, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. VI. Two depravations of Man, the one Natural, the other Acquisite.
IN every man not quickened by the holy spirit, I consider Two Depravations, one
Natural, the other Acquisite. The Natural I understand to be in that, Not the
child of a Day, and in that, I was conceived in iniquities, and in that of S.
Paul, We were by nature the children of wrath: and likewise in all those places
of holy Scripture, in which this humane nature of ours is condemned. The
acquisite I understand in that, All flesh had corrupted his ways, and in that
of S. Paul's, I was alive once without the Law, and generally in all those
places of Scripture, where the malignity of our flesh is spoken of. From the
Natural proceeds the acquisite, and by the acquisite the natural is inflamed.

O^ these two Depravations I understand that the natural cannot be repaired,
but by grace, and I understand, that they only are free from it, who enter into
the kingdom of God by faith, and come to be the sons of God by the holy
spirit, which abides in them; In such sort, that in them, who knowing Christ
by Revelation, and accepting the covenant, which he made between God, and man,
believe, and because they believe, are baptized; The natural depravation is
repaired, and they remain only with that, which is acquisite, from which they
go on freeing themselves by little and little, the spirit of God helping them
therein. And whilst they go freeing themselves of it, that which they offend,
is not put to their account of sin, because they be incorporated in Christ
Jesus, and therefore S. Paul says, Nothing comes to them to condemnation.

The Depravation acquisite with the infla^mation of the Natural, I understand,
that as it was got by habit, so it may be lost by habit: and to this serve, as
I understand, the Laws, and Precepts, which humane wisdom has found out; in
such manner, that a man may of himself free him self from the acquisite
depravation, and from the infla^mation of the Natural, as we read, that many
did free themselves; but he shall never be able to free himself by himself
from the natural depravation. For from this, as I have said, The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ does free us.

CONSID. VII. That God will that we should remit unto him the execution of all
our desires.
IN effect it is true, that we understand many things by experience, which we
should not understand by knowledge. I having oftentimes determined to do many
things, the one more pious, more holy, and more Christian then another, and
having seen, that as it were always my determinations sorted out contrary to
that which I determined, and there having some pious, holy, and Christian
things come from me without thinking thereon, and without any deliberation of
mine preceding, I stood as it were confounded in my self, not understanding in
what this secret did consist.

I did not wonder, that in things, which I deliberated as a man, the contrary
should come to pass of that which I would; but I did wonder, that in the
things which I deliberated as a Christian, the same should befall me. And
finding my self in this confusion, it came to pass that I read that
deliberation of S. Peter, Though I should dye with thee. And considering that
although the deliberation was pious, holy, and Christian, the contrary of that
which he deliberated, befell himself, I understand, that the reason, why my
Deliberations came out contrary to me, was because I did deliberate without
consideration of the impossibility that is in me to put in effect that which I
did deliberate.

And over, and above I understood, that although God chastised my
inconsideratnes, not suffering that to come to pass, which I intended, yet on
the other side he satisfied my affections, suffering that to come to pass,
which I did not procure, nor hope, nor pretend unto. whence I have gathered,
That the will of God is, that I should depend on him in such manner, that I
should deliberate, or propound nothing, without holding him before mine eyes,
showing unto him my good will, and remitting the execution of the same to him.
And that as well in things, which appertain to the outward, and corporal
living, as in those things, that apper tain to the inward, and spiritual
living.

This will of God does so much restrain, that although I know, that this which
I have said, is that, which he would have from me, I dare not determine,
saying, I will do it accordingly; for I know that impossibility of mine: and
not daring to deliberate, I dare desire to conform my self always with this
will of God, and to remit to God the Execution of the same, and I assure my
self, that God for his mercy shall favor me in this good design of mine. And
I understand, that in this manner I ought to govern my self in all things.

There will come to me a new desire to have confidence in God in all things, I
will remit my self to him, that he should put this design of mine in
execution in this manner. I desire to govern my self in Charity, in Hope, in
Mortifications, and simplicity in all other things, which may make me like unto
Christ, and like unto God, and in all those things that may redound to the
corporal and spiritual profit of my neighbors, in such manner, as the desire
stand alive, and entire in me, and the execution of it remains remitted unto
the goodness of God.

In this self same manner I pray every Christian person to govern himself,
or, to speak better, to suffer himself to be governed of God; certifying him
that God will not only fulfill his desires, but content him with many other
things, which though he neither thinks on them hopes for them, nor desires
them, shall be effected by him to the glory of God, and to his own edificatio^,
and his neighbors: This God shall do through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For confirmation of these things, which have been said, I consider that a man
naturally determines only of those things, which he supposes to be in his own
power to do, or not to do; In as much as no man determines to cause that it
should rain, or be fair weather. Whence I gather, that our Determinations
shall never want of arrogance, and presumption, if we shall think that to be in
our power, which is no more in our power, then to cause Rain, or to make fair
weather. Wherefore we ought not to determine, but to desire and to remit to God
the execution of that which we desire.

Together with this I consider to the self same purpose, that in our Christian
Determinations we ought always to consider, whether that which we determine be
acceptable to God or no: For it is a sign of great ignorance to determine to
do a thing for the honor of God, which thing we are not certain is acceptable
to God. And so I resolve in my self in this matter, that our Deliberations
shall then be good, and discreet, when they shall be conformable to that which
God would have from us, and conformable to our possibility; for as much as it
is a foolish thing to promise another that, which is not in the power of him
that promises to put in execution. And this being true, it is well said, that
the Deliberation consists in desiring, and remitting to God the execution of
our desires, holding for certain, that he will favor as in them for Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. VIII. The Covenants which Jesus Christ our Lord made between God, and
Man.
ALL men in acknowledgement of that being which we have from God, are borne
with obligation to love God, to depend upon him, and to suffer our selves to be
ruled, and governed by him. This obligation being hindered by our depravation,
and evil inclination, draws to that, which is altogether contrary. This
obligation we may call the law of nature; and we may say, that to discover this
obligation of ours, and this depravation, the law came, which God by means of
Moses gave unto the people of the Hebrews. This evil inclination is so
powerful in the minds of men, that however much they labor, they never come
to satisfy entirely to their obligation.

God knowing this, sent his only begotten Son into the world, being made man,
and was pleased, that in him should be executed his justice for that which all
men had failed, and were to ^aile, touching the obligation with which we are
borne. In such manner, that this is the covenant between God, and man, That
they should believe, and hold, that that justice, which was executed upon
Christ the Son of God, does free, and make them exempt from the chastisement,
which they should deserve for that wherein they fail, in regard of the
obligation with which they are borne; and that God makes t^em just, holds them
for adopted Sons, and as such rules; and governs them, in this present
life, and afterward raises them up, and shall give them eternal life.

Humane wisdom is not capable to admit this covenant. First, because seeing
Christ a man as others are, it cannot be brought to understand, that he is the
Son of God. Afterward, because it sees not in what to found the truth of this
covenant, to believe it, and hold it for certain, and to rely upon it. For
hereunto is necessary a proper, and particular Revelation from God, which must
throw down to the ground all the discourses of humane wisdom; in such manner,
that holding it for certain and firm, that Christ is the Son of God, and that
the justice which was executed in him, does make us exempt from that wherein we
fail, touching our obligation, we do oblige God to justify us, according to
the covenant, which he has made with us. And being justified we are
incorporated in Christ, and planted in him in such manner, that as an herb is
sustained by virtue of the earth where it grows, or is planted; so we are
sustained by the virtue of Christ in whom we are planted, because we persevere
in the covenant.

From this covenant two other covenants depend; the on^s, that we believe, that
Christ rose glorious, and that this faith does incorporate us in the
resurrection of Christ, to the intent, that we should rise, as he arose, and
that God should do unto us that which he did unto Christ. Humane wisdom
finds not wherein to found the resurrection, it believes it not; but the man
that has accepted the first covenant, does easily accept this second. The
other covenant is, that we believe, that Christ lives an everlasting life in a
sovereign degree with God, and that this faith is to give to us eternal life,
and that by this faith God should do with us that, which he did, and does with
Christ.

Humane wisdom finds not wherein to found the hope of this eternal life:
but the man, who has by revelation accepted the first covenant; and by the
first has accepted the second, does easily accept this third, in such manner,
that we being certified, that Christ is the son of God, we do by faith
accept the covenant of justification, which does incorporate us into the death
of Christ; and we do accept the covenant of the resurrection of Christ, which
does incorporate us into the resurrection; and we do accept the covenant of
eternal life, which does ncorporate us into that eternal life, which Christ
lives. We believe four things, and God does four things with us. We
believe, that Christ is the son of God, That he dyed, That he rose, And that
he lives. And God makesus his sons, he justifies us, he raises us up, and
he gives us eternal life.

Of the two first we have enjoyment in this present life, and these make us,
that we love God, that we depend upon him; according to the obligation where
with we were borne, having overcome great part of our evil inclination.

Of the other two we shall have enjoyment in that other life; and
experimenting in this life. In these two first things, the truth, that is in
the covenant, which Christ made between God, and us, we certify our selves of
the ^uth, which is in the two second; which we shall experiment, when it shall
please the divine Majesty: In the m^ ^ace let us attend to stand, and persevere
in the covenant, and covenants, which Jesus Christ our Lord has made with us.

CONSID. IX. An excellent privilege of piety.
ALL good the works whereunto we apply our selves in this present life, do
appertain either to the being a man, or to the being godly.

The being of a man which we have, draws us to have compassion one toward
the other, to help one another, and that, in all those things that appertain
to the commodities of this life.

Piety draws us to have confidence in God, to love him, to depend upon him; it
draws us to have confidence in Christ, to love him, and to preach him; it
draws us to mortification of the affections, and appetites, that are after the
flesh, and it draws us to the despising of all that which the world does
prize, as honors, states, and riches. There will be a person altogether
estranged from piety, who will not only exercise himself in all those things,
to which the being of a man which he has, does draw him, but also in those
things, that are proper to piety, enforcing himself also to do those things,
and he shall do some of them: And there will be another altogether pious, who
shall not only exercise himself i^ those things, which are properly belonging
to piety, but also in those things, which are proper to that being of a man,
which he has applying himself unto them, when they offer themselves unto him.
And as the stranger to piety exercising himself in those things, which are
properly of piety, does not exercise himself in piety, but in the being of a
man, which he has; (for his principal intent is his own proper interest,
which is proper to the being of a man.) so on the other side, the person, that
is altogether pious, exercising himself in those things, which are proper to
that being of a man, which he has, exercises himself in piety, because his
principal intent is the glory of God, which is proper to piety. And it will
come to pass, that one estranged from piety, shall preach Christ, and shall
not exercise himself in piety, because his principal intent will be his
proper glory, and his proper interest: and on the contrary it will come to
pass, that a pious person will do good to one that is without piety, and he
shall be exercised in piety, because his principal intent is the glory of God:
And although he was not moved to that thing with Christian charity, but with
humane mercifulness, nevertheless he exercised himself in piety.

Whereupon I gather, that the greatest of all others are those privileges,
which they enjoy which have piety, which is obtained by the holy spirit, which
is communicated to the faithful by Jesus Christ or Lord.

I will add this, that as he, who is estranged from piety, is as it were
deprived of the knowledge of the difference of works, which is here set down;
so also is he deprived of the knowledge, that he does never exercise himself
in piety. And that he, who is pious, does excellently well understand, when he
exercises himself in those things, which are proper to a man, and when he
exercises himself in those things, which are properly of piety, and this only
bethinking himself a little, or to say better, not suffering at any time his
mind to wander carelessly. In effect it is true, that these privileges of piety
are Books, which Esaias says, God has prepared for them that love him, that is,
for them, that should come to know, and to love him, being justified by faith
in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. X. In what regard the estate of the Christian person, that belieues
with difficulty, is better, then of that Person which belieues with ease.
AMongst them, which have the name of Christians, I do consider two sorts of
men; the one, extremely facile to believe in matters of Religion all that is
told them; and the other extremely hard. And as I understand it, the facility
of the one grows from superstition, and from little consideration; and the
difficulty of the other in believing, grows from two much consideration.

The first on no cause call humane wisdom into counsel; and the second call
it in all things: and so with difficulty they are brought to believe that,
which humane wisdom does not approve.

The first, amongst some true things which they believe, believe many false,
and it comes to pass, that they give much more credit to the many false, then
to the few true: The second do not believe the false, and doubt of the true.

Considering farther, I find that the first by the spirit of God, when it is
communicated unto them, are certified of those true things, which they believe,
by which certification they go by little, and little, [freeing themselues] from
deceit in false things, and so they go leaving there.

Moreover I find, that the second, by the selfsame spirit of God, when it is
communicated unto them, are certified in the true things, by which
certification they fortify themselves in believing the true things, and in not
believing the false things, in such manner, that the holy spirit entering into
two persons, one very easy to believe, and the other very difficult, it puts
them in that estate, that the one combats with his own self, laboring to
drive out of his mind those falsities, which with much facility he had been
persuaded, and the other combats with himself, laboring to certify himself
in those true things, which he has not been able to believe by the relation of
men. Both these persons labor, but I hold for better the estate of the person,
that is hard to believe, then of him, that is easy, and that for three causes
principally.

The first, because it is more easy to believe the truth, whereunto the hol,
spirit helps, and many other things help, then to believe a lie, which
superstition, and many other things hinder from.

The second, because the person, who is easy to believe, may with ease be
deceaved; and he that is hard, suffers himself hardly to be deceived.

And the third, because the person, that is easy to believe, rests many
days in error, as they rested in the Primitive Church, that were converted
from Iudaisme to Christian Religion: And he that is hard, remains free from
all false opinion, in as much as he only belieues that which the holy spirit
teaches him.

Whereupon I resolve my self, that without any comparison that estate is
better, in which the spirit of God sets the person hard to believe, when it
begins to instruct him, then that, in which it sets that person, who is easy
to believe.

Together with this, I resolve my self in this, that that which is believed
without the instruction of the spirit of God, always consists more in
opinion, then in faith, and is always mingled with false, and feigned things.

Whereupon it may be understood, that when a person equally gives credit to all
things that are said unto him, he is without the spirit of God, he belieues by
relation, humane persuasion, and by opinion, and not by revelation, nor
inspiration.

And it being true, that the blessedness of a Christian man does not consift
in believing, but in believing by revelation, and not by relation, it is
concluded, that it is not Christian faith that which is by relation, but only
that which is by revelation is the Christian, and that which makes us blessed,
and that which brings with it Charity, and Hope, and that which purifies the
heart, and is that, which in every thing is pleasing unto God: Of this self
same, God make us rich by Jesus Christ our Lord!

CONSID. XI. In what ma^er Gods being just does redound to the profit of them,
that by Revelation believe in Christ.
ALL the perfections, which the holy Scripture attributes to God, seem even
according to humane wisdom to redound to the benefit of man, except it be
one, which seems to redound to his damage: for as much as it is beneficial
to a man, that God should be omnipotent, liberal, wise, faith^ull, benign,
merciful, and pitiful; but it seems not, that it is beneficial to him,
that he should be Just. For God being Just, and man unjust, he finds not how
to be able to save himself in Gods judgment.

The goodness of God is so great, that being willing, that this perfection of
his, which seems to us to redound to the damage of man, should no less
redound to his benefit, then all the other; he did determine to execute upon
his own proper Son all the rigor of that Justice, which he ought to have
executed against all men, for all their impieties and sins, to the intent,
that men holding this truth for certain, that God has executed the rigor of
his Justice on his own proper Son, may know, that it is as beneficial to
them, that God is Just, as that he is merciful; it being certain, that
administering Justice he cannot fail to sa^e them, they having accepted for
their own, that Justice, which was executed on Gods own Son.

Whereby I understand and certify my self, that God revealed unto the Saints
of the Old Testament, how that his justice ought to be executed upon his own
proper son Jesus Christ our Lord, and therefore they might certainly hold, that
it was no less favorable for them, that God should be Just, then merciful,
together with all the other perfections, that are attributed unto God.

Furthermore I understand, that those men, which are not certifi'd by
revelation, that God has executed on Christ the rigor of his Justice, as we
have said, do always fear the judgment of God, and it is grievous unto
the^, that Justice is in God; for they do not find how to be able to
satisfy it.

From this fear superstitions grow, seruples grow, and ceremonies grow: From
all which we are free, that are come by revelation to the knowledge of Christ,
being certain that God being just, he will not twice punish.

Let us believe the Gospel, which does certify us* that we were punished in
Christ; and in this let us assure our selves, knowing that God is Just, and
that we have been already punished on the Cross, In Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XII. In what manner the Reason of our inward man serves us to that,
which the Eyes of our outward Man.
HAving often said, that to stand, and persevere in the kingdom of God, it is
needful for a man to mortify in all things, and altogether his reason, and
his humane prudence; it is doubted, this being true, to what purpose God put
Reason in a man, since he will not have him to serve himself thereof, whilst
he abides in his kingdom. To this it seems to me, that I may answer
resolutely, that God put reason in the inner Man, to that end for which he put
the Eyes in the outward Man. For as much as the outward eyes are able to see
the Sun, not of themselves, but with the self same Sun, and likewise all those
things, which the Sun discovers: so the reason, which is in the inward Man,
is able to know God, not of it self, but with the self same God, and likewise
all those things, which God manifests.

The first man priding himself of his reason, would know God without God, as
if one would see the Sun without the Sun; and he deprived himself of the
knowledge of God, and was left to the government of his own reason. And he, and
all they, that have imitated him, procuring to know God with their own reason,
only by means of the Scriptures, and of the Creatures, are moreover more rash
then they, who being unwilling to see the Sun with the Sun, should endeavor to
see it with the light of Candles.

Now this being true, we may understand, that God has put reason in man, to
the end, that with it he might know God, but with God, and not by his own
discourses.

It is meet, that God should require of man, that he mortify his own reason,
in as much as it presumes to know God, and the things of God by it self alone,
without the spirit of God, if so be he desire to know God, and to abide in the
kingdom of God in such manner as he ought.

Of this Mortification we have already at other times spoken, and said, that
it is that, which Jesus Christ our Lord discovers unto us.

CONSID. XIII. A comparison which shewethin what the benefit, which the
generation of mankind has received from God by Jesus Christ, does consist.
A Certain great Kings Vassals rebelled against him: for their rebellion he
condemned them to death, deprived them of their goods, drove them out of his
kingdom; being condemned, deprived, and driven out, they set themselves to
serve other Kings, strangers, and enemies to their natural King.

Things standings thus for some space of time, the king that was benign toward
his vassalls, desiring to reduce unto his kingdom those that went wandering,
and banished, first of all he executed the rigor of his justice upon one son
of his, and afterward he fent to make public proclamation throughout the whole
world, in the which he declared, that his justice was already satisfied, and
that he generally pardoned all those that had rebelled against him, exhorting
them to return unto his Kingdom, and promising unto them entire restitution of
that which theyhad lost.

They which were culpable in the rebellion heard this Proclamation, of which
some pretending that they had not run thereinto would not accept the pardon, it
seeming unto them, that accepting it they should make themselves to have been
Rebels: Others, although they knew themselves Rebels, would not give credit to
the Proclamation, it seeming to them too strange a thing, that the King should
pardon them, because his Son had been obedient to him. Likewise some others,
although they knew themselves Rebels, although they held the Proclamation for
certain, although they took copies of it, and they them selves published it,
notwithstanding all this, they dared not to return unto the kingdom, but
rather by all ways, and means possible to them they bestirred themselves to
obtain pardon of the King with services, gifts and presents; by no means
willing to enjoy the Kings liberality, or the obedience of the Kings Son. And
so not coming to the kingdom, their estates were not restored unto them, and
so neither these, nor those other enjoyed the general pardon, in such sort,
that as much as belonged to them, it was no more, then if it had never been
made. There weresome others, who knowing themselves Rebels, and giving entire
credit to the Proclamation, having confidence in the Kings word, accepted the
pardon general, and came unto the kingdom, submitting themselves in all
things, and altogether unto the regiment of their own King. And although at the
beginning they doubted somewhat of the pardon, and so much the more, as they
saw that their estates were not presently restored unto them, notwithstanding
perceiving not to depart from the kingdom, and seeing that the King used them
well, and that by little and little, he went on restoring unto them that which
they had lost by their rebellion, they likewise went on certifying themselves
to have obtained the pardon, and found themselves most contented in h^ving come
to serve their own King, and to abide under his regiment, and government.

And because they had proved the evil of rebellion, and of banishment, they
did deprive, and dispose themselves of all friendship, and of all intelligences
with men, and of all their own proper designs, which according to their
opinions might make them another time Rebels. In this they employed, and in
this they exercised themselves; whereupon by little and little they gained so
much credit with the King, that not only he restored unto them all that, which
they had lost by their rebellion, but he made them many great gifts, and he
used them in that manner, as if so be they had neverbeen Rebels.

This is the Comparison: and although it be of it self clear, I will not
cease to declare a little better, and say; that the first man being in the
kingdom of God, being created to the Imag^ and lik^nesse of God, rebelled
against God, for which rebellion he was deprived of this Image and likeness of
God, he was driven out of the kingdom of God, and he was condemned unto death;
and in this banishment all mankind as it were abode, serving the Devil a long
while.

God willing of his infinite mercy to remedy this evil, first of all executed
the rigor of his justice upon his own proper Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and
afterward sent to preach throughout all the world, how that now his justice was
satisfied, and how that he had now pardoned all them that were rebels, and that
they might at their pleasures return unto the kingdom, out of which they were
driven, and that he would restore unto them his own Image, and likeness, which
they had lost. This Proclamation has been heard throughout the whole world.
And of mankind some holding themselves Saints, and just, have imagined, that
the pardon belongs not to them, it seeming to them, that where there is no
error, there needs no pardon; and so they have let it pass. Others, although
they hold themselves for rebels, yet trust not to the pardon, it seeming to
them a thing too too strange, that God should pardon them, and receive them
into his kingdom, and restore unto them that, which they had lost by
rebellion, for another justice, and obedience.

There are others, who albeit they know themselves Rebels, and although they
hold the pardon for certain, and embrace the Gospel, and read it, and preach
it, yet for all this they cannot bring themselves to enter into the kingdom of
God, because they have more confidence in themselves, then in God, and so they
will rather stay under the government of their humane prudence, then come unto
the kingdom of God. These think they ought to gain the pardon of their
rebellion with their industry, and diligence, and with their merits. And
because as well they, as those others, come not to the kingdom of God, they
feel not the benefit thereof, nor enjoy the liberality of God, nor the
obedience of Christ. And unto this estate they are brought through their own
arrogance, and presumption, and so by this means continue always in their
rebellion. There are others, who know themselves rebels to God, and do give
entire faith, and credit unto the pardon general, which is preached unto them
on Gods behalf in the Gospel, and so instantly without farther bethinking,
accepting the pardon, they come unto the kingdom of God, renouncing the
kingdom of the world, and the government of humane prudence. And albeit these
at first may feem to make some kind of doubt, doubt of the pardon, doubt of the
government, and regiment of God, yet in as much as they depart not from the
kingdom, they go on certifying themselves both in the one, and the other of
these matters, and so much the more, as they feel, that God proceeds in
restoring unto them that image and likeness of God, which the first man lost
by his rebellion, with all those other privileges, which were lost by the ^ame
rebellion.

And because the principal punishment of the rebellion was death, albeit he
do not deliver them from temporal death, for they die, as well as others, yet
he delivers them from eternal death, promising them the resurrection, and
giving them a signal thereof by the inward vivification, and by the
resurrection of Christ.

And these men live in the height of cheerfulness, attending only to mortify
their wisdom^, and their humane reason, and all those other things, that led
them to their fore* passed rebellion, and which might lead them on to the like.
In this they abide, in this they persevere, and so they go getting so much
favor of God, that he does not only cause them to feel the pardon, and that
happiness which is to be in his kingdom, and to possess the image of God in
it; but he does many other graces, and favors unto them, accepting them for
his Sons.

This kingdom begins in this present life, and is continued in that which is
to come. And all this feli^ity those persons do acknowledge from the
liberality of God, from the obedience of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. XIIII. Amongst the things which Christian Piety obliges us to
believe, what that is which is believed with greatest difficulty.
HAving set my self sometimes to consider, with how great difficulty man's
mind is brought to believe, as it ought, the things of Christian piety, when
it sets it self to view, and review them, I am come to examine amongst all
these, what that is, in which there is greatest difficulty found. And I am
resolved, that it is the Pardon General, by the justice of God, which was
executed on Christ.

I am come to this resolution by co^ering, that all men being friends to their
own interesses, do easily believe those things, in which they loose nothing by
believing them, and with difficulty do they believe those things, which being
believed might redound any way to their damage.

In as much therefore as it being true, that amongst all those things, which
are believed in Christian piety, only this General pa^don, as it is said,
might redound unto the damage of him that believes it, in case it should not
be true, it seems to me, that my resolution is good.

Holding, that amongst the things which are believed, this is that which is
believed with greatest difficulty, I might fortify this my resolution with
many reasons: But this seems to be so sufficient, that I will content my self
therewith, fortifying it with that, which is seen by experience, that even he
also, who gives credence to the Proclamation, which is published through the
world concerning the Pardon general, shows that he does believe that
dispoyling himself of all outward justification, and boldly entering into the
kingdom of God, in which God equally provides for his, both of things that
appertain to the body and the soul; nevertheless he finds much repugnancy
in his mind, when he will reduce it to those terms, that he should totally
hope from God the sustentation of the body, and that of the soul; in as much
as he always goes thinking, and saying in himself* And if it should not be
true, that God would provide things necessary for my sustentation without mine
own sollicitousnesse, what shall become of me? And if it be not true, that God
has executed upon Christ the rigor of his justice, and that by his order the
Proclamation of Pardon general be published through the world, I shall remain
miserably abused. And it is certain, that so much more any person makes these
discourses, by how much it seems to him, that he might of himself provide both
for the one, and other thing.

Passing on further, and willing to examine whether with greater difficulty a
man brings himself to hope from God either the sustentation of his body, or
that of his mind, I suppose it is the sustentation of the body. This I suppose
to be so, in regard that a man brings himself with less difficulty to expect
from God that which he certainly knows he cannot be able to obtain of
himself: It being therefore true, that a man does more distrust of himself
touching his justification, then his sustentation, it is concluded, that there
is greater difficulty to bring a man's self to hope for his corporal, then his
spiritual sustentation.

Having gone thus far with my consideration, I well understand, what the cause
is, that the rich man enter^ with difficulty into the kingdom of God. And
willing to persuade my mind, that it should bring it self to depend on God,
as well in corporal, as in spiritual things, I bring to remembrance, how
Christ does promise them for vantage to the^, who seek the kingdom of God. And
I suppose, that finding all that which Christ promises in things pertaining to
the soul, to be true, I have no cause to doubt, that I should not find him
true likewise in those things, which appertain to the body.

When this does not suffice me, I think in this manner; Since that I am
justified in having accepted, and believed the Proclamation of the Pardon
general, and since that I am entered into the kingdom of God, from which the
first man was driven by rebellion, and that I go on recovering the privileges
which the first man lost by his rebellion, ought I to doubt, that God without
my sollicitousnesse will not provide for me in outward things, since it is
true, that the first man, as long as he remained in the kingdom of God, was
provided of them without his own sollicitousnesse? And that this is true, I
know from hence, that amongst those other punishmets, with which God chastned
his rebellion, this was once. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy
bread!

From all these Considerations I gather, that it becomes me to attend with my
mind to depend on God, as well in the sustentation of the body, as in that of
the mind. And so much more in the sustentation of the body, now I have
accepted, and believed the Proclamation of the Pardon general, and am entered
into the kingdom of God, as I know that it is true, that with greater
difficulty a man brings himself to trust in this matter, then in that other.

Together with this I gather, that I shall then be entirely a citisen of the
kingdom of God, when I shall depend altogether on God, being a lively, and
true member of the son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XV. How Christian persons ought to govern themselves in their
tribulations, afflictions, and troubles.
BEcause humane wisdom, as we have otherwhere said, thinks that it is humility
not to have confidence in God, and that it is pride to have confidence in him,
it is necessary that a Christian person should always stand upon his guard
touching this point, in such manner, that he come not to be couze^ed with the
white for the black, nor the black for the white.

When a pious person finds himself in some great trouble, and distress, he
is solicited by the Devil through the means of humane wisdom persuading
him, that it is amiss to believe, that God shall deliver him from that
distress, and trouble, in which he finds himself, and that that which
appertains to him, is only to bring his mind to content himself of that,
which God will do concerning him.

This persuasion seems pious, and holy, but being examined with a Christian
spirit, a man may know in it a certain spice of desperation, and diffidence,
which consists in that first part, where it is said, that it is a miss to
have confidence in God. And although the second part with the desire of
reducing the mind to submit it self to God by good, yet it is marred by the
first.

Now to the intent that the second may be good, the Christian spirit makes the
first good, persuading every pious person, when it sees him in distress, and
trouble, that God has promised, that he will make account of them, that make
account of him, and that he will not suffer them to be evil entreated of
worldly persons, nay rather he will have great care of them, and will help
the^, and will defend them.

Thou make account of God, hold then for certain, and firm, that God makes
account of thee, and that by and by he will draw thee from this distress, and
trouble, in which thou find thy self, in such sort, as the wicked, who seek
thy harm, shall have no cause to rejoice of thy harm.

Speaking to him these words, it redu^eth to his memory all the promises, that
God in holy Scripture makes, pertaining hereunto. And when the pious person
that is in tribulation, is made capable of this truth, and stands firm, and
constant in this hope, it persuades him to reduce his mind to content himself
of that, which God will do with him in that tribulation. And in such case this
conformity with the will of God is pious, and holy, because it is founded upon
confidence, which is a pious and holy foundation.

To this humane wisdom opposes it self, and says, Thou having seen that God
permits, that his should be persecuted, afflicted, and evil entreated, in what
can thou found thy confidence, that he will free thee from this affliction,
and trouble? In what I say, O Christian, can thou found this confidence?

To this the Christian spirit replies, It is true, that God permits all that
you say to befall them which are his, but when it is for the cause of the
Gospel, for the manifestation of his own glory, for the illustration of his
own name* and not for the malignity, and appetite of the men of this world, God
well consents that his Saints shall be evil entreated, when they are evil
entreated, because they be Saints. For from hence redound all that which we
have spoken of. But he does not now consent, when they are evil entreated as
men for the things of the world. For he has promi^ed altogether the contrary.

David glories, not to have seen in all his life any ^ust man forsaken of God:
And in this very self same may all just men boast themselves: for albeit God
permits, that they should suffer, when they suffer, because they be Saints,
and just men, he does not consent, that they should suffer for those things,
which indifferently be fall to men in this present life.

From all this which is spoken, it may be gathered, that a Christian person,
when he is evil entreated for his piety, and justice, rejoicing that in it,
and by it the name of God is illustrated, he ought to remit himself wholly,
and altogether to God, reducing his mind to content it self of that which God
shall ordain, and dispose of him: and when he is evil entreated as a person of
the world, he ought to believe and hold for certain that God will draw him out
of that affliction, and out of that trouble with much satisfaction, and his own
content; and he ought to reduce his mind to content himself of that which
God will do.

And this truly is a Christian disposition of the soul, which is only found in
them that stand incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVI. That the promises of God belong to them who believe them.
CHristian piety requires that a Christian man should hold certainly, and
firmly, that God will maintain him in this present life with his grace, and in
his grace, and that in the other life he will give him immortality, and glory.

Humane wisdom presuming, or pretending, piety, persuades him, that he ought
to hold for certain that God will deal thus with him but on condition that he
have Faith, Hope, and Charity, which are the gifts of God that give life, and
being to a Christian. And in the mean while humane wisdom understands not,
that a man shall so far enjoy these three Graces, as he shall abide certainly,
and firmly grounded in those other two things, wherein Christian piety requires
that a Christian man should abide firm, and assure himself in. For in these
two things does Faith and Hope consist, from which Charity does arise and
proceed.

Whence it is well gathered, that it belongs to a Christian to shut his ears
to humane wisdom, and to open them to the Promises of the holy spirit; and so
to attend to certify himself, and found himself in those two first things.
And as I understand the matter, he shall then obtain, and possess these three
Christian gifts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, when he shall certainly, and
firmly believe, that God will maintain him in this present life with his grace,
and in his grace, and that in the other life he will give him immortality, and
glory.

I know, will the pious Christian say, that God calls not unto him but those
whom he has first known, and predestinate: I know also, that those whom he
calls, them he iustifies, and them he glorifies. And I know certainly, that he
has called me, and thereby I assure my self, that he has known, and
predestined me, and that he has justified me, and that he will glorify me.
In this let him stand, in this let him confirm himself without doubting in any
manner. For the promises of God are fulfilled with them.

That this is true, may be proved by many authorities of holy Scripture. But
better it will be to say in this manner, That the truth of this matter is not
believed, except it be experimented; and the experience appertains only to
them, that stand incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVII. In what manner a Man ought to resolve himself touching the
world, and touching himself, that he may become a true Christian.
ALL the Christian business consists in trusting, believing, and loving: for
all this is piety, justice, and holiness; for as much as a man having
confidence, gets piety; believing, gets justice; and loving, holiness.

That a man may trust, believe, and love, it is necessary to apprehend, to
understand, and know: To apprehend, in what thing he ought to have confidence,
To understand in what it is co^venient to believe, And to know that which ought
to be loved. Of this wisdom, cognition, and intelligence, a man is incapable,
partly for the depravation, that is natural to him, by reason of Original
sin, and partly by reason of that which is acquired by evil custom, and worse
exercises.

The Wise man meant this, when he said, That wisdom enters not into a mind
that is evil inclined, nor abides in a body subject unto sin.

Whereupon I understand, that a man, which desires to trust, believe, and
love, that he may obtain piety, justice and holiness; to such a one it
appertains to be wise, to know, and to understand; dispoilng his mind of all
evil inclinations, and estranging his body from all evil exercises, and from
every evil custom.

Together with this I understand, that to the intent a man may dispoile his
mind of every evil inclination, it is meeter, that a man should courageously,
and generously resolve himself touching the world, turning his back to all the
honor thereof, to all the glory thereof, and to all the estimation thereof,
not pretending unto it, not procuring it, nor willing it in any thing, nor in
any manner, putting an end to all kinds of ambition, and self esteem.

Together with this I understand, that to the intent a man may estrange his
body from all evil exercise, and from all evil custom, it is meet, that a
man should valorously resolve touching things which concern himself,
renouncing in good earnest all those things, from which there does come, or may
come any satisfaction, or any corporal content; putting an end to all,
estranging himself from it, and abhorring it. For doing in this manner, he
shall purify his soul, and his body, and he shall make himself able; God
giving unto him that wisdom, understanding, and knowledge, which he is capable
of. And so doing he shall come to obtain Confidence, Faith, and Love, and shall
be Pious, Just, and Holy, and consequently he shall become a true Christian.

Unto this resolution I understand that Jesus Christ our Lord inviteth every
one of us, saying, He that will come after me, etc. And as I understand it,
then a man is to be said to take his cross upon him, when willingly he suffers
the martyrdom with which the men of the world will martyrize him, whether it
be of the body, or of the soul. That of the body, the true Christians of the
Primitive Church did suffer, when those which were open enemies of God, and of
Christ took away their lives, because they believed in Christ: That of the
mind has been suffered, and is daily to be suffered by true Christians, that
have followed the steps of the Ancient, when they who are secret enemies of
God, and of Christ, do despise them, esteem them for vile, and for nobody;
deprive them of honor, and fame. And as I understand it, this is the most
cruel, and most terrible, and most unsupportable martyrdom of all: And a man
that stands constant in this kind of martyrdom, may well hold himself for a
true martyr of Christ.

Together with this I understand, that to the resolutions, which a man should
make with the world, and with his own self, and to the martyrdom whereunto
he ought to be ready, Christ added, And let him follow me, I conceive a man
does not obtain piety, justice, and holiness through the resolution, nor
through the martyrdom, but through the imitation of Christ, in as much as
imitating Christ he goes recovering in his mind the image, and similitude of
God, with which the first man was created, pretending to recover it also in his
body in the resurrection of the just, where having obtained impassibility and
immortality, the Christian shall perpetually rejoice with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XVIII. In what things that person who pretends, and desires to enter,
and to persevere in the kingdom of God, ought to be exercised; and what a man
brings of his own thereunto.
Understanding that which our Lord Jesus Christ says, that none can come unto
him, except his eternal Father conduct him: And understanding what S. Peter
says, that Faith is not for all men, and that Faith is the gift of God, I
understand likewise, that it is not in any man's power to believe, to love, and
to have confidence. Neither is it in a man's power to know God, nor to know
himself, nor to hate the world, and himself: For as much as all this must
come unto him by particular and especial favor of God, in such sort, that as
it seems hereby, it is not in man's power to form himself touching the inward,
so that he should become pious, just, and holy; for all this must come unto him
from God. On the other side I perceive many Exhortations, and Admonitions, of
which the holy scripture is full, by which generally men are exhorted, and
instructed unto piety, justice and holiness. I conceive, that it appertains
to every man to pretend to desire and procure Piety, Justice, and Holiness,
but seeking it of God, pretending to have it altogether from him, and by him.
And as I understand, it appertains to that Christian man, that exercises
himself in desiring, and demanding, this to exercise himself with all study,
and diligence in those things which belong to him, and which seem to be in his
own power to do, that is, in refrayning the affections, and the appetites, at
least in outward things, in which they may be restrained; that is to say, not
to see that, which would give satisfaction to thine eyes, and not to hear that
which delights thy ears, and so in all the other outward senses, in which a
Christian may overcome himself, separating his body, when he cannot separate
his mind.

But above all things a Christian man ought to attend principally not to
content the men of this world, neither to walk, nor to speak after the relish
of their words; ever more remembering himself of that saying of S. Paul, If I
seek to please men, etc. In which matter he ought to observe this rule; If so
be he be solicited to please men in things contrary unto piety, he shall in no
wise please them: if in things conformable to piety, always: And if in
indifferent things, he shall please them in those things, in which he
displeases himself, and he shall not please them in those things, wherein he
finds his own proper satisfaction; In such manner, that then he shall bring
himself not to please men, when they desire of him things contrary to piety,
and when he shall have in those things his own proper satisfaction. And in this
manner, he shall not forbear to satisfy them, because he would not satisfy
them, but because he would not offend piety, and because he would not give
nourishment to his mind touching its own satisfaction.

To this pass a man shall easily bring himself, recommending himself to God,
and always living with watch over himself, imagining that he lives amongst
more then mortal enemies, amongst which it becomes to stand always on his
guard, that nothing may happen unto him unawares. And exercising, and occupying
himself in this, he must not pretend hereby to get piety, justice, and
holiness, but he shall pretend only to keep his mind very wakefull, and his
manners well moderated; to the intent that when it shall please God to give
unto him piety, justice, and holiness, they may fall into his soul so happily,
and prosperously, as water falls on good ground, when it is plowed, and purged
from thorns, and stones: Holding this for certain, that as the Tiller, when he
cleares his ground from thorns, and stones, does no way oblige God, that he
should send his rain, and his Sun upon it; so neither does a man by purging,
and cleansing the appetites of his body, and the affections of his mind,
oblige God, that he should send his holy spirit to him. And as the Sun, and the
rain does more good to the earth, which it finds plowed, and purged from
thorns, and stones, so in like manner the holy Spirit does more good to the
mind, which he finds free, and purged from affections, and appetites. And
after this manner the Christian man understanding that which belongs to him,
and exercising himself therein, and understanding what he is to expect from
God, and desiring it, in short time shall find himself much comfortable to
the image of God, and unto that of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XIX. That the Christian life consists in this, that a man esteem
himself dead to the world, and pretend to live to God.
THe Christian name in the first beginning, was in the eyes of the world so
vile, so despised, dishonored, and abject, that none accepted it, but only
they, who being called of God, and having set an end to Ambition, to Glory, and
all worldly reputation, did esteem and judge themselves altogether dead unto
the world: And properly this name of a Christian was taken by them when they
came unto Baptism, in such sort, that it was first, that they were called of
God, and that they did esteem, and judge themselves as it were dead unto the
world, and after that they came to Baptism, in which they took the Christian
name. For those which were baptized, although they were formerly called Saints,
were afterward called Christians; in as much as being chosen of God they did
accept the justice of God executed on Christ: and being baptized they became
dead, and buried as much as belongs to the world, and they were raised up, and
did line toward God, making profession to imitate Christ, who died with
ignominy to the world, and lives gloriously to God. This S. Paul meant, where
he says, that the Christians are dead, and buried in Babtisme with Christ in
his death; to the intent that as Christ was dead and buried, and lives; so we
also being dead and buried may live.

We Christians are dead, and buried as well in respect of our being dead on the
Cross with Christ, as also in respect of the opinion which the world has of
us, and of that which we have of the world, and we are raised up, and Live, as
well in respect that we are raised up with Christ, as also in respect of that
opinion which God has of us, giving unto us his holy spirit; and of that which
we have of him, endeavoring to make our selves very like to the Image of his
only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

After that the Christian name began to he honored, and glorious in the eyes
of the world, Kings and Emperors themselves being honored thereby. And after
that Baptism is given, and communicated to them, which do not persevere in
that first deliberation to judge them selves dead unto the world; albeit in
baptism the Christian name is taken, and that in Baptism a man does promise,
and make profession to imitate Christ, in as much as he died unto the world,
and lives to God. For although in the eyes of the world it be an honorable
thing to take the Christian name, and to make the Christian profession, it is a
dishonor to accomplish that which is promised, and to keep the profession. Men
commonly contenting themselves with taking that part with Christ, which is now
honorable, that is, the name, and the profession, care not to take that which
is ignominious, that is, to dye unto the world; nor that, which the world
neither sees, nor understands, that is, to live unto God. And therefore that
which S. Paul says, belongs not unto them: for they are neither dead with
Christ, nor are raised with Christ: for none rises, but he who is dead.

I consider, that it belongs to a Christian, to the intent he may satisfy the
name which he holds, and observe the profession which he has made in his
Baptism, to reduce himself to that deliberation to which men in the beginning
of the manifestation of the Gospel did reduce themselves, resolving themselves
in this manner: I am dead and buried, as much as belongs to the world: for when
they baptized me, they slew me, and buried me: I am raised up, and live toward
God; for when Christ died, I was buried in Baptism with Christ in his death; I
began to rise, and to live with Christ in his resurrection, and in his life.
God killing the flesh of Christ on the Cross, killed mine; and raising up
Christ, raised up me. Now it being true, that I am dead and buried, it is
necessary, that in me there be no greater liveliness of affections, and
appetites, then in a man, who truly and effectually is dead and buried. And it
being likewise true, that I am raised, and alive, it is needful that all those
affections, and conceits should be alive in me, which are in a man who is truly
and effectually raised up. He that lives with this deliberation, and
resolution, will live on his guard, and watchfulness, in such sort, that when
he shall know in himself any affection, or any appetite which belongs to a
man, that lives to the world, straight way he will labor to kill it, saying,
this belongs not, nor appertains to me, who am dead to the world. And when he
shall find himself solicited by any thing that is matter of honor, and of
worldly esteem, or when he shall resent himself, because the one, or the other
is taken from him, he will quickly provide remedy for the evil, saying, I
know I live not unto the world; why then I ought not to pretend unto, or to
esteem that which the world esteems; and if I live unto God, I ought not to
pretend unto, nor to esteem but only that which God pretends unto, and esteems;
that is, that I should esteem my self dead and buried in respect of the world,
and that I should esteem my self raised up, and live unto God; in such sort,
that I being dead, and buried unto the world, ought not to pretend unto the
things of the world, nor I ought not to resent myself, when I am deprived of
them; and being raised up by God, and living unto God, I ought to pretend unto
the things of God, and to be grieved, and to resent my self, when I shall be
deprived of them. And the things of God, which a Christian ought to pretend
unto, are, the holy Spirit, that may rule and govern him, and which may
maintain him in the possession of the kingdom of God in this present life, as
much as may be, and in eternal life, as it ought to be; and this by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XX. That in the Infirmity, Amendment, and Health of the mind, Men
ought to govern themselves, as in those of the body.
IN the Infirmity, in the Amendment, and in the Health of the mind, I
conceive, that those men which remain in the kingdom of God, ought to govern
themselves, as discreet men govern themselves in the Infirmities, Amendment,
and Health of the body. That which I would say, is, that as the discreet
person, that is sick in his body, seeks discreet and experienced Physicians,
who by applying unto him his convenient medicines, and giving him a right
regiment do cure him: Even so he, that finds himself sick in his mind, ought
to seek a spiritual, and experimented Physician, or Physicians, that may set
him in the way of the knowledge of Christ, that so becoming the member of
Christ he may be healed of the Infirmity of his soul, of which I understand
all those are healed, who being called of God do believe in Christ: all others
whosoever, remain in their infirmity.

Furthermore, I would say, that the discreet person, that is upon recovery of
his bodily infirmity, lives always very attentive, and very wary of himself,
in all things being careful not to eat any thing that may cause him to
relapse, nor to commit any excess that may make him fall into the same
inconveniency: so he who finds himself to have any health of mind, whilst
he remains upon his recovery, ought to live very attentive to himself, and
very wary over himself in all things, being careful not to engage himself in
any of those things which may cause him to relapse, or loose any part of that
health which he has gotten; being always, when ever he comes into
conversation, and in other affairs of the world, attentive, and watchful not
to take any of those things that may do him hurt, even as he carries himself,
that is upon recovery, in banquets, and other occasions, where he is afraid to
err in any thing that may spoil his bodily health, feigning that he eats, and
does not eat, and entertaining himself in such sort, that he hurts not his
bodily health, nor offends those that behold him.

Furthermore I would say, that as he who having been sick, and upon recovery,
although he find himself well, if he be a discreet man yet does not suffer
himself to be transported to eat things contrary to his body, nor do any
dammageable exercises, although he do^ not live with that attention, with
which he lived, when he was upon recovery, being afraid to return unto the
sickness from which he was cured: so in like manner he that finds himself
healed of the infirmity of his mind, feeling himself much mortified, and much
quickened, ought not to live negligently, nor to debauch himself, or put
himself out of hisown way in the dealing, and conversations of men, and in
intermedling with the outward things of the world, being afraid to return to
his former infirmity by the depravation of his mind, considering that the
relapses of the mind into sickness are more dangerous, as well as the
relapses into bodily sickness; albeit God himself does ever keep from this
kind of falling those that have got health by regeneration, and renovation,
which the holy spirit causes in those, who are incorporated in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

CONSID. XXI. The difference of Sins, and Sinners: The Obligations of Piety:
The Signs of Piety and Impiety.
ALL Men that sin, sin either against themselves, or against their neighbors,
or against Christ, or against God. They sin against themselves, defyling their
bodies with carnal vices, and with Drunkenness; depraving their minds with
Ambition, with Envy, and with Wrath: For whilst they occupy themselves in these
matters, besides the natural depravation with which they are born, they add
corruption to their manners. They sin against their neighbors, doing them
evil, and damage, in their persons, in their estate, in their honor, and
fame, and giving them evil example, and evil doctrine. They sin against
Christ, justifying themselves by their own works: for thereby they show that
they give no credit to Christ, touching the Covenant of Justification, which
covenant he made between God and Man, shedding his blood. I say they declare,
that they do not hold it for a thing firmly established, that they do not rely
upon it. They sin against God, when they resent themselves, and are grieved
touching that which God does: For in grieving themselves, resenting themselves,
and afflicting themselves, they show that they do not content themselves
thereof. And this discontent of men proceeds in that, that they esteem it not
good, and their esteeming it not to be good proceeds from this, that they have
not a good opinion of God, upon which self same ground they grow in the end
even to hate God.

Now they who sin against themselves, sin against the dignity of a man: they
who sin against their neighbor, sin against Charity: they who sin against
Christ, sin against the Faith: and they who sin against God sin against
natural Piety.

They who sin against themselves, sin also against their neighbors, in as much
as by their sins they give evil example, and they sin against Christ, in as
much as by their sins they make Christian religion to be evil spoken of; they
sin against God, in as much as they are convinced in themseves, either by the
Law, or by their own judgments, that they offend God in that which they do,

They who sin against their neighbors, sin likewise against themselves,
augmenting their proper depravation and corruption: they sin against Christ
depriving themselves of Charity, which is the proper counter-signe of Christian
Piety; and they sin against God, being convinced in themselves, either through
the Law, or through their own consciences that they offend God in that which
they do.

They who sin against Christ, sin against themselves, depriving themselves of
justification, and consequently of the kingdom of God: they sin against their
neighbors in giving them examples of incredulity, and they sin against God:
for in offending the Son, they offend the Father, and offending him that is
sent, they offend him that sent.

They who sin against God, sin against themselves, depriving themselves of
piety against their neighbors, by giving them evil example; against Christ
for the selfsame respect that they do who sin against Christ, they sin
against God for the union, which is between Christ and God.

From hence I gather, that a man owes to himself purity, and cleanness, which
is got by mortification of the appetites, and affections, which are according
to the old Adam. He owes unto his neighbors Love and Charity, with good
example, and good doctrine: To Christ Faith; and to God Piety.

And I understand that as unto Faith there is also annexed certain hope of the
resurrection and life eternal; so unto piety is also annexed the worship in
Spirit, and in Truth.

Furthermore I gather, that to live licentiously, and vitiously, is a sign of
depravation, and corruption: To live hurtful to his neighbor, is a sign of
malignity, and iniquity: To live superstitiously, and ceremoniously, is a sign
of incredulity, and diffidence: To live discontent for that which God does, is
a sign of Impiety. As on the contrary, to live chaste, and pure, and modest, is
a sign of mortification: to live without prejudicing any one, is a sign of
Charity, and goodness: To live with peace and conscience is a sign of
fidelity, and confidence: To live contentedly touching every thing which God
does, is a sign of piety, and holiness. Whereupon I understand, that as
mortification, and charity are gotten only by Gods gift, so likewise that
faith, and confidence, piety, and holiness, mortification, and charity are
conserved and increased in a man by the spirit of God, even that which is
obtained through Jesus Christ our Lord.

I will add this further, that in those things wherein men sin against
themselves, and against their neighbors, if so be they sin through weakness,
and infirmity, presently after they have sinned, they are sorry, and repent,
considering the offense of God, and the hurt of their neighbor, and of
themselves. And in those things, wherein men sin against Christ, and against
God, if they sin through weakness, and infirmity, they do the self-same,
considering the offense of Christ, and of God, the ill example of their
neighbor, and their own damage.

And furthermore as they that sin in carnal vices, find satisfaction in their
sins, when they sin through wretched wilfulness, so also they, who sin
against Christ in outward justification, and against God, being grieved at
those things which God does, if so be they sin through incredulity, and
impiety, they are to find satisfaction in their own works, and in their own
opinions*

And by these counter-signes may a man know when he sins through frailty, and
infirmity, and when through wretched wilfulness, and incredulity; always
setting before his eyes the light of the Spirit, which is obtained through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXII. For what reason God sometime gives a godly man a Child, and
suddenly takes him away.
EXamining with my self what God intends, when he bestows upon a godly person
a child, and a few days after takes him away again; I suppose he intends that
self same which we intend, when we give an Infant a thing, and seeing him much
delighted therewith, and desirous to make experiment of his mind, and
inclination, we take it away again. And as I understand the matter, as we have
a good conceit of that child, whom we see with the same cheerfulness to let
go the thing, when we take it from him, with which he took it when we gave it
unto him; and that as we have an evil conceit, when we perceive him to be
sorrowful, grieved, and weep, and thereupon we oftentimes upon this occasion
knock, and beat him: so God willing to make proof of a pious person, and of his
mortification, gives him a Son, and when he sees him joyful, takes him from
him. And if the said person leave his son, when God takes him away with the
selfsame joyfulnesse, with which he received him, when God gave him, he gives
good sign of his piety, and holiness: if he be sorrowful, grieved, and weeps,
he gives an ill sign of his piety, and a worse of his mortification: and
sometimes it comes to pass, that God for this cause the more sharply
chastises him even in that which most grieveth him.

One difference there is, that we giving the thing to the child, and taking
it away, intend to prove him, and to know him; and God in bestowing a son
upon a pious person, and taking him away, intends that the said person should
know himself, that he should understand how far he is proceeded in piety, how
far he is proceeded in mortification, and he intends to exercise him in
mortifications. And it is a much more easy thing to God to give a son to a
man, and to take him away, then for a man to give a Pear, and take it away.

Together here with I understand, that it belongs and appertains to a pious
person to demean himself with God, when he deprives him of any thing, which he
has given him, how dear soever it be unto him, as a well inclined child
demeanes himself toward his father, when he takes from him the thing which he
had given him. But to this piety none ever come, but they only, who enter in at
the gate, and that is, our Lord Jesus Christ.

CONSID. XXIII. That to him, whom God disenamours of the world, and enamours of
himself, the self same things befall, as do to him, that disenamours
himself of one woman, and enamours himself of another.
FInding my soul altogether barren, and dry, and as it were estranged from
God, and understanding that this proceeded, because God had hid his presence
from me, I thought to remedy this necessity of mine, by reducing my memory,
that it should not think upon any other things then God. Scarce had I made this
deliberation, ^carce had I begun to put it in execution, but I perceaved, that
although it be in my power to exercise my memory in God, as in another thing,
yet for all that it is not in my power to make that my mind should feel the
presence of God, and so free it self from its barrenness, and dryness, and
estrangement from God. Furthermore I understood a very great difference between
the state, in which the soul that labors to have God present, finds it
self, from the estate in which it finds it self, when God ^auseth it to feel
his presence. And being willing to know in what this difference consists, I
understood it consisted in this, that in one estate man's spirit works, and in
the other, the holy Spirit works. And so I resolved with my self, that
between these states there is the same difference, that is between Flesh and
Spirit.

Passing on further I understood, that those men, who upon their own designs,
and for their own interresses desire, and endeavor to disenamour themselves of
the world, and enamour themselves of God, not being inspired, nor moved
thereunto from the holy spirit, are much like to those men, who for their own
designs, and for their own interresses, do labor, and endeavor to
disenamour themselves of a base, and vulgar thing, and to enamour themselves of
some other thing, that is qualified with much worth; not being incited
thereunto either by the sway of their own proper affections, or by the desire
of the thing it self, to which they would affectionate themselves. I would
say, that the difficulties, the distasts, and the troubles are much alike.
which the one, and the other make experience of, and that neither these, nor
those do ever obtain that which they pretend.

Furthermore I understood, that those men, whom God would dis^namour of the
world, and enamour of himself, are much like to those men, whom a qualified
person would withdraw from another base, and vulgar person, and make enamoured
of themselves. I would say, that almost the self same things befall to the
one, as to the other that with the same facility the one, and the other both
disenamour, and enamour themselves; and that almost the self same things
betide the one and the other, and that there are almost the self same conceits
in the one, and in the other. For as the one is forwarded to unlove, and to
love by favors, and cherishments, and by outward demonstrations: so the other
is forwarded, or (to speak better) is constrained to unlove, and to love, by
favors, and cherishments; and inward demonstrations spiritual, and divine.

One notable difference I find, that the one, because he loves changeable
things remains always with fear; and the other because he loves stable
things, has driven all fear from himself. Furthermore I find, that the one
of them has his satisfaction in his own power touching that which he loves by
means of remembrance; and the other stands always at the mercy of God, it not
being in his own power to be able to take, or feel more satisfaction, then
that which God will give unto him, causing him to feel, and taste his presence.

And I understand, that when the Person, whom God would disenamour of the
world, and enamour of himself, applies himself by his own industry, and by
his own exercises to enamour himself of God, he does experiment in himself
that which he proves, who for his own designs, and for his own interresses
would disenamour himself of the world, and enamour himself of God. In such
sort, that they who God disenamours, and enamours, can give testimony of the
estate of them, who labor to disenamour, and enamour themselves; but these
cannot give testimony of the state of those others. Whereupon I understand,
that men toil themselves in vain, that seek for their own designs to
disenamour themselves of the world, and to enamour themselves of God.

Furthermore I understand, that they may judge themselves to be most happy, who
know that they have not been moved of themselves to disenamour themselves of
the world, and to enamour themselves of God, but have been moved thereunto by
the spirit of God.

Furthermore I understand, that they who go about disenamouring themselves of
the world, and enamouring themselves of God, loose their labor, when without
being moved by him to love, they by their own industry, and by their own
exercises seek to discover Gods presence, when he hides it from them; And when
God withdrawing himself from them, they for their own satisfaction would have
him present.

And above all things I understand, that the proper exercise of them, whom God
would disenamour of the world, and enamour of himself, is to apply their
minds to disenamour themselves of the world, not accepting of its Favors, nor
its Cherishments, nor its flatteries, but driving them away from himself,
flying them, and abominating them: Not pretending for all this, that God being
moved by this their exercise, should enamour them more of himself, but that
the favors of God finding them dispoiled, and deprived of the favors of the
world, will become more effectual in them, will more penetrate, and transform
them more into God, and so they shall more speedily, and entirely obtain, and
get the Love of God. That this is true, every man will easily understand, that
shall consider, how that he, that has expelled, and altogether abandoned the
familiarity, and conversation of a base, and vulgar Person, comes much more
easily to enamour himself of a Personage exceedingly qualified in worth.

Having passed through these considerations, and understood these secrets, and
others, that are annexed unto them, and that do depend on them, looking toward
the Holy Scripture, I have known that these things are very conformable to that
which I have read therein: for as much as Solomon in his Canticles, does
celebrate this Enamourment between God and the soul; and that the departing
from God is called Adultery, when the soul leaves God, and applies it self to
the World. And it seems to me, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, leaving
one that would have followed him, and calling another, that alleged excuse, or
delay, it was nothing else, then to refuse the love of one, and to enamour the
other. This self same, as I conceive, he meant to let his Apostles understand,
when he said unto them, you have not chosen me but I have chosen you; as if he
should have said, you have not enamoured your selves of me, but I have
enamoured you. This very self same, as I understand, S. John meant to say,
when he said, that to become the sons of God, must proceed, not from the will
of man, nor from man's spirit, but by the will of God, and by the Holy Spirit,
in such sort, that in this present life it appertains to a man to apply
himself to disenamour himself of the world, and to occupy himself in praying
God, that he would enamour him of himself, to this effect giving unto him his
holy Spirit, which is obtained by believing in Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXIV. That those Persons, who are governed by the holy Spirit in their
serving of God, pretend to increase in the love of God.
GOd generally loves all men, and he loves with particular love all those, for
whom he has executed the rigor of his Justice on his only begotten Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Men generally hate God, and they hate him with
particular hatred, who are guilty to have added other depravations to their
natural depravation.

The love which God bears men, proceeds from the great things, which he has
done for them, in such sort, that with reason he loves them more, to whom
justification by Christ does appertain. And man's hatred toward God proceeds
from the depravation, wherewith he offends him, (for as it is said, He that
offends, pardons not) in such sort, that with reason they most have God, that
have most offended him*

According to reason it seems that God being most perfect, he ought to be most
soveraignly beloved of man, and that man being most highly imperfect, ought to
be most highly hated of God. Likewise because man has received many good
things from the Liberality of God, he oughtmuch to love God: and God having
received* from man nothing but offenses, and injuries, he ought to be hated of
God. But on the other side so great force has the obligation which God has to
love man for the great matters that he has done, and does for him, that
however he know the height of imperfection to be in him, and that he is
offended by him, he does not leave to love him: it coming so to pass on Gods
behalf in this case with men, as it comes to pass to a good father, with a
disobedient and vicious son, who is more drawn by the force of that which he
has done for his son, to love him, then by the disobedience, and depravation
of his son to hate him. And likewise on the other side, the hatred, and enmity
which a man has to God through his natural depravation, and through the
offenses, that he has added to this depravation, enforce so much, that
although man know the height of perfection in him and although he find, and
feel himself benefitted of God, not only he cannot bring himself to love God,
but also he cannot leave to hate him: That betiding a man in this case with
God, that betides to a vicious, and malignant son with a good father, with whom
his villainy, and malignity has more force to hate his father, then the
knowledge of his fathers goodness, and of the great obligation which he has
to his father to make him love him.

Whereupon I understand, that God willing to be loved of man, as a good father
would be loved of his son, (knowing that the impediment of this love is that*
which is spoken of, that he who offends pardons not) executed the rigor of his
justice on his own son, as if a good father should say to a disobedient son,
See I have chastised' thy brother for thy disobedience and offenses; fince then
I have taken away the impediment, love thou me as I louethee.

Hence I understand, that the intent which God had executing the rigor of his
justice on Christ, was not les^e to secure me, then to satisfy himself.
Further I understand, that a man who gives credit to this justice executed on
Christ, accepting it, and making it his own, does altogether loose the hatred
which he bears to God, and begins to love God, even as the son who belieues
that his father has chastised his brother for that which he had disobeyed in,
leaves to hate his father, and begins to love him. And now I understand that as
the son desiring, not that his father should love him, for he already knows
that he loves him; nor much less that he should love him more, for he knows
that he loves him much, but he himself desiring greatly to love his Father
applies himself with all his force to serve him in every thing, which he
thinks to be pleasing unto him, and puts himself to great hazards for him, and
deprives himself of all his pleasures and all his satisfactions for him,
considering that being loved by his Father, and likewise doing great things for
his Father, he shall come to love his Father greatly: Even so neither more nor
less the man that is already justified desiring not that God should love him,
for he knows already that God loves him, nor that he should love him more,
for he knows that he loves him much, but he himself desiring to love God much,
applies himself with all his force to serve God, knowing that being beloved of
God for the great things which God has done, and does for him, that he also
doing great things for God, shall come to love God greatly.

Furthermore, I understand, that the consideration of the great sins which
God has ^doned us, makes us to grow in the love of God, as the confideration
of the great offenses which we have done, when we do not feel the pardon,
makes us to grow in hatred.

Furthermore I understand, that the services, which those persons, who are
governed by the spirit of God, do to God, are not done to satisfy the
Obligation, with which they were born; neither are they done, as humane wisdom
instructs, and as humane Philosophy teaches, pretending piety, thereby to
oblige God, either to the intent, that he should pardon their offenses, or that
he should love them, but properly to bind themselves to love God more, and
every day more to increase in the love of God.

Furthermore I understand, that the services unto which the holy Spirit applies
these persons, are to disenamour them of themselves, and of the world, and to
enamour them of God, and of those persons that love God. And I understand, that
then a man disenamours himself of himself, when he depriues himself of all
those things, which may give, or cause unto him outward satisfaction in any
kind whatsoever. And then, as I understand, he disenamours himself of the
world, when he takes away and apparts from his mind all thought to satisfy
and please the world in things of the world, and when any occasion offers it
self, he puts this deliberation in effect.

And then I understand it, a man affectionates himself to God, and to the
persons that love God, when he applies himself with his mind unto them, when
by service, and benefits he does oblige himself to love them, doing unto them
that which he would do unto God himself, if he saw him to have need of his
service, accordingly as David says he himself did, Ps. 16.

And furthermore, that to suffer for Christ, and for the confession, and
manifestation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, does above all things enamour
them of God, and Christ, that so suffer. and I understand, that in their own
suffering love does in great part deprive them of the sense of that which they
suffer.

And withal this I understand, that without comparison the love which God
bears a pious, and just man, however sorry a one, and imperfect hebe, is much
greater then that love, which a pious, and just person, however much perfect he
be, bears to God; even as a good Father more loves a son, however sorry a one
he be, then a son, however good he be, love his Father; and because this is so,
it is no marviel, if they who be such, live with much security, that neither in
this present life any thing shall be fall them, that shall be evil for them,
nor that that felicity which is promised to them that are pious, and just,
shall be wanting unto them in the life everlasting; knowing the particular
Providence of God; and they are just, accepting the justice of God executed on
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXV. In what sort pious persons are moved to put in execution the
justice of God.
AVery great part of Christian piety, as I understand, consists in this, that
a man should never dispose of himself, neither in effect putting his own will
in execution, nor saying in his thought, This would be well for me, if so b^he
have not some evident sign of the will of God: in such sort, that when the
state wherein he finds himself, the place, or the manner of living shall
become wearisome to him, and there shall come thoughts into his mind, saying,
This, or that thing would fit me well; he should presently say, But what know
I, if this would be good for me? God is he, who knows what is good, and since
he knows it, to him I remit my self, that he should set me in it, and in the
mean space I will believe, that that which is best for me, is to continue in
the state wherein I am? With this resolution a man condemns the judgment of
humane wisdom, and reason, and renounceth his natural light, and enters into
the kingdom of God, remitting himself to the regiment and government of God.

Furthermore I understand, that albeit to some Saints of the old Testament, and
to others of the new, God has manifested his will as it were by words, the
common language, with which God speaks to the pious, is to put it into their
hearts that which they should do, and afterward to necessitate them to do
it, or to facilitate the execution thereof; in such sort, that when a pious
person shall feel himself moved to change his state, place, or manner of
living, or whatsoever other thing, in which he shall be doubtful, whether it
be a motion of the spirit, or of the flesh; if on the other part he shall see
himself necessitated to put it in execution, or shall find much facility in
executing it, he shall take it, that God declares his will unto him by this
means; and holding that demonstration for a sufficient token of Gods will, he
shall not doubt to put it in execution. If he shall have the will, but neither
the necessity, nor the facility, he shall keep himself quiet; and if so be he
shall have the necessity, or the facility, and not the will, he shall likewise
abide quiet, saying If this be the will of God, he will put it into my will,
that I should put it in execution. In this he shall so much more assure
himself, in as much as I understand it, and hold for certain and firm, God is
so jealous of them that attend to this piety, that even then when they are so
much solicited by sensual appetites, and by humane affections, that they come
to desire the execution, God himself hinders them, to the intent they should
not come to deprave themselves, except when he means to punish them; letting
them fall into that which they desire, because they hold it a good thing for
them; as he chastised David in the case of Bersabe; and this chastisement is
very terrible: which as I understand it, does not consist in the Execution of
that thing which a man desires, but in the knowledge of the inconvenience,
wherein he finds himself to be fallen after the Execution. In these like
cases also pious persons know the will of God, but it is that will of his,
which is with wrath, and with fury; and so they do confirm themselves in the
deliberation, to think that nothing befits them, but that in which they find
themselves, and to stand attentive to hear the language of God, when he moves
the will, and facilitateth, and necessitateth the Execution thereof. With which
language I understand that God also speaks unto the impious, as he spoke to
Nebuchadnezzar, and as he spoke to Darius, and Cyrus, and as he spoke to Titus
and Vespasian. But there is very great difference in that, which they that are
pious do, and in that which they do that are impious; forasmuch as they
neither knew, nor do know the will of God, and therefore albeit they did it,
yet for all this they did not serve, nor do serve God therein. But the pious,
because they know the will of God, and knowing it put it in execution, they
serve God therein. And in as much as they who are such, do set themselves to
all their works with this knowledge, they do, as I understand, in all things
serve God. Those are they who believe, and do Gods justice executed on Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXVI. That the Flesh, whilst it is unregenerated Flesh, is the enemy
of God, and that Regeneration is properly the work of the holy Spirit.
SAint Paul the Apostle speaking by eyperience of the holy Spirit, condemns
the Flesh for the enemy of God. I understand by Flesh all men, in as much as
they are not regenerated by the holy Spirit. Humane prudence, that always
opposes it self against the holy Spirit, holding this condemnation for an
hard and terrible thing, and not willing to endure it, will have it that S.
Paul means by Flesh, that which Socrates, or Plato would have meant, that is,
the Judgment of the Flesh. In this opinion all they who follow humane wisdom
do concur, holding it for an absurd and evil thing to condemn as sins,
all the works of unregenerated Flesh. For, according to their opinion, there are
some, with which unregenerated men do not only not offend God, but in effect
do him service, such as are those, wherein they agree with beasts, both the
one and the other being moved by natural instinct; as for a Father to beget
Children, and for a Son to nourish his Father; which things humane wisdom
says, since they be not vices, nay rather being virtues in brute beasts, it is
no ways just to say that the self same should be sins in unregenerated men:
for in such case the condition of mankind would come to be worse then that of
brute beasts. Here I understand humane wisdom deceives itself, in as much as
it does not consider, that the brute beast having neither wisdom, nor reason,
does not alter the order of God, nor the institution of nature; and a man not
regenerated by the holy Spirit, by his prudence, and reason does continually
pervert, and alter it, nay he cannot leave to pervert, and alter it, in as much
as being proud he goes mending the works of God by his own reason, and by his
own prudence, and in as much as loving himself in every thing that he does, he
pretends his own interest, and his own proper glory; and so he does not follow
the natural order, nor pretends the glory of God. In such sort as the Father
bringing up the son, and the son nourishing the Father, every one of them
pretends his own glory, and his own interest, and his own satisfaction: That
being properly in men through the vice of their corrupted flesh, which leaves
to love, and to esteem God, and esteems and loves it self, aiming in every
thing at its own proper glory, and its own proper ^nterest.

Whereupon I consider in this present life that which is in the house of a
great Lord, who has thirty slaves, for whom he does sufficiently provide all
necessary things, and ordaining them the things, in which he will be served of
them. Of these thirty slaves I imagine that ten of them are fools, without
understanding, and without any manner of discourse, altogether as Beasts. These
as I understand it, without perverting, and without altering the order which
their Lord has given them, do that which is commanded them, not pretending
any thing else, but only to obey their Lord: The other ten, I suppose, are well
experienced, and have judgment, and discretion, who pretending to know, and
understand as much as their Lord, and sometimes more, pervert the order that is
given unto them, supposing to find the point better, and having the eye to
their own interresses, have always an eye to gain their liberty, and to be
better entreated, and more cherished of their Lord, not contenting themselves
with their servitude, nor contenting themselves with that ordinary
entertainment which they receive from their Lord: The other Ten, I imagine to
my self, are likewise experienced, and understanding, and such as have
judgment, wit, and understanding, but persuading themselves, that their Lord
knows more then they, and no ways serving themselves of what they know to
understand their Lords meaning in that which is commanded them, without
perverting or altering the order that is given unto them, obey their Lord, and
contenting themselves of their servitude and of their entertainment obey their
Lord, pretending only to do that which is ordained them for the profit, for
the satisfaction, and for the glory of their Lord. The first Ten serve but like
Beasts with their bodies, and these in the world are the brute Beasts. The
second Ten in serving pretend to serve, but offend, and then offend most, when
they serve most, and best; for then they do most alter, and pervert the will,
and order of their Lord: And these are all men, in as much as they are not
regenerated by the holy Spirit: The third Ten serve as obedient Sons, not
perverting, nor altering the order, and will of their Lord, and they serve both
with their bodies, and with their minds; and these are the men that are
regenerated by the holy Spirit, without which regeneration it is impossible
that men should reduce themselves to this degree. And therefore S. Paul well
says, that the flesh is the enemy of God, and is not subject to the Law and
will of God; neither though it would, could it, in as much as a man doting upon
his own wisdom, and his own reason, pretends to mend the works of God, and in
as much as being enamoured of himself in every thing which he does he has an
eye unto himself.

To the intent this may be the better understood, I say, that by regeneration I
understand that change, and outward, and inward Renovation, which the holy
Spirit does in those persons, who believing in Jesus Christ, and accepting as
their own, Gods justice, that he executed upon Christ, are changed, and
renewed in all their affections, in such sort, that no ways pretending in the
execution of their own appetites, nor in the sway of their own affections, that
which they did pretend before their regeneration, having lost that
understanding to go about mending of Gods works, and having lost their own
love, whereby they loved themselves, as if one of the Ten slaves of the
second order should pass to the number of the Ten of the third order.

Those men, who by wit, and humane artifice pretend to change themselves, and
to renew themselves, as I understand it, do not obtain this Christian
regeneration, but that which is humane, that which is of the flesh, and of
humane wisdom, and reason; such as was that of some heathen Philosophers. For
in Christian reason the holy Spirit only has part, nay it is so much
Regeneration, and Renova^ion, in as much as it is wrought by the holy Spirit;
that is in as much as the holy Spirit works it in a man, when he feeling his
election, and his vocation, and permitting the holy Spirit to work in him
without pretending to work of himself, nor to follow his proper judgment, nor
his proper opinion in any thing, when he thinks himself to stand farthest off
from his Regeneration, and Renovation, finds himself more near, and more
entire, and more perfect therein. And this is that Regeneration, and
Renovation, which S. Paul says, the holy Spirit works in them which are true
Christians. And this is that self same, which the son of God himself our
Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ spoke of to Nicodemus.

CONSID. XXVII. That by Mortification a Christian man maintains himself in
his resolution, and by reducing of his mind to God, he maintains himself in
the certainty of Gods providence.
THE man that being called of God, feeling his vocation, and answering unto it
applies himself with his mind to piety, as I understand it, is first moved to
resolve himself touching the world, not willing to have from it any greater
part, then that which it shall please God that he should have in the dignities
thereof, and in the estimation thereof; and he is moved to resolve with
himself, not desiring touching his body neither more commodities, nor any
better condition in outward matters, then it shall please God to put him into.
Furthermore I understand, that a man cannot maintain himself in his
resolution with the world, if so be he do not mortify the affections that
live in him, of Ambition, and Avarice, and of selfe-estimation; neither can he
sustain himself in his Resolution with himself, if he do not mortify his
sensual appetites that live in his body. And therefore after that the feeling
of his vocation has moved him to these two Resolutions, the feeling of that
faith, whereunto he is called, together with the holy Spirit, which together
with Faith is communicated unto him, dorh mortify in him the affections which
might hinder, and disturb the Resolution with the world; and the appetites that
might hinder and disturb the Resolution with himself; in such sort, as Faith,
and the holy Spirit does mortify the affections and appetites of a man to
conserve, and maintain him in those Resolutions, which through his vocation he
has made with the world, and with himself. Whereupon I understand it, that
for a pious person to feel himself solicited by ambition, and his own proper
estimation, is not a ^igne, that he stands not resolute with the world, but
that he has not mortified his affections. Likewise I understand, that for a
pious person to feel himself solicited by the pleasures of the body, is not a
sign that he stands not resolved with himself, but that he has not mortified
his Appetites. And so I take this Resolution, that a pious person, who
answering to his Vocation is resolved with the world, and with himself,
desiring to maintain himself in his Resolutions, ought to attend unto
Mortification, which as has been said, maintains a person in his Resolutions.

I likewise understand, that the self same calling of God does move a man
being called to accept the particular Providence of God in all things; holding
for certain that all are his works, wherein his will does particularly
concur. And I understand, that the Faith whereunto a man is called, and the
holy Spirit, which by Faith is communicated unto him, do bring a man to
content himself of every thing that befalls him, either good, or evil; holding
it all for good, to the intent, that he should sustain himself in his
certainty, in which he could not maintain himself, but by being brought to
this pass.

And hence also I understand, that for a pious person to resent himself of
those things, which happen amiss to him touching his body, is not a sign,
that he has not certification of Gods providence, but that he has not
reduced his mind to content himself of that which God does. And so I resolve
my self in this matter, that together with a man's attending unto the
mortification of his Affections, and of his appetites, he ought to attend to
reduce his mind to this conformity to the will of God. For in this manner
maintaining his own Resolutions in himself, he shall also maintain the
Certainty of Gods providence, and shall likewise maintain himself in piety,
justice, and holiness, which is got by believing on Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXVIII. For a man to assure himself of his Vocation.
FOrasmuch as I understand, it does greatly import, that a man should be
certain, that he is called of God to the grace of the Gospel of Christ, that
is, to the intent, that believing in Christ he should obtain immortality, and
eternal life: (for this certainty works in him the resolution with the world,
and with himself, and mortification, by which he is maintained in his
resolutions.) I come now to say, that a person that shall not have had a
Vocation so evident, so clear, and exterior, as was that of S. Paul, after the
coming of the holy Spirit; or as was that of the Apostles, whilst Christ
conversed with men; nor so effectual, and powerful, as in some persons, in
whom, although it be inward, the effects are so evident, as may serve for
outward; but shall have had a quiet, and remiss Uocation, as it is in those
persons, in whom it being inward, and notable to show it self by outward
signs, because they are of themselves outwardly moderate in their affections,
and appetites: I say that such a person may certify himself of his Uocation,
by the sense, that he has of his justification through Faith. I would say,
that when a Pious person being moved unto Christian piety, or having understood
the motion, shall doubt whether he were moved, because he was called of God, or
that he was solicited of his own self-love, finding in himself some sense of
his justification by Faith, that is, of peace of conscience, which they obtain,
who believing make Gods justice their own; he may well assure himself, that
his motion to piety was the Uocation of God, and no design of humane wisdom;
this being certain, that only they, who are called of God, do feel in
themselves the benefit of Gods justice executed on Christ Jesus.

CONSID. XXIX. That to believe with difficulty is a sign of Vocation.
THE Easiness with which they believe the matters of Christian Faith, who
believe by Opinion, by Relation, and by persuasion; and the Difficulty with
which they believe them, who believe them by Inspiration, and Revelation, has
led me to this Consideration, that they, who believe by Relation, amongst some
true things believe many false, and are likewise more easy to believe false
things then true; and they, who believe by Revelation, believe only true
things, and o^ falsities they admit none; in such sort, that the difficulty of
believing is rather a sign of Vocation, then the easiness. He that believes
by Revelation, believes as much as he feels, and because in those things which
he does not feel, he finds contradiction, he believes that which is inspired,
and revealed unto him, and yet not that always, but when the Revelation, and
Inspiration, and the inward sense is lively and entire. They who obtain this
Faith, Christ calls them Blessed, and these selfsame are the sons of God.
And this is the faith, that always leads Charity, and Hope in its company, and
without which it is impossible to please God; That which purifies the hearts,
makes them clean, and quickens them; Of which our omnipotent God make us rich
by Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXX. That God in communicating spiritual things unt^ ^s, deals as
in giving the fruits of the earth.
SEtting my self sometimes to account with God, I say unto him in this sort:
Wherefore Lord, when you call a person to your kingdom, do you not make him
presently feel his justification? Do you not presently give him the holy
Spirit, which should rule, and govern him? And why do you not show unto him
your presence? To this it seems to me, that he makes answer to me, saying, For
the self same cause, that I do not make the grain as soon as it is sown,
to spring, so that it may be reaped. This, say I, is the curse of sin: And this
other matter, says he, is also through the curse of sin. Again, say I,
Since you have done it with S. Paul, and with some others, why do you it not
generally with all? For the self same cause (replies he) that I have sometimes
given men bread to eat without causing it to grow by the ordinary way, willing
to show my omnipotency both in the one and the other. As those persons (say I)
Lord to whom thou have given bread by extraordinary ways, do more acknowledge
that bread from thy liberality, then those other, who have it by ordinary
ways; even so also all thine elect would more acknowledge all their inward
gifts from thy liberality, if so be thou would do with them that which thou
did with S. Paul, rather then guiding them, as thou guidest them by an
ordinary way. I will (says God) that both the one, and the other should
acknowledge from me that which they obtain by the ordinary way, and that so
much the more, as it seems to themselves, that they get it by industry, and
labor. For in this thing I will, that they should mortify the judgment of
their humane wisdom which mortification should not be necessary, if they had
these things by extraordinary way. I will have the labourer to labor the
ground, and to sow his seed, and I will that he shall attribute to me the
fruit of all his labors. I will likewise that the spiritual persons
laboring, and traveling themselves should submit themselves to believe, and
to love, and that they should so get justification, and the holy Spirit; and I
will, that they attribute all unto me. And hold thou it for certain, that as
the labourer should prove himself very rash, that should think to gather much
grain, having the water at his command when he pleased, and the Sun when he
pleased: so likewise should that spiritual person be very rash who would hope
to increase much in piety, having the inspirations in his own power when he
would. Whereupon hold for certain, that he does take the better, who freely in
all things, and every where leaves it for me to do, without opposing himself
in any thing, and without supposing to govern by himself that which ought to
be governed by me. With these Considerations I put my mind in quiet, when I
find it impatient, and not well enduring to expect God, remitting my self in
all things, and every where to my God; being assured, that he does govern, and
will govern me in this Christian business according to my necessity through
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXI. That the liveliness of Affections is more dammageable then that
of the Appetites; and that it is necessary that both the one, and the other
should be Mortified.
EXamining in what properly the Liveliness of Affections, and of the Appetites
does consist, and when this Liveliness does offend, and when it does not
offend, and verify^g, that the Liveliness of Affections consists in the
inward satisfaction that is according to the flesh, that is, when a man abides
alive and vigorous in rellishing with the senses of his mind the things that
belong to the world, such as are honors done to him, selfe-boastings, and that
which is principal, his reputatlon, and fame. And I understand that the
Liveliness of Appetites consists in the outward satisfactions, that is, when
a man abides alive, and vigorous to relish with his five bodily senses, the
things that delight, and content the sensuality. And resolving my self, that
this Liveliness of Affections, and Appetites is then hurtful, when he who
has it, knows it not, nor understands it, or does not hold it for a fault,
nor defect; and that then it does not hurt, when he that has it, knows it,
and understands it, and holding it for a defect, and vice, goes by little, and
little refrayning and mortifying it; I come to consider, which of the twois most
dammageable, and most contrary to the holy Spirit, either the Liveliness of
Affections, or of that of the Appetites? In this resolution I come first
considering, that the Liveliness of Affections holds the inward man alive in
the things of the world; and that the Liveliness of Appetites holds the
outward man in things of the Flesh. And I understand that by how much the soul
is more worthy then the Body, by so much is the Liveliness of Affections more
contrary to the spirit, then that of the Flesh. Furthermore I consider in this
matter; A certain person goes to a feast for his own satisfaction, I would say,
to satisfy his Appetites in seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching;
and another person goes to comply with the world for the satisfaction of him
that makes the Feast: And it will seem, that in him that goes for his own
satisfaction there is greater Liveliness, then in him that goes for others
satisfaction, and it is not true: for if in him that goes for others
satisfaction, the Affections of his own proper estimation, and of the honor of
the world were not alive, he would not go: in such sort, that albeit he does
not go being drawn by his Appetites, yet he goes being drawn by his own
affections, and by theirs whom he desires to please. It being very true, that
that person that goes for his own satisfaction, satisfies his own Appetites;
and he that goes for others satisfaction, satisfies his own Affections, and
others: It is clear that the satisfaction of the Affections is more
dammageable, and more contrary to the spirit, then that of the Appetites.
Furthermore I consider, that in the eyes of humane wisdom he is reprehended,
and defamed, that is unbridledly alive in his Appetites; And he is praised, and
honored, that is moderate, and temperate in them; and he is esteemed to be a
Saint, that has altogether mortified the^. And on the contrary, he is
esteemed, and prized, that keeps lively his Affections of honor, and his own
particular esteem; and he is esteemed vile, and of no worth, that is in all
these things mortified. Now it being true, that to the eyes of humane wisdom
that always appears great, which to the eyes of the holy Spirit seems little,
and that always appears little to humane wisdom, which appears great to the
holy Spirit, it will easily follow that humane wisdom holding the Appetites
more dammageable then the Affections, the holy Spirit will hold the Affections
more dammageable then the Appetites. Many other things might be considered to
confirm this, but these abundantly suffice to come to my intent, which is this,
that that person, who studies to be like unto Christ, and like unto God, and to
comprehend the Christian perfection, in which he is comprised by the
incorporation whereby he stands incorporated in Christ, must attend to the
Mortification of his Affections and Appetites, always keeping strict account
with them to kill them in that wherein he shall see them alive. But
principally he ought to attend to the mortification of his Affections, as well
for that respect, which we have spoken of, as also because in the death of the
Affections the Appetites dye, But the Affections do not at all dye in the
death of the Appetites, nay it comes to pass, that in the death of the
Appetites the Affections revive: For, as has been said, in in the eyes of
humane wisdom the mortification of the Appetites is very highly esteemed of.

Hereby I understand this, that when any Person kills his Affections by Humane
wisdom, and industry, despising Honor, and reputation of the world, he grows
Vicious, and Licentious; for the Appetites live, and grow unbridled: And when
another Person kills his Affections by the Holy Spirit, he does together
therewith kill his Appetites: by which proof a man may judge of many designs,
and motions pertaining to the despising of the world, whether they be of humane
spirit, or from the Holy Ghost.

I would that in me the Affections were altogether dead, and likewise the
Appetites, so that neither my mind should be delighted with any thing, that
were not spiritual, and divine, nor my body should take of the things of the
world more then that which suffices to maintain, and sustain them in the
world the time that God has ordained, that it should live here! But if so be I
must run out in any thing, and that some kind of Liveliness is to be kpet,
That of the Appetites would less displease me, then that of the Affections. I
would say, I should hold it for less inconvenient to see in me some
Liveliness of Appetites, and to satisfy my self in them, then to see in my
self any Liveliness of Affections, and to satisfy my self, and others in
them. Nay verily if the shame of the world, and the ill example I should give
to spiritual persons did not restrain me, I could scarce contain my self
sometimes from suffering my self to be transported to the satisfaction of my
Appetites, holding it for certain, that by that means I should sooner mortify
my Affections, and that my Affections dying, my Appetites would also dye with
them,

I will add this, that the Affections are mortified, when a man having
opportunity to grow in Honor, and reputation, and in much credit with men,
will not, but renounceth all: And that the Appetites are mortified, when a man
properly may satisfy them, and does not satisfy them.

He that mortifies his Appetites, does kill his flesh, and he that mortifies
his Affections, crucifieth himself entirely with Jesus Christ our Lord.

In saying, that sometimes satisfying my Appetites I should think to mortify my
Affections, I mean that the shame, and confusion, which I should deserve in
having satisfied my Appetites, would be a cause, that I should not think to put
in execution my Affections, and that I should be wary from any more satisfying
my Appetites, as I hold for certain many of those persons prove in themselves,
who attend unto the Spirit, of which Persons only I speak.

CONSID. XXXII. In what consists the abuse, and in what consists the use of
Jmages, and of Holy Scriptures,
I Understand it, that learned men being without the Spirit, do suffer the
self same deceit in the Holy These 32 and 33 Consideratio^s being read
together, may vindicate the Authors good meaning, from his dubi ous and offen
sive expressions in the present Consideration. See the Preface.
Scriptures, which unlearned men without the spirit of God do in Images; in
this manner: An unlearned man keeps a Crucifix of Christ in his Chamber, by
means whereof always when he enters into his chamber, he remembers that
which Christ suffered; And finding Piety, and Religion in this remembrance, he
puts in all other parts of his house other Images like unto that; and knowing
well, that always as he walks up and down his house, and as he goes into the
Churches, and also through many parts of the City, he shall find such like
Images, which will reduce unto his memory that which Christ suffered, he cares
not to imprint in his mind Christ Crucified, contenting himself to see him
Painted: And as long, as he does not keep him in his mind, he neither
feels, nor tastes the Benefit of Christ's Passion. And it comes to pass that
when this unlearned man is moved to demand any thing of Christ, it seeming
sufficient to him to behold him painted with his Bodily Eyes, he cares not to
lift up his mind to behold him with Spiritual Eyes, in such sort, that a man
may say, that he does not pray unto Christ, but unto that Picture.

In the self same manner a learned man without the Spirit keeps written in
Holy Scripture the things, that pertain to a Christian man; that which he
ought to believe, and that which he ought to do; in such sort, that when ever
he gets his book, he understands both the one, and the other: And this seeming
sufficient to him, he imployes all his study, and all his diligence in having
many books, that may declare unto him Holy Scripture, not caring at all to
imprint in his mind that which he reads, and that which he studies in Holy
Scripture, nor to form his opinions, nor his conceits in things pertaining
unto Christian Piety according to that he there reads, and studies. And it
comes to pass, that being desirous to understand some secret of God, and of
spiritual matters, applying himself to seek it in Holy Scripture, he does
not lift up his mind to pray God that he would show it him, and that he would
teach it him, in such sort, that he does take for his aim the spirit of God;
but that which by his own proper nature, and his own proper wit he learnes
from that, which was written by them, who had the spirit of God. And if so be
they suffer this deceit, that handle the Scriptures which were written by the
holy spirit, what may we think is the deceit of them, who handle the writings,
that are written by humane spirit? The unlearned man, that has the spirit,
serves himself of Images as of an Alphabet of Christian Piety; forasmuch as
he so much serves himself of the Picture of Christ Crucified, as much as
serves to imprint in his mind that which Christ suffered, and to taste, and
feel the benefit of Christ. And when he has imprinted him, and tastes, and
feels him, he cares no more for the Picture, leaving it to so serve for an
Alphabet to other beginners: And when he has Christ in his mind, when he is
inspired to demand any thing of Christ, he cares not to set his corporal
eyes on the Picture, but sets his spiritual on the impression, which he keeps
in his mind: In like manner a learned man, that has the spirit, serves
himself of holy Scriptures, as of an Alphabet of Christian piety, wherein he
reads that which appertains to piety, until such time, as it penetrate into
his mind, so that he tastes, and feels not by Judgment, nor by humane
Wisdom, but by his own proper mind, in which he imprints those conceits, and
those opinions of God, which are there written; in such manner, as when there
comes unto him a desire to understand any secret of God, first he goes to the
book of his mind, first he consults with the spirit of God, and afterward he
goes to prove that which he has understood, with that which he finds written
in those holy books; in such sort, as having at first served himself of holy
Scriptures, as of an Alphabet, he afterward leaves them to serve for the same
effect to other beginners, he attending to the inward inspirations, having for
his proper master the spirit of God, and serving himself of holy Scriptures,
as of an holy conversation, and which causes refreshment unto him, altogether
putting from himself all those writings which are written by humane spirit.
And so as well in the unlearned with the spirit, as in the learned with the
spirit, as I understand it in this manner, is fulfilled that, which was
prophesied of the time of the Gospel, where it is said, they shall be all
taught of God, accordingly as they experiment in themselves, who obtain the
spirit, which is communicated by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXIII. In what manner through the patience, and through the
Consolation of the Scriptures we maintain our selves in Hope.
ACcording to S. Paul, we who in this life abide in the kingdom of God,
Maintain our selves in the hope of eternal life through patience, and
consolation of the Scriptures. The patience consists in this, that although
the accomplishment of that which we desire, seem long, we do the more fortify
our minds to hope more and more, no ways departing from confidence. And the
consolation of Scriptures consists in this, that reading in them the promises
of God, we do anew confirm, and fortify our selves in Hope; there betiding
unto us that which betides to one, to whom a Lord promises by his Letters a
thousand Ducats of In-comes, who maintains himself in the Hope to have that
revenew through patience, fotti^ying his heart more and more through hope, when
it seems to him, that the accomplishment of the promise is delayed, no ways
departing from his hope, and comforting himself with the Letter of the Lord,
in which reading the promise, he does anew comfort himself in hope, and anew
confirm himself in the confidence which he has to obtain the revenew which
is promised him. I would say, that like as he supporting the delay, and reading
the Letter conserues himself, till the promise be made good unto him: So we
on the other side bearing the delay of Christ's second coming, and reading the
holy Scriptures, confirm ou^selves, until we come unto that eternal life,
which is promised us by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXIV. In what does consist the benefit which men have obtained from
God by Christ.
A Certain rich man has a woman slave vicious, and ill inclined, who has her
children also vicious, and ill inclined, as her self is. He because they be
such, will not for some time keep them in his house; but at another time for
some other occasion he contents himself to keep and maintain some of them in
his house; and moreover to the end they may more willingly stay with him, it
pleases him to use them as sons. And because he sees their evil
inclination, and sees, that if so be he go by the way of rigor with them, it
will be impossible to keep them in his house, he does not only pardon them for
being born of a vicious and ill inclined slave, (For, for as much as concerns
this point, he did set his mind at quiet, when he took them into his house:)
but he likewise pardons all that which they shall do, being vitiously, and
villanously drawn, and overcome by the evil inclination with which they were
born. And they by the good usage of their Lord, who has made himself a Father
unto the, and by the good customs, that they learn, being in his house, go
leaving that which they inherit from their old, and evil mother, and go
getting that which they see in their new, and good Father: and in this manner
they come to be heirs of the goods of their Lord, who is become unto them a
Father. By this similitude I understand in what Christ's benefit toward men
does consist. The rich man is God. The evil slave is humane nature depraved by
the first transgression. Her sons are all mankind. The house of God is the
kingdom of God. The time, in which God admits men into his kingdom, is the
time of the Gospel. The occasion is the justice of God executed on Jesus
Christ our Lord: For this God is content to admit into his kingdom them that
come unto him, and to hold them for sons, and to use rhem as sons. And
because he knows their evil inclination, and sees, that if he use rigor with
them, it will be impossible for them to keep themselves in his kingdom, he
pardons them not only the fault of their depraved nature, with which they
are born, which is original sin, (for as much as belongs to original sin, he
pardons it, when he admits them to his kingdom;) but also all those things,
which they shall do vitiously, and villanously, being drawn, and overcome by
that evil inclination, with which they were born, (which is proper, and
natural unto them,) whilst they go combating, and contrasting with it.
Whereupon they by the favor of God, who of a Lord is become unto them a
Father, making them sons of slaves, and by the good customs which they
learn continuing in the kingdom of God, go by little and little forsaking that
which they hold of their old, evil, and vicious mother; and go on getting
that which they see in their new, good and heavenly Father, leaving both to
appear, and to be like their mother. And as before they came unto the kingdom
of God^* they had and represented in them the image and the likeness of
depraved nature: so likewise being entered into the kingdom of God, they have
and represent in themselves the image and similitude of God; recovering that
which the first man lost. By this I understand, in what sort a man was created
unto the likeness and similitude o God, and in what does consist the benefit
that men have received by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXV. Whence it is, that that difficulty comes, which pious persons
have to continue in that whith appertains to Piety, and Justification.
Considering that the duty of Piety is for a man to content himself of every
thing which God does, persuading himself and holding for certain, that all
that so comes to him, is Good, and Holy, and Just: And believing that all that
which comes to pass in this present life, comes to pass by divine providence,
without admitting, that anything should come to pass by chance: And
considering that the duty of Christian Faith is to accept with his mind, and
to confess with his mouth the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord. And seeing on
one side in many men that have not the spirit, much conformity to the will of
God, in such manner, that they neither grieve themselves, nor resent out of
measure the death of those persons whom they greatly love, nor for the loss of
goods, nor for the loss of Honor, and that they themselves are content to
dye: And seeing likewise in many other men that have not the spirit, much
acceptance, and much confession of the Gospel without any scruple of doubt at
all. And seeing on the other side, that some spiritual persons grieve
themselves, resent themselves and are very sorrowful for the death of those
persons whom they loved, and for other inconveniences that befall them, and
they cannot bring themselves to be willing to dye, and that they feel the loss
of estate, and the loss of Honor; And seeing also in other persons who have
the spirit, much wavering in the acceptance, and confession of the Gospel,
that they cannot certify, nor confirm themselves of all that is therein; I
have many times set my self to consider the causes, whence these contrary
effects should proceed; forasmuch as it seems, that in him, who has not the
spirit, there should not be conformity with the will of God, nor should he give
credit to the Gospel: and in him that has the spirit, there ought to be both
the one, and the other. And after I have considered the matter, I understand,
that however flesh does sometimes a little contradict flesh, yet in the end
flesh suffers her self to be overcome, and subdued by the flesh: whereupon
there being a man that has not the spirit, as well an affection of the flesh
willing to conform it self with God, as to grieve, to be sorrowful, and to
resent it self for the inconveniences that offer themselves in this present
life, it comes to pass, that one affection overcomming the other, it seems
that such a man does conform himself with the will of God, and it is not true:
For he does not conform himself, but with his own proper will, by which for
his own satisfaction, and for his own designs, he does determine to content
himself of every thing, and to co^form himself in all things with the will of
God.

That this is true, we read in many Books of the Gentiles, and we hear, and
see it in many other Nations altogether Infidels, and others, that counterfeit
faith. Likewise I understand, that there being a man, that has not the spirit,
as well an affection of the flesh to accept, and confess the Gospel, as not
accept, nor confess it, it comes to pass, that one affection overcomming the
other, it seems, that such an one believes the Gospel; and it is not true: for
he does not believe but only his own opinion, and imagination, as the Jew, that
stands stubborn in his Law, and as the Moore, that believes his Alcoran.

On the other side I understand that the flesh always repugnes against the
spirit, always contradicts it, and always struggles with it, by reason of the
great enmity, that is between them two. Whereupon it comes to pass that there
being in a man that has the spirit, an affection of the spirit, that makes him
willing to conform himself with the will of God, contenting himself of every
thing that God does, and repugning, and contrasting with the flesh, which
suffers not it self to be overcome, but after a long space, it comes to pass,
that the man who has the spirit, laments, resents, and is grieved for the
corporal incommodities, and for all those other things, in which the flesh
suffers, and above all things for death, even as we see that the saints of the
Law did grieve themselves, and as S. Paul, a Saint of the Gospel would have
resented it, as himself says, if that friend of his had died; and as the
proper son of God our Lord God Jesus Christ did resent himself.

In like manner I understand, that there being in the man which has the
spirit, an affection of the spirit to be willing to accept, and confess the
Gospel, and the Flesh repugning, and contradicting, because it has no part in
such desire, nor in such will, it comes to pass, that a man that has the
spirit, feels a weakness in his faith, and goes wavering, and doubting in it,
as we have read in some Saints, and as we our selves see it in others; in such
sort, that as from the small contradiction which the affections of the flesh
have amongst themselves, there comes forth an appearance of Piety, and
appearance of Faithin them, that have not the spirit: so from the great
contradiction, that is between the Flesh, and the Spirit, there proceeds in
them that have the spirit a weakness in faith; that befalling in a man, which
befalls in the world, in a Province, or in a commonwealth. I would say, that
as it comes to pass, that when any person speaks, or publishes any thing
with an affection of the spirit, he presently finds a contrast, a
contradiction and outward persecution although it be a thing which is
ordinarily spoken, and practiced, but without the spirit, and out of humane
affections: so likewise when a man goes about through the motion of the spirit
to persuade himself, and confirm himself in any thing pertaining to piety,
or justification, he suddenly, finds an inward contrast, and contradiction:
for his own affections, and his own appetites, which are mortal enemies to the
spirit, rise up against him. And this comes to pass, not withstanding that the
self same things have been formerly accepted, and believed of him by his own
proper affection, and opinion.

Whereupon I gather this conclusion, That it is a sign, that it is the holy
Spirit which works in a man that which sets him in the will, and in the desire
to have much piety, and much faith, when in all this a man finds in himself
much contrast, and much contradiction, and when also the same comes to pass in
that which is exterior unto men. And I resolve my self, that in this
contrast, and in this fight a man ought to labor, and travel much, but
without affliction, or grieving himself; for although the flesh together with
all its affections remain alive, yet the holy spirit should have the victory,
and bethe conqueror. For it is not meet that the son of the slave, that is,
the flesh, should be heir with the son of the Freewoman, that is the spirit,
of those goods that properly belong to the spirit, that is of the knowledge of
God, in the present life, and of the vision of God in life everlasting. And
saying the flesh, I understand the affection of flesh, that which men receive
from Adam, all which must needs dye in us, to the intent that all that may
live, which we can receive from Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVI. In what the Christian Liberty does consist, how it is known,
and how it is exercised.
THat it may be well understood, wherein it is, that Christian liberty does
consist, how it is to be known and how it is to be exercised, it imports much,
to understand first in what the Hebrew servitude does consist, how it was
understood, and how it was exercised. The Hebrew servitude, as I understand it,
proceeded from the command of the law, which menacing, and promising kept men
in servitude, and entreated them as servants. Amongst them, that were of the
Hebrew people, some applied themselves to the law by inspiration, and others
out of opinion; and there were others also, who cared not for the law, living
licentiously; they knew not the Hebrew servitude, neither exercised themselves
in it. They who out of opinion applied themselves to the law, desiring, and
procuring, that the Menaces, wherewith the law threatened trangressors, should
not be executed on them, and that the promise, which the law made to them, that
observed it, might be fulfilled in them, knew the Hebrew servitude, but did
not exercise it as they ought: For being governed by their own proper spirit,
they were most superstitious in some things, and most licentious in other. They
who by inspiration applied themselves unto the law, and exercised themselves in
it, as was meet, desiring the promises thereof, and fearing the threatenings,
knew the Hebrew servi ^ude, seeing that it behoved them always to stand knit
unto the law, and they exercised themselves in it as was meet, holding
themselves for servants, and depending on the will of God for being governed by
the holy spirit, that did inspire them to the fulfilling of the law; they were,
pious, holy, and just, in such sort, that the Hebrew servitude consisted in the
law, and was known when men applied themselves to the observation of the law,
and was exercised, when the application proceeded from the holy spirit. On the
contrary, the Christian liberty consists in the abrogation of the law, which
was altogether abrogated in the coming of the holy spirit, which succeeded in
place of the law to govern the people of God.

Among them, who have the name of Christians, there are some, who feel this
Liberty by the holy spirit: there are others, who divine it by humane spirit;
and there are others, who neither feel, nor divine it*

They who neither feel, nor divine it, are in all points, and altogether like
unto them, amongst the the Hebrew people, who divined the servitude of the law,
being in all things, and altogether most superstitious, obliging and binding
themselves not only to that, which they think to be the law of God, but also to
that which they know to be the law of man and more then this, they themselves
do oblige, and bind themselves to other laws; in such sort, as they know not
in what Christian liberty does consist, neither do they know it, nor exercise
it, living wretchedly in miserable, and hard servitude. They, who by humane
spirit divine Christian liberty, are much like unto them amongst the Hebrew
people, who made no account of the law, they taking away from themselves all
manner of yoke, live licentiously, not knowing, nor exercising the Christian
liberty, as was meet. They are ordinarily impious, and vicious; and I
understand it, that they divine Christian liberty by humane spirit, they who by
their own wit, and Judgment, and by that which they read, and hear, and
understand, that a Christian man is free, not considering whether they be
Christians in such manner, as that Christian liberty appertains to them; grow
to make the licentiousness of the flesh Christian liberty.

They who by the holy spirit feel the Christian liberty, are like as it were
to them amongst the Hebrew people, who through the holy spirit applied
themselves unto the law: They know, that Christian liberty consists in this,
that a Christian shall not be chastized for his evil living, nor shall not be
rewarded for his well living; knowing, that chastizement is for the
unbelievers, and the reward for the faithful: in as much as God will chastize
them, that believe not on Christ, and not believing on him do not accept the
covenant, that he set between God, and man; and that he will reward them
that shall believe in Christ, and accept the covenant of Christ.

They who in this manner know the Christian liberty, having no regard neither
to chastizement, nor to punishment, and having a regard to observe the decorum
of those persons, whom they represent in this present life, that is, to be a
member of Christ the most perfect head, and to live in this life a life like
unto that, which they are to live in eternal life, do well exercise the
Christian liberty: For being governed by the holy spirit, on one side they
find, and know themselves to be free, and exempted from the law, in so much
that it seems to them, that they may say with S. Paul, All things are lawful
unto me: Neither fearing to be chastized for transgression, nor hoping to be
rewarded for observation; in which they feel, and know the Christian liberty.
And on the other side they find, and know themselves obliged to be like unto
Christ in their life, and manners, and therefore they say with S. Paul, all
things are not expedient. And standing in this they exercise themselves in
Christian liberty, in such manner, that Christian liberty consists in the
abrogation of the law, and is known, when men do not fear the chastizement
of the transgression of the law, nor pretend the reward of the observation
thereof. And it is well exercised when men observe the decorum, that belongs to
a Christian, who is a member of Christ, and ought in all his things to be very
conformable to Christ. Hence I gather, that since men, that divine Christian
liberty by humane spirit, and wit, and Judgment, make themselves vicious, and
impious; and not understanding it, make themselves superstitious, and
miserable; and understanding it, knowing it, feeling it, and exercising it by
the holy spirit, become holy, pious, and just, becoming very like unto Christ
our Lord, it is good, that a man should apply himself to understand the
Christian liberty, craving of God his holy spirit, which may cause him to know,
and feel it, and likewise make him to exercise it. And in this manner, neither
will the not knowing it make him to live with superstition, and in misery: nor
the knowing it by humane spirit make him to live licentious in his manners, and
impious in his mind: And to understand it, know it, and exercise it, will make
him to live without fear before God with holiness, This XXXVI. Consideration
says the translatour seems expressed in difficult, and ambiguous words, which
may justly breed exception, if so it be not taken altogether. I confessed
says he) it is one of them, which I do not fully understand. See the Preface.
and Justice all the time of his life, and will afterward set him glorious in
life everlasting with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVII. That they, who know God by men's relation, have a false opinion
of him, and they who know him by the holy spirit, have a good.
THis is always true, that men frame their opinions, and their conceits of
those things, which they know not, according to the relations, and
informations, that men give them of those things. And it comes to pass, that
understanding, that a man takes an affection to every thing, which he sees, we
hold him for vain; And understanding, that he does delight to take money, and
gifts, we hold him for covetous; and understanding, that he does not pardon,
when he is offended, we hold him for cruel, inhumane, and vindicative. In
like manner this is always true, that if it come to pass we have need of
such a man, we do endeavor to gain his good will with those things, which
are according to the opinion and conceit, which we have of him by relation, in
which we continue, and persevere, until such time as holding strait
familiarity with that man, by little, and little we go framing other opinions,
and other conceits. according to that which we our selves know of him.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that now we do not go about to gain his good
will by those things, with which we did at first, following the Relation; But
by those things, which according to our own knowledge seem to us to be to
purpose.

This self same betides us with God: Men being deceived by humane Philosophy,
and by their own wisdom, and reason, which does reach unto the knowledge of
God, and being deceived principally by superstition, and false religion, they
make relation, that God is so delicate, and sensitive, that he is offended for
every thing: that he is so vindicative, that he does chastize all offenses:
that he is so cruel, that he chastizeth them with eternal punishment: that
he is so inhumane, that he de lights, that we should evil entreat our
persons, in so much as to shed our own blood, which he has given unto us; and
that we should deprive our selves of that substance, which he has given unto
us to the end that we should therewith maintain our selves in this present
life: that he does delight, that we should go naked, and barefoot, always
suffering: That he is vain, and that presents do please him, and that he
delights to have gold, and goodly furniture; and in sum, that he delights
himself of all those things, in which a Tyrant does delight, and rejoices to
have from them, that are subject to him. According to this Relation, which men
make us of God, we frame our opinions, and our conceits of God, and so much the
more, in as much as what men tell us by word of mouth, we find written in the
writings of men. And in as much as both they and we, when we begin to read holy
Scripture, have already conceived this opinion of God, and formed these
conceits of him, it comes to pass, that not gathering the true fruit of holy
Scripture, which consists in the knowledge of God, but rather stretching it
out, and understanding it according to that opinion, and to those conceits,
which we bring with us by the Relation of men, it befalls us, that the holy
Scripture, being the Relation of the holy spirit, by means where of we might
conceive a true opinion, and right conceits of God, we make it, that it become
the Relation of men, and that it speaks not that which the holy spirit
intends, but that which humane ignorance imagines. From whence it comes, that
men knowing, that they have need of God, because they hold him for sensitive,
for vindicative, for cruel, live in continual scruples, in continual fear,
and terror, which are things that ordinarily beget hatred. Because we hold him
for inhumane we evil intereat our own persons with fastings, with watchings,
with disciplines, and with all those other things, which the flesh abhorres;
And in this we think much to please God. Because we hold him for covetous, we
offer unto him our goods, and we adorn him with ornaments of gold, and of
silver, and of jewels. And in sum, because we hold him for a Tyrant, we
demean our selves with him in all things, and every where, as we demean our
selves with them that are Tyrants. In this we abide, and in this we persevere
with God all the time that we frame our opinions, and our conceits of God by
the Relation, that we have of men. Whence I understand, that whilst a man
procures to gain Gods good will by these things, he shows, that the opinion,
and conceit, that he has of God is by man's Relation. And if any man shall say
unto me, I do these things to conform my self with others, but I have no
confidence in them, nor I esteem them at all; I shall answer him, that it is a
most difficult thing to understand, whether he trust in them, or no; And I
shall say unto him, Will thou, Brother, understand whether thou trust in the^,
or no? Examine thy self well, whether thou find satisfaction in doing of them
or no? whether thou have a good opinion of them, who do them or no? and
whether thou have an evil opinion of them that do them not, or no? And so
shall thou understand, whether thou have confidence in them or no. And finding,
that thou have confidence in them, hold for certain, that the opinion, and the
conceit, which thou have of God, is by Relation of men.

They who accepting the Gospel, and through the Covenant of Justification,
which is by Jesus Christ our Lord, being made the sons of God, and having
familiarity with God, know God, and get a new opinion of God, and frame new
conceits of God, not now by relation, but by knowledge, and experience; and
going unto the holy Scriptures with their new opinion, and with their new
conceits, find written in it the self same, which they know, and experiment:
They understand, that God is patient, merciful, slow to wrath, and estranged
from revenge, except it be in them, that are the vessels of wrath, whom also
God for sometime tolerates, and co^ports. Understanding this, they drive out of
their minds the scruples the fears, and the terrors; they understand, that God
is full of such loving kindness that to give eternal life to men, he sent
into the world his own son, made a man, on whom he executed the rigor of his
Justice, whereby they know, that he does not delight, that men should evil
entreat their own persons, but that they should in such sort be dispoiled of
self-loue, that being evil entreated upon whatsoever occasion, they should not
be grieved, nor resent themselves; And that he would not, that they should
deprive themselves of their goods, but that they should possess them in such
manner, that being by what ever occasion deprived of them, they should not
esteem it for evil, nor be sorrowful; and that it being necessary to leave
them, God calling them to the preaching, and manifestation of the Gospel, they
should immediately leave them, and deprive themselves of them. Finally these
persons holding this new opinion, and these new conce^ts of God, knowing God
first in Christ, are Just, and holy; and knowing that God delights himself of
holiness, and Justice, they serve him in holiness, and Justice. And also
acknowledging God in these natural things, they content themselves of all
thing, after whatsoever manner they come to pass; they follow willingly that
order, which God has set, without being grieved, or resenting themselves for
any of those things which befall them, holding them all for good, and just, and
holy; although sometimes according to the Judgment of humane wisdom they be
judged the contrary. And because they understand, that God is delighted with
this obedience, and this mortification of humane wisdom, in serving with
obedience, and with mortification, they serve with piety: In this they abide,
whilst they remain in the opinion, and in the conceits, which are had of God
by the familiarity, and by the knowledge, and by the experience that they have
of God, who accept ^he covenant of Justification, which is by Jesus Christour
Lord. They as I understand, not only find no satisfaction in those things,
which they do, who stand in that opinion of God, and in those conceits of God,
which are had by Relation of men; but if they be necessitated to do them, they
feel displeasure, and discontent: And this displeasure, and this discontent in
these things I understand to be a good countersigne for to know, that a man
has now lost the opinion, and those conceits of God which are by Relation of
men, and has obtained that opinion, and those conceits of God, which are by
familiarity, and by the knowledge of God, and by the experience of those things
which are by the spirit of God.

By this Consideration I understand the cause, why a person beginning to have
familiarity with God, and to have experience of the things of the spirit of
God, it seems every day to him, that the knowledge of God is renewed in him,
that is, that he comes anew to know God; and that by reason that holding a
long time imprinted in his mind that opinion of God, and those conceits which
are by Relation of Men, and not being able at once to dispoyle himself of
them, and going leaving them by little and little, he goes on by little and little
receiving that opinion, and those conceits of God, which are by the spirit of
God. Whereupon it comes to pass, that it seems to him to make so many changes
in the knowledge of God, as those are, which he makes in leaving his old
opinion, and his old conceits of God, and in clothing of himself of a new
opinion, and new conceits of God. And because it is also more proportionable to
the depraved nature of man to abide in the first, then in the second, in the
old, then in the new, in that of Adam, then in that of Christ, in that of the
Law, then in that of the Gospel; I understand, that with difficulty does a man
spoil himself of the old, and cloth himself with the new. And I understand,
that to a regenerate man, and renewed by the holy Spirit, it appertains to keep
his mind all his life long, attent to dispoyle himself of that opinion, and of
those conceits of God, which are by Relation of men; and to cloth himself of
that opinion, and of those conceits of God, which are by Revelation of the
spirit of God, which is obtained by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XXXVIII. By a comparison is showed in what the error of false
Christians does consist, and what thing that is which true Christians do.
THis is certain, that all of us would judge, and hold them for very sots, and
very fools, who finding themselves banished from a kingdom by their demerits,
and there being presented unto them on their Kings behalf a Patent subscribed
with his name, and sealed with his seal* by which he pardons them, and enables
them to return unto the Kingdom, and they taking the Patent, and
acknowledging the ^ngs hand in it, and the Kings seal, should not care at all
to co^ ^to the kingdom, setting themselves to examine, whether the seal, with
which that Pattent was sealed, were of gold, or of brass; and occupying
themselves in adoring, and adorning it, themselves always abiding in exile,
and deprived of the kingdom, and deprived of the Kings Grace, procuring by
other means, and by other ways to have that selfsame, which the King had
freely, and liberally given unto them by that Patent of his, which they had
read, and acknowledged, and which they adore, and observe with reverence, doing
in it, and with it that which is of no importance to them, to that purpose for
which the King sent it unto them. For that which belonged to them to do, if so
be they were wise, were in receiving, and acknowledging the Patent to come unto
the kingdom, and to accept the Kings Grace, and afterward to conserve, and
well keep that his Patent in testimony of their pardon, and thereby should they
know from the Kings hand, and from his seal what ever concerned them to know.

By this comparison, or similitude I understand what a man ought to do
presently after he comes to the knowledge of the Evangelicall preaching, which
is like unto a Patent, by which God freely and liberally pardons all those
misdoings, by reason whereof we remain in exile, and out of his kingdom, and
he does enable us to return, and to enter into it, and to recover his favor,
and together with it his Image, and similitude. And I understand also how
great, and wherein the error, the sottishness, and the folly of men does
consist, who reading the Gospel, approving it, and holding it for true, and
yet not relying upon that which it promises, nor entering into the kingdom of
God, nor making peace with God, do occupy themselves in examining and
verifying curious matters of God, and of Christ, such as appertain not to them,
and are not profitable unto them; and do occupy themselves in serving God, and
Christ in those things which are not required of them, nor are acceptable unto
him, and by which they do peradventure more procure the wrath of God against
themselves. In this error I understand it, all men come, who govern themselves
in Gods affairs with humane wisdom, not knowing God, nor knowing Jesus Christ
our Lord.

CONSID. XXXIX. That Quickening answers to Mortification, and the glory of the
Resurrection answers to Quickening.
THis is certain, that as soon as a man being inspired of God accepts the
covenant of justification by Jesus Christ our Lord, he begins to dye unto the
world, and to live unto God, to dye unto Adam, and to live unto Christ, to come
out of the kingdom of the world, and to enter into the kingdom of God: And
that at that time which a man dies, the soul being separated from the body,
he does accomplish his dying to the world, his dying to Adam, and his coming
out of the kingdom of the world; and that when he shall arise again, his soul
returning to unite it self with the body, he shall live perfectly, and
entirely unto God; he shall live unto Christ, and shall abide in the kingdom
of God. Whereupon considering the difference that is betwixt the state of a man
however much mortified he be to Adam, and to the world, whilst his soul
remains with his body, and the estate of another man already dead, his soul
being severed from his body, I understand the difference that shall be between
the estate of a man, how much soever mortified he be to God, and to Christ,
whilst he continues in this present life, from that estate in which he shall
stand being raised to God, and to Christ in eternal life: understanding that
there shall be without all compare greater difference between the state of the
Resurrection, and that of Vivification, then is between the state of Death, and
that of Mortification, although this should be never so great. I would say,
that much greater is the difference between a man raised up, and him that is
quickened, then that which is between a man that is dead, and him that is
mortified; understanding that the mortified stands as it were dead, standing
^rucified unto the world, and unto himself rather in the other life then in
this; and that he who is quickened, stands as it were not raised up, standing
subject to passions and to death, from all which he is free in the
Resurrection. And understanding all this, I use so to call Mortification an
imperfect death, and vivification an imperfect resurrection. And I understand,
that such shall the resurrection ^e in eternal life, as the Vivification is in
the present: I would say, that the glory of the resurrection shall answer to
the perfection of the Vivification. Whence I gather, that since Vivification
answers to mortification in this present life, and that the glory of the
resurrection in eternal life shall answer unto vivification, it belongs to the
pious Christian, who desires to live eternal life, to attend to mortify
himself much, to become much like to Christ in his death, that he may be
likewise much like to Christ in his surrection* in which a man shall
perpetually abide in the kingdom of God, together with the son of God himself
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XL. Two Wills in God, one Mediate, and another Immediate.
IN God I consider two Wills, one Mediate, and General, and another Immediate,
and Particular. With one I understand it, he governs the universe; And with the
other, I understand, he governs those, who are redeemed by Christ. Of the one I
understand all the creatures are the executioners every one in his degree, and
office; and of the other I understand, the holy Spirit is the executioner, and
the persons which are partakers of the self same spirit.

Furthermore I understand, that men do oftimes grieve themselves for those
effects which result from the Mediate Will of God, because it seems to them to
redound unto their damage. And I understand, that of those effects, which
result from the Immediate Will of God, those persons to whom they appertain,
do always rejoice, because they always redound to their good. The effects of
the Mediate Will I understand to be those, which result from the heavenly
influences, and other natural causes, which following the order that God has
set, do sometimes hurt, and sometimes help. This order, and this course I
understand, is sometimes altered by the Immediate Will of God; and I understand
it, is sometimes restrained by the self same Will. And in this alteration, and
restraint I understand, that one part of that Will of God, which we call
Immediate, does con^ist; because it follows not the common and general
order: The other part of the Immediate Will of God I understand consists in
those things which he himself does by his word, and by the holy Spirit; such
as are the Creation of the world, and particularly that of Man; the Reparation
of mankind by Jesus Christ; the Vocation of the participation of this good;
the Justification, with all the other spiritual knowledges, and feelings. To
this Immediate Will of God I understand a man was subject in his first
creation: And I understand, that in sinning he made himself subject to the
Mediate Will of God, under which subjection I understand all evils do
consist, and all troubles, to which our humane nature is subject, amongst which
death is a most principal one.

In this discourse that has been said, I understand two things; the one, that
Adam disobeying God made us subject to that Will of God, which is Mediate, and
the^eupon to evils, and to death: And that Christ obeying God returns his to
the subjection, and to the Will of God, which is Immediate; and therefore he
frees them from evils, and from death: From death he frees them, habilitating
them unto the Resurrection, in which they shall live an eternal life: And from
evils he does sometimes free them, causing that those should not touch them,
which should touch them according to ordinary course; At other times depriving
them of the feeling of them; and othertimes mortifying them therewith: In such
sort that the evil is converted into good, in such sort, that like as he does
not in such manner free them from death, that they should not dye, but he does
abilitate them to a most happy everlasting life; so neither does he free them
from evils, in such sort, as they should not touch them, but he does
abilitate them to draw good out of these evils.

The other thing which I understand, is that the continual sighing of a man,
that feels, or begins to feel in himself the benefit of Christ, ought to be
desiring, and demanding to be freed from the subjection of Gods Mediate Will,
and return under that Will which is Immediate. For God being soveraignly good,
or rather good it self, in that Immediate Will of his there can be nothing but
that which is such as he himself. And I think assuredly, that Christ
counselling his to say, Thy will be done, does coun^ell them to have this
desire, of which I have spoken, and that they should always sigh ^n this
m^nner; as if he should have said; Crave of God that he would make you exempt
from that ordinary Regiment, and government, and make you free from the
government of his Mediate Will, and that he set you in that of his Immediate
Will; in such sort, that like as the heavenly armies are immediately governed of
God, so you also, that are on earth, may be immediately governed of God!

Whence I gather, that when a pious person shall feel himself troubled, and
molested in his body, or in his mind, it shall be well, that attributing that
trouble, and molestation to the subjection of that will of God, which is
mediate, he should feel in himself the evil of Adam; and that desiring, and
sighing to feel the good of Christ, he should say to God, Thy will be done!
Free me, Lord, from this thy mediate, and general will, and set me in thy
immediate, and particular will! deprive me of the feeling of evil of the
disobedience of Adam and set me in the feeling of good of the obedience of
Christ! They who say these words, Thy will be done, and understand it not in
this manner, if they shall well examine their minds, I am assured they shall
find they say, because they cannot choose: for if so be they could cause that
God should do that which they would, they would not easily remit themselves to
the Will of God: but when they cannot put in execution their own wills, they
say unto God, Thy will be done, making a virtue of necessity. They who say unto
God, Thy will be done, pretending as is said, to be subject to the Will of
God, that is Immediate, they say it with all their mind, they say it with the
holy Spirit, and they say it in that sense which Jesus Christ our Savior
intended it should be said.

I do not understand, that in that Will of God, which I call Mediate, there is
not a particular providence of God, but I understand, that that providence is
general to many persons, such as is to rain, the sun shine etc. of which
things many enjoy their parts. And the Immediate Will I understand it is a more
particular, and more favorable providence with them who are elected, such as
it was in giving us Christ, and such as are other favors, which are done more
to one then to another, of which sometimes some wicked like wise have their
part, although that be not Gods princip^l intent: so as when he staid the Sun
through Ioshuah's prayers; of that favor many wicked had their part, as man
may say, by chance, the people of God enjoying it much otherwise, because they
felt the favor of God. In this selfsame manner a man may discourse through
all outward favors, which God does unto his, of which others likewise that are
not his, do always enjoy some part, but they do not know that more
particular, and more favorable providence, and Will of God, and so as much as
concerns them, they are things that come by chance.

I resolve therefore my self in this, that saying the Mediate Will of God, I
understand that particular providence of God, which is with natural order, in
which always God does concur; and that saying the Immediate Will of God, I
understand the more particular, and favorable providence of God, by which the
natural order is altered. And to this I attribute all that which God works in
his, and for his. And I call them his, who are incorporated with Jesus Christ
our Lord,

CONSID. XLI. That God will, that Pious Persons should know that all things are
to come from him, and that they should pretend to have them all of him.
COnsidering that Jesus Christ our Lord certifies every pious person, that he
shall obtain from his eternal Father all that which with confidence he shall
demand in Prayer; and experimenting in my self, and finding the selfsame
experience in other persons addicted unto piety, that sometimes I do less
fully obtain that which I demand, when to my seeming I have most confidence in
prayer; And that sometimes I do obtain that which I demand, when to my seeming
I have less confidence in prayer; I suppose that God so demands of a man
confidence in his prayers, as he demands of him all his love. God well knows
that a man cannot Love him with all his heart; and he well knows, that he
cannot have confidence in prayer; for both the one, and the other is contrary
to his natural inclination; and it is necessary, that both the one, and the
other should come from him. And he requires it of man, because man should know
himself, and knowing himself should humble himself, and remit himself to
the mercy of God, and should not pretend to be able to do any thing of
himself. And because he knows that a man's mind is most arrogant, he is
sometimes the more deaf to a man's petition, when it seems to a man himself to
have greatest confidence in his prayer. This God does, to the intent, that a
man should not attribute that to his own confidence, which he obtaines by
prayer; and to the intent, that he should understand the difference between
that confidence, which is properly his own and that which comes from God: And
to the inten^ ^e mig^ (...) that (...) ^akes and not of him and that he loves
him, sometimes he gives him that which he demands, when to his own seeming
he has least confidence; other times he gives it him without demanding, only
upon desiring; and sometimes he gives him that, which he would, it may be,
desire, without any desiring at all. Whereupon I understand, that God would
have from a man, that he should apply his mind to give all his love unto him;
to have confidence only in him, to hope from him all whatever appertains to
this present life, or to the future. With this application, and with this
propension I understand, that a man obtaines two principal things; the one,
that God winkes at his coldness in love, his weakness in confidence, and his
impatience in hope; and the other, that God himself by little, and little goes
inflaming him in love, fortifying him in confidence, and animating him in hope;
and so he comes to fulfill that, which Jesus Christ our Lord promised.

CONSID. XLII. In what sort a pious person ought to govern himself in the
state of prosperity, and in inward adversity.
IT comes to pass, that a pious person finding himself in a dry, and
discontented estate, finds himself likewise without confidence, and as it
were an Infidel. And it comes to pass, that the self same finding himself
in another estate with satisfaction, and with joy, and content, finds himself
together therewith full of confidence, and full of faith, whereupon the enemy
of mankind willing to disturb his felicity, comes to persuade him, that he
trusts, and believes for the good, which he finds in himself, in such sort
that he has confidence in himself and not in God; And it is clean contrary.
And therefore the pious person finding himself in that first estate, shall
know, and understand, what he is of himself what his own being is, and the
being which he has from Adam, and shall think, because he has at other
times felt the favor of God, he feels in that estate his disfavour, for as
much as none ever feels the disfavour, but he that has felt the favor: And
so thinking shall assure himself of his election, of his vocation, and
prededestination, and shall say, The self same God, who without my desert has
at other times favored me, shall draw me out of this disfavour, and return
me unto his favor.

When a pious person shall find himself in the estate of prosperity, he shall
know, and understand that which he is through God, and the being, which he
has from God, and the being which he has through Christ, and shall know in
himself the presence of God, unto which he shall attribute his loving, his
confidence, his believing, and his hope, knowing that they are all the gifts of
God, having already known, what he is of himself, what he is without God.

In this manner knowing himself in that first estate deprived of the presence
of God, and knowing God in the second state, and being rich by the presence of
God, he shall much augment himself in the knowledge of himself, and in the
knowledge of God: And this, as Solomon says, is all that belongs to a man. He
would say that Hoc est omnes homo.
herein consists all his being, and all the perfection of a man, that he
should know, that his being, and his perfection comes from God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Addition.
I do not mean, that Justification answers to Faith, but that they, who
believe, enjoy Justification of the Justice of God executed in Christ. And I
understand, that a man being Just by this Justice, does as much prize himself*
or esteem himself, or vainglory himself, as much as the theife, who is
taken from the Gallows in The Week before Easter.
the Holy Week, prizeth himself, esteems himself, and vaine-glories
himself for his deliverance: Men never esteem themselves* but for that
wherein they find, and know their own proper virtue: I speak of them, who
have good judgment. And if any man shall say unto me, wherefore does S. Paul so
much prize himself, and glory for his being a Christian^ I will answer him,
that S. Paul did not prize himself of himself for his own glory, but he did
prize himself of Christ for the glory of God: as the thief prizing himself
for his deliverance glories not, nor prizeth himself for his proper glory,
but prizeth himself, as a man may say, of the Holy Week for the glory of
Christ.

CONSID. XLIII. How a pious person may assure himself to have obtained Piety,
and Justification by the Spirit, and not by Humane wisdom.
FOr as much as I understand that amongst other things with which the evil
Spirits disquiet, and molest the thoughts of persons applied unto piety, one is
to persuade them, that the knowledge, which they have of God, and of Christ,
and that understanding of the spiritual things of the holy Spirit, is not
gotten by them through Revelation, or inward Inspiration, as they obtain it
who are elected of God, and as it ought to be, to the intent, that that
blessedness, for which our Savior pronounced S. Peter blessed; may reach unto
them; but by humane wisdom* by Judgment, and by humane industry, as those men
obtain it, who are not elected of God, and therefore are neither held; nor
called blessed. And because understanding this I desire, that they, who know
God and Christ by the holy spirit, should understand their good, and their
felicity, I say that every pious person and just by the Justice executed in
Christ, being solicited with such imaginations, and with such persuasions,
should for the first hold it certain, that his piety, and his justification
were not the work of the holy Spirit, he should not be solicited with such
imaginations, nor with such persuasions. For flesh is never contrary unto
flesh, and it is always contrary to the spirit. And therefore the evil
spirits, who, as David says, seek ill thoughts, serving themselves of the
enmity that is between the flesh and the holy Spirit, do disturb the Spirit
with such imaginations, and with such persuasions. If they cannot by such
means drive away from them such kind of imaginations, and persuasions, let
them compare that which they know of God and of Christ, and that which they
understand of spiritual things by the operation of the holy spirit himself,
with that which men of the world, who are prized and esteemed for their wits,
and judgments, and for their industries, do commonly understand, who have read
the same things, which they have, and have heard the same things which they
have, and pretend that self same, which they do. And finding it, as indeed
they shall find it, that it is much different, and very diverse, and of
another quality; that which they know of God, and of Christ, and that which
they understand of spiritual things by means of the holy spirit himself,
from that which commonly men know, and understand; They may well certify
themselves, that neither by wi^* nor by Judgment, nor by humane Industry they
have obtained the grace of Piety, and the grace of Justification, b^t properly
by divine revelation, and by divine inspiration, and by the holy Spirit; except
they be so presumptuous, and so arrogant, that they think themselves to have
more wit, and more industry, and more judgment, then other men. But this
thought is always far from those persons which are elected of God to the
participation of the grace, and favor of God, which is preached amongst men in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLIIII. In what manner a man shall know what fruit he has made in
Mortification* and what is the cause, that they, who apply themselves to Piety,
are solicited by Affections, and Appetites, with which they were never before
solicited.
I Understand, that when a person would understand the profit that he has made
in mortification, I would say, what affections, and appetites he has
mortified, he shall know it by examining himself thoroughly, what affections,
and appetites he has found alive in himself and entire, being solicited by
them. And considering what, and which of them are now dead, and mortified, he
shall understand what profit he has made in mortification. For I understand,
that he, who has never felt the shame to speak of the Justice of Christ, has
not mortified the affection of shame, which is proper, and natural unto man:
And he, that has felt the shame, and now no more feels it, he it is that has
mortified it; as S. Paul had mortified it, according as he shows, saying, that
he was not ashamed to preach the Gospel. And I understand, that if he had
never been ashamed, he would never have gloried in not being ashamed. In like
manner I understand, that none has mortified the affection of the honor of
the world, and of his own proper esteem, but he that having been solicited
thereunto, and having combated is now no more solicited. This self same I
understand of the affections of anger, of envy, of hatred, and of revenge, as I
likewise understand it of the seusuall appetites: Understanding, that none has
mortified the carnal appetite, but he, that having been solicited by it, and
having combated with it, is no more solicited. This self same I understand of
that Appetite, which delights to see things that please the eyes, and to eat
things, that please the taste, and to hear vain things and matters of the
world, and to smell delicate things, understanding it, that he only may say,
that he is mortified in these appetites, who having been solicited, and
molested by them, and having combated with them, is is now reduced to such
terms, that either he feels them not, or is so much master of them, that with
^ase he overcomes them, when ever they molest him. And because none dies, but
he that has lived, it being necessary, that in them who are to be quickened,
all that, which is according to the flesh, should die, as well touching
affections, as appetites, I understand, that all this being to die in the
regenerated, it is the work of God, that presently when a man sets himself to
piety, he should be molested, and solicited not only from those affections,
and appetites, with which he was formerly solicited, but moreover with others,
which he never before felt, being different, yea and very strange ones; to the
intent that feeling them alive he may kill them, and killing them, his
regeneration should be made perfect, as appertains to them that are members of
the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CGNSID. XLV. Whence the fear of death proceeds in pious persons, and that it
is a sign of Predestination for a man to content himself, that there should
be another life.
VVIlling to understand whence it proceeds, that many estranged from piety have
voluntarily offered themselves unto Death and have willed, and desired it, and
have themselves killed themselves; And many pious are grieved, and much resent
the remembrance of Death, not being able to reduce themselves to be content to
die, which according to humane reason ought to be clean contrary; In as much,
as they who are estranged from piety either do not believe the other life, or
are doubtful of it, or do not think to be happy in it; And in as much as
they who are pious, believe the other life, and are very certain of it, and
are assured that they shall be happy in it; I come to think after this manner,
that amongst them who are estranged from piety, some do not fear death for
some opinions whereof they are persuaded; and others because they hold it for a
point of valor not to fear it; And others love death, believing that they
shall get fame by dying; and others, because it is troublesome, and painful
unto them to live in necessity, or in dishonor, wherein they do, as the
sick-patient, that puts himself into hazard of running into a greater
infirmity through desire of coming out of that less which he feels. In all
these I consider their own proper rashness, their own proper folly, and
their own proper impatiency. Moreover I think, that amongst the pious, that
fear death, some fear it because they are not thoroughly confirmed in piety,
nor thoroughly assured of that Justice, by which eternal life is obtained;
others fear it through natural instinct, it being Gods doing that men should
fear Death, and love life, to the intent they may preserve themselves in life;
and others fear it, in as much as it is given to men in punishment of their
sin, it being Gods doing, that a man should feel as a punishment that which
is given him as a punishment by general sentence, which belongs to every man,
as indeed the evil of original sin belongs to every man.

In every of these I know piety, Justice, and holiness, albeit, in the first
I know weakness, and infirmity, as I also know in those pious persons, who
without feeling the inward Inspiration, that God would have them to die, do
desire, and love Death. For this desire is not free from some branch of
impatiency, like unto that of them, who are strangers from piety.

Whence I take this resolution, that for as much as in them, who are strangers
from piety, the not fearing of death, and the loving it, proceeds from
rashness, folly, and impatiency; and the fearing of death in the pious
proceeds from piety, Justice, and holiness; that neither the stranger from
piety has cause to exalt himself, when he fears not Death; nor the pious
has cause to be sorrowful, when he finds himself fearful of Death:
knowthat the fear comes to him through weakness and infirmity, for his small
assurance, and firmenes^e in his confidence; or it comes to him by natural
inclination, or it comes to him through sense of the punishment of sin, which
is effectual in all them that appertain to the people of God, yea even when
themselves think it not so. Whereupon if a man shall say, that Christ having
satisfied for original sin, they who are his members, ought not to feel the
punishment, or chastisement of death, I shall say unto him, that Christ did not
revoke that sentence given against us, whereby we are all obliged to Death, but
that he remedyed it by his resurrection, in such sort as we die by Adam, and
shall rise again by Christ.

I also take another resolution, that is, that a pious person does then content
himself of Death, as pious, when by his death the glory of God is illustrated;
as the Christian Martyrs did content themselves; and when it is Gods will, that
he should die. For then, as I understand, God gives him content, in such sort,
as when a pious person feels in himself a strong fear of Death, not being
able to bring himself to be content to die, he may hold for certain, that
God will not at that time take him from this life: And he ought to think that
as long as he fears, the natural inclination, and the chastizement of sin
work their effects in him, and so he will not be grieved, nor account
himself Iesse in piety for this matter. They that are strangers from piety,
when they least fear Death, and when they have most brought themselves to be
contented with it, if they wouid speak truth, will confess, that if it were
in their power, they would not that their should be any other life; for they
are not certain to be happy therein. And they who are pious, when they most
fear Death, speaking the truth will confess, that they would not be
contented, that there were no other life, feeling within themselves that God
has not created them for this, but for another. And for a man to be thus not
contented of this life only, as I understand it, is a great countersigne for a
man to be assured of his piety, and of his Predestination. For I hold for
certain, that to them, to whom God means to give eternal life, he does also
put a great love, and great affection of it, in such sort, that he who shall
find in his mind a desire that there were no other life, let him hold
himself impious, although he would choose to die, and let him not despair.
For albeit he be out of piety, he ought to think, that God is able to draw
him out of it, as he has drawn, and does draw all them that have been, and
are in it. And he who shall find in his mind a love of eternal life, not
contenting himself with ^his present, may hold himself for pious, and for
predestined unto life everlasting, although he fear death, considering all
this, which has been said, and above all, that even the only Begotten Son
of God feared Death, Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLVI. That they, who walk through the Christian path without the
inward light of the holy Spirit, are like unto them that walk in the night
without the light of the Sun.
ALL they, who being guided only by their natural light, and by humane wisdom
presume to understand the things that are of the Spirit of God, and to walk in
the Christian way, that is, to live Christianly, I liken them to a man, that
goes by night with the light only of his own eyes, through a way that is full
of dangers, and inconveniences. And it seems to me, that as to such a one
sometimes a piece of wood will seem a thief, and a stone an armed man, and
thereupon he will fly, and be afraid; and another time the water will seem a
stone, and he will wet himself, and the shadow will seem to him a tree, and
thinking to lean to it he will fall on the ground: Even so neither more nor
less he that walks Gods way being guided by his natural light, is sometimes
affrighted by those things which ought not to affright him, and is sometimes
secured, and reposeth himself on those things, on which he ought not to
secure, nor repose. And so going he goes on groping like a man amazed, and
without knowing what he does. He that walks by the light of the holy
Scripture, and by the examples of Saints, but without the Spirit, I liken him
unto one, that walks by night carrying a candle in his hand, and goes not
altogether in the dark: but yet notwitstanding he goes not without fear, nor
he goes not secure in his mind, nor certain not to fall into many
inconveniences. Whereupon I understand, that as to the traveller, of whom I
have spoken, that travels by night, by the light of his own eyes only, the
best, and most wholesome counsel that could be given him, were, that he
should stay in his journey whilst the night lasts, until such time as the
^unne were risen, and would show him the way, and the things that are in it,
and he might travel, being helped by the light of his own eyes. Even so to
him, that walks Gods way only with his natural light, with the testimony of
Scriptures, and with the example of Saints, the best, and most wholesome
counsel that could be given him, is, that he should firm himself in his
journey, whilst the night of his own proper blindness continues, until such
time that God send him his spirit, by means whereof with his natural light^,
and with his wisdom, he may be able well to understand the journee, and to
see all that is therein. And if any person shall demand me, saying, How shall I
do to firm my self in this journey? I will answer him, Exercise not thy
self in any thing pretending Justification thereby nor Religion of any sort,
nor of any quality; and pray God affectionately, Pretending ^erit.
that he would send thee his Spirit, which may be unto thee as a Sun in this
journey, wherein by thine own wisdom, thou neither know, nor can
travel; and stand attentive all the time, that God shall defer to send unto
thee his Spirit, applying thy self to all those things, which offer themselves
to thee, in which thou know true piety without any mixture of superstition,
and content thy self of whatsoever God does, and be discontented of all
whatever thou do thy self. This is that which I should say unto him. And I
understand, that as if the sun should break forth altogether with all his
splendour, it would in such sort blind the eyes of the Traveller, of whom I have
spoken, that he would not be able to make any more use of them, then as if it
were night: Even so in like manner if the Spirit of God should at once give
unto a person all that knowledge, which he gives in lengh of time, it would
blind him, and put him in greater inconvenience, then at first. And because
this is true, I understand that our God, rich in liberality, and in mercy,
gives unto us his spirit, and he gives it unto us in such manner, as it may
help, and not harm us, not according to our appetites, but according to his
eternal wisdom, by which as a good Father he governs them, who are his
sons remaining incorporated in his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLVII. Four Counter-signes to know them by, who pretend piety, and
the spirit, not having either the one, or the other.
Understanding that the false Prophets, of whom our Lord Jesus Christ
counsels us to beware, because they show themselves as Sheep and are Wolves,
are properly those, who having entered themselves into Christian piety,
pretending by their own exercises, and by their own industry to obtain the
spirit of God, and to become spiritual, and not being able to compass their
intent, remain always impious in their minds, although they dissemble, and
feign piety as much as it may be feigned with strange superstitio^ns, and
other ceremonies, which have an appearance of piety: and understanding likewise
that the cause, why Jesus Christ our Lord ^aith unto us, That we should beware
of them, is because they are the most pernicious pestilence that can be for
them who attend unto piety, in as much as having. ^ost the shame of the world,
and having renounced honor, and outward reputation, and having lost the
respect unto God, and to all religion, they do only attend to do all the
damage that they can to piety, and to those persons that attend unto it,
finding the door open thereunto by the communication, and conversation that
they have with such persons. Now desiring that pious, and spiritual persons
should know these kinds of Wolves that make themselus Sheep, and knowing them,
should beware to converse and deal with them, with that dove-like simplicity,
which they have obtained through the holy Spirit, using that serpentine wisdom
which is natural unto them; I have considered four countersignes, whereby
spiritual persons may discover, whether he that comes unto them, comes called
of God, or comes on his own designs being called by his own proper love I
would say, whether he, that despising that false religion which the men of the
world follow, would apply himself unto that true religion, which the sons of
God follow, comes freed from the deceit by his own wisdom and by his own
humane reason, or purely by the participation of the holy spirit. For as I
understand, they who come to be freed from the deceit of false religions by
humane wisdom, are always impious, and are pernicious to spiritual persons.
The first countersigne, is The great affection to spiritual things, being
delighted in them, and running after them with anxiety. And I call spiritual
things all those things which are properly of the holy spirit, and are inward,
and divine things, such as are the reading of holy Scripture, dis^urses of holy
things, continual prayer, and continual adoration in the spirit, that is, for
a man to be contented with what ever God does, holding it for holy, and for
just, and for good, as much as the frailty of the flesh permits.

The second Countersigne is The total abhorring of all those conversations,
and of all those readings of men, and of books, in which there is no part of
the holy spirit to be seen. For I understand, that a man that has truly tasted
the conversation, and the reading of those persons, and of those books, in
which the holy spirit is, cannot taste other men, and other books; and if he
do relish them, it is a sign he has not tasted those other.

The third Countersigne is To approve the things of the holy Spirit, the
conceits, and the knowledges, and the apprehensions, that are obtained by the
holy spirit, and that with the mind, and not with the wit. Humane wisdom does
sometimes approve spiritual things not with the mind, but with the wit, and
by opinion, and not by inward sense. And I understand it, that a man that has
the inward feeling, does easily know when one approves it with his mind, or
with his wit.

The fourth Countersigne is The Mortification of the mind, and of the body; of
the mind in all the affections, that are according to the world, amongst which
I put especially, Curiosity, in what way soever it come palliated, and adorned,
and of the body in all the appetites that are according to the flesh. Humane
wisdom approues and teaches mortification; but however much it approve, and
teach it, there never was yet, nor never shall be man, that without the
Christian spirit, I would say, without remaining incorporated in Christ, can
obtain it in such sort that it may not be easily discerned by him that shall
in part have got it by Jesus Christ our Lord. And therefore I resolve my self
in this, that pious and Christian persons may securely admit unto their
conversation, and acquaintance those men whom they shall see affectioned unto
spiritual things, drawn away, and disenamoured from those things in which the
holy spirit has no part; and those of whom they shall see the things of the
holy spirit to be approved, and in whom they shall see true mortification,
holding for certain, that humane wisdom, and humane craft suffices not to
feign, nor to dissemble in all these things, although it suffice for some of
them, and even in this not altogether, but in part. And this part is easily
discovered by pious persons, and Christian, to whom it appertains, to use the
Serpentine wisdom in such sort, that making use of these four Countersignes,
they shall know those who come unto them making show of sheep, being indeed
wolves, and so doing they shall make use of that help, which Jesus Christ our
Lord gives.

CONSID. XLVIII. That he who prays, and works and understands, does then
pray, work, and understand as he ought, when he is inspired to pray to
work, and to understand.
S. Paul, in the 8 to the Romans understands, that Prayer is one amongst those
other things, wherein in our weaknesses, and infirmities we are favored of
God, and helped by the Spirit of God: And so he says, that we not knowing how
to pray as we ought, the Spirit of God prays for us. Whereby I understand,
that then holy Spirit prays for us, when it moves us, and when it moves us to
pray, for then it prays in us. And I understand, that he, who prays with the
Spirit of God, demands that which is the will of God, and so he does obtain
what he will. And he who prays with his own Spirit demands that which is his
own will, wherein consists the not knowing neither what, nor how we ought to
pray.

Man's mind is presumptuous, and arrogant; and not willing to yield, that it
knows not what, nor how, it ought to pray, says, I will crave of God, that
he should do his own will, and so I cannot err: and does not consider, that
to pray in this manner, comes because a man cannot choose, and that
peradventure it would not go well with him, nor is convenient, that God should
do his will; as it was not convenient for Ezekias, when death was intimated
unto him; and that he does not know how he shall content himself, and conform
with the will of God. But man not willing to give himself as overcome, no not
by this neither, says, I will demand of God, that he would cause, that I
should content my self with that which shall be his will, and so I shall be
sure to hit the mark; and does not consider, that oftentimes it is better for
a man not to content himself; nor to conform himself with Gods will: as it
was better for Hezekias, and as it is better for those persons, who grieving,
and resenting themselves for that which God does, come to re-acknowledge
themselves, and to know God, and to humble themselves, and to exalt God, in
such sort, as will they, nill they, man's mind is forced to confess that which
S. Paul says, that we know not what, nor how we ought to pray. And he who
confesses this, understanding from the self same S. Paul, that the Spirit of
God prays for us, and in us, will apply himself to pray God, that he would
give him his Spirit to pray for him, and in him. When he, that prays by humane
Spirit says those words of the Pater noster, Thy will be done, albeit they be
words spoken with the Spirit of God, he does not pray with the Spirit of God,
because he does not pray being inspired, but taught. And S. Paul does not say;
That the holy Spirit teaches us to pray, but that he prays by us, and that
he prays in us. I will add this, That they, who pray with their own proper
Spirit, when they obtain that which they demand in Prayer, they feel in their
minds a contentedness mixed with pride, and with self estimation; and they
who pray with the holy Spirit, obtaining that which they demand in their
Prayers, feel a most excessive content mingled with humility, and with
Mortification. And I hold that these feelings are sufficient to give a person
entire knowledge, whether he pray with his own Spirit, or with the holy
Spirit. It is very true, that in case a man have never prayed with the holy
Spirit, he cannot make this difference. Cornelius prayed with the holy Spirit
before S. Peter went to his house, yet he did not understand, that he prayed
with the holy Spirit; But he understood it afterward, when by S. Peter's
means he had obtained of God even more then he pretended; I mean not, more
then the Spirit of God, which prayed by him, and in him, but more then
Cornelius himself pretended unto in his own mind; in such sort, that
oftentimes the Spirit of God prays in us, and by us, without our knowledge,
that it is the holy Spirit that prays, and what that thing is, which in
Prayer is demanded. The self same I understand in working as in Prayer: For S.
Paul likewise puts them for gifts of the holy Spirit, to minister, that is, to
do service to our Neighbor, and the exercise of Charity. And I understand,
that because we do not know, not how, nor when to work, God gives us his
Spirit, that should work in us.

Humane wisdom, that always opposes it self to the Spirit of God, pretends
to know how to work, and when it does work it works for its own proper
benefit, it works for its own proper glory, and for its own proper
satisfaction, and not purely for the benefits of his Neighbor, not for Gods
glory, not for the satisfaction of them that love God, and therefore it knows
not nor how, nor when it ought to work. On the contrary, the Spirit of God
works for the profit of the Neighbor, for the satisfaction of them that love
God, and it works for the glory of God. When he that works by humane Spirit
imitateth the works of holy men, follows, the doctrine of the Saints, I do
not understand that he works with the holy Spirit, but with his own proper
Spirit, because he does not work being inspired, but taught: And S. Paul
says, that it is a gift of the holy Spirit to work by the holy Spirit. They
who work with humane wisdom find content in their own works, but mingled
with arrogance, and with presumption: And they who work with the holy Spirit,
find likewise content in their own works, but most different, and mingled
with humility, and Mortification. In such sort, as a person examining his
mind, after he has wrought, may by his consideration understand, whether it
be humane wisdom that has wrought in them, or the Spirit of God. It is very
true, that he who has never wrought with the Spirit of God, cannot make this
difference. In Cornelius I consider the self same in his working, as I have
done in his Prayer: He did work with the holy Spirit, but he did not
understand that it was the holy Spirit; and he understood it, when he saw and
felt in himself that which arose from his working. And between that which
Cornelius wrought, and prayed with the holy Spirit, before he knew Christ, and
received the holy Spirit, and that which he prayed, and wrought with the holy
Spirit, after that he had known Christ, and received the holy Spirit; I make
this difference, that at the first praying, and working he did not understand
that he prayed, and wrought by the holy Spirit. That which I understand in
praying, and working, I understand likewise in the acknowledgments of God, and
in the understanding of holy Scripture, considering that S. Paul sets also
these understandings for gifts of the holy Ghost; understanding that humane
wisdom not knowing how to understand the things of the Spirit of God, God
gives his spirit unto them who are his, to the intent he may teach them those
things. Man's mind is proud, and haughty in this point, as in all others;
whereupon putting it self before the holy spirit, it goes helping it self as
much as it may to gain by its own proper understanding and judgment the
knowledge of God, and the understanding of Scriptures. And it is a marveilous
thing, that how much it labors the^ein, so much more it dis-enables it self,
taking, and understanding the things of God, and of the spirit of God in a
contrary sense, and by the contrary. They who understand, and know the holy
Spirit, by how much more they apply themselves to understand, and know, by so
much do they know, and understand the more. When as he, who knows and
understands the things of God, goes about with his own proper wit, and his
proper judgment, albeit he do understand that which the Saints have
understood, yet I do not understand, that he knows, and understands with the
holy spirit, but with humane wisdom; understanding, and knowing, as being
taught, and not inspired, And S. Paul makes it to be a gift of the holy spirit,
to know the holy spirit. He who knows, and understands the things of God with
his own proper wit, and judgment, finds the same satisfaction, that he finds
in other knowledges, and in other understandings of humane things, and of the
writings of men, and with this satisfaction looking upon it, he feels pride,
and selfe-esteeme in his own mind. And he that understands and knows with
the holy spirit, finds in that which he knows, and understands, most
different satisfaction from that which he finds in those other things, which
he knows, and understands and finds in his mind, Humility, and
Mortification; in such sort, that by the feeling which a person finds in his
own mind, when he shall have got a knowledge of God, and when he shall have
understood a place of holy Scripture, he may Judge if he have gained that
knowledge, and that understanding with his proper wit, and Judgment, or with
the spirit of God. If so be the feeling shall be of pride, and of self
esteem, judging that what he has known and understood, is with his own wit
and Judgment, he shall not firm himself therein: And if the feeling shall be
of Humility, and Mortification, judging that what he has known, and
understood, is with the holy spirit, he shall firm himself, and fortify
himself in it. It is very true, that he who has never known, nor understood
with the holy spirit, cannot make this difference.

From these three considerations I come to take this resolution, that as well
to pray as is meet, as to work, and to know, and understand, and as for all
other things also, in which we exercise our selves with our minds, or with our
bodies in this present life, we have need of the government of the spirit of
God, without which although it be grievous to us, we ought to confess, that we
know not to pray as we ought, and that we know not to know, and understand as
we ought. With this confession we shall always demand of God his holy
Spirit, and he shall give it us through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XLIX. Whence it proceeds, that humane wisdom will not attribute all
things to God: And in what manner they ought to be attributed to him.
FOR three Causes I understand it, men being deceived by the judgment of
humane wisdom, will not confess that every thing comes from God. The first
is, that they might not deprive themselves of the merits of their own good
works, understanding that they should deprive themselves of them, when every
thing should be attributed to God; in as much as in their good works, the
goodness of God would be that which was to be considered, and not that of men.

The second Cause I understand is, because men judging of Gods works with the
selfsame judgment, with which they judge their own proper works, they hold
that for evil in God, which they would hold for evil in evil men: And it
seeming to them an evil, and absurd thing to attribute any evil thing to God,
who is soveraignly good, and is goodness it self, they resolve that they will
not attribute every thing to God.

The third Cause, as I understand, is because they think that if men believed
that God did all things, they would become dissolute in their lives,
licentious, vicious, and insolent, and remiss in succouring, helping, and
favoring their neighbors; every man saying of himself, if I live ill, it is
because it pleases God, that I should live so, and he himself, when it so
seems good to him, will make me to live well; and saying of their neighbor, if
such a one be needy, tribulated, and afflicted, it is because it so pleases
God; and when it shall please God that he should not be so, he will draw him
out of necessity, and out of tribulation, and out of affliction, and therefore
it is not necessary that I should meddle ther^with.

To these three Causes, or reasons of humane wisdom I understand that a man
may fully answer in this manner. To the first, that if men knew themselves,
they would know in themselves rebellion, iniquity, and sin, and in their works
self-love, and selfe-interest, and so they would not pretend to obtain merit
through their own works; and not pretending it, the first cause of impiety
would be taken away, in which they do easily fall that are in the eyes of the
world, just and holy: for they properly are those that seek Meritin their
works. From this inconveniency they are free, who knowing the being, and the
nature of man, renounce their own merits, cleaving only to the justice of God
executed in Christ.

To the second Cause and reason, it may be answered, that if so be it seem to
men an absurd, and evil thing, that God should harden the heart of Pharaoh,
making him to sin in not suffering the people of God to depart; and that God
should command Shimei, that he should sin by cursing David; and that God should
make them to sin, to whom the Scripture says he gave the spirit of error, and
that he should ordain, that Judas should sin by selling Christ; and that God
should blind them, of whom S. Paul (Romans 1) speaks, that they should fall into
silthy, and abominable sins: And if like wise it seem an absurd and evil thing
to men, that which God does to many men in the world, it is not because the
things are in themselves absurd, and evil, but because they are works of the
holy spirit; and men judging with humane wisdom, with which they cannot
understand the divine secret that is in them, come to judge falsely of them;
being herein toward God, as rash men are toward their Princes, judging evil
of them; when for the good government for the common profit, they do something
which turns to the damage of some particular, not considering, nor peircing
the intent, which the Prince has in such like things. For if they did
consider, and understand, they would judge well of those things, and of the
Princes that do them. I would say in the selfsame manner rash men, because
they understand not the intent which God has in his works, they judge them
evil, and then pretending piety, they will not attribute them to God, and if
they did know, and understand the intent that God has in those things which
they judge evil, they would hold, and judge them for good; and so they would
not come to deprive God of his particular providence in every thing. And
certainly if these men did consider, that God hardening the heart of Pharaoh,
that he should sin, not letting Gods people go, did pretend to illustrate his
glory, and to make manifest his power in favoring his people, they would
account the hardness of Pharaohs heart amongst the works of Gods mercy, for as
much as that which the people of God desired, was thereby effected: and this
selfsame judgment they would make of the curses of Shimei; and of Judas his
s^lling Christ; and of the sins of them, of whom Saint Paul speaks in the first
of the Romans; and they would make the selfsame judgment in all the works of
men, not doubting to attribute them all unto God, searching out the secret
judgment that is in them, even as pious persons search them out, to whom it
oft-times happens, that they hold something of their own or others for an
error, because they know not the intent that God has in it: And afterward by
time knowing the intent that God had in it, they hold it for a very certain
thing. And to the self same persons it oftentimes befalls, that they hold a
thing for well done, which afterward by tract of time they knew was ill done.
This sometimes happens to them, when they stand not very attent to consider the
judgments of God; and sometimes, because it does not always please God that
they should understand that which he pretends in his works; as peradventure it
did not please him, that Moses and Aaron should understand that which he
pretended in the hardness of Pharaohs heart, to the intent they should not
cease to be very instant, that he would let the people of God to go out.
Whereupon it seems, that man's piety consists in applying his mind to
understand that which God pretends in his works, especially in those which
seem absurd and evil; and to venerate, and approve those which he does not
understand, holding them all for holy, just, and good.

To the third cause, and reason, which men find not to confess that God does
all things, it may be effectually, and by our own proper experience answered,
that those men, who believe, and hold for certain, that God does all things,
for this self same cause that they abide in this certainty, are pious, and
just; and being pious, and just are in themselves most temperate, and most
modest, and are toward their neighbors most merciful, most diligent, and
most liberal, in as much as piety and justice do as well mortify in them the
appetites of sensuality, that might make them vicious, and insolent, as also
the affections of the mind, that might make them interressed, and lovers of
themselves, and consequently remiss with their neighbors. This mortification
in them proceeding partly from that union which they hold in their hearts with
God, never forgetting themselves of God, and principally from that
incorporation with which they stand incorporated in the death of Christ, who
killing his own flesh on the Cross did likewise kill the flesh of all them,
who believing in him are made his Members. And they who remain in this, never
come to excuse their licentious lives in the liveliness of their minds,
saying it pleases God they should be so: nay, rather finding in themselves any
vice, and finding in their minds any liveliness, they know the relics of
their own iniquity, rebellion and sin, and demand of God, that he should
mortify them in them, as he has mortified the rest: nor do they ever become
remiss in helping, and favoring their neighbors; except in as much as the
affections that are according to the flesh, and humane wisdom dying in them,
and those which are according to the spirit reviving, they do not move with an
anxious affection of the flesh, but are moved with a moderate desire of the
spirit: And in as much as they do not feel in themselves any motion to help,
and succor their neighbors, they know that God will have it so.

This I say, because those persons that stand in this piety keeping good
account with their inward motions, hold those to be wills of the flesh, which
are not according to that which they knew to be the will of God. And they hold
those to be the will of the spirit, which they know to be conformed to the will
of God; making this judgment by that which is the due of piety, and that which
is the due of justification, and by that which the holy Scriptures, New and Old
teach: and standing attent hereunto, they overcome the motions which are
according to the flesh, and execute those which are according to the spirit.
And albeit they have their imperfections by Gods will, their desire is to
become perfect. And although they hold the sufferings of their neighbor to be
the will of God, they hold likewise their motions to help, and favor them to
be the will of God; And knowing in their own imperfections, and in the
sufferings of their neighbors the will of God, which is with wrath, and
knowing in their own desires of perfection, and in their motions to succor
their neighbors the will of God, which is with mercy, loving the will which is
with mercy, and flying from that which is with wrath, they do attend unto
perfection, and do attend to succor their neighbors, remaining quiet, when
they do not perceive any motion, understanding it, that God would have them to
remain quiet.

Having said that which moves men not to attribute all things to God, and that
which may be answered unto it, now I will say that which I think thereabout,
remitting my self to more perfect, and spiritual judgment.

In God I consider two wills, as at other times I have considered it, one
Mediate, in as much as it works by these, which we call second Causes: And the
other Immediate, in as much as it works by it self. Unto the Mediate I
understand men stand subject through original sin, and from the Mediate I
understand that men are exempted, and freed by regeneration, but in a certain
manner.

I suppose, that in a man's flying those things, which by this Mediate will
might do him harm, and in applying himself to those things, which by the
self same might do him good, a man's freewill does consist; all those things
appertaining to good or ill being exterior, and corporal to virtuous, or
vicious living in the outward. To the Immediate will of God I understand
generally all men are subject, God working in them, in some with love, in
others with hatred, in some with wrath, in others with mercy, in some with
favors, and in others with disfavour. And this will of God I understand is
that, unto which S. Paul says, men cannot make resistance; and this I
understand that God uses illustrating his glory, and showing his omnipotency
in them that are his, in such sort, that in this Will of God there are two
parts, or two wills, one of Hatred, of Wrath, and disfavour, and the other of
Love, of Mercy, and Favor. The first as I understand fell upon Pharaoh, upon
Shimei, and upon them, to whom God gave the spirit of error, and upon Judas,
and upon those whom God delivered over to a reprobate sense. And this self
same I understand fell upon all those which are vessels of wrath, as was Nero,
and as all they have been, and are, and shall be, who with malignity persecute
the Christian spirit in those who are the Members of Christ. All these, as I
understand do the will of God without understanding themselves, that this is
the will of God. For if they did understand it, they would cease to be impious,
and they would be pious. That will of God, which is of love, of mercy, and
favor, I understand it in Moses and Aaron, and David, and in the Saints of the
Law, and I understand it in S. John Baptist, and in the Apostles, and in the
Martyrs, and likewise in all those, who are called of God to the participation
of the Gospel, all which I understand do fulfill the will of God; for herein
consists piety. And I understand, that neither Pharaoh, nor Judas, nor those
who are vessels of wrath, could cease to be such; nor Moses, nor Aaron, nor
Paul, nor those who are vessels of mercy; in such manner, that Judas could not
forbear to sell Christ, nor S. Paul could not forbear to preach Christ.
Finally I understand, that in those things which are done in the world by Gods
Mediate will, they who are vessels of wrath, know the natural order, and know
the goodness, or malignity of men. And I understand, that in the selfsame
things they who are the vessels of mercy, know in the natural order the will of
God, who set this order; and in that which is, or seems to be goodness, or
malice of men, they know with the will of God, the goodness and malice of men.
In the self same manner I understand that in those things which are done by the
Immediate will of God; they who are impious do not know but only their own
proper wills, and those which are of them that do them; and I understand that
in the self same things they who are pious, know the will of God, attributing
all things to God, considering in those, who are the vessels of wrath, as were
Pharaoh, Shimei, Judas, and Nero, the will of God with wrath, with hatred, and
with disfavour; and knowing in them, who are vessels of mercy, as those of the
Hebrew people, and those of the Christian people, the will of God with love,
with mercy, and with favor. And in this manner without doing injury to God,
without depraving themselves, and without loosing charity, nay rather
illustrating the glory of God, mortifying themselves, and growing in charity,
they come to believe that God does all things, some with his mediate will, and
others with his immediate will; some as in vessels of hatred, of wrath, and
disfavour; and others, as in vessels of love, of mercy, and favor. And those
are they, who amongst all men are pious, knowing God, and are just, knowing the
Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. L. In what the Depravation of man does consist, and in what his
Reparation does consist. In what Christian Perfection does consist.
COnsidering that which I understand, and know of Gods being, in as much as he
is impassible, and immortal, and in as much as he is wise, just, and
merciful, faithful, and true; and considering that which I understand, and
know of the being of a man, in as much as he is passible, and Mortal, and in
as much as he is ignorant, impious, vindicative, false, and a lier: And
understanding by the testimony of holy Scripture, that man in his first
creation was created after the Image, and similitude of God, I come to
understand, that there is as much difference from the kind of being, in which
God created man, to that kind of being, wherein he now is, and abides, as
from that being, which I know of God, to that being, which I know of man: And
knowing by testimony of holy Scripture, that for the sin of the first man,
from that first perfect being, and that being like unto God, man is come to
this imperfect being, and like unto the being of other animals, in as much as
pertaines to his body, and to the being of evil spirits, as touching his
soul, I come to understand, that the evil, which is to come to mankind by the
sin of the first man, consists in this, that of impassible he is become
passible, subject to cold, and to heat, to hunger, and to thrist, with all
other corporal incommodities; and of immortal he is become mortal, subject
unto death; and of wise he is become ignorant, of just, impious, of merciful,
vindicative, of faithful, false, and of true, a lier. Whereby I understand,
that because the evil, into which mankind fell through sin, touches men in
their bodies, and in their minds, the grace which God has pleased to do unto
mankind by means of Jesus Christ our Lord appertains likewise both to
bodies, and to minds; and so it is, that as soon as a man is called of God, he
does accept for his the Justice of God executed on Christ; being made a member
of Christ he begins to be partaker of that first Reparation, which is of the
mind, and is by the death of Christ: And it is also true, that that man who
shall depart from this life a member of Christ, shall be partaker of the last
Reparation, which shall be of the body, and shall be by the resurrection of
Christ, and shall be in the general resurrection of all men; in such sort, as
they who are members of Christ, by the death of Christ do repair the evil of
their minds in this present life, if not altogether, yet in part; and they do
repair by the resurrection of Jesus Christ the evil of their body in life
everlasting, and then shall they have recovered entirely that Image, and that
similitude of God, with which they were created, being in their bodies
impassible, and immortal, and being in their minds just, wise, merciful,
faithful, and true in which I understand our whole felicity does consist.

After that I have understood all this, I resolve my self, that the proper
exercise of a Christian in this present life, is to attend unto the reparation
of his mind, and to recover the image, and similitude of God, with which he
was created: And albeit as I have said, so much of this is recovered, as there
is (as a man may say) of the incorporation in the death of Christ in a man;
nevertheless I understand it appertains to a Christian to exercise him self
to recover it in this manner: When he shall be solicited by the depravation of
his mind unto impiety, remembering himself that God is just, he shall say, no,
to me it belongs to be just, and not impious. When he shall be solicited unto
revenge, remembering himself, that God is merciful, he shall say, no, to me it
appertains to be merciful, and not vindicatiue. When he shall be solicited
unto wrath, remembering himself, that God is patient he shall say, no, to me it
appertains to be patient, and not wrathful. When he shall be solicited to
falsity, and lies, remembering himself that God is faithful, and true, he
shall say, no, to me it appertains to be faithful, and true. When he shall be
solicited to desire to be esteemed, and prized of the men of this world,
remembering himself, that God is a Pilgrim, and stranger in this present life,
he shall say, no, for to me it appertains to be a pilgrim, and stranger with
God, that I may be altogether like unto God. And finally when he shall be
solicited to any thing, which may redound to the hurt of his neighbor in any
sort whatsoever, remembering himself that God loves men so much, that to
repair their evil, and damage, in which they were thrown down headlong, he
gave his own Son unto death, he shall say, no, to me it appertains to have
love and charity. And so running through all those things, with which a man may
be solicited by his own affections through the depravation of the mind, he
shall find perfections in God, with which he may repress them; and so by
little and little he shall go augmenting in himself the reparation of his
mind, which is the first thing, and he shall go every hour more abilitating
the reparation of his body, which is the last. And in this exercise I
understand the Christian perfection consists. I would say, that (...) is a
Christian more, or less perfect in this life, (...) ^ch as occupying himself
more or less in this exercise, he does obtain more or less of that part,
which is to be gotten in this present life, of the image, and likeness of God,
with which he was created. And for this cause I understand, that our Lord Jesus
Christ concludes his discourses of Christian perfection, saying, Be you
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: As if he should have said:
Finally, I say unto you, that you attend to be like unto God in perfection: He
is perfect, and you also attend to be perfect, as he is. And this is properly
a Christian admonition, in as much as it is of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LI. In what manner God makes himself to be felt, and in what manner
God makes himself to be seen.
HAving oftentimes said, that to those persons, who are entered into the
kingdom of God, accepting the grace of the Gospel, God makes them to Feel
his presence, and to the self same he lets his presence to be seen through a
glass darkly, as S. Paul speaks; I come now to say, that it is without all
comparison a greater favor, which God does to them, to whom God lets his
presence be seen, then that which he does to them, to whom he does make his
presence to be felt; in as much as he that sees it, it is necessary that he
should feel it; but it is not necessary that he that feels it, should see it: I
would say, in as much as sight cannot stand without feeling, but feeling may be
without seeing. That this may be well understood, I say, that as I understand
it, then a man feels the presence of God, when loving, and believing, being
confident, and hoping, and when praying, and working, and understanding, he
does really, and indeed feel that he is moved, a^ ^ted by the holy Spirit to
love, to believe, to have ^nce, and to hope, and also to pray, to work, and to
understand, feeling that the holy Spirit is that which does inspire him to
love, to believe, to have confidence, and to hope. And it is he himself, that
prays, works, and understands in him: for so it is, that in all these
exercises feeling the favor of the holy Spirit he feels the prefence of God.
Furthermore I say, that then a man sees the presence of God, when by the
gracious favor of God it is showed unto him, in what manner God sustaines all
the things which he has created in their proper being, in which he created
them, and in what manner God failing them, or withdrawing himself from them
never so little they would fail in their beings. To penetrate well into this
Consideration, I go imagining that which is ordinarily seen in the house of a
Pope, where all they that abide in his house, do depend of him, and are
sustained by him in that degree, and in that dignity, in which he has placed
them; and the Pope dying, all the whole house breaks up, and cease to be, in
such sort as he that was Secretary, is now so no longer: The self same I say
of all the other officers of the house, who all of them in the Popes death
loose that being, which the Popes life gave unto them.

Passing on forwards, I consider that which by experience is understood in a
man, who is so far a man in as much as his soul stays in his body, that being
altogether sustained by the benefit thereof. I would say, that the members of
the body exercise their own offices so long as the soul abides within the
body; the soul departed, the body dissolves and returns to earth, in such
manner, as they now are no more eyes, which were formerly eyes. The selfsame I
say of all the members of the body, all which, the soul being departed from
the body, loose that being which they had by the presence of the soul in the
Body.

In the Popes house because I am able with my wit and with my judgment to
consider, and see that which I have said, it is sufficient to see, and consider
the presence of the Pope, his providence, his bounty, liberality, and justice,
in as much as he maintains his house with good order, and with good
government, And in as much as I am able with my wit, and discourse to
understand by experience, that the soul being parted from the body, a man
cease to be that which he was, every one of his members ceasing to execute
the office which it exercised: I am able also to understand by experience, that
the being, which the body has, comes by the soul, and that the soul is she
that governes every one of the members of the body, as is meet, making them to
serve to that for which they were created. And so I understand, that there are
in the soul providence, and discretion, and all the other good qualities
annexed thereunto. But in God, in as much as I am not able neither with my wit,
nor by experience to understand in what manner all things depend of him, in
such sort, as he failing them, they fail, I cannot by my self see that which
is in the Popes house, nor understand that which I understand in a man, albeit
by that which I hear spoken, and by that which I read, I may imagine it: But
wanting the seeing, and wanting the understanding by experience I cannot
certify my self in it, until God himself let me see, and understand how
this is, showing me his presence, which I understa^d consists in this
demenstration, and in this union. Furthermore I understand, that it would be
great satisfaction to the Popes Favorite servant, when the Pope were
unalterable, and immortal, to see that his being, and his sustentation in that
degree comes to him from the Pope, and depends upon the life of the Pope. And I
understand also, that it would be very great satisfaction to see really, and
indeed in what manner the being and sustentation of his body depends upon his
soul. And I understand that it is without any comparison much higher, and more
excellent then any of these, that satisfaction, that glory, and that content
which those persons feel in themselves, who in any sort whatsoever see in what
manner God sustaines, and maintains all things, giving unto them a being, and
giving unto them life, in such manner as without him they would cease to be,
and to live. For in this vision they know, and feel themselves favored of God,
and in the self same they quiet themselves, and assure themselves in their own
minds, understanding that they are sustained, and governed by him, who has
all things in his own power. And in the selfsame vision in a new manner they
know in God omnipotency, wisdom, justice, mercy, truth, and fidelity; and
knowing this they grow in the love of God, in faith, and in the confidence of
God, and in patience, with which they hope for eternal life. And so that comes
to pass which I said in the beginning, that a man seeing the presence of God
begins to taste in part in this present life that which he shall taste entirely
with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LII. That a Christian ought to put an end to the Affection of
Ambition, which does consist in Growing: and also to that which does consist in
Conserving.
Understanding that Jesus Christ our Lord says to all us that are Christians,
that we should Learn humility of heart from him; And understanding also, that
S. Paul does admonish us, that we should reduce our minds to that which we
know of Jesus Christ our Lord, who being the Son of God humbled himself to
take the shape of a man, making himself a man; I come to know, that as
humility of mind is the most profitable thing to a Christian, so also the
affection of Ambition, which is the contrary, is the most pernicious thing, and
that which most deprives him of Christ, and most makes him the member of Satan.
And I call affection of Ambition all that desire, all that thought, and all
that diligence, which a man uses with intent to increase his estate, his
honor, and his reputation, and to conserve himself in that which he has got;
In such sort, as there are two parts of the Ambitious Affection; the first to
increase, the second to maintain. Humane wisdom judges them free from the
affection of Ambition, who set an end to growing; and in very truth they are
free from a good part thereof. Yet the other remains, which is so much harder
to leave, by how much humane wisdom does not know it; nay rather judges them
vile, and of no worth that have it not: But the holy Spitit which knows it,
judges them ambitious which have it; and will that they whom he governs,
should utterly leave it, renounce it, and free themselves, in such manner, that
they have no intent to grow in the eyes of the world, nor have intent to
conserve themselves; although it require not of them, that they should
studiously, and for their own fantasies do things, by which they should come
to be abased, and diminished from that state of honor, and reputation,
wherein they find themselves, contenting it self, that they should reduce
their minds to increase, and decrease, according as it shall be Gods will. And
it will also, that together herewith they should employ themselves altogether,
and in all things to augment themselves in the eyes of God, and to conserve
themselves in that, wherein they shall be augmented. And therefore to the pious
Christian, who ought to learn humility of Christ, and to reduce himself to be
like unto Christ in his humility, it appertains to set an end to all ambition,
dispoyling himself of all affection, and thoughts, touching his advancement in
the things of this world, or touching his conserving himself in them, thinking
only to augment himself in the things of God, Trusting, Hoping, Loving, and
procuring to conserve himself in that which he shall have obtained touching
Confidence, Hope, and Love, resolving himself, that that which appertains to
him, is to please God, and them who are partakers of the Spirit of God, and not
the world, nor those who follow the opinions, and counsels of humane wisdom:
and doing so they shall become like our Lord Jesus Christ.

CONSID. LIII. In what manner the men of the world attending unto Honor, are
less vicious, then attending unto conscience.
ALL men are generally malign, and perverse, in so much as to walk amongst
them is the same as to walk amongst Tygres, and Lions, and amongst Vipers, and
Serpents: except only in as much as their furies, and their outrages are tied
by some chains, amongst which the chiefest, and most strong are Honor, in as
much as pertaines to this present life, and Conscience for the life to come. I
would say, that the intent of the Honor of the world does bridle some men,
that they are not so vicious, nor so licentious in their living, as they would
be following their natural inclination: And some other men the fear of
eternal punishment bridleth; for they think, if I do this, I shall offend
God, and he will chastise me with eternal punishment. And this is the
conscience, in such manner, that a man may say, that all men who are not
governed by the holy spirit, are like many Lions that stand chained, that they
should not do harm, but in such manner^, as breaking the chains with their
fury, they do evil according to their natural inclination, in as much as the
men that stand bound with these chains, do not evil, nor are licentious; but
the chains being broken with their fury, and rage, they do evil according to
their natural inclination. Whereupon considering, that of these chains with
which men stand bound, the strongest is the honor of the world; in as much as
a man does more easily cast his conscience behind, then his honor; I come to
understa^d that the men, who attend unto the honor of the world, because they
are tied with the stronger chain, are amongst the other men of the world the
least vicious, and least licentious, partly by their own proper inclinations;
for being subject to the government of humane wisdom they do much esteem
Honor; partly for respect of those persons, with whom they take counsel, who
being partly themselves applied to Honor, and understanding it, do always
counsel rightly according to that which belongs to Honor, which does not so
happen in conscience, in as much as a man is not of himself inclined unto it,
either because he does not believe more then he sees, or because he doubts, or
because he puts himself upon the hazard; and in as much as willing to be
counseled in those things whereof he doubts, he takes counsel with other men,
who neither are applied to conscience, nor understand it, and so cannot
counsel rightly accorping to that which is due to conscience. That this is
true, he shall clearly know, whosoever shall come to examine himself, finding
it true that they do more esteem Honor then Conscience, and that they are
more resolutely, and more virtuously counseled in a business, when they put
it in a case of Honor, then when they put it in a case of conscience. And it
may be, that the cause, wherefore (according as it is reported) they live
less vitiously amongst the Infidels, then amongst those, who are called
Christians, is because they in most things attend unto Honor, and these in
many things attend unto Conscience. Out of this generality I except regenerated
men, renewed by the holy spirit, who without being bound with chains, live
modestly, and temperately: In this they are governed by the holy Spirit, which
is communicated unto them that believe: In whom this government is so powerful,
that without being bound with any chain; for they fear not dishonor, nor are
of scrupulous conscience, and yet they pass the men of the world in not being
vicious, and licentious, having slain all their affections on the Cross of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LIIII. That Prayer, and Consideration are two books, or Interpreters
very sure ones to understand holy Scripture, and how a man ought to serve
himself of them.
I Hold it for a very certain, and very true thing, that for the understanding
of holy Scripture, the best, the most certain, and the highest interpreters of
all, that a man can find, are these two, Prayer, and Consideration. Prayer as
I understand, discovers the way, and opens, and manifests it: And
Consideration I understand, puts a man into it, and makes him walk therein.

Furthermore I understand, that it is necessary that these two interpreters, or
books should be helped on Gods part, he inspiring him who prays, to pray. For
I understand that he who prays, not being inspired to pray, prays out of his
own proper fantasy, out of his own proper affection, and out of his own
proper will; and not knowing to pray as he ought, is not heard in his prayer:
and he who prays being inspired to pray, prays for the glory of God, and
prays for the will of God, and knowing to pray as he ought, he is heard in his
prayer, that being granted him which he demands.

Consideration, as I understand, ought to be helped on man's part, who
considers of spiritual things with his proper experience. I would say that
he who considers, should have proved in himself those things, of which holy
Scripture speaks, in such manner, that by what he finds, and knows in
himself, ^e comes to understand that which is written in holy Scripture. They
who consider without this experience, go in the dark, and go groping, and
albeit they sometimes divine, and some other times they do hit right, not
having the proof thereof in themselves, they neither know, whether they do
hit right, nor relish that wherein they do hit right.

And they who are in prayer helped from the holy spirit, and in consideration
are helped by their own proper experience, oft-times hitting right, or rather
as it were always, they do both know that they hit right, and they do
relish that, wherein they do hit right. To be better understood, I declare
my self with two authorities, one of S. Paul, and the other of David, daring
to put the example in my self. I say that reading that of S. Paul, Even as the
testimony of Jesus Christ is confirmed in you, and willing to understand it
well, first I will work with the book of prayer, praying God that he will open
unto me the way for the understanding of these words; and in my prayer I stand
steady, as much as I can keep my mind firm in it. Afterward opening the book
of consideration, I begin to consider within my self, of what Christian
matters I have any experience; and I begin also to examine, what is that
testimony of Jesus Christ, which he brought unto the world. And finding in me
the government of the holy spirit, and feeling my self justified in the
justice of God executed in Christ, which two things are so joined together,
that a man can hardly understand, which of them he feels most, either the
government of the holy spirit, or the justification by faith; and understanding
that the testimony, which Christ published unto the world, does principally
resolve it self into two parts, that is, into that; The kingdom of heaven, or
the kingdom of God, which is all one, draws near; and into that, which he
speaking of his own blood, says, For you, and for many it shall be shed to
remission of sins: Of which two parts, one has intent unto the kingdom of
God, which is begun to be felt, and tasted in this present life, and is
continued, and perpetuated in life eternal; the other un^o the justification
that is by Christ: I come to resolve my self, that S. Paul understood, that
the Corinthians might testify by their proper experience, that Christ spoke
the truth in the testimony which he gave unto the world, as well touching the
coming of the kingdom of God, as also of justification by the justice of God
execured in his most precious flesh. And I understand, that so much a man may
call, and judge himself a Christian, in as much as he has this testimony of
Christ our Lord confirmed in himself. In like manner willing to understand
that of David, For I am a stranger with thee, etc. and having opened the book
of Prayer, I open that of Consideration, and I go examining in what manner I
am a Pilgrim, and stranger in this present life. And finding, that I am such,
in as much as I am not known, nor am prized, nor esteemed in the world, and in
as much as I do not prize, nor esteem the world: And finding likewise, that
God in this selfsame manner is a Pilgrim in the world; for he is not known,
nor prized, nor esteemed in the world; and because he neither prizeth, nor
esteems the world, holding it for that which it is, I understand, that David
would say: Lord, because the world does that with me, which it does with thee,
and I do that with it which thou do. And I understand, that in this manner
the Saints of the Law were strangers with God; and in this manner are the
Saints of the Gospel, and amongst them as the head the Son of God our Lord.

In this manner I understand a man is to serve himself of these two divine
books: and I understand, that the one helps the other marvellously: And I also
understand, that he who can consider with his proper experience, does always
err, when he sets himself to consider without having first opened the book of
Prayer. And I think that always, as it were, when this selfsame is moved to
pray motion is the instinct of God.

Out of all this I gather, that this being true, that the true understanding of
the Scripture ought to be sought by means of these two interpreters, or books,
which are Prayer, and Consideration; and that prayer needs to be helped with
the inspiration of God; and Consideration with the experience of that man that
considers, it is also true, that to the pious Christian, who sets himself to
holy Scripture, it appertains to live in a continued desire, that God would
give unto him his holy spirit, and to attend to the mortification of all that
which is flesh and humane wisdom in him, to the intent, that vivification may
succeed to mortification: for they only, who have begun to be mortified, and to
live, can consider by their own proper experience; for they only feel in
themselves the spiritual gifts of God, which they obtain, who believe in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LV. Against curiosity; and how the holy Scriptures ought to be read
without curiosity.
Man's mind desires to maintain it self alive, and to conserve it self in its
liveliness with diverse meats, amongst which, as I understand, Curiosity is
that which most pleases it, and most satisfies, as well in regard of it
self, as that always there goes ambition, and vanity mingled therewith. And I
understand that this Curiosity is so savory unto the mind of man, that it
feeds thereon, in what manner soever this meat be seasoned, and dressed, so
that it be Curiosity. Now it being needful, that this humane mind should dye,
to the intent, that in the persons, who attend unto Christian piety, that
resolution may be maintained, which knowing themselves to be dead on Christ's
Cross, they have made, and do make with the world, and with themselves: It is
also needful, that this food of curiosity should be taken from them, not
giving it unto them in any manner, nor by any way; taking it from them
principally in those things, in which piety, religion, and holiness, which are
the most precious things, may be pretended. And amongst these I hold for most
dangerous the study of holy Scripture, when it is with curiosity: for albeit it
is ordinarily a good means to kill the mind of man; the mind is on the other
side so live, that it converts it into curiosity, delighting to maintain it
self with that alone, when it cannot with other things. And therefore I
understand, that it belongs to the pious Christian to stand very vigilant, and
wary in many things, in which there may be curiosity, and that he should not
have it, and principally in the study of holy Scripture, to the intent, that
the syncerity of the holy spirit, which is in it, may not be converted into
curiosity of the flesh, as it befalls the curious, who read the Scriptures only
to know, and understand: In which I understand, that the Pious Christian ought
only to pretend the inward knowledges, and feelings, which God by means of his
holy spirit shall give unto him; and those, which he by means of these shall
go experimenting of the things of the holy Spirit, in such manner, as taking
into his hand a book of holy scripture, he should pretend to understand that
which belongs to him; and so think, that he understands not that which he has
not experimented: and thus thinking if he shall desire to understand it, he
shall attend to experiment it, and not to seek with curiosity that which others
have therein understood: And attending unto experience, he shall likewise
attend unto total mortification of the mind, depriving it of all curiosity;
and together with the experience, and with the mortification, he shall get the
true understanding of holy Scripture, and shall understand how that the
Christian business does not consist in knowledge, but in experience: And he
shall know the deceit that they suffer, who think that they do not understand
holy Scripture, because they be not instructed, nor furnished of knowledge and
humane learning; understanding that it is needful for them, who are instructed
and rich in them, to renounce and leave them: for to obtain the true
understanding of holy Scripture, which as I have said, is not gotten by
knowledge, nor ought not to be procured with curiosity, but is gotten with
experience, and ought to be procured with simplicity. In as much as to them who
are instructed, and adorned with this simplicity, God reveals his secrets, as
the proper son of God himself affirms, Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVI. Which is the most certain, and most secure way to obtain perfect
Mortification.
HAving oft-times said, that the Mortification of all that which a man has
from Adam, is very necessary to a Christian, it is not long since that I
understood the cause why it is necessary and the most certain, and most secure
way to come to obtain it. And I have learned it from the Apostle S. Paul, where
he having said, that he did endeavor to make himself like unto the death of
Christ, with intent to come to the participation of his resurrection; laboring
to comprehend the Christian perfection, as he felt himself comprehended by it
in Christ; he says that he did this altogether forgetting things that were
behind, as well those, which might breed him satisfaction, as also those which
might cause him molestatio^; and occupying his mind, in remembering that he was
called of God through Christ, and that the vocation was from above, that is,
that he was called, to the intent that believing he might obtain everlasting
life, or rather I understand, that it is that life by which the holy spirit
mortifies them, who being called of God do answer. And so it is, that a man
keeping in his memory this thought, comes to fly, and abhor all those things
that may hinder him this vocation, and he comes to seek, and love all those
thing which may conserve, and increase it; and so coming to hate his
affections, and appetites, knowing that they are those which may hinder his
vocation, he comes to mortify them in such manner, that all that which he had
of Adam dying in him, and that which is of Christ living in him, he comes to be
much like unto Christ, it befalling unto him the selfsame which befalls a
person, who being called ^y a great Prince to a great feast, and fearing to be
hin^red, and disturbed in his journey by some delightful things that may
present themselves unto him, he takes as expedient to free himself from all
those things, and to p^sse freely through them, to keep always in his memory,
that he is called by that great Prince, and that he is called unto that great
feast, in comparison where of all those feasts that may offer themselves unto
him in the way, are not feasts, but childrens plays. I would say, that as this
person carrying this thought alive in his memory does mortify in himself all
those appetites which might come unto him of s^eing those feasts, which offer
themselves to him in the way, much better then if so be he should make a
resolution not to see them. For it might be, that coming by chance to see them
he should be hindered, and disturbed by them, in such manner, that when he
should come to see the principal Feast it would now be finished. Even so
neither more nor less, but rather much better, the person that is called of
God keeping alive in his memory the thought of his vocation, does mortify, and
also kill in himself all the affections, and appetites, which being according
to the old man might hinder him, and disturb his vocation, much better, then if
he did detetmine always to combat with them: For it might be, that wandering
from his vocation, he might also wander from his determination. I shall say
rather better, that doing after this manner the holy Spirit is that which
mortifies him, and if he should do in other manner, it being humane wisdom
that should work, he would never come to obtain his intent; it being Gods
ordinance, that the spirit of God should be the master, and the guide^ of all
them, that are called unto the grace of the Gospel of his only begotten Son
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVII. Whence it comes to pass, that by the knowledge and sense of the
things of God the Flesh is Mortified.
EVery day I go certifying my self, that the Christian business is not
knowledge, but experience: I would say, that it is not got by knowledge, but by
experience. First of all I understood, that the proper exercise of a Christian
is to attend unto Mortification. Attending unto it he feels, that the profit of
it consists in this, that a man mortifying his affections and appetites goes by
little and little comprehending that divine Christian perfection, in which he is
comprised by the incorporation, with which believing he is incorporated in
Christ. Passing on further, I know that the most certain and secure way, by the
which he who is called of God, comes to true Mortification, is always to hold
firm in his memory a firm thought, that he is called of God, and that the
calling is made to give him everlasting life. Now I understand, that this
marveilous effect of Mortification through the remembrance of the vocation,
proceeds partly from the baseness of the flesh, and partly from the efficacy
of the things of God. I would say that the flesh being vile, and miserable, and
being subject, feeble, and infirm to be able to hold in it self the
knowledges, and senses of divine things, it comes to pass, that by the
efficacy of them it is affrighted, and becomes vile; in such manner, that it is
easily overcome, and mastered by the spirit, and so it remains mortified
together with all those things which are corrupt in a man by the depravation of
the flesh. And because the remembrance of the calling by God is very
efficacious in men with the knowledge, and sense of heavenly things, and they
are subject, frail, and infirm, I understand that which God says, That a man
who shall see him shall not be able to sustain himself with his mind, nor
with his body. And therefore the perfect vision of God is reserved to the just
in eternal life; when the flesh being raised up shall be a subject able to
endure the vision of God. In this mean space on the one side by the benefit of
God the Flesh is mortified in the just, not only with the memory of their
vocation, but also with every other vocation, and sense, which appertains to
the things of God. And on the other side God goes moderating in them these
knowledges, and these senses, to the intent they should not come to nothing,
accommodating them to the frailty of the flesh, as we temper the hot liquour,
which we would keep in a glass vessel, in such manner, as the liquor is
conserved in the vessel without breaking the glass. And I understand, that
corporal, and outward exercises, together with those other things which are of
man's industry, do serve unto those persons which are called of God, for a
certain entertaining of themselves in that estate, in which a knowledge, or
sense of some of Gods things has left them which is past; and that through
their labor there should be given, or communicated unto them another, which
may make them to make progress in Mortification; in such manner, that I have
reason to say, that the Christian business is not knowledge, but experience.
If it were knowledge, it would work the effect that other knowledges do, that
is, to swell up, and make proud those who have them. And because it is
experience, it does the effect, which other experiences do, that is, to
humble, and cast on the ground all that which is humane wisdom, and to exalt,
and lift up to heaven all that which is in the spirit. I understand this effect
is in them, who being called of God are members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LVIII. Eight differences between them, who pretend, and procure to
mortify themselves with their proper industry, and them, who who are mortified
by the holy Spirit.
THis is always a truth, that all men in applying themselves to religion, as
well unto the false, which consists in superstitious observations, as unto
the true, which consists in accepting the grace of the Gospel of Christ, do
apply themselves likewise to Mortification. But amongst them who procure to
mortify themselves with the holy spirit, I have considered eight notable
differences, by which a person may know, whether he mortify himself by his
own industry, or whether he be mortified by the holy spirit.

The first Difference is, that they who mortify themselves with their own
proper industry, are presumptuous, and ambitious, knowing their own proper
virtue in their mortification; and they who are mortified by the holy spirit,
are humble, and modest, not knowing any proper virtue of their own in their
mortifications: for the holy spirit works in them that which a very great
Fever does in a man: I would say, that as by the presence of a great Fever a
man becomes as it were deprived of all carnal desires, keeping alive only the
desire of health; so by the presence of the holy spirit a man becomes as it
were deprived of all that which is flesh, keeping alive only spiritual desires.

The second Difference is, that they who pretend to mortify themselves, go
always seeking new manners, and new inventions to obtain mortification, and
they who are mortified by the spirit, embrace those occasions of mortification;
which are offered unto them, by what way soever they come, persuading
themselves, that with the^ and in them God will mortify them.

The third Difference is, that they, who mortify themselves, always live sad,
and discontent, because they deprive themselves of their pleasures, and
corporal contents, and are not cherished with the spiritual; and they who are
mortified, live, as it were always cheerful, and contented, because they
abhor, or begin to abhor corporal pleasures, and begin to taste spiritual
pleasures.

The fourth Difference is, that they who mortify themselves, are much like unto
a man, whose head were cut with a rough and rusty saw, in as much as all things
are unsweet, and sour unto him. And they who are mortified, are like unto a
man, whose head were cut with a sharp sword, and an arm skillful in cutting;
In as much as the holy spirit mortifies him, without that himself feels the
mortification. That this is true, those persons who are mortified by the holy
spirit, know by experience.

The fifth Difference is, that they who mortify themselves living always in
continual trouble, and in continual labor, are like unto a man that learnes
with exceeding pains a most difficult, and unpleasant science, who finding in
the principles thereof much unsweetnesse, and much molestation, comforts
himself only with an opinion, that he shall prove excellent in that science:
And they that are mortifyed, neither traveling, nor laboring themselves in
their mortifications, are like unto a man that goes delighting, and recreating
himself in the study of that science which he has already learned, wherein
finding few things which he understands not, he finds few things that trouble
him.

The sixth Difference is, that in them who mortify themselves by themselves,
there is never true mortification; nay rather they are like unto quick lime, in
as much as the quick lime smoakes not, whilst there is no water cast thereon,
which is no sooner cast upon it, then it shows the fire that it has within;
so they whilst they have no occasion to err, do not err: and when occasion
comes they presently show the liveliness that they have within them, either
erring, or being straightly solicited to err. And they who are mortified by
the holy spirit, have true mortification, and are like unto dead lime, in as
much that like as the dead lime does not smoke, how much water soever be cast
upon it: so neither do they err, nor are much solicited to err, although
many occasions offer themselves unto them. And so shall this be.

The seventh Difference is, that they who mortify themselves in the occasions
of erring do miserably loose themselves: For being deceived by humane wisdom
they do always go avoiding the occasions, which incite them to err: And
they who are mortified, in the occasions of erring, that offer themselves unto
them, are refined as gold in the fire, for being helped by the holy spirit in
the proper occasions they are mortified, not avoiding any of them; and
therefore they are the same in the occasions, as out of the occasions.

The eight Difference is, That they who mortify themselves by their proper
industry, do principally attend unto the mortification of the flesh, they that
be such having no intent to mortify the mind, not knowing, that from thence
arises all the evil: And they, who are mortified by the holy Spirit, attend
principally unto the mortification of the mind, knowing that from thence comes
all the evil; And knowing that the mind being mortified, the flesh remains
mortified.

By the examination of these Differences may a person know whether he mortifies
himself, or whether he be mortified by the holy Spirit: Being advertised of
this, that there are three estates in those persons, who are mortified by the
holy Spirit.

The one is, when the holy spirit mortifies them, without that they know, or
feel the virtue of the holy Spirit in them. And in this estate, that belongs to
them, which is said in the fourth difference.

The other is, when the holy spirit mortifies them, and they feel, and know in
themselves the virtue of the holy spirit. And in this estate, there appertains
unto them that which is said in the first Difference.

The third is, when through the absence of the holy Spirit, or because they do
not feel, and know his presence, they go mortifying themselves with their own
industry. And in this estate, they feel a good part of that which is said in
the First, the Third, the Fourth, and the Fifth Difference, to be felt by them,
who mortify themselves by their own proper industry. It is very true, that to
them who are mortified by the holy spirit, their own industries in
mortification are profitable unto them; It being indeed true, what S. Paul
says, That to them that love God, all things work for good to the glory of
God, and of the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LIX. That in the motions to pray the Spirit does certify a man, that
he shall obtain that which he demands.
REeading in Isaia, that death being intimated unto Hezekiah a pious King on
Gods behalf, he resented himself, was grieved, and lamented, praying God
with tears, that he would not take away his life: And reading a little after,
that the destruction of Jerusalem being intimated on Gods behalf unto the
selfsame King with the Babylonian captivity, without resenting himself, nor
being grieved, nor lamenting, and without praying God, that he would revoke the
sentence, he was contented, that the will of God should be executed; accepting
it as a benefit of God, that those evils should not come in his time: And
considering that God prolonged the time of Hezekia's life, and that he did
execute his sentence upon Jerusalem; I come to certify my self, that pious
persons being governed by the spirit of God, and chiefly in their prayers, in
as much as S. Paul says, The spirit of God prays by them, and in them, they
do never as it were pray to God, but for that which it is Gods will to grant
them, of which the holy spirit, which inspires them to pray, is certain.
According to the judgment of humane reason, it had been more just, and more
convenient, that Hezechiah should have resented himself, and lamented, and
been moved to pray God for the revocation of the sentence given against
Jerusalem, then for the revocation of that sentence which was given against
his own proper life: And Hezechias a pious King moved by the holy spirit prayed
for his own life; and for that which touched Jerusalem, he conformed himself
with Gods will: whereby I understand that it behoues pious persons to keep good
account with their motions; I would say, they ought to be well advertised
being moved to pray to God for any thing, whether that motion be of humane
spirit, or of the holy spirit. And I understand likewise, that the proper
countersigne, whereby they may be able to judge between these motions, is the
Inward certainty, or uncertainty with which they shall find themselves in
prayer. Finding themselves uncertain that they should obtain of God that which
they demand, they shall judge, that the motion is of humane spirit; And finding
themselves certain to obtain it, they shall judge that the motion is of the
holy spirit: For as much as the motion of the holy spirit draws always with
it the certification; a man judging in this manner, if the spirit of God which
has moved me to pray, did not know that it is the will of God to grant me that
which I demand, it would not have moved me. This certification I certainly hold
was in Hezekiah at that time when he demanded his life to be prolonged. And
because he did not feel in himself this certification, I do certainly hold,
that the self same Hezekiah did not demand that the sentence against
Jerusalem should be revoked. With this assurance I see, that Christ prayed,
raising up Lazarus, and praying for the conservation of his Disciples. And with
doubtfulnesse I see he prayed in the Garden; and because he felt, whence this
motion did arise in praying, he remitted himself unto the will of God. And if
the son of God himself felt these two motions, and in one of them he found
himself certain, and in the other doubtful; every one may think, whether it be
not necessary to be watchful over himself in them; albeit they only shall know
them, that shall be true members of the same Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CGNSID. LX. Whence it proceeds, that the superstitious are severe, and the
true Christians are Merciful and Pitiful.
THE severity, and rigor that I see, and know for the most part in those
persons which the common people holds for devout, and spiritual, they being in
very truth superstitious, and ceremonious, in as much as appertains to the
chastising, or desiring to chastise the vices, and defects of men; I understand
proceeds from two causes. The one is the proper nature of a man, who is
inclined to prize, and esteem his own things, and to condemn, and despise
others. And the other is the proper nature of superstitions, and ceremonies, to
which is annexed severity, and rigorousnesse. And so it is, that these such
like superstitious, and ceremonious persons, desiring that their superstious,
and ceremonious living should be esteemed, and prised, are forced to be severe
and rigorous with works and words against them, who being not as they are have
outward defects, and vices, that so their manner of life, which they hold for
virtuous, may be the more prised, and esteemed. And it is likewise true, that
superstitions, and ceremonies having their original, and beginning from some
kind of law, which men have imagined, and severity, and rigor being annexed
to the nature of a law; (for by these it is maintained, and sustained,) it
comes to pass, that as well those, who attend to the observation of the law,
or of the Ceremonies, and Superstitions, that arise from it, as also they, who
attend to cause others to observe them, are severe, and rigorous against them
that do not observe the^. From hence I understand the cause, whence the
severity, and rigor in the Hebrews did proceed; And hereby I do not marvel,
if they that in being superstitious, and ceremonious are like unto the
Hebrews, are also severe against the vices and defects of men. And that which
I more esteem is that hereby I understand why God in the time of the law was
severe, and rigorous, showing more severity, and rigorousnesse unto men, then
piety, and mercy, although he did show them both the one and the other. And I
esteem it much more, that hereby I understand, that because after that God sent
his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord into the world, men stand not
subject to the Law, but under the Gospel, which is estranged from severity and
rigor, it comes to pass, that they who belong unto the Gospel being the
people of God, are not severe nor rigorous against the vices, and defects of
men, but are rather pitiful, and merciful. And also it comes from hence,
that God shows more pity and mercy, then severity and rigor. In such manner,
that the affection of severity and rigor in a man is a sign of self-love,
and of a mind subject to the law, to superstitions, and ceremonies, as were
the minds of the Hebrews: And a pitiful, and merciful affection is a sign
of mortification, and of a mind freed from the Law by the Gospel; such are
those of true Christians, members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXI. In what manner a pious person governes himself in those things
that befall him.
EVery Pious person in those things that come unto him in this present life, as
I understand, governes himself in this manner: The accidents being of that
quality, that his own will concurres not in them, if they be adverse, and
contrary, as the loss of honor, or of estate, or the death of some person
dear unto him, he comforts himself, saying, so it has pleased God. And if
they be prosperous, and favorable, as the increase of outward, and inward
goods, he does not pride himself, considering, this is the work of God, and
not mine. The things being of that quality, that his own proper will concurres
in them, if they be of evil, such as are his proper defects, and sins, he
embraces himself with Christ, saying, If in me there be defects, and sins,
there is in Christ satisfaction, and justification: And if they be of good, and
of favor in outward works, or in inward sentiments, he does not grow proud,
because in such matters he sees the goodness of God, and not his own proper
goodness. And I understand, that the content which such a person finds in
those things which he does well, is much like to the content, which a person
may feel, when a person makes a good letter, because another that writes well,
leads his hand by his. I would say, that as such a person contents himself
seeing a letter made with his hand, although not with his industry, attributing
the industry to him that guided his hand, and attributing to himself the
errors that are in the letter, knowing that the other would have made a better
with his own hand: so the spiritual person does content himself of the
consideration of the works which God does in him, and by him, attributing them
to God, and attributing to himself the errors that are in his works, knowing
that they would be much better, if God had done them without him. That this is
true, they shall understand by proper experience, who have a relish of the
things of the holy spirit, which are obtained by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXII. That humane wisdom has no more jurisdiction in the judgment
of their works, who are the sons of God, then in the judgment of the proper
works of God.
IN the self same manner, and for the self same cause, which S. Paul
understood, that they who are governed by the spirit of God, are the sons of
God, I understand that they who are the sons of God, are governed by the
spirit of God. And I understand, that as humane wisdom is incapable of the
knowledge of God, so likewise it is incapable of the knowledge of them, who are
the sons of God. And even as humane wisdom penetrateth not to understand the
admirable ccunsell that is in the works of God, neither does it also penetrate
to understand the divine counsel that is in the works of them, who are the
sons of God: Both those, and these being done by the spirit of God.

Farther I understand that humane wisdom, when it sets it self to judge the
works of them that are the sons of God, condemning, and taxing them through
cause of that self same temerity, which appears when it sets it self to
judge the works of God, condemning them, and calumniating them. I would say,
that that rashness of men is not less, which follow the judgment of humane
wisdom, when they set themselves to judge evil of Moses for the Hebrews whom
he slew when they worshipped the Calfe; and when they set themselves to judge
evil of Abraham, because he commanded his wife Sarah, that she should lie,
saying that she was his sister, and not his wife: And because S. Paul cursed
Ananias standing at judgment in his presence. And because he excused his
cursing, saying, he did not know him. And when in like manner they set
themselves to judge certain things like unto these, which the sons of God do
being governed by the spirit of God, which according to the judgment of humane
wisdom are absurd, and reproveable, and according to the judgment of God are
holy, and good: I say that this is no less rashness then that, with which
they set themselves to judge evil of God, because he favors many lewd men
with temporal good, depriving many good, and because he does other things
which humane wisdom calumniates, and condemns, and for which humane Laws do
rigorously chastise those men that do them: In as much as humane wisdom has
no more jurisdiction in the judgment of the works of pious men, then in the
judgment of the works of God, they being done by God himself, and the other
by those who being the Sons of God are governed by the spirit of God, and
therefore are free, and exempt from all humane law, as God himself is free and
exempt. I would say, that men should not have had more reason to have chastised
Abraham, if he had killed his soon Isaac, then to condemn God, because he
slaies many men by sudden death. But this government of the spirit of God is
not known, nor understood, but of them who are partakers of the spirit of God
itself, as it is known by experience, and as it is said by S. Paul the great
Preacher of the Gospel of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIII. That the holy Scripture is like a Candle in a dark place, and
that the holy spirit is like the Sun. This showed by s^aven conformities.
SAint Peter in his second Epistle understands, that a man that attends unto
piety having no other light to guide him in it, the that of the holy Scripture,
is like unto a man that is et in a dark place having no other light in it, then
that of a candle; and he understands that the man that attends unto piety
having obtained the spirit of God which guides him, and sets him in the way, is
like unto a man that stands in a place, wherein the sunbeams enter, which
make it clear, and resplendent: Where I consider seven things. The first,
that as the man set in a dark place, stands better with a candle then without
it: so the man that attends unto piety, which to him is a dark place, in as
much as humane reason, and wisdom do rather do him harm, then good in it,
stands better with the holy Scripture, then without it.

The second thing which I consider is, that as a man in a dark place sees not
the things that are therein so clearly, and manifestly with a candle, as he
might see them with the sun; so a man that attends unto piety, does not
understand, nor know the things of God, nor God himself so clearly, and
manifestly with holy Scripture, as he might see, and know them with the spirit
of God.

The third thing which I consider is, That as a man set in a dark place with
the light of the candle only, stands in danger to remain in the dark, any
occasion happening to extinguish the candle so the man, who attending unto
piety has no other light then that of holy Scripture, stands in danger to
remain without light, there coming any occasion that may deprive him of the
holy Scripture, or of the true understanding thereof.

The fourth thing which I consider is, that as it sometimes befalls a man set in
a dark place, where the light of the candle is, that being desirous it should
give more light he snuffes it himself, or seeks some other to snuff it; and
in the snuffing it comes to pass, that it is extinguished, and a man remains
without light: So unto a man, that attends only unto piety with that which he
knows and understands by holy Scripture, it sometimes comes, that willing to
understand more, or better in it, or by it, either he himself interprets it,
or seeks some to interpret it to him, and in interpreting, it comes to pass,
that of holy Scripture making it humane Scripture, a man remains in the dark,
albeit he does not so persuade himself.

The fifth thing which I consider is, that as on the Sunbeames entrance into an
obscure place, where a man serves himself of the light of a candle, it comes
to pass, that a man sees more clearly then before, all the things that are in
that place, the candle remaining as it were without light and without splendour,
in such manner, that now a man being desirous to see the things that are in
that place, that which he least looks upon is the candle: So the holy Spirit
entering into the mind of a man, that attends unto piety, serving himself of
the Scripture to that intent, it comes to pass, that a man understands, and
knows the things of God, and God himself more clearly then he did before;
the holy Scripture remaining in as much as to him ward as it were without
light, and without splendor: in such manner, as now being desirous to
understand the things of piety, and desirous to know God, that which he least
looks upon is the holy Scripture, attending to consider with the holy Spirit,
that abides in his mind, and not with that which is written in it. And
therefore S. Peter well commends the study of holy Scripture; but whilst a man
stands in the dark place of humane wisdom, and reason, and he wills that this
study should continue so long, until the light of the holy spirit shine into
the mind of a man: understanding that this light being come, a man has no more
need to seek that of holy Scripture, which departs of it self, as the light of
the candle departs, when the Sunbeams enter; and even as Moses departed at
the presence of Christ and the Law at the presence of the Gospel.

The Sixth thing which I consider is, that as a man which enjoyes the light of
the Sun, when he did certainly know that it would not fail him, albeit he
would not cast away the candle for the benefit received, but would rather leave
it to the intent it might serve another to that purpose which it had served
him, and yet notwithstanding would not serve himself thereof in that which he
did before serve himself: so the man that enjoyes the light of the holy
spirit, knowing certainly that it cannot fail him, albeit he do not cast away
holy Scripture, but rather leaves it, that it may serve to another for that
which it has served for unto him; nevertheless he does not serve himself of
it, in that whereof he did formerly serve himself, as I have already at other
times considered.

The seventh thing that I consider is, that as it is not of the essence of the
Sun, when it enters into a place where a candle stands, to show and discover
all that which the candle contains in it; so likewise it is not of the essence
of the holy Spirit, when it enters into the mind of him, who being applied
unto piety serves himself of holy Scripture, to show, and discover all the
secrets that stand shut up therein, albeit it do show, and discover that part
of them, which God will shall be discovered unto a man to whom the holy Spirit
is given.

The gifts of the holy Spirit are different, and the holy Scripture being
written by diverse persons, who had different gifts of the holy Spirit, and so
writ diversely, by consequence, it is understood of those persons, who have the
holy Spirit, of one in one part, and of another in another part, according as
the gifts are different, which are communicated from God with the holy Spirit
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIV. In what manner Jesus Christ our Lord will be followed and
imitated.
HAving at other times in these Considerations touched, as I then understood,
that which Jesus Christ our Lord says, He that will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, I come now with better
consideration to say, that I understand that in these words Christ says, Every
man that will follow me being desirous to be a Christian, let him renounce that
which humane wisdom teaches him, saying that a man ought not to be wanting to
himself, to his own, and to his honor, with intent not to be wanting unto
God, nor to them that are Gods, nor to the honor of God. And let him take upon
himself his Cross, which is his martyrdom, the shame, and the ignominy that
he shall suffer in the eyes of the men of this world in being wanting unto
himself, and to his, and to his honor. And so doing, he shall follow me, who
have been wanting unto my self, making my self a servant of a Son, that I
might not be wanting to God: and I have been wanting to mine own, not esteeming
them for mine, but those only that God has called, and made mine, making them
holy, and just: And I have been wanting to mine honor, contenting my self to
dye as a malefactor: and so doing he shall follow me, and shall be truly a
Christian. In such manner, as properly the injury, and the shame that redounds
to a Christian through the denial of himself in being wanting to himself,
and to his, and to his honor, is the Christian Cross, and is the self same
as to go after Christ. I would say, these words of Christ are of as much
value, as if I should say; he that will be a Christian, let him esteem himself
dead unto the world, in as much as not to seek the Glory, nor the reputation of
the world, and let him procure that which Christ procured, and seek that which
Christ sought; and in this manner he shall be a true Christian, as they are,
who knowing themselves, and feeling themselves bought by Christ, do hold him,
and knew him for their Lord; and for their superior, and do worship in spirit,
and in truth the true God, who is the Father of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXV. How that is to be understood, which S. Paul says, that Christ
reigns, and shall reign, until the resurrection of the just being made; he
do consigne his Kingdom to his eternal father.
THe men that reign in the Kingdom of the world, live under four most cruel
Tyrants; the Devil, the Flesh, Honor and Death. The Devil tyrannizeth them
making them impious, and enemies of God, and oftimes brings them to that
pass, that they kill themselves by diverse ways. The flesh tyrannizeth them
making them vicious, and licentious: Honor tyrannizeth them making them light,
and vain, and presumptuous, in such sort, that they dye whilst they live.
Death Tyrannizeth them, not suffering them to enjoy their prosperityes, and
happiness, cutting short their steps in them. This tyranny none understand,
but they that feel it; and they only feel it, who being desirous to enter
into the Kingdom of God, do procure to reduce themselves to Piety, do
travel to Mortify the flesh, and will resolve themselves with the world,
putting an end to glory, and to their own honor, and think to dispose
themselves, and to content themselves to dye. For as soon as ever they would
do this, they find difficulty in it, they feel, and experiment the tyranny,
and they know themselves tyrannized.

These selfsame persons if so be their desire to enter into the Kingdom of
God be a calling of God himself, and not their proper fantasy, accepting for
their own the justice of God, executed in Christ, do in this present life, go
out of the tyranny of the three tyrants in going out of the Kingdom of the
world, and entering into the Kingdom of God, wherein God reigns through
Christ. I would say, that Christ reigns as the Son of God, he being in them
that stand in his kingdom, and with them properly the same which the head is
in the Members of the body. For as from the head there descends virtue and
efficacy into the members of the body, which are Governed by it; even so from
Christ there descends virtue, and efficacy to them, that are in the Kingdom of
Christ, with which they combat against the tyrants, that hold other men
tyrannized: and so they are governed by Christ in this present life, and by
means of the same they shall obtain the resurrection, and life everlasting: and
so they shall go out of the tyranny of the fourth tyrant, which is death, and
shall enter into the Kingdom of God, where God shall reign by himself. In
the mean space they being gone out of the Kingdom of the world, having felt
the tyranny of the four Tyrants, do feel the sweetness, and pleasantness of
the Kingdom of Christ, feeling in themselves the virtue, and efficacy of
Christ, and the government of the holy Spirit, and feeling themselves Patrons
and Lords of their sensual appetites, and of their affections of Honor, and
of the ambition of the world, being resolved with themselves, and with the
world, in as much as being incorporated in Christ they find their flesh dead,
and they find dead in them the respect of the world, and certifying themselves
of their resurrection, immortality, and eternal life. Which certification
causes in them this effect, that albeit they feel death according to the body,
yet they feel it not as much as belongs to the soul through the certain hope
of resurrection. In this I understand consists the Kingdom of Christ: And
because the resurrection of the just being accomplished, we shall not need to
combat with the Devil, there shall be no need to mortify the flesh, nor to
contrast with the world, nor shall there be death to overcome. I understand,
that S. Paul says, that then Christ shall consigne this Kingdom to the
eternal Father; and that God shall be all in all, ruling, and governing every
thing by himself; in such manner, as the Kingdom of Christ according to S.
Paul shall endure until the universal resurrection, and the Kingdom of God
in men shall then begin, and shall be continual; men perpertually
acknowledging the benefit received by Jesus Christ our Lord. Like as it betides
unto a thirsty traveller, to whom there is given a vessel of cold water, who
whilst he drinks feels the benefit of the vessel, which gives him the
water; and having drunk, albeit setting the vessel aside he thanks him that
gave him to drink, nevertheless he acknowledges that by means of the vessel
he received that benefit. In such manner that as the thankful wayfairing man,
who is refreshed with the vessel of cold water, whilst he drinks, feels the
benefit of the vessel, and after he has drunk, feeling and knowing the
benefit of him, that gave him the vessel, he knows likewise the benefit of
the vessel: Even so men, whilst they stand in this present life, they feel
the kingdom of Christ, feeling the benefit of Christ; and in eternal life
they shall feel, and know the benefit of God; who has given Christ unto them,
and they shall know the benefit of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXVI. In what manner the malignant spirit is more impetuous then the
holy spirit.
BEing desirous to understand, which spirit is more impetuous in a man, the
Holy, or the Malignant, I resolve my self, that the malignant spirit is much
more impetuous in the impious, then the good spirit in the Pious; being moved
to this resolution for two Considerations, of which the one is founded in the
proper Nature of the spirits: For the malignant is by nature impetuous; and the
holy is by nature mild and quiet, in so much, that if at any time there seem
to be violence, or alteration, that is none of its own, but of the liveliness
of man's flesh, in which, and by which the Holy spirit works. And the other is
founded in the proper nature of men: for they being more inclined unto the
motions of the malignant spirit, then to that of the Holy Spirit, it comes to
pass, that unto that of the malignant spirit they are incited with their
proper affection, and inclination; and to those others of the Holy Spirit they
are benumbed from the self same thing. In such manner as the malignant spirit
being impetuous of its own proper nature, and the malignant spirit being
incited in the impious with the proper nature of the impious; and the Holy
Spirit being made more slow in the pious, through the proper nature of the
pious, in as much as he is a man; it comes to pass, that the malignant spirit
is more impetuous in the impious, then the Holy Spirit in the Pious. And in the
impious I understand that ordinarily the Holy spirit is nothing at all
impetuous; and in the Pious I understand the malignant spirit is more or less
impetuous, according to the greater or lesser liveliness of affections, that
is found in him: And in the same manner I understand, that the motion of the
Holy Spirit is more or less effieacious, according as the mortification that
is in him, is greater or less; in as much as through the liveliness of the
affections, and appetites of the pious, the force and violence of the malignant
spirit are increased, and by mortification are repressed, and retarded: and
because it is likewise true, that through the liveliness of the affections,
and appetites of the Pious, the forceablenesse of the Holy spirit are retarded,
and repressed, and with mortification are increased, and helped. Understanding
that all this is true, I understand likewise, that the Pious, who would, that
the motions of the malignant spirit should not have force nor be efficacious in
him, and that the motions of the Holy spirit should have force, and efficacy in
him, ought to attend unto the mortification of his affections, and appetites,
attending to Mortify in himself that which he has of Adam, and to make alive
that which he has of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXVII. That in the regenerate only by the Holy Spirit there being
experience of the things of God, there is also Certification of them.
ALL that in this life is done, known, or understood, is either by natural
instinct, or it is by experience, or by knowledge, or by divine inspiration,
and revelation. In the beast there is natural instinct, and experience as
every one may by himself consider. In men there is generally natural
instinct, and experience, as in Beasts, although with greater excellency: And
there is also knowledge, which as I understand consists in that, which one man
learnes from another, man having no greater assurance thereof, then the
relation, that is made unto him. And it is as much in divine things as in
h^mane. In men regenerated by the Holy spirit there is natural instinct, and
experience, and knowledge, and moreover divine inspiration, and revelation. I
would say, that regenerated men wise, know and understand some things by
natural instinct, others by experience, and others by Science, and others by
Divine inspiration. The natural instinct standing more chaste, and more pure in
them, then in other men. And having experience not only of natural, and humane
things, as other men have, but also of spiritual, and divine things; and
having not only science, learned from other men, but also inspired, and
revealed from God. All men being without the Holy spirit, are without
experience of spiritual things, and divine, having only that science of them,
which is gotten by the Scripture: whence it comes to pass, that as in the
humane, and natural things of which they have no experience, having only the
science, they remain with opinion without any assurance: even so in divine
matters being without experience they remain with opinion without any
assurance. In as much as where there is no experience, there can be no
assurance; And experience in the things of God is reserved to them, who have
the spirit of God, who having experience of spiritual matters, know that they
know, and understand natural, and humane things. I would say that the
difference between that, which regenerated men have science of, know and
understand in divine matters, and that which other men, how wise soever they
be, have science of, know, and understand in the self same things, is as much
as is between that, which those Physicians, which only know the Theory, have
the science of, know, and understand in Physique, and that which those
Physicians, who together with the Theory have the practice, have the science
of, and know. Whence I gather, that unregenerated men having no experience in
divine matters cannot have either confidenee, or diffidence that should be
sollid, and firm, but only through opinion, in such manner, as they have in
humane affairs. And therefore that comes forth true which I have written in
another Consideration, that God ofttimes gives unto pious persons some things
which they have no confidence to obtain, denying them some other, which they
have confidence to obtain; understanding that this comes to pass, when his
confidence, and his diffidence consists in science, and opinion, and not in
experience, and certification. Furthermore, I come to gather, that regenerated
men having experience of spiritual things have assurance of them, and that
having assurance they have also confidence, and diffidence solid, and firm.
And therefore that comes forth true which I have written in another
Consideration, that through that certainty, or incertainty, with which pious
persons find themselves in prayer, they may understand when they are inspired
to pray by the holy spirit, and when they are moved to pray from humane spirit,
and consequently when they are to be confident, and when they are to be
diffident.

Ezechias King of Judea, had experience in spiritual matters, and therefore
being inspired to pray in his infirmity he prayed, and his life was prolonged
to him, according to his confidence. And the self same King being diffident to
be able to obtain by his prayers of God, that he should revoke the sentence
given against Jerusalem, did not care to pray. If he had not had experience in
divine things, governing himself only with science, he would with so much the
more confidence have prayed, demanding the revocation of the sentence given
against Jerusalem, in as much as he had praying obtained the revocation of the
sentence given against his life: But having experience he forbore to be
governed by science, and so he stood firm in the confidence, and firm in the
diffidence. And if experience of divine things teaches thus much to one of
them, who had the spirit of Moses, how much better shall it teach it to them,
who have the spirit of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CGNSID. LXVIII. That the desire of knowledge is Imperfection in a Man,
contrary to the judgment of Humane Wisdom.
HVmane wisdom judges that the desire to know is a great perfection in man;
And the holy spirit judges that it is a great imperfection in a man. Humane
wisdom confirms her opinion, saying, that it has been seen by experience,
that in the world those men have lived most virtuously, who having the greatest
desire to know have most given themselves to endeavor to know, and have known
most: And here is alleged a troup of Philosophers. And the holy spirit on the
contrary affirms his sentence, saying, that through the desire of knowing
sin came into the world, and through sin death, and with it all the miseries,
and all the troubles whereunto we stand subject in this present life. That
this is true, is proved by the persuasion of the Devil, who said unto E^e, You
shall be like Gods knowing good and evil. Passing on farther, the holy spirit
faith, that the desire of knowledge destroyed the Hebrews, in as much as
desiring to understand the prophecies that spoke of the Messiah, and procuring
to understand them by the way of wit, and humane discourse, they imagined to
themselves, and figured a M^ssias so contrary to him whom God sent them, as
when they had him, they knew him not, and not knowing him they did not receive
him, and from their not receiving him, redownded not only that they did not
enjoy him, but it caused their ruin, and perdition. Passing on farther the
holy Spirit says, that the Gentiles desiring to know the original, and the
beginning of natural things did procure to know them with their own wits, and
discourses; whence comes to pass that which Saint Paul said, They became vain
in their imaginations, and they worshipped the creatures, and ran headlong into
other absurd, and brutish inconveniences. In the self same manner the holy
spirit says, that many men desiring to know the things which appertain to
Christian Religion, and procuring it with natural light, have made such
strange conceits of God, and of Christ, and of the Christian state, and of the
Christian living, that a man may say with truth, that of Christ they have
nothing but the name; participating on one side of the inconvenience of the
Hebrews, in as much as they read holy Scripture, and desiring to understand
it, and procuring this not with that spiritual light, with which it was
written, but with natural light, they do not understand it: And participating
on the other side of the inconvenience of the Gentiles, in as much as desiring
to know that which the Gentiles knew, they read that which the Gentiles writ,
and they think as the Gentiles thought, and frame Gentiles minds.

The holy spirit having proved his sentence against that desire of knowing
which men have, says further, that that virtue which is got by desiring to
know, and knowing that which may be known with natural light, is rather a vice
then a virtue, in as much as it makes men presumptuous, insolent, and
consequently impious, and incredulous. That this is true, appears by this,
that the men that follow their proper natural light, by how much they are more
virtuous, according to the world, by so much they have less confidence in God,
and do so much less believe in Christ, and therefore are so much more
impious, and more incredulous; in such manner, that it stands well to say that
the desire to know is a great imperfection in a man.

In this discourse I learn two things. The one, that humane wisdom has no
jurisdiction in judging of the perfection, and imperfection of a man. The
other, that it appertains to every man, who being called of God to the grace
of the Gospel makes answer thereunto, to mortify, and kill in himself the
desire to know, of what sort soever it be, that he may not fall into the
inconvenience of false Christians, and of the Gentiles, and of the Hebrews, nor
into that wherein our first Fathers fell; and that they may come to the
perfection whereunto S. Paul came, not desiring, nor procuring to know other
then Christ, and him crucified. Which wisdom we ought to desire and procure
but with prayer to God, we, who having accepted the grace of the Gospel, are
true Christians incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXIX. That a man ought always to acknowledge himself incredulous,
and defective in faith: and that there is so much faith in a man, as much as
there is knowledge of God, and Christ.
When I consider the great efficacy which Jesus Christ our Lord attributes
unto Faith, saying, that with it, how little soever it be, we may remove
mountains from one place to another, returning upon my self and not finding my
self with such an efficacious faith, I know how weak, and feeble my faith is,
and then I turn my mind to God, saying with the Apostles, Lord increase my
faith, and saying with the father of the Lunatique, Lord help mine unbelief.
And understanding that my faith is to come through the gift of God, and
holding for certain, that I shall have so much of faith, as I shall have of the
knowledge of God, and of Christ, for as much as men, how ever good relation
they have of other men do so much trust them, as they know them; I turn my
self to pray God, that he would let me know him, and would let me see him,
and that he would let me know, and see Christ as much as may be in this present
life: to the intent, that I may have confidence, and so my faith may be strong,
and efficacious. Wherein I consider the craft of the enemy of mankind, and
most full of enmity against Christ, in as much as he understanding, that the
intent, with which Christ did so much exaggerate the efficacy of Faith, makes
that men, how much soever they believe, and how much confidence soever they
have, should always judge themselves incredulous, and defective in the Faith,
has made that amongst men, who do approve the Gospel of Christ, it should be
an honorable thing to believe, and a shameful thing not to believe, or to
doubt, to the intent, that persuading themselves for their own honor sake,
that they do believe, they should not come to know themselves incredulous,
and defective in the faith; and so they never come to get that which Christ
pretends they should get, that is the knowledge of God and of Christ, and by
the knowledge Faith, and by Faith justification, and by justification
glorification, and eternal life. And in very truth great is the blindness,
and ignorance of men in every thing, that see only with the eyes of humane
wisdom; and very excessive great in this, that not admitting in humane matters
one testimony that testifies only of hearsay, except he speak of certain
knowledge, or proper experience, it persuades it self by it self, and by
others, that in divine matters it suffices to testify on hearsay, having
neither certain knowledge, nor proper experience, nay rather neither pretending
the one, nor procuring the other; and that which is worse, reprehending them,
who pretend the certain knowledge, and procure the experience, not contenting
themselves to testify on hearsay by relation of others. And in divine
matters, I understand that they have certain knowledge, whoknow God, and Christ
by revelation, and inspiration, of which things they only can give testimony,
who have them, and their testimony is true. The other albeit they give
testimony of themselves by hearsay, their testimony is not true, because they
do not think as they speak. And in the self same things of God I understand,
that they have experience, who find, and feel in themselves the effects,
which the knowledge of Christ, which makes them just, works in them, and by
consequence the effects of piety, and the effects of justification. All other
men, when they give testimony of these things not having the experience of
them, their testimony is not true, because they do not think what they speak.

From all this I come to gather, that a man ought to judge himself
incredulous, and defective in the Faith, as long as he has not so much faith
as suffices therewith to remove mountains from one place to another; and that
judging himself such, he ought to demand of God, that he should give him
faith, not contenting himself to testify in divine things by hearsay, and
byrelation, but by certain knowledge, and proper experience.

Furthermore I come to gather, that there being in effect as much faith in a
man, as there is knowledge of God, and Christ, and that by faith a man gets
justification; and by justification he gets glorification, and life eternal;
And that God being able to give in an instant to a man so much knowledge of
himself, and of Christ, letting himself to be known, and showing forth Christ
unto him so much as suffices to believe, we ought not to distrust of the
salvation of a man, whilst his soul in his body, always hoping that God will
do with him that which he can do, and that which he uses, suffering
himself to be known, and showing Christ unto him; to the intent, that knowing
he may believe, and love, and believing, he may enjoy the Christian
justification, and enjoying the Christian justification he may go to live, and
reign with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXX. In what those three gifts of God, Faith, Hope, and Charity do
consist: and in what their eminency amongst other gifts does consist: and the
eminency of Charity amongst the three gifts.
COnsidering that the Apostle sets forth the most high and excellent amongst
the gifts of God Faith, Hope, and Charity, I have oftimes set my self to
examine in what this eminency does consist, and not having been able to
understand in what they consist, it seems to me, that I am not able to
understand, in what their eminency amongst the rest does consist. Now beginning
to mine ownseeming a little to understand in what they consist, I begin
likewise to feel in what their eminency does confist.

Faith, as I understand, consists in this, that a man should believe and hold
for certain all that which is contained in holy Scripture, having confidence in
the divine promises, that are contained in it, as if to him properly, and
principally they had been made. Of the two parts of faith, which are, to
believe, and to have confidence; I understand, that of one of them a man's mind
is in some manner capable: I would say, that a man is able to bring himself to
believe, or at least to persuade himself, that he does believe: And of the
other I understand he is incapable; I would say, he is not able of himself, to
reduce himself to have confidence; nor to persuade himself, that he has
confidence: In such sort, as he who believes, and has not confidence, shows
that his belief is industry, and humane wit, and not divine inspiration; And
he who believing has confidence, shows that his belief is inspiration, and
Revelation. Whereupon I understand, that to have confidence is a good
countersigne in a man, to certify himself, that he believes by inspiration,
and revelation.

Hope, as I understand, consists in Patience, and in the sufferance, with which
a man that believes and has confidence, expects the accomplishment of the
Promises of God, without putting himself into the Devils service with
impiety, nor into that of the world with vanity, nor into that of his own flesh
with vice. Like as a captain, who having promise from the Emperor, that at his
coming into Italy he will use his service, albeit the Emperor slow his journey,
and he be solicited by many Princes, that would serve themselves of him, will
accept no party, expecting the coming of the Emperor, fearing that if he come,
and find him in others service, he will not accept him to his own service. This
Hope presupposes Faith; I would say, that to expect, it is necessary, that
there should be Faith in him who hopes, with which he should give credit to
that which is told him, and have confidence in that, which is promised him: For
otherwise he should not be able to maintain himself in expecting. And that
Hope does properly consist in this, I understand by some speeches, which we
read in the Gospel, such as is that of the Ten virgins, who did expect the
Bridegroom; and that of men, that expect their Lord when he returns.

Charity, I understand, consists in the love and in the affection, which a man
that believes, has confidence, and Hopes, carries to God, and to Christ, and
likewise to the things of God, and of Christ, standing properly affectionated,
and enamoured of believing, of having confidence, and of hoping: in such
manner, that because he who has these three gifts of God, stands united with
God, believing, hoping, and loving, with great reason are these three gifts the
most high, and most excellent amongst all the other.

Having understood in what these three gifts of God consists, and in what their
eminency does consist, and desiring to understand for what cause the self same
Apostle puts Charity for more eminent, then Faith, and Hope, I think, and hold
for certain, that the eminency consists in this, that he who believes, and has
confidence, shall never stand solid in the Faith, if he find not a taste, and
relish in the believing, and in the having confidence; nor shall he stand
solid in Hope, if he do not find a taste and relish in the Hope: Charity
therefore being that which gives the taste, and savor, with which Faith is
sustained, and Hope; it well follows, that Charity is the most eminent between
Faith and Hope; in as much as it maintains, and upholds the other, and it by
it self alone maintains, and upholds it self; and in as much as Faith shall
fail, when there shall be nothing to believe, nor to have confidence in; and
Hope shall fail, when Christ being returned, and the resurrection of the just
being made, there shall be nothing more to hope: but Charity shall never fail;
for there shall be always what to Love, and there shall be always what to
taste. For in eternal life we shall love God, and Christ, and we shall find
relish, and savor in the contemplation of God, and of Christ; we, who in
this present life have lived with Faith, Hope, and Charity, being incorporated
in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXI. Upon the most holy prayer of OUR FATHER.
IN the most holy prayer of Our Father I consider all this: First that calling
God Father, it becomes me to reduce my self to hope from God, all that which
an obedient son may hope from a most good, and loving Father. And albeit I am a
disobedient Son, it matters not: For God considers me not by that which I am of
my self, but by that which I am by Christ, of whom I am a member, and who was
a most obedient Son; through which Sonship I call God Father. If I should call
him Father for the common generations sake, my being would be of importance;
but calling him so through particular regeneration, my being imports not to
make me obedient, or disobedient, but as I have said the being of Christ, who
was most obedient. And farthermore I understand, that it is necessary, that I
should reduce my self to be with God such a one, as a good, and obedient Son
is with his Father.

Secondly I consider, that saying Our, I presuppose, that I hold for brethren
all those, who through regeneration, hold God for their Father, and that I
ought to govern my self with them, as with brethren.

Thirdly I consider, that because God is, where he is known, holy Scripture
uses to say, that God is in Heaven; for there God is known. God is in all his
creatures; but it is not said, that he is, but only in them, who know him, and
where he lets himself to be known.

Fourthly I consider, that the proper desire of a pious Christian is, that Gods
Name should be sanctified; I would say, that God should be esteemed, and judged
of every one for Holy, and for just in all his works, as he is in truth.

Humane wisdom not finding holiness, nor justice in many of those things
which be fall men in this life, flying from the inconvenience of attributing
injustice to God, falls into another inconvenience, depriving God of his
particular Providence in all things. And the holy spirit knowing in all things
holiness, and justice on Gods part, does not doubt to attribute them all to
God; desiring that men captivating the judgment of their own humane wisdom,
should sanctify the name of God, confessing, and holding, that God does all
things, and that in all things is holiness, and justice. There are some men,
who sanctify God in the things which they judge good, drawing themselves back
in those things which they judge to be evil. And there are other men, who
sanctify God generally in all things, but with the mouth, and not with the
heart. And the desire of the Pious Christian is, that God should be sanctified
in all things, and that the sanctification should come from the Heart; for in
this manner God will be sanctified.

Fifthly I consider, that the proper, and continual sighing of a pious
Christian consists in the desire, that the Kingdom of God should suddenly
come, when the resurrection of the just being made, Christ shall consigne the
Kingdom to his eternal father. For that shall be properly the Kingdom of
God, in as much as the just shall be governed immediately by God, seeing God
himself face to face. God reigns in this present life in the just but by
Christ, as he gives light but by the Sun: and God shall reign in life
eternal by himself, as by himself he shall give light.

Sixthly I consider, that the pious Christians flying from the will of God,
which is with wrath, and that which is mediat by those things which we call
second causes, do demand, that that will of God should be executed here on
earth which is executed in heaven, understanding that which is with mercy, and
with love, and that which is immediate by God himself.

Seventhly I consider, that the Pious Christians feeling, that through the
curse for the first man's sin it results that they eat their bread with
sorrow, and care, they demand of God, that freeing them from the solicitude,
and the grief, he should provide them of ordinary sustentation, in such
manner, that they may be provided, and sustained according to their necessities
without grief, or sollicitousnesse, acknowledging their sustentation only from
the liberality of God, and even in this, beginning to feel the remedy of the
first man's sin, together there with feeling the benefit of Christ.

Eighthly I consider, that the pious Christians, not because they make any doubt
of the general pardon, which they have had by the justice of God executed in
Christ; for of this they are most assured; but because they rejoice to remember
themselves, that they are debtors; which remembrance breeds in them humility in
the sight of God; they ask always of God, that he would pardon them those
things, for which he might in justice chastize them. And I understand, that
they allege the pardon, which they have given to them, who were their debtors,
rather to oblige themselves to pardon, then to oblige God, that he should for
such cause pardon them. This I understand thus, by that which Jesus Christ
himself ads in the Gospel, saying, If you pardon, you shall be pardoned.

Ninthly I consider, that the pious Christians knowing their own weakness fear
the Temptation, in as much as it may sever them from Christian decorum; and
knowing here with the necessity, which they have to be mortified with
temptations, they demand of God, not that he should not tempt them, but that
the temptations may be of that quality, that they should not make them to loose
the Christian decorum

Tenthly I consider, that pious Christians having understood, that many are the
evils that combat the just, they are afraid to be oppressed by them, and
knowing the frailty of their own forces to be able to make resistance, they
have recourse to God, demanding of him, that he should free them from all.

In these desires, and in these demands I understand that pious persons stand,
and persevere, not only through the outward doctrine of Jesus Christ our Lord,
which they find written in his history; but also through the inward doctrine
of the holy spirit, who puts these desires into their minds, and moves them to
demand these things. And they, who with the outward Doctrine of Christ have not
that inward of the holy spirit, in praying ^s taught, and not inspired, do not
pray as the true and lively members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXII. That man pretending that part of the image of God, which did
not appertain unto him, lost that part, which did appertain to him.
IN the creation of man, I read that he was created after the Image, and
similitude of God. And a little after I read that pretending to get the image
of God, he became disobedient to God* and was driven out of Earthly Paradise.
Whereupon understanding that the Image, and similitude of God, with which man
was created, was different from that, which man in his depravation pretended, I
am come to consider, that the Image of God, with which a man was created, is
that which appertained to him, as a man, that which might stand; and be
received in him; and that the Image of God, which a man pretended unto, is that
which did not appertain unto him, as a Man, that which is properly of God, not
being communicable to the creatures. And albeit from the words, which contain
the creation of man, there is only gathered, that the Image of God, with which
he was created, did consist in the superiority, that he had overall other
creatures; nevertheless by that, which it seems to me S. Paul felt, and that
which I see fulfilled in Christ, and feel and see begun in them that are the
members of Christ, I understand, that besides the superiority, which the
Scripture notes, man was like unto God, in as much as belongs to his mind, in
Piety, Justice, and Holiness, and as much as belongs to his body in
impassibility, and in immortality. In this I certify my self, remembering, that
we recover by Christ that which we lost by Adam. We lost by Adam Piety,
justice, and Holiness, and we lost the impassibility, and immortality of our
bodies; and by Christ we shall in this life recover piety, justice, and
holiness in our minds, and we shall recover in eternal life the
impassibility, and immortality of our bodies. And because I see Christ being
raifed impassible, and immortal, I have said, that I see in him that complete,
and perfect Image of God. which man lost. And because I feel, that they, who
are the members of Christ being regenerated by the holy spirit, have piety,
justice, and holiness, I have said, that in them I see the Image of God begun
to be repaired, which the first man lost.

Of that Image of God, which man pretended unto, albeit from holy Scripture I
cannot gather, that it consisted but only in the knowledge of good and evil;
nevertheless by that, which I consider in every of those men, who have not
obtained the christian regeneration; and properly by that, which even they, who
have obtained it, do feel in themselves, and know of themselves, I
understand, that besides the knowledge of good and evil, which holy Scripture
notes, man pretended unto that Image of God, which consists in the proper
being of God, who is of himself, and gives being, and life to every thing that
is, and lives, and therefore loves himself, and for himself loves all things,
and would be loved for himself, and above all things, and has majesty, and
glory, and omnipotency.

This I think understanding thus, that since there yet lives in a man that
cursed persuasion of the enemy of humane kind, there yet lives a rash pretense
to obtain that image of God, which only appertains to God, not being
communicable with the Creatures.

Whence as I understand it proceeds, that a man will not depend on others, but
on himself, to which things he attends as much as is possible for him; and that
he loves himself, and loves all things for himself; and pretends in every of
his own matters his own proper glory, and would put in execution every thing
that comes into his appetite. And from this self same fountain, I understand,
proceed in a man those other things, which are annexed unto these, such as are
proper estimation, Ambition, Vainglory, Anger, Envy. And I understand, that in
those men, who have obtained Christian regeneration by Christ, so much does the
pretense to Gods image, which belongs not to them, go abating, as much as they
go recovering that which belongs to them; in such manner, that as Piety,
Justice, and Holiness go increasing in the^, so does self love, ambition,
and proper estimation, arrogance, and their own rashness go decreasing; The
incorporatio^ wherewith they stand incorporated in Christ, working this
singular effect in them, from which it comes that they are humble, and obedient
sons, not presumptuous, nor disobedient, as was the first man*

To understand this better, I set my self to consider between God and man, the
devil, and Christ the selfsame as between a Father, and a presumptuous
son, an evil slave, and an obedient son. And I understand, that God did
with man giving him his Image, and similitude, that which a father does with
his son, giving unto him in his house an authority such as belongs to a son.
And that man did with God, pretending unto the Image of God, that which a
presumptuous son does with his Father, that contents not himself with that
degree which he has in his fathers house, as a son, but pretends, and wills
the degree which his father has: And that the Devil did that to man
persuading him to become disobedient, which an evil slave does toward his
master, procuring to sever his sons from his obedience, to do him
displeasure, and to ruin them. And I understand that Christ did with God, in
contenting himself, that on him should be executed the justice of God, that
which an obedient son does with his father, contenting himself that his father
should chastize him for that, for which he ought to chastize the other
disobedient son, to reduce him to his obedience, and to restore unto him in his
house that degree and that dignity which belongs to a son. From all that is
said I take two resolutions: The first, that it belongs to the pious Christian
to desist from the pretense of that Image, and similitude of God, which belongs
not to him, renouncing every desire to know all self love, all ambition, all
proper esteem, all arrogance, and all presumption, and to attend to recover
entirely that Image, and similitude of God, which appertains unto him,
demanding of God greater piety, greater justice, and greater holiness, and
demanding of him impassibility, and immortality. The second, that to the pious
Christian it belongs to know his reparation from the obedience of Christ, and
to know his depravation from the disobedience of Adam, and so to leave to
imitate Adam, and to attend to imitate Christ: Who being in the form of God
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, taking upon him the form of a servant; for which cause God has
exalted him, and given him absolute power, and superiority in Heaven and in
Earth. So much did avail before God the obedience, and the humility of Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXIII. That the union between God and mon is made by love: that love
grows from knowledge: what a kind of thing knowledge, love, and union is.
SO far forth as I understand, does a man remain united with God, in as much as
a man Lo^es God; that if the Love be great, the Union is great. And if the Love
be little, the Union is little. Some men there are, who love God by relation, but
they remain not united with God, because they first loved themselves before
God, loving God for themselves. There are other men, who love God because God
himself willing to be loved of them, has let himself be known, and seen by
them; they stand united with God, because they first love God before
themselves, loving themselves for God. In them as I understand so great is the
union which they have with God, as is the love which they have to God. And so
much is the Love which they have to God, as is the knowledge, which they have
of God. If the knowledge be perfect and entire the love is perfect and entire,
and the union is perfect and entire,; and on the contrary; in such manner, that
there is as much perfection, or imperfection in the union, as there is
perfection, or imperfection in the Love, and knowledge. The self same is
between love and knowledge. Whereby I understand, that because the knowledge
which men have of God in this life is imperfect through the power of our flesh,
the love also which they have to God is imperfect; and the union is imperfect,
which we have with God. And I understand also, that because our flesh in life
everlasting shall not be base, but glorious, our knowledge shall be perfect,
our love shall be perfect, and our union shall be perfect.

In the mean while I understand, that a pious person, who by the liberality of
God begins to know God, and to love God, and to stand united with God, ought to
pretend to grow in the knowledge, in the love, and in the union, not judging
himself deprived of the knowledge, nor of the love, nor of the union with God,
whilst he finds in himself any part of true knowledge, any part of love, any
part of union.

The true and efficacious knowledge of God, as I have otherwhere said as I
understand consists in certain sentiments, and in certain knowledges of the
proper being of God, which pious persons do obtain, some more, some less,
some with greater evidence, some with less, according to the will of God,
which causes the sentiments, and the knowledges, of which they can only give
testimony, who have tasted them, nay they only understand this Language, it
being to all others altogether unintelligible; It being most true, which Saint
Paul says, that a man without the spirit of God does not understand the
things, that are of the spirit of God.

The true, and efficacious Love of God I understand consists in an affection
from the very bowels which a man bears to God, and to all those things that
are Gods, desiring that he should be known, loved, and prized in the world, in
such manner as is just: To the intent, that he should be known, loved, and
prized with this bowelly affection, I understand Christ pretended that his
Christians should say that first part of Our Father, which all appertains to
the glory of God. From this bowelly affection I understand it proceeds that a
man loves God above all things, loving every thing for God, the creatures in
general, in as much as they are the creatures of God, all all men, in as much
as they be the creatures of God, and in as much as God will, that our neighbor
should be loved, and our neighbor is every man, of what blood soever, state,
or condition; and men regenerated by the holy spirit, as the creatures of God,
as neighbors, and principally in as much as in them is seen, and known the
image and likeness of God, in such sort, as we have otherwise declared.

Amongst the creatures the man that loves God, loves them most who do most
illustrate the glory of God. And amongst men whom he lou^ as neighbors, he
loves them most, whom he sees least depraved, and least impious. And I say
less, understanding that in all men, who are not regenerated by the holy
spirit, there is found depravation, and impiety. Amongst regenerated men he
who loves God, for the love of God loves them most whom he sees, and knows to
be most conformable to the image, and similitude of God, and in whom he sees
this image more proper, and more natural. And a man who loves God, loves
himself, as the creature of God, as a neighbor, and in as much as he sees the
similitude and image of God reformed in himself, not procuring, nor willing in
any other manner to be loved for himself, but rather despising, and abhorring
the love that men bear him, when they do not love him for the love of God. In
this manner I understand, that a man who loves god. loves himself for the love
of God, and loves all things for the love of God. And farther I understand,
that a man, who loves himself above all things, loves god for respect of
himself; and this man pretends his own utility in the love of god: he loves in
respect of himself the creatures, loving them more, from whom he expects more
profit: He loves all men in respect of himself, loving them most which are
most profitable, and most necessary: And he loves in respect of himself the
men, whom he thinks to have obtained the Christian regeneration, loving them
most, by means of whom he pretends to be able to get piety, justice, and
sanctity. And resolutely he pretends, and procures to be loved for himself,
and to be loved about all things, which as I have at other times said, is
natural to a man, in as much as he pretends to get the image, which belongs
not to him. And here I understand that a man, who reduces himself to a desire
of not being beloved but for the love of god, finding molestation in the love,
which is borne toward him for himself, may judge to have made great profit in
the knowledge of god, in the love of god, and in the union of god. Of this
sort, and quality, as I understand, is the love which men have, who are united
with god, which as I understand is in part in a man in this present life, and
shall be entire in life everlasting. And he who shall feel any thing of this
part, has great reason to live joyful, and content, holding that part as an
earnest of his increase, and of his perfection in life everlasting.

The true and efficacious Union between God and man, consists in this, that S.
John says, that he who loves God, dwells in God, and God dwells in him. Gods
inhabitancy in a man may well be felt, as it is in truth felt; but to them, who
feel it not, it cannot be made to be understood. The self same may as it were
be said of man's inhabitancy in God. And I say as it were, because it seems that
it may be made to be understood, saying, that he who loving God stands united
with God, abides in God, always remembering God, even like as he who loving a
Creature, stand united with it, abides in it, always remembering himself of
it. It is very true, that not thus neither is the dwelling of man in god
understood.

For this union I understand Christ our Lord prayed unto his eternal, and
heavenly Father, demanding of him, that they who were to believe in him, should
be one self thing with him, and with the Father himself, and should be one
self same thing between themselves.

From this divine union it proceeds, that a man altogether, and in all things
remits himself to the will of God, dispoyling himself of his own proper will,
and so brings himself to will that which God wills, and in that manner which
God wills, to love that which God loves, and in that manner which God loves it,
and consequently not to will that which God wills not, and not to love that
which God loves not. And the man that is thus remitted, and thus reduced, may
hold for certain, that he stands united with God, and that he dwells in God,
and God in him. And he shall understand, that he so far stands united with God
as far as he stands thus remitted, and thus reduced. If he stand much, the
union is much, if little, the union is little.

It proceeds also from this divine Union, that a man likes and dislikes all
those things which those persons like and dislike, who stand in the self same
Union, in such manner, that there is between them a very great conformity in
wills; and so great is the conformity which is between them, as the Union is
great which they have with God, and between themselves. This conformity is
likewise a good countersigne, with which a man may certify himself, whether
he stand united with God, and how much of this union he has gotten.

Having understood, how the Union between God, and man is made by Love; and
that Love grows from that knowledge which a man has of God. And having
likewise understood in what the Union, and the Love, and the Knowledge do
consist, I come to resolve my self in this, that to that person which attends
unto piety, it belongs to attend to obtain the knowledge of God, and with the
knowledge the love, and with the Love the Union. Pretending to obtain all this
by the liberality of God, and exercising himself in knowing himself, I would
say the frail, and miserable being of man; and to disenamour himself of
himself, not willing to be loved for himself, and procuring to be loved for
God; and in disuniting him self from himself, not willing to have things
according to his own fantasy, and will, but according as God shall offer them
to him, either by himself, or by means of men, or by means of the creatures.
And in this manner shall he obtain the perfect knowledge of God, the perfect
love of God, and the perfect Union with God. But not now in this present life:
for the flesh except it be raised up, is not a fitting subject for this; but in
life everlasting, where the flesh being raised up shall be an able subject to
be as it shall be like unto the glorious flesh, with which Christ Jesus our
Lord arose.

CONSID. LXXIV. That it be^ides to pious persons in spiritual things, as it
befalls in outward things to him, who having been blind begins to see.
TO the person that begins to understand spiritual, and divine things, and
that begins to know them, I understand that befalls which befalls those persons,
who having by some accident lost the sight of their eyes, begin to recover it.
I would say, that as those persons go knowing the being of things according as
they go recovering the sight of their eyes, first confusedly, as it befell to
the blind man in the Gospel, who beginning to open his eyes saw men, and it
seemed to him, that they were trees; and afterward less confusedly, until
such time, as by little and little they come to see, and know things in their own
proper being.

In the selfsame manner these persons go on knowing spiritual, and divine
things, accordingly as they go purifying their minds with Faith, and with
Love, and with union with God.

First they know them confusedly, and afterward less confusedly, and so by
little and little they go advancing in the knowledge of them, until such time
as they ariue I would say unto such pass, as they come to know God, and the
things that are gods, in that manner, which may be in this present life. And
hence as I understand it proceeds, that that thing, which a person without the
spirit holds for holy, and just, and good, in the things of God, another
person, who has the spirit, condemns and reputes defective and evil. And
hence it likewise proceeds, that that which a person, who has little of the
spirit, holds for most certain, another, who has more spirit then he, holds
for an error. Going on thus from one step to another, the clearenesse of that
judgment increasing, which spiritual persons have of divine matters. Whereby
I understand, that the error of pious persons, when in those divine, and
spiritual matters, which they know, they form their conceit^ according to
that, which they come to know by the first knowledge, not expecting other
knowleges more clear, and more evident, is no less, then that of the blind
man, who begins to recover the sight of his eyes, when in the things, which he
begins to see, he forms his conceits according to that, which they appeared
unto him at the first, not expecting to see them better, and more clearly.

Furthermore I understand, that it belongs to every Pious person to be very
modest, and very moderate in approving, or condemning things, for as much as
pleases, or displeases God, considering that the judgment, which God makes
of things is very different from that which men make, how spiritual soever
they be: In as much as oftimes a person that has much spirit condemns that,
which another who has little spirit approves. And I understand, that only
those things ought to be approved for holy, and to be condemned for evil, of
which we have the certain testimony of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CGNSID. LXXV. How it is understood, that God communicates unto us his Divine
treasures by Christ: how God reigns by Christ: and how Christ is the head of
the Church.
WIlling to understand in what manner we, who are the members of Christ, do
obtain all the things of God by Christ, I consider, that as all men, who have
the outward sight of the eyes clear, do know the outward being of things
through the benefit of the Sun; in which God has set his outward light: so all
men, who have the sight of their inward eyes clear, do know all inward things
by the benefit of Christ, in whom as Saint Paul says, God has set all the
Treasures of his Divinity: I would say, that as God having set all the outward
light in the Sun, the Sun it self sends forth his beams, which work his
effect, and are efficacious in those things, which are abillitated, for as much
as only those living creatures are deprived of the benefit of the Sun, to whom
eyesight is wanting, and to them, who shut themselves up in caves, or dens,
whereunto the Sunbeames cannot pearce: in the self same manner, God having put
in Christ all the treasures of his Divinity, this Christ powers out his
treasures upon them, who being men are clothed with the same livery, with
which he was clothed, which treasures are efficacious in those Persons, which
God has drawn unto the knowledge of Christ, and so they are members of Christ,
they only being deprived of this divine influence, who have not the knowledge
of God, and consequently are not Pious, and who have not the knowledge of
Christ, and consequently are not just; for in them only the divine Treasures,
which Christ powers out upon men, are not efficacious; they standing as much
deprived of the sense, and knowledge of them, as he who is borne blind stands
deprived of the sense, and knowledge of the light, of the Sun. And I
understand, that as it appertains to him, who finds himself in this
privation to pray God, that he would open, and clear the sight of his eyes, in
such sort, that he also may enjoy the light of the Sun, in as much as the Sun
of its own self lets it self to be enjoyed: so in like manner to him who
feels not in himself the gifts of God, which are communicated unto men by
Christ, it appertains to pray God, that he would habilitate him, and that he
would purify him, in such sort, as he may become a good subject to receive the
divine trasures efficaciouslie, which Christ powers out upon all men, In as
much as god has for all put them in him, and he generally powers them out
upon all men, as S. John very well understood, saying, That of that which
abounds in Christ, we all; who are his members receive grace, and more grace:
In as much as god by the means of Moses gave not unto us but the law only, but
by means of Jesus Christ he gives grace unto us, Justifying us in the Justice
executed in Christ himself; and he gives unto us truth, giving unto us his
spirit, which teaches us every truth. And because all these divine gifts do
come, and shall come unto men in this life from Christ, and he gives them unto
them, and communicates them unto them, it is rightly said, that this is the
kingdom of Christ, and that it shall so long last, until the resurrection of
the just being made Christ consigne the kingdom to his everlasting Father. god
reigns at present, but by Christ, even as god sends his light but by the Sun:
And in the life eternal god shall reign by himself, and communicate his
light. I would say, that in the life eternal, all divine gifts shall come
immediately from god unto men, and from god shall come light immediately unto
men. In this manner understanding the benefit of Christ toward men, and the
kingdom of Christ in this present life. I understand likewise after what sort
Christ is the Head of the Church. I would say I understand, that as from my
Head there descends virtue throughout all my members, they being all governed,
and sustained by it: so from Christ descends virtue for all them that appertain
to the Chursh, being all of them sustained; and governed with the divine gifts
which are communicated to them from Christ. And I understand, that they
appertain to the Church, who being called of god, and drawn to the knowledge of
Christ, are able to receive with efficacy the divine Treasures, which the only
begotten Son of god Christ Jesus our Lord sheds upon all.

CONSID. LXXVI. What thing scandal is, and in what manner Christian persons
ought to govern themselves in the scandal.
COnsidering how much esteem is made in holy Scripture of a Scandal, in as
much as Jesus Christ our Lord threatens the world because of the scandal,
advising us that we should not give scandal to none of those who believe in
him; And in as much as S. Paul says, that for the avoiding of scadalising of
one christian, he would forbear to eat flesh all the time of his life: I have
desired to live in this life in such sort, that I be not cause of scandal to
any: And I have desired the same for those persons, whom I love in Christ. And
considering that on the other side a man cannot live in this life without
scandalising some, for as much as even Christ himself scandalized; nay he is
even called a Rock of offense, in as much as many have fallen stumbling at his
humility, and abasement, and do fall without being able to rise:

First I have considered, that scandal is the same as offense; and so we say,
that he is scandalized, who for that which he hears, or sees done, severs
himself, or is solicited, and tempted to sever himself from that which he
ought not, or would not sever himself.

Afterward I have understood by holy Scripture, that God scandaliseth, and is
scandalized; that Gods Saints scandalize, and are scandalized; That the Saints
of the world scandalize, and are scandalized; And that the men of the world,
who do not attend to any holiness, scandalize, but are not scandalized.

God scandaliseth his Saints, when they being imperfect, and setting themselves
with natural light to judge the works of God, are tempted to judge evil of
God, o^ not to believe the providence of God. That this is true appears by the
73 Psalm, Truly God is loving unto Israel. God likewise scandaliseth the
Saints of the world in all things that are not conformable to humane reason.
For they having no other then natural light, and judging them there with, they
do tax them, and condemn them for evil. And hence it proceeds, that with
difficulty they bring themselves to be willing to attribute particular
providence to God, and that they will not admit predestination, except after
their own way.

They who judge the works of God with spiritual light, God never scandaliseth
them, nor them who captivate their understandings to God: Neither does God
scandalize the men of the world, for they keep noaccompt with God, believing
that all things come by chance.

God is scandalized, or tempted to do that which he^ would not, being as he
is, merciful, and pitiful, when they, who he holds for his own, and favors
as his own, distrust themselves of his promises, or of his omnipotency, and
providence, in as much as with their diffidence they provoke him to chastise
them as it were against his will. In this manner the Hebrews in the Desert
scandalized him, as appears by the history, and by the Psalms, 78, and 75.

God is also scandalized from the Saints of the world with the arrogance, and
presumption, with which they sell themselves for Gods Saints, for which God is
forced to chastise them with blindness, as he chastised the Hebrews, and
chastises false Christians. And God is scandalized from the impious, when with
their sins, and vices they show, and discover the impiety, and infidelity of
their minds, in as much as he is as it were necessitated to destroy them, as
appears by many places of holy Scripture, and particularly by that which S.
Paul says, Romans 1.

The Saints of God scandalize God in the manner that has been spoken of; And
they scandalize the one the other; when they that are perfect use more liberty
then were ^it in the presence of the imperfect, through which liberty they are
tempted to make an evil judgment of the Christian faith, or to do as the
perfect do, not holding for certain, and firm, that they do not ami^e. From
this sort of scandal S. Paul had intent always to keep himself as appears,
Romans 14. and 1. Cor. 8. The self same scandalize the saints of the world, when
they do not co^form themselves with them in the things which to their seeming
are religion, and s^nctity. So the Scribes, and Pharisees were scandalized at
Christ, as appears; Math. ^5. And the Hebrews were scandalized at S. Paul, as
appears by this, that even unto this present day the Saints of the world are
scandalized at the Epistles, which S. Paul writ, judging them hurtful to
Christian living. And so a man may say, that the Saints of the world have
stumbled, and do stumble at Christ, and at true Christians, and at their
matters, and so much the more, as they be the more like unto Christ. Of this
scandal Christians that are the Saints of God, are to take little care, as
Christ himself took little care, saying, Let them alone, they are blind leaders
of the blind. Mat. 15. The men of the world are not scandalized by the Saints
of God, because they have no competency with them. The Saints of God are
scandalized from God through their imperfection, and by means of the
selfsame imperfection the imperfect are scandalized from the perfect in the
manner that has been said. The Saints of God are scandalized from the Saints
of the world, in as much as being by them falsely doctrinated, and counseled,
and being by them persecuted with detraction, with evil entreaties, and with
death, they are solicited to depart from the gospel, and from Christ. This is
that scandal, for which Christ threatens the world, and from which Christ
exhort^ every one to keep himself, Matthew 18.

The Saints of God are likewise scandalized from impious men, albeit they buy
their own scandal* in as much as seeing in them the works of imp^ety* and
incredulity, they are tempted to the self same, or are molested by them. In
this manner was Lo^ scandalized with the filthiness of the men of Sodom, as
appears 2. Pet. 2, 7. And the Saints of the world scandalize God, and the
Saints of God in the manner that has been said. And they themselves are
scandalized from God* and from the Saints of god in the manner that has been
said. The selfsame are sca^dalised one at another, in as much as it would be
a wonder to find one that approues another manner of living, a thing which is
natural to the holiness of the world, which consists in superstitious
observations: The self same are scandalized from the men of the world, in as
much as they conform themselves with them in nothing. The men of the world
scandalize god; and the Saints of the world in the manner which has been
spoken; but themselves are never scandalized in any kind: for they keep no
account with god, nor with religion, nor with piety.

There is indeed a kind of the men of the world, who through the conversation
which they have with the Saints of the world pretending a certain manner of
holiness are scandalized as the Saints of the world are scandalized, albeit
they be not so pernicious as the Saints of the world.

From all this discourse I come to gather this resolution, that to every
Christian person it appertains to attend to form in himself a mind so like
unto God, and unto Christ, that he should altogether be scandalized at those
things, at which God is scandalized; that is, at the diffidence and
doubtfulnesse of them, who are the Saints of God, but imperfect; at the
arrogance of the Saints of the world; and at the vices, and sins, with which
the men of the world manifest the impiety, and incredulity of their minds; and
that it appertains to them to attend to form their manner of living so like to
the manner of the life of our Lord Christ; that they do not in any manner,
scandalize God, distrusting, or doubting of his promises, or of his
omnipotency, and providence; Nor scandalize the Saints of God in any thing,
esteeming little to scandalize the Saints of the world, when the glory of God
comes between the Christian truth, and edification, and the profit of the
Saints of God, as Christ did, as appears in Mat. 15. and as S. Paul did, and
as they have done, and do from time to time, who have followed, and imitated,
and do follow, and imitate Christ. Let the Saints of the world stumble, and
fall, and break their necks rather then the truth of the Gospel suffer any
detriment in the Saints of God. Whereupon if any shall doubt, saying, How shall
I govern my self, when I shall be forced to scandalize either the Saints of
God, which are imperfect in being superstitious, or the Saints of God, which
were never superstitious? I shall say unto him, that he ought to beware of
doing, as S. Peter did in Antioch, who having more respect to them that were
superstitious, scandalized, causing them to stumble, who had never been
superstitious. I would say, that having respect to the superstition, and
pertinacy of the converts from Iudaisme, he did scandalize, and put in hazard
the ^yncerity of the faith of the converts from gentility, feyning the
observation of the Law against the Christian Faith. And I will say unto him,
that he do as S. Paul did in the selfsame ti^e, who having more respect,
that the Faith of those of the Gentility should not be scandalized, then the
superstition of them of the Iudaisme, did publicly reprove S. Peter. I would
say, that if a Christian person, that understands the Evangelicall gospel, and
knows the Christian verity, shall find himself amongst persons that go
understanding, and knowing the one, and the other thing, accommodating himself
to their incapacity, and frayltie, he shall do as they do, dexterously
pretending to draw them to the knowledge of both the things. And I farther say,
that in case he find himself, where there is both of the one, and the other
sort of persons, if he shall think, that dissembling with them that do as yet
keep any part of superstition, he shall scandalize, and make them fall, who are
free from superstition, in as much as seeing him in the superstition they may
come to hold the superstition for necessary, he ought not to dissemble in any
manner, albeit he should think to put his life in danger; haying always
regard, that the Christian faith, and the Evangelicall truth stand firm, and
constant. Here I will add this, that when a Christian person scandalizeth a
Christian, who knows the Evangelicall truth, because he would not scandalize
another Christian, who as yet does not well understand it, if his error proceed
from covetousness, or from ambition, because the one is richer, or more
powerful then the other, his error is intolerable. And if his error proceed
from indiscretion, or from weakness, and infirmity, it is tolerable.

In all the things that have been said, I learn these thirteen things.

First what a Scandal is.

The Second, that to the intent I be not scandalized at the works of God, it is
needful to renounce my wisdom, and my human reason, and to pray to God, that
he give me spiritual light, with which I may understand his works.

The third, that I do then scandalize God, when I distrust my self of the
promised works, and of his omnipotency, and providence.

The Fourth, that I ought to keep my self as much as is possible, not to use
my Christian Liberty in presence of weak Christians, and that are infirm in
the faith.

The Fifth, that I ought lightly to esteem the scandal, that the Saints of the
world take at the truth of the Gospel.

The Sixth, that the scandal that is pernicious to him who scandalizeth, is
that, which the Saints of the world do, pretending to do service unto God.
And here I learn, that I ought to keep my self as from the fire to persecute
any man of what manner soever, pretending to ^oe God service therein.

The Seventh, that I ought to hold it for a good countersigne of Piety, when
the works of the impiety, and of the infidelity of the men of the world do
Scandalize me.

The Eight, that it is a good countersigne to know the Saints of the world, by
the felicity wherewith they are scandalized from every manner of person, and
their publishing, and showing of their Scandal.

The Ninth, that it is a sign of impiety for a man not to be offended, nor
scandalized in any thing.

The Tenth, that it becomes me to be like god, and Christ in the inward, to the
end I be not Scandalized but of that, wherewith god and Christ are scandalized.

The Eleventh that it becomes me to live like Christ, that I may not scandalize
but as Christ.

The Twelfth, that for no cause I ought to scandalize any in prejudice of the
Christian faith, although I do know, that I scandalize the weakness, and
infirmity of imperfect christians.

The Thirteenth thing that I here learn, that when I shall have scandalized in
prejudice of the Christian Faith through indiscretion, or through weakness, my
error will be tolerable; and when I shall scandalize in prejudice of the same
christian faith through covetousness, or ambition, my error will be
intolerable. And from this error I am certain my god shall preserve me, and
he shall also preserve all those persons, whom he has called to the
acceptance of the grace of the gospel to be heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXVII. Two contrarieties between them that live according to the
flesh, and them, that live according to the Spirit.
COnsidering, that men, who live according to the flesh, while they think not
of it, do believe little, have less confidence, and love yet much less, as
they themselves well know, and feel, and accordingly as they show it in their
words, albeit they would not show it: And considering, that the self same
persons, when they take themselves into consideration, do persuade themselves,
that they believe much, and have much confidence, and do yet love much more:
And considering on the other side, that those persons, who Live according to
the spirit, although they seem regardlesse, believe, have confidence, and love
more or less, according to that part of the spirit, which they have according
as they themselves know it, and feel it in themselves, and as they show in
their words, speaking with more piety, with more faith, with more confidence,
and with more affection of the things of God, when they speak coldly, and when
the force of the spirit moves them to speak of the things of piety, and of
faith, and of confidence, and of love, then all the men of the world together,
when they set themselves with diligence, and attention to speak thereof. And
considering also, that it comes ofttimes to pass, that those selfsame
persons, grounding upon themselves cannot bring themselves to believe, nor
less to have confidence, and much less to love. I have set my self to be
willing to understand, whence these so contrary effects proceed. And I find,
that one part proceeds from that which Christ says, that out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks. Whence it comes to pass, that he who lives
according to the flesh, having not in his heart neither faith, nor confidence,
nor love, cannot give of that which he has not, and consequently cannot,
except he set himself purposely thereto, make show offaith, confidence, or
love. And because he who lives according to the spirit, has in his heart
piety, faith, confidence, and love, and having to give of that which he has,
it is necessary how careless soever he seem to be* that he should yield forth
piety, faith, confidence, and love. And therefore the holy Scripture calls the
just man's mouth a vein, or mine of life. And I find likewise, that the other
part of these contrarieties proceeds from this, that the man who lives after
the flesh, because he keeps no account with his heart, then persuades
himself, that he believes, that he has confidence, and that he loves, when he
has the faith, the confidence, and the love in his understanding. He knows,
that it is necessary for a Christian; that he should believe, have confidence,
and love; and then he persuades himself, that he believes, has confidence,
and loves. And the persons, who live according to the spirit, because they keep
account with their hearts, not contenting themselves to hold the faith, the
confidence, and the love in their understandings, cannot persuade themselves,
that they believe, have confidence, or love, but when they feel in their
hearts the effects of confidence, and love. And because this sentiment is
through the favor of God, who gives it not when men would, but when it
pleases his Divine Majesty, hence it comes, that those persons, who live after
the spirit, do then find most difficulty in believing, loving, and having
confidence, when they do most instantly procure it. Whence it is well
gathered, that the sign of what a man has within him, is to be taken from
that which he shows outwardly, when he stands regardlesse. And farther, that
through the facility, or difficulty, with which a man persuades himself to
believe, have confidence, and love, it may be known, whether his faith,
confidence, and love, stand in the Understanding, or in the Heart. And so this
conclusion is made, that they, who while they think not of it, speak most
christianly, and when they would bring themselves with humane industry to have
confidence, to believe, and love, find most difficulty in this, are true
Christians incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXVIII. Two griefs, one according to the world, and the other
according to God: And two weaknesses, one according to the flesh, and the other
according to the Spirit.
AS Saint Paul puts two griefs, one according to the world, and says, that
this causes death; and the other according to God, and says, that this
causes life: Even so I put two weaknesses, one according to the Flesh; and I
understand, that this causes fear; and another according to the spirit, and I
understand this causes love. And I put them, because I feel them in the
Griefs, which S. Paul puts: understanding, that then a man feels grief
according to the world, when he falls into some such inconvenience, as causes
shame, or loss, or any other discommodity in the eyes of the world, in the
reputation, and dignity of the world. And I understand, that this grief
causes death, in as much as a man that grieves in this manner, except he
speedily remedy his grief, becomes blasphemous against God, in as much as
attributing unto him the cause of his grief, he laments of him, and by being
blasphemous against God, he comes to get himself eternal death. In the self
same manner I understand, that then a man feels grief according to God, when
he falls into any inconvenience, by reason whereof he fears to be deprived of
the grace of God, and of the holy spirit of Christ, and of God himself. And I
understand, that this grief causes life, in as much as he, who is grieved in
this manner, does more, and better know himself, and ^o does more cordially
recommend, and remit himself to God, and from this recommending himself to
God he comes to obtain resurrection, and life everlasting.

For the two weaknesses which I put, I understand, that a man is then weak
according to the flesh, when his weakness grows from self love: And I call
weakness to resente himself for those things, which come to pass against his
will. This weakness I understand causes fear: for where self-love is, there
is always fear. And I understand, that this weakness is tolerable in
Christian persons, being no sign of impiety, but of imperfection. ^n the self
same manner I understand, that a man is then weak according to the spirit, when
his weakness grows from the love of God, resenting himself, when he sees
himself deprived of God, or of any of the things that are of God, which are
means to him to grow in the love of God, and in the confidence in God. This
weakness I understand causes love, because it proceeds from love, and so is
converted into love, and is therefore laudable, and a sign of christian
perfection.

Weakness according to the Flesh, but not blameworthy, I understand was that,
which S. Paul felt for the reprobation of the Hebrews. And weakness according
to the spirit I understand was that, which S. Paul ^elt through the sting of
the flesh; and that which he felt for the sickness unto death of his friend.
And that also was weakness according to the spirit, which they of Miletum felt
for the departure of S. Paul.

Whence I gather, that Christian persons ought not to grieve themselves much in
their weaknesses, that are according to the flesh, since in them they be
tolerable; for they are not mortal: And that the selfsame Christian persons,
ought to rejoice much in their weaknesses, which are according to the spirit,
in as much as they are signs of perfection, and the way of vivification, of
resurrection, and of eternal life.

The sons of this world feel the grief that is according to the world, but
they do not feel the grief which is according to God. And those of God feel
the one, and the other grief; the one, in as much as Adam lives in them; and
the other, in as much as Christ lives in them.

The sons of this world have indeed the weakness, that is according to the
flesh, but all of them do not know it for weakness, neither feel it as such.
The weakness which is according to the spirit, they neither have, nor know,
nor feel. And the sons of God have, know, and feel both the weaknesses,
knowing in the weakness that is according to the flesh, the relics of the
old Adam; and knowing in the weakness that is according to the spirit, the
renovation of the new Adam our Lord Jesus Christ.

CONSID. LXXIX. How perilous the errors be, which men do pretending piety.
I Hold for certain, that amongst those errors, which we, who are the sons of
God, committing may offend God, the greatest are those, which are committed
pretending piety. That this is true, I see as well by the rigorousnesse, with
which God has chastized these errors, according as it is read in holy
Scripture, as also because it appears in the self same Scripture, that God
has with his hand restrained them who have been his, not consenting that they
should fall into these kind of errors; not having done the same in other
errors, wherein they have had intention to satisfy their appetitites, and
affections.

Of the rigorousnesse, with which God has chastized them who have erred
pretending piety, he might principally give testimony, who willing to hold up
the Arc of the Testimony, which to his seeming was about to fall, died
instantly: And Saul who was deprived of the kingdom of Israel, and
perpetually deprived of the grace of God, for the sacrifize that he made to God
for the victory that he had against certain nations, of which God had given him
command, that he should not leave any live thing which should not pass the
edge of the sword.

Whereupon if any shall demand, saying, Why then has not God used the
selfsame rigorousnesse with others, who have erred more perniciously
pretending piety, as a man might say with S. Paul, who before he was a
Christian, pretending piety persecuted and slew the Christians? I will make
answer, First that as hitherto God has not given me the account thereof. And
then I will say, that God does not use this rigorousnesse except with them, who
are of the number of his. And S. Paul when he was in that error, was not in the
number of those who were Gods, the Hebrew people having then left to be the
people of God; and therefore his error was not chastized as that of Vzzahs, nor
as that of Saul's.

That God has restrained with his hand his elect, not suffering them to err
in piety, albeit he have suffered the^ to err in other things, it serves me
for a most effectual example that which is written of David, who pretending
piety, desired to build the Temple of Jerusalem and God did not consent
thereunto, because it was not his will, that he should build it unto him; and
therefore he should have erred, if he had builded it. And the selfsame
pretending to satisfy his appetites with Barsabe^ caused her husband to be
s^aine, and did with the wife what pleased him; to which matter God set no
impediment at all.

In like manner S. Peter not pretending piety denied Christ, and God consented
it to him; and pretending piety he would not converse with the Gentiles, and God
did not consent to it* As likewise he did not consent to it, that S. Paul
should go, where he pretending piety would have gone, until that pretense of
his became not his, but of the holy spirit which abode in him.

And I hold it certain; that the most continual, and ordinary temptation, with
which pious persons are tempted, is this of pretending piety, in which the
Angel of Satan transfigures himself into an Angel of light, making that to
seem piety, which is no piety. But pious persons may comfort themselves with
two things: The one is, that against the temptations of the Angels of Satan
they have the illustrations of the holy spirit, who discovers the deceit of the
malignant spirit. And the other is, that God uses to restrain with his hand
pious persons, that they should not fall into this kind of error, it being so
much contrary unto true piety. And together herewith pious persons ought
always to stand watchful in such manner as the Angel of Satan coming
transfigured into an Angel of light, they may know him, and guard themselves
from him.

Three things here offer themselves to me. The first, seeing the error is so
great, which is committed pretending piety, every man ought to go with more
regard to do those things, with which he pretends piety, then to do things,
with which he pretends his proper satisfaction.

The second, that those persons which are elected of God, do not err
pretending piety through the illustration which they have of the holy spirit,
and because God restraines them with his hand. It is a great sign of piety,
and of the election of God, not to err pretending piety.

And the third, that then a man erres pretending piety, when he does a thing,
wherewith by himself alone he thinks to satisfy God, and to oblige God. As if
I should chastise my body, not with that intent, with which Saint Paul says he
chastised his, that is, to hold it in servitude, and subjection to his spirit;
but with intent to merit by that chastisement, which I do on myself.
Amplifying this comparison throughout all the outward things which men do, it
is understood, when they err pretending piety. And I return to say, that he
who shall feel himself directed by that way, through which he does not err
pretending piety, he may certify himself, that he is the son of God, and
consequently Brother of the only begotten son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXX. What Gods intent is, demanding of men that which of themselves
alone they cannot give him: And why he gives them not at once all that which he
will give them.
Understanding that it is true in effect, that men who see with the eyes of
humane wisdom, hold it for injustice, and cruelty in God, that he demands of
men things which they of themselves alone cannot give him, such as are, The
love with all the heart even in the time of the law, and the Faith of the heart
in the time of the Gospel, which are two things which a man is of himself as
able to give unto God, as he is able to touch heaven with his hand. And
understanding likewise as it is in effect true, that the men who see with the
eyes of the holy spirit do in the self same demand, and through the selfsame
demand know mercy, and piety in God. And they should have known altogether the
contrary in him, if so be he should demand things, that men could give unto
him with ease. And setting my self to consider whence these two so contrary
judgments proceed, which humane wisdom, and Gods holy spirit make conce^ing
this demand of God, I have understood, that the judgment which humane wisdom
makes, proceeds from the not knowing the being of God, and the not knowing the
being of man; and that the judgment which the holy spirit makes, proceeds from
the knowledge of Gods being; and the being of man. And it is certain, that
because humane wisdom knows not the being of God, it proceeds, that seeing he
demands of men that which they cannot give; it judges that he does this to
condemn them, as it would of one of the Princes of this world, who sold
require of his subject^* that they should not sleep for a whole year, setting
a penalty, if so be they did sleep. And because humane wisdom knows not the
being of a man, it proceeds, that it would hold it for a better, and more
profitable thing for a man, that God should rather require of him that which he
can give, rather then that which he cannot give; even as it judges, and holds
for better, that a Prince of the world should demand of his vassalls rather
that which they can give him with ease, then that which they cannot give him,
though with difficulty. And it is also true, that from the knowledge, which the
spirit of God has of Gods being, it proceeds, that not judging of him that
which of the Princes of the world, it knows, that he demanding of men that
which they cannot give him, he does it not to condemn them, but to save them:
and that from the knowledge, which the holy Spirit has of the being of man, it
proceeds, that knowing that he in himself is so arrogant, that if God should
demand of him for his salvation things that he could with facility give of
himself, he would enter into such pride, when he had given them, that by the
selfsame way, whereby he thought to obtain salvation, he would get
condemnation* he comes to know, that the intent with which God demands of men
that which of themselves they cannot give him, is not to condemn the^* as
humane wisdom judges; neither is it to difficult their salvation, as the
selfsame humane wisdom judges, which hereupon holds God for unjust, and for
cruel, but it is to save them, and to facilitate their salvation: God doing
this, to the intent, that men proving to love God with all their heart, he
knowing their impossibility in the one, and in the other matter, should have
recourse to God demanding of him both the one thing, and the other, to the
intent God may give them both the one thing and the other, and they giving to
God the one thing, and the other, may obtain that felicity which they desire,
not for that which they are of themselves, but for that which they are through
God. In such manner, that with much reason, not humane but divine, men that see
with the holy spirit, know mercy, and piety in God, considering that he demands
from men that which they cannot give him of themselves, and they would know
cruelty in God, when he should demand of them that which they could give him of
themselves, even as a man that has discretion, when he saw that a Father
should put the government of his estate upon an ignorant, and unwise son of his,
holding the Father for wi^e, he would judge, that he had not intent to make his
son the Lord, but to cause him to loose the estate. So much difference is the
judgment, which the spirit of God makes in the judgment of God, from that
which humane wisdom knows in the selfsame things. And here I understand,
that for the selfsame causes, for which God demands of men that which they
cannot of themselves give him, it comes to pass, that to the^ to whom he
begins love, and faith, and augmentation in the one, and in the other thing,
through some acknowledgments, and feelings, and through some tastes of
spiritual, and divine things, he does not give so much evidency, and so much
cleerenesse in them, as they themselves would, and as much as might serve to
make that they should comprehend him with their understandings. I would say,
that as he demands of them that which they cannot give him, to the intent they
should not enter into pride, as they would enter, if he should demand of them
that which they could give him, and so their salvation would be hindered: so he
does not let them entirely comprehend spiritual things, which he sometimes
makes them feel, to the end they should not pride themselves, and so hinder
their salvation. God knows our evil Lump, and desiring our salvation he
deals with us, as he sees it convenient we should be dealt with; herein doing
that with us, which we do with a child, when we would have him to love us, and
depend on us. I would say, that as we give not the child at one time all that
which he would from us, and which we mean to give him* nay rather some things
we give him altogether, others in part, and others we only show unto him so
much as to breed in him a desire to them, and to enamour him of them, to the
end he may go enamouring himself of us, may follow, and depend on us, knowing
that if we gave him at once all that which we have to give him, he would grow
proud, and would not love us, nor depend on us: so God gives not unto us at
once all that which we would from him, nor all that which he will give us, but
some things he gives us altogether, and others in part, and others he lets us
see so much as suffices to breed a longing in us for them, and to enamour us
of them, to the intent we may follow him, love him, and depend on him. This he
does, because he knows us to be such, that if he should give us at once all
that which he has to give us, we should become proud, and so he should not
have from us what he would, that is, that we should love him with all our
heart, and that for the obtaining of eternal life, firmly believing we may
make ours the justice of his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXI. Two weaknesses in Christ, and in his members; and two powers in
him and them.
IN Christ I consider two weaknesses: the one is that which he felt in the
inward; and the other is that which he showed in the outward. That which he
felt in the inward I con^ider in the tears which he shed over Jerusalem; and
in those which he shed in the death of Lazarus; and in the Agony with which he
prayed in the garden, sweating-drops of blood. And that which he showed in the
outward, I consider it seeing he was held for base, for vulgar, for vile, yea
and also for an ill, a pernicious, and for a Scandalous man, and seeing that he
was mocked; outraged, and persecuted until he was crucified for a malefactor,
and as a malefactor. And I understand, that without any comparilon the
weakness that Christ showed in the outward, was greater then that which he
felt in the inward. I would say, that the inward which he felt, was not in that
degree of weakness, which the outward was, that he showed.

In the self same Christ I consider two Powers, two virtues, and Efficacies.
The one is that which he felt in the Inward, the other is that which he showed
in the outward. The power which Christ showed in the inward I consider in this
manner, that he said to S. Peter when he reprehended him, for cutting of
Malchus his ear, saying unto him, think thou not that I can pray my Father,
and he shall send me more then twelve Legions of Angels? etc. And I consider it
in many speeches which I read in S. John, when Christ spoke of his Union, which
he had with God. And the power, which Christ had in the outward, I consider in
the miracles which he did, and in the authority, with which he did them, and in
the Power, and Majesty with which he spoke, and taught. And I understand that
without all comparison the power, the virtue, and the efficacy, that Christ
felt in the inward, was greater then that, which he showed in the outward. I
would say, that the outward which he showed, was not in that degree of power,
as the inward was, which he felt.

In every one of them, who are Christ's members, I consider the same as it were,
that I consider in Christ. I will put the example in S. Paul, in whom after the
selfsame manner I consider two weaknesses, one which he felt in the inward,
and the other which he showed in the outward, That which he felt in the inward
is well known by that which he says of sin, that dwelt in him. Romans 7. and
for the selfsame I understand that he says 2. Corinthians. 2. I will gladly
glory in my infirmities. For the selfsame I understand that he says, when I
am weak, then am I strong. For the selfsame I understand, that it was said
unto him on Gods behalf, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my grace is
perfected in weakness. And that which he showed in the outward, was well
shown by the evil opinion that almost every one had of him: every one
persecuted him, every one reviled him, evil entreated him, martyrized him, as
is read in the Acts of the Apostles, and as he himself writes 1. Cor. 4. and
2. Cor. 11. And I understand, that the weakness which S. Paul showed in the
outward, was much greater, then that which he felt in the inward. I would say,
that which S. Paul felt in the inward, was not in that degree of weakness, as
that was which he showed in the outward. In the self same S. Paul I consider
two Powers, two virtues, and efficacies; the one which he felt in the inward,
and the other which he showed in the outward. That which he felt in the inward,
he published saying, I can do all things in him who enableth me. And he showed
it very openly Romans 8. saying, that there was no creature able to separate him
from the love of God.* And that which he showed in the outward, is seen by the
miracles which he did, and by the many people that he converted. And I
understand, that the power which S. Paul felt in the inward, was much greater
then that which he showed in the outward. I would say, that which S. Paul
showed in the outward, was not in that degree of power, as that which he felt
in the inward.

The self same which I consider in S. Paul I consider in every one of them,
which are the members of Christ, more or less, according as is that part of
faith, and of the spirit, which every one of them possesses; understanding
that from S. Paul's being a member of Christ it proceeded that he was in all
that has been spoken like unto Christ. Farther I understand, that the
consideration of the two weaknesses considered in Christ, works the same
effect in him that considers them, I that the weakness, which he feels in the
inward, goes abating in him in as much as his affections, and appetites go on
dying; and the weakness which he: shows in the outward, goes increasing, in
as much as he is estee^ed more vulgar, more vile, and more of little regard: and
is more mocked, more outraged, more persecuted, and worse entreated. And I
understand also, that the consideration of these two powers, virtues, and
efficacies considered in Christ, works that effect in him that considers them,
that in him grows increasing the power, the virtue, and the efficacy, that he
feels in the inward, in as much as he has more peace in conscience, has more
spirit; and more other knowledges, and divine conceptions of God, and of the
things of God. And there goes abating in him the power, the virtue, and the
efficacy, which he shows in the outward, in as much as he only shows
himself, when he is inspired, and moved of God to show himself; in such
manner, as that so much i^ one the more like to Christ, in as much as he is
more weak in that which is seen, and in as much as he is more powerful in that
which is not seen:

I will add this, that the saints of the world know the power in God by the
power that Christ showed in the outward, knowing weakness in God through the
weakness that Christ showed in the outward. They know power in God through the
transfiguration of Christ. And they know weakness in God by the death of
Christ. And I understand, that the Saints os God know without all comparison
greater Power in God through the weakness which Christ showed in the outward,
then through the power which Christ showed in the outward: and it is so indeed,
that they knew greater Power in God by the grace of Christ, then by the
transfiguration of Christ, knowing that it is so indeed. And so it is
perceaved, that from Christ's showing himself weak, his death on the Cross did
result; and from his death on the cross is resulted all the good of the world,
all the felicity, and the prosperity, which they who are Christ's members do
enjoy, and shall enjoy together with Christ, there being in them that which
was, and that which is in Him, to whom be glory for ever.

CGNSID. LXXXII. In what properly consists that Agony, which Jesus Christ our
Lord felt in his Passion and in his Death.
HAving oftimes heard speak of the Agony, of the fear, and loathing, and
sorrofulnesse, which Jesus Christ our Lord felt in his passion, and death, by
persons who pretended to show the cause, why Christ felt so much his
sufferings, and his death, many other men having suffered, and died, some as
men, and some as Christians, some of them without having showed so much sense,
others having showed none at all, and others having made show to rejoice, and
delight themselves in their suffering, and to rejoice in their Death. And never
having remained satisfied in my mind, neither with that which I heard say, nor
with that which I read in their books, which handled this matter. Last of all
joining that which I heard a Preacher say, with that which is read in Isaia,
and in S. Peter, I have made this resolution, That God having put all our
sins on Christ to chastize them all in him, and he having taken them all upon
himself, and known them all in general, and in particular, he felt for every
one of them that confusion, that shame, and that grief, which he should have
felt, if he himself had committed them. Whereupon seeing himself in the
presence of God contaminated, and defiled with so many, and so abominable
sins, it came to pass, that he felt all that Agony, all that fear, all that
sorrowfulness within himself, and all that shame and confusion, which
appertained to every one of us to have felt for every one of our sins; had we
been punished for them. Whence proceeded, that he sweat drops of blood in the
garden, for the anguish which he felt, not because he saw himself near unto
death, but to see himself in the presence of God full of so many sins, for
which reason he prayed putting his face to the earth, as if he had been ashamed
to have looked up to heaven, knowing that there lay upon him so many offenses
committed against God. And this truly is the cause, why Christ showed more
sense of grief in his Passion, and in his death, then any of the Martyrs, that
have suffered for the Gospel, and then any other man of the world, that has
dyed for the world. And of this shame, and confusion, which Christ felt seeing
himself defiled with our sins, he may have felt some little parcel, that
has seen himself in the presence of some great Prince, praying him for the
pardon of one that has been a Traitor, he feeling the shame, that belonged to
the other to have felt. Now that it is true, that God has laid on Christ all
our sins, and that Christ has taken them all upon him, is plain by Jsaia,
where he says, He took our infirmities, and our griefs he suffered: And a
little after, he was scourged for our Rebellions, and beaten for our iniquities.
And a little after, he took on him the sins of many. And more then this he
says, we were healed by his blewnesse of stripes. And this selfsame is
proved by Saint Peter, who seeling the selfsame, which Isai felt, says as it
were the selfsame, which Jsaiah does, And wretched man that I am! for now am
I well aware of the evil that I have done offending God, not living according
to the will of God, in as much as with every one of my offenses, and with every
one of my sins I have augmented the Agony, the fears, and the sorrowfulness,
which my Christ suffered in his death and passion.

Hereby I understand two most important things: The one, that if the rigor of
the justice, that was executed on Christ as well in the outward, as in the
inward, had been executed upon all us, every man taking that part which
belonged to him for his offenses, and sins, we should all have gone into
destruction; there being none none of us sufficient to be able to endure on
himself that part of chastizement, which belonged to him for his part, in case
Christ had not satisfied the justice of God for us all. And the going into
destruction, I understand should have consisted in this, that none of us should
have been able to stand solid, and firm in the suffering without fainting, and
so to sever our selves from the obedience of God: And therefore Caiaphas said
well, if he had meant well, whed he said it, it is expedient that one man
should dye for the people, that the whole nation perish not. The other thing
which I understand here is, that it was more then necessary, that he should be
more then a man, nay that he should be the Son of God, who was to reconcile
men with God. For being to be chastized for the sins of us all, knowing them,
and feeling them all in himself, as if he had committed them all, he might
make resistance to the agony, fear, and sorrowfulness, to the shame, and
confusion, without coming to nothing, and without in any manner departing, no
not in any part, from the obedience of God; persevering, and standing therein
solid, and constant, as our Lord Jesus Christ stood, who was likened to a
lamb, that is lead to the slaughter as well for the innocence, with which he
lived, as for the obedience, wherewith he was content to be sacrifized for us,
being the son of God; and one self same thing with God, which obedience is*
and shall be unto him, glory, and honor for evermore

Amen.
CONSID. LXXXIII. Five Considerations in the resurrection of Christ.
IN the glorious Resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord I consider five things,
which do in a great manner excite me to live in this present life, a life very
like unto that, which I am to live in life everlasting.

The First is, that as the torment, which Christ felt in suffering, was in
great manner increased, because he had took upon him our sins, and because he
knew them on himself, as well as if he had himself committed them all: so the
glory, which Christ felt in his Resurrection was increased in great manner, to
see that we all of us arose with him.

The Second, that as God slaying on the cross the flesh of Christ slew ours,
in such manner, that to himward we are held, and judged as if we had been
really, and indeed dead: so God raising up Christ raised us all up, in such
manner that as much as belongs to him we are held, and judged as if we had been
really raised up.

The third, That as the effect whereby our incorporation in the death of Christ
in this present life is known in our mortification, not that which we make with
our own industries, but that which we obtain by the incorporation in Christ,
which the holy spirit works, which is by faith communicated unto us, making us
to abhor the world with all that which is world, and also our selves with all
that which is ours: So likewise the effect by which our incorporation into the
Resurrection of Christ is known in this present life, is our vivification,
which selfsame incorporation in Christ the selfsame spirit works in us,
regenerating and renewing us all, and altogether, and making us to love God, and
all that which is Gods, and to love Christ, and all that which is Christ's.

The fourth thing which I consider is, that as with my sins I augmented the
agony, and the torment of Christ in his passion; so with my Resurrection I
augment the joy and pleasure of Christ in his Resurrection. And as I am grieved
at that; so I glory in this. Nay the glory of this makes me to forget the
sorrow of the other.

The fifth thing which I consider is, that only they, who stand incorporated in
Christ, are certain of their Resurrection, founding it in the Resurrection of
Christ. And therefore S. Paul willing to persuade the Corinthians the
resurrection of the Just, founds his persuasions on the Resurrection of Christ.
With these Considerations we Christians shall come to feel in our hearts the
profit which comes from the glorious Resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXIV. That only the Incorporation in Christ is that which mortifies.
REturning to consider that which I have at other times considered about the
two depravations that are in a man, whereof the one is natural, and
hereditary, and the other is acquisite, and is learned, I come to understand,
that both these depravations are in the mind, and are in the body. I would
say, that from our first parents all men inherit this, that they are borne in
their minds impious, and enemies of God, and infidels to God, and full of
self love: and in their bodies they are born vicious, and evil inclined. And
I say further, that with evil exercises, with evil companies, and with false
doctrines we go on augmenting as well the depravation of the soul, through
which we are born the sons of wrath, as that of the body, through which we
are manifoldly worse then Beasts.

Humane wisdom not knowing the natural depravation of the mind, nor that of
the body, nay only knowing the acquisite depravation of the body, has never
had intent to mortify in men but only that, which it has known for evil. And
hence it comes, that all the Laws, Doctrines, and Religions, which men have
found, have had intent only to mortify the depravation of the body, and of this
only the acquisite. But God knowing principally the natural depravation, and
of this holding that of the mind for the worse, had in the law of Moses an
intent to mortify both the one and the other depravation, and principally that
of the mind, which is more natural, and more pernicious unto men, being as it
is more contrary unto God: And therefore commanded the love of God, the worship
of God, and the confidence in God, and forbade all inward concupiscence. This
which the Law of God pretended to do, it never did, not through the
imperfection thereof, but through the imperfection of men. But the
incorporation in Christ does it, for as much as as soon as a man is incorporated
by faith in Christ, the natural, and acquisite depravations begin to dye in
him, and they go on dying, according as he goes incorporating himself in
Christ. And a man goes incorporating himself in Christ accordingly as he goes
on being like unto the death of Christ, and as long as he goes on through this
way, the things wherein he erres are not imputed unto him either through
natural, or acquisite depravation: and the natural depravation dying first in
him, and of this, rather that of the mind, then that of the body, the
Mortification of the acquisite Depravation which remains, is facilitated, to
the end that he should as it were by way of exercise attend to mortify it
whilst he lives. And he mortifies it rather with the consideration, then with
outward effects. And the consideration is of that which Christ suffered, of the
being dead on the Cross with Christ, and the being raised with Christ, and
that it is his intent to live in life eternal with Christ; which
considerations are of such efficacy in a man, that making him to loose the taste
of all things of this present life, it mortifies in him all that is flesh, and
all that is world, albeit I do not think that it dies altogether, until that
a man dye indeed. From all this is gathered, that humane wisdom knows not what
thing mortification is, and that the law of Moses commanded it, but did not
give it; and that it is only gotten through the incorpororation, wherewith,
we who believe are incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXV. Four manners by which a Christian knows God by means of
Christ.
HAving often spoken of the knowledge of God, as of a most important thing, and
so much that in it felicity and eternal life consists: And having said that
there are three ways to know God; One by the contemplation of the creatures,
which is proper to the Gentiles; the other by reading of the holy Scriptures,
which was proper to the Hebrews; and the other by Christ, which is proper to
Christians. And having never remained satisfied in this third, (I would say in
the manner of that understanding, through the which we Christians know God by
Christ) after that I had well considered it, I find Four manners, by which we
Christians know God by Christ.

The first is by the Revelation of Christ,

The second is by the communication of the holy spirit.

The third is by christian Regeneration, and Renovation.

And the fourth is by a certain inward vision by revelation of Christ.

I understand that a Christian knows God, when Christ himself suffers himself
to be known, because we then know God in him, he being the express image of
God, conformable to that he says to S. Philip, He that sees me, he sees my
Father also. Ioh. 14. And conformable to what S. Paul says, Colos. 1. speaking
of Christ, who is the Image of the invisible God. And that it is true, that a
Christian knows God by Revelation of Christ, is manifest by that, No man knows
the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Mat. 11. This
Revelation I understand is inward, having nothing that is visible, and so it
appertains to the inward eyes, and not to the outward. And this presupposes
the knowledge of Christ. I would say, that to the knowledge of God by
Revelation of Christ the knowledge of Christ proceeds, which I understand
consists in knowing his Divinity, his Humanity, his being Divine, and
Humane, his glory, and his ignominy, his dignity, and his baseness, and so his
omnipotency, and his humility. And it is certain, that I knowing that Christ is
the Image of God, and seeing in him Omnipotency, Justice, Truth, and Fidelity,
I come to know not now by relation of holy Scripture, but by the revelation of
Christ himself, that there is in God omnipotency, justice and truth, and
fidelity, for as much as these things are in Christ, and Christ is the Image of
God. In such manner as he who in this manner knows Christ, not by relation of
men, but by inward revelation of Christ himself, may say with truth, that he
knows God in Christ: As the man, to whom S. Paul, in whom was a great part of
the image of Christ, should have discovered all his mind, all his inward
things, might have said with truth, that he knew Christ in S. Paul, although
this comparison serves not to ascertaine, but to explain that which I would
say. By the communication of the holy spirit I understand the christian knows
God; for I understand, that the holy spirit is given to them, that believe in
Christ. And understanding by S. Paul, that the spirit of God searches out the
deep secrets of God, I understand, that we also know God himself and by
Christ, in as much as the holy spirit is given unto us by Christ, Christ
himself being he, that gives it unto us by the will, and ordinance of God,
even as by the selfsame will, and ordinance the light is given unto us by the
sun. And it is certain, that the holy spirit is efficacious in me, that am a
christian, to make me know omnipotency in God through the great power which he
shows in me, mortifying me, and making me alive; to make me know wisdom in
God by the wisdom which I get through his holy spirit; to make me know
justice in God, because he justifies me in Christ; to make me know truth in
God, because he keeps promise with me; and to make me know goodness, and
mercy in God, because he bears with my slothfulness and sins. And so I come
to know all these things in God, not now by relation of Scriptures, but by that
which the holy spirit works in me which is communicated to me through Christ.

By the Christian Regeneration, and Renovation I understand that a christian
knows God. For I understand that he being regenerated, and renewed by the holy
spirit, which is communicated unto us by Christ, goes on leaving, and
renouncing the image of Adam, which is proper unto us by the humane generation,
by which we are naturally the sons of wrath, we are enemies of God, impious,
rebels, and infidels; and goes on taking, and recovering that image of God,
which is proper unto us by christian regeneration, by which we are as it were
naturally the sons of grace, adopted sons of God; we are the friends of God,
pious, obedient, and faithful; and so by little and little, we come to know God
in us, knowing in us those divine perfections, which the holy spirit attributes
to God. And getting the regeneration, and the renovation through the holy
spirit, and the holy spirit through Christ, it comes to be true, that by Christ
we know God in us. And it is a clear ease, we should never know in God truth,
fidelity, justice, bounty, were we not first true, faithful, just, good etc.
It being natural of man to judge of others according to that which he knows
in himself.

By a certain inward vision I understand, that a christian knows God, after
that he has known him by the revelation of Christ, by the communication of the
holy spirit, and by the Christian regeneration. And for as much as belongs to
this knowledge I refer my self to that, which I have said in another
Consideration: Wherein I have set certain comparisons, by which a man, that
has not attained to this knowledge of God, may in some sort arrive to
understand in what it does consist. And if he do arrive, I am sure, that there
will come upon him so great a desire of this knowledge, that he will
continually go after God, saying unto him these amorous words, show unto me
thy Countenance. And I am also certain, that God will show it unto him, when he
shall please, and as it shall please his divine Majesty, accommodating himself
to humane incapability, which is most incapable of this inward vision. And
because the Christians incorporated in Christ, who know God by the revelation
of Christ, by the communication of the holy spirit, by the christian renovation
and regeneration, go on making themselves capable of this inward vision, going
on nearer and nearer to impassibility and immortality; it is truly said, that
we christians come to know God by Christ by a certain inward vision, but in
part, as may be in this present life: the perfect, and entire vision being kept
for the life eternal, where perpetually seeing God face to face, we shall be
most blessed with Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXVI. To know the inward Motions when they are of the holy spirit,
when of the malignant spirit, and when of a man's proper spirit.
I Remember to have written in an Epistle in what sort men in this present life
are moved to all things with one of these three spirits, with the holy and
divine spirit, with a man's own and evil spirit, with the malignant and
diabolical spirit. And because I understand how much it imports to the, who
attend unto Christian perfection to be wise, to know with what spirit they are
moved to work, or not to work, I come a new to consider, that we, who attend
to Christian perfection, do well know, that to obtain that which we seek,
which is immortality, and eternal life, it becomes us to follow the motions of
the holy spirit, and to fly those of the Malignant spirit, and to contrast with
those of our own spirit. Farther I consider, that it befalls many, that not
knowing how to make difference between these Motions, thinking to follow the
holy spirit they follow the malignant spirit, or go after their own proper
spirit. Their error proceeding not because they know not where away they ought
to go, for they well know they ought to go toward eternal life; nor because
they know not the way; for they know well, that the way is piety, justice, and
holiness; but from their not knowing in what thing properly piety, justice,
and holiness do consist; for in case they knew it, they would draw nigh to know
when they are moved by the holy spirit, when by the malignant spirit, and when
by their own proper spirit. For in as much as a man goes on knowing in what
thing properly piety, justice, and holiness do consist, his eyes go on
opening to know when he is moved by one spirit, and when by another: without
which knowledge a man that attends to Christian perfection is much like unto a
ship, which stands in the midst of the sea, not knowing with what wind to
sail, because it has lost the needle. Having afterward considered, how that
all this is true, of which there is none, that attends unto Christian piety,
but can give testimony; I am come likewise to consider, that after that a man,
who attends unto Christian piety, knows that he travells toward life eternal,
and knows that the way is piety, justice, and holiness, it is necessary that
he should know, that holiness consists in the election of God; that is, that
they only are holy, whom God chooses, and accepts for himself; that justice
consists in believing in Christ, that is, that they only are just, who
believing make Christ's justice theirs; and that piety consists in approving for
good all that which God works, and to be contented therewith, that is, only
they are pious, who with their minds approve that which God works; and in
such manner content themselves, that they would not change, nor alter it,
though they could. For I understand, that this being known, a man begins to
approach to know the motions of the spirit, when they are of the good spirit,
and when they are of the evil spirit, and when they are of a man's own spirit.
For as much as he holds for motions of the good spirit all those things, which
go directed to answer unto the vocation of God, to say with S. Paul, Lord what
will thou, that I should do? And with Ananias, Behold Lord, here am I! And all
they, which go directed to believe in Christ, to say always, Lord increase my
faith! And all they, which go directed to remit themselves in all things, and
altogether to God, to suffer themselves to be ruled, and governed of God,
approving and holding for good all that which God does. The selfsame holds
for ^tions of the evil spirit, all those which are contrary to these. He
holds for motions of his own spirit, those which although they be not contrary
to these, are not contrary to himself. By this I suppose every person, who
shall keep strict account with himself, shall much approach to the true
knowledge of the Spirits to understand with which of them he is to walk. And I
suppose that he should more, and better approach certifying himself, that
those are motions of the holy Spirit, which shall draw him to the imitation of
Christ principally: In as much as he was most obedient to his eternal Father;
in as much as in him was perfect charity: in as much as he had profound
humility, and most great meekness. For it is certain, that the holy spirit in
them, who are the members of Christ, being the selfsame which was in Christ,
it does inspire, and move them unto that, unto which it did inspire, and move
Christ, he as head, and as the lawful Son, we as members, and adopted sons.
And certifying himself likewise, that those are motions of the malignant
spirit, which are contrary to these: And that those are motions of a man's own
spirit, which do draw a man unto his proper interest, to his proper honor,
and glory, and to his proper recr^ation, and satisfaction. And moreover I do
not say hereby that he does ascertain himself in making this difference of
spirits in knowing these motions; but I say, that so a man comes approaching
thereunto, reserving the perfect, and entire knowledge to the^ who have it by
particular gift of God, who know Satan even when he transforms himself into
an Angel of light, when he offers, and propounds unto them things of apparent
piety, justice, and holiness, to which time these advises do properly belong,
it being as it is a very great inconvenience, into which men fall, when they
err pretending piety.

Finally, I resolve my self in this, that the man who desires to travel to
God with prosperous wind, pretends to recover in this present life the image
of Christ, setting Christ before his eyes, and bringing himself to follow
those Motions which Christ would have followed, and to contrast with those
motions which Christ would not have followed. And this is that perfection,
which is proposed to all of us that are the members of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. LXXXVII. That all the creatures were spoiled in man's depravation, and
that they shall be restored in man's Reparation.
REading S. Paul, I find he touches many secrets worthy of much
consideration. And amongst others I esteemed it for most worthy that which he
touches of the Restoration of the creatures in the glorious resurrection of
the sons of God: into the consideration of which secret I have ofttimes
entered, and it has befallen me, that by how much the more I would have
understood it, so much the less have I understood it. My spirit came to this
understanding, that as man in his depravation marred all the creatures, so in
the reparation of man all the creatures shall be repaired: That the first Adam
subjecting all men unto misery, and unto death, marred all the creatures; and
that the second Adam Jesus Christ our Lord conducting men unto felicity, and to
eternal life shall repair all creatures. But as I did not understand in what
sort all the creatures were marred in man's depravation, I did not neither
understand in what sort they shall be repaired in man's reparation. In which
thing that secret which S. Paul means, does consist, which secret it seems
Isaia had formerly understood (chap. 65.) where God promised to create new
Heavens, and a new earth. And the self same secret it seems S. Peter
understood in the last chap. of his 2. Epistle; And the selfsame seems to be
understood in the Revelation, chap. 21. Then I understand, that God having
^reated man in a state of immortality, and sovereign happiness, he created
all things with such order, and with such temper, that they did all of them
accord to make man immortal, and most happy. Farther I understand, that man
subjecting himself to misery by eating the fruit of the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, and committing himself to death in having been disobedient
to God eating the fruit of the tree against the commandment of God, and it was
necessary that all the creatures should leave their being, and their temper,
with which they were created to make man immortal, and most happy, and take
another being, and another temper, whereby they should all accord to make man
miserable and mortal. From hence I understand proceed the evil influences of
the Heavens, and the poysonfull, and unhealthfull things which the earth brings
forth, all which augment man's misery* And from this, that all creatures took
upon them to make man miserable, and mortal, I understand that S. Paul says,
that all of them do anxiously desire to be free. Understanding this, I come to
understand, that men being to be immortal, and most happy in the Resurrection
of the just, all the creatures shall return to recover that being, that temper,
and that order, with which they were created, to make men in their reparation
immortal, and most happy, as in their depravation they did pervert their
being, their temper, and their order to make them miserable, and mortal.

In this generality of creatures I do not understand the good Angels to be
comprised: for not being marred they have no necessity of being repaired* nor
the evil Angels; for not having been marred with man to make man miserable,
and mortal, they shall not be restored with man to make him immortal, and
most happy. In this consideration more then in any other of these, which I have
hitherto considered; me thinks I see the most high obligation, which not only
all men in particular, but all the creatures in general have to Christ. For as
much as through Christ's obedience men shall return to that being of
immortality, and felicity, which they lost by Adams disobedience. And by the
selfsame the creatures shall return to recover their being, and their most
perfect temper, which they lost through the disobedience of Adam. And so this
remains imprinted in my mind, that Adam disobeying God depraved all men, and
condemned them unto death, and marred all the creat^res, and subjected them, a^
S. Paul says, to vanity. And that Christ obeying God repaired all men, and
gave unto them immortality, and restored all the creatures, and put them into
their firm, and stable being. I speak of this that shall be in the
Resurrection of the just, as though it were already; for as much as to Godward
it is already after Christ raised up. And by how much I the more remember this,
so much the more do I abhor all manner of inobedience to God, and so much the
more do embrace my ^elf with all manner of obedience to God. And I feel, that
in as much as I go applying my self to this, so much the image of Adam goes
abating in me, and the image of Christ goes on reforming, and likewise that of
God, to whom be glory everlasting

Amen.
CONSID. LXXXVIII. What the cause may be, that God commanded man, that he
should not eat of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil.
OF^times I have deliberated to understand, why God when he set man in earthly
Paradise, commanded him, that He should not eat of the fruit of the Tree of the
knowledge of Good and Evil; not being satisfied with that which commonly is
understood, that God commanded this, to the end man should acknowledge him for
superior: which cause shall not be sufficient to me, albeit I refuse it not,
and as often as this desire has come upon me, I have as often driven it from
me, holding it for curious, as I hold for curious all the desires, which go
seeking out the wherefore in Gods works. And it is befallen me, that having
been now free from this curiosity, reading with other intent the first chapters
of Genesis, I suppose to have understood what I desired. For the first I
understand, that God created man in an entire, and perfect estate, in which he
had the spiritual light, which served him for that, for which the natural
light now serves him, which was the self same, that the knowledge of good and
evil. Farther I understand, that in the midst of that earthly Paradise there
were two Trees, of which the Scripture calls the one the Tree of life, and the
other the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil: In which I understand God
had set this natural virtue, that the one of them should make them, who eat
thereof, immortal, and that the other should give the knowledge of good and
evil to them that did eat thereof. And understanding, that as the immortality
was supreme felicity, so the knowledge of good and evil was extreme misery.
That which I say of the Tree of life, I understand by this, that God having
given man the curse for his sin, the Scripture says that he said, that he
drove him out of the earthly Paradise, that he should not eat of the Tree of
life, and so live for ever. Neither was God content to have driven man out of
Paradise, but he set for guardian a Cherubim, whereby it seems that this Tree
had that natural virtue to give immortality. That which I say of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, I understand by that which I read, that the
selfsame instant, in which our first Parents being deceived by the Serpent did
eat of the fruit of the Tree, they had the knowledge of good and evil, in such
sort, as suddenly their eyes were opened, and suddenly finding defect in the
works of God, they knew themselves to be Naked. Whence I come to understand,
that God did with the first man, as the mother does with her little son; I would
say, that as a mother seeing her little son has a knife by him, fearing if he
take it in his hand he would cut himself with it, commands him that he should
not come nigh unto it, telling him if he come near she will knock him: So God
setting the first man in earthly Paradise, and knowing the inconvenience
wherein he was to fall, if he did eat of the fruit of the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, commanded him; that he should not eat thereof, telling him,
that if he did eat he should dye. Furthermore I understand, that as the child
coming nigh the knife, and cutting himself falls into the inconvenience of
which his mother had given him warning, and his mother beats him for his
disobedience, ac^ording as she had threatened him, so that the child falls into
two inconveniences, the one is of having cut himself through the propriety of
the knife, and the other is of blows for the disobedience toward his mother:
So the first man eating of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, falls
into the inconvenience, which God gave him warning of, and God chastised him
with death, as he had threatened him, in such sort as man falls into two
inconveniences, the one is of having his eyes opened to know good, and evil,
whereby he lost the spiritual light, and got the natural light, he lost the
divine science, and got science, and humane discourse; and that was through the
proper nature of the Tree, by which he should without the commandment have
done the same effect. And the other inconvenience is that of death, and that
was for the disobedience, with which he did eat the fruit of the Tree,
disobeying God. Whence I come to gather, that God showed most exceeding great
love to man, in commanding him that he should not eat of the fruit of that
Tree: I understand that he commanded him, because he should not fall into the
inconvenience in which he ^ell at the knowing of good and evil; Which
inconvenience I understand is much greater then that which we can imagine. This
is conformable to what S. Paul says, that sin entered by disobedience, and
death entered by sin, which was executed on all the descendents of the first
Adam: For in his disobedience they all disobeyed, and so all sinned, and
therefore all die; As on the contrary by the obedience, justice or justification
entered, and by the justification life entered, unto which all the members of
the second Adam Jesus Christ our Lord shall be raised up glorious: For he
obeying all they obeyed, and so they are all justified, and shall therefore all
of them be raised up to glory, and immortality. This intelligence which I have
set of the virtue of these two Trees, satisfies me in as much as thereby the
benefit of Christ i^ illustrated. For the rest I remit my self to better
intelligence.

In this Consideration some things offer themselves to me, which I would desire
to know, but holding them for curious I leave them, until it shall please God
to make me to understand them. And this I hold for certain shall be, when the
desire of knowing shall be mortified in me in every thing and altogether. For
God will, that as the first man desiring to know, lost himself; so we should
gain our selves, mortifying, and slaying every desire to know, contenting our
selves only to know Christ crucified, who is to us the Tree of life, to him be
glory for ever,

Amen.
CONSID. LXXXIX. Six causes, for which it seems necessary, that the Son of God
should live in that manner, and that form of life wherein he did live.
AT present I find six causes in the Consideration, from which it seems to me
to see the mavelous counsel, with which the only begotten Son of God being
made man, lived amongst men in that form of life, we read, that he did li^e.

The first cause is this, that God having determined t^ deceive humane wisdom
in saving not them that were wise, but them that believed, as Saint Paul
understands it, 1. Cor. 1. It was necessary that Christ should take upon him in
the world a form of living, in which he could by no means be known by humane
wisdom. If Christ had taken on him S. John Baptist his form of life, humane
wisdom would have found in that outward austerity whereon to found it self to
accept him for the son o^ God: And if he had taken upon him Moses his form
of life, humane wisdom would in the selfsame manner have found in that
outward greatness whereon to found it self to accept him for the son of God.
And therefore it was necessary that he should take upon him that form of life
which he took, wherein was no appearance at all of austerity, nor of
greatness. And so it comes to be, that by how much the more humane wisdom
considers it, so much less does it find whereon to found it self to come to
accept Christ for the son of God. And hereto squares fitly a letter which I
remember to have written pretending to show the cause wherefore Christ did
sometimes show his divinity, and at other times hid it.

The second cause is this that the life of Christ being to be as it were an
example of life for them, whom he came to make the sons of God, it was
necessary that he should take that form of life which was most imitable of all
the rest. If Christ had taken the form of S. John Baptist his life, he would
have frighted many with the asperity and austerity: And if he had taken that of
Moses, few could have been able to imitate it; And therefore it was necessary
that he should take that which he did take so imitable to all sorts of people,
that no man can excuse himself, say^ng, I cannot imitate Christ, I cannot live
as Christ lived. I do not understand, that Christ taking that form of life
which he took, did pretend that every one, who was to be the Son of God,
should imitate him in that outward living, but that amongst all others it
should be the most easy to imitate by them, who would altogether imitate him in
his outward, and in his inward living; as for the inward, in his obedience to
God, in charity, in meekness, and in humility of mind; and as for the outward,
in living without austerity, and without greatness, but with poverty,
baseness and vileness.

The third cause is this, that Christ coming to save all sorts of people, it
was necessary he should take a form of life, in which he might practice, and
converse with all sorts of people. If Christ had taken S. John Baptists form
of life, the Publicans, sinners, and harlots would have been ashamed to speak
unto him; nay verily if he would observe decorum, he was bound not to speak,
nor converse with them: and if he had taken Moses his form of life, base, and
vulgar persons could not have practiced, and conversed with him by reason of
his greatness. And therefore it was necessary he should take that form of
life, which he took, wherein he might practice, and converse, as he did
practice and converse with all sorts of people, in so much as he was for this
calumniated by them, who made profession of holiness.

The fourth cause is this; Christ coming to Preach the Kingdom of God, and to
put himself in the possession thereof; and the Kingdom of God consisting, as
S. Paul says, in justice, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, it was necessary,
that by his example he should show unto us a form of life much to this
purpose, to maintain us in the justice, and in the peace, and in the joy of
the Kingdom of God. If Christ had taken S. John Baptist his form of life,
which was by the world approved for holy; (for the world is so discreet, that
it esteems them, who esteem not it,) he should have put his imitators in
competency with the Saints of the world: and if Christ had taken Moses his
form of living, which is procured by the men of the world, he should have put
his imitators in competency with the men of the world: and therefore it was
necessary that form of life which he took, which is of such quality, as they
who imitate him conserve themselves in their justice, in their peace, and in
their joy. For coming not in competency with the Saints of the world, nor with
the men of the world, they are not deprived of the possession, which they have
of the Kingdom of God.

The Fifth cause is this, that Christ having to suffer for our sins a cruel
death, shameful, and public, and unjust not voluntary, it was necessary he
should take a form of life that was fit to come to this effect. If Christ had
taken S. John Baptist his form of life, although the fame of holiness would
not have freed him from a cruel death, as it did not free Saint John Baptist,
it would have freed him from a shameful, and public death, as it did free S.
John Baptist. And if Christ had taken Moses his form of life, albeit the
greatness of the estate would not have freed him from violent death, as it
has not freed many great men of the world, it would have freed him from a
shameful and public death: and therefore it was necessary, that he should
take that form of life, wherein dying shamefully he did ennoble shame; and
dying publicly he certifies all of us, that we might know it, and may believe
our justification, of which thing we ought to be most assured.

The Sixth is this, that Christ coming to preach, and to give inward
regeneration, and renovation, which things presuppose mortification, it was
necessary he should take a form of life very accommodate to mortification, to
show with it, and by it the proper way of mortification. If Christ had taken S.
John Baptist his form of life, he should have well shown the way of the
mortification of the body by the asperity of life, but not that of the
mortification of the mind for the reputation, which this form of life has in
the world. And if Christ had taken Moses his form of living, he should not
have showed either the one or the other mortification, and therefore it was
necessary, that he should take that form of life which he took, in which much
better then in any other a man gets the mortification of the mind, and by that
of the mind that of the body, in as much as the world holds for vile them, who
without making profession of outward holiness live holily; and despises
these; as a most base thing; and in as much as after this despising comes the
mortification of the body. And so in them, that imitate the form of Christ's
living, is certain and perfect mortification.

In these six causes I learn six things.

The first, that he, who by consideration of Christ's life would know him to be
the son of God, must of necessity mortify the judgment of his human wisdom.

The Second, that no man can excuse himself, saying, that he cannot imitate
the form of Christ's living.

The third, that then a Christian is most like to Christ's living, when he has
a form of life more apt to make that all sorts of people may practice and
converse with him.

The fourth, that that form of living is most apt to make that a man in it
should conserve himself in the possession of the kingdom of God, that comes
not in competency with no sort of men, neither of the Saints of the world, nor
of the men of the world.

The fifth, that that form of life is most like to that of the son of God,
that is most exposed to martyrdom.

And the Sixth, that that form of life is most proper, and able to obtain the
Christian mortification, which is most despised in the eyes of the world, in
which without making profession of outward holiness a man lives holy. And of
the things, which have been spoken I take this resolution, that they who live
holily, without making profession of outward holmesse, are very much
habilitated, and exposed to martyrdom, do conserve nthemselves very well in
the kingdom of God, are fit to converse with all sorts of people, imitating
the form of life which Christ held, and deceive humane wisdom: and therefore
it properly appertains to them that which S. Paul says Colos. 3. Ye are dead,
and your life is hid with Christ in God, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

I will add this, that Christ conserving himself in that form of life in
which he was borne, being borne the son of God, until that he dyed by the will
of God, teaches us, that we shall do well conserving our selves in that form
of life, in which we found our selves when we are called to be the sons of God.
So be it that in that we attend to reduce our form of life as much as may be
possible for us, answerable to that form of life which Christ held in this
world, in such manner as in us may shine out entirely the image and similitude
of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XC. In what the Christian perfection, the Duty, and Decorum do
consist.
I Have oftimes said, that Christian perfection consists in this, that a man
incorporated in Christ in his death and in his resurrection should live
according to the Christian Duty, keeping the Christian decorum; understanding
that so much shall a man get Christian perfection, in as much as he shall live
according to Christian duty, keeping christian decorum. Now I say that then a
man lives according to christian duty, and keeps christian decorum, when he
imploies himself in those things, in which Christ would have employed
himself. And consequently I say, that then a man departs from the christian
duty, and leaves to observe christian decorum, when he i^ploies himself those
things, where in Christ would not have employed himself: in such manner, as to
him who would obtain Christian perfection desirous to apprehend that dignity in
which he is comprehended, it appertains to live in all things, and altogether
according to the Christian duty, and to observe the Christian decorum, setting
before his eyes all the life of Christ, constituting his duty, and his decorum
in being in every thing, and altogether like unto Christ, doing only that which
Christ would do, and by no means doing what Christ would not do.

Passing on farther I say, that as I understand that Men whilst they are, as
the Scripture terms them, flesh and blood, can by no means attain to so great
perfection as that which is known in Christ. So also I understand, that to all
them, who know, and feel themselves incorporated in the death of Christ, and
in the resurrection of Christ, it appertains to fix their eyes upon this so
high perfection, to pretend to obtain it, and in effect to procure it. For to
this I understand the Holy Spirit moves, and conducts them, to whom Christ is
communicated. Here I gain two things, the one, that from henceforth I shall
attribute to weakness of my Flesh all that which I shall do, which Christ
would not have done. And all that, which I shall leave undone, which Christ
would not have left undone. And I will attribute unto the force, and efficacy
of the Christian spirit all that which I shall do, which Christ would have
done, and all that which I shall leave undone, which Christ would have left
undone; not excusing my self in that which shall proceed from mine infirmity,
and weakness, nor waxing proud for that which shall proceed from the force,
and efficacy of the Christian spirit. The other thing which I gain is, that
from this day forward I shall not go examining as it were, to say what is
lawful; holding that to be a matter of servants and slaves: And I will go
viewing, and reviewing as it were to say what is expedient; holding that to be
for sons. And I will hold it for a thing convenient and expedient for me to
live according to the Christian duty, and to observe Christian decorum,
regarding this duty, and this decorum as it were to say in the face of Christ,
in all that which is written of him, and in all that which by the things which
are written, and by that, which I shall experiment in me, I shall be able to
gather from his divine perfections. In these two things I understand other two:
The one, that they do not know the Christian Dignity, who go procuring to
cover with pretense of christian Piety those things, which they do through
weakness, and infirmity of the flesh: And the other, that they do not know
themselves for sons of God, who go examining what is lawful: (This being
certain, that they who know the christian dignity, do with good will manifest,
and confess that which is of the weakness, and infirmity of their flesh. And
that^ they who know themselves for sons of God, being ashamed to examine what
is lawful, go observing what is expedient, attributing to their proper
infirmity, and weakness all that which they do, and all that which they leave
to do.) Attending to what is Lawful, and going out of what is expedient; out
of which they, who know themselves for sons of God, and know the christian
dignity, do never procure to go.

The weakness, and infirmity I understand we have it all of us in the body,
and in the mind. To the weakness and infirmity of the body I understand
appertain all those things in which we do delicately, and with corporal
delight serve unto our corporal necessities. And to the infirmities, and
weaknesses of the mind I understand appertain all those things, in which we
have intent to satisfy unto the eyes of the world; in such sort as I traveling
on horseback do delicately serve unto the necessities of my body, a thing
which Christ did not ordinarily. And this is a weakness and infirmity of my
body. And procuring that my riding on horse should be polite, and well
furnished, I have intent to satisfy the eyes of the world: and this is a
weakness, and infirmity of my mind. This example may be extended to all other
things, which we deal about in this present life. Whereupon it is fit to
advertize, that they who begin to conform their lives in outward, and
corporal things with that of Christ, run hazard of never getting the
conformity in the inward, which is the essential, and to fall into vainglory
and presumption. And therefore it is needful, that every person called of God
to the grace of the Gospel, should begin to conform himself to Christ's
living in the inward, as it were to say, in the obedience to God, in the
meekness in the humility of mind, and in the charity; and afterward attend
to conform himself also with the living of Christ in the outward, but so
much, as the outward shall help him, and serve him to grow in the inward: For
this is that, which principally pleases God, and Jesus Christour Lord.

CONSID. XCI. That only the Sons of God have certain satisfactionn in every
thing.
BY one of the three ways all men come unto the things as well those which
pertain to piety, as unto all other things. By our own wills: against our own
wills: and by the favor of God. In those things, unto which we come by our own
will, there is design: in those things whereunto we come against our wills,
there is passion: in those things, whereunto we come by the favor of God there
is admiration. The sons of Adam never find certain and firm satisfaction in
those things, unto which pretending piety they come with design. For their
designs go founded in selfe-interest, and in self-love. And holding this
foundation when their designs hit not out to them they cannot stand with
satisfaction, how much soever they persuade themselves to remain satisfied, and
would show it to others. That this is true they know by proper experience, who
with design pretend piety, changing their manner of living, of state, and of
condition, or do occupy, and exercise themselves more in one thing then in
another. The sons of God do then find certain satisfaction, and firm in
those things, unto which they come by their own proper will with design, when
their design is either to help the mortification, and the vivification, into
which they have begun to enter by the favor of God, or is to serve Christ in
his members. That this is true they understand by proper experience, who
holding themselves for dead in the cross of Christ do attend unto
mortification with design to mortify themselves only to live as dead, in as
much as they are dead, and their life stands hid with Christ in God.

The sons of Adam do by marveile abide without passion, and without grief in
those things whereunto they-come without their will, such as are diseases,
infirmities, death and dishonor: for they do not in these kind of things
know the will of God; or if they know it, they hold it for rigorous, and
therefore judge themselves enemies of God. That this is true all of us as it
were know by some experience. The sons of God then are without passion, and
without grief in those things whereunto they come against their wills, when
knowing the will of God, they reduce themselves to conform themselves with it,
in which conformity they find content and satisfaction in their minds, albeit
the flesh feel grief, and affliction, being in that estate, wherein it would
not be. And it is no marveile, that in them who are such, the flesh would
resent it self and be grieved, since it did resent it self, and was grieved
in the only begotten son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

The sons of Adam do seldom times come to the things of piety by the favor
of God, and when they do come, they do not feel it, neither know it, and
therefore do not taste it, and not tasting it, they cannot therein find
satisfaction. That this is true they know by experience, who having been the
sons of Adam are now the sons of God, who do remember themselves of some
things unto which they came by the favor of God, they not knowing the favor
of God in them, and therefore not tasting it, nor finding content in them. The
sons of God come many times by the favor of God to the things of piety; and
when they feel it, and know it, then they taste it, and tasting it they find
satisfaction therein, and they remain with admiration. That this is true the
sons of God themselves know by experience, coming to many things without
their proper will, and without design, without contradiction, and without
passion, but properly through the admirable favor of God, in such sort as they
find themselves with abomination of those things which they formerly loved, and
with love of those things which they formerly hated, without knowing themselves
by what way, nor by what manner they are come unto it. This marveilous, and
favorable work I understand that God works in his sons in this world, opening
their eyes to the knowledge of the justice of Christ, which showing unto them
that it appertains to them, makes that they abhor their own proper justices, I
would say, all that which men do pretending to justice themselves in the sight
of God, which they altogether leave, and despise, and condemn. Opening their
eyes to the knowledge of his divinity he draws them to the knowledge of
themselves, and of the men of the world, and so disenamours them of themselves,
and of the world, and enamours them of himself, and of Christ. Opening their
eyes to the knowledge, that God slaying on the cross the flesh of Christ did
altogether ^slay their flesh, he draws them to the hatred of their proper
flesh, and makes that resolving themselves with themselves they love
mortification, and procure it. Opening their eyes to the most happy estate of
life eternal by the consideration of Christ raised, he makes them to hate the
present life, and all that is in it, and that appertains to it, and so they
love eternal life, and despise the present life, and rejoice to loose it.
Finally, always when God would reduce his sons to the hatred of an evil
thing, I understand he gives them the knowledge of a good thing. For he knows
that being affectionated to the good they will hate the evil much the rather
then if he gave unto them the knowledge of the evil thing it self, as much
the rather and with more ease I should bring my self to hate the worldly
living, considering the felicity of the Christian living, then I should do
considering the evil of the worldly living: Which I understand proceeds from
the natural condition of man's heart, which cannot leave to love something, in
such manner, that to reduce it to hate any thing which it loves, it is
necessary that there should be some other thing propounded to it, which it may
love.

In this discourse I intend Ten principal things. The first, that the sons
of Adam do not find in any thing neither certain nor ^rme satisfaction; and
that the Sons of God find it in all things which they do as the sons of God.

The second, that as then my design in that which I do by my will, shall be
Christian, when I shall pretend to augment my self in that, in which I have
begun to enter by the favor of God.

The third, that in that which comes unto me contrary to my will, albeit the
flesh resent it self, and be grieved, the mind is to be contented, and
satisfied.

The fourth, that I am come by the favor of God into those things, in which I
do not know mine own design, nor others violence.

The fifth, that God giving unto me the knowledge of spiritual, eternal, and
true things, he draws me to the hatred of corporal, temporal, and false
things.

The sixth, that through the knowledge of life everlasting I come to hate the
present.

The seventh, that knowing my self dead on the cross of Christ I facilitate my
mortification.

The eighth, that attending to the knowledge of God I come to the knowledge of
my self, and of the world, and into hatred of my self, and of the world.

The ninth, that attending to know the justice of Christ I renounce and refuse
all mine own justifications.

The tenth, that they, who do not begin to hate their own proper
justifications, and themselves, and the world, and the present life, and
temporal things, and false, have not as yet begun to be the Sons of God, but
are as yet the Sons of Adam: For as much as in them, who begin to be the
Sons of God, all these hatreds are begun to be felt,, unto which they come
by as many other affections. And Sons of God are they, who believing the
Gospel stand incorporated in the only begotten Son of God Jesus Christ our
Lord.

CONSID. XCII. In what manner Mortification is the proper counter^igne, by
which we know our selves the Sons of God.
HAving ofttimes said, that the proper countersigne, whereby a man may know
himself to be the Son of God, being dead on the Cross with Christ, and
being risen with Christ, is the Mortification, by means whereof he hates the
world, and himself: And understanding that the Devil as crafty, and subtle
might from hence take occasion to disquiet the Sons of God, giving them to
understand that they are not such, since they do not know in themselves so
much hatred of the world, and of themselves, that they have not* ofttimes
pleasure to content the world, and to satisfy themselves, I come to declare my
self in this manner; I say in this, that I understanding by experience, that
suddenly when a man is called by God to the grace of the Gospel, and enters
into it, and is incorporated in Christ, and is therefore dead with Christ, and
risen with Christ, he feels, and finds himself inwardly much changed in his
designs, and purposes, in such manner that he hates that which he loved
before, and loves that which he hated before. I am of this opinion, that
Mortification, and the hatred of the world, and of himself, is the proper
counter sign, whereby a Christian knows himself to be the Son of God, and
therefore the heir of eternal life. But I do not understand, that this
mortification, nor this hatred are at one throw ^rfect and entire in the mind,
and in the body of a man, who becomes the Son of God by acceptance of the
Gospel, and by incorporation in Christ. Nor do I understand that they are
perfect, and entire no not in the mind only: But I understand, that the
incorporation in Christ works this effect in a man who accepts the grace of the
Gospel. For as before he accepted it, he delighted himself, and rejoiced with
his mind, and with his body in the honors, and in the dignities of the world,
seeking them and procuring them, and keeping his intent principally on them,
neither tasting, nor rejoicing of the principal and divine things, nor having
any intent unto them, and therefore neither seeking, nor procuring them; so
after that he has accepted them, he hates in his mind that which he formerly
procured, and sought, and loves that which before he despised, and fled,
changing altogether his intent: And albeit his body repugne,, and contradict,
being not as yet altogether mortified, it suffices that his mind stands
changed as much as concerns the intent conformable to his knowledge. That
which I say of men, and of the dignities of the world, I say also of the
delights, and pleasures of the world, understanding that as the man, that
accepts the grace of the Gospel, before he do accept it, is intent to seek
and procure his pleasures, and his contents delighting his sensuality, and
would if it were possible have as many other corporal senses for to content,
and satisfy himself sensually in the use of the creatures, and is grieved,
and resents himself, when any of his corporal senses fayl him, or are in any
kind marred; so after he has accepted the grace he does not only not attend
to that which he formerly attended, but on the contrary he is altogether intent
to deprive himself of all that which may give content and satisfaction to his
sensuality, and is grieved that he is necessitated to satisfy it in any thing
for the sustentation of of his life, and therefore would be deprived of his
five senses, and rejoices when he finds himself deprived of any of them, or
finds himself with any defect in any of them. All this I say a man begins to
feel in himself suddenly as he accepts the grace of the Gospel becoming the
Son of God. And I say farther, that as a man goes on growing in the
incorporation in Christ, so he goes growing in his Mortification, in his hatred
in quality and in quantity; in quality, hating every day more that which he
has begun to hate, because he knew it estranged from Christ, and unworthy of a
Christian person incorporated in Christ; hating it likewise with his body as
well as with his mind, outwardly and inwardly, as are the things which in
themselves are foul, and unclean, which things also men will hate, who with
natural light pretend to be just, and holy: and in quantity, hating much more
those those things which he has begun to hate. For he begins the spiritual
light being more clear in him, he going on more distinctly knowing the things
which appertain to a Christian man, and those things which do not appertain to
him he goes on hating more things; first hating them with his mind, and
reducing himself by little and little to hate them also with his body, and
laboring that his hatred as well of the mind, as of the body, may go on
increasing in him. And this is properly the exercise of a Christian man for the
whole time of his life.

From all this discourse this is well gathered, that the countersigne, whereby
I know that I am the son of God, that I am dead on the Cross with Christ, is
not the total mortification, the total hatred of the world, and of my self
with my mind and with my body in all things, but the ^eginning of
mortification, and of the hatings, and in some principal things, when it is
come without being procured or sought with humane industry, and when it
continues in the mind, albeit the flesh, the sensuality will seek and procure
the contrary, and albeit in that which is offered to it, it rejoices, and
delights it self; the mind standing free from that rejoicing, and from that
delight feeling, displeasure, and trouble in those things, of which it is
^orced through the frailty of the flesh, to take more then is sufficient to
supply to its corporal necessities, in such manner as the body receives those
things, and not the mind, a man feeling together with the satisfaction of his
body affliction of the mind. And in this, that is, for a man not to take more
of the creatures then that which suffices to serve to his corporal
necessities, I understand consists that hatred, which Christ will, that they
who would be his members, should bear to their proper life. And I understand
that S. Paul standing in this combat of his mind, would not that his body
should take more of the created things, then that which suffices to maintain
him alive; and his body would take more of them to satisfy and delight its
sensuality. He felt that which he wrote to the Romans, Chapter 7. And since that
went so with S. Paul, which he himself in that place says and confesses, no
Christian person is to esteem him self an alien from Christ, nor from the
Christian Sonneship, because he feels a liveliness in his flesh, and because
he feels not in every thing, and altogether the hatred of the world, and of
himself, which it behooves him to have, that he may be perfect; but feeling
part of this Mortification, and of these hatreds, as has been said, he has
good cause to hold himself for the Son of God incorporated in Christ, and dead
on the Cross with Christ, and to attend in such manner to mortification, that
it may so much grow, that he may become like to Jesus Christ our Lord, who as
S* Paul says, Pleased not himself: To him be glory for ever,

Amen.
CONSID. XCIII. That that suffering is most Christian, and most acceptable to
God, in which he that suffers, finds least of his own will.
ALL that we suffer in this present life, who attend unto Christian perfection,
whether in the body, or in the mind, is either by our proper will, or by some
others will. By our own proper will we suffer when we deprive our selves of
our commodities, and of our satisfactions; And we suffer by others wills, when
without our will we are deprived of our commodities, and satisfactions. Man's
mind, as I have often said, is most arrogant, and being such it seeks in
every thing its own proper glory, and its own proper honor: And therefore
according as the humane mind stands alive in us more or less, so we find
more, or less satisfaction in that which we suffer. ^f the mind stand much
alive, we find much satisfaction in that which we suffer by our own proper
will, and little in that which we suffer by others will; And if the mind stand
much dead, we find little satisfaction in that which we suffer by our own
wills; and much in that which we suffer by others will. And this much, or
little satisfaction may give us testimony of our mortification.

The person which has his mind much alive, always feels and resents himself
in those things which he suffers through others will, as well because he does
not think that suffering that with patience he pleases God, it seeming to him,
that it is because he cannot choose; as also because man's mind being most
arrogant cannot suffer that violence should be offered unto it. The self same
person who has his mind much alive, does always rejoice, and content
himself in those things which he suffers by his own will, both because in
suffering he thinks to please God, as also because where he knows his own
will, he always finds satisfaction. On the contrary, the person who has his
mind much mortified, always esteems little, and has suspicion of that which
he suffers by his own will, as well because the principal thing, whereunto he
has intent, is to mortify his own will, always being suspicious of it; as
also because being in the midst of his own proper glory he cannot well content
himself with that suffering which is voluntary, knowing that it always
redounds to the glory and honor of him who suffers. And the selfsame person
who has his mind much mortified, does always much esteem, and content
himself of that which he suffers by the will of God, as well because he knows
that what h^ suffers, redounds to the glory and honor of God, unto which thing
he principally attends.

Amongst those things which a man suffers by his own will, being able not to
suffer them if he would, I put Abstinencies, and Disciplines, Watchings, and
Hayre-cloaths, with all that which is thereunto annexed: And amongst those
things which a man suffers by another will, I put violences, Dishonours,
Persecutions, Martyrdomes, Infirmities, Deaths, with all that which is
thereunto annexed.

The persons who have by proper experience known what thing a live mind is, and
what thing a dead mind is, or at least which is begun to be mortified,
examining themselves by that which they shall have suffered, and shall suffer
in both these manners, thatis, by their proper wills, and by another will,
shall know that all that which has been written is true, their knowledge
answering to experience, and knowing it they will attend to mortify their
minds from good to better, until they have reduced them to those terms, that
in what they shall suffer by their own proper will, they pretend to help and
serve them, who are the members of Christ, and to mortification, which faith,
and the holy spirit work in them, as I have otherwhere said: and that in that
which they suffer by others will, knowing in all that, the will of God, and not
that of men, and of other creatures, which cause them to suffer, they rejoice
themselves, and content themselves, pretending to satisfy unto the duty of
piety, and to observe christian decorum. And I understand, that a man who
suffers by others will, does then attend unto the duty of christian piety, when
coming into poverty by any occasion whatsoever, he contents himself
therewith. The selfsame I say of dishonor, of corporal infirmities, and of
death, with all other things which are of that quality. And then I understand,
that the selfsame man, who suffers by others will, observes christian
decorum, when suffering for Christ he is contented to suffer, Glorying as S.
Paul says, in afflictions! And for Christ I understand they suffer, who either
for preaching the Gospel, or for teaching christian living, having the gift of
an Apostle, or of a Doctor, are persecuted, evil entreated, dishonored, and
martyrized; and they who for the christian life, in which a man attends to
recover the image, and likeness of God by the imitation of Christ, are
esteemed base, murmured at, and slaundered; and they who to accommodate, and
satisfy them who are the members of Christ, and stand incorporate in Christ,
deprive themfelves of their commodities, and of their satisfactions. And this
voluntary suffering I hold to be the most proper to a Christian.

They who suffering by others will: imitate Job, satisfy unto the duty of
Piety, conforming themselves unto the will of God. And they who suffering by
others will, and also by their own will, shall imitate S. Paul, shall observe
the christian decorum: God having showed in Job a most efficacious example of
patience in suffering by another will in natural things, and in S. Paul a
most divine example of animosity in suffering by others will in Christian
matters.

And in this discourse I intend eight things.

The first, that according as my mind does more or less content it self of
that which it suffers by its own proper will, or by others will, I know that
the mortification thereof is greater or lesser.

The second, that in that which I suffer by mine own will, if I do not suffer
it for Christ, I seek mine own honor, and mine own glory, and mine own
interest, and mine own profit.

The third, that contenting my self with that which I suffer by others will, I
do satisfy unto piety, and observe christian decorum, and therefore seek the
honor and glory of God.

The fourth, that I ought to hold for certain, that all suffering of what sort
soever it be, which without my will offers it self to me in this present life,
is by the will of God.

The fifth, that as then I shall in my sufferings satisfy christian piety, when
I shall imitate Job.

The sixth, that as then I shall in my sufferings observe christian decorum,
when I shall imitate S. Paul, in as much as he imitated Christ.

The seventh, that they suffer for Christ, who preach him, who imitate him, and
they who serve him in his members.

The eight, that that voluntary suffering is most proper to a christian, that
redounds to the profit of them who are incorporateed in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCIV. Three sorts of Conscience: one by the Law natural, and the
other by the written Laws: and the other by the Gospel.
ALL men of the world, as I understand, frame their consciences with one of
these three means: There are some, who attending unto natural piety, which
consists in this, that a man employ himself wholly, and every one of the
members of his body in those things for which he knows God created him, and
them, and that he serve himself of all created things properly for that, which
God created them for. They go forming their consciences by the law of nature,
having a good, or bad opinion of themselves, according as they know their
living is conformable, or not conformable to the duty of natural piety. Those
I understand by how much they have their understandings more illustrated to
know that, whereunto they are bound by Natural piety, and by how much the more
they do apply themselves to satisfy unto this obligation, so much worse
opinion have they of themselves knowing that they fail much, and in many
things to the duty of natural piety, whereunto man through the depravation of
original sin can by no means satisfy of himself.

There are others, who attending unto the Hebrew piety, which consists in this,
that a man should in every thing, and altogether live conformable to those
Laws whereunto he is obliged, or persuades himself to be obliged, observing
them according to the intention of him that made them; go forming their
consciences by that which they know of those Laws, and having a good, or evil
opinion of themselves according as they know their living conformable, or not
conformable to that which the Laws demand of them. These I understand by how
much they do the more know that whereunto those Laws oblige them, and by how
much they do the more apply themselves to fulfill that obligation, so much
have they worse opinion of themselves; knowing that they fail much, and in
many things unto the Hebrew piety, whereunto they have intent to satisfy, that
being impossible unto them, as well for the blindness of their understandings,
with which they can by no means penetrate to know properly the intention of
him that gave the Laws, and not knowing it they can never secure themselves to
have satisfied unto them, in as much as through the rebellion of the Flesh,
which as S. Paul says, subjects not it self to the law of God, neither indeed
can. There are other men, who hearing the voice of the Gospel, which promises
remission of sins, and reconciliation with God to them who Believe in Christ,
leaving to pretend natural piety, and renouncing the pretense of Hebrew piety,
embrace themselves with christian piety, which consists in this, that a man
being incorporated by faith in Christ should esteem himself pious, just, and
holy, notwithstanding that he do not altogether satisfy natural piety, nor to
Hebrew piety, and moreover notwithstanding he do not altogether satisfy to the
duty, and to the decorum of christian piety. They, I understand, by how much
they have their understandings more illustrated in the knowledge of the Gospel
of Christ, and by how much they do more apply themselves to give credit unto
the Gospel, so much better opinion have they of themselves, forming their
opinions not by that which they know in themselves, but by that which they
believe of the Gospel, which God knows, who does not consider them by that
which they are in themselves, but by that which they are in Christ. He does not
hold them for good nor for evil by that whereby they approach, or by that
whereby they go far off from the duty of natural piety, nor from the duty
of Hebrew piety, nor for that they observe or not observe the Decorum of
christian piety; but for the fidelity, or infidelity, with which they
persevere, or sever themselves from the Gospel and from Christ.

The men that attend unto natural piety, without having christian piety, are
for the most part vicious; for in them the flesh is made licentious.

The men, that attend to Hebrew piety without having christian piety, are
ordinarily superstitious, and are scrupulous; nay from hence arise all the
scruples, and all the doubts in those that are called cases of conscience. For
men not being able entirely to understand the intention of him that gave the
Law, it comes to pass, that a man not being able to certify himself to have
satisfied unto the Law, goes procuring to satisfy with superstitions, and
nevertheless remains with very great scruples, the which are the greater in
them who stand most applied to satisfy unto Hebrew piety. Besides that in the
understanding of the intention of the Law there are so many opinions, as they
are that go about to understand it. In sum, whilst a man continues subject
to the law, having framed his conscience by the opinion which he himself has
of himself, he never comes to feel peace of conscience.

The men that attend to christian piety, go forming their consciences as I
have said by the opinion which God has of them considering them incorporated
in Christ, and not by that which they know of themselves. According as
christian piety goes being efficatious in them, so do they go on every day
satisfying more and more unto natural piety, and unto Hebrew piety, not to
form their own consciences by their own satisfaction, but to observe the duty
of Christian piety, and the Decorum of the Gospel. In these only vices are not
found, ^or in them the Flesh is not licentious; nay rather being dead on the
cross with Christ, goes by little and little mortifying it self. And in them
only are no superstitions, nor scruples; for they know that Christ has freed
them from all the Law, having satisfied for them; and being free they have none
any more to accuse them. And because they also know that God sets not to their
account that which they fail to the duty of Christian piety, and to the
Decorum of the Gospel, which does amor^ ^ly oblige us to be like unto God, and
to the son himself of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCV. That men are incapable of the divine Generation of the son of
God, and of the spiritual Regeneration of the sons of God.
AMongst the things in which human curiosity shows her rashness, I hold it
for a very principal to endeavor to have the science, and to understand the
Divine generation of the son of God, in what manner the son is begotten of
the Father, for what cause the Word of God is called the Son, or the son of
God is called the Word. And I say that I hold this rashness very principal
amongst the rest: for I understand, that humane intelligence is as incapable to
comprehend the divine generation of the Son of God, because this is a thing
altogether alienated from that which he knows, understands, and experiments
touching his own generation, as the intelligence of a worm, which is bred of
the corruption of the earth, is incapable of the generation of mankind, that
is, how one man is the son of another man, or one of the other Animal is the
son of the other Animal; because this is a thing most alienated from her own
proper generation. And besides this I understand, that as in ^ase a worm
should come to understand in what manner a man is generated of another man, and
would make other worms to understand it, they would never be capable thereof,
it being a thing altogether alienated from their generation: so supposing that
some one man should come to understand the divine generation of the son of
God, and would make other men understand it, they would never be able to
understand, because it is a thing most different from their generation. And
therefore extreme great is the rashness of men, who with their natural light
only will understand this divine mystery; and also great is that of them, who
will understand it being helped by the holy Scriptures in that language. And
hence it comes, that albeit S. John understood the divine generation of the
son of God, and would give it to understand to men, they are not capable
thereof, not understanding that, which according to S. John the words signify,
with which he would declare it; as it were to say, what thing S. John meant,
saying Logos o^ Verbum: willing also to show better the incapacity of humane
intelligence in the divine generation of the son of God, I think on this
wise; that if it be incapable of the spiritual regeneration of them who being
incorporated by faith in the son of God come to be the sons of God by
adoption, how much more shall it be incapable of the divine generation of the
proper son of God? Now the humane intelligence is incapable of this spiritual
regeneration, all they who are regenerated know by experience, knowing in
themselves, that they should never have understood this divine mystery, if they
had not experimented it; and knowing also, that although they labor to make
them capable who are out of it, they do nothing at all; as the worm also
should do nothing at all, which having understood how the matter of humane
generation goes, would make other worms capable thereof. This selfsame I
understand by that discourse, which S. John tells, that passed between Jesus
Christ our Lord, and the great Master of Israel called Nicodemus, who came to
speak with him by night. And so it is, that Christ speaking unto him of the
spiritual regeneration, whereby a man leaves to be the son of wrath, and
becomes the son of grace, leaves to be the son of Adam, and becomes the son of
God, Nicodemus with all his natural light, withal his humane Sciences, and
with all his intelligence of sacred Scriptures was so incapable of this
spiritual regeneration, that Christ marveiling at it, said unto him, Art thou
a Master in Israel, and know not these things? And adds, If I have told
you earthly things, and you believe not, how will you believe if I tell you
Heavenly things? Willing to say, If thou be incapable of this spiritual
regeneration, which although it be spiritual, is nevertheless such, as is
wrought here on earth, and in the men of earth; how much more incapable will thou be of the divine generation to believe it, of which I would speak unto
thee; for as much as it is not done on earth, but in Heaven, and is not done in
an earthly thing, but in an heavenly. Let this then be the conclusion, that it
being true, that whilst a man is without the spirit, with all his natural
light, with all his sciences, and human learnings, and writings he is not only
incapable to understand the divine generation of the only begotten son of God,
but he is also incapable to understand the spiritual regeneration of the
adopted sons of God. Let none be so bold without having obtained the spiritual
regeneration, to presume to understand it, nor to speak of it. Nor let none be
so rash, that without having obtained the spiritual regeneration, and having
been admitted to those sacraries of God, unto which S. John was admitted when
he said, In the beginning was the word, he should dare to will to understand it,
penetrate, nor compass it with his wit, and humane discourse; holding for
certain, that of this divine mystery they only are capable, unto whom by the
will of God the proper son of God Jesus Christ our Lord will reveal it.

CONSID. XCVI. That as then a man knows himself a pilgrim in this world, when
because God loves him, the world persecutes him.
COmmonly all men esteem themselves citizens of those places where they were
borne, esteeming themselves pilgrims and strangers in all other places. They
who pretend that every place is a man's country, esteem themselves strangers no
where. They who being regenerated, and renewed by the holy spirit, are more
then Man, esteeming themselves Citizens of the Kingdom of God, and of
eternal life, esteeming themselves pilgrims in all countries of the world. The
first following sense go after the judgment of sensuality. The second
following the natural light go after prudence, and human reason. And the
third following the spiritual light go after Faith, Hope, and Charity. The
first delight themselves of that which pleases sensuality. The second
despising that which pleases sensuality seek their proper glory, and their
proper satisfaction of their minds. The third despising both the one and the
other thing, love the honor of God, and the glory of Christ. The first the
world loves. The second the world despises, albeit on the other side it prize
and esteem them. And the third the world despizeth, hates, and persecutes. The
first God knows not. The seconn God abhorres. The third God prizeth, loves and
favors. Where I do not understand, that God prizeth, loves, and favors this
third sort, because the world despises them, abhorres them, and persecutes
them, but that the world despises, abhorres, and persecutes them, because God
prizeth them, loves them, and favors them.

Farther I understand, that from their thus feeling themselves on one part
prized, loved, and favored of God, and on the other part despised, persecuted,
and hated of the world, it redounds, that they following where the holy spirit
leads them, running after Faith, Hope, and Charity, esteem themselves Pilgrims
in this present life, esteeming themselves Citizens of eternal life:
Esteeming themselves Pilgrims in this present life, they live like Pilgrims,
having no intent to inherit in this present life, nor to rejoice of that which
they rejoice, who are Citizens thereof, and so they pass lightly through all
these things, setting affection to none of them. And holding themselves
Citizens of eternal life, they begin to live, as they live there, and they
have intent to inherit in it and to rejoice in that which they rejoice in, who
are citizens thereof, and herein they set their affections. They I understand
that albeit the remembrance of death frightens them in regard of the sense, in
regard of the liveliness that is in them in their affections, and appetites in
regard of esteeming themselves Pilgrims in this present life, and citizens of
eternal life, it comforts them, and gives them content, considering that death
is the end of their Pilgrimage. They who albeit they be indeed prized, loved
and favored of God are not yet despised, hated, and persecuted of the world,
do not as yet esteem themselves Pilgrims in this present life, not being
handled as Pilgrims, albeit they esteem themselves Citizens of eternal life,
in as much as they know, that they are prized, favored, and loved of God. It
is true indeed, that this estimation is not entire, nor perfect in them, until
that the world knowing them prized, loved and favored of God, begins to handle
them as Pilgrims, despising them, hateing them, and persecuting them. For as
then they feeling themselves handled by the world as Pilgrims, have recourse to
Christ, and recourse to God: and being as they are more prized, more loved,
more favored of God, and more illustrated in the knowledge of eternal life,
they esteem themselves Pilgrims and strangers in this present life, in such
manner that however afterward the world return to prize, love, and use them
well, they do not leave to esteem themselves Pilgrims, and to hold it good to
go out of this pilgrimage.

Here I understand two things: The first, that it is Gods will, that they whom
he loves should live as Pilgrims. And the second, that between them who hate
the world, because they are persecuted of the world for piety, and them who
hate the world for other respects, there is this difference, that these second
although they bear hatred to the world, whilst they are despised of the world,
and would be contented to go out of the world, when the world returns to
prize them loving the world they would by no means go out of the world. And
the other after that they once hate the world seeing themselves despised hated
and persecuted of the world, they never more return to love the world, how
much soever it love, and esteem them. This difference proceeds from hence, that
following the light of the holy spirit, and being illustrated in the knowledge
of eternal life, they do always hold themselves for pilgrims in this present
life, and always hold themselves for Citizens of the Kingdom of God and in
eternal life, and therefore hate this life, and rejoice to go out of it. On
the contrary the other following the natural light have no certainty of
eternal life; and if they have any, they do not stand sure to be well in it,
and therefore they do not altogether hate this life, nor rejoice to go out of
it. In this discourse christian persons shall understand, that they are to
esteem themselves pilgrims and strangers in the world in this present life, and
that they are to esteem themselves Citizens of the Kingdom of God, and of
life eternal: And that if so be the feeling themselves very fearful of death
shall make them know that they are not come to this to esteem themselves
pilgrims, they ought with continual prayer to pretend it, being certain, that
by how much more perfectly they shall stand therein, then they shall be most
like to Christ, and most like to God, who have been and are in this present
life strangers and pilgrims, and like such have been, and are used. And to
every Christian person it appertains to procure to be like to God, and to the
son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCVII. Whether Justification be a fruit of piety; and whether piety be
a fruit of Justification.
WIlling to examine between these two gifts of God, Piety and Justification,
which of them may be said to be the fruit of the other, that is, whether piety
be the fruit of justification, a man being first just, before pious, or whether
justification be the fruit of Piety, a man being pious before just; and willing
in this matter to proceed with order as it were, I first say, that by Piety I
understand the true divine worship, which consists in worshipping God in
spirit, and in truth, John 4. approving with the mind whatever God does,
holding it for just, holy, and good. In this signification I understand S. Paul
uses this word Piety: 1. Tim. 3. And I say, that by justification I understand
the purity of conscience which dares appear in judgment, such as was S. Paul's,
when he said there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, etc. Passing
on farther I understand, that calling into counsel for the making of this
examination the natural light, prudence and humane wisdom, she will always
say, and affirm, that justification is a fruit of piety, understanding that
one cannot have justification, and purity in his conscience, if he do not
first adore God in spirit and in truth, giving unto him that which it ought to
do as his creature; and that suddenly when he gives to God that which he ought
to give, he is just having cleanness in his conscience. And so it is
resolved, that Justification is a fruit of piety; since from a man's being pious
it redounds that he is just. Farther I understand, that calling into counsel
for the making of this trial the holy spirit, and the Christian spirit, he
will say and affirm, that Piety is the fruit of Justification, understanding
that a man cannot have Piety, worship God in spirit and truth, if he be not
first just accepting the Gospel of Christ making Christ's justice his, and
understanding that instantly when a man believing is just, he begins to have
Piety adoring God in spirit and truth. And so it is resolved, that Piety is a
fruit of Justification: for a man is first just, then pious. If that were true
which natural light says, prudence and humane wisdom for the selfsame cause
it would follow, that there has not been, nor is, nor shall be a pious man, I
would say, who should give entirely, and completely unto God that which he
ought to give. And it being true, that which the holy spirit, and the Christian
spirit says, it well follows that there has been, is, and shall be a great
number of just men: for there have been, are, and shall be many men, that have
been, are, and shall be iustistified by Christ, accepting, and making
Christiustice theirs. Men that Judge, that Iustfication is a fruit of piety, by
the self same case give testimony of themselves, that they judge by natural
light, by prudence, and humane wisdom, as Plato, and Aristotle would have
judged, who had no notice at all of Christ. And in very truth, I know not what
they think of Christ, of the Christian business, nor of the Gospel. The men
that judge that Piety is a fruit of Justification, by the selfsame case give
testimony of themselves, that they judge by the holy spirit, by the Christian
spirit, as S. Peter and S. Paul judged, who largely knew Christ, and had the
spirit of Christ. They have this opinion of Christ, that in him God chastised
all our sins, that is, all that wherein we fail unto that which as the
creatures of God we are bound to give unto God. They think of the Christian
business, that it is a living under the government of the holy spirit in
holiness and justice. And they think of the Gospel, that it is a Proclamation
that compriseth these two things, Remission of sins, and Justification by
Christ; And the regiment and government of the holy spirit: Of which two things
they enjoy, who believing in Christ accept the Gospel. From all this discourse
I gather, that they who understand Justification to be a fruit of Piety, follow
Plato and Aristotle; And that they who understand Piety to be a fruit of
justification, Justification being a fruit of Faith, follow S. Paul and S.
Peter. It is also gathered, that this name Piety understood in the manner in
which it is here understood, it cannot be attributed to God, because he owes no
man any thing. Nay on the contrary every one owes to him. And that which he
does with us, is not for piety, is not for debt, nor for obligation, but for
compassion, for mercy and for liberality, being in every thing toward us
compassionate, merciful, and liberal; Which ought principally to be known in
this, that he put all our sins on his precious son Jesus Christ our Lord, to
put on us the justice of the selfsame Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. XCVIII. How that is to be understood, that the holy Scripture says,
attributing condemnation sometimes to infidelity, and sometimes to evil works;
and salvation sometimes to Faith, sometimes to good works.
AMongst those things in holy Scripture, which give molestation to Christian
persons, who having faith feel within themselves the fruit of Faith, that is,
Justification, and the fruit of justification, that is, the peace of
conscience, when they will examine with them their conceptions, their
spiritual feelings, I hold for very principal this, that feeling themselves
justified by Faith, and consequently with peace of conscience, cannot
understand for what cause Christ speaking of the day of Iudement, says, that
he will condemn some because they have not done well, and will save others,
because they have done well: Nor for what cause S. Paul says, That God will
render to every man according to his works: Romans 2. And S. Peter, That God will
judge every one according to his works. At which they so much the more marvel,
in as much as the same Christ says, that he that believes shall be saved, and
he that believes not, shall be damned. And the selfsame S. Paul says, that
the Faith of the heart justifies, and the confession of the mouth saves. And
the selfsame S. Peter attributes the salvation of the soul to Faith. And from
their not understanding of this matter it comes to pass, that every one of
them thinks in this manner; If God be to judge me according to my works, there
is no doubt but he will condemn me; for there is not in them any goodness;
nay in those which seem best, there is more contamination of self-love,
interest, and proper glory, in such sort, as if I be to be judged by my work,
it will go ill with me. Whereupon being desirous to take away this
molestation, and this scruple of Christian persons, and spiritual, and to
salve the intelligence of the holy Scriptures, in such sort as they should not
contradict themselves, I think thus, That in good or evil works God co^siders
not the quantity, but the quality, which consists in the mind of him that
does the works in the thing wherein he implies it. That this is true in evil
works needs no proof: and that it is true in good works is evident by that
which Christ says of them that cast their moneys into the Treasury of the
Temple, praising the mind of him that did the works, And it is evident
likewise by that which the selfsame Christ says speaking of the day of
judgment, where he does not say that he will save them who have bin
charitable simply, but they that have been charitable with himself, that is,
they who believing shall stand incorporated in him. Whence it seems that Christ
says, that he will save them who have used charity with him, and condemn them
that have not used it. Now it being clear, that they cannot work with a pious
mind, but only who are pious, and holy; nor can know Christ in his members to
use charity toward him, but they only, who appertain to the selfsame body of
Christ, it is clearly approved, that none can work well, work Christianly, but
those who are the members of Christ, those who have the spirit of Christ, and
are pious, and holy, and just, and believe in Christ. And this being approved
it is likewise approved, that it is the selfsame in holy Scripture to say,
That men shall be saved by their good works, and condemned by their evil
works; and to say. That they shall be saved by their Faith, and condemned by
their Infidelity. Whereupon Christian persons are to two things. The one, That
they only work well for holding themselves justified by Christ, they do not
pretend to justify themselves by their own good works, and so working they
work purely for the love of God, and not for their own proper love, as those
men work, who not holding themselves justified by Christ, pretend to justify
themselves by their own good works, and so working for their own proper love,
proper interest, and not for the love of God, they noe not work well; for their
works do not please God, cannot be called good works. The other, that God
judging them according to their works, will not put to their account the
contamination that he shall know in them, having pardoned them original sin
together with all that which they have from this evil root. And because he
will put to their account the Faith which he shall have given them, and the
purity that shall be in their works whether few or many, in as much as they
shall be the fruit of Faith. And so God shall save them, showing in the outward
judgment, that he saves them for their good works, saving them indeed by the
Faith, which he shall have given them. God shall justify the sentence with
which he condemns the impious, and superstitious, and shall save the pious,
and holy, alleging the outward works of the one, and the other; the living
with holiness and justice on the one part, and the living with injustice, and
impiety on the other part. But this shall not be but for men who know not, nor
see not but in the outward. And in the self same sentence they who know, and
see the inward, the root whence this living and working on the one part, and
this living and working on the other grow, they being more then men by the
Christian regeneration, shall know, that Faith has saved them that shall be
saved, and that infidelity shall have condemned them that shall be condemned.
Here may an impious person say to me willing to calumniate holy Scripture, and
a superstitious willing to canonize his own superstitious works; If this which
thou say be true, what need were there to make mention of works Were it not
better that the Scripture stood solid in saying that whosoever shall believe
shall be saved, and whosoever shall not believe, shall be condemned? To them I
will answer three things.

The first, that from their not understanding the Scriptures it proceeds, that
they find inconstancy in them, and they would not find it, if they understood
them, and they should understand them, if they would not understand them with
prudence, and humane reason, which is incapable of the things which are of the
spirit of God, such as are the holy Scriptures.

The second, That God having as it has been said to justify his sentence
before men, who see not but the outward, it is necessary that he should
allege the works which are outward, those which give testimony of the Faith of
him who believes, and of the infidelity of him who believes not.

And the third, That all men being most ready to work evil, and most slow to
work well, it seems a necessary thing, that the holy Scripture should use this
manner of speech to refrain the pronesse to evil, and to incite the slownesse
to good, to the end, that as they who now feel the Regeneration, and Christian
renovation, should depart from evil, and apply themselves to the good, only
for the duty of the selfsame regeneration, and renovation, to observe the
Christian decorum, not to grieve, nay rather to rejoice the holy spirit. So
they also who begin to feel themselves regenerated, and renewed, shoul do the
selfsame to make firm their vocation, and to work their salvation. And that
should they also do, who do not know the regeneration, nor renovation, for
fear of being condemned. And so even these should be less evil: And they
being less evil should be more good for their proper interest; until such
time as having begun to feel the affections of the Christian regeneration, and
renovation, they also may be good, not doing evil, and doing good not now for
fear, and for interest, but only for the duty of Christian persons
incorporated in Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory forever.

CONSID. XCIX. Whence it proceeds that men b^eve not that all our sins were
chastised in Christ, or they believe is with difficulty.
COnsidering the extreme difficulty, wherewith men bring themselves tobelieve
the Gospel, the good news of the Remission of sins, justification, and
reconciliation with God for the justice of God executed on Christ, For as much
as they also who believe by revelation, and divine inspiration, find more
difficulty in believing this Remission of sins, Justification, and
Reconciliation, then all other things besides, which the Christian Church
believes, I have many times set my self to think whence this difficulty may
proceed, And lastly I am come to this resolution, that to believe this.
Remission of sins, Justification, and Reconciliation a man finds in himself
the contradiction of his evil conscience; and from hence it comes, that with
extreme difficulty they who believe by divine Revelation, and divine
Inspiration, bring themselves to hold themselves for just: They who believe by
opinion, and relation being never able to bring themselves to this.

They who believe being inspired, until they find peace in their consciences,
do not entirely believe the Gospel. And finding peace in their consciences,
the inward contradiction ceasing, the difficulty of believing the Gospel is
taken away. They who believe being taught, as they never find peace in their
consciences, they never believe the Gospel: For the inward contradiction never
cease, that not ceasing, neither does the difficulty in believing cease; nay
whilst the contradiction lasts, the difficulty may be called impossibility.
Men do easily believe by relation of holy Scriptures, that God is most
omnipotent, most just: They believe, that Christ is most innocent, and pure
from all sin: They believe that Christ suffered by the will of God: for in none
of these things they find inward contradiction which suffices to cause that
they should not believe that which holy Scriptures affirm. And not to exclude
the benefit of Christ they believe also that Christ satisfied for original
sin; for neither in this do they find contradiction, in as much as their
consciences not accusing them of original sin, they not knowing their own
proper fault therein, they easily bring themselves to believe, that without
their proper merit that is pardoned unto them, wherein they know not their own
(...). And when it comes to the point to believe that Christ satisfied God for
the sins that every one of them commits, albeit they have the Scriptures
which most largely give testimony thereof, nay all they in conformity preach
this, suddenly they draw back, because they find the inward contradiction in
their own consciences, and so they resolve to restrain the benefit of Christ
only to original sin; understanding it after their own manner: or to enlarge
it also to their proper sins, but with the addition of proper satisfaction.
As if Christ had said, I have satisfied for the sins of you all, but with
condition, that every one should satisfy for his own. And they consider not
the injury which herein they do to Christ, they consider it not because they
feel it not, and they feel it no^ because they know not Christ. They who by
Gods gift believe, that God is most just, that Christ is most innocent, that it
was the work of God that Christ should suffer, and that he suffered for
original sin, in the end reduce themselves to believe, that through Christ's
sufferings they get remission of sins, and are just, and are now in the grace
of God reconciled with God: considering in this manner, if God be most just, if
Christ be most innocent; if that which Christ suffered, he suffered by the will
of God, and the will of God was that he should satisfy for original sin, it
is also true, that men who have obtained the whole pardon of their sins, are
just, and are reconciled with God, since from original sin it comes to all to
be sinners, unjust, and enemies of God, and it comes for us to do things,
whereby we grow in injustice, and in enmity. With this Consideration they
pacify their consciences, and facilitate their believing, and hold for
certain, that they who do not believe this, either do not believe that God is
most just, or do not hold that Christ is most innocent, or do not believe
that it was Gods will that Christ should suffer, for if they did believe it,
they would believe that which follows, that is, that he suffered not for
himself, but for them, and so would hold themselves for Just. Here I
understand all this, First, the blindness of humane wisdom, which is not
capable of the truth which the Gospel preaches. Secondly, the ignorance of
men, who not understanding whence this incapacity comes do not attend to
remedy but to cover it. Thirdly, that Christ satisfying for original sin he
satisfied for all that which we sin through evil inclination, which is
natural unto us through original sin. Fourthly, that the faith of them who
believe being taught, neither quieting, nor pacifying their consciences, does
not facilitate them to believe that all our sins were chastised in Christ.
Fifthly, that the faith of them who believe inspired, quieting and pacifying
their consciences facilitaeth them to believe, That all our sins were chastised
in Christ. And so it is, that they who have this infpired faith, proving and
experimenting in themselves the truth which the Gospel preaches, come to
understand by experience that which at first they believed by inspiration.
First they believe that Christ was chastised for them. For so the Gospel
preaches unto them, and they are inwardly moved to believe that is true.
Afterward finding peace in their consciences they understand in what manner
Christ was chastised for them. They who do not believe it, or believe it, not
being inspired, but taught, never finding peace in their consciences, never
understand that saying of the Prophet being fulfilled in them, Except you shall
believe, ye shall not understand Esaias. 7.

CGNSID. C. That the fruits which in Christian Persons in the beginning of
their Incorporation in Christ seem of the spirit, are of the flesh.
Seeing by experience that almost in all persons, who accepting the Gospel come
to be incorporated in Christ, in the beginning of their incorporation there are
found certain tastes and feelings, and certain desires and vehemencies, and
certain intelligences of holy Scripture of the Christian buisinesse, and
certain tears, all which seem to be of the spirit, and is altogether of Flesh,
and as matter of the Flesh in time dries, and falls. And willing to understand
whence this proceeds, I have considered, that to every one of the^, who are
incorporated in Christ, that befalls, which to a branch, which being cut from
one tree is grafted in another. I would say, that as that branch would not
produce the fruit which it does, if it were not grafted in that tree; but that
first fruit is as it were altogether of the sap which it brought with it from
the tree, from whence it was cut: so the person incorporated in Christ would
not have the tastes or the feelings, nor the vehemencies, nor the desires, nor
the intelligencies, nor the tears which he has, if he were not incorporated
in Christ; but that is as it were all Flesh, affection of the flesh, and
complacency, and satisfaction of the flesh, which standing yet alive, and not
able to satisfy itself, nor to please it self in carnal matters, pleases it
self and satisfies it self in spiritual matters. Whence I understand, that
every person who comes to be incorporated in Christ, may rejoice himself of
those tastes, and feelings, of those desires, and impetusses and of those
intelligences, and tears, in as much as they assure him, that he is
incorporated in Christ; for as much as he should not have any of these things,
if he were not partaker of the incorporation. And I understand, that holding
them for fruits of the flesh and not of the spirit, by the sap of that root
of Adam, and not of that root of Christ, he ought to cast them away, and to cut
them off, no ways feeding himself with them; for that would befall him which
befalls many persons, who feeding themselves with such meat, persuade
themselves to live in the spirit, and live in the flesh. And I understand, that
they ought to have intent, that there should be nothing found in them, but that
which is of the spirit, and of the root of Christ, in which he stands
incorporated, and as it were engrafted, holding for fruit of the root of
Christ, humility, meekness, patience, the despising of himself, the denial
of his own proper will, the obedience to God, charity: for all these things
were seen in Christ whilst he conversed corporally amongst men: and unto these
does God inspire us, and the spirit of Christ moves us. And these shine out in
them, who stand perfectly incorporated in Christ; and the fruits redound to the
Glory of God, and to the glory of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CI. Whence it proceeds, that the impious cannot believe; that the
superstitious believe with ease; and that the pious believe with difficulty.
IN the Impious I consider the impossibility in believing; and I call them
impious, who make profession to be the enemies of God, as Pharaoh, and as the
Scribes, and Pharisees, who were contrary unto Christ. In the superstitious I
consider the facility in believing; and I call them superstitious, who not
being pious make profession of piety, and believe that they are pious. And in
the pious I consider the difficulty in believing; and I call them pious, who
having by the Spirit accepted the general pardon, which the Gospel offers
unto us, attend to confirm themselves in it, and to live in this present life,
a life like unto that, which they are to live in life eternal. The
impossibility of the impious I understand consists in this, that God blindes
their eyes, and shuts their eyes, and shuts their cares, and harde^s their
hearts, to the end that not knowing the general pardon, which is intimated
unto them, they do not believe it, and so do not obtain salvation. This S.
John understood in this manner, when he said, therefore they could not believe,
because Esaias said again, he has blinded their eyes. Nay this very thing
Christ meant, as it is proved by the three other Evangelists, and S. Paul
understood it, as S. Luke testifies the last of the Acts. The facility where
with the superstitious believe, I understand proceeds from their believing with
humane wisdom, from believing by opinion, and by relation, and from believing
by use, and custom, they holding it for impiety to doubt. That this is true is
approved by this, that amongst those true things which they believe, they
believe many other false things, and they believe the false things more then
the true. Nay they do not believe that which is the foundation of all true
things, that is, the remission of sins, and the reconciliation with God by
the justice of God executed on Christ. And I say they do not believe it; for
if they did believe it, for the selfsame reason they would leave to be
superstitious, and would be pious.

The difficulty wherewith the pious believe, I understand proceeds from human
wisdom, from evil conscience, and from the liveliness of mind, and from the
lasciviousness of the flesh, and it proceeds from human wisdom: for by how
much they go on the more procuring to certify themselves in the faith, so much
the more contrast, and impediment does human wisdom go making against them in
it. That this is true, is approved by this, that because they principally
procure to certify themselves, and confirm themselves, that all their sins
were chastized in Christ, in this they who are Christians, find more contrast,
then in all other things which they believe. It proceeds from evil conscience,
in as much as it accuses a man as the enemy of God: and therefore he with
difficulty assures himself in that which the Gospel believes, that God has
now pardoned him, and holds him for his friend. That this is true is approved
by this, that instantly when a man finds peace in his conscience, he stands
confirmed in the faith, in such manner that he is, little solicited to doubt.
It proceeds from the liveliness of the mind, and from the lasciviousness of
the flesh, in as much as man's mind being a friend to life, and his flesh being
a friend to rejoicing, does eagerly combat against the faith, understanding, or
divining, that faith slaies in a man the liveliness of the mind, and mortifies
the lasciviousness of the Flesh. That this is true is approved by this, that
according as the vivacity of the mind goes dying in a man, and the
Lasciviousnes of the flesh, so the beleiving goes on facilitated. But it is not
to be understood, that the death, nor the mortification are those things, which
facilitate to believe, but that faith being that which kills us, and mortifies
us, the believing is facilitated in us, the forces being taken away from our
enemies; I say from them, which make difficult to us our believing, in such
manner as humane prudence, an evil conscience, and the vivacity of our minds
with the laciviousnesse of our flesh are three Instruments, whereby the evil
spirits serve themselves to make difficult our believing to us, who believe by
Revelation, and by divine Inspiration, nay with these three self same
Instruments I understand that the belief of the general Pardon is hindered to
the superstitious, who with ease believe all other things: and with the same I
understand the believing is made impossible to the impious, whom God has made
blind, deaf, dumb; there being in all that is in the impious, in the
superstitious, and in the Pious self love for the Principal enemy. And
certainly it is true, that from it proceeds the contradiction of human
prudence, from it the contradiction of the evil conscience, and from it the
repugnancy of the liveliness of the mind, and of the lascivious^esse of the
flesh. That this is true, is approved by this, that if there were no proper
love, a man would not be so curious in willing to assure himself of the
Christian verity, he would not be so scrupulous in his conscience, nor would so
much repugne against the death of the liveliness of the mind, nor to the
mortification of the lasciviousness of the flesh, and so the contradictions
would cease, and the contradictions ceasing, the difficulty of believing would
also cease.

From all this discourse this resolution may be taken, that if the wicked would
be free from the impossibility in believing, they must attend to renounce their
proper love, if they can: And that if the superstitious would know that they
are not pious, that they do not believe as they ought to believe, nor that
which they ought to believe, they must attend to dispoile themselves of their
proper love as much as they can: And that ^he Pious who shall feel themselves
molested with the difficulty of believing, and would take away the difficulty,
and so facilitate the believing, they must travel to disenamour themselves of
themselves, and of the world, and to enamour themselves of God, and of Christ.
This they shall do considering the evil that is in themselves, and in the
world, and the good that is in God, and in Christ. I say that this
consideration will be very profitable to them, so that it always go
ac^ompanied with prayer, praying God, that he would disenamour them of
themselves, and of the world, and that he would enamour them of himself and of
Christ; and that he would slay, and mortify in them all that which is flesh,
and humane prudence, to the end they may be capable of so great a quantity of
faith as may suffice to cause, that they never come to doubt, nor to stagger in
it, being to him always loyal, and faithful, as belongs to them, being made
his sons by the incorporation wherewith they stand incorporated in his only
begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CII. That Christian faith has necessity to be confirmed with
experience: Of what kind the experience is, and how it is obtained.
BElieving being the foundation of the Christian business, which consists in
accepting the general pardon by the justice of God now executed on Christ, it
seems a proper thing, that a Christian should exercise himself in those
considerations, which appertain to believing. And so amongst other things
which I have considered about believing, this is, that a man never stands
solid, and firm, and constant in the Christian faith, until he have in
himself some experience of that which he believes. And it is as certain, that
he holds so much firmness, as he holds of proper experience; and no more at
all. It befalls us that believe with the Gospel that which comes to pass to
us with a very wise and spiritual man: I would say, that as whilst we believe
the wisdom, and spiritualty of this man by relation of othermen, we are in
such manner disposed, that other men coming, who make us contrary relation, we
shall change the opinion which we had of him, or at least we shall doubt of it,
until having strict familiarity with such a man we know by experience, that
the relation is true which was made us, for as then no man is able to
perswadeus the contrary: even so likewise whilst we believe that which the
Gospel says, that God chastized all our sins in Christ, by their relation
who preach the Gospel to us, we stand in hazard, that other Preachers coming,
which should tell us the contrary, we shall believe in another manner, or at
least we shall doubt of the first preaching, until that we having experience
of that which is preached unto us in the Gospel, stand firm, and constant in
that which we believe, all the men of the world being unable either to change,
or alienate our faith in any manner, after that it is confirmed by proper
experience. Whence I understand that the first and principal intent, which we
ought to have, who accept the Gospel, believing that in Christ God has
chastized all our sins, is to get the experience of this, to the end that our
faith being ^o confirmed no man may be able to sever us from it, nor to make us
doubt thereof, nor to stumble, as they are able, whilst our faith is not
confirmed with experience. And if any man shall ask me, how the experience
offaith is g^tten? I will answer him, that then a man has experience of that
which he believes, when he has peace in his conscience, it seeming to him,
that he can appear in the judgment of God with that selfsame security
wherewith he would appear, if he had lived with that innocence wherewith
Christ lived, and had by Gods will suffered that, which Christ suffered.
Farthermore I will answer him, that mortification, and vivification are most
efficacious experiences, by which our Faith is confirmed, in as much as they
only, who believe, know themselves just in Christ, have mortification, and have
vivification. And if another shall ask me, saying, how shall I do, who
believe, to confirm my faith with experience? I will answer him two things.
The one, that he dispoile himself of all justifications, that are without
Christ, as well of those which consist in not doing, as of those which consist
in doing, and that embracing himself only with the justification which is in
Christ, which does consist in believing, he travel with prayer to God,
supplicating him, that he would make him feel the peace of conscience, that he
would mortify him, that he would make him alive: and the Other, that he keep
very strict account with himself, with his works, with his words, and with
his thoughts, with intent to know in all these things how much mortification,
and how much vivification he has gotten; and with intent also to mortify
himself, and to make himself alive every day, more pretending to get this
Christian experience, with which the Christian faith is confirmed. And to him
that would consider to have the scien^e, how he ought to do to dispoile
himself of his own justification, and so as well of those that confist in not
doing, as of those, which consist in doing, I should say unto him, that of
those which consist in not doing he shall dispoile himself, knowing that if he
do not kill, if he do not rob, if he be no fornicator, if he do no injury to
his neighbor, it is either because he is not inclined thereto, or because he
fears the shame of the world, or the punishment wherewith such sins are
punished in this life. And of this he may certify himself, considering that he
forbeares not to do other things, unto which he is inclined, which are not so
shameful in the world, nor are not chastized in this life; such as are
ambition, honor, proper satisfaction, and proper reputation. And I will say
unto him also, that of the things which consist in doing he shall dispoile
himself, knowing on one side the superstition which he has put in some of
them, and on the other side the self love with which he has contaminated, and
defiled the other. And in this manner he shall come to these terms, that
knowing himself in himself deprived, and dispoiled of all justification, he
shall be constrained to embrace himself with that which the Gospel offers
unto him, showing unto him, how God chastized all our sins in his only
begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CIII. Against the Imagination, with which our Christian Faith is
troubled.
THat which I have ofttimes said, that for a man to be solicited to doubt, is
a sign of Christian profiting, I now return to consider. For I understand that
such solicitation grows from a man's willing to believe, and from his desiring
to stand firm, and constant in the Christian Faith, in the general Pardon
which is intimated unto men in the Gospel. The impious are not solicited to
doubt, because they neither will, nor desire to believe, Nor the superstitious
neither are solicited to doubt; For believing with humane, and earnall wisdom
they have none to solicit them to doubt. They who have made progress in
Christian living are little solicited to doubt: for having with much experience
confirmed their faith, they have disarmed their enemies, I say those that did
solicit them to doubt. And here I understand, that men are incapable of being
able to have so much Faith in the, that they should be altogether freed from
being solicited to doubt, and therefore God gives them the Faith according to
their capacity, as we do not put so hot water into a glass vessel, as into
one of earth, nor into one of earth, as into one of bra^e, accommodating it
unto the capacity of the vessel, not willing it should be broken; in such sort
as the much solicitation to doubt remains only for them, who having left
impiety, and being here freed from the deceit of superstition, begin to accept
by the holy spirit the general pardon which the Gospel publishes, and begin
to bring forth ^uit in Christian living, and go profiting in it. For they
desiring to believe find alive in themselves humane prudence, of which the
evil spirits serve themselves to solicit them to doubt. And so it is, that
when one of these persons renouncing, and leaving his own justifications, those
which consist in doing, and those which ^onsist in not doing, will embrace
himself with the justice of Christ, which the Gospel offers unto us, when
through his own imperfection he sees it not so clear, and discovered, as he
sees corporal things, and those which consist in humane prudence, he is
suddenly tempted, and solicited to doubt of the truth, which the Gospel
affirms: Whereupon such a person ought suddenly to remedy to the temptation in
this manner.

First, he shall hold for a certain countersigne of his profiting in Christian
Faith to be solicited to doubt, and he shall say, If I had not a will and
desire to believe, I should not be solicited to doubt, as I was not solicited
when I did not stand in this will, and in this desire, and so he shall come to
quiet himself with this matter, whereby the Devil procures to disquiet him.
And if there shall come a fancy to him to say that his doubting is of the same
quality with that of them who doubt without spirit, he shall say it is not
true; for they who doubt without spirit feel no distaste in doubting, nor
desire not to be free; and I feel distaste in doubting, and desire to be free of
it, and consequently am certain that my doubting is not of that quality with
that of theirs who doubt without spirit; I would say, without being tempted,
and solicited to doubt, because they desire to believe.

Secondly, he shall think thus, if this Christian faith were not a spiritual
and divine thing, it would not find in me the contradiction which it finds, as
those things have not found contradiction in me, which were not spiritual nor
divine, but superstitious, and humane, in which I would persuade my self. And
in this manner the contradiction, with which the Devil would disquiet him,
shall be an instrument to him to quiet him.

Thirdly, he shall think this: If this Christian faith were not the gift of
God, I should not feel in my self the new desires to please God, to stand
always united with God, to see him glorified and sanctified of all men, which
desires after that I have in earnest applied my self unto it I seel. And in
this manner with the experience of the love of God he shall certify himself
of the truth of that which the Gospel affirms.

Forthly he shall think thus: If this Christian faith were not a spiritual,
and divine thing, it would not have begun to give me an abhorring of corporal
things, humane, and of the world, the which albeit I do not altogether
abhor, I am at least come to this, that I do not love them, I do not
procure them, I do not desire them as I was wont. And in this manner by
experience of mortification he shall confirm himself in the Christian truth.

Fifthly, he shall think thus: If I knew any other better thing then this, or at
least that were equal to this, with which I might appear before the judgment
of God, I should indeed have cause to doubt of the truth of this; Now I knowing
no other thing better, nor other thing such as it is, I have no cause to doubt.
And in this manner he shall certify himself that he is come upon the gain,
and not on the loss, and that in persevering in this Christian faith he cannot
loose, but gain. And if it shall come into his fancy to say that he might
loose much in case that which the Gospel says were not true, in as much as
he should attribute that to Christ, which were not due to him and it not being
due to him he should come to offend the glory, and the majesty of God; he
shall instantly have recourse to experience, and think thus; After that I know
my self pardoned through Christ, and reconciled with God through Christ,
acknowledging my self dead with Christ, and raised up with Christ, and
expecting my glorification with Christ, I know, and feel, and find in me the
beginnings of mortification through the despisall of the world, and of my
self; and I feel the beginnings of vivification through the love and
affection to God, to the glory of God and to the will of God. And these
principles are good. And it being true, that from an evil cause never comes a
good effect, it is true also, that the cause is good, whence this effect is
grown. And therefore it is most certain and true that which the Gospel
publishes and affirms: That God having put on Christ all our sins, and
having chastised them all in Christ he has pardoned us all, and has
reconciled us with himself by Christ; which pardon, and reconciliation all
they which believe enjoy. Here the Christian person shall stay himself, who
willing to embrace himself with the justice of Christ shall be disturbed with
the persuasions which shall solicit him to doubt, and shutting the door to
them which may come, shall recommend himself to God saying with Hezechias,
Lord I suffer violence, answer for me. Isaia. 38. And let him be sure, that God
will help him, fulfilling with him that which he promised by David, where he
says, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him to Honor.

CONSID. CIV. That Baptism through the Faith of the Gospel is efficacious
even in Children, who dye before they come to the age to be able to approve
their being Baptized.
TAking occasion from that which S. Peter says, That the Ark wherein Noah
saved himself in the flood, was a figure of our Christian Baptism, I have
considered that as Noah giving credit to the word of God did believe that the
flood would come, and did believe that himself and his should be saved in the
Ark; not by virtue of the Ark, which could not naturally work this effect but
by the will of God, who used this Ark for an instrument of safety to him and
his: so we also giving credit to the Gospel of God believe that Christ shall
come to judge the quick and the dead; and we believe that all our sins being
chastised in Christ we and ours shall be saved in that judgment, being
Baptized, not by virtue of the water which cannot naturally work this effect,
but by the will of God, who uses the water for the means of our salvation.
God could well have saved Noah in the flood without the Ark; and it seems he
took the Ark for the means to condescend unto the frailty of Noah, who more
easily believed that he should be saved in the Ark, then he would have believed
that he should have been saved without the Ark. Albeit he did not trust in the
Ark, but in the word of God, who promised to save him in the Ark: and so not
the Ark, but Faith was that which saved Noah, with which he made the Ark, and
put himself in it. In the self same manner God could well save us in day of
judgment without the water of Baptism, and it seems he takes the water for
the means to condescend unto our frailty, which causes that we do more
easily believe to be saved by Baptism, then we should believe to be saved
without it, albeit we have not confidence in the water, but in the word of the
Gospel of God, which promises to save us by Baptism: And so we shall be
saved in the universal judgment, not because we are Baptized, but through the
Faith with which we are Baptized. Where I understand two things: The one, that
to all of us who are Christians, it appertains to secure our selves in the
judgment of God with the remembrance that we were baptized, as Noah secured
himself in the Flood with the remembrance of the Ark, the Ark being to him
that which Baptism is to us. The other, that we who are baptized being
children are to assure our selves that we are then really, and indeed baptized,
when the years of discretion being come, and feeling by the will of God the
voice of the Gospel we rejoice to be baptized, in such sort, that if so be we
were not baptized, we would then be baptized; That betiding tous which might
have befallen a man, who had bin put into the Ark of Noah whilst he was asleep,
who being awaked, and finding himself in the Ark would have thanked Noah, that
had put him in the Ark; affirming, that if he had not been entered therein, and
could have entered therein, he would without all doubt have entered therein. In
such sort, that as that man being entered into the Ark not by his own proper
faith, but by the Faith of Noah, should have saved himself in the Ark by his
own proper faith, esteeming it good, that he had entered into the Ark: So we
who in out infancies were baptized having entered into Baptism not through our
own proper Faith, but by the Faith of them who put us therein, shall be saved
in Baptism by our own proper faith, approving and holding it for good to be
Baptized.

Another thing also may be said, that as the Beasts which Noah put into the Ark
entered in by the faith of Noah, and were saved in the Flood by the faith of
Noah, they having neither knowledge of good nor evil to enter into the Ark,
nor to approve their entering in, but being put into it: So the children of the
first Christians, who enter into Baptism by the faith of their Parents, and
come not to the age to be able to approve or reprove that which their Fathers
have done, they, because they have not the knowledge of good or evil, shall be
saved in the day of judgment by the faith with which their Fathers have put
them into Baptism. In effect exceeding great is the force, and efficacy of
Faith, I say of that which giving credit to the promises of God, stands certain
of the fulfilling of them, showing its certification by putting in execution
that outward thing, which on Gods behalf is commanded. This Faith saved Noah
in the Flood by means of the Ark, and this Faith shall save all us in the day
of judgment by the means of Baptism: us, who believing the Gospel shall be
Baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, to
whom be glory for ever,

Amen.
CONSID. CV. Three principles whence the ignorances arise, with which men err
against God.
COnsidering that which S. Paul says of the sin which he had committed against
God in persecuting the Christian Church, But I obtained mercy because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief; And considering the prayer wherewith Christ being put
on the Cross prayed his eternal Father for the sin of them that crucified
him, saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. And
considering that which S. Paul says of the wisemen of the world; For if they
had known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory; I have
gathered three Principles, from which I understand and all the errors which
men do against God through ignorance do proceed. The first is Malice. The
second is Inconsiderateness. The third is Incredulity. In this manner from S.
Paul's standing in unbelief, from his not believing that Christ was the Son
of God, that he was the promised Messiah in the Law, that he died for* the
sins of every one, that he was raised up for the resurrection of every one,
and that he was glorified for the glorification of every one, it proceeded,
that he persecuted and slew them that did believe and preach this, thinking
therein to do service to God, as from step to step others have done with the
selfsame intentions which S. Paul did, who as S. Paul have erred and do err
against God; not by Inconsiderateness; for he, and they go with attention to
that which they do; nor through Malice; for they do not hate for their own
interest those whom they persecute, but through Infidelity, because they do
not believe in Christ. Whence I understand it proceeded, that God using mercy
which S. Paul gave him to know Christ, and so of a famous persecuter he became
a most famous Preacher, as I understand has befallen them who have erred as S.
Paul erred. From the Gentiles, who were Ministers, and executers of Christ's
death, not considering what they did, proceeded that they erred inconsiderately
killing the innocent, as many Gentiles have erred, who have been the death of
many Christians not co^fidering what they do. For if they did ^onsider it as
they ought, there is no doubt they would not do it. And therefore because they
err as Beasts, their error is not put to their account. This I believe,
holding for certain that God did hear Christ, when he said, Father, f^rgiue
them, for they know not what they do! And S. Steven, when he said, Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge! From that the Scribes and Pharisees minds stood
full of indignation against Christ, as have been and are from time to time full
of indignation against them that imitate Christ, the minds of those, who being
like unto the Scribes and Pharisees, make profession of outward holiness being
void of the inward, it did proceed, that is come to pass, and goes on
proceeding that maliciously killing them, whom they have known and do know to
be members of Christ, who have been always hated of the Saints of the world,
because they ruin, and throw down that sanctity, whereof they make profession.
With them I do not understand that God uses mercy: For albeit they stand as
S. Paul did in Incredulity, that is, not in credulity, which makes the err,
but proper Malice and Malignity. Nor do I understand that Christ prayed, nor
that his members pray for them: for their error arises not through
Inconsiderateness, but from Malignant Depravation. Nay this sin I understand
is that which Christ calls against the holy spirit, which he says shall not ^e
pardoned neither in this nor in the other world. And this selfsame sin I
understand Saint John calls a sin unto death

The men who imitating the Scribes, and Pharisees err through ignorance
arising of malice I understand they have left to be men, and are in^ernall
spirits.

The men who imitating the Gentiles who killed Christ err through ignorance
arising from inconsiderateness, I understand they have left to be men, and are
beasts. And the men who imitating S. Paul err through ignorance bred from
incredulity, are as I understand truly men, to whom incredulity is so proper,
as Inconsideration is proper to the Beasts, and as malice is proper to the
infernal Spirits. And therefore the error which grows from Incredulity
without mixture of malice* and inconsideratnesse finds mercy with God, he
being drawn to the faith who errs through ignorance bred of incredulity.
Whereupon if any shall ask me saying, whence do thou think, that the Hebrews
erring through ignorance grew, of which S. Paul says Romans 10. For being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own
righteousness they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God?
I will answer him, that it was bred partly from Malice, and partly from
Incredulity through the hatred which they bore unto the Gospel. That this is
true is approved, that some believed, and others remained in their ^beliefe.
The selfsame will I answer to him, that shall demand of me, whence it did
proceed, and does proceed the erring through ignorance of them, of whom Christ
says Every one that shall kill you, will think that ^e does God good service?
And so much the more, by how much to me it is approved that S. Paul was one of
these, and found mercy: for his erring through ignorance grew from Incredulity.

In this discourse I learn this; That every man ought to stand on his watch,
not to appassionate himself at any time in the things that appertain to
religion: I would say in defending one thing and impugning another with
passion, to the end that the passion may not blind him in such manner as he
come to err against God through Ignorance bred of malice.

Further I learn, that a man ought not without consideration to set himself to
any of those things, which shall offer themselves unto him, and much less to
those which belong to religion, to the end that he come not to be counted in
the number of Beasts.

Further I learn, that a man who finds himself free from passion, and from
Inconsideration that he err not against God, ought to, acknowledge himself
to be in Incredulity, and so to pray God, that he free him from it. And in the
mean space he ought to abstain himself from putting in execution those things
which are in prejudice of his neighbor; And then the more, when they shall
seem to him more holy, and more just before God.

And I learn further, that only the regenerated Christian being more then a man
being gone out of Incredulity does not err through Malice, does not err
through Inconsideration, does not err through Incredulity, erring only through
frailty, in as much as he has not yet left altogether to be a man, has not as
yet altogether comprehended the Christian perfection, wherein he is
comprehended by the incorporation with which he stands incorporated in the
death, in the resurrection, and in the glorification of the son of God Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CVI. That that which the Scripture calls the knowledge of Good and
Evil, the wisemen of the world have called, and and do call natural light,
Prudence, and humane reason.
BY that which I read of the Creation, and Depravation of man, I consider that
a man was first created after the image and likeness of God, and was put in
the garden which they call earthly Paradise; and afterward eating of the fruit
of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, lost the image and likeness of
God, and was driven out of the earthly Paradise, remaining with the knowledge
of good and ^vill: understanding that as it is not natural for a man according
to his first creation to abide out of earthly Paradise, so it is not primarily
natural to him to have the knowledge of good and evil. And that which I
experiment in the reparation of man in his regeneration and renovation,
^onsidering that for the accepting of the grace of the Gospel the remission of
sins, and the reconciliation with God by the justice of God executed on
Christ, and so to enter into the kingdom of God, and to recover the image, and
similitude of God, and to have the government of the holy spirit is necessitated
to captivate his understanding, and to renounce, and mortify his prudence, and
his humane reason, and his natural light, I understand that that which holy
Scripture calls the knowledge of good and evil the wise men of the world have
called and do call natural light, prudence, and humane reason. And so I come
to understand, that a man is necessitated to captivate his understanding to
mortify his own prudence and his own natural light, which is the selfsame as
to renounce the knowledge of good and evil; to obtain the Christian
^eparation, regeneration, and renovation. For it is a most just thing, that if
he have to recover that which he lost, he should first renounce that which he
gained, as it were to say, that if he be to recover his spiritual light, he is
to renounce his natural light. And if we grant (as it is necessary to grant
by that which we read, and that which we experiment) that the reparation of our
humane nature by the Christian regeneration, and renovation consists in this,
that a man accepting the Gospel, and being incorporated in Christ, goes
recovering the being, the degree, and dignities, in which the first man was
created, and goes on leaving the being, the degree, and the dignity, in which
the first man remained after that he was depraved; It is likewise necessary,
that we should grant, that as that which we gain is not natural to the being
which we now hold, so likewise that which we leave was not natural to the
being which we had according to our first creation. Whereby we come clearly to
understand, that the natural light, which we now hold, is not from our first
creation, but from our depravation. And besides this, that the spiritual
light, which we gain by Christ, is from our first creation. And this spiritual
light I understand was so natural to a man in his first creation, as the
knowledge of good, and evil, and natural light is now natural unto him. And
I suppose, that the first man not recognizing the spiritual light for a thing
properly his, but communicated to him by the favor of God, did desire the
knowledge of Good and evil, pretending that that would be to him as it is,
natural. And of this knowledge of good and evil, I understand a man gets a
greater, or lesser part, according as he is more or less purged, and purified
in his affections, and appetites, which are according to the flesh. Whence I
suppose the wise men of the world have taken occasion to believe, that the
knowledge of good and evil is a spiritual thing, and is of the first creation
of man; not considering that this effect proceeds hence, that as well the
knowledge of good and evil, and the natural light is a perfection of man in
the state of his depravation, as the spiritual light was in the state of his
first creation, and is in the state of his reparation.

Against that which has been spoken two things offer themselves: The first,
that by that which S. Paul says, Romans 1. that the Gentiles by their natural
light might have known God, and by that which the self same says Romans 5. That
the selfsame might have naturally known the will of God, it seems, that the
natural light is not of the state of the depravation of man, but of the state
of his first creation. The second, that it being true, that the old Saints, as
David, and the new Saints, as S. Paul, in that which they have written have
served themselves of natural light, of Prudence, and Human reason, it seems
that it is not evil, nor that it ought to be renounced, left, and mortified.
To the first I understand it may be answered, that S. Paul willing to convince
the Gentiles, in as much as they did excuse themselves, saying that they could
not know God, and therefore worshipped him not; nor could not know the will of
God, and therefore they had lived viciously, he shows them, that although they
had not had the knowledge of God to worship him, nor that of the will of God to
obey it, which knowledge being by spiritual light was in the first man before
his depravation, and abides in the Christians in our reparation, nor having had
the knowledge which the Hebrews had by their holy Scriptures, yet that having
had the knowledge, that can be gotten with the natural light by the
contemplation of the creatures, and by the testimony of their consciences, and
not having satisfied to that knowledge of God, and of the will of God, they
came to be in fault, neither did there remain any excuse at all to them. In
such manner, that from the words of S. Paul it cannot be gathered, that a
christian man is not to renounce his natural light, but that the natural
light suffices to know God in a certain manner, and to understand the will of
God.

To the second thing I understand it may be answered, that the Saints serve
themselves in their writings of the knowledge of good and evil in that of
which it is capable, in which thing it is also illustrated in them by the
spiritual light. And that they have renounced it, and mortified it in that of
which it is incapable, that is, in the justification by Christ, in the
reconciliarion with God, in the regiment, and government of the holy Spirit,
and generally in all celestial things, spiritual, and divine. I understand it
indeed, that the felicity would be much greater, and the perfection of a man,
that the knowledge of good and evil were totally extinct, and dead, and the
spiritual light were totally kindled, and alive. But I understand, that the
flesh passible and mortal is not a subject habilitated for so great felicity.
And I understand that this shall be after the resurrection, when it shall have
obtained impassibility, and immortality; in the mean space it is necessary,
that the Saints should serve themselves of the knowledge of good, and evil,
and of the natural light, because they converse, and deal together with men,
who serve themselves of the self same science, and of the self same light,
following in that the counsel of Christ, be you wise as serpents, Mat. 20. and
that which S. Paul says, be you wise in understanding. 1. Cor. 14.

Here two things offer themselves unto me:

The first, that because the knowledge of good and evil, the Natural light,
Prudence, and Humane reason are in a man through his disobedience of God, and
are of the state of depravation, it comes to pass that this science, this
light, and this prudence never give man true felicity, nay rather as Solomon
affirms, As the science, the light, and wisdom increase, the affliction, the
anguish, and the grief increase; and therefore felicity decreaseth.

The second, that considering that Adam before he had the knowledge of good and
evil, was not ashamed to stand naked; and after he had the knowledge of good
and evil, was ashamed, and clothed himself, I come to understand, that
whilst a man has the spiritual light, and serves himself thereof, he knows
no defect in any of the works of God, nor does pretend to correct, and
moderate them. And whilst he has the knowledge of good and evil, and serves
himself thereof, he knows defects in the works of God, and pretends to
correct and amend them; such is the arrogance of the men, who glory to have the
knowledge of good, and evil, to have much natural light, much prudence, and
much human reason. And such likewise is the humility of the men which have the
spiritual light, who stand in the Kingdom of God; standing by the faith of
the Gospel, incorporated in the Son of God Jesus Christ our Lord.

CONSID. CVII. In what manner from a man's not knowing himself; nor God, there
is caused in him an impossibility in accepting the Grace of the Gospel.
BY how much I set my self more profoundly to consider the benefit of Christ,
considering that it is in all, and upon all them that accept it, so much the
more do I marveile, that all men run not after it, and embrace it, and set it
in their hearts, there being offered unto them by way of gui^t, the remission
of their sins, the reconciliation with God, and consequently immortality, and
life with Christ: And having set my self many times to consider whence it may
proceed, that all they who have knowledge of this most singular grace, do not
accept it, I have understood, that it proceeds from a man's not knowing neither
himself, nor God. And in effect it comes to pass, that man not knowing in
himself the impiety, and the malignity, and the rebellion, which, are natural
to him through original sin, he does not distrust himself to be able of
himself to satisfy God, and to be just before God. In the selfsame manner it
comes to pass, that man not knowing in God bounty, mercy, and fidelity, does
not trust in God, and so cannot persuade himself, nor secure himself in his
mind, that the justice of Christ appertains to him, that God accepts him for
just by reason of that which Christ suffered. And if a man knew himself,
considering himself impious, malignant, and rebellious, not only of himself,
but for being as he is the son of Adam, he would distrust himself to be able
of himself to justify himself. And if he knew God, knowing in him bounty,
mercy, and fidelity, he would easily trust himself of him, accepting the
pardon which the Gospel offers him, and so much the more, as knowing himself
it would not seem strange to him, that God should pardon him without his proper
merit the evils, and inconveniences, wherein he knows himself to have
fallen, partly without his own proper fault, and partly with his own proper
fault, bred, and derived from that of others, with which as I understand David
excused his sin saying, behold J was shapenin in wickedness etc. whence I
understand, that as it is impossible, that a man not knowing himself, nor
knowing God should accept the grace of the Gospel, and should secure himself
with it, so it is impossible, that a man knowing himself, and knowing God,
should pretend, or think to justify himself by his own proper works, nor to
avoid the evil, not to apply himself to the good. And if one shall say unto
me, How then did the Hebrew Saints, who knew themselves and knew God, pretend
to Justify themselves with the sacrifises which the law commands? I will
answer, that the Hebrew saints did not place their iustifications in their
sacrifices, but in the word of God, which promised to pardon them, they making
those sacrifices. And here I understand, that here it was much more difficult
to the Hebrew saints, because they knew themselves, and knew God, to reduce
themselves, and to hold themselves for just, sacrifising, then it is for the
Christian saints, who know themselves, and know God, to reduce themselves, and
to hold themselves for just, believing, and accepting the grace of the Gospel
in as much as it is most certain, that the Hebrew saints in sacrifising knew
that they gave unto God, that which they themselves out of their natural
inclination did delight to give him, and that which they knew is not pleasing
in it self, or for it self, nor contents God, as is approved by many things
which we read in the old holy Scripture, and is particularly in the Psalms,
and Isaia* And in as much also as it most certain, and true, that the Christian
Saints believing know, that they give unto God that which by their natural
inclination they would not give, and that which God delights, and would should
be given unto him, as is approved by all the Scripture. Whence I take this
resolution, that the men who in the time of the Gospel pretend to justify
themselves, working, give testimony of themselves, that they know not
themselves neither know God. That they, who pretend to be just, believing, give
testimony of themselves, that they know themselves, and know God. Whereupon
remembering my self of a comparison, which I have written, saying, That God did
with the Hebrew people giving them a ceremonious law, that which a Merchant
does departing for the Levant and doubting of the chastity of his wife, knowing
her inclined to compose sonnets, and canzons, he enioynes her every day to
write him a sonnet on some of those things passed between them, albeithe
delights not in sonnets, And considering, that to the Hebrews, who knew not
themselves, nor God, that came to pass, which might have come to pass to the
Merchants wife, in case that not knowing her own inclination, nor that of her
husbands, she should think to justify her self with him giving him sonnets
having lost her chastity: and considering that to the Hebrews who knew
themselves and knew God, that came to pass, which might have come to pass to
the selfsame woman, in case that she knowing her own inclination, and that of
her husbands, should pretend in making sonnets to obey her husband, and not to
wander out or exercise herself in other matters in dishonor of her husband, I
come to know the exceeding great inconvenience wherein they remain, who in the
time of the Gospel pretend, and suppose to justify themselves, working, and
working that which is not commanded them: for as much as they cannot pretend
obedience, a^ the Hebrew saints, which obedience was imputed to them for
justice, and held them united with God without committing adultery against God,
as they who neither knowing themselves, nor knowing God, did pretend to justify
themselves, sacrificing. In this discourse I learn two most important things.

The first is, that since it is true, that God demands not now of men that they
should sacrifice, demanding of them that they should believe, that they should
accept the grace, the remission of sins, and the reconciliation with God,
which the Gospel offers them, showing unto them how that God having put on
Christ the sins of all men, he has chastized them all in him, and so his
justice rests satisfied. The man how much a sinner and wicked soever he be,
who shall not hold himself for pardoned, and for reconciled with God, and so
for just, shall by this selfsame case give testimony of himself, that he
knows not God, since he does not trust himself on his word, and that he does
not know Christ, since he does not stand certain, that he is just in Christ.
And if such a man shall pretend to justify himself working, he shall give
testimony of himself, that he does not know the natural inclination of man,
in such sort, that either I must know my self to be just in Christ, although I
know my self a sinner in my self, or I ought to deny that which the Gospel
affirms, that God in Christ has chastized the sins and iniquities of all
men, and mine together with them, or else I am constrained to say, that God is
unjust chastizing sins twice, once in Christ, and another time in me. And
because to say this would be impiety, and to deny the other would be
incredulity, it remains, that I enforce my self to hold my self for
pardoned, and reconciled with God, and so for just in Christ, subjecting the
natural light to the spiritual.

The second thing which I learn is, that it being true, that the impossibility
which is in man to accept this holy Gospel of Christ, proceeds from a man's not
knowing himself, nor knowing God, it belongs to every man to apply himself in
good earnest to know himself, and his own natural inclination taking it even
from Adam, and to know God; taking for his principal application continual
prayer, praying God affectionatly, and fervently, that he would open the eyes
of his mind in such manner, that he may come to these acknowledgements, and
praying him that has begun to open them, that he would every day more and more
open them. And in this manner if he shall not have begun to accept the holy
Gospel of Christ, in going on taking away the impossibility he shall begin to
accept it: and if he shall have begun to accept it, the difficulty which he
finds in accepting it being taken away, he will accept it more and better,
faith being efficacious in him to mortify him, and to make him alive, with
which things the Christian faith is confirmed in us, which is the foundation in
that most divine confession of S. Peter, when he said unto Christ, thou art
Christ the son of the living God: to him be glory for ever.

Amen.
CONSID. CVIII. In what manner the evil of Adams disobedience appertains to
us all: and the good of Christ's obedience reaches unto us all.
BY that which I read in holy Scripture, and by that which I know in my self,
I understand, that for to come to believe the good of Christ's obedience, and
that in Christ's obedience we all obeyed, and that in Christ's raising up we all
arose, it is convenient, and necessary to believe the disobedience of Adam, and
that Adam disobeying we all disobeyed, and that in Adams dying we all dyed, I
say it is necessary for every man to believe the evil of Adam, that he may
come to believe the good of Christ. For I understand that it is impossible that
a man should believe the good of Christ, if he do not believe the evil of
Adam. In as much as not believing it he shall not feel it, and not feeling it
he shall not desire it, nor procure to free himself from it, and not desiring,
nor procuring it, he will never come to believe the good of Christ, which is
the proper medicine against the evil of Adam. But if he believe the evil of
Adam, together with the believing it he will feel it, finding himself in
himself impious, unfaithful, and the enemy of God, and as he shall know
himself to be come into such impiety, and infidelity, and enmity without his
own proper fault, so he will easily reduce himself to believe to be able to
come unto piety, fidelity, and friendship without his own proper merit;
whereupon he will believe the good of Christ, and believing it he will feel
it, feeling himself more faithful, and more the friend of God in Christ; and
then shall know with effect, that as the evil of Adams disobedience, whilst
he did not believe, and not believing it did not feel it, was effectual to
make him by his own fault more impious, more unfaithful, and more the enemy of
God: so the good of the obedience of Christ is in the self same manner
efficatious, whilst he believes it, and whilst believing it he feels it, to
make him in himself more faithful, and more the friend of Christ. Whence I
understand, that as they who believe the evil of Adam do free themselves from
it, and they who believe the good of Christ, do enjoy it: so they who do not
believe the evil of Adam, do not free themselves from it, and they who do
not believe the good of Christ, do not enjoy it. It is very true, that as
they, who believe the evil of Adam and the good of Christ, pass through the
evil of Adam and the good of Christ is in part suspended in the^: so they who
do not believe neither the evil of Adam, nor the good of Christ, pass
through the good of Christ, and the evil of Adam is suspended in them. In as
much as they who believe, pass through the miseries of this present life, and
through death, which are things of the evil of Adam; and whilst they stand in
this present life; and whilst their bodies abide in the sepulchers, the good of
Christ is in part suspended in them And in as much as they who do not believe,
pass in this present life through the good of Christ enjoying many things
together with them that believe the good of Christ; and in eternal life
because they shall be raised up, the evil of Adam shall be suspended in them.
So I understand that as the evil of Adam was efficacious to make us all dye,
from which death notwithstanding they who believe are free; so the good of
Christ is efficacious to raise us all up: of which Resurrection notwithstanding
they shall have no joy, who do not believe, because they shall not be in good
estate therein. In Adam we all dye, in Christ we all arise. And in the evil of
Adam shall they all remain, who shall not accept the good of Christ: But in
the good of Christ none shall remain but only they who have believed him, and
shall have accepted, and felt it. For in effect the Resurrection of Christ
shall not be glorious, but only for them, who believing to be dead in Adam, and
raised up in Christ, shall give themselves to live in this present life, as
dead and raised up, beginning even now to live a life much like unto that;
which they have to live in life everlasting; in such manner, that as the
Vivification is an imperfect Resurrection, so the Christian living in the state
of this Vivification is imperfect, albeit in respect of the living in the state
of Depravation it is most perfect. And the draught of living in the state of
the Resurrection in as much as it is imitable in the state of Vivification, we
see in Jesus Christ our Lord in his purity, bounty, sidelity, obedience, and
charity. And here I learn two things. The one, that sinee a man believing the
evil of Adam frees himself from it, and believing the good of Christ enioyes
it,; It belongs to every one to believe this evil, and this good, not
expecting for all that to feel it, that he may believe it; for this were to
pervert the order which God has set, who will that we shall believe, before we
feel; but believing that he may feel it: For believing together both the evil
and the good, the efficacy of the good will deprive us of the feeling of the
evil in this present life in part, and altogether in life eternal, in as much
as we shall be then altogether free from the evil of Adam, and altogether
intent to enjoy the good of Christ. The other thing which I here learn is that
they, who in this present life do not give themselves to live as dead, and
raised up imitating the life of Christ, do not believe that they dyed in Adam,
and that they rose again in Christ, how much soever they say, and affirm to
believe both the one and the other thing. For if they did believe them, there
is no doubt but they would apply themselves to live as dead, and raised up,
this being properly the efficacy of Faith, to reduce by little and little them
that believe in truth to be dead in Adam, and raised up in Christ, to live as
dead, and as raised up, not because they intend to become just, but because
they do now know and feel themselves just in Christ, and because they hope
for the crown of justice, that is, immortality and life eternal. And here I
will add this, that as the acceptance of the indulgence, which a King makes
unto them that being fled for some excess out of his Kingdom remain in the
service of another King, is efficatious to make them that leaving the stranger
Kingdom, and the service of the strange King, they should return to their own
Kingdom, and to serve their own King: so the acceptance of the Gospel is
efficacious to make, that all men who accept it, leaving the Kingdom of the
world, and the service of the world, should come unto the Kingdom of God, and
to the service of God: And that leaving to live according to the flesh they
should live according to the spirit: so that they who leave not the Kingdom of
the world, and the service of the world, and the living according to the flesh,
give testimony of themselves, that they have not well accepted the Gospel,
however much they say to believe it, no otherwise then they, who do not leave
the strange Kingdom, and the service of the strange King, returning into their
own Kingdom to serve their own King, give testimony of themselves, that they
do not accept the indulgence of their King, how much soever they say to
acceptit, and to believe it, since they do not the will of the same King,
which would the self same from them, which God would from us, that is, that we
should leave the Kingdom of the world, and the service of the world, and that
we should come unto the Kingdom of God to serve God in holiness, and justice,
and in the Gospel of his only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord.

CGNSID. CIX. The Conceit which as a christian I have at present of Christ, and
of them who are the Members of Christ.
DEsiring to resolve my self in my self in the conceit, which as a Christian
I ought to have of Christ, I go on considering in him two generations, the one
divine, and the other humane. And two times, the one of approbry, and the other
of glory. According to the divine generation I know that Christ is the word of
God, the son of God, of the same substance with the Father, and one self same
thing with him, so like unto him that he might well say to Philip, Philip, he
that sees me, sees my Father also, John 14. This as I understand is that Word,
with which God created all things according as Moses says, God said let there
be light: And according to that which David says, by the word of the Lord were
the Heavens made. Psalm. 33. With this self same word I understand, that God
maintains all things, conformable to that, In him was life, John 1. And to
that, upholding all things by the word of his Power. Heb. 1. This self same
word I understand that by the work of the holy spirit in the womb of the most
holy Virgin, God clothed with flesh with intent to repair all things by him,
as he made all things by him, and maintains all things with him. And I
understand that this word of God, as Isaia says 53. was prosperous in Christ,
in as much as that came to pass, which God pretended in him, and by him. And
so I understand, that it is one and the self same word, that of which S. John
says, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word
was God: And more beneath, And the word was made flesh. And with that which S.
Paul says Colos. 1. For by him all things were created, that are in heaven,
and that are in earth. But setting my self to search in what thing this divine
generation of the son of God, of the Word of God does consist, in what manner
the Son is generated of the Father, for what ^ause the Word is called the Son,
and the Son is called the Word, I find my self so incapable of this
intelligence, that I anew confirm my self in that which I have written in
another consideration, saying, that as the worms which are bred of the
corruption of the earth, are altogether incapable of the manner by which one
man is generated by another man: even so the men who are generated by carnal
generation, are altogether incapable not only of the manner, how the son of God
was generated, but also of the manner how the sons of God are regenerated by
the holy spirit of God. And if I should understand in what manner Moses, and
David, and S. John, and S. Paul understood it, that God created all things by
his Word, I should also understand this divine secret, which I go searching
out, wherein I go considering the power, where with Christ also in his humble
state did that which he would, being suddenly obeyed by his creatures, without
that any gave any farther impediment, then was granted unto them. If it shall
please God, that I be capable of this divine secret, before I go out of this
present life, I will also adjoyne that here which he shall teach me to his
glory, and of Christ, and of those who are the sons of God in Christ, and
through Christ. Otherwise I will content my self of this; for I am sure, that
I shall see with these corporal eyes in life eternal, that which at present I
desire to see with the eyes of my mind. And in the mean space I rejoice in
this, that at present I know that this Word of God, this son of God, with whom,
and by whom God has created, and repaired all things, is of the selfsame
substance of the Father, and one self same thing with him, and is eternal as
is he. I understand, that the holy spirit, accommodating it self to our
incapacity, speaking with us, uses these words used amongst us, such as are
Word, and Son, not to the end, that by them we should comprehend the divine
secret, but because we may have some name of him. According to this divine
generation I understand, that Christ is the first begotten son of God by his
eternity, that he was always the Son, and that he is the only begotten son
of God by his singularity, that he is only the Son by generation, all others
that are Sons being Sons by regeneration. For what belongs to the divine
generation of Christ, I understand that in him was neither diminution, nor
augmentation. He was the same before his incarnation, that he was in his
incarnation, and that he is in his glorification.

According to the human generation I understand, that Christ by the work of the
holy spirit was generated in the womb of the most holy Virgin, in what manner I
know not, to me it suffices to know, that the flesh with which the Word of God
clothed it self in this world was taken from that most holy Virgin. For
according to this flesh I know Christ for the Son of David and of Abraham. And
I see now in part fulfilled in him, the promises of God made unto David; as
much as belongs to the perpetuity of the Kingdom in his seed: and those made
unto Abraham, as much as belongs to the multiplication of his seed, and as much
as belongs to the inheritance of the world. And I expect to see them entirely
complete in life eternal, the resurrection of the just being made.

According to this human generation I know in Christ two Times: the one of
shame, and the other of glory. In the time of his opprobry I know him a man
passible, and mortal, with all the miseries which being annexed unto
passibility and mortality do grow in a man, that lives in poverty. And I know
him with a flesh like unto mine, saving that his was not sinful flesh, nor
flesh subject unto sin as mine is. In this time I know Christ most humble and
most meek, he esteeming himself for that which he was in that being in which
he stood clothed with flesh as one disguised amongst men, that he might be
handled of men as man. In this self same time I know Christ most obedient to
his eternal father, most clean from all sin, and therefore most just, and
most holy, in such manner as he might securely say to them who persecuted him,
and calumniated him, who of you can convince me of sin? Joh. 8. And S. Paul
speaking of him might well say (2. Cor. 5.) He who knew no sin. And S. Peter
1. 2. who did no sin, nor was any guile found in his mouth. And of this
innocence of Christ all the Scriptures are full as of a most necessary thing to
be understood of all them who know themselves just in him, and by him.

In the time of glory I know Christ a man imp^ssible, and immortal, and I know
him most glorious, and most triumphant, as he who has gotten absolute power in
heaven and in earth, having obtained the kingdom of God, and the inheritance
of God for Gods elect, having slain all of them in him, raised them all up in
him, and glorified them all in him. And so that comes to be of them, which is
of him. In this time I know Christ for Lord, for Head, and for King of the
people of God, of the Church of God, and of the elect of God. I know Christ for
Lord of the elect of God, because I understand that he has redeemed them with
his precious blood, delivering them from sin, from hell, and from death, in
which things the first man had set them, and unto which things he had obliged,
and made them subject. And because the Apostles in their Writings do joy to
call Christ Holy, they know Christ for the Head of the Church of God: For I
understand that God having put in him his holy spirit with all the treasures of
his divinity, he communicates and distributes them most liberally to those, who
being incorporated in him appertain to the Church of God to every one according
to his capacity, doing with them that which my head does with my body: In so
much as that as my hand, if it could speak, would say, and affirm, that it
feels that from my head there descends a vital virtue, by means whereof it
lives; so every one of those, who being incorporated in Christ are the Church
of god, because he can speak, says, and affirms, that he feels that from
Christ there comes unto him a spiritual virtue, by means whereof he lives a
spiritual life. This S. John thus understood Chap. 1.) when he said, For of
his fulness have we all received, and grace for grace. And so S. Paul
understood it. Colos. 1. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fulness dwell. I know Christ for King in the people of god, for I understand,
that he is he, who with his spirit rules, and governes it not only in inward
things, and divine, as head, but also as god. In outward things, and corporal,
as King. In all which things being as they are the Sons of god as S. Paul
says Romans 8. they are lead by the spirit of God. And so I understand, that the
kingdom of god is not called the spiritual kingdom, because he governes us
in spiritual things; but because governing us in spiritual and corporal
things he does not govern us with the outward law, but with the inward law,
which is the government of the Holy Spirit, the Christian spirit. Of this
kingdom of Christ the holy Scriptures are full. Esaias. 5. Mic. 5. Daniel. 7. By
which I understand that in this present life God reigns but by Christ, and that
in lifeeternall, god shall reign but by himself; For then he shall be all in
all. 1. Cor. 15.

In this manner I know Christ glorious for King in the people of god, for Head
in the Church of god, and for Lord of the Elect of god. And I know Christ
humble, most innocent, and free from all sin, and abounding in all justice:
And I know fullfilled in him in part the promises of god made to David, and to
Abraham. And I know him for the Son of god first borne, and only begotten,
and I know that he is the Word of god with which god created all things; and I
know him eternal and consubstantiall. And I hold for certain, that as the
Christian faith shall go on being in me more efficacious mortifying me, and
quickening me: so theseknowledges of Christ shall go on being more clear, and
more distinct, by which I shall go on from day to day always more knowing god
as he may be known, whilst this flesh being passible and mortal is not a
subject habilitated to see Christ, and to see God face to face, as I shall see
him in life eternal.

Having taken this resolution in the conceit which I ought to have of Christ, I
go resolving my self in the conceit that I ought to have of them who are the
members of Christ, considering every one of them a Son of god, not first
borne as Christ, who always was a Son, but an adopted Son by Christ, and
in Christ, not only begotten as Christ, who is the son by generation, but
regenerated by Christ, and in Christ, borne the son of wrath, and re-borne
the son of God, not in the state of gloryfication, in which Christ i^, but in
the state of opprobry, in which Christ was, not Lord of Gods elect, but one of
the number of them, who being elected of God are the servants of Christ,
redeemed, and bought by Christ: Not head of the Church of God, as Christ, but a
member of the Church of God, of which Christ is the head. Not King of the
people of God as Christ, but governed by the spirit of Christ, by means of
which spirit I know that all the members of Christ stand united amongst
themselves, and united with Christ himself, and therefore united also with
God, God abiding in them, and they in God. And so I see fullfilled that Prayer,
which Christ made unto his Father for this union (John 17.) saying, That they
may be one in us etc. And I understand, that in this union consists all the
christian perfection. I pray God, that he do in such manner Imprint it in my
memory, that it may not seem that it sever itself, or depart from it, not so
much as for one moment, to the intent that I never may do thing which shall
not be worthy of this union, which I acknowledge from my christ who is my Lord,
my Head, and my King. To him be glory with the Father, and the holy spirit,

Amen.
CONSID. CX. That the principal gifts are not understood, until they be
possessed.
A Most great testimony of the Christian life is this, that according as a
christian man goes perfecting himself in his christian customs, so he goes
clearing himself in his christian conceptions. Nay I hold for certain, that
the selfsame christian spirit which goes perfecting him in his customs, goes
clarifying him in his conceptions so much, that it can be hardly understood,
whether the clarification in the conceptions comes from the perfection in the
customs, or the perfections in the customs come from the clarification in the
conceptions. And therefore it is sure to say, that both the one, and the other
thing comes from the christian spirit, which does marvellously work both the
one and the other in them who accept the Gospel of Christ. This I have said to
this purpose, that I having understood that the christian business is not
science, but experience, and having by many comparisons procured to make some
persons capable of this truth, I have never remained satisfied in my mind, in
such manner that it seemed to me to have expressed to mine own manner my
conceit, until now that having in mine own judgment comprehended it with more
clearenesse, itseems to me to be able to express it better. And so I say,
that between the believing, and accepting the christian things, Faith, Hope,
and Charity, with humane wit^ or with the christian spirit, I know the
difference which I know between accepting, and approving those three natural
virtues, Magnanimity, Valor, and Liberality, and having them indeed. I would
say, that as there be me^, who hearing speak of these three natural virtues,
and of the perfection of them, albeit they do not know them in themselves do
approve them and accept them for good: so there be also of those men who
hearing speak of those three gifts of God, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and of the
perfection, and efficacy of them; albeit they do not know them in themselves,
do approve them, and accept them for good, believing that thy who accept the
grace of the Gospel, do enjoy the remission of sins, and the reconciliation
with God through Christ, and approving the hope with which they expect the
felicity of eternal life, and the love with which they love God above every
thing, and they love their neighbor as themselves. And I say farther, that as
whilst they, who approve those three natural virtues not possessing them,
albeit they willingly hear talk of them through the desire which they have to
possess them, yet is not that so much as that it gives them entire
satisfaction. Nay rather when they look upon themselves, and find themselves
without the^, they grieve themselves, and are malcontent, and so much the
more as it seems to them that they are more perfect, because they do more
loose the hope of being able to obtain them: so likewise they, who approve
these three gifts of God not possessing them, albeit they rejoice to hear
speak of them through the desire which they have to possess them, yet is it
not so much as that gives them entire satisfaction. Nay rather when they look
upon themselves, and find themselves without them, they grieve themselves, and
stand malcontent, and so much the more, as it seems to them, that the gifts
are the more perfect, because they so much more loose the hope of obtaining
them. Farther I say, that as when it should happen, that those (...) who
approve the three natural virtues not possessing them, should come to possess
them knowing themselves magnanimous, valiant, and liberal, they would affirm
to have never well understood what thing these three virtues are, and would
after a much other manner rejoice to hear speak of them, knowing them to be in
themselves: and albeit it would grieve them when they knew themselves imperfect
in them, it would not grieve them that they should be as perfect as they are.
So likewise when it befalls that the men who approve the three gifts of God not
possessing them come to possess them, because God gives them unto them,
knowing themselves with Faith, with Hope, and with Charity, they affirm that
they never well understood what these three gifts of God are, and do most
fully rejoice and satisfy themselves to hear speak of them; and so much the
more, in as much as he, who speaks more highly of them, because they know them
in themselves. And albeit they are sorry, and grieve themselves, when looking
upon themselves they know themselves imperfect in them, it grieves them not
that they be so perfect as they are; nay rather they are content, and if it
were possible, they would add unto them much more perfection. So much is the
satisfaction which they find in believing, hoping, and loving. In this manner
I understand, that as none is capable of being magnanimous, or valiant, or
liberal, but only he who has magnanimity, valor, and liberality: so none is
capable of Believing, Hoping, and Loving, but he who through the Christian
spirit has the gift of Faith, Hope, and Charity. And so it comes to pass to
be so true, that a man may as it were touch it with his hand, That the
spiritual gifts and Christian are not understood until they be possessed.

In this discourse I understand all this.

First, that it being true, that none are capablo of the gifts of God to
understand them, but they only who have them, it appertains to every person
that would understand them, first to demand them of God, and not to think that
he understands them until that he know them, and feel them in himself, as
the Magnanimous knows, and feels magnanimity in himself.

Secondly, that they may say that they know, and feel the gifts of God in
them, who find entire satisfaction, when they hear speak of Christian
matters; and albeit they are sorrowful, and grieve themselves, when they see
themselves imperfect in them; they rejoice, and content themselves that they
should be so perfect as they are, considering that by how much they are the
more perfect by so much the more does the glory of the Gospel of Christ, and
of God come to be illustrated, and so much does the baseness and the
vileness, the infirmity and the weakness of man come to be more known.

Thirdly, that as one in being magnanimous has magnanimity, in being valiant
has valor in being liberal has liberality: so in ones accepting the grace
of the Gospel, he has Faith, and is Just, and in desiring the day of
judgment, has Hope, and is holy, and in Loving God and his neighbors has
charity, and is pious.

Fourthly, that as the magnanimous does not loose his magnanimity for twice or
thrice falling into p^sillanimity, except he neglect himself in such manner
that forgetting to be magnanimous he becomes pusillanimous. And what I say of
the magnanimous, I say of the valiant, and of the liberal. So the just man by
the Christian faith does not loose the justice of Christ for committing two or
three iniquities, except he neglect himself in such sort of the Faith, that
forgetting himself of his being just by faith he become unjust. And that which
I say of the Just, I say of the Holy through Hope, and I say of the Pious
through Charity: where if one shall demand me saying, whether I believe, that
he who has by the gif of God Faith, Hope, and Charity, can come to loose his
justice, his Holiness, and his Piety, which he has gotten with Faith, with
Hope, and with Charity. I will say unto him, that if it be possible, that he
should come to loose his Faith, his, Hope, and his Charity, it will be also
possible, for him to loose his Justice, his Holiness, and his Piety, these
being the effects of those. And I will say unto him, that I hold it for more
difficult, that one who has by the gift of God, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
should deprave himself in such manner, that he should loose them, and with
them should loose his Justice, his Holiness, and his Piety, then it is for
another, who is by natural gift magnanimous, valiant, and liberal, should
come to make himself so pusillanimous, so fearful, and so covetous, that he
should loose his magnanimity, valor, and liberality. And I will say moreover
unto him, that as it is a secure thing for the magnanimous, valiant, and
liberal to live upon his guard, suspicioning of himself, that if he should
grow ne^ligent, he might come to loose his magnanimity, his valor, and his
liberality: so likewise is it a secure thing for the Just, Holy, and Pious to
live upon his guarde, suspicioning of himself, that if he should grow
negligent he might come to loose Faith, Hope, and Charity, and with them
Justice, Holiness, and Wisdom. It is very true, that I shall hold him for
much more secure, who by the inward spirit shall be certified that he can by
no means come to loose his Justice, his Holiness, and his Piety, then that
other, that always lives upon himself suspicious of himself. For I
understand that the security which is divine, mortifies, and kills all the
desires of sinning, as that which is humane quickens them, and kindles them.
And because I understand also, that the sus^icionating, which is as it were a
fearing even when it is of the holy spirit, being a thing proper to the
Hebrews, is a thing of imperfect Christians, it being proper to the perfect
Christians of them who have much Faith, much Hope, and much Charity to say with
S. Paul, who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.

Here I will add this. That as Liberality is so annexed to Magnanimity, that
he cannot be magnanimous that is not liberal; so Hope and Charity are so
annexed unto Faith, that it is impossible that he should have Faith, who has
not Hope, and Charity; it being also impossible that one should be just without
being Holy and Pious. But of these christian verities they are not capable, who
have not experience in christian matters, which they only have, who by the
gift of God, and by the benefit of Christ have Faith, Hope, and Charity, and so
are Pious, Holy, and Just in Christ, and do attend to comprehend that Piety,
that Justice, and that Holiness, in which they are comprehended, being like
unto God, and to the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord,

AMEN.
The end of the Hundred and Ten Considerations.
AN EPISTLE DEDICATORY of JOHN VALDESSO to his Commentary upon the Romans. TO
THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LADY, the Lady DONA IULIA de Gonzaga.
Persuading my self, most Illustrious Lady, that by means of your continual
reading the Psalms of David, which I sent the former year unto you, translated
out of Hebrew into the ordinary Castillian language, you have framed to your
self a mind such as was David's, thatis, alike pious, alike confident in God,
and alike resigned to God in all things: And being desirous, that you passing
on forward might frame to your self a mind like perfect, like firm, and like
constant in those things, that appertain to the Gospel of Christ, as S. Paul
had, I now anew send you the Epistles of S, Paul translated out of Greek into
the ordinary Castillian, by the continual reading whereof, I am certain you
shall much benefit your self in spiritual edification. But this with
condition that you read them not with intent to know for curiosities sake, and
for vanity, as men that are without piety do, who imagine to put an obligation
upon God by setting themselves to read S. Paul, as if one that were a
Castilian, should by speaking Greek suppose to put an obligation upon a Greek
Emperor: but with intent to frame and ground the mind according as S. Paul's
was grounded and framed. And of this I am to advertize you, that so far forth
you are to imitate David, in as much as you know that he imitates God; and that
so far forth you have to imitate S. Paul, in as much as you shall know that
he imitates Christ. This I say in regard that it appertaining to you to attend
to become very like unto Christ, and very like unto God, endeavoring to
recover that image and likeness of God, whereunto the first man was made
conformable, I must not be content that you should think to recover it holding
only before your eyes David and S. Paul as samplers for to sum up the account,
it would by this means betide you as it does to a Picture drawer, that takes a
copy of another picture, whereby it comes to pass that he does not only fall
short of the natural, but that he attaines not to the perfection of that
Picture, which he copies out: And if he do it, it is to be deemed a kind of
miracle. I say therefore this does not content me, for I would that you should
so long set David and S. Paul for yoursamplers as your heart serves you, not to
set God and Christ for your patterns: but always endeavoring so to perfect*
your self in that which belongs to piety, and in that which belongs to the
Gospel, as that at least the heart serving you to propound Christ and God for
your patterns, you should come to draw the image so like to the proper image
of God, and to the proper image of Christ, that the image might serve for a
sampler to others even as the images of David and of S. Paul do now serve for
samplers unto you. And if happily it seem to you, that what I now say, is a
new thing and not formerly practiced, know that it is of great antiquity and
much practiced, although because it is not understood it seems to be new and
not formerly put in practice. That this is so appears by that which S. Paul
writes to the Corinthians, who as he there says, were as yet carnal and not
spiritual, Be you imitators, says he, of me, even as I am of Christ; meaning
thus much, imitate ^ee even as I imitate Christ. Whence I conceive that if the
Corinthians had been spiritual, he would not have said unto them imitate me,
that is, take a copy from that image which I have drawn of Christ, but he would
have said unto them, as he says unto the Ephesians, that where spiritual, Be
you imitators of God, as dearly beloved Children, meaning thus, in as much as
you are the sons of God, and exceedingly beloved of God, see that you attend
to recover the image and likeness of God, not taking the sampler from any man
but from God himself. And verily it seems that our Lord Jesus Christ himself
had this intention, in as much as in one place saying, Learn of me for I am
meek and lowly in heart, he says in another place, Be you perfect according as
your heavenly father is perfect. See here it is then no new thing nor unusual
that I propound, in counselling you to take the picture from the proper image
of Christ, and from the proper image of God, but an old thing, and such as has
been practiced by Christ himself, and by his Apostle S. Paul. It now remains,
that recommending your self to God, you should apply your mind thereunto. And
that you shall do by imitating David as far as he imitateth God, and is
conformable to the image and likeness of God, having taken out his own picture
from God himself; and imitating S Paul as far as he imitateth Christ, and is
conformable to the image and likeness of Christ, having taken out his own
picture from Christ himself. And stay not here but passing on farther think
that you are to imitate God, taking out your picture to the life, from the
self same image of Christ, and from the self same image of God. And because
the continual reading of the History of Christ, would much further you in the
imitation of Christ, and in taking your picture of Christ, in as much as many
of Christ's works, and many of Christ's words carry great efficacy in them, and
by them, as I conceive, God works much more effectually upon the hearts of men,
mortifying and quickening them thereby, more then by any other written in the
Scripture, I intend by the favor of God to serve you in them, as I have served
you in David and in S. Paul. And know for certain, that as in reading of S.
Paul, a man may perceive the marveilous effects of the cross of Christ, so by
the reading of the History of Christ, a man may come to know, see, and feel in
a wonderful manner the proper cross of Christ; and under the name of cross I
understand all that, which was of weakness and infirmity in Christ, both in
regard of that which he himself felt, suffering hunger and thirst, cold and
heat, with all the other discommodities whereunto our bodies are subject, and
in his feeling of affliction and anguish for some things which he saw amongst
men and in men, and in his inward feeling of death, as also in regard of that
which he showed in the outward, being esteemed a vile, base, and vulgar person
and accordingly used, and farther being held for a pernicious and scandalous
person and accordingly crucified. Now this which I have spoken of touching the
History of Christ I shall accomplish at such time and manner as it shall please
the Divine Majesty; in the mean space loose no time attending every day to make
your self more like unto God to this intent serving your self of reading
David, and more like unto Christ serving your self of reading S. Paul, in whom
also you shall behold the cross of Christ, albeit not so evidently as in the
Evangelists. And because it may perhaps seem strange to you that I should make
present of S. Paul unto you before the Gospells, in as much as the reading of
S. Paul is commonly esteemed more difficult then that of the Evangelists, which
contain the history of Christ, I would have you to know that as far as my
understanding can reach, there is without all doubt more difficulty in the
perfect understanding of the Gospel then that of S. Paul, which proceeds as I
conceive from certain causes, which would be a long work to make repetition of,
only now I will say, that for as much as in S. Paul I read the conceptions and
apprehensions of S. Paul, and in the Gospel I read many conceptions and
apprehensions of Christ, I find so much more difficulty in the perfect
understanding of the Gospells, then in the perfect understanding of S. Paul as
I conceive the conceptions and apprehensions of Christ were more elevate and
more divine then the conceptions and apprehensions of S. Paul, not denying but
that to speak generally, and as much as concerns the style, the Gospells are
more intelligible then S. Paul. But of this matter I reserve my self to speak
more at large, when it shall please God that I come to translate the Gospells.
Now concerning the translation, I have been desirous to ty my self strictly to
the letter as much as possibly might be, even so as to leave the matter
ambiguous in the Castilian language, when it would bear, where ever I found it
ambiguous in the Greek, so as the letter might be applied both to the one and
to the other sense: and this I say for as much as intending the translation of
S. Paul, I may not pretend to write m^e own conceits but those of S. Paul. It
is very true, that in some places, which seemed necessary unto me, I have
added some small words in the text: But of these, some are understood in the
Greek text, although they be not expressed, and others seem of necessity to be
understood. And all these, as you may observe, are marked to the intent you may
know them for mine and make use of them as you please in reading or not reading
them. But of this be advertized, that as you should not do well in
disesteeming, that which God may give you ability to understand of your self
in this reading, so neither is it good that you should too much trust upon your
own judgment, despising the judgment of others. It is not good that you
should despise your own, and it is amiss that you despise that of others. In
the Declaration, which I have written upon that which I have translated I have
kept my self as near as was possible for me to S* Paul's mind, setting down
his conceptions and not mine own. And if I have gone aside in any thing it has
been through ignorance, and not through malice, and therefore with a very good
will shall take delight in being corrected and amended in whatsoever I have not
hit the mark, and most of all in that from whence any scruple how light soever
it be, may arise to any Christian mind. For however you know my principal
intention in this writing was to satisfy your desire, yet notwithstanding I
desire, together with your profit to profit likewise all other persons that
shall read this writing, and not offend the least of them in any thing at all.
This is my principal profession, in as much as I co^ceive the son of God made
profession of the same here in this present life, whom I being a Christian am
bound to imitate.

For the Latin words which I set in the beginning of the Declarations, I would
not have you think that they serve that by the Castilian you should understand
the Latin, for oft-times they confront not the one with the other: But only
think that they serve to the end that you may the more eafily understand what
those Latin words are which answer the Castilian (which as I said before are
conformable to the Greek Text and not to the Latin) for S. Paul wrote in Greek
not in Latin. And incase you have a desire to read S Paul's Text without
busying your self in my Declaration, that you may do it with greater ease I
will advertise you of some things, which shall open the way and facilitate the
understanding of S. Paul's mind. And so I say unto you, that by Gospel S. Paul
understands the preaching of that good news of the pardon general, which is
published throughout the world, affirming that God has pardoned all the sins
of the men of the world, executing for them all the rigor of his instice upon
Christ; who gave notice to the world of this pardon, and in whose name all give
notice thereof, to the intent that men moved by the authority of Christ, who is
the son of God, should give credit to the pardon general, and giving
confidence to the word of God, should hold themselves for reconciled with God
and give over the seeking after otherkinds of reconciliation. By which you
shall understand, that God in this case deals with men as a Prince, against
whom his subjects having rebelled and by reason of this rebellion fled from his
kingdom, he grants them a pardon general and sends his own son to give
them notice thereof, to the intent that they should give credit to the pardon
for the authority of the son, and so relying on the Princes pardon return to
the kingdom giving over to seek for pardon from the Prince by any other way or
means. Whence it follows, that they, who believe that Christ is the son of
God and yet give not credit to the pardon general, which he published and does
publish, these do not hold themselves for reconciled with God, but go seking
other reconciliations not relying upon that which Christ published, and is on
Christ's behalf published, they do the self-same, which the vassalls of the
Prince would do, who believing that he that publishes the pardon general to
them, were the Princes son, would not for all that ac^ompt themselves
pardoned and so not return to the kingdom. And I understand likewise, that
neither that Prince, to whom this should thus happen, should attain his
intention in as much as he sent his son to no other purpose then to the end
that being acknowledged for his Son he might be credited in that which he
manifested: so neither does it seem that God attaines his intention in those
who knowing Christ for the son of God, yet not giving confidence to that
which he gives them notice of on Gods behalf do not esteem themselves for
reconciled to God. He attaines his intention only in those who knowing Christ
to be the son of God, and giving confidence to that which he gives them notice
of on Gods behalf do account themselves for reconciled to God, and so for
pious for just, and for holy. It is very true indeed, that the knowledge which
they have of Christ as the son of God, who feel not themselves reconciled to
God; cannot properly be termed knowledge, being more properly opinion then
knowledge: for were it knowledge it would work in them the same effect that it
does in others, certifying them of their reconciliation with God, and giving
them peace in their consciences. And moreover know that by Letter S. Paul
understands all that which a man does, says, and thinks without being
inspired thereunto by God, albeit they be such matters as other men have said,
done, and thought being inspired thereunto. Letter it was in S. Peter, when in
Antioch he severd himself from the conversation of the Gentiles because he
would not scandalize the Jews, and Spirit it was in S. Paul when he did
reprehend him for it. Know further that by Faith S. Paul understands the credit
that a man gives to the pardon general, which Christ published, and which is
now in Christ's name, and on Christ's behalf published. And that by Hope he
understands the patience and sufferance, wherewith a man that believes, does
hope for the accomplishment of that which he believes without being wearied in
his hope, and without giving over the pursuit of that which he hopes for. And
that by Charity he understands that inward bowelly affection, wherewith a man
that believes and hopes, does love that which he believes, and that which he
hopes for, loving God and Christ, from whom and by whom he hopes to obtain that
which he believes, that which he hopes, and that which he loves, and loving
also all those things that are Gods, and that are Christ's. Know moreover, that
by the Justice of God S. Paul understands the perfection of God. As we, when
we would signify a man to be perfect, say he is just, our meaning being this,
that there is nothing in him that is not very good, and in effect that there is
nothing wanting to him. By the Grace of God he understands the favor that God
shows unto a man in drawing him to accept the pardon general, and in
maintaining and increasing him with other inward favors, which are called
Grace, inasmuch as God bestows them graciously without any respect of desert,
only because it is his will. That by the Gift of God he chiefly means his
having given Christ unto us, to the end that the rigor of his justice being
executed on him we should hold for certain the pardon general, and he
understands particularly those outward gifts of the holy spirit, which in S.
Paul's time were in abundance communicated to them that believed. That by sin
he almost always understands the affection and the appetite to sin, which
lives in a man through his natural depravation and through his acquisite, and
I say almost, in as much as some times he means by sin the sacrifice for
sin, That by the Old man he understands the man, that is not regenerated nor
renewed by the holy Spirit. And by the New man he understands the man, that is
renewed and regenerated by the holy spirit. And know likewise that by Flesh, by
the carnal man, by the body of sin, and by the law of the members he
understands the self same that he does by the Old man, that is, nature without
the spirit, and know that by the law of God he understands that which God gave
unto the Hebrew people by Mos^s, which sometimes he terms the Law of death,
because it was its part to condemn, and other where he calls i^ the Law of
sin, because it stirred up in men the affections and appetites of sinning.
That by the Law of the spirit he understands faith, by Circumcision he means
Iudaisme, and by Uncircumcision, he understands the state of the Gentiles. And
finally know, that by Christian liberty he understands the degree, state, and
dignity, unto which God advances a man, that accepts the grace of the Gospel,
who being regenerated, and renowed, and made the son of God, is free and exempt
from those things whereunto other men are subject, in as much as he maintains
himself in his regeneration and renovation, and does not deprive himself of
that sonship for which he is governed and ruled by the spirit of God. Of all
this you may serve your self, as it were of a guide, by means whereof you may
understand many of the things, which you shall read in S. Paul. And because it
may perhaps cause admiration in you to see, that S. Paul setting himself to
reprehend vices in some of them, to whom he writes, and admonishing them of
those vices from which they ought to beware, names certain vices, which are
shameful even in the men of the world. So that it may seem strange, that
there should be any necessity of admonishing Christian persons touching those
vices, and that withal he scarce touches those vices which are more inward
and more pernicious. You shall know, that in as much as in S. Paul's time there
were some who made carnal licentiousness of Christian liberty, and gave
themselves unto vices and villainies, it was necessary that S. Paul should touch
them in those particulars wherein they did most sin. In such sort as it was
needful even in that time, to seek redress for outward vices in christian
persons, in as much as they did not esteem them for evil nor were not ashamed
of them through the false perwasion which they had run into, of christian
liberty; and because they had put an end to the esteem of the world. But it is
now needful to apply remedy to christian men for their inward vices, in regard
that they partly for God, and partly for the world do abstain from outward
vices, suffering themselves to be overcome by the inward; partly because they
do not know them for vices and partly because the world holds the want of
these vices for a vice. You shall find some things in S. Paul which you shall
not feel in your self, and other things, which you shall not understand, and
some other, which will seem strange to you: And all these it seems fit to me
that you should pass over not ca^ing much to weary your self for the
understanding of them, in as much as the intention with which you go about to
read S. Paul is not to understand all that S. Paul says, but to frame your
mind as God shall give you grace to understand, feel, and taste in S. Paul. I
also advise you, that when you begin to read an Epistle, you leave not to read
the argument which you shall find written before it, for it gives much light to
the whole Epistle. But in truth all these advises are nothing, and there is one
of much more avail then all these, that is, that when ever you shall take S.
Paul into your hands, you should commend yo^r'selfe to God, beseeching him that
he would send his Holy Spirit that may be your guide in the reading; and you
shall endeavor to obtain it by means of the only begotten son of God* Christ
Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory for ever.

AMEN. FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 6. for execution in this manner, read, in this manner I desire
to etc. p. 21. l. 1. f. all good the works, r. all the good works. p 23. l. 22.
f. there r. them. p. 24. l. 11. f. believe a lie, r. unbelieve a lie. p. 29. l.
18. f. perceiving, r. persevering. p. 29. l. 27. f. dispose, r. dispoile. p.
34. l. 23. f. once r. one. p. 35. l. 22. f. by good, r. be good. p. 39. l. 25.
f. meeter. r. meet. p. 45. l. penult. f watchfulness r. watchful. p. 50. l.
28. f. peace and conscience r. peace of conscience. p. 82. l. 24. f being a
man, r. being in a man, p. 89. l. 20. f. does reach unto r. does not reach
unto. p. 98. l. 3. f. vocation of r. vocation to. p. 103. marg. f. omnes homo
r. omnis. p. 105. l. 1. f. that his piety, r. that if his piety. p. 109. l. 8.
f. know r. knowing. p. 116, l. 6. f. that then holy spirit, r. then the holy
spirit. p. 172. l. 25^ f. whilst his soul in his body, r. his soul in his
body. p. 193. l. 24. f. Psalm. 75. r. 95. p. 198. l. 12. f. felicity, r.
facility. p. 208. l. 30. f. begins love, r. begins to give love. p. 220 l. 20.
f. proceed, r. precedes. p. 222. l. 9 f. of man, r. to man. p. 227. l. 10. f.
and it was, r. it was. p. 239. l. 24. f. the ways, r. these ways. p. 240. l.
35. f. would, r. should. p. 241. l. 29. f. justice, r. justify. p. 244. l. 12.
f. purposes in such manner, r. purposes and desu^ in etc.


