A Dyalogue defensive for women / against malycyous detractoures.



The Prologue.
To the right worshypfull and his synguler good maystres Arthur Hardberde*
Robert Vaghane sends most hearty gretynge.
TO you maystres Arthur, my service premysed
As reason of right, requires to recompense
Your gentle heart, which has not despised
Before this time, to take with benevolence
My wrytynges unworthy, full of vain sentence
which kyndnes considered, good cause does constrayne
And dewty me dryueth* to do my dylygence
with some small gift, for to requyte again.
Your bownteous benygnytie, imboldeth my rudenes
This treatise following, unto you to dedycate
which to mine hands, occurryde doubtless
As I on my Journey, was riding but late
By a friend of mine, with whom I was assocyate
As by chance I asyghted, at a certain place
which wylled me than, that I would algate
So forth and talk with him, a little space.
Than secretly, he did unto me commit
Against detraction, this dyalogue defensive
For the woman sakes, both necessary and fyt
when preuye reprehendeth, against them list to strive
Of whose vice the circumstance, he plainly does dyscryue
That through auaryce, the syn insacyable
Detractours swarm, as bees about an hyue
where felonous flatery, to them is profitable.
I took the volume, and read therein apase
And well perceived at the first sight
It was feigned in favor, of one in your case
Howebeit I would not ask him, what she hight
But unto him, I said anon full right
what is your mind, that I herin do shall
For feign I would, if it lay in my might
Your mind accomplysshe, what soever befall.
I would said he, if it your pleasure were
That you would vouchsaue, at my hand to take
This little small volume, your name for to bear
whose fantasye with faynynge, is set for to make
Lest slander perchance, his sharp sown out shake
To move me malice, which only mean rest
Your name may cause, such noyses to asslake
Therefore present it, where as you think best.
Than in my mind, I thought that you were
Your cause considered, and also your estate
Most worthy to whom, I might send or bear
It to present, or else to dedycate
And because it declares, how the Pyes do prate
And what them causes, such pratynge to use
I trust in God, it shall your mind recreate
Through to read it, if you will not refuse.
And of your thanks, to me I require
No part at all, sens mine is not the pain
But of your gentylnes, I humbly you desire
That he may have thanks, that labors does sustain
And as to my self, no thake I will claim
Sens thank to pain, is ever consequent
Yet natwithstandynge, while life does remain
Mine heart and service, shall be at your commandment.
This Dyalogue, as Dyamonde derely dyght
And as a (weke) most worthily wrought
Shynynge with eloquence, as star does of light
Me thynkes that you, of reason most ought
As she that with pain, experyence has bought
Have in your custodye, as answer for your cause
As the free Fawcon, has you herin taught
Your self to defend, against pyes and dawse.
FINIS.
Robert Vaghane to the reader.
Read gentle Reader, all rygour set aparte
Only with indyfferencye, ponder this argument
Be not weyde with wylfulnes, yt often does truth subuarte
Enterlet no parcyallytye in judgment
Remember this rule, that Justice in election
Takes no place in will nor affection.
Bend not then in Judgment, although parchaunce
Unto the has be extended, a ancient occasyon
Requyrynge against women, to have thy defyaunce
Do not consent, to such a light parswasyon
Ever consider, it is a made affection
To judge all vnparfyte, though one lack parfection.
Raylynge without reason, void of humanytye
Outragynge and lewd, for lack of intellygence
Blinded through ygnoraunce, with mystes of sensualytye
Evermore the Pie, sets out her sentence
Relatynge her malice, by unjust accusacyon
This shall ye perceive, by the Fawcons declaracyon.
Bestow not then thy labor, to prate with the Pie
Unjustly accusynge, thy nowrysshe and mother
Read and record, how the Fawcon does replye
Defending the femalles, with Aucthours one and other
Evermore aledged, and noted in the mergent
The gentle reader, to satysfye and content.
FINIS.
The Aucthour speaks.
IN the month of Dece^bre, when phoebus ye bright
with his mocyon had entered in to ye first degree
Of Capricorn, when long is the night
And the day time, most in breuytie
Than snowes lies deep, upon the hills hye
waters congyled, in to yse hard and thycke
Trees, Plants, and Herbs, seem than to dye
Few things growing, appear to be quycke
The wether most bitter, with wyndes sharp and cold
Causes great company, together to resort
Unto the fire side, where ale good and old
Merely they drink, their hertes to comfort
Early in a morning, in this month of Decembre
From sleep I arose, and to my study went
Before all things than, I did remember
That time of every man, should frutefully be spent
At the first by chance, I red an oracyon
Most pleasauntly set forth, with flowers rethorycall
Descrybynge the monstrous vice of detraction
The dowghter of eunye, the furye infernal
whose pestylent poison, as cankar does crepe
Among all people, in City, Tower, and Town
Bringing Innocents, in to pains deep
And from their good names, it does them cast down
By reading this Aucthour, I was pensyfe in my heart
As one that had proved, his words to be true
Sorrows constrained me, to lay this book aparte
The remembrance thereof, my pains did renew
Anon I espied in the Oryent
That dame Aurora, to me did apeare
And the Son with his beams, as gold resplendent
To our Orizont, began to draw near
with speed than my study, and books, I did forsake
Intending all thoughts, from my mind to expel
And toward a Forest, the way did I take
Not far from the parties, where I did dwell
In this Forest fair, as I walked a while
Beholdynge hye trees, with arms long and wide
Suddenly within the space of a mile
An Arbor most pleasant, there I espyde
To that place of pleasure, for my recreacyon
with speed I approached, it made my heart light
Anon I was taken, with great admyracyon
Of all the fair pleasures, when I had a sight
This place was enuyroned, with Hedgyes three
Of Hauthorne thycke, three dyches deep cast
Three waters there were, which I did se
In to the Arbor by them, as I past
Oaks that were old, in the first hedge were growing
And Elines in the second, that large were and long
In the third Hedge, with bows down bowynge
Many trees together, were thruste in a thronge
The Ash and the Aspe, with his leaves that do quake
The Box and the Beyche, together did stand
The Cork causynge slyppers, to crack and to crake
with the Ewe tree, a defense to this land
The Plane and the Poplar, there I did se
The Salowe, the Pyne, and the Maple rownde
The holy with his pryckes, and the walnut tree
with the Fyr and the Hasyll, hanging to the grownde
In the mids a Cypress, I did espy
Borderyd with Olyues, in cyrcle rownde
And under the Cypress, down did I lie
where benches on each side, were made above the grownde
These trees to behold, in my mind I did muse
Of all kinds there growing, and in order set
All pleasures worldly, I would refuse
To have such an Arbor, if I might it get
Such flagraunt savors, such odours sweet
I never felt in the month of May
Against all dolor, a medycyne most sweet
Is to this Arbor, to take the ready way
As in this place pleasant, my self I did comfort
with savors soueraygne, and colors good for sight
A Fawcon and a Pie, to the same did resort
And over my head, in the Cypress they did light
Great strife was between them, with argumentacyon
Their opynyons contrary seemed unto me
The Pie prated fast, with much contencyon
And said that her sentence, needs true must be.
The Fawcon.
The Fawcon most gentle, with sober behauour
Said jangling words, the troth do not try
And few wise men, I think do favor
The lyghtnes of a pratynge Pie.
The Pie.
The Pie than answered, with words full of yar
And said, my sayings I will never deny
Of women I look, to have no hyar
Naught is their nature, their wits not worth a fly.
The Fawcon.
All things said the fawcon, Deuteronomy. 32.
of Gods creacyon
As scripture records, Genesis 10.
be perfyt in their kind
woman was create, by dyuyne operacyon
Perfyt in body, in reason, will, and mind.
The Pie.
Perfyt? who there said the Pie I the pray
Perfection in woman, shall never take place
Vnperfyt she is, and rude always
In body, and in soul, void of all grace.
The Fawcon.
In the old law, thou may plainly se
Said the Fawcon, that Gods creatures all
Be sownde and perfyt, without deformity
A bongler or a botcher, thou ca^nest not God call
But if thou wylt scripture, leave and forsake
And fly unto reason, with me to contend
In what thing tell me, did God woman make
So imperfect, that thou can not her nature commend.
The Pie.
In her body said the Pie, she lacks perfection
Both faint and feeble, labors to sustain
Hearted as an hen, she needs protection
She can another suffer the wind, nor the rain.
The Fawcon.
If strength of body, with houge and great quantyte
Preemynence quod the Fawcon, do prove and infer
Among all creatures, than man in dygnytie
To diverse brute beasts should far be under
In Lion, Elephant, Bear, Bull, and Bore
Quantyte in body, boldness, strength, and might
In plenty and abundaunce, be seen evermore
No man has like, thou may se with thy sight
Yet these beasts all, be subject to man
For all their hougenes, he is highest in degree
wherefore gifts bodily, another may nor can
Preemynence in nature, prove where they be
If shape of body, that semely is in sight
If countenance comely, if bewty give perfection
Than must thou needs grant, that woman of right
Ought before man, be taken in election
But corporal qualyties, as bewtye, strength, or shappe
Boldness or greatness, no proffe can make
Of nobylytie in man, in him though thou them lap
Sens brute beasts of nature, these qualyties take
And like as their presence, no dygnytie can bring
Unto man nor perfection, so on the other side
Their lack and absence of imperfection nothing
Can prove in woman, in whom they do not bide.
The Pie.
Yet humayne perfection, then said the Pie
In gifts of the soul, does chyefly consyst
As reason and knowledge, thou ca^nest not deny
Nor against this verytye, thou ca^nest not resst
The Fawcon.
I grant said the Fawcon, that the power intellectyue
Of the soul, with reason and lyberty of will
Set man in perfection, as his gifts prymytyue
By help whereof, Gods laws he does fulfill.
The Pie.
Than prove shall I lightly, that woman is
Vnperfyt said the Pie, and bestyall of kind
Sens these powers spyrytuall, by nature she does mys
And none of them all, in her thou may find
Of knowledge she has, no more than a Calfe
In Judgment as wise, as a Capon or a Gander
And the troth of her to speak, in this behalf
Her wit is apysshe, and in lewdnes does wander
To rail and to skolde, no tongue she does lack
To invent myschyfe, she is not to seek
Of craft and desceyte, she has a great pack
But in goodness, her wit is not worth a leke.
The Fawcon.
That woman has these powers rehearsed above
Of the soul said the Fawcon, that add such perfection
Unto mankind, by reason I shall prove
That in this matter, shall be her protection
Theffect without the cause, can never be found
For between them, there is mutual relacyon
Let this be of my reasonynge the ground
And hark what shall follow, in true declaracyon
Knowledge in learning, as in the arts seven
In natural Phylosophye, and moral also
To make dysputacyon, of the bodies of heaven
And of earthly creatures, in their places lyinge so
Facultyes and crafts, to invent and find out
And chaunses to tell, are they come a long season
All these to be theffectes, no man does doubt
Of the intellectyue power, the will and the reason.
The Pie.
what woman, I pray the than said the Pie
These gifts have had, that effects thou do call
Except thou be doubtless, dysposed to lie
Thou ca^nest rehearse none, another great nor small.
The Fawcon.
I can said the Fawcon, rehersall to the make
Of mo such women, than thou have in the
Condycyons gentle, wherefore good head take
And thou shall here named, mo than two or three
Carmentes the maid, first did invent
Our latyne letters, as writers do tell
Her industrye and labor, with will and intent
In memory perpetual, do cause her to dwell
The.ix. virgynes pure, that musyes we call
The.vii. arts lyberall, did first to us find
And pleasant Poetrye, containing matter moral
Under Fables feigned, these maids did combynde
Mynerua, which also Pallas was named
As goods was taken, of art and sapyence
Because that in Grecia, she first set and framed
Plants, shrubbes, and trees, as Aucthours give euydence
The use of armor, the helmet, and breast plate
with Ingynes wonderful, and fortresseys strong
For wars with her policy, she did first excogytate
The rehersall of her acts, requires time long
Diotima a maiden, high knowledge had
In Phylosophye, through whose fame and report
Socrates the Philosopher, most grave and sad
To her co^myne Lecture, did come and resort
Leontium also, a woman most wise
Against Theophrast, with oracyons did contend
And works most excellent, she did deuyse
Against detractours, women to defend
Paula and Eustochium, were learned right well
Unto whom Hierome, of high estymacyon
Epystles and works, the troth for to tell
Diverse did write, for their recreacyon
In our country natyue, women thou may se
In both tongues expert, the Latyne and the Greek
In Rethorycke and Poetrye, excellent they be
And with pen to endyte, they be not to seek
If women in youth, had such educacyon
In knowledge and learning, as men use to have
Their works of their wits, would make full probacyon
And that of men counceyll, they need not to crave.
The Pie.
These Examples excel, if they be unfeigned
Said the Pie, for women to the stars they extol
In natural knowledge, now am I constrained
To grant that woman has, much in her noll.
The Fawcon.
I shall prove said the Fawcon, that supernatural
Knowledge in woman, may well take place
Prophecye I mean, the gift celestyall
In to the soul infused, by especyall grace
Cassandra daughter, to Pryamus the king
A lady most fair, did show the destruction
Of noble Troy, when it was most florysshynge
That by Paris acts, it should come to confusyon
The.x. Maidens gentylles, that Varro does call
The Sybylles, this gift of Prophecye received
Of meruayles they did speak, before they did fall
Such as trusted their sayings, were not deceived
Sybylla Tyburtyna, Lactant. q^ gentiles
did write in her book
That Messyas in Betheleem, of a maid should be borne
And that in Nazareth, man's nature he took
Man to redeem, that by sin was forlorn
Sybylla Erythrca, as Lactancyus does record
The process of the Passion, most plainly does express
How the Jews unjustly, their soueraygne Lord
Oppressed with pains, and deadly dystresse
His buffyttes, his scourgynge with whyppes that did cut
His crown of throne, with pryckes sharp and long
The eysell and gall, that to his mouth were put
These things she descrybed, and all his other wrong
The Eclypse of the Son, that made men to quake
with works that were wonderful, seen at that season
His dolorous death, that amendeds did make
For man's mysdede, and for his high treason
All these she descrybed, by dyuyne reuelacyon
Long time before they came to effect
And as saint Austayne makes recytacyon
Of domes day, De ciuit. Dei. li. 18. sect. 110.
the fearful signs she did detect
In the acts of the Apostles, Luke does recyte Act. 110.

How Phylyp the Euangelyst, had dowghters four
All virgyns clean, with whom was the spryte
Of Prophecye, as they Sybylles had before
wherefore sens women, such knowledge have had
Both natural pure, and nature exceeding
who doubts in this, except he be mad
whyther they have reason, with ye power of understanding
But these two powers, set man in perfection
And from brute beasts, they do him exclude
women have the same, as I have made induction
Ergo they be perfyt, I may well conclude.
The Pie.
Although I must grant, that they of nature be
Perfyt said the Pie, Esa. 14.
made by Gods creacyon
So is the Devil, yet in Hell lies he
By dyuyne sentence, in endless dampnacyon.
The Fawcon.
What meanest thou, that murderer to mind
Said the Fawcon, that man did take in his snare
Our dysputacyon, is of woman kind
which unto the Devil, thou may not compare.
The Pie.
Between two extremes, Arystot.
that in qualytyes agree
Comparyson may be made, than said the Pie
The Devil and woman, be like in degree
Their end is to have, an evil destenye.
The Fawcon.
why women said the Fawcon, make me relacyon
More than men, such fortune should have
Sens man and woman, be of Gods creacyon Mat. (...)

He denies no mercy, to them that do it crave.
The Pie.
where vice is raygnynge, (...) come ^os. ^0
than said the Pie
Punysshement must follow, thou know right well
All vice raygneth in women, this is no lie
Therefore in pains, they must needs dwell.
The Fawcon.
The Fawcon than answered, mylde in his mode
Saying Pie from thy raylynge, thy self remove
Christ that suffered death, racked on a rode
Forbid that ever, thou should this prove.
The Pie.
Prove said the Pie, what maystry is this?
who put man I pray the, in his first creacyon
From Paradyse, that place of pleasure and blys
But woman, through the Deuylles temptacyon?
And therefore doubtless, I may her well call
The fontayne and welsprynge, of all calamytie
For through her pride, sin orygynall
Did ysshewe with death, to all her posterytie
And like as the first woman, Eve I do mean
Did sow the sede, of all iniquytie
So sith her time, women maynteyne
All sin and vice, in most enormytie
wauerynge they be, and light as the wind
Crewellas Tygres, than Lucyfer more proud
And trust in them, no man can find
She is no woman, that can lie loud
Of carnal pleasures, they be insacyable
In battyll, bluddy bold Barons for them dye
woman to man, was never profyttable
But full of cost, who can this deny?
The Fawcon.
A proverb proved said the Fawcon, I find
The barkynge of a Curre, no King can restrain
So no man can cause, the malycyous mind
Of the pratynge Pie, from raylynge to refrain.
The Pie.
A prater I am called, because I hit the nail
Even upon the head, than said the Pie
when I say the troth, thou say I rail
Yet my true sayings, thou ca^nest not deny.
The Fawcon.
Nothing said the Fawcon, is more repugnant
Unto the troth, than thy sayings all
And that may be proved, by reasones abundant
Deduced of pryncyples Theologycall
From Parydyse pleasant, as thou do say
Adam was expulsed, Genesis ^0.
with his posterytie
That Eve was full cause, I do say nay
whom thou do call, the mother of myserie
As Eve Gods commandment, there did transgress
So did Adam, as the storye does tell
The Sone of a maid, their offense did redress
whose death did break, the brasones durres of hell
Now for as much, Psalm. 14. (...).
as dysobedyence
Of both our first parents, Gods rat did provoke
It was not all only, the woman's offense
whereby mankind, did suffer Gods stroke
And as Dyuynes make declaracyon
If Adam had never, 21. (...). distinct. ^2.
consented to sin
In Paradyse mankind, should have had habytacyon
Although Eve before, to offend did begin
wherefore thou Ianglar, now may thou well se
Against our first mother, thy unjust accusacyon
Seeing that man is proved, cause for to be
As well as the woman, of all trybulacyon.
The Pie.
Than chattered the Pie, and said with high voice
Though it be so, as thou tellest to me
Beware yet in women, lest thou rejoice
They will deceive the, by mutabylytye.
The Fawcon.
who is said the Fawcon, all times at one stay
Through this world wide, Eccle. 1.
and never mutable
Man is subject, to passions always
His life in this world, must needs be varyable.
The Pie.
I grant said the Pie, but this is my mind
All women of promysse, be ever unstable
Their fantasyes change, and turn as the wind
And dowble be their deeds, this is no fable.
The Fawcon.
In reuoluynge of stories, said the Fawcon then
Of women stedfastnes, much may thou read
On the contrary part, thou shaft find of men
That they have been false, in word and in deed
what kingdoms noble? what Cities of price
By treason have perysshed, as Chronicles tell
Contryued through the false deuyce
Of cowharde Captains, that there did dwell
who betrayde the high king, our savior Jesus
Pains for to suffer, with extreme passion
But Judas unjust, and treatour untrue
which hanged him self, through desperacyon
Aeneas with Anthenor, Troy did betray
And gave it to the Greeks, that were void of compassyon
Than perysshed that City, as the storye does say
The treason of those Traitors, caused great lamentacyon
Few feldes be foughten, without treason I dare say
Of one part or other, few kingdoms be won
without preuy packynge, for treason does decay
Mo cities and countries, than battyll axe or gonne
If stedfastnes were stablysshed, substancyally in men
And grauytie were groued, in rulers that be light
If promys were performed, if the commandments ten
Of man were well observed, both by day and night
Then constant I might call him, but since ye faith fails
And treason with all vice, in him has taken place
Therefore him to praise, syttell it avails
For mutable he is, and tourneth in small space
That women be constant, and true as fine stele
Examples we read, of Penoclope
And Lucrecya, that sorrows did felt
Both matrones noble, as stories do say
Hester the queen, (...).
fair Iudyth most chaste
As scripture does say, their people did save
From crewell death, when all hope was past
Among the men, such grace God them gave
who can descrybe, with pen or with tongue
The constant virtue, of Susan most kind
Unto her husband, the storye is long
In Danyell the Prophet, Dan. (...).
thou may it find
The mother of the Machabeis, that.vii. were in nombre
Exhorted her children, marterdom to take
Her stedfastnes caused, all men to wondre
No pain could cause her, the faith to forsake
The woman of Chananee, Ma. 150.
of Christ was commended
For her faith unfeigned, and steadfast belefe
By her prayer devout, her daughter was amended
That by vexacyon of a Devil, suffered much grefe
Of virgynes most chaste, what need I to speak
As Katheryne, Margaret, and many thousands mo
No Tyrayne could cause them, their vows to break
Their thastyte to save, they suffered much woe
At Christ's death, Marci. 140.
when the Apostles all
Their master did leave, through mutabylytie
Men were found light, and trundlynge as a ball
In them was no faith, but infydelytye
In one woman than, all faith did remain
when men did shrynke, and turn as the wind
Mary Christ's mother, it is that I mean
No sorrow could cause, her faith to vntwynde
Examples for this matter, almost innumerable
I could here recyte, if time would permyt
That women of deed and word, be right stable
But here be ynowe, for them that have wit.
The Pie.
Yet women said the Pie, be great confusyon
Unto all men, for in batteyll bold
Of blood they have caused, often great effusyon
Of their myschyfe, much in stories is told.
The Fawcon.
Thy fables feigned, make small probacyon
Unto thy purpose, the Fawcon did say
when dyddest thou read, in true declaracyon
That women cause batteyll, by night or by day.
The Pie.
Did not fair Helene, than said the Pie
Of Troy the city, cause the destruction
when the strong walls, with towers and towrrettes hye
By the Greeks did fall, and had there subuersyon.
The Fawcon.
where malice is raygnynge, there false accusacyon
Does follow said the Fawcon, in field and in town
Therefore of Troy, thou say the desolacyon
was caused by Helene, the woman of renown
Did not Alyxaunder, his lust to fulfill
Sone to king Pryame, by strength steal away
Fair Helene from the Greeks, against her own will
when she her hands wrong, how ca^nest thou say nay
If weeping tears, if sygtes sore and sad
If lamentacyon, might then have prevailed
Fair Helene had escaped, Paris most mad
From Grecye in to Troy, with her when he feased
And though battyll bloddye, with murder most miserable
Between these two nacyons, enshewed to their pain
The adulterat it caused, by deed detestable
which could not from lust, his body restrain
what mountain mighty, what sees roughe and deep
Have men passed through, as beasts without wit
Their raygynge has caused, good women to weep
with vyolence constrained, their lust to admyt
Such myschyfes many men, often have precured
And yet they cesse not, the same to support
As to wchynge this matter, I am full assured
All their madness fully, I can not report.
The Pie.
I can report than, said the Pie
That women be crewell, and love to be in strife
Cursed no Cayn, thou can not deny
Angry as the waspe, wedowe, maid, and wife.
The Fawcon.
The fair Fawcon answered, with words yt were wise
Saying Pie thou art peuysshe, and blind as a block
No man with reason may the suffyse
Thy malice is meruaylous, and styffe as a stock
Thou raylest against reason, when thou do impute
Yar unto women, with crewell condycyon
For unto the contrary, I shall dyspute
Their pacyence and pytye, in perfyt dyleccyon
Heat causes yar, Arystotle
in man and in beast
Of yarfull heart, crewelnes does spring
where crewelty does dwell, compassyon has no rest
For contraryes together, Arystotle
can have no bydynge
what causes fearsnes, in Lion, wolf, and bear
In Bores that be brym, and mastyffes much of might
which all in their raygynge, in pieces rent and tear
Their praise that they take, by day or else by night
what moves man, so fearse for to be
And crewell of deed, as beast wod and wild
But heat causynge yar, when he without pytie
In war does destroy, the mother with the child
And like as heat fervent, yar does inflame
In man and in beast, and crewell them does make
So colones contrary, crewelnes does tame
Causynge man and beast, to shyuer and to quake
women in their nature, be cold as a kay
In respect of men, wherefore inclynacyon
To be yarfull or crewell, from them is a way
And petye most tender, in them has habytacyon
who is so sad, of crewelnes to here
In spoylynge or murdre, as these women be
For frayes and for feyghtynges, they make heavy chere
Upon every man's hynderaunce, they take great petye
what weeping tears? Luce. 2^
what sore lamentacyon
Did women make, in Jerusalem
Vyon the lambs death, taking compassyon
That borne was of mother, Mat. 10.
and maid in Bethleem
But men at that time, as beasts raygynge mad
Their high king and maker, did nail to a tree
At that season tell me, whyther men had
Like unto women, compassyon and petie.
The Pie.
Admyt that thy reasones, did fully conclude
For women said the Pie, as thou do infer
Yet profit from them, thou must needs exclude
Their husbands they bring, in det and danger
Ease they love all, to labor they dysdayne
wafters they be of money, meat, and cloth
And from the black boll, they can not refrain
To speak all I know by them, I am loath.
The Fawcon.
I am full loath, the Fawcon did say
Unto the Pie, such raylynge to here
Nothing is true, thou speak here this day
Thy fables be feigned, and false this is clear
A woman's office, as Arystotle tought
In his Econymyckes, primseco noca. ^0.
is ready for to make
Such things for sustynaunce, as to her be brought
Her famylye to feed, that pains and labors take
All richesse procured, by night or else by day
Through the man's travail, in field or in town
The wife with her wysdom, must keep from decay
And suffer no proffyte, in loss to fall down
By practes I prove, in places as I pass
The prudent polycye, in such gubernacyon
Of women that wisely, the world do compass
In most honest manner, to their co^mendacyon
what labor of body, do they often sustain
what break of sleep, when they should rest take
with honestye their husbands, and house to maintain
These things to fulfill, no pains they forsake
Men diverse I have know, to wast, spyll, and spend
At drynkynges and games, such richesse as they had
when women full busylye, did labor to amend
Their husbands lewdnes, that made them full sad
wherefore sens women, their dewtyes do fulfill
As I have declared, without feigned fable
They rail without reason, and speak all at will
That say unto men, they be not profyttable
Cryinge in his cradell, at his first beginning
when man does lie rocked, not able to stand
who does him than feed, with meats nurrysshynge
But woman that to help him, does put to her hand
who can women lack, in syckenes or in health
To wasshe and to wrynge, and meats to prepare
A comfort they be, in poverty and wealth
Unto all men, to whom they repare
And therefore Scripture, Genesis 10.
does woman call
An helper to man, in every dystresse
when fortune fails, and causes him to fall
Chyfe remedy she is, of all his heaviness
And though thou Pie pratynge, by unjust accusacyon
All kinds of vice, to women have object
Yet in all virtues, they have delectacyon
And therefore of God, I think them efect
Humble they be, and lowly in heart
Pytefull and pacyent, with sobre behauour
And contynence from them, does never depart
with dylygence for virtues, they do ever labor.
The Pie.
How can thou them virtuous, and chaste of life call
Said the Pie, that men by subtyle prouocacyon
Move unto vice, and cause them to fall
No devil unto woman, is like in temptacyon
Meandre the flude, that makes men to muse
And laboryous labyrynth, that Dedalus devised
Such wyndynges and tournynges, never did use
As women in temptacyon, for men have contryued
All gifts of nature, they inclyne to provoke
Man unto pleasure, and his reason to blind
And with Cupydes darte, to give him a stroke
Thus clean and fresshe men, in bondage they bind
Their countenance smiling, as the messenger of love
Their eyes most wantonly, ever roll and turn
Upon syghtes semely, and all things above
Because love them burns, they desire to burn
Their hands and fyngers, for this they keep white
Dasshed full of rings with many a precious stone
To show their pretty fete, they have great delight
On their toes how they tryppe, to se it is alone
They laughed, they speak, they sing, they dance
The lusts of love, in youth, to inflame
Their garments be garnysshed, after the guyse of France
And to use painted words, their tongues be not lame
They breasts they lay forth, as a Boucher does his flesh
To be sold in the shambles, and over them they lay
A fine lase of sylke, with an owche that is fresshe
Or else a small chain, that was gotten in their play
And as an horse master, that to a fair does bring
His Horses all platted, the mane and the tail
So women their hear, as gold wyre shynynge
They wrappe, plete, and plat, young lovers to assail
But Paul unto Tymothe, (...) Timoth. 20.
a document does give
Unto all women, such fyghtnes to despise
And so does Peter, 1. Pe. ^0.
which says they should live
Not in wanton apparel, but in sad and sobre wise
I dare not now speak, how some do counterfeit
The colors of their faces, as they were natural
Strange hear also, for their heads they do get
Of their muskes, posyes, and po^manders, I make no rehersall
All these pretty tryckes, these pretty dames do use
In to Venus dance, young Rufflers to assure
How can thou Fawcon say, but their gifts they abuse
Defend them in this matter, thou can not I am sure.
The Fawcon.
Stop there said the Fawcon, and hark to me a season
For thy bragging bostes, lightly I shall make base
And declare unto the, by inuyncyble reason
That delyberate dyscrecyon, in the does take no place
Shameless thou art surely, thus shamefully to speak
That man to vice is moved, by woman's prouocacyon
For women of clean living, be often moved to break
Their chastytie by churles, that chafe them by temptacyon
what painted words, woman's love to allure
what tokens that be trycke, do these men use
what rings, what hertes of gold fine and pure
which women do utterly contemn and refuse
And when by such tokens, men can not obtain
Their purpose and will, than they do invent
Letters of love, expressing their pain
And preuely by messengers, they be forth sent
If letters be contemned, if wrytynges take no place
Than labors do lovers, in their own persons take
They ride and they run, many miles in small space
And move honest women, chaste life to forsake
with syghes semynge sorrowful, their folly they express
with wepynges their words, be myxed for to move
Pytefully complaining, of deadly dystresse
Thus women to deceive, all wyles they do prove
But if all their glosynges, their matters can not speed
If their tokens with their trynkettes, and letters be despised
Than often constant women, they bring in great dread
when by vyolent oppressyon, they have them defylled
Dyna that to Jacob the Patryarke, Genesis 34.
was daughter
By Sychem was oppressed, as scripture does tell
In punyshme^t of his vyole^ce, there followed great slaughter
Among all the people, that in his city did dwell
In the city of Gabaa, Iud^^.
what abhomynacyon
Did men commit, against the Leuytes wife
The wide world may wondre, of their bestyall fasshyon
For among them by oppressyon, the woman lost her life
Did not Annon, 11. Reg^ 130.
that sone was to Dauyd the king
Chaste Thamar oppress, his sister natural
After which act, he had not long liking
For absolon his brother, gave him wounds mortal
Lucrecya the Romayne a matrone right famous
Defiled by oppressyon, of Tarquimus sone
After the deed, both shameful and vyldynous
On a sword that was sharp and kene, she did rone
Such dolor deadly, his heart did oppress
Through the deed most detestable, by vyolence committed
That death most dredefull, to end her dystresse
Before life in efection, she thought to be admytted
Many thousands mo of maids, wedowes, and wives
Most tyra^nous tourmentes, as writers do tell
Have suffered, and also have lost their lives
Their chastyte to save, and Tyra^nes to repel
They be received, ergo I may conclude
Upon thy words, that aucthorytie they bring
And from my sayings, all fables the exclude
As touching the examples, of women's good living
But now to return, after long dygressyon
To our matter intended, mine examples declare
That men much have used, crafty instygacyon
women to wrappe, in the deuylled net and snare
And as prouocacyon, has been in times past
Of men much used, the cle^nes to subvert
Of women contynent, so such as live chaste
Be now provoked, from ele^nes to auert
They be not women, that their gifts do abuse
Of nature and of grace, and to vice them apply
But men most sensual, that study and muse
Daily their lust to fulfill in lecherye
Now I pray the Pie plainly, as it is in thy thought
Speak here thy mind, whyther more does provoke
The mn that does seek, or the woman that is sought
The troth hereof should cause the, thy raylynge to revoke
Do thou not daily, with thine eyes se
How men mased with love, to women make shute
And on the other part, few or none they be
Of women to whom such vice, thou may impute.
The Pie.
Now am I constraynted, to grant said the Pie
By reason and experyence, that all prouocacyon
Of man comes commonly, for I can not deny
Of thy sayings and examples, the suffycyent probacyon
But yet for their raiment, all gorgyous and gay
Reprehended of the Apostles, both Peter and Paul
In excuse of the werars, what can thou now say
If this matter thou defend, than wise I the call.
The Fawcon.
Full sharp be the sayings, said the Fawcon in deed
Of these two Apostles, that raiment reprehende
And deckynge of women, yet if thou take good head
Thou shall find that women, they little bysco^mende
Saint Austen to these sayings, August^.
answer does make
Of both these Apostles, and says that none offense
Ryseth of raiment, when women do take
Unto dyscrecyon, dylygent aduertence
If after the custom, of their country they use
Raiment right royal, and according to their state
Secludynge vain glory, if they do refuse
All purpose in lovers, lust carnal to instygate
Than sin is avoided, for who so decked was
In garments most gorgyous, as Hester the queen
As the beams of the Son, shynynge through the glass
with gold and perles, to glyster she was seen
Even so did Iudyth, herbewtye augment
with apparel of great price, that caused admyracyon
Yet these women both, for their good intent
Of scripture deserved praise, and co^mendacyon.
The Pie.
Thou semest said the Pie, all manner to commend
And use of raiment, be it never so vain
Yet Paul unto Tymothe, did utterly intend
All women from vanytie, in raiment to restrain.
The Fawcon.
Nothing I think less, said the Fawcon I the tell
Than against the sayings, of Paul for to speak
All vanytie in raiment, the Apostle does repel
All vanytie in the same, my mind is to break.
The Pie.
Be plain in thy terms, said the Pie I the pray
And dystynctly declare, what thy meaning is
By vanytie of raiment, for nothing can I say
To the if thy mind herin, I do mysse.
The Fawcon.
So often said the Fawcon, as women raiment use
Against the guyse of their country, or above their degree
And power be decked, so often they take and choose
In werynge their apparel, follysshe vanytie
Vanytie in raiment, also I do call
when for praise or vain glory, raiment is worn
Or else to provoke, and cause men to fall
In to lust of the body, when reason is forlorn.
The Pie.
Do not women said the Pie, their raiment abuse
All these four ways, which thou do express
In most vain manner, thou can not excuse
Herein the femyne sex, nor their lyghtnes redress.
The Fawcon.
I know not said the Fawcon, the surety to say
That any so live, but if thou such find
what can thou infer, now in the way
Of reasonnynge, against the whole kind.
The Pie.
If one be naught, so be all the rest
I say said the Pie, of the femyne gendre
For among them all, she that is best
would be loath of her life, a reckenynge to render.
The Fawcon.
In raysynge unreasonable, thou ragest against right
Said the Fawcon, when thou do of few women's vice
Infer all the rest, in their living to be light
If thou harken thy blind err, shall be open at a tryce
Some men be murderers, should I therefore call
All mankind murderers, some thieves and traitors be
Should I therefore say, all men do fall
In to the same vice? no that were madness plainly
Because Cayn did murdre, Genesis 40.
therefore did his brother
Abell the same, Mala. 1.
Esau was reject
And forsaken of God, in the womb of his mother
was therefore Jacob refused of God, ad ^0. 90.
and also neglect
Horrible heresies these blind sayings be
If they be defended, and by scripture confounded
And who is so blind, but he may well se
That these saying? against women of reason, be not grounded
For what raylynge heretycke, so shameless can thou find
To say that our Lady, the virgyne most pure
was light in her living, or corrupt in her mind
Because pleasure some women, to lust did allure
Cesse therefore thy sayings, and raylynge most rude
Condemn not a multitude, that innocent is
As though from all goodness, thou would them exclude
Because that a few, be found to do amys
Because that a few, be both light and vain
In raiment and apparel, against the Apostles rule
Thou may not therefore, of the whole flock complain
As though every woman, from virtue did recule
But many therebe, to sayings evil so prone
And daily in the same, accustomed to sleep
That slanders cansynge many, to syghe and to groan
As pastymes they take, when Innocents do weep.
The Pie.
Yet the master said the Pie, may lawfully speak
Of his servant his pleasure, be it false or true
Like manner the husband, does not Gods precept break
when he is wyfes sorrows, with slander does renew.
The Fawcon.
Blind was the first err, and every naked naught
But this is much worse, said the Fawcon in very deed
Christ that man's soul, with his death derely bought
Forbid that this err, come in christen man's creed
Do thou not find, daclared in Scripture
That Christ is the fountain, Ioha^nes 140.
of troth and verytie
That man has by grace, he has by his nature
This troth is the way, to the celestyall city
As troth man to heaven, does condyth and guide
So by falsenes and lies, that nocyuous be
Slaunderers suddenly, to hell slyp and slide
where ever they shall rest, in careful calamytie
For Dauyd the prophet, Psalm. 14.
in his Psalm does record
That sclaunderars and liars, to endless perdycyon
Shall fall by just sentence, of the heavenly lord
when sin shall be rewarded, with right retrybucyon
The wise man also, Sapt. 1.
bears wytnes to this matter
And says that the mouth, the soul does sley and kill
Of that man which delyteth, of sclaunders to clatter
And the names of good people, with detraction to spyll
Now for as much, as deedly detraction
To all people is dampnable, no state or degree
Excepted at all, therefore dredefull dampnacyon
All men deserve, that of their wives sclaunderars be
And it is commonly said, that on the devil to lie
Offense and sin it is, is it not than offense
Against christian women, with sclaundars out to cry
Of whose gentle nature, man should speak in defense
Paul says that man, Ad ephesians. 5
should love his wedded wife
As his own body, and cherysshe her always
Against Paul they do plainly, that love to be in strife
with their wives, whose names with sclaunder they decay
Peace therefore Pie, and this opinion peuyshe
That men may rail their pleasure, speak thou no more
For sclaunder is a matter, of all other most theuyshe
The offense thereof doubtless, deserves sorrows sore
And if blind affections, thou would set aside
And eluyshe envy, from thy heart clean expel
Than would thou say, that reason in men does not bide
That with raylynge, the fame of women hurt and quell
For in case that any, be found lewd or light
In so great a nombre of women, as there is
Thou may not at their vice, geast or tail by right
But be heuye and sorye, for such as do amys
And in this behalf to say, I dare be bold
That none, the hole kind of women does sclaunder
Except he be such, as was naught young and old
And blyndly by vice, lives in the deuylles danger.
The Pie.
I grant said the Pie, that sclaunder is naught
And lyghtnes in judgment, that causes much woe
But if mean lives and women's, were to the bothom sought
Of men than of women good, thou should find mo.
The Fawcon.
This doubt to dyscuse, to no man it pertayneth
Said the Fawcon, for God this matter must try
But experyence, and also scripture me constrayneth
The rather to women, in this behalf to wrye
For scripture me teaches, that all kinds of sin
More by man than woman, had rote and beginning
And practyse does prove, that contynuaunce therein
Of men most chefely, has eade and mayntaynynge
The first murdre by crooked Cayn, Genesis 40.
was committed
when innocent Abell, to death he did drive
Incontinent Lamech, Ibidem.
began admytted
For against stymulacyons, he would not strive
Noe first dronkarde, Genesis 90.
whose fylthynes his child
Chain did dyscouer, his brethren it perceiving
Abhorred that deed, wylfull and wild
And covered the preuyties, cause of their conceyuynge
First tryan was Nemrath, Gentsis. 10. and. 11.
first ydolater was he
He set naught by God, by his lyghtnynge, nor his thondre
The tower of Babell he builded, that all men might se
Than divided were the tongues, that made men to wondre
The sin against nature, both brute and bestyall
Men first did commit, Genesis 19.
as scripture does record
Of.v. Cities the people perysshed, great and small
In punysshement of that sin, by the high king and lord
Pharao of Egypt, Exodi. 1.
that Tyran styfe and flowte
First Innocents did murdre, and to death did them dress
For the murdre of those children, Exo. 14.
he dyed without doubt
The red see him swalowed, with his people more and less
And like as these offenses, had first orygynall
Beginning of men, so contynuaunce they have
Of men most chyfely, which daily to them fall
From enormyties they labor not, their souls for to save
For who does kill and murdre, in batteyll that is bold
who robs and spoleth, both by see and by land
who Tyranny does use, that makes hertes cold
who Innocents does kill, with a bloddy hand
who? but man set on myschyfe this vice does commit
As lewdnes were lawful, all vice he does take
In the snare he lies slepynge, the knot is fast knyt
No kind of crime crooked, he will forsake
In Sessyons and in Lies, who is perjured but he
Great oaths that be odyous, no man refuses
And lecherye is laudable, in every degree
Both symonye sinful, and vsurye man uses
And although some women, to these sins do fall
Above rehearsed, yet in respect of men
Their nombre is nothing, or else very small
For against one of them offendynge, of ye the other there be ten*
The Pie.
I think said the Pie, that thy sayings now be
Indyfferent against men, for practyes does express
That few of these vices, in women we may se
which thou have rehearsed, but in men they be doubtless
For murdre and robrye, that openly is done
Symonye, vsurye, and treason untrue
Brybrye that changes, that judge as the moon
Heresies and scysmes, that dyssencyon do renew
Periurye and rybawdrye, with polling and oppressyon
All these sins sensual, that foul and fylthy be
Of man be much used, I must needs make confession
Much more than of woman, that from these seems fre.
The Fawcon.
Yet man at his danger, as though well he were
Does laughe said the fawcon, so sin does him blind
If his sin he did se, than change would his chere
Perceiving to his maker, how he is unkind
His breast he would beat, for mercy he would call
For his deeds of dampnacyon, he would knele on his kne
And many salt tears, from his chekes than should fall
If he his works wicked, did ponder as they be.
The Pie.
As it ought to be said the Pie, thou do speak
But as thou do speak, so shall it not be
whyse man is here living, Gods laws he will break
Cease therefore thy sayings, by the counceyll of me.
The Fawcon.
Than shall I return, to make repetycyon
Of our matter first moved, said the Fawcon in this place
Thou saydest that all women, do lack perfection
Of body and their souls, be void of all grace
A pertlye I have proved, that as perfyte they be
In body as man, and their souls have creacyon
Unto the image, of the high Trynyte
Thuo perfyt they were create, by dyuyne operacyon
That depenes of wit, with reason profounde
In women take place, mine examples express
For the.vii. Aries lyberall, had their first ground
And inuercyon by women, this is doubtless
Aptnes also, and pronytie they have
Unto all kinds of virtue most pure
with dylygent endeavor, they have labored to save
Their souls from all vice, and grace to procure
And furthermore Pie, I have made declaracyon
That women in living, the men do excel
Confounded I have, thy false accusacyon
And reasones I have used, thy raylynges to repel
Of scripture sometime, the sayings I have sought
Hystoryes profane, and experyence most sure
The documentes of Doctors, forth I have brought
For the femynyne sakes, their right to recure.
The Pie.
By thy process said the Pie, as I can perceive
Thou concludest all women, virtuous to be
Because that a few, virtues did receive
whereof examples, thou dydes recyte to me
At the length thou do take for fynall conclusyon
That women in their living, far men do excel
As though they alonely, of grace had infusyon
This utterly from men, grace thou wylt repel.
The Fawcon.
Not so said the Fawcon, for that is not my mind
Grace from all men, utterly to exclude
Nor by mine examples, thou can not find
That all women virtuous, I entende to conclude
But this conclusyon, of all my sayings take
That to knowledge and virtue, women apt be
And if of their lives, comparyson thou make
More godly than men, they seem unto me.
The Pie.
Their proctour thou art made, said the Pie I perceive
A reward to receive, their part thou do take
But when they with doblenes, shall the deceive
I think than this office, thou wylt forsake.
The Fawcon.
The troth to defend, why should I refuse
A proctour to be, the Fawcon did say
Innocents to help, we should our wits use
In their causes just, and help them always
None other reward, to receive I desire
But troth to try forth, and malice to subdue
This brought to pass, than have I my hyre
For than shall be known, the false from the true
And where as by doubtenes, I shall be deceived
(As thou say of women) that can not so be
For doubtenes of those, is never conceived
In whose hertes is playnes, and symplycytie.
The Pie.
I se said the Pie, with the to contend
Against the femyne gendre, I am much unable
As one overcome, therefore I make an end
For little it avails, before the to fable.
The Fawcon.
Yet one thing of the, or thou from hens fly
I demand said the Fawcon, what moved thy mind
In all thy sore sayings, so shamefully to lie
with raylynge outragyous, against woman kind
whyther their nature, their words, or their living
Thy tongue have provoked, to deadly detraction
Or rather by rashness, of envy procedynge
Their fame to defaulke, thou have delectacyon.
The Pie.
Their nature is good, than said the Pie
And so be their deeds, the troth for to tell
Malice me moved, of women to lie
Sister to Megera, the ragynge fend of hell.
The Fawcon.
why do thou than women, more than men sclaunder
The Fawcon did say, with thy words that be wild
Sens men by deeds deadly, live in more danger
Of soul than women, which seem vndefylde.
The Pie.
The lowest part of the hedge, is trodden down
Under fore said the Pie, when the highest is forborne
woman's power is small, in field and in town
Therefore I them sclaunder, therefore I them skorne
Men rule and govern, by see and by land
Promocyons and profytes, by them I may have
Therefore to catch somewhat, in to my hand*
I laud them, I flatter them, when I begin to crave
He that wylleth with wealth, in this world lead his life
Placebo he must play, his kne both bow and bend
Flaterars fare of the best, and live without strife
when playnes with troth, great men do offend
Their appetytes to please, my mind I apply
As they say I say, be it wrong or right
Sometime I grant, sometime I deny
Young Rufflers to please, whole wits be full right.
The Fawcon.
Than if thou shuldes plainly, and as the troth is
Thy mind against men, said the Fawcon express
Rebuke they should have, of praise they should mys
And thy style against women, than woldes thou redress.
The Pie.
I grant said the Pie, but yet adulacyon
Needs must I use, great men to content
And against women, my common detraction
These two to contynewe, is my full intent
Auaryce of mind, that is insacyable
Adulacyon to use, has given me occasyon
And so has envy, the vice detestable
Provoked detraction, with false accusacyon.
The Fawcon.
The Fawcon most fair, much moved in his mind
Against the Pyes words, and open confession
with syghes sore, ascendynge from his heart kind
In lamenting manner, made this exclamacyon
O world most wretched, O time unfortunate
O blyndnes most beastlye, O life without light
O virtue, O grace, from man's soul separate
The deeds of darkness, have put forth his sight
Now reason is blinded, by sin sensual
And judgment corrupt, by offense customable
will wandereth wyldly, by appetyte carnal
All powers of man's soul, be found reprouable
Flaterars most false, that fables can feign
Great men accept, and to counceyll take
Playnes and Justice, be exyled clean
And oppressyon causes, Innocents to quake
Extorsyon is extolled, and rygour does rule
Detraction and derysyon, with nobles do dwell
Verytie and petie, from these men recule
And falsenes with flatery, true plannes do quell
All these seem lawful, to men that be of might
Their wylles and pleasures, they take for a law
with ragynge and raylynge, they run against right
For small is their lernyng, their wits not worth an hawe
O Pie most peuysshe, how can thou such praise
And Innocents condemn, whose deeds deserve lawde
The hertes of plain people, thou do disease
which covet in troth, to live without frawde
But seeing my sayings, can take no place
In hertes that be hard, congelyd with vice
No remedy I find, but prayer for grace
That many from his sin, may wake and aryce.
The Aucthour.
When these words were spoken, the Fawcon took flight
The Pie for to punysshe, that fled fast away
Of them both shortly, I lost there the sight
And whomwarde I walked, from that Arbor gay
Anon I drew forth, the argumentacyon
Of these two birds, the Fawcon and the Pie
As you have hard me make recytacyon
Nothing from their sayings, my style I did wrye
The people to profit, my purpose is plain
No man to dysplease, with word or with will
But deadly detraction, I would restrain
That causes many men, their souls for to spyll
The prince of peace pearls, the lamb immaculate
That suffered sorrows sharp, sin to suppress
And with his blood, Apoc. 1.
washed out souls co^camynate
On the Altar of the Cross, the devil to depresse
He grant by his grace, that charytie may spring
In every man's heart, as flowers spring in May
Than God shall we love, our heavenly king
And envy expel, that our souls does decay
Than reason shall rule our deeds with dyscrecyon
Between man and man, love shall be unfeigned
Therefore, when thou shall come to her sight
which will be shortly, as far as I guess
Say thou art send, to plead in her right
As in the quarrel, of thine own maystresse
Than shall she se, what thou can express
For her defense her right to recure
And from detractours, that would the suppress
In her Cypress cofer, she will keep the sure.
FINIS.
Thus ends the Fawcon and the Pie. Anno dn^i. 1542.

Imprynted by me Robert Wyer / for Richard Banckes.

Cum priuilegio regali / ad imprimendu^ solu^. per septem annum.

Robert wyer.

The prynter.




