The Hystory of the two valyaunte brethren Ualentyne and Orson, sons unto the
Emperor of Greece.



ALl Princes and other Lords that take pleasure for to read all books* I will
recounte unto you the life of the two chyualrous Lords Ualentyne and Orson,
sons of the Emperor of Greece, and Neuewes unto the mighty King Pepyn king
of France. The which historye I Henrye Watson simple of understanding have
translated out of French in to our maternall tongue of English, at the
Instaunce of my worshypfull master wynkyn de word* prayeng all the reders or
hearers here of to have my youth for excused, if I have failed in anythyng.

Tabula.
Now the king Pepyn wedded Berthe a lady of great renown. ca. i How the
Emperor of Greece was betrayed by the Archebyshop of Constantinoble, whereof
euel took him as you shall here afterward. ca. ii. How the archebyshop after
that he was gaynsayde of the lady Bellyssant for to save his honor ymagyned
great treason of the noble lady. ca. iii. How the archebyshop put him self in
the habyte of a knight for to follow the Empress Bellyssante that was
banyshed. ca. iiii. How the Empress Bellissant childed two ^^^^dren within the
forest of Orleau^ce, whereof the one was called Ualentyne and the other Orson,
and how she lost them both. ca. v. Of the bear that bare away ane of the
children of Bellyssant through the wodde. ca. vi. How by the evil counsayll of
the Archebysshop there was new customs raised in the cite of Constantynoble,
and how this treason was known. Ca. vii. How the Emperor Alex^der by the
cou^say^ of ye wysest sent for the king Pepyn for to se the truth of the
quarrel of the marchaut and of the Archebysshop. ca. viii. How the Archebysshop
and the merchant fought in a field for to know the occasyon of Bellyssant,
and how the archebysshop was dyscomsyted. ca. ix. How king Pepyn took leave of
the emperor for to return into France, and how he went unto Rome afterward
against the sarazyns that had taken the cite. ca. x. How king Pepyn besyeged
Rome. And how valentyne Justed with the admyrall and slew him, by whose
prudence the cite was gotten again. ca. xi. How Haufray and Henry had may at
valentyns because that the king loved him so well. ca. xii. How Ualentyne
conquered his brother Orson in the forest of Orleaunce. ca. xiii. How Ualentyne
after that he had conquered Orson returned unto Orleaunce. ca. xiiii. How
Haufray and Henry wodde have slain Ualenne in the chamber of the fair
Eglantyne. ca. xv. How the duke Sauery sent toward king Pepyn for socoure
against the grene knight that would have hysdoughter Fezonne by force. ca. xvi.
How diverse knights came into Acquytayne for to win the fair lady Fezonne.
ca. xvii. How Haufray and Henry made valentyne to be watched and Orson on the
way for to be slain. ca. xviii. How Orson and Grygar fought together before
king Popyn, and how Orson vanquysshed him. ca. xix. How Grygar after that he
was vanquysshed and querco^men by Orson confessed the treason that Haufray and
Henry had done against the noble Ualentyne, and than was hanged and how
Ualentyne was delivered out of prison and how Ualentyne and Orson departed for
to go toward Acquytayne. ca. xx. How Orso^ waged battle against the grene
knight And how valentyne fought with him and might not overcome him. ca. xxi.
How Uale^tyne by the grace of god auised him for to send Orson upon the morrow
for to fight with the grene knight, and how orson overcame him in batayl. ca.
xxii. How after that Orson had conquered the grene knight, valentyne made him
to be crystened, and sent him unto king Pepyn. And how he had knowledge of
his fader and mother through the grene knight. ca. xxiii How on the night that
Orson had handfest Fezon an angel appeared unto valentyne and of the
commandment that he gave him. ca. xxiiii How king Pipyn had knowledge that
valentine and orson were his neuewes by Blandymayn and the grene knight that
came and yielded him to the king as he had promised valentyne before. ca. xxv
How the good king Pepyn departed out of France for to go toward the Emperor
of greece to bear him tidings of his sister bellissant. And how before his
retoruyng he made war to the Soudan that had besyeged Constantynoble. ca.
xxvi. How the grene knight Justed against two sarazins and how he slew the one
and the other fled, and how king Pepyn with his host was enclose within
Constantynoble. ca. xxvii. How valentyne and orson arrived at the strong
castle where as the fair Clerymonde was. ca. xxviii. How as valentyne was
before the castle spekinge to the gardes Clerymonde made her complaynte all
alone of Ualentyne, and how he Justed for the enter of the castle with the
seneshall and slew him and wan it. ca. xxix How valentyne showed the ring
unto Clerymonde that her brother the grene knight had given him, and how he
spoke unto the head of brass, which told him all his generacyon. ca. xxx.
How by an enchauntour named Pacolet the gyaunt Ferragus had tidings of his
sister and of valentyne. And of the answer that he gave Pacolet. ca. xxix.
How Pacolet returned into Portyngale for to seek Bellyssant valentynes mother,
and how he saw her in Ferragus castle. ca. xxxii. How valentyne and Orson
were betrayed by Ferragus, and how he put them in an obscure prison, where as
they made pyteous complayntes. ca. xxxiii. How Pacolet comforted the two
ladies. ca. xxxiiii How Pacolet by his art delivered valentyne and Orson out of
king Ferragus pryso^, and co^duyted them out of his country with their mother and
the fair Clerymo^de. xxxv. How valentyne and Orson concluded for to depart
out of the castle for fere of Farragus, and how they and the ladies sailed
into Acquytayne. ca. xxxvi. How the king Ferragus for to have vengeance on
valentyne and on his sister Clerymonde made assemble his host, and how he
dysce^ded in Acquytayne. ca. xxxvii. How the duke of Acquytayne was taken in
the battle by Ferragus, and how Orso delivered him by the aid of Pacolet. Ca.
xxxviii. How Orson would assaye the will and the truth ^ the fair* Fezonne or
that he wedded her. cap. xxxix. How the Gyaunt Ferragus for to have succor
sent for ye king Tro^part and the enchau^tour Adramain. ca. xl Of the pyteous
co^playntes that the Empress Bellyssant made unto her son Ualentine or he
went un to Constantinoble, and how he spoke unto the Emperor his father
before his uncle king Pepyn. ca. xli. How Ualentyne and the grene knight were
taken prysonets in the battle before Constantinoble by the Soudan Moradyn and
his men. cap. xlii. How the enchau^tour Pacolet delivered val^tine and ye grene
knight out of ye prison of ye souda^ Moradin. xliiii How Pacolet deyued the
soudan Moredyn, and made him mount upon his horse of wodde, and brought him
in to the city of Constantinoble, wenyng to him that he had brought him in to
Portingale. cap. xliiii. How the soudan Moradyn was taken and bound and after
was hanged. cap. xiv. How the king Trompart came before Acquytayne for to
succor the gyaunt Ferragus, and brought with him Adramayne the enchauntour, by
whom Pacolet was deceived and betrayed fasly. cap. xlvi. How Adramayne and
Pacolet playde before the barons, and how Adramaine stole away Pacolettes vorse
of wodde and the fair Clerymonde. cap. xlvii. How the king of ynde made
king Trompartes head to be smyten of, because he had slain his brother, and
how he would have had the fair Clerymonde unto his wife. cap. xlviii. How
Pacolet in a maidens clothyng avenged him on the false Adramayne. cap. xlix.
How king Ferragus host was al disco^fited, and put all to death, and how
Ferragus was slain afterward within Acquitayne. cap. l. How Orson and the Duke
of Acquitaine went in to Constantinoble with a great host* for to succoure the
Emperor. And how Orson led the Empress Bellyssant with him. cap. li. How
the christen men for to have vytaylesyssued out of Constantinoble. And how
Ualentyne and the grene knight were taken prisoners by the false Sarazyns and
paynyms. cap. lii. How by the succoure of the duke of Acquytayne all the
paynyms and sarasyns were slain before the city of Constantynoble. cap liii.
How the Emperor received his son Orson with great joy, and his wife
Bellyssant. cap. liiii. How the king Pepyn took leave of the Emperor of Greece
for to return into France. cap. lv. How Haufray and Henry ymagyned great
treason. against Orson by the aid and consenting of twain of their neuewes.
cap. lvi. How Garnyere entered into king Pepyns chamber for to accomply she
his ^ursed enterprise, and how he left the knyfe within the kings bedstrawe.
cap. lvii. How Garnyere accused Orson falsely of treason unto king Pepyn., and
how the knyfe was found in the kings bed. cap. lviii. How Orson when they
would have judged him put opposition and demanded batail against his accusers,
the which was vttred him by the twelve peers of France. cap. lix. How Orson
slew Florent in the field, and vanquy fshed Garnyere, and how Hawfray cut of
his head as he would have confessed the treason. cap. lx. How Valentyne in
sekyng the fair Clerymonde aryued in Antyoche and how he fought with a
maruey^ lous dragon. cap. lxi. How the serpent took of Ualentynes helm, and
how Pacolet armed him and brought him another helm and of the complaints that
the queen Rozemonde made for Ualentyne. cap. lxii. How Valentyne slew the
dragon through the grace of God almighty. And how the king of Antyoche
received him with great honor. cap. lxiii. How Valentyne after that he had
discomfyted the dragon made the king of Antyoche to be baptized, and all they
of his land, and of the queen Rozemonde that was enamoured on him. cap.
lxiiii. How the king of Antyoche was put unto death for the renounsing of
mahowne by Brandyffer his wives father. And how the Emperor of Greece and the
grene knight were taken prisoners by Brandiffer before the city of Cretophe.
cap. lxv. How the fair Clerymonde after that the year was complete did
counterfeit the seek womant oath end that the king of Ynde should not wedde
her. And of the king Lucar that would avenge the death of Tromparte his father
against the king of Ynde. cap. lxvi. How the king Lucar in the fair and great
city of Esclardye wedded and took unto wife the fair and gracyous Rozemonde.
cap. lxvii. How the noble knight Val^tyne departed from Esclardy for to go in
to the mighty and puissau^t city of ind^ the gree for to bear ye defiau^ce of
king Lucar. cap. lxviii. How Ualentyne did his message to the king of Ynde
from the king Lucar, and o^ the answer that was given him. cap. lxix. How
Ualentyne returned in to the city of Esclarbye. And of the answer that he
had of the king of Ynde to bear to king Lucar. cap. lxx. How king Lucar with
fyftene kings went and assyeged the king of Ynde. cap. lxxi. How the king of
Ynde catyed away the fair Rozemonde behind him, and how Valentyne rescowed
her and brought her again. cap. ixxii. How Rozemonde found the manner and the
facyon to make her self be led unto the king of Ynde the more the which she
loved perfytely and how he led her in to his city of Ynde. cap. lxxiii. How
king Lucar did so much that king Brandiffer abode with him, and sent Ualentyne
in to Angory^ against king Pepyn. cap, lxxiiii. How Pacolet by his charm and
craft made all the sarazyns to be put unto death. And how king Murgalant was
slain. cap. lxxv. How the sarazyns were discomfyted and how king Pepyn took
the city of Angorye. cap. ixxvi. How Valentyne returned into Ynde after the
bata^^ ^ bare with him ye body of king Murgaia^t. cap. lxxvii. How Valentyne
herd ty^inges of his father and how Pacolet delivered the king of Ynde by his
charm, and delivered him Brandiffer at his own will. ca. lxxviii. How king
Lucar made all the hundred satazins to be dr^wen at horses tails. And how
Valentyne and Pacolet departed out of his host sectetly for to goo unto
Angorye* cap. lxxix. Of the bysion of king Pepyn. And how he went into the
holy land with the twelve peers. cap. lxxx. How king Papyn put him upon the
wait in the habyte of a pilgrim with the twelve peers of France, and how the
king Papin spoke unto Haufray and Henry before all the lords of his court.
cap. lxxxi. How Haufray and Henry betrayed the king Pepyn their father and the
twelve peers of France. ca. lxxxii How the Calyphe of Bendas aryued in the
host of king Brandiffer and how he gate trewes for a month during the which
trewes he made the peace between the king of Ynde and king Lucar and
Brandyffer. cap. lxxxiii. How Haufray for to accomplysshe his treason aryued
before Lucar and Brandiffer, and how he himself was deceived by treason. cap.
lxxxiiii. How king Brandiffer wrote a letter unto his daughter Galazye and gave
it haufray for to bear unto the strong castle. cap. lxxxv. How the fair
Galazye after that she knew the falsnes and treason of Haufray she made him to
be put in a dark prison much streghtly. cap. lxxxvi. How Ualentine and
Pacolet arrived before the strong castle and how Pacolet raised up the devil for
to know if he might take it. cap. lxxxvii. How king brandiffer and king Lucar
took king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France within the city of
Jherusalem. cap. lxxxviii. How the king of Surie sent a messenger unto the
Patriarch of Jherusalem bidding him bring him king Pepin and the twelve peers
of France the which he did. cap. lxxxix. How the king of ynde the great led
king Pepyn away for the part of his prisoners, but he knew not that he was
king of France. ca. lxxxx. How king Pepyn being with the king of Ynde had
knowledge of the fair Clerymonde. ca. lxxxxi. How Brandyffer brought unto the
strong castle the twelve peers of France, and put them in prison. ca.
lxxxxii. How Brandiffer after that he had assembled his host mounted on the sea and went and beseged the cite of Angory. ca. lxxxxiii. How Brandiffer knew
that Lucar Was in Angorye And sent unto Valentyne for to make the appoyntement
to bye him again, ca. lxxxxiiii. How Valentyne demanded the king of France
for change of king Lucar by the consent of the lords and barons. ca.
lxxxxv. How Myllondangler that was named the king of France for to save king
Pepyn was delivered out of the prison of brandiffer in change of kyngelucar.
lxxxxvi How valentyne and the duke Myllon issued out of Angory upon the
sarazyns, and how the sarazyns lost the battle and were dyscomfyted. ca.
lxxxxvii. How king Pepyn was delivered in change of the king of Yndes
Marshall. lxxxviii. How king Pepyn took his leave of the fair Clerymonde, and
how he told Valentyne tidings where she was. ca. lxxxxix. How king Pepyn
departed from Angorye and returned into France for to so coure his wife. ca.
C. How Valentyne went into Ynde the great, and counterfeit the physycyon for to
sethe fair Clerymonde, and how he spoke with her. ca. Ci. How Ualentyne rode
away with Clerymonde and how the king of Brytayne was yielded unto king Pepyn
by treason, ca. Cii How Valentyne took the strong castle, and delivered his
father the Emperor of Greece, and all the prisoners that were with him* ca.
Ciii How the Seneshal went unto Ualentynes ships and how he was put unto
death with all his men. ca. Ciiii How the emperor Orson, and the Grene knight ^
abode in garnyson in the strong castle. And how Haufray and Henry made their
fader to dye. ca. Cv. How after the death of king Pepyn the duke Myllon
Dangler would have made the little Charles to be crowned king of France. ca.
Cvi How the emperor of Greece, Orson and the grene knight departed from the
strong castle for to go socour Valentyne in Angorye. ca. Cvii. How the christian
men issued out of the cite of Angorye, and of the ordenaunce, and of their
meruaylous batayles. ca. Cviii How Ualentyne slew his fader pyteosly in the
battle without knowing him. ca. Cix. How millon dangler returned into
France. And how Valentyne and Orson returned in to greece. ca. Cx. How
Valentyne took leave of the fair clerymond for to go unto Rome for to be shryuen
of his sin. ca. Cxi How Valentine in great dolor of his body performed his
penance for the sleyng of his fader. ca. Lxii How the king Hugon made
Clerymonde to be demanded for wife, and how he betrayed Orson and the grene
knight. ca. Cxiii. How Galeran did his message unto Bellyssant, and the (...),
^ of the meruayllous comp^ay^^tes that Clerymonde made. Ca. Cxiiii. How
Bellyssant and Clerymonde knew the treason and false enterprise of king Hugon,
and how the prouoste smote of the head of Galeran. Ca. Cxv. How Orson and the
Grene knight were delivered out of the prison of the king of Surye, by the
appoyn tement of the war that they made after to king Hugon of Hongrye. Ca.
Cxvi. How at the end of seven year Ualentynge dyed with in his palace of
Constaniynoble, and how he wrote a lettre that he was known by. Ca. Cxvii. Of
the meruayllous by syon of Orson, and how he be came an hermyte in a great
wodde. Ca. Cxviii.
Here ends the table newly correct, and truly set in order so that ye may
find every chapyter lightly as the nombre shows.


How the king Pepyn wedded Berthe a lady of great renown. Capitulo Primo.


UErytably we find in the ancient cronicles, that the noble and valiant king
pepyn wedded and took unto wife Berthe of great renown, dyscrete and prudent,
which had and suffered in her time great trybulations and adversities by envy.
For she was chaced and expulsed from the company and habytacion of the
foresaid king her husband by a false and a coursed old woman replete with
malice. The which old woman for the first night found manner and facion to put
a daughter others in the place of the good Queen Berthe. And she led and
conduyted this treason for to uphold her daughter with the king, in the place
of Berthe his spouse, for they resen^bled much. The which king had two
children by that maiden, that is to wi^te Haufray, and Henry, the which in the
time of their reign grieved and wasted much the country of France, and were
of fyerse courage and full of maltalent. These twain were cause to put the
Queen Berthe in exile, where as she suffered innumerable pains and dolours. And
the foresaid lady, was full long in exyle, leading her life in tears and
lamentacions. But afterward. God of his inestimable grace, delivered the good
lady from adversity, for at the request and instaunce of diverse great lords
the lady was accorded unto her husband king Pepyn, the which in great pity
and honor received her. And with in a little while after she was conceived
with a sone, which was the right puyssaunt Charlemayne, and afterward he was
chased out of the realm by the for said Haufray and Henry, as ^o is showed
more plainly in this present book, but now I will specify unto you ye
plain matter of this present book, and specially of the deeds and gouernyng
of the valeaunt Ualentine, and of his brother Orson.

It is true that the noble king Pepyn had a sister named Bellyssant fair
plesaunte and ^ight gracious. And in every thing well thought and endoctryned.
And the king Pepyn her brother loved her with perfyte love. And in so much
that it happened for the reowne that she had, and because that both great and
small loved her for her beauty and humylitie, the king Alexander Emperor of
Constantynoble was enbraced with her love right ardantly. So it was not long
after that he came into France for the same cause in right great estate,
accompanied with diverse earls and barons the which were all in great pompes
and rychesses. So shortly after his arryuayle he assembled all his great
lords, and commanded them to array them in their best array, and that they
should go unto the king Pepyn, for to know if he would give him his excellent
sister Bellyssane in marriage. And so they went forth and spoke unto king
Pepyn. Also sone as king Pepin understood their message, he granted them their
request right Joyously. wha^ this was known evidently, they made Joy on every
side for the good alyaunce of the Emperor Alexander and of king Pepyn, and
was received with all the tryumphe that might be. The spousaylles was made in
great bobaunce and honor. It is not to be asked if there was largess on
every side of all manner of things. The feast endured long, and than the
Emperor and his men took leave of king Pepyn his brother in law for to go
unto Constantynoble with his Empress Bellyssant. The king made for to array
his men for to accompanye the Emperor and his noble sister Bellyssant. And so
they mounted all on horseback with a great sort of Ladies for to conuaye
Bellyssant. They the which abode behind, wept tenderly for the departing of
the gracyous lady Bellyssant. The king conuayed them diverse Jorneys till that
they arrived at a port of the sea where as the Emperor would mount upon the
sea. And there he took leave of king Pepyn in rendryng him mo thanks that I can
recounte for the noble there that he had made him. But among all other things
he thanked him for his sister. Bellassant the which he had given him to wife
with so fre a will. At these words king Pepyn embraced him saying thus. Fair
sir and right cordial lord and brother to the regard of my puyssau^ce I have
not received you in triumph and magnificence as I ought to have done. But so
much I know the graciousnes of you, that of my little power ye hold yo^
content. And to me appertains not the thanks and praysynges, but to you
when that you have wylled for to decore me so much, and with your person
honor that ye have taken my sister to wife. And know that from hence for
ward I have steadfast purpose that we shall be good friends together. And as
for me I am he that with my puysaunce would put both body and goods in
adventure for to serve you and socoure you in all places after my power. And
after king Pepyn went toward his sister Bellyssant, and said unto her. Fair
sister think upon the place that ye be extraught of and guide you in such
manner that I and your friends, and all the blood ryall may have Joy profit
and honor of you. You go into a strange country fro your nacio^, wherefore
govern you by wise Ladies, and keep you from beleuyng of evil counsayll, you
are the creature in the world that I have most loved. Wherefore if I heard
any tidings fro you but good, it would be the cause to abredge my life. The
king gave his sister Bellyssant full many notable ensygnementes. And after he
embraced her and kyssed her full swetely with weeping eyes, because of her
departing. And the gracious lady which had a pyteous heart answered him lite^
or naught, for with her plesaunt eyes she wept, and with her sweet heart
syghed so sore, that it was impossible for her for to speak. Then took leave
ladies and da^moselles, knights and sqyers, as well of France as of
Constantynoble. There was wept full many a tere, and full many profounde syghes
was casten out for the Lady Bellyssant* The king Pepyn returned in to
Frauncae. And the Emperor mounted on the sea, and had wind at will. And had
the time so much at his pleasure, that within short time he and his men
arrived at Constantynoble, where as they were received with great tryumphe and
honor, the which should he to long to recounte. But it befell not long
after that the great Joy and tryumphe that was made to Bellyssant was
changed in to teeres and lamentacions for the gracious ^^oy Bellyssant, that
by treason and false accusacion was casten in exyle, as ye shall hear more
plainly.

How the Emperor was betrayed by the Archebysshop of Constantynoble,
wherefore evil came to him as you shall hear. Cap. ii.
IN the city of Con^^antinoble was an Archebysshop, the which the Emperor
loved above all other. And gave him mo gifts and rychesses than any other, and
most trusted him. The Emperor made the said archebisshop governor of his
house and his principal confessor and above all other the most secret,
wherefore he had a sorrowful heart afterward. For the false bishop not
thynking upon the great honor and worship that the Emperor had done to
him, was inbraced with love dysordynate, for the cle^e beauty of the excellent
lady Bellyssant the which was so amyable and virtuous He was so ^eruently
taken in her love that it happened one day that he spyed her all alone in her
chamber prepayred, and so he went to her and sat down by her, and began for
to behold her all smiling, whereof the Lady took no keep, for the disloyal
Archebysshop was so preuy and famylier in the house that none in the world
would have thought that ever he had ^en so full of treachery and namely toward
the Emperor that loved him so derelye. Now there is not a worse enemy than he
the which is famylyer in a house when he caste^^ him for to do evil, as well
showed this false and cursed Archebysshop, the which being ^y^^ynge beside the
virtuous Lady, opened his venymous mouth so foul and abhomynable, and spoke
unto her in this manner. My right dear and sovereign lady I am your little
servant and chapelayne, wherefore I beseech you that it will please you for to
give audience unto my words of a thing the which I shall tell you, for the
which thing I have suffered great aduersyties and doloures by long conty
nuaunce. Know my redoubted Lady that the beauty of your person, and the
pleasant figure formed and composed about natures operacyon, has rauysshed
my spi^^^es and enbraced me heart in such wise that night and day I think
on none other thing but on your highness. And that worse is leseth rest,
meat, and brynke, manners, and countenance when that I think upon your fair
eyes and replendysshynge vysage so I require of God that be will give you
volente and courage for to receive me for your simple lover. And that I might
serve you and fulfill your delites and pleasures. For if it be so that you
refuse me for your lover. there is nothing more nerer me, then to ^^uo the
death. Alas lady you the which is renowned in every thing sweet and amyable,
curtaysy ^enynge and debonayre, be not cause to dyminyshe my life, but give me
holly your love, by such a covenant that I shall be loyal in love yea more
than ever was any man. And that more is, be not afraid nor have no dread of
God for to commit this sin and offense. For I am the vycayre of God in
earth, wherefore I may give you absolucio^ and penance fa^^^e and light. At
these deceiuable words diabolique, full of treason and de^epcions, the lady
prudent wise and eloquent, answered de^^rely and softely. Ha false and
disloyal irreguler Archebysshop, tempted and full of diabolique volente how
dare thou pro^fe^ with thy mouth that ought to be sacred such vylainous
words, dishonest and abominable, against the majesty imperial of him that
has enourysshed the so tenderly, and eleuate in honor more then to the
appertains fro whence may come to the and move this maladiecion, to be cause
of my dampnacion, the which should instruct me in the faith in ma^ners and
conditions, even so as the Emperor thinks and affieth him in all. Never
please it God that the blood of France from the which I am extraught, nor the
majesty of the puissau^t Emperor, be shamed nor dishonaured by me in any
^ane. O falfe and cursed man, behold what thou would do, that will dispoyle
and unclothe me of mine honor and put my body in vytupetable shame for ever,
and my soul in the way of dampnacion eternal. Leave thy folyshe opinion, for
to such an end as to have my love, thou may not a^tayne nor come to. And
if that thou speak any more come thereof, know for a certaynt^^ that I shall
show the Emperor thereof. And then may thou say that of thy life is
nothing, go thy way hence and speak no more. Of this answer was the
Archebysshop to angry, but he dutst not proceed no further forth on that
matter, sithe that he might not have the love of the lady. And so all confused
he returned, for he could not spy nor se by no manner that the Lady showed to
him any manner of sign of love that he might comfort him in. He repented him
greatly of his foolye, when that he saw that he was refused of the lady, but
he found no remedy for to save his honor save by trea son* for he thought
well within himself that the Emperor knew not by the Empress the evil will
of his courage. To sone began the folly, and late he repented, It happens
oftentimes that the thing the which a fool thinks remains undone.

How the Archebysshop gaynsayed of Bellyssant, for to save his honor
ymagined great treason. Cap. iii.
IN mind and thought to profounde and enu^ous was the Archebisu^oppe doub^yng
that the Emperor would not make him dye for the false treason that he had
committed against the majesty of his soue* reign. Wherefore he thought for to
save his honor in the best wise that he might. And he did so much that for
to cover his ma^adiction, and for to show appearance of loyalty and prudence,
in dissimulyng that with all his power he desired ^he we^th and honor of the
Emperor, the day of the Ascencio^ of our Lord, he came toward the
Emperor* and drew him apatte, and said unto him in this manner of wise.
Right hie Emperor, it is true that I know the great graces and benefits
that ye have done and given unto me. And know well that by you I am mounted
and eleuate in honor morethen unto me apper^ayneth. And yet of your grace ye
have made me (indigne) master and governor of all your house, in putting
your trust and confidence more (...) me, then in any other of your court,
wherefore I ought not to be in no place there as I should hear your majesty
usurped and dyffamed, and your renown adnychylled for even so god help me,
if that I had not rather submit my self unto death than for to see or
hear before my presence, languages or words that were not lycyte unto your
magnificence. Wherefore given intelligence unto my words and I shall declare
unto you a thing the which touches greatly your person profit, and
honor. Syrit is true and certain, that Bellyssant your wife, sister unto the
king of France, the which ye have willed to praise so much and honor, that
you have taken her to spouse (keeps you not loyalte as she ought to do) for
(...) lou^th another than p^^ for very certaynte, and yt she is dissoyall unto
you. But it is so that I will not declare the name nor the person of him that
does his vol^ute with your wife, for you know well that I am a priest sacred,
and may not desire the death of nobody. But never the less knew for a
certaynte that the truth of this matter came to me in confession, wherefore I
ought not nor will recyte in no manner the name of him that does you such
dishonor purchase. But and you will believe me, there is not a more vyler, nor
dishonester woman in all your court then is your wife that you hold so dear.
Where by your body is in danger and peril* for she purchases night and day
the manner to put you to death, to the end that she might doohet will the
better. And therefore I am bound to will your profit and keep your honor. I
adue^t se you and let you know that you take he^e, and correct her also well
as you may. And the most secretly yt you may with your honor. Orelles I
hold your honor lost and your person dishonored. For it is to great shame
among the princes, that you think that you have taken to wife the sister of
the king of France for the flower of beauty, of prudence, and nobleness, and
you have an harlot, the which is enuenymed with your life, and desires your
death, in procutynge it from day to day, whereof I am right displeasaunt. The
which thing look that you remedy also well as you may for to save your
honor. When the Emperor understood the words of the false traitor
Archebisshoppe, ask not if he were right sorrowful in his heart, and angrye,
for he had loved her as his life. The Emperor beliued lightly ye words of
a false Archebysshop, for he had his trust in him more then in any man of the
world. The sone given credence made a great inconuentence to sourbe. There is
no danger so great to a prince as to give credence lightly. The Emperor
answered nothing for he was so espyred with anger, and wounded at the heart so
profoundly, that he lost manner and contenaun ce. And went thorough the palais
imperial, casting out angul^^yous syghes. Then he houed still a while, but he
might not refrain his Ire, wherefore he entered in to the chamber of Bellyssant
without speaking any word, or making any semblaunt (the which took no keep.)
And without speaking any word to lady or (...) mosell, cruelly, and with a
fyerse courage, came and took the fair lady by the head and pulled her by the
here so rudely, that he threw her against the earth, and made her excellent
face run ^l on blood. Then began the lady to weep and ^tye right
pyteously, and said. Alas my right dear lord, what thing moves you for to
smite me so outragiously* For I did never thing the days of my life to you
but all honor, and loyal set^y^e with my body. Ha hoar said the Emperor I am
to well enfourmed of thy life, that cursed be the hour and the date that ever I
had knowledge of the first. And then he smote her again so mightily that the
good lady lost her speech, and all the ladies and damoyselles wend that she
had been dead, wherefore they made a cry so high that the barons and knights
of the cour^ hard it, and ran quickly in to the chamber. Some took up the
Empress Bellysant, and the other spoke unto the Emperor after this manner of
form. Alas sir how have you your courage so cruel for to destroy and undo
so noble a lady as she is* and that is so well beloved of every body* in whom
was never seen vyllanye nor dishonor. For God sir be a little more moderate.
For with wrong and without cause, you undertake this quarrel against the good
lady. Speak no more said ye Emperor, I know, I se, and wot how^ the thing
goes. And yt more is by god almighty I am deliue^ed totally to put her unto
death. And if there be any of you that will say the contrary, I shall make you
dye an evil death. At those words spoke a wise baron ^ said: Redoubted sir
auise you and consider well what ye will do, you know well that the lady that
you have spoused is sister unto the king of France named Pepyn, the which is
puyssaunt fyerse and of great courage. And you ought to beliue steadfastly that
and ye do outrage unto his sister Bellyssant, he is a man for to avenge him by
such a facion that he may do great damage in this country also well upon men
and children, as on towns and cities. And put your self in exile, the which
should be great damage and pity. And on the other side you se well that ye
lady is great with child, wherefore it is peril unto you for to smy^e her or
touch so rudely. After these words yc lady kneled upon her knees before the
Emperor and spoke thus unto him right piteously weping. Alas my lord have
pytt on me, for I never thought vyllany against your person, and if that ye
will not have pity on me, at the least have compassion on the child that I
bear in my womb, for I am great with child of your deed, of ye which god give
me grace to be delivered Ioyously. Alas sir I supplye you and require you that
ye make me be put in to a toure, and there to be kept straightly unto my
childing. And after that I am delivered, do with my body what soever you will.
Thus and in semblable manner the good lady complained her weeping and syghyng
full profoundly with a sorrowful heart, and they had their hearts right hard
that could abstain them from weeping. But the Emperor that was deceived by
the false Archebysshop, would have no compassion on his wife, but cruelly and
fyersly answer unto her. False strompet dishordynate of as much as thou art
with child I ought little to rejoice me, for I am so much informed of thy
government that I have nothing, and that dysloyally thou have habandoned thy
self unto o^ there than me. Wha^ they saw that the Emperor would not refrain
him nor appese his I^e for nothing, by acomyn accord they took her and led
her into a chamber. And the most amyably that they might held her with words
in showing unto her her great fault, and the sorrowful lady was dysorned in her
chamber that had her face disteyned with blood. The ladies that were next
her person brought her fair water to Was^he her with all. And at that hour
entered into her chamber her squire named Blandymayn. And when he saw her in
such estate, he wept for pity, and said unto her. Ha madame I se well that
you are falsely betrayed. I beseech god that cursed be the person that has
purchased you this evil. For god my righ^ dear lady take a ^ytle comfort unto
you. And if you will believe me I shall led you into France again toward the
king Pepyn your brother, the which gave me un to you for to serve you in your
necessities, the which thing I would do after my puyssau^ce. Believe my
consayll and we shall return into France again. For you may be sure that the
Emperor shall make you dye shortly with great shame and dyshonoure. Then
answered the dolourous lady. Ha Blandymayn my friend it should be to me to
shameful and dyshonest for to go in such manet without other deliberacyon. And
it might be believed lightly that the Emperor had good cause, and that I were
culpable of the deed. Wherefore I had ^euer die an evil death, than for to
recover blame for a thing that I am innocent of, and accused with out cause.
After these things thus said, the Emperor that was with the barons a little
moderate and satisfied of his Ire, he sent for his wife Bellyssant, the which
was brought before him quickly. When he saw her his heart trembled for sorrow
for this that he dutst not put her to death, because of her brother king Pepyn,
and his puissaunce. With rude words he said to her. False and cursed woman by
the is mine honor vyturped. Wherefore I swear God that and it were not for
thy brothers sake, the valeaunt king Pepyn, I should make the to be brent in a
fire, but for his sake thy life shall be prolonged at this present time. Now I
^o the to wit, that from this hour I banisshe the, and expulse the from my
country and Empire, in commanding the expressly, that to morrow thou depart
out of this city, for if I se the any more, thou shall never have respite till
thou have suffered death. And yet I command all them of my country that there
be none so hardy of them to accompany you, or co^uey, save allonely yoursquyer
Blandymayne that you brought out of France with you. Go where as you will go at
your adventure, for thou shall never slepeby my side, nor in my bed. Sone
after that commandment of the Emperor that was short and s^daine, without
soiourney or delacion, the Empress Bellyssant, and her Squire Blandymayn,
mounted on horseback and came in to the Ly^ie, where as was shed full many a
tere, both of lords and ladies knights, and squyers, with all ye commune
people, the which ^^ted and sorowed out of mesure, for they made such
lamentacions that there was never seen nor heard so piteous a thing. Every
body ran unto the gate, for to command the good lady unto God, that by the
false Archebisshop was so pyteously banyshed. And at the issue of the gate they
made the pitefullest etie that ever was heard. Now goes Blandymain that
conduyeth the sorowefull lady Bellissant, and has taken the way to go toward
the realm of France. When the lady was out of the walls of the city, and
that she saw her self in the fields pyteously a^ourned, like a woman shamed
and dishonored, she wayled bitterly. For she considered the lyguage, and the
blood ryall that she was issued out of, the right high magnificence imperial
that she had been put in. And after thought on the miserable and dolorous
fortune yt was turned upon her so suddenly, she said. Alas alas wherefore
ta^ieth death, that he will not come and abredge my life, and finishe my dolours
and anguysshes, Alas I was borne in an unhappy hour for to suffer such pain,
and for to fall from so high estate unto such pouerte, for of all the
unhappiness I am the most unhappiest. Now is al my joys transmued in to
distres, my laughinges changed in to wepynges, my songs converted into
syghes. In the stead of the cloth of gold that I was wont for to wear, I am
as a womam public full of injuries and vitupere committed and aiourned. And of
precious stones of inestimable valor, on all sides I must the remnaunt of my
miserable life arouse my vesture with bitter tears, yt shall make my life and
my days to fynyshe. O you pastorellis of yc sieldes consider my great dolours,
and weep mine exite. Now pleased it God and the vyrgin Mary that I were
descended of as poor estate as the poorest of ye world, at the least I should
have doloure to se^ me in such pouerte. Alas wherefore ^yghteth me the son,
and wherefore does the earth sustain m^* for I ^aue no ^ede that the dangerous
fountain of distress oppress me so sore. For it is not in mine humayne
puyssaunce, to bewail the profou^de sorrow that my poor heart endures. O
false envy and treason, I ought well for to curse the with my heart, for by
the to day I am the most sorowfullest creature living upon the earth A my
brother the king Pepyn, what shall ye do with this poor discomforted. It were
better for you that I had never been borne of my mother, or that from the womb
of my mother I had been put under the earth. In making this aspre complainte,
the lady abode in a swowne upon the horseback, and she was almost fallen
down or that Blandymain might come unto her, then he dressed her up and said
unto her. Alas madame take unto you some comfort, and enter not so in
despair, have steadfast trust in God, for even so as you are innocent he shall
keep you and defend you always Then he espied a right fair fountain,
toward the which he led the lady. And also nete it as he might he set her
down for to repose her and refreshe her. Here I will leave to speak of them,
and will speak of the Archebisshop that perseuered in his malice dampnable and
dyabolyque.

How the Archebysshop put him in the habyte of a knight, and mounted on
horseback for to follow the Empress Bellyssant that was banisshed. Capit.
iiii.


WHen the Archebisshop saw that the lady was departed, he thought in himself
that he would go after her, and that with her he would do his pleasure. He
left rochet and other vesture, and as irreguler and appostate, gyrde his
sword about him, and mounted upon a swifte courser and followed fost after for
he had one of the best coursers of all Constantynoble. He tode so fast that
within short time he had tyden a great way. And of all them that he met* he
asked tidings of the noble lady Bellyssant. And they showed unto him the way
that she held. So long rode the false traitor Archebysshoppe that he entered
in to a mighty great forest and a long, he took the high way and enforced
him to tide apace. He had not ryden long when he apperceiued the lady with
Blandimayn the which were beside the fountain whereas the lady was descended
for to refresshe her, and rest her for she was weary and heavy full of sorrow and
doloure, so that she might not sustain her. Whiles that Blandymayn comforted
the sorrowful lady, the Archebisshop drew nere them and know the fair
Bellyssant, but she knew him not a far because that he was dysgysed, but
when he approached she knew him well enough. Alas said she Blandymayne, Is^
now come toward us the false Archebysshop that is cause of mine exyle. Alas I
am to sore aferde that he do me not some vyllany. Lady said Blandymayn, have of
him neither fere nor doubt. For if he come for to do you evil or displeasure I
shall put my body for to defend yours unto the death. At these words was
arrived the archebisshop that light of his horse, and salued the lady in the
best manner that he might and said. Right dear and honored lady, it so be that
the Emperor has dechared you, if you will accept me for to be your love, and
accomplysshe my desire, I shall do so much toward the Emperor that he shall
put you in your first estate, and be exalted more higher then ever you were,
wherefore auyse you, for I do it for your great honor and prouffyte. Ha said
the lady, dysloyall and cruel adversary of all honor imperial, I ought well
to have cause to love the, and hold the dear, wha^ that by thy false malice
thou haste made the Emperor understand that I have myserably borne me toward
his majesty and made me be detect from all honor and prosperyte. Thou have
put mein the way of extremite and misery, and is the causer that I shall
finishe my dates in dolorous distress, for there is not a more discomforted
lady in the world then I am. Lady leave such words, for by me there ca^
nothing co^ to you but good. For I am puissaunt enough for to change your
doloure and discomforte in to Joye and solace, more then ever you had. In
saying these words he enclyned him toward the lady, and wend to have
kyssedher. But Blandimayn sterte between them, and gave the Archebysshoppe so
great a stroke that he folled him unto the earth, and braket wayne of his
teeth. The Archebysshoppe gate him up and drew his sword quicklye. And
Blandimain took a glayue that he had brought with him, and assailed him right
asprely and the Archebysshoppe him. They fought so long that they were booth
sore wounded, and as they were thus fyghtyng, there arrived on them a notable
merchant, that ascryed unto them also far as he myghth se them saying.
Lords lords leave your debate, and tell me from whence it proceeds, and I
shall tell you who has right or wrong. Sir said Blandimain, let us fynyshe
our enterprise. Alas said the lady sucoure us, for here is the false priest
that will take mine honor from me by forte* which is ye cursed Archebisshop
that has separed me by creason from my lord and husband the Emperor. when
the merchant understood her, he had great pity on her, and said to the
Archebisshop. Sir leave your enterprise, and touch not the lady, for and the
Emperor know of this deed he would make you dye an evil death before all
the world. Also soon as the Archebysshop understood the merchant speak, he
left the batrayl quickly and began for to^^e through the wodde. He was right
sorrowful that he was known for he thought well to have had his pleasure of the
lady. But he enterprysed such a thing, whereby his treason was known
afterward and disclosed as it shall be recounted to you afterward. After the
depatrynge of the Archebyshop the lady abode in the wodde beside the fountain
tryst and sorrowful, with Blandimayn that was wounded. The merchant that was
abiden said. Alas lady I se that by the Archebysshop ye are falslybetrayed, and
have b^ expulsed from the Emperor. Now god give me grate to live so long
that I may accuse him of this misoe^e, and to purchase his death. L^ly to god I
commaund^ you the which give you patience and comfort So the marchaunte took
his leave, and Blandymayne thanked him many times. Than Blandimayne mounted the
Lady upon her horse, and after mounted upon his own, and went unto a lodginge
that was there beside, where as they abode by the space of eight days for to
hele Blandimayn. Wha^ he had rested him, and that he might ride they put them
upon the way toward France, And the sorrowful lady complained her by the
way and said. Alas Blandimayn my friend, what may my brother and all the lords
say of my pyteous case, when they shall know that for a vylaynous deed I am so
shamefully deie^^e from the Emperor, and as a romen woman banisshed the
Empire of Constan tynoble. Alas I am right certain that my brother will believe
lightly that I am culpable of the deed, and make me die shamefully for he is
right fyerse of courage, lady said Blandimayn be of good chere, and put your
trust in god. In spekyng thus Blandymayde that the lady conduyted rode so
much that after that they had passed diverse countries and regions, they arrived
in France, and passed by Orleaunce for to go unto Paris* where as the king was
accustomed to soiourney most. So they* entered in to a great forest that is
six mile from Orleaunce in the which happened pyteous things, unto the
Empress Bellyssant, as I shall make mention hereafter.

How Bellyssant was delivered of two fair sons which were named Ualentyne,
and Orson and how she lost them. Capit. v.


BEllyssant was ryding within the forest, the which was with child as you have
heard re^^^ed before. It happened that her body had determined and fulfilled
her time, that constrained her for to des^ende of her horse and complain her
tenderly. Blaudimain demanded her what she a^led that she complained her so.
Alas Blandymayn said the lady, light down of thy horse and help that I were
laid under yonder great tree and think (...) for to ^^ke me some wife. For
the time is ^om^ that I must n^des be delivered without any longer delay.
Blandymayne descended quickly and laid her upon a fair grene place under a
tree, the which he did chose and mark for to know it the better. And then he
le^t on horseback, and rode also fast as he might for to seek some wife to
help and sucoute the lady.

The noble lady Bellyssant abode there all alone with out any company, save God
and the blessed v^gyn mary, that did help her, and succored her in such manner
that she was delivered of two fair sons in the forest. But they were not so
sone come upon the carthe, but that the good lady suffered much pain and
angu^she as you shall hear. So as the lady was delivered of the fruit of her
womb, and that she lay under the tree, there came unto her a beer, the which
was man ^e^lously great and horrible, and took one of her children in his
mouth, and went his way^ into the thycke of the forest also fast as he
might. Then was the gracious lady sorrowful and not without a cause, for the
perdiction of her child, and began for to cry with a feable v^yce much
pyteously. And upon both her fere and hands she went after the beer in the
forest, that was anon out of her sight. Alas to little auayled her the
pursuyte. For she shall never se her child unto the time that by miracle he be
yielded unto her again. So long went the lady through the forest weeping for
her child, and trauaylled her so fore to goo after, that a strong sickness took
her, in such wise that she fell in a swoun^ upon the cold earth as it had been
a dead woman, I will leave here to speak of her, and will tell you of the other
child that was left all alone. It happen^d the same day that the king Pepyn
was departed out of Paris, acco^panyed wys diverse great lords and barons, for
to go unto Constantinoble to se his sister bellyssant. And took his way toward
Orleaunce* and he rode so fast that he entered into the forest where as his
sister* Bellyssant was delivered, but he knew nothing thereof at that time. Now
it is true as it was the pleasure of god that as the king Pepyn passed
through the forest, he espied under the hye tree the other son of Bellyssant
all alone that lay upon the earth, so he rode that way and said unto his
barons. Lords by the god that created all things I have found here a much
fair encountre, se what a fair child I have found here. By Ihesus said the
lords sir king you say true. Now said the king Pepyn I will that it be
nourysshed at mine expenses also long as god shall give it life. And will that
to be kept right tenderly, and nobly as if it were mine own propre child. For
y^ yt god send him life untyll the time that he be a man I shall give him great
lands and tenementes for to live upon. Then the king Pepyn called unto him
one of his squyers, and gave him the charge of the child, sainge to him. Bear
this child to Orleance, and make it baptized, and seek him a good nouryce, and
make that he be nourysshed also well as is possible Good right had king Pepyn
to love the chylte, for he was his nenew^, but he know it not. The souyer took
the child as king Pepyn had him and bare it into Orleau^ce. And after made
it to be baptized and gave it his name For he made it to be named Ualentine,
for such was the name of the s^^er. After he sought a nouryce and made the
child to be well kept as he was commanded. The king ^oode in the forest,
always holding his Iournaye* for he had great desire to be in the City of
constantinoble to se his sister Bellyssant that he loved so much. And even so
as he passed through the forest, he recountred Blandymayn that led a wife with
him. Blandymain knew the king, and anon light of his horse and salwed him.
After the salute done the king said unto him. Blandymayn fair sir, tell us
tidinges of Constantinoble. And among other things tell us how our sister
Bellyssant does. Dear sir said Blandymayn as to the regard of tidinges, with
pain can I tell you any that is good. For your sister Bellyssant has to much
evil by the treason and false language of the cursed Acchebisshop, for she is
vanisshed from the Emperor, and chased out of the country. And the
Archebysshop made him believe so many false words, that if the lords of his
court had not been, the which fered your futoure, he would have made her he
btence in a fire before all the world. Blandymayn said the king Pepyn the
which was tryst and sorrowful, Of as much hold I the Emperor more
folysher, because he made not my sister dye, for by the God almighty, if I had
her hate at this present time, I should never rest ^il that I had made her
dye an evil death. Now forward lords said king Pepyn for our vyage is
done. Return we unto Paris for I will go ^ote^der. I know to much tydinges
of my sister, with out demaundinge, or enquiryng any more. At these words he
turned the bridle of his horse for to return, making great sorrow in his
courage, and began to say unto himself. Ha very God almighty (said he)
how often is man deceived by woman. Now am I come to the clean contrary of
mine entencion, for I purpensed to have had once of my sister Bellyssant in my
life Joy and pleasure. And to have had the Emperor Alexander for my friend,
to succoure me in all my necessities. And by her I am greatly diffamed, and put
unto a great dishonor. In that distress and melancoly rode the king Pepyna
great while, so long he ^ode so that he arrived at Orleau^ce. Then Blandimain
that saw well, and knew well the courage of the king Pepyn durst declare no
more unto him of the lady B^llyssant. So he ^^iourned toward the tree where as
he had left her but he found her not, wherefore he was angry and ^yght
sorowefull. He descended, and fast^ned his horse, and began to search her
thorough the wodde, And he did so much that he found her lyeng upon the
earth, the which had wept so much for her child that she might not speak
but with great pain. Blandimayn embraced her and set her on her fete, and then
^^^de unto her. Alas who may have brought you hither H^ Blandymayn said she
ever encrea^^^h my doloure, and dystresse. Ie is true that when you were
departed there came a beer to me a bare away one of my children: And I put
myself on ye way after thinkyng to have taken it from him* but I could not
return unto the tree whereas I left mine other child. Lady said he I come
from the foot of the tree, but I have found no child, yet have I well looked on
every side. When the lady heard Blandymayne, she was more sorrowful, than
before, and yet again she tell in a swone, blandymayn took her up and wept
full hercely for the ladies sake. He led her toward the tree where as she
had left the child; but when she found it not, she discharged so great
sighs, and so pyteous, that it seme^ that the heart in her ^ely would depart in
sunder. Alas said she, thereis not in the world a more discomforted lady cha^ I
am, for from side to side I am deuoyde of Joy, of pleasure of myrche, and am
replete with doloure and misery* and of intolerable dystresse grieved with all
trybulacyons, and among all desolates, the most ^esolate. Alas Emperor you
are the cause toauauncemy death wrongfully, and without cause, and by ^uyl
counsel have depryued me from your company for on my soul never the days of
my life did I fault with my body. I have now lost by you* your* propre
children legityme issued out of blood ryall, by wh^n^ I trusted ones to be
venged. Come death unto me for to finisshe my dolor for the death shall be
more agreeable unto me, than to live in this martyr. When Blandymaine saw the
lady so inwardly discomforted, the best wise that he might he comforted her,
with the woman and lead her into a little village where as she was bayned,
kept, and cherisshed, ^yll that she was well healed, and in good point, and
that of her great sorrows she was a little appeased for there is no ^ole but
that it is forgotten by process. Tha^ blandimain beg a^ for to tell and recyte
unto the lady how he had encountered the king Pepyn her brother, the which had
demanded him tidinges, and how he was angry against her. And said, by God
madame I have great fear that ye shall not be welcome to the king your
brother For also soon as he knew that the Emperor had expulsed you from
him, he showed the semblaunt that he was much angry against you, as he the
which will believe lightly that the fault is in you. Ha God said the lady. Now
is come unto me the thing that I most doubted, at this hour may I well say
that I from al sides have adversities. For I am expulsed from my lord and
husband the Emperor, without right or reason. Never shall I return unto
Paris, but will go into a strange country, so far that never man nor woman
shall have knowledge of my fault, nor know where I am. If my brother the king
Pepyn held me, he would make me dye. Now it is better for to sechewe his ire
and ^uroure, then for to abide the death. And Blandymayne said unto her. Lady
weep no more, for ye be sure that I shall never leave you unto the death, and
am delivered to live and dye with you, and to keep you company whether soever
you will, go, Blandymayn said the lady let us go at our adventure and I thank
you heartily for your good will, for my trust is hole on you. Thus is the lady
Bellyssant and Blandymayn on their way much pensyfe and sorrowful, all
charged with anguysshes. Here will I leave for to seakpe of them ^ will tell you
of the Beer that bare away the child through the Wodde.

Of the bee^ that bare away one of the children (...) the ^mpresse Bellyssa^t.
Cap. vi.


THe Beet that had taken one of the children of Bellyssant, de^oured it no^ but
bare it in to his caue^ne that was profounde and obscure. In the which was
four young Beets strong and ^u^ssaunt. The Beer cast the child among his
w^^l^es to be eaten, but God that never forgeteth his ^rend^s showed an euydent
miracle. For the young Beeres dy^d^ it no ha^me, but with their roughe ^awes
strooked it so^tel^e. When the Bee^ saw that her ly^le whel^es would not
devour it, she was right amerous of the child (so much) that she kept ^t
and gave it ^ou^e a hole yea^^. The child was ^l^ tough^ because of the
neue^^taction of the bee^* as a ^^de be^st. So he began to go in the ^odde, a^^
^^^ame great (...) in a wh^^e and b^gan for to smite the (...) castes of the
forest in such wise that they all douted him, and ^ledde before him. For he
fereo nothing in the world. In such esta^e was the child ledyng a ^^^stes
life ye space of xv. yea^e. He became (...) great and st^^^g* that none durst
pass through the forest ^or him* for both men and beast^s he put unto death,
and ^a^e their (...) alr^w as the oth^^ beasts did, ^^d ^^^ed ^ ^ea^^ (...)
li^^ and not humay^e. He was called Orson ^^^au^^ of the beer that had
nouryshed him, and h^ (...) al^^ coug^ as ^ bee^e. He did so mu^he harm^ ^n ^h^
^or^^, and was so ^ore redoubte^, that there was (...)* we^e he never so
^aliau^t and hardy, but that he had great fere to encountre the wild man. The
^enowne ^prange so of him, that all they of the country* ^bout^ ^ha^^^ and
hunted him with force and strength* but nothing auaylled all their dead, for
he fered neither ^y^^e^ nor weapons, but brake al (...) pieces. No w^^ is in the
forest ^^dang the life of a wild beast, without we^in^ of any cloth, or any
word speaking. And the mothe^ Bellyssa^t that thought that she has lost him*
goes as a woman discomforted through the country at a^^^ture, and Blandymayne
conduyted he^* and comfort her also well as he ma^e. The lady be ^ayled ever
her two children, for she has lost them, and prays oftentimes unto god with
good heart and to the vi^gyn Mary, yt they would save her two children.
Blandymayn and the lady Bellyssant passed by ^y^ers places, and so much (...)
^e^^ by s^^ and b^ land, that they (...)d at a ^o^^^ o^ ^o^^yngale, upon the
which was ^ ^^st^^l. And in that same castle did remyyne ^ ^^^n^t that was so
great and so puyssaunt that there was no horse that might sustain him, and he
was called Ferragus.

IT happened that this Ferragus issued out of the castle, and came unto the
port for to demand trybut^ of the ^asse^s, as he was accustomed to take of
every ship. He entered into the ship whereas Bellyssant was, that was
^e^l^^^sshed with diverse marchaundises. And also soon as he ^spi^d Bellyssant
he ^o^^ her ^y the hand and l^dde (...) into (...) castel^ to w^^^e his wy^^,
for he was married unto a lady right pleasant and fair. And B^^n^^m^^n went
after the lady that the gyaunt ledd^ i^ great honor, without doing he^
vylla^y^ in any facion, either in thought or deed, and presented her unto his
wife* the which received her gladly, and had great joy of her coming for the
gracious maynteine that she saw in her. The gyaunt commanded his wife that
Bellyssant should be sumptuously kept as her person, and Blandymayn he^ squier
in like wise. She was received with great joy in the castle, ^or she was well
endoctrined both in ^^^dicio^^ and in science, and could speak amiable, and
govern (...) ho^e^^ly among little and great. And when she had re membraunce
of her children she weptetenderly both with ^^^^e and mind, ^ut the wife of
the ^yaunt recomforced her ever. And of all that was in the castle, she was
ever next her person. For she ^oued her with ^o ^^^^^te love, that without
her she might neither (...) nor drink, she was long time in the castle of
Ferragus. Here I will l^ue you to speak of her, and (...) ^e^^ you of the
Emperor, and of the false Archebysshop*

How by the cou^sail of the Archebysshop there was new customs raised in the
city of Constantinoble, and how the occason was known. Cap. vii.


Alexander the Emperor after that he (...)* ^xp^^sed sham^fully his wife
(...)king P^^y^s s^ster of Frau^^^, and (...)^ed her from his company he made
diverse complayntes, and repented him in his heart (...) the ^^^t (...) (...)
^^^^^d of (...) e^te him ever in (...) ^olysshe oppinion, and the Emperor
believed him And gave him so much puyssaunce and authority above the other,
that that which (...) commanded was done. He governed so much ^ had so much
domynac^^ (...) that (...) als^d up (...)mes and vsages in the (...) of
^onstantyno^i^, against right and reason. It happe^ed that there was a fayer in
^he ^it^ the which was kepy the. xv. day of Septembre. And from diverse
counet^es came the merchants to that faye^. When the day was comen that it
should be kept, the to wne was full (...) merchants of every country. The
Emperor made the fayer to be kept as it was accustomed (...)the ^^^yng thereof
unto the Archebysshoppe, ^he which made (...)e two hundred men for to accompany
him and they departed from the cite to keep the faye^ (...) the same fayer was
present ye merchant that I have made me^cy on of to fore, that is to w^t he
the which found Blandy mayn and the Archebi^hoppe (...)ynge the
Archebysshoppe knew him well (...)ought, but he made no semblaunt. For he
doubted to ^y^h^ that his fall^od were not known. He would have ^^t him to
death gladly, but he had not the puyssau^ce without to great ^c^au^der. This
day ^he sai^ matchau^t that was well garnisshed with clothes of gold and ^^ke
^o^^e more the^ any other wherefore wha^ the fayer was (...)y ^h^d the
Archebysshop sent ^ sargeaunt to him for to demand him the trybute than was
accustomed* for the ^^^ynge o^ his marchaundyse. The sergeaunt (...) (...) him
and said. Sir merchant ^ou must pay x. pence for every pound that you have
sold, for so (...) ordained. ^o said the matchaunt that ^u^l may happen to
him that has raised up such a custom, that is the (...) and dissoyall
Archebisshoppe (whom God curse) for it is lon^ ^ (...) sithe he ought to have
dyed a shameful death. Then (...) the merchant had so reuyled the
Archebysshop, the sargeaunt (...) his staff and smote the merchant upon the
head that the blood ran down. When the merchant felt him self smyten he
drew his sword and smote him so hard that he vette him do wne dead. then arose
a great noise thorough the fayer and meuyng of people in such manner that the
other sergeauntes took the merchant and led him toward the Archebysshop.
The Archebysshop would have made him dye without delay but the merchant that
was wise and well a^uised demanded the law that is to say, that he would ^e
heard in his reasons and defenses, and the justice was favorable, and vttred
it to him. Then the Archebysshop made him ^e led before the Emperor, for he
had great ^olente to make him be sudged to death. but in desiring the death of
other, he purchases his own as ye shall hear, The Archebisshop made to
present the merchant in the palace* where as was the Emperor that com maunded
the Judge to put him in chair. And the Archebisshop made an advocate
rigorously prepose against the merchant, in accusing him of the murdre that he
had done, and of the great ^u^ur^es that he had said against the reverence of
the Archebysshop. When the purpose was made against the merchant, he kneled
down before the Emperor and said unto him. ^ight high and excellent Pri^^e
if it please you of your benyg^e grace to give me audience before al your
barons I shall tell you a thing of great importance, which touches your
person. Merchant said the Emperor speak on hardely, for I give the l^^en^e.
Sir said the merchant make that the gates of your palace be shy^ to the end
that none depart from this place. Them* peroure believed the marchaunte, and
said before them all on hye, Lords barons and knights that desires and ought
to love the honor and the prouffyte of the tryumphant empire, e^tende to my
words. The time is come^ that the treason of the cursed Archebysshop that you
se here, must be known and declared openly before your reuerences. Alas sir
Emperor it is the cursed man by whom your wife has been chased from you with
wrong and sham^* And you have evil spended the good noutysshynge of him, for
he ought to keep your honor most and he is the worste, for it happeued one
day that he required the fair lady Bellyssant of love, the which is wise and
prudent refused him. And when this pe^uers traytre priest understood and
apperceyued that of the lady he should never have his pleasure, for fere that
his sin should not be known, he made you believe falls words how that she
was not loyal to you, but haba^doned her to other. The which thing saw your
excellent reverence, and of the lords here present, he lies as a falls
infidele to you, and if that for the more gretter approbacio^ ^e demand me how
I know it and that declared me the truth I tell you that I passed one day
on my way sone after that your wife was benysshed out of this country and in
ridinge through a wodde I sound these priest irreguler and apostate in arms,
and in habyte dyssymulate, against god and the ordenaunce of his voc^^yon. And
in that same wodde he had assaylled right fyersly Blandymayn that kept and
conduyted in her doleful fortune, the right noble, and fra^ke lady Bellyssant
your wife. And right so as I saw their debate I began for to c^ye. My lords
leave your debate, and then the lady which wept full piteously began for to
say unto me. Merchant my friend come and sucour me against this traitoure and
false Archebisshop that with force and against my courage. Will be^yue me o^
mine honor. Alas said the lady it is he by whom I am put in exyle, and
chased from the Emperor and his country. So I smote my horse for to separate
the^, but this same Archebysshop took right sodaynlye the flight through the
wodde, for he was to displeasaunt when he saw that he was known. Alas noble
and puis saunt Emperor, I have thought many times in my courage to declare
this matter unto you. But I du^st not speak to you, nor inform you of the
case, and if you find the contrary make me die, when the Emperor hard the
merchant say so, he began for to syghe and weep full tenderly, and after said
unto the Archebysshop. Ha false servant, I ought to praise and honor the
little. I have enforced me all my life to do the good and exalte the in
honor, and thou yeldest me dyshonoure and treason for my loyalty and good
will. Now even so ^^d help me, my heart told me ever that I should be
deceived and becra^ed by the. Alas the thing that I most doubted is happened
me. Thou have made me of all Princes the mo^ste ^^famed and unhappy. And of all
the greatest the most little and wretched. Alas said ^he Emperor (...)
^ander I ought well for to hate and disprayse my wretched life, when that by
treason I have lost the thing which I most loved, in an evil hour have I
believed thy counsel so lightly. Ha said the Archebisshoppe be not angrye with
me for nothing that the merchant tells you, for never of this dead I knew
nothing, nor am not culpable, but am innocent, and so I will hold me. Thou
lie fasly said the merchant, for of thy treason thou can not excuse the.
And if thou will say the contrary I will fight with the in a field to sustain
my quarrel. And I offer here my body to suffer death, if that I re^dre the not
before the darkenyght false traitor, either dead or vanquysshed, or thou shall
confess thy case. And to the eude that none think but that my courage
accords with my heart and sayings. I deliver the me gage, and think to
defend the well. When the Emperor Alexander saw that the wager was casten
down he said to the Archebisshop. Now is it time after justice and right that
you think for to right with the merchant, or else to knowledge the truth,
Hay sire said the Archebisshop, you ought to wit that to fight or do deeds
of arms I ought to be excused, for Iama prelate and a priest sacred, wherefore
it apperteyneth not in no wise that I should fight, for in that doing I should
false and repreue the dignite of holy church. By my fayht said the Emperor,
in this quarrel is none excutacion, but behooves you to fight with the
merchant that accuse you of treason, and it that ye will not do it. I hold you
for culpable of ye deed. Of these words was the Archebysshop much affrayde,
for he s^ we well that he must needs fight, and said to the Em perour.
Redoubted sir when you will that I prove with my body that I am innocent of
this cause, I shall be ready, how well that it is against mine estate, in
excusing him, but little auayled his speech and his excu sacions, for the
Emperor commanded that the Ar chebysshop should be kept in such wise, that
he might have him at his pleasure every time that he should ask for him. And
commanded also that the merchant should be taken and honestly treated. Then
the Empe roure assembled his counsayll, and the day was determined, the field
taken, and the tyltes made, for the merchant and the Archebisshop to fight in.
In the which battayll God that is ryghtfull Judge, showed before every body
that treason and falshode returned ever to their masters, as you shall here.

How the Emperor Alexander by the counsayll of the most wisest, sent for
the king Pepyn to be at the day of battle, for to here the truth. Cap. viii.


AFter that the day was determined, and the field commanded to be prepared,
the lystes made, there came tidinges to the Emperor that king Pepyn was come
to Rome to aid and comfort the pope against the false infideles, enemies of
our holy faith. And tho it was advised by the counsel of the most discrete
of his palais, that they should go fetch king Pepyn, to the end that he might
be present at the forsaid day of battle, for the more honester excusation of
the Emperor. And that he might se and know clearly that by evil treason he
had separed his wife out of his company, or that by good right and good quarrel
he had expulsed her. To this counsayll he accorded, and sent with all diligence
diverse messengers to Rome, to whom he gave letters to bear to king Pepyn,
that was at yt time in Rome, defendyng our holy faith against the infideles,
as I have told you before. The messengers b^ne departed from Constantinoble,
and have done so much by water and by land that they are come to Rome to
ward the king Pepyn, whom they salued as it apperteyneth unto such a king,
and after said unto him. Right redoubted lord and excellent king, we present
you these letters from the puyssaunt Emperor of Constantinoble our lord
wherefore behold the continue of the same, and the^upon please it your majesty
ryall to give us an answer. The king Pepyntoke the letters anon, and opened
the^, and beheld them. And after that he had read them, he spoke on high
before al his barons and said. Lords by god almighty here is tidings of great
admiracion. Themperoure Alexander sends me word that my sister Bellyssant
that I had given him to wife, has been put by him in exi se wrongfully,
through a false Archebisshop that has given him to understand a lie, the
which of his deed much detestable, is accused by a merchant that in this
quarrel will live and dye, in fighting with the Ar chebysshop in a field
before all the world. And that this may be the more certain the forsaid
merchant as a hardy man, and well assured of this deed, for to pu^sue it with
the aid of God, with good and loyal quite in having sted fast confidence in
god, has casten and delivered his wager against the false traitor ye
Archebisshop. Now it is so that the day that they shall fight together is
determined, where as I may know for a certaynte whether my sister Bellyssant is
culpa ble of the crime that is put upon her or not. And if it be so that the
Emperor has unjustly done het this dishonor. I swear you by mine oath
ryall that I shall take vengeance on him. For the great offense that he has
committed, can never be recompensed. Then commanded the king Pepyn that all
they of his court were ready for to accompany him unto Constanty noble, for he
would be there at ye day of the enterprise made between the merchant and the
Archebysshop, so they made all things ready as the king had commanded. Pepin
departed from Rome with a much fair company, and so long has he ryden yt he
is come to the sea, and mounted into the galees, and have done so much that
they are aryued at Constantinoble. And when the Em perour knew the coming of
king Pepyn, he commau^ ded to tynge all the belles of the city, and that they
should make Joye through the city. Every body was glad of the coming of king
Pepyn. Themperoure light on horsbacke right sumptuously^ accompanied, and
issued out of the cite to mere with him. But also soon as he saw the king
Pepyn he remembered Bellyssant and began to weep and to syghe so pyteously, that
he coud speak never a word but weep, and make great lamentacions with heart and
mouth to anguysshously. The king Pepyn that had the courage fyerse and
proud, cared not for his wepinge. He made semblaunt that he had no pity nor
compassion on him for all his weping, but said unto him in this manner. Emperor
leave your weeping, and discomforce you not so much if that you have lost my
sister Bellyssa^t. For who that leseth a harlot ought not to be dismayed. And
sith that my sister is such one, have no fere of her, thought nor
displeasaunce, H^ said the Emperor for god say not such words of your
sister, for I believe steadfastly that there is al honest in her, and loyalte.
And yt with wrong and against right I have expulsed her from me. By my faith
said the king Pepyn, of as much more ought you to be blamed and every body
may know the great sapience that remains in you. When that by one evil
exhortacyon you have so diligently banisshed my sister from you as a common
harlot, with so great shame. And know that I am little beholden unto him that
has done such shame and dishonor unto my person, and to all the blood
ryall of France. When the Emperor Alexander heard and understood the words,
and courage of king Pepyn, he was much sorrowful in his heart and answered
symply unto the king Pepyn again, and said. Alas sir king Pepyn do not move
your self in Ire, but molify a little your courage, for by the pleasure of god
almighty ye troth shall be known Emperor said the king Pepyn to long have
you carried. For it is a compu saying, that to late it is for to shyt the stable
door, when the horse is lost. Now is my sister Bellyssant gone in exyle
poorly arrayed I wot not whether, wherefore my heart ought well to be sorry,
wha^ yt for you I must lose her, for I am right certain that I shall never se
her. Alas one should be well ware co give so hastily Judgment, for one may do an
evil thing, whereby he may repent him all at leyser, and you know well that
renown is dear, For wha^ it is lost be it by right or by wrong, it is late
recoueringe of it. Lyttel have you preysed the honor of my person, when that
without any deliberacion, or consideracion that diverse such things have be
fallen, and does by envy (that ye have exyled my sister) In saying these
words, the Emperor and king Pepyn entered into Constantinoble with much
great honor. And when they were within the city the Emperor would have made
king Pepyn and his me^ lodge within his palace much honorably. But king
Pepyn would not enter, but made lodge his men round about him in the cite. And
would not receive of them pe^ our neither gifts nor presents at all, how well
that he presented him diverse things, as well vytayle as rich tapissery and
iewelles. Much was the king* Pepyn in great thought for his sister Bellissant
for all they of the cite affermed him that she was the best lady that ever
was found* and that by treason and unjust quarrel she was accused and
banisshed.

How the Merchant and the Archebysshop fought together for to clear the lady
Bellyssant, and how the Merchant overcame him. Cap. ix.


ALso soon as the day was comen that the merchant and the Archebysshop
should fight together in the field, the Emperor commanded that they should
be brought before him, and when they were before him he ^ad them make them ready
to the field, and fynisshe their enterprise. The knights of the Archebysshops
country, went and armed him sumptuously. And the Emperor commanded that the
merchant should be armed in his presence, even as his propre person* And
before that he was armed The Emperor made him knight and promised him cities to
w^es and castelles and great possessions if he might vanquishe the
Archebysshop. and when the two champions were armed, and their blasons hanged
at their necks, their horses were brought to them, and they mounted on the^ to
go to the field. Then the Emperor commanded the knights and sargeauntes that
they should convey the Archebisshop of the place, and that they should take
good kep^ unto him and this he charged them on their lives, to the end that he
might not flee for he was subtle and caucelous. The merchant* was mounted
upon his horse well armed in all places; and a strong sword ^^rde^ about him, so
he ^od^ toward the field and entered the first therein. After him came so
great a multitude of folk out of Constantinoble, that they could not be
no^bred. And it was not long after but that the Archebysshop entered into the
field strongly accompanied* For he was much rich and of a noble nation.
There was ye king Pepin that beheld the merchant gladly, and with good
heart, saying. My friend God give the grace to have victory against the false
man. For by ye faith of my body, if that the Archebisshop be vanquished to day
by the, and that I may know the cr^uthe of my sister, Bellyssant, I shall
reward the so highly that in all my court thou shall be the greatest. Sir
said the merchant I than^e you. And know you for certainte that or it be
night I shall make him confess the trea son by the leave of God, so he give the
grace, to whom I command the* and (...) ^e (...) form the king there (...) a
heraute and m^de them swear both as it is the custom* and after they made to
avoid y^ field cle^^e of all the people that stood within, and left the two
champions therein. Now be they upon the renges, and they that had the charge of
the field brought them their speres the which they took and smote their
horses with ye spores, and came together also fast as they might rynne,
hyttyng each other so merueylously, that they broke their speres to their
hands, and passed forth to ^etche their course. And when they were at the end
of the field, they returned the one upon the other in contynent with their
swords in their hands, and joined them together fyersly, in geuyng each other
so peysaunt strokes that they smote into ye field great quarters of their
sheldes. When the Archebisshop saw that the merchant assailed him so asprely,
he thought that he would beat of unto night. For such was the law^ in those
days, that if one man app^led another and defied him in battayll, it was
behouefull to him for to vaynquysshe him before the sone setting, or he should
be hanged. wherefore the Archebysshop thought to keep himself steadfast. And the
merchant that knew well the custom, did enforce him the more to do feats
of arms against the Archebysshop, that followed him nere. And so much the
merchant appressed him with strokes, that with one stroke that he gave him he
smote of one of his ears: and a great piece of the haubergon that was of fine
stele. And ye stroke was so impetious that the merchants sword fell from
him. when the false Archebysshop saw that the merchant was with out weapon:
he smote his horse with a foyne in such wise, that he smote out one of his
eyes. And the horse that felt himself hurt, ran and lepte so in the u^^lde
that he cast the merchant down and fortune was so peruers to him that his
foot stacke fast in the styrope. And the horse that would not rest trayled
him so impecuously^ that all they of the congregation were heavy and sorrowful,
and said to themself that they had no more trust in the merchant. And when
the king saw him in such distress, and peril, he began for to weep much
piteously in saying to himself. Alas alas merchant now se I well evidently
that thy days been finyshed for this world. Alas now may I know manifestly
and for certain that my sister is culpable of ye dead that she had been
charged with. And that God will show euydently to all that with good right the
Emperor has expulsed her from him. If she had been buried also soon as
she had been christened, I had been well happy, and borne in a good hour, for
by her is the noble blood of France put to a great shame, And even so God
help me if that I held her now I should make her die a villainous death.
Many profounde syghes made the good king Pepin. And the Archebisshop with all
his puissau^ce might not make his horse approach the merchant, the which
seemed well to be a thing miraculous. Now the merchant was so trailed through
the field that his horse foundred and fell down. And when ye^ horse was down
ye merchant rose up that was valiant and hardy. And when the Archebisshop
perceived the merchant that was risen, he came renning to him and gave him two
or three strokes that the merchant was all astonyed therewith. So he withdrewe
him back a li^ie for to take his brethe and after he auaunced him subtylly,
and with a fyerse courage he smote the Archebysshop in such manner that his
sword fell out of his hand. And wounded him so through his harneis that the
blood ran unto the earth The Archebysshop put his heart and his force for to be
avenged, and broched his horse to run on the merchant But he was subtle and
drew a great poynted knyfe, and cast it against the Archebysshoppes horse, and
smote him in the body so rudely that the horse began for to lepe and flynge,
wherefore the Archebisshop was in to great danger to fall down. And with the
leping of the horse he lost his shield. And the marchaunte cast it out of the
field, to the end that he should not help him self no more wythall. And when
he had done so, he went and smote his horse in the belly with his sword, so
that the Archebysshop and the horse fell unto the earth, the which rose up in
contynent, but the merchant was diligente and gave him so great a stroke that
he smote him down platte to the erath, and than he lepte upon him, and pulled
of his helm to have smytten of his head. When the Archebysshop saw him in
this danger, he was full of treason, and said to the merchant Alas friend I
beseech the that thou will have pity on me, and give me time and space for to
confess me, to the end that my soul be not in danger, for to the I plde me
as vanquysshed and culpable. When the merchant herd the Archebysshop speak so,
he was curteys and debonayre, and trusted the fair words of the Archebysshop
and let him rise. Wha^ the false priest was upon his fete, he had neither will
nor desire to confess him, but took the merchant anon in his arms and threw
him down, and lepte upon him suyenge by great Ire. Merchant thou shalt never
escape my hands without vylaynous death, if that thou accord not unto a thing
that I shall command the. Ha said the merchant that saw himself betrayed.
Archebysshop I se and know well I am in your mercy and that with me ye may do
your pleasure. Wherefore I pray you that ye will tell me what thing it is that ye
will I do And I shall accomplysshe it, so that it please you for to ^aue my
life. Merchant said the archebysshop this shalt thou do. I will that before
the Emperor, and the king Pepyn thou testify openly, that with wrong and
against right thou haste accused me falslye, and by envy. And of this deed
discharge me, and shall take the charge by such a covenant that if thou will
do it, I swear and promise the to save the fro death, and make thy peace
toward the Emperor, and the king Pepyn. And more over I swear unto the by
the faith of gentylnesse and by the order of preesthode, to give the a nece of
mine in marriage, the which is rich fair and pleasant. Than may thou say
that there was never none in thy lignage so happy, nor so rich. And therefore
auyse the if thou will do it after this manner, and ches^ whether thou will live
or dye, for thou may no^ escape by none other way with thy life. Incontinent
as the merchant herd the Archebysshop speak so, he was much sorrowful, and not
without a cause, he reclaymed both god and our lady mekely to keep him from
death and save his right. And than he answered in this mauer Sir Archebysshop
your reason is good and I am ready to accoplysshe it, and obey you, in aff^enge
me that you will keep your promise. In me said the Archebysshop ye shall find no
fault. Now in gods name said the marchaunte go do to to the Emperor, and I
shall dysaccuse you of the great injury* that I have preposed against you, it is
well said now rise up and you shall come with me. At these words the merchant
rose up* and when he was up he recorden the treason that the Archebysshop had
done him, fayninge that he would have confessed him, as I have made mention
here before, wherefore he took courage to him, and thought to serve him with
the same mese, for it is said comnenly the treason will ever return to his
master again. Tha^ he took the Archebysshop in his arms with so great
courage that anon he had thrown him under him, and than said to him.
Archebysshop you have taught me to play this pagent, wherefore think now to
confess you to me, for ye shall have none other confessor but me. Yet thought
the false Archebysshop on diverse cauillacions, and with sweet words would have
deceived the merchant again. But the merchant never trusted him more, nor
gave him no more time nor space to rise up, but anon with great diligence put
out both his eyes and gave him so many strokes that he had no strength to
defend him. And when the marchaunte saw that he was domynatour, and had the
over hand he rose up and let him lie. And called the kepers of the field, and
said to them. Lords here may you se if that I have done my deuoyre against the
Archebisshop, and if he be vaynquysshed. you se that I put him in such estate
that when it seems me good I may slay him or kill him. Wherefore I pray you
that it will please you to make the Emperor, and the king Pepyn to come
hither with their lords, for to here the confession of the Archebysshop, and
to here that with unjust quarrel he has taken battle against me. Than went
they to fetch to the field the Emperor Alexander, and the king Pepyn, the
which came accompanied with many notable barons to the place where as the
Archebysshop was sorrowful and confounded. And the Emperor demands him the
truth of the matter. And the false Archebisshop knowledged before them all the
deed, and told them all the manner, and how that with wrong he had spoken
against the lady Bellyssant, and without any cause had made her be put in exile
by tre^son and falshode. Alas chynke how many pyteous tee^es there was shed
on all sides, and specially of the Emperor, for his cries and lamentacions
were so pyteous, that all they that were about him wept bytterly, and made
great sorrow. And if the Emperor demeaned great dole, demand not if that the
king Pepyn at that time was tryste and sorrowful. Alas it was not without a
cause that they demeaned such sorrow, when they saw and knew that by to
light believing, and false treason they had lost the excelle^ lady Bellyssant
king Pepyns sister and wife unto the Emperor And there was between the
Emperor Alexander and the king Pepyn Joye in dystresse by two parties
con^oyned. Joye to the king Pepyn that of his sister knew the loyalte. Doloure
and displeasaunce to the Emperor that of the dead found himself culpable.
Because that then he knew that with wrong he had chaced her from him. And
after all the lamentacions, and the confession and treason of the Archebysshop
hard. The Emper^pre assembled his counsayll for to Judge what death the
Archebysshop should die of and it was established that he should be boiled in
^yle all quick, and so it was done. After the which judgment every body
withdrewe them unto their demayne and dwelling place. And when the king Pepyn
had withdrawn him into his lodgyng, the Emperor dole^t and sorrowful,
syghyng profoundly came toward him, and kneled down before him and said all
weeping. Alas sir I have committed against you a crime to detestable, and
dishonest. Now se I clearly my miserable fau^te, and knows that by my
folyshnes and light creaunce I am and have been cause to put your sister in
exyle, and to perdiccion, of the which thing I require you of pardon, and
before you I present me as culpable abydyng your grace. And in knowledgyng of
my false villanye, and for satisfaction and a mendes I yield and put into your
hands the Empire of Greece, that justly and of good right appertains to me.
For I require ^o have no more the name of an Emperor, nor of a king as long
as I shall live upon the earth, but will as a servant in all things obey you
for I have well deserved it. When the king Pepyn understood the good will, and
the great humilite of the Emperor, he took him up and pardoned him before at
his lords. And after that their peace was made by a common accord they
delybe^ed between them for to send messengers into every country to search
the noble lady Bellyssant. After the which things, the king Pepyn took leave of
the Emperor for to return into France.

How the king Pepyn took leave of the Emperor, and departed from
Co^stantinoble for to go into France. And how he went afterward to Rome
against the Sarasyns that had taken the city. Capitulo. x.


How king Pepyn departed from Constantynoble after the things aforesaid. And
so much he wen^ by water and land that he arrived in France, and went unto
Orleau^ce for to refreshe him. For gladly he was there because of the great
fore^^es that were about it, wherefore he commanded that for his welcome home*
they should hold table round, and so it was done. And when it came to the
hour of the full dinner, the squire that had nourysshed Ualentyne took him by
the hand and presented him before the king, in saying to him. Sir ^o here the
poor orphelyn that your majesty found in the forest of Orleaunce, the which
you gave me for to nouryshe and keep now have ^ nouryshed him unto this
present time, notat mine expe^ces but at yours. Wherefore I beseech your
excellent majesty that ye will have remembrance of him, for he will become
great within a while, and therefore it is time to think theton And when he had
heard the squiec speak he called the child Ualentyne and took him by the
hand and he saw him so wise and well thought in manners and co^ dicions, that
at the same hour he gave him all the cups, pottes, and goblettes, and the
other vessels yt at that time was made ready for to serve ye court. And then
the king said before them all in the court, I will that Ualentyne be derely
kept. And for the great beau tie and honor of his person, the king would
that ye young child Ualentine, which was at that time but twelve year old,
should be nourished with his dough ter Eglantine, which was so fair, so wise,
and so well endoctrined, that all the world spoke good and honor of her. The
two children were nourished together, and loved well each other with love just
and loyal, in such wise that the one could not be merry without the other. And
principally Eglantyne ye kings daughter, seeing and consydering the prudence of
Ualentyne, she was so esprysed with his love in all honor, that without him
she might neither have solace nor recreacion. Ualentyne became great and of
fair stature, in althinges well endoctrined. He loved much horse and harne^s,
and found himself gladly at Justyng. And there as he went he bare away the
pryte and the honor. Than the king seeing his valiantness and good will, he
gave him horses and hatneis lands, tents, a great possessions. And it was not
long after but that there was great brute of him in the court, whera^ many
had great envy diverse times and oftentimes said to him in reproach that he was
but a fundelynge, and a poorechyld, without knowing any of his friends that
might aid him. For the which words Ualentyne wept full of^e. And when the
fair Eglantyne saw him angered the would weep full tenderly, and with all her
might comfort him. Ualentyne bate him so meke and so gentle in king Pepyns
coutte, that he was beloved of lords, ladies, knights, and squyers, and every
body said good and honor by him. And his brother Orson is within the forest,
toughe and covered with here as a bear, ledynge a wild bestes life as it is
madt mention of before and as in this chapter it shall be declated unto you. For
know that soon after that the king was at Orleaunce there came a messenger
unto him that was sent from the pope. The which demanded help and socoure
against the paynyms enemies of our holy faith that had taken the cite of Rome.
Wha^ king Pepyn understood that the Satas^^s was with in Rome, he made all
diligence to prepayre his host, Of the which the child Ualentyne was made
chief and pryncypall governor. When Eglantyne knew that Ualentyne did goo,
she was much sorrowful, as she that loved him best of any creature. The fair
Eglantyne sent for him secretly to come and speak with her. And wha^ he was
come^ she said unto him sighing full tenderly. Alas Ualentyne my love, now se I
well that I shall have no more joy and consolacion, when that ye will depart for
to go unto battle. Alas ye are wine only love, my comfort, and the refuge of
my pleasaunce. Now would to God that I had neither kynne nor friend in the
world, that would let me to do my^ will. For right so God help me I would
never have other in marriage but you* and than should ye be king of France,
and I Queen. A madame said valentyne Leave your imaginacion, and have not your
heart so ardaunt on me. You know that I am a poor foundlyng that your rather
has nouryshed for gods sake and am in no manner a man for to have you, nor
the poorest damoysell that is with you, think else where and do so that ye may
show of what blood ye becomen of. And to god I command you the which have you
always in his keeping* At these words departed Ualentyne and left the fair
Eglantyne dolence and sorrowful for his departing. The king and his hooste were
ready for to mount on horsback, and departed from Orleaunce to go to Rome. Than
the king Pepyn call led his lords and barons of his court, and said to them
Lords you know that all the world makes mencyou of a wild man the which is
in this forest, wherefore I have great will and affec^ion to see him taken or I
go any farther. To these words consented the lords and barons of his court.
The chase was ordained and they entered in to the wodde. They took diverse wild
^eestes, but for to find Orson every body was a fer^ save Ualentine that was
his brother but he wiste nothing, the which desired to fight with him. So long
they went through the wodde, that the King Pepin arrived before the pit
obscure and tenebrous, where as Orson healde him. And when he saw the King he
issued out suddenly and ran against him, so he took him in his nails the
which were right great and cast him to the earth right boystously. And the
king that wend to have dyed cried tight high for socour, so there came to him
a valiant knight, when he saw the wild man that would have straungled the
king he drew his swer^e for to have ronue upon him. But when Orson saw the
naked swerd finmbing, he left the king and ran to the knight and took him
in his arms and held him so hard that he threw down both horse and man. Than
the horse gate up that was sore afraid and ran through the forest. And Orson
held the knight the which with his ^^arp nails stran gled him, and pyteouslye
pulled him in pyeces. when the king came to his men that wet thereby, he recoun
ced to them the great danger that he had been in* and the piteous death of the
knighte, of the which tidinges they wet much a^alhed. Than they put them
togide^ and went toward the cave of Orson for to take him and s^e him. They
found the knight, but they saw not Orson, for it pleased not god that he should
be conque red, save of his brother Ualentiue. the which conquered him as you
shall here afterward. And when the king saw that he might not have the wild
man, he left him and wence on his vyage to Rome. The bataylles were renged,
and the Oryflambe of France war given to bear a valiant prince that was named
Myllon Dangler, wise and of right good conduyte. There was Getuays and Sampso^
his brother that were va lyaunt knighres, and diverse other dukes earls and ba
rons. Now they have ryden so much that they are co men unto Rome and have
demanded battle, and the manner of the sarasins and it was told them how an
ad myrall had taken Rome, and put many men to death, and destroyed. And had
undone the churches and made temples for ydolles. And there constrained the
Pope, cardynalles, archebisshoppes, and bisshoppes to serve them after the
guyse of their law cursed and dampna ble and when king Pepyn understood these
tidings, he was much sorrowful for the distress that the christen men
werein. He approached nere the city of Rome and made to assemble his host, and
put his men of arms in arraye, and ordained his battayles. For his heart was
entyerly set for to maynteyne the christen faith* the which I shall recyte
unto you here after following.

How king Pepyn beseged Rome. And how Ualentyne Justed with the Admyrall and
slew him, by whose prudence the city was gotten again. Capitulo. xi.


AFter that the king Pepyn had assyeged ye cytee of Rome / he called his
ba^ans and knights and said to them in this wise. Lords you know euydently
that this mastyf Admyrall / and enemy of our holy faith has put many valiant
christian men unto death / and vyllauyed the church Romayne / where as our lord
Jesu christ was served so devoutly and honored / the which ought for to
styre us unto compassyon and moderly pity. And therefore I am purposed by the
help of Jhesu christ my creator / in whom is my trust / for to fight and
expel the paynyms and sarazyns out of the cite of Rome / and of all the
country about it / wherefore advise you which of you will bear a letter / of
dyffyenge unto the for said Admyrall in my name. For I will deliver and give
unto him a Journeye of battle. And will fight with him in exaltinge and
susteynyng our faith unto the death. When king Pepyn had spoken thus / there
was none that would present them for to answer / save Ualentyne that stepte
forth before the king and spoke before them all saying. Sir if it please you
to give me license I shyl undertake the message / and shall speak before all the
panyms / and their fyerse Admyrall / in such manner that with the help of god
/ and of his sweet mother / ye shall know that I have done your message to your
profit and mine honor. Of the good will / and valiant courage of Ualentyne
the king was right Joyous / and all they of the court meruaylled thereat. Than
the king made a secretary to come / which he made to write a letter of
dyffyaunce, and after gave it to Ualentyne for to bear unto the Admyrall panym.
And Ualentyne mounted on horsbacke and took leave of the king and of them of
the court. And than he put him self on the way, in putting him in the guard
and kepinge of our lord Jesu christ and came unto Rome. And it is not to be
demanded if yt he was well looked on, for he behaved him so well on horsbacke
and in arms, that there was none that saw him but that they took great
pleasure. He went toward the palace where as ye Admyrall was in his halles
tryumphauntly in great pompes. Ualentyne ent^ed in, and came before the
Admyrall and salued him in this manner Jhesus that was borne of the vyrgyn Mary,
and that for us all suffered death and passyo^ save from evil encombrau^ce the
noble and puyssaunte king Pepyn, And mahommet save ye and socoure, the
redoubted Admyrall even as I would. when Ualentyne had spoken thus the Admyral
rose up, and as fyerse and proud said unto him. Messenger Ualentyne return
the, to the end that I se thee no more. And tell unto king Pepyn that of
Jesus holds the law, that he believe on mahommet, and that he renounce his
believe for evermore or know for a certaynte that Iam purposed for to put him
unto death, and to dystroye all his lands. Now go thy way messenger, and
make before me no more abiding. For to here thy word my heart can not suffer.
Great folly have thou enterprysed, wha^ that so fyersly thou art entered in to
my palace for to declare such a thing before my high majesty. Now know for a
certain that if I knew that thou did it by pride or presumpcyon, and that
thou haste enterprysed this thing by mockery, you should never return unto
king Pepyn. when Ualentyne herd the fyerse words of the Admyrall, he was
much ferefull, and not with out a cause. For he was full nere the death / if
that our Lord had not preserved him he was so inspyred of god that he gave him
an answer solytarye / as well for the life of the body / as for* the life of
the soul. And as wise and well endoctrined to give an answer spoke in this
manner wise. Alas right mighty and hit Emperor do not thyncke in your
ymaginacyon that by pride / or presumpcyon I am comen before your magnyfycence.
For sir when you shall know the manner, and the deed how I am comen / you will
be a meruaylled. Tell us how thou art comen and all the deed, for even so
mahommet help me but I shall take pleasure and conso lacyon to here the recite
thine enterprise, and multeply thy courage in all goodness. Than spoke Ualentine
and said. Sir Admyrall it is true and certain that by falls and dysloyall envy
I have been accused to the king Pepyn and they have told him that for the
great fere and dred^ that I had to go to war I would have returned into
France. For the which cause the king Pepyn has me in great indignacion. And
one morrow he made me to be taken for to smite of my heed. when I saw my self
in this danger, for to length my life I did auaunt me before them all of a
great folly. For I swore before them of the court that I should come toward
you, for to defye you and all your ba^ons on king Pepyns behalf. And more
over I did vaunte me that at my departing I should demand you three strokes
with a spear upon your bodi that is so valiau^t and so well renowned, for to win pryse and honor wherefore I require you that ye accord me this thing,
for otherwise I dare not return before the king Pepyn, lest he make me dye.
Sone said the Admyral by mahommet the right puyssaunt, you shall not be
refused, but at this same hour I vttre to you ye Justes. And to the end that
ye frensshmen that has assyeged this cite may se your hardynes, I shall make
the Justynge place to be made* ready and ordained without the cite. Gramercy
than said Ualentyne, that fell down for to kiss the fete of the Admyrall, in
token of humylyte and obeysaunce. But it is said in a common proverb, that they
do the shoo often of, whom of they would cut of the foot. Ualentyne was
renowned in the court of the Admyrall, and ever he required god that he would
do him so much that he might know and wit from when she was comen, and who
was his fader and his mother. And as he was in that great thought, ye admyrall
said unto him. Fair sone me think you are right heavy and thoughfull. It is
true sir said Ualentyne, and not without a cause. For I have to great fere that
I shall be slain by you in the Justes. Wherefore I pray you humbly that it
will please you to make me have a priest that may give me absolucyon of my
sins. Than the Admyrall commanded that they shol de fetch him a priest. And
when he was comen, he gave him unto Ualentyne in saying to him. Now have and
confess you of all your confessyons, I would not give you a button. Ualentyne
took ye priest and drew him aside. And when they were together Ualentyne said
unto him. Alas sir you are a christian priest, and ought amongst all other to
have will and courage to keep and defend our holy faith, wherefore harken and
understand that I shall tell you I pray you with all my heart, for it is a
thing the which is right chargea ble. It is true that I must fight todaye
with the false Admyrall that is so great an enmye to our faith. Now know I
well that sarasyns and paynyms will issue out of the cite for to se ye Justynge
that is determined without the walls of the cite. Wherefore I shall tell you
what in shall do, you shall aduertyse the christian men that is in the cite that
none of them issue out: but keep them in harneys without any noise. And when yt
paynyms shall be without the cite they shall take ye gardes of the gates, in
such manner that when ye sarazins would enter in to the cite, that you shytte
the gates against them. And bydde the christian men send king Pepyn word of
this fayte, and that he keep his men in arms, to the end that when it shall
be time that he come rennynge upon the sarazyns, and they of the cite shall
assayll them on the other side. And by this mean they shall be slain and
vaynquysshed to day. And when Ualentyne had told this to the priest he
confessed him, and after his confession the priest departed, and went his
way, and commanded him to god. Than the Admyral made Ualentyne to be led in
to his chamber for to dyne and take his refeccyon. And commanded that he should
be also honorably se^^yd as his person Ualentyne was set at the table with
diverse other barons. Much could he behave him honestly before them all. when
the dyuer was done the Admyrall called to him a neuewe of his, that was called
Salatas. And co^ maunded him for to arm Ualentyne also well as his propre
person. And did charge his said neue we that he should deliver unto Ualentyne
ye best horse yt might befounde in all his court. And when ye Admyrall had
spoken so to his new, he entered in to the halle prepared, and there he was
armed by paynyms expert in arms. And Salatas took valentyne and led him in
to afayre halle, and than he made to be brought before him much harneis, and
with the best that he could find he made valentyne be armed as the
Admyrall his uncle had commanded him. And when he was armed he lepte upon a
mighty stead, and the Admyrall issued out of his place mounted, and in arms
right triumphantly. Than they rode both two toward the chief gate of Rome.
For on that side King Pepyn had laid the siege. And when they were in the
field valen tine took his shield and hanged it about his neck, in the which
was a heart ongled and dented with sable, in a field of s^luer, and beside that
heart was a tree, the which arms did signifye that he was found in the
forest. And King Pepim had given him those same arms. Then came the
Frenshmenne upon the renges, whereof valentine was right Joyous. The cry was so
great through the cite of Rome that all the Pa^^^nes issued out for to se the
Justes. And the christenmen that were within the city armed them also secretly
as they might, and took all the gardes of the gates* in such wise that none
might enter in. And King Pepyn advertised of this case* kept all his menn^ in
arms for to socoure the noble valentyne at his neade. So the hour was comen
that the Justes should begin, and than they fetched their co^rs and couched
their speres / and ran the one against the other so impetuously yt their
speres all to sheuered. Than they returned for the second spear. And Ualentyne
fierle and hardy ran against the Admyrall, and smote him by such a manner that
the spear perced his body throughout / and than the admyrall fell down deed in
the field / making a great cry when the paynyms saw their Admyrall deed, and
dyscomfyte, they ran upon Ualentyne for to have put him to death. But
valentyne with a hardy courage, smote his horse with the sporres, and with his
sword of arms he did so great dedys of arms that he passed the paynyms, and
slew and wounded many. Than came king Pepyn and his host and entered in to
the battle, the which was so asprely assailed of the sarasyns, that he was
smyten down to the ground. But valentyne came theder the which socoured him
so that he horsed him again. And when he was mounted he said unto valentyne.
Child you have saved my life, but and it please god it shall be rewarded the.
At that time rose a great cry on both parties, and ye battle was so fyerse
and strong that the paynyms were constrained to recule abacke. The christian men
that were in the cite issued out upon them the which had planted the
standards and baners of king Pepyn upon the walls, whereof the paynyms were
sore abashed, and meruaylled. They were assailed also well of ye kings host,
as of them of yt cite, so that shamefully and myserably they fynysshed their
days. In that battle remained deed upon the field ten thousand paynyms, and
all through ye enterprise and valyauntnes of valentyn, the which bare him so
rygorously that day the he slew four horses under him. And thus through his
prowess ye cite was won again. For the which there was made great Joye and
mirth through all crystendom and pryncypally in ye cite of rome, and in those
parties nere it, every body cried mountioye to the king Pepyn of France. He
was praised so of every body, yt by the consent of the people he was sacred by
the pope Empeorure crowned. Much well he governed and augmented the church in
his time. He did egall Justyce unto every body, so that all folks said good
of him. In this time was pope Clement the fourth of that name, that consacred
king Pepyn Emperor.

How Haufray and Henry had envy at Ualentyne because that the king loved him
so well. Ca. xii.


AFter that the king Pepyn by the grace of god, and by the strength of arms
had chaced the infideles and enemies of our faith out of the parties Romans,
he came unto Orleaunce, and there he found the queen Berthe his wife that
received him which all the Joye and tryumphe that might be made, with her little
sone Charlemayne, and her excellent daughter Eglantyne. The which was right
glad and Joyous / because that Ualentyne was comen again safe and sound, So
she sotourned not long but that she sent for him and he came with a good
will. Than when the lady sa we him, she salued him amyably saying. Ualentyne my
love ye be hertely welcome well ought you to be de rely kept and honored, for
it is said that above all other ye have won vyctorye and triumph upon the
paynyms that held Rome in their subiectyon. A madame said Ualentyne to god be
the lauds and prai^^^ges, every body says what they list. And as for me I
have done nothing that is worthy praise. And more over the king your fader
has done me so much good and honor, that in my life I can not deserve to
what service someuer I do him. And in saying these words Haufray and henry
esprysed with envy did enter in to the chamber of Eglantyne. And when Haufray
and Henry were entered they said unto him. Uale^tyne what come you here to do in
the chamber of our sister that apperteyneth not to you, to much ye show
yourselfe folysshe and hardy for to enter in to her chamber ryall, for you are
but a begyler, and none can know what you are, nor from whens ye becomen.
Wherefore beware that ye be not founden no more with her, lest that evil come
to you. Ualentyne said unto Haufray, of your sister have no doubt, for sith
that I was borne I never thought toward her thing, save all good and honor.
If that I be poor, and that they know not what I am, yet would I not do nor
think thing that should be against the maiestery all. And to the end that
you have no doubt that your sister Egla^tyne shall have by me any blame, at
this same hour I promise you that I shall never enter in to her chamber
again. At these words departed Ualentine out of the chamber, and Eglantyne
abode weeping al alone much tenderly. Ualentyne mounted into the palace for to
serve the king which was set al ready. There was haufray and Henry, and the duke
Millon dangler that served the king at table with Ualentyne. And when he was
risen he called Ualentyne, and said heryng them all. Lords here is Ualentyne
that has well and truly served me, and socoured in my necessitees, to the
end that each of you may know it and for the good services that he has done
me, in abiding till better come I give him the Erldom of Clermont in ^u^rgne
Sir said Uale^tine god yield it you, for ye do me more honor and goodness than
I have deserved. To hear such words were Haufraye and Henrye to sorrowful
wherefore each said to other. This same foundelynge which god course is in the
grace of the king, so that if we find not remedy / he shall be unes cause of
our great dommage. For the king has no children but us, and the little
Charlemayne, of whom we may do our will after the death of our father, but it
is of certayntye that Ualentyne will supporte him and hold him against us.
Wherefore we must find the manner to put him in the indignacion of the king,
and to purchase his death for otherwise we can not avenge us. And than may we
at our own pleasure gouernethe realm without contradyecyon. Than spoke
Haufray and said, Brother Henry I have found the manner whereby the false boy
shall be deceived and betrayed. I shall tell you how, we shall make the king
our fader to understand that he has vyoled our sister, and that we have
found him in naked bed with her. And when ye king shall know this I am
certain that he will make him dye shamefully It is well said answered Henry, let
it be done as you have said, and so shall we be au^uged. In this wise abode
they thinking and imagining always treason against Ualentine for they coueyted
his death right sore. And valentin serves the king so debonayrly, that the
king above all other desired him in his company. For every day he mayntey^ed
him from well to better, in prayenge god that he would give him know ledge of
the place that he was extraught of, And Orson his brother is in the forest
which is so much fered and redoubted that none durst approach nere the wodde
for him. The complayntes came unto ye king every day from one all parts. So
it, happened day that a poor man came unto the king all wounded and blody,
and said to him. Sir I complain me to you of the wild man. For even so as I
and my wife passed through ye forest berynge breed, wine, and other vytaylles,
ye wild man came and took al from us and ete it, and more oner he took my
wife and did twyes his will with her. Now tell me said the king, whether art
thou soryer for thy vytaylles, or for thy wife. By my faith sir said the good
man, of my wife I am much more dyspleasaunt. Thou have right said the king.
Now go to my treasourer and set prise on thy loss, for it shall be re^ored
the. After the king called his barons to take advise on Orson. So they aduysed
among them that the king should make erye al about, that who might take ye
wild man quycke or deed, he should have a. M. mark of fine gold. So the
counsayl was holden and the cry publysshed. And theder came many knights of
all estates for to take Orson and the pryse conquer Than the king Pepyn
being in his palace with diverse great lords and noble barons that of this
matter spoke and made great admeracions among them self. Among the which
lords and barons Haufraye that was mortal enemy of Ualentine began for to
say thus. Syrhere is Ualetyne that you have nourysshed and put in great
honor, which has required our sister Eglantine of love dysordinate, and
of great dishonor. And because that I am well informed of this case, for to
se what he can do, and for to she we his valyauntnes, let him go seek the wild
man that is so dread and you shall give him Eglantyne, so shall his will be
accomplysshed on all sides. Haufray said the king thy speech is not gracyous,
but is full of envy. For if so be that Ualentine be poor / and of low bitthe,
and that I have found him in the foreste, I find him so good / humble and
debonaire, that he seameth more gentiller, and of nobler courage than thou
art. Leave thy speaking of him / for the good matters and conditions that is
in him / proves and shows that he is extracte out of a good place, and of a
noble lignage. And for the goodness that I have found in him / I will and it
pleases me that he goo when it pleases him to my daughter / for from a noble
heart can not proceed but honor And so much I a^^ye me in him that he will not
think against my worship nothing but that is honest and l^^^te. And when
Haufray hard the king, that so stronglye repreued him in supportinge
Ualentyne, he was displeasaunt in his heart / but he made no semblau^t. Than
spoke Ualentyne that had well understood the words of Haufray and said.
Haufray with wrong and without a cause ye have spoken of me, and yet I never
did you amysse. You will that I go for to fight with the wild man, to ye
end that I dye, and that ye may be venged on me* but I make auowe to god that
I shall never rest in no place till that I have found the wild man. And when
yt I shall have found him I shall fight with him in such manner that quick or
deed I shall bring him hither before you all, or I shall finisshe my dates.
And if it happen that god give me the strength for to conquer him, there
shall ueuer none se me in this country till that I have found the fader that
engendered me, to the end that I may know if I am bastard or legitime, and
wherefore I was left in the wodde. When the king understood the enterprise of
Ualentine he was much displeasaunt, for he fered more to lose him than any of
the other of his court. And curses Haufray and Henry that made him enterpry
so that thing. And after called Ualentine and said. My child auise you what
you will do, for to fight with the wildeman, it seems me a thing impossible
to you. You know well enough that by him is deed many valiant men, and that
some noble champyons has left this enterprise. And therefore be not so
dysmaybe that for the speech of them twain you lose your life, for it is to
cruel a thing to abide such a be that is without natural understanding.
For god my child suffer and endure the words of ye enuyous for it is a fair
virtue to them that can endure false tongues to speak. A sir said valentyne for
god pardone me for I shall never change my purpose. They call me in reproach
foundelynge, for ye which I am right sorrow full when yt I can not know what I
am, nor of what place. I take leave of you and command you to good, For to
morrow in the morning I think to take my way for to acheue mine enterprise.
At these words de parted the valiant knight Ualentyne, and took his leave of
king Pepyn. Upon the morrow he herd mass and after mounted on horsbacke for
to go seek the wild man. Now it is not to be demanded if the fair Eglantyne
made great sorrow and lainentacons all yt night. And when that it was day she
called to her a damoy sell that was secret and said unto her. My friend goo
toward valentyne and tell him that I send him word that he come and speak
with me or he depart, and that he have no boubte of non living to enter in to
my chamber. For above all things I desire to se him, and it is my synguler
will that he take leave of me or he depart. Than went the damoysell toward
Ualentyne that was on horsbacke, and did unto him her message as Eglantyne had
charged her. When Ualentyne understood the message he said unto her. My damoy
sell I know that the love that is bitwene my lady Eglantyne and me, is lay al
and of good equity, and yet I know so much by her that she would not think
the thing that might torn her to dyshonoure. And so god help me as for me I
would her no harm, but all honor and worship. But envy is of such nature
yt it has never rest. And sooner ben the enuyous of their nature enclyneo to
say evil of good folks than good, And ever ymagyneth false invencyons against
them that would win honor. Now it happens me in this manner, for I know
for certaynte that Haufray, and Henry ^ brederne of my lady Eglantyne have
great will to purchase my death, wherefore damoy sell you shall go toward her if
it please you, and bydde her that she take no dyspleasure if I have taken no
leave of her, and than he badde her farewell and rode his way.

How Ualentyne conquered his brother Orson in the forest of Orleaunce. Ca. xiii.


NOW rydeth valentyn upon his Journey all alone save a squire that he had
with him. And so long he rode that he came to ^he wodde where as the wild man
was And than he put on his helm and tokele ue of his squire. So he entered and
sought the wild man all yt day, but he found him not, and when it was night
he dylcended of his horse and tied him unto a tree, and than he took bread and
wine that he had brought with him, and a little refresshed him. And when that
he had eten and that the night was comen, and the day all faylled, than
Ualentine for fere of the night mounted upon a tree, and there abode. And when
it was day he looked about him, and saw his brother Or so^ that ran through
the forest as a wild be, the which auysed the horse of Ualentine, and drew
toward him And when he saw him so fair and so pleasant, he combed him a
paas we^h his roughe hands, in making him chere. For he had never seen so
fair a be when Ualentines horse felt and apperceyued the wild man that
scratched him on all sides, he began for to stryke and flynge incontinent
myghtely. And Ualentyne that was upon the tree beheld the manners of the
wyldeman, that was right horrible for to behold, and much to doubt. Than he
reclaymed our lord and the glorious vrgin Mary right devoutly, in praienge and
requiringe him with heart and mind that he would preserve him from the wild
man, and give him victory against him. Orson turned so much about the horse
of Ualentine, that the horse that was fyerge began for to smite and byte him.
And when Orson apperceiued that he enbraced the horse for to cast him down,
and fight with him. When the noble Ualentyne saw that the wild man woldesse
his horse, he cried on hye and said. Wild man leave my horse and a bide, for with
me thou shalt have battle. Than Orson the wild man left the horse of
Ualentine, and lift up his eyes and looked up in to the tree. And when he saw
Ualentine he made him signs with his hands and heed the he would pull him in
pieces. And then valentine made the sign of the cross in reco^maunding him
unto god and after drew out his sword and lepte down beside Orson. When
Orson saw the sword that valentyn would have smyt^e^ him with, he drew him
back and kept him from the stroke. And then he came to valentyne and with
clean strength threw him to the earth under him, whereof valentyne was sore
abashed and discomforced for he wend well to have dyed and fynyshed his days
in that place. For he felt Orson the savage so strong that he had never hope
for to escape fro him. Ha very God said he have pytie on me, and suffer not
that I fynyshe here my days thus pyteously by this wild man. Diverse times
vale^tyne wend for to have turned Orson under him, but he ne might. When
valentyne sa we that by strength of body he might not win him, he drew out
a sharp poynted knyfe and smote Orson in to the right side, in such wise that
the blood issued out by great haboundau^ce. Then Orson ^^er^^ up when heselte
himself wounded And for the dolor that he felt, as all in a ^age he gave
such a cry that all the wodde so w^ed thereof. After he came again unto the
noble valentine, and so fiersly he assailed him with his sharp nails that he
cast him yet down again. And there they fought so long together that it
were to much for to recount all the manner. As they fought thus without cesyng.
Orson took his shield fro about his neck. And when that he had taken it from
him, he beheld it tyght strongly, because of the beauty of the colors that
he was not accustomed for to se, and then he cast it strongly against the
earth, and incontinent returned unto valentyne, and with his nails and his
teeth pressed him so hard yt he broke both harneys and haubergon. And smote
him so tudely with his nails that he made the blood spro^g out on all sides.
And when Ualentyne felt himself so sore wounded, he was tyght sorrowful and
pensife and began for to reclayme our sord with both his heart and courage.
Alas said he very god almighty in ye is mine only hope and trust, mine only
refuge and comfort, wherefore I pray the humbly that thou will have pytte on
me. And even so as by thy worthy grace thou kept and saved Bany^lamong the
lions, so keep me from this wild man. And when Ualentine had made his prayer
unto god, he went toward Orson with his sword for to have smyten him, but
Orson lepte a back and went to alyttell tree, the which tree he bowed and
bracke it, and made thereof an horrible staff, and after came unto Ualentyne
and gave him such a struck yt he made him for to fall upon one knee.
Ualentyne as hardy rose up quickly, and so began between them a right fyerse
battle. And the two brethren had ardau^e desires for to destroy each other,
but they knew not yt they were brethren, nor the cause of their fortune. Orson
was so cruel and so strong yt he would have stain Ualentyne diverse times if it
had not been for his sword that he doubted above all things, because of ye
knyfe that he had smyten him with. So much and so long they fought together
by diverse manners that they were both weary and strongly trauayled. Then
Ualentyne beheld Orson and began for to say unto him. Alas wild man,
wherefore do thou not yield the unto me thou lyuest here in this woddelyke a
beast, and has no knowledge of God, nor of his blyssed mother saint Mary,
nor of his holy faith, for the which thy soul is in great danger. Come on
thy way with me and then shall thou do wisely. I shall make the be baptized,
and shall teach the, the holy faith. And shall give the flesh and fylthe,
bread and wine enough for to eat, and clothes and all manner of things that
appertains unto a man's body, and shall use thy life honestly as every
natural body should do. When Orson understood Ualentyne speak, he apperceyued
well by his signs yt he would him good. And Ualentyne spoke unto him of God
and of ourlady, and then after the course of nature that can not lie, Orson
fell down upon both his knees, and stretches forth his hands toward his
brother Ualentyne, in making him sign that he would forgive him, and that he
would obey unto him in all manner of things for the time to come. And he
showed unto him by signs that never the days of his life he should fail him,
neither with body nor goods. It is not for to be demanded if that Ualentyne
was glad when he saw that the wild man was conquered by him and put in
subjection, and made great joy and not without a cause. For he had conquered
more honor by his prowisse then any knight that was in his time, for there was
none that durst undertake it were he never so bold nor hardy. He took Orson
by the hand, and showed him by signs that he should go before him till they
were out of the wodde, and so he did, and anon they were out of the wodde.
Then Ualentyne took one of his gyrthes, and for doubt that he should do him
no harm nor none other, he bound his hands taste unto his body. And when
that he had bound him fast he mounted on horseback and led him with him as
a beast tied, without that ever this same Orson did him any harm, or made
him an evil semblaunt, that was a thing myraculous.

How Ualentyne after that he had conquered Orson departed from the forest for
to return to Orleau^ce, toward the king Pepyn that was there. Cap. xiiii.


UAlentine has done so much with gods help, that he has overcome and
conquered the wild Orson. He mounted on horsbacke for to go to Orleaunce and
he did so much that he entered into a great vyllage, but also sone as the men
of the vyllage saw the wild man, they ran into their houses, and for great
fere shytte their doors so that none might enter. Ualentyne cried unto them,
byddyng them have no dread, and that they should open their gates, for he
would have lodging, but for any thing that he could say, they would not open
their doors. Then he es^ryed them sayng, by god almighty if you give me no
lodgyng for to paise the night and take my rest, know that I shall unbind the
wild man and let him goo, and than I am certain he will find me lodging to
my pleasure Often required Ualentyne that he might have some lodgyng, but every
body had so great fear of the wild man that they durst not open their doors.
And when Ualentyne saw that none would lodge him, he vnbo^^d Orson, and after
made him sign that he should smite against the gate of a great place in the
which was holden hostry, and Orson took a great piece of wodde, and smote at the
gate with so great strength, that at the third stroke ^^smore it to the
earth, and then they e^^red, and shytte the gate after them. When they that
were within saw that the w^ide man was entered they ran all out at the back
door. Ualentine went toward the stable, and dressed his horse. After that
Orson and he went to the kechyn where as they found capo^s and diverse other
meat upon a great spytte before the fire. Then Ualentine made sign unto Orson
that he should torn the spytte, for the meat was not enough, but also soon as
Orson spied the meat, he set hands on a great part of it, and pulled it of.
He asked not if it was ^oste enough, but eat as a wolf does his pray, and
after he espied a caudron full of water, in the which he put in his head and
drunk as a horse does at the river Ualentyne made him sign that he should
leave drynkyng, at that he would give him wine. And than he took a pot and led
Orson into the seller that was open. And when he had drawn the pot full of
wine, he gave it him, and Orson lift up the pot and tasted it and found it
good. And he drunk so myghtely that he drunk all out, and after he cast the
pot unto the earth: and made sign unto Ualentine that he should draw more
wine. And valentyne took up the pot and filled it with good wine Orson took it
and espied a great bolle and put the wine therein, and then he bare it unto
Ualentynes horse for to drink. And when Ualentyne saw that, he made him sign
that he drunk but water, and Orson showed him by signs that the wine was
better then the water. Diverse other things did Orson in the house the which
should be long to recounte. The night was come, and it was time to go to
bed. So Ualentyne souped and made Orson soupe with him the which spared not
the wine, for he took so much yt he was drunk. Than he laid him do w^e by
the fire and began for to snore and sleep marvelously. And valentyne beheld
him saying. Ueray God what is a little thing of a man on sleep, and of the man
that by to much drinkyng leseth his memory. Now se I this wild man, in whom
now neither force nor strength, and might be slain or ever he awaked. And
when he had said this, for to prove more the hardines of Orson* he put him so
hard with his foot that he awaked him, and then he made him sign that there
was folks about the house. Then Orson arose as all afraid and took a great
logge that stood in the chymney, and ran against the gate so myghtely that
he made al to shake. And valentyne began for to laugh right strongly, whereby
Orson knew that he did it for to assaye him So he made him sign that he should
take his rest, and that he should have no fear of nothing, for he would keep
him well. Than Orson laid him down by the fire and his logge in his arms. And
Ualentine was all the night beside him, the which did watch him with out
slepynge for fere that he should be assailled, for the noise was so great that
every body left his house, and withdrew them into the church. And all the night
without any reast ronge the belles for to assemble the people, that in a great
nombre alarmed made the watch for fere of the wyld man. And thus passed the
night till that it was light day. And when it was day light Valentyne
mounted on horsbacke, and bound Orson, and put him on the way toward
Orlyaunce And he did so much that upon a thursday he aryued within the town.
And when he was apperceyued ledynge Orson the savage they made so great a cry
tha^ within the town of Orleaunce was never none such herd, every body ran
into their houses and shyt the gates, and than mounted into the wyndowes for to
se him. The tidinges came unto king Pepyn that Valentyne was arrived and that
he had conquered orson the savage, and brought him with him, of the which
tidings king Pepyn was greatly abashed. And in making the sign of the
cross said in this manner.:* Alas Valentyne my child in a good hour was thou
borne, blessed be the father that engendered the, and the mother that delivered
the in the wodde, for I se and know that thou art byloued of god and that by
the he shows us an euydent miracle. And the people that were in the wyndowes
cried. Live amongst the other the hardy Ualentine, for he is well worthy great
honor when that by his pro wesse he has conquered this man that never none
durst assail every body is bound to do him honor and reverence for by him
we are delivered and assured of the thing that we most dredde Ualentyne rode
through the town of Orleaunce till yt he came before the palace ga^e. And wha^
the porters saw him, they shyt the gates for fere of Orson. Than Valentyne
said unto them, be nothing afraid, but go unto king Pepyn and tell him that
upon my life I Warrant him from the wild man, and all them of his court. For
I know him so well that he will do no ^e erthly creature harm in no manner. The
porter did go up into the palace and told the king the tidinges how Valentyne
took the wild man upon his charge. Than the king commanded that they should
let him in. So Valentine entered in and took Orson by the hand. When the
queen Berthe and the fair Eglantyne knew that they were in the palace they
went in to their chambres for great fere. Valentyne mounted up and entered into
the halle where as king Pepyn was with all the barons and knights of his
court, and Haufray and Henry that with semblaunt showed great signs of love to
Valentyne. And him seemed that they were right Joyous of his vyctory and
prowess. But they were never so syrowfull in their hertes, for they wend
never that he should have returned on live and cursed Orson because he had not
slain hi. The king Pepyn and all they of his court beheld Orson gladly. And
the king said. Lords by god almighty it is a metuayllous thing to se this
wild man, he is tight well made and of a fair stature. And how well that he is
roughe, if he were clothed as we be, he would seem a right fair knight. Than
spoke Ualentyne unto king Pepyn and said. Sir I require you that he may be
baptized, and than he shall be taught the law of Ihesu christ, for that is my
desire, and so I have promised him. It pleases me well said the king, and I
will that it it be done so. Than he commanded a pressed that he should baptized
him. And these were his god ^a ders, the nable king Pepyn, ye duke Myllon
dangler and the puyssaunt knight Ualentyne, and upon the other side was ye
duchess of Burbon, and diverse other ladies of grere renown. And other name
they gave hi not save that which he had taken in the forest. When Orson was
baptized king Pepyn sat him down to dinner, and Ualentyne served him of the
cup, for that was his office. And when every man was set, he commanded for to
let Orson in to the halle, for to se his manners and countenance. Orson entered
in to the halle and came before king Pepin that beheld him right voluntaryly.
Orson aduysed ye meet that was in the platter and took as much as he might
catch and bare it away, and ete it quickly. And when he had eten it he
looked on the other side and espied a servant that bare a pecocke in a platter
for to serve the king. Than Orson ran toward him a great pace and took it
fro him, and than he satte him down upon the earth in ye mids of the halle,
and began for to ete it as a famisshed wolf. Ualentin apperceyued it and
showed him bysygnes that he governed him not will, whereof Orson was ashamed,
for above all things he fered and redoudted naturally Ualentyn, and king
Pepin badde that they should let him alone, for he took pleasure at him. When
he had eten well he took a pot of wine and of he dronkeit, and after kest the
pot against the earth and began for to shake his heed, whereat the king and
all the barons that were there laughed much strongly And when the night was
comen, there was given a right fair chamber unto Ualentin, in ye which was
ordained a bed for Orson, but for nothing was the bed apparaylled, for
also son as he entered in to the chamber he laid him down upon the earth,
and anon he fell a sleep for he was not accustomed for to sleep otherwise.

How Haufray and Henry took counsayll for to ^lee Ualentyne in the chamber of
Eglantyne. Ca. xv.


Right glad and Joyous was the excellent lady Eglantyne that Ualentyne had
conquered the wild man. So she sent him word that he should bring the wild
man unto her. Than Ualentyne called Orson and took him by the hand and led
him in to the chamber of Eglantyne, in the which was diverse ladies that gladly
beheld Orson. And Orson in laughing lepte upon the bed, and sat there
making diverse signs that was ryghe pleasant unto ye ladies. But that the
which he did they understood not, of the which they were much displeasaunt.
So they called Ualentyn and demanded him what it was that the wild man showed
them by signs. And Ualentyne said to them. My ladies knowwe for a truth that
ye wild man shows you by his signs that he would gladly kiss and colle the
damoy selles that be here, whereat they began for to laughe and to behold each
other. And thus as they devised together, and that they played in the chamber of
Eglantyne for the coming of the wild man, Haufray came toward Henry and said
to him. Fair brother to evil go the our feate, for you se that this wretched
fou^delynge Ualentyne mounteth and increases every day more and more in
honor among the princes and ladies, and among the other things the king is
more louinge unto hi than unto either of us two, ye which may adnychyl
gretely our honor. Haufray said, Henry ye say truth and speaks wisely.
And as for me I fe re not but that we shall have ones and evil reproach by him
if he endure long. Brother said Haufray harken What I shall tell you. Ualentyne
is now in ye chamber of our sister Eglantyne, the which thing we have de
fended him so long ago, wherefore we have good occasyon for to take him and
move strife and debate against him. And therefore if you will believe me we shall
go in to the chamber, and by us shall be put to death. And than we shall make
the king believe that we did find him with our sister doing his will with
her. Thus spoke the two traitors false and dysloy all. And even so as ye Jews
by their envy crucyfyed and ymagyned yt death of our lord with wrong and
without cause. Even so did Haufray and Henry to Ualentyne that was so sweet
and so amyable, obeyenge unto every body, and out of his mouth never issued a
vylaynous word. And after that they had accorded their unhappy enterprise,
they went in to the chamber of the fair and pleasant Eglantyne, And also
soon as Haufray was entered, he said unto Ualentin. Evil and dysloyall man
now know we that if thy folly and outragyous volente you will not cefrayne
nor abstain the, but in persevering in thy malice and folysshe oppynyon,
purcha sing from day to day the dyshonoure of our fader yt king Pepyn, by
the mean and accord of our falls and dysloyall sister Eglantyne, of ye which
you do your pleasure and will, even so as of a woman unhappy and habandoned,
wherefore it is well right and reason that evil come to you. And sith yt the
king sets naught thereby, it is force that we take vengeance on you* and in
saying these words the traitor. Haufray lift up his hand and smote
Ualentyne upon the vy sage in such manner, that he made the clear blood issue
out of his mouth haboundauntlye. And than Henry the other traitor approached
nere him, and with a glayue that was both sharp and long he wend to have
smite Ualentyne much outragyously. And when Orson saw that they would outrage
valentyne / he lepte forth and gave Haufray so great a stroke with his rough
hand that he felled him unto the earth. And after he ran toward Henrye, and
streyned him so between his arms that if the ladies had not ben that appeased
him he had dystroyed him at that time. Than arose the cry in the chamber so
great / that the most part of the barons came into the chamber. And when they
apperceyned that Orson dealt so evil with the kings sons / they would have
smyten him with glayues and swerdes, and put them all in defense against him,
for to have put him to death. Than Ualentine for to socour Orso^ drew his
swerd. And swore by god almighty, if any of them touched Orson with swerd or
knyfe, he should be his priest what someuer might happen therefore. And than he
made sign unto Orson that he should be still without doing any outrage. And
Haufray and henry went toward their father king Pepin sorrowful and heavy, and
haufray said unto him. Ha sir in an evil hour was ever Ualentin borne the
which you hold so dear. For he has brought the wild man hither, that has
almooste dystroyed us. Sir you shall do tyght evil if you let him live any
longer, for do^mage and dishonor he will bear you shortly. For god make that he
be drowned or hanged, for the guard of him is naught nor his company. When the
king Pepyn understood this tidinges, he was much sorrowful. And said that he
would make Orson the savage to be put in a toure where as he should never come
out but by license. So king Pepyn sent for Ualentine for to demand him the
case. And Ualentine recounted unto him the enter pryse as it had been done by
Haufray and Henrye saying Sir I was in the chamber of my lady your daughter
Eglantyne, in the company of diverse ladies and gentle women, that desired
strongly, for to se Orson, and pryncypally I had brought him unto my lady
Egla^tyne. So I can not tell you wherefore nor by what title my lords your two
sons Haufray and Henry did enter into the chamber / in saying unto me that I
did my pleasure with your daughter, and that they knew it long agone. And
in spekyng unto me fyerse and proud words, Haufraye by an outrageous volente
smote me upon my vysage with his hand, and Henrye with his sweard wend for to
have slain me Orson being that my body was in danger, went toward them
and smote them both down, so that the bruyte and the noise arose therefore as
you may here. And is it true said the king Pepyn so as you tell me. If sir
said va lentyne upon the pain of my life, other thing nor other cause know I
not. Now by god said the king Pepyn Orson has done his deuoyr and that
which he ought to do. And you Haufray and Henry full of envy and cursed malice
/ ye be to blame. I se and know clerelye that wythall your puyssaunce ye seek
from day to day to noye Ualentyne. ye be well of an evil nature to purchase
his evil when you se that I love him and that he serves me truly. I defend
you to will him any hurt, wherefore let him alone. For I will not for goo him
for none other. And I am well certain that he would never think nor search my
dyshonoure. Even so departed Haufray and Henry that were much soroweful and
displeasaunt. And Ualentine abode at that hour in the hal with all the other
lords and barons of the court. And Orson went through the palace here and
there. At the last he entered in to the kechyn, and saw the meet that the coke
made ready for souper, so he approached nere him and took two capons all raw
and ete them as a dog. When the coke saw that, he took a pestel and gave
Orson so great a stroke that he made him for to bow. Than Orson stouped down
and took the coke and threw him down in the place, and gave him so many
strokes that he had almoost slain him. The tidings came unto king Pepyn that
orson doewe the coke, and that none durst approach* nere him. Whereat the king
was angry, and made Orson to be brought before him, and made him signs that he
would make him be hanged. But Orson went anon and fetched the pestell, and
showed the king how the coke had smyten him. And when the king under stood
the case, he pardoned orson entyerly, and commanded that none s^, old touch
him any more. And valentyne showed him the guyse and manner how he should
behave him in the palace for the time to come, and took totally ye charge of
him. And he taught him so well that he did never after evil nor dyspleasure,
but if yt they began first. And in this manner they abode long with the noble
king Pepin that was both their vn^^es. But they knew it not.

How the duke Sauary sent toward the king Pepyn for to have socoure against
the grene knight, that by force would have had his daughter Fezonne unto wife
and spouse. Capitulo. xvi.


VAlentyne and Orson were at that same time in the kings court when that from
the duke Sauary there came aknyght unto the king Pepyn, the which after all
due reverence spoke unto him in this manner. Free king, and of almoost
redoubted, the good duke Sauary to whom I am servant has sent me hither to
you, requiringe you for to socoure him against a falls and a cursed painym that
has assyeged him, and he names him self the grene knight, the which will
have his daughter by force of arms against his will, the which is as fair as
can be found, and she has three hardy brederne, that is to wit. Garin.
Anselme. And Garyn the youngest. Mylordes said the king, we will socoure the
good duke Sauary with a good will at his need with all your puyssau^ce. Sir
said the messenger god yield it you, for ye shall do a great alms, and I
thank you thank you a hundred times on my masters behalf In saying these
words there entered another messenger in to the palace, ye which after that he
had salued the king as he ought for to do, he said unto him thus Right
excellent king, and above al other redoubted* assemble your host and men of
war in all the haste yt you may, and send them unto the cite of Lion. For
there is comen and issued out of Almayne moo than a hondreth thousand
fyghtyngemen, that will dystroy your realm and put it in subgeceyon when king
Pepyn had vnderstonden these tidings he was much a basshed, and made to come
before him the Archebysshop of Reyns, and the duke Myllon dangler* Geruais and
Sampson. And after he told them the words of the messenger, and demanded
them counsayll if that he should go toward Acquytaine for to socoure the good
duke Sauary* or toward Lion to defend his country To ye which thing
answered Myllon dangler. Sir upon this matter you must be counsaylled, for your
shyrte is more nerer your body than your gown, yo^ ought not for to defend
the country of another, and let your own be dystroyed. Wherefore without
taking ony^ore counsayl you shall go toward Lion for to keep and defend your
country. And when you have chaced your enemies, and casten them out of your
country than may ye go sureli and socoure the good duke Sauary that
demau^deth help of you. He byleueth his cou^sayll and accepted it* and after
said unto ye messenger of the good duke Sauary, that at that time he might not
socoure his master, for it behooved him to lead his host toward Lion. But tell
your lord that he keep him well till that I have done here, and that than I
shall so coure him with so great a nombre of folk that he shall be content. Sir
said the messenger to evil it happens him that you may not come now, for
he has gretenede. But sith that it can not be none otherwise I thank you for
your god will. And with the leave of your high majesty I will depart from you.
At these words the messenger of the duke Sauary returned in to Acquytayne and
told the tidings and the lettyng of the king Pepyn. And when the duke Sauary
understood that he might have no socoure of ye king Pepyn, he was much
sorrowful. For ye grene knight made him great war, and had assyeged him to
nere. And you ought for to know that this same grene knight was brother unto
Ferragus the gyaunt, that kept the lady Bellyssant in his castle, the which
was Ualentines mother, and the wild Orsons, as you have herd declared before.
Now is ye duke Sauary within Acquitayne right pensyf and sorrowful for ye grene
knight that made him such war for his daughter. He made to be cried and
commanded that all they of his host should be in harneys as unto such a case
apperteyned. And that on the morrow in morning he would issue out upon ye
grene knight for to fight with him Every body put himself in point and did
their dylygence for to arm them. And when the day was clear the trompettes
and clarons did so wne, and than the men of arms on every side as well on
horsbacke as on foot put hem upon the way to issue out of the cite Great
haste had the duke Sauary to assayll the grene knight. But such weneth to
auaunce himself that oftentimes do the his own do^mage. And so it happened
unto the duke as you shall here. The duke Sauary issued out of Acquytaine with a
great company. And when he was upon the feld he made to sown his trompettes and
clarons as a valiant champyon for to assayll his enemies, and smote in
amongst them. The sarazyns and painims that were in great nombre, did rynne
unto arms, and than began a meruayllous and a fyerse battle. And the grene
knight sinote with his axe of arms mighty strokes, for at his first enter he
slew two knights. Than the Duke Sauary drew to ward him / and they assaylled
each other right fiercely, for the good duke was much valiant. But not for
that* he did to great a folly when he enterprised to fight with the grene knight
/ for the predestynacyon of him was such that he should never be conquered, nor
vamquysshed but of a man that should be a kings son and that had never been
nourysshed of womanne, nor souked their breasts. So he thought that such a man
might never be founden. But such a child is upon the earth that shall fight with
him and vaynquyssh him that is Orson the savage as you shall here afterward The
duke Sauary and the grene knight fought long together. But the good duke Sauary
entered to far in for when he wend to have withdrawn him to his host he was
enclosed with painyms and sarazyns, that took him prisoner and led him unto the
grene knighte, the which was so right glad of him, that he would not have
let him go for no treasure. And the good duke Sauery reclaymed God and the
virgin Marye in his heart. When the chrystan men knew that the duke was taken,
they returned into Acquitayne heavy and sorrowful. Than began the people for to
make great dole and sorrow in the city of Acquytayne / weeping bytterlye for
their good Duke that they loved so much. There was his three sons. Garyn*
Anseline* and Garyn the yo^gest, that made great dole for their fader. But
above al other the sorrow and lamentacions of Fezonne passed the which teared
her here that was shining as the gold, and wept full bytterly with her
pleasant eyes and said. Alas in an evil hour was I borne, when that so many
noble knights and vassalles must suffer so hydeous deaths, and pyteous
lamentacyons for me. And yet there is a thing in my heart that greueth m^ much
more, that is for the good Duke my father, that is in the hands of his mortal
enemies for my sake, where as it behooves him for to fynyshe his days in
sorrow and dystresse. Alas my right dear fader to much have you loved me, when
that my love is sold you so derely that you must suffer death therefore. Thus
complained Fezonne full soore weeping, the which had the will and courage to have
slain her self, but the ladies let her And the grene knight in his
pauyllyon that made the good duke to be brought before him, and said unto him
right fyersly. Now see thou that thou art in my subgeccyon at this time and
that I have puysaunce for to save the or spyll the. I shall tell the what thou
shalt do give me thy daughter Fezonne unto wife, and in this doing thy life
shall be saved, and I shall lead her into thy greane mountain where as I shall
make her to be rychely crowned. Sarazin said the Duke I shall tell the my will.
Know that thou shall never have my Daughter if that thou make the not be
Baptized, and believe in Jhesu Christ. Sauary said the greane knighte never
speak unto me of such a thing / for never the days of my life will I believe
in thy god. And yet I tell the more that and thou will not believe my counsall I
shall make the dye and fynysshe thy days vyllaynouslye. And yet I tell the that
I shall make Acquitaine to be burnt / and to be put to execucyon. And all
men and womenne and children little and great I shall make suffer death
Paynym said the Duke Sauary god of his inestimable grace keep me from thy
furour and great cruelnesse for in him is all my trust, and in him is only my
conforte. For long were they speaking of this matter, both the grene knight
and the Duke Sauary, that in reclaymynge god syghed full tenderlye. And the
greane knight beheld him. And when he saw the great lamentacyons that he made*
and the pyteous tears that he wept he said unto him, Free duke, leave thy
weeping, for I am so esprysed with the love of thy daughter. and so ardauntly
enbraced, that for the love of her I have no talent nor courage for to put the
unto death, but am to tally delibered for to let the go under this condition
that thou shall find me a knight within this six months that by strength of
arms may wyn thy daughter against me, and thou do I shall return home into
my country again wythal mine host, without was tynge or destroyinge of the
land. And if it happen so that I be not conquered and over comen within ye
said terame I shall have thy Daughter unto wife, and lead her into my country
without making any other war And the Duke accorded thereto. And than the
trewes was cried for the space of six months. After that the cry was made,
the grene knight gave the duke sauary license for to go, and made him for to
swear that he should hold the said covenant truly. Thus the appointment was
made between them twain for ever. And after came in to Acquytayne and made it
to be known and publysshed al about the form of the appointemen. And when he
had made ye trewes for six months to be cried. He sent for his counsayll
and declared unto them the manner how he had done with ye grene knight. So they
aduysed and concluded amongst them ye the duke should send messengers in
every country there about, for to search and inquire if there were any knight
that would fight with the grene knight for the fair lady Fezonne. And after
they sent out messengers unto all the christian realms, and gave unto them
letters, wherein was contained the beauty of his daughter, and the enterprise of
the grene knight. And the duke said in his letters that he the which might
conquer the grene knight, should have his daughter in marriage. The letters
were given unto twelve messengers that had the charge for to bear them unto
twelve christian realms, and there to publysshe and manyfeste the foresaid
tidings.

How diverse knights came in to Acquytayne, for to win the fair lady
Fezonne. Capitulo. xvii.
IN that same time during the trewes king Pepin was gone against his enemies
toward Lion, acompanyed with three score thousa^de men. He did so much that
he chaced and put to flight a king named Lampatris the which king had a
great host. This Lampatris was king of the S^ynes, of Hollande, and Fryse.
And with this he held the country of Monemarche, in the which was a strong
cite, where as they with drowe them for fere of the king Pepyn. And when they
were all entered in to the said cyre, king Pepyn assyeged them in such manner
that he famysshed them. And he oppressed them so that they yielded them unto his
grace when he had taken the cite, he made the paynyms to be crystened, and
believe in Jhesu christ. And gave the cite unto the Marshal of France that was
called Guy. After all these things king Pepyn returned in to France with all
his host, and a yued at Paris, and had tidings anon of the duke Sauary
how he had taken trewes with the grene knight. And when he knew ye manner how
they were appointed. He said before al his barons laughing. who that would
have a fa^^^l^ue, it is time that he show himself valiant, for he that
mayeconquere the grene knight by deeds of arms, he shall have in marriage the
fair Fezoune, daughter unto the duke Sauary. And yet he shall have with her
half his lands and possessyon, and that it is true lo here ye lettres, hold
and read ye contenue of the same. Every body beheld these letters gladly, but
there was none so hardy nor so valiant that durst undertake the enter pryse
save Ualentine that said before them all unto the king Pepyn* Right dear sir
if it please your majesty for to give me leave, and license for to preue my
strength in Acquytayne against the grene knight. I shall go gladly. Sir give me
leave to go out of France, for I have great desire for to leave the country.
And I shall ride so much that I shall never rest unto the time that I have
found my mother that bare me. For it greueth me full sore that I have been so
long without knowing what I am* Ualentyne said the king care you not what
you be. For I am puyssaunte enough for to give the goods largely, and mount
the in honor, and all them of my court. And I shall hold you also dear as
if you were of min own blood. Sir said Ualentine for god pardon me, for it
has been my will long. When king Pepyn saw that Ualentyne was totally
delybered for to go in to Acquitaine he gave him leave by this covenant that he
should return unto him again also soon as he had foughten with ye grene
knight, if god gave him life and hele. And valentyne promised him. In
departing he took leave for to go in to Acquitayne. Than Eglantyne was more
sorowfuller than ever she was before, and more replete with bitter teres. She
sent for valentyne that came unto her anon. And than she said unto him
weeping full tenderely. I se well that of you I shall never have loye nor
consolacion and that you have entencion for to leave the country of France.
Alas now pleased it God that it were mine honor for to goo with you, for
even so God help me if ever I would have other husband but you. But sithe
that it is so that I cannot be maistet after my will, and that my lyberall
arbytre is kept by other puyssaunce and that it is force that the body abide
behind, my heart and my will shall be with you for ever without any other
intencion save of true love and just without villanye I shall love you. And to
the end that at your necessities ye may sucoute your indige^ce when time is,
lo here the keye of my treasure that I present unto you, take gold and silver
at your own pleasure, for there is enough. My lady said valentyne, of gold
and silver I have no kept, but it greueth me full sore that I can not wit what
I am. And know that of one thing I am much abashed, that is that I bear a
cross upon my shoulde^, the which is also yelowe as the fine gold. I can not
tell from whence comes to me such a sign, wherefore I am purposed never for
to rest unto the time that I have knowledge of my nativity. I bydde you fare
well my lady and weep n^ more for me. For by the faith of my body if God will
that I be of a place come that is any thing worth or of valor of ex^^action
for to have you. I shall never have to spouse nor wife other than you. And also
my tyght dear Lady if I find that I am not worthy for to have you unto wife
by lack of hyghnes of lynnage, I would not be your husband in no manner of
wise for in the time to come the cursed and malicious men would say, where is
all the brethren and sistren, and cosynes of this unhappy renegate, that has
abused the king Pepyn so much that he has given him his daughter unto wife and
spouse. And therefore I de sire ^aboue all chinges to wit of what estate I am
of. And at these words departed Ualentyne, and left Eglantyne in her chamber
weeping full tenderly, and then he began to consider that the love of a woman is
a great thing and marvelous. For he saw well that, and if it pleased him
Egiantine king Pepins daughter would go with him whether someuer he would, but
the wit and the reason that was in him, domined so at every reason that he
would do no vyllaynous thing that might turn him to reproach and dyshonoure
afterward. And so he left Eglantyne and put him on the way. And when it came
to the departing he was co^uayed of diverse great lords of the court. Whe^fore
Haufray and Henty were right glad and joyous of their departing, because of
their great enuyes that of long time had remained in them, yet they ymagyned
and advised that they should make Ualentyne to be taken by the way and orson
that he led with him and make them dye and fynysshe their days shamefully to
the end that he might be avenged of the thing that they desired most^ in the
world.

How Hawftay and Henry made to watch Ualentyne and Orson upon the way, for
to make them dye. Cap. xviii.


AS Uale^tyne and Orson were departed from the court of king Pepyn for too go
in to Acquytayne, envy deceiuable, and cursed treason entered more then before
in to ye hearts and courages of the two false and cursed traytouts the kings
sons Haufray and Henry, in such wise that for to come unto their false
enterprise they spoke unto a cosyn germayn of theirs, and so much abused him
that it was advised amongst them th^^ xxx. men puyssaunt and strong should
watch them, and take good keep unto the child Ualentine and also Orson, so
that where someuer they found them* that they should be destroyed and put unto
death. After this counsel he made to assemble thirty men of the most
redoubted that he might find. And after he sent them armed and made them go in
to a forest that was both great and large, by the which Ualentyne and Orson
should pass. God it was not long after that valentyne and Orson that ran
on foot before him more faster then a horse entered into the forest. Tha^ they
were apperceyued of Grygar and his ^elowes that were in an enbulshement, when
Grygar saw valentyne he issued out against him with his or^wen sword in his
hand for to have slain valentyn, and such a struck he gave unto the noble
knight valentyne, that he cut his flesh through his harneis and made the blood
to issue out, and after said unto him. Ualentine here must you dye, for to
long have you lived. When valentyne saw: that he was wounded and assailed on
every side with enemies, he recommaunded him unto God and unto the glorious
vyrgyn Mary, and after said unto them. My lords you have s^oren my death,
and I see well now that with wrong and without cause here must I fynishe my
days, but and it please god to dai^ I shall sell you my death so dear that you
shall not return all together in hele again. And then he drew out his
sword and gave the first so great a stroke upon the head that he cloue him to
the teeth, and so he dyed. After he went toward the other by so great fiersnes
yt or ever he stynte he slew four or five. And Orson sterte forche as half
aftayde with his rough hands, and ^ore and rent all them that he found in his
way, so that with his sharp nails he pullee them in pieces, and bote and
strang^ed them with his teeth. He threw them to the ground one upon another,
and after passed over them in smiting them with his fete much vylay^osly.
Ualentyne was on the other side that held his bloody sword in his hand^,
defendyng him so valiau^tly that none durst approach nere the two noble
brethren. And when Grygar saw that none durst approach nere them he was much
sorrowful and cried unto valentyne saying. Ualentine yield you to me for here
it behooves you to dye. Then the child valentyne recommended him unto God,
besechyng him that he would keep him from evil and sucoure him at his need.
And after he went to ward Grygar and began battle with him again much
fyerlly. Of Grygar and his men it is a pyteous thing to recounte, for they had
long speeres wherewith, they kept Orson of: and anon they had enclosed
valentyne round about, the which defended him so valiauntly that the
hardyest of them all durst not come within his rea^he, for them that he hitte
the throue never after. But for all that in valentyne and Orson were great
prowesses and valiau^tnes corporal not for that by the great nombre of the
other the which were thyrey strong and puyssaunt, valentyne might not ^esiste,
for they preased upon him so sore that he might not welde his sword, and then
they took him and bound him strayghtly and rode away with him also fast as
they might. when Orson saw yt the which had newely slain one of them, he
ran after the^ houlyng right hydeosly, but nothing auailed his pursuit for
they rode away so fast that Orson had lost the sight of them anon, and
wyste not whether to goo. Then Grygar commanded them for to pursue Orson and
that they should take him quycke or dead, but for nothing go they after, for he
ran so impe^ueusly through the forest that the most hardiest of them durst
not come in his sight, and so Orson escaped fro the traitors. And they led
valentyne to a castle that was in the forest, which a these kept yt was cosyn
to Grygar. And the false tray tours bare al their buty^s together. But ye king
Pepin knew nothing thereof, for he wend verily that there had been no better
men in all France when Ualentyne was entered into the castle they took him
rudely, and led him into a tower obscure and dark, and after put him in a
profunde dongeon. When Ualentyne was closed in the said dongeon, he began for
to weep right pyteously, in praying and reclaymynge god and the virgyn Mary
that they would give him grace for to escape from that place. Alas said
Ualentyne now am I come to the thing that I most doubted. That is for to
were into the hands of mine enemies and of them that desired my death from
day to day long agone. Wherefore I beseech God devoutly yt he will sucoure me
in this great danger. Alas good king Pepyn never ye days of my life shall I se
you, nor of my death you shall know nothing. For in this pyt obscure and foul
behooves me to fynisshe my days. Farewell Orson, for thou have suffers death
for my love. And if thou loved me with perfit^ love, so did I the as much, and
more than if thou had been my propre brother. Alas my sweet mother that I have
so much desired for to se, I shall never have knowledge of you wherefore my
poor heart sygheth, and mine eyes melts in teeres, above all the most
sorowfulness, when it behooves me to dye without knowing what I am, but since
that it pleases God that I must dye thus I thank him, and commit my soul
in his guard. In this manner complayneth Ualentyne in the obscure pyt, and his
enemies is in the castle that amongst them holds ple^e what they should do
with him. Than some of them said. Lords the most expedient that is, is to
make Valentyne dye without any other deliberacion Lords said Grygar to that
thing I am not consenting but am of the oppynyon that we shall keep Valentine in
prison, the which can not escape us, and that we go toward Haufray and Henry,
for ^o tell and recount unto them this deed, and they shall give us cou^sayl
upon this matter. To this counsel the^ accorded al, and were delybered for to
goo unto Paris, where as king Pepin soiurned at that present time. Grigar after
this counsayl took his way toward Paris. And Orson was within the wode
pyteously ve wept, that all that night had rested him at ye foot of a tree. And
as the day was light he put him on the way, and thought within him self that
he would never reast till that he had done the king to wit of that treason,
and how Valentine was taken and led away. He took the his way and ran
faster to Paris than a horse, but grigar the traitor was sooner there. And as he
was entered into the palace he went toward haufray and henry, and recounted unto
him how Ualentyne was taken and enprysoned, whereof he was right glad, but it
dyspleased him much when it was told him that Orso^ was escaped. Not
withstondyng he recomforted him in that, that Orson coud not retorn unto Paris
again and more over of this that he coud not speak and yt he could not reco^t
the manner of the enterprise, but their entencion was well turned backward for
Orson abod not long when he arrived at paris. And at the same day that he
arrived the two traitors had taken counsayl between them that Grygar should
return upon the morrow unto the castle for to put Valentyne to death without
any remyssyon. In a good hour aryned Orson at that time, the which also sone as
he was in the palace he entered into the great hall whereas the good king Pepyn
was, the which at that same time was set at the table for to dyue, accompanied
with diverse noble knights and barons. when king Pepyn saw Orson he wend
verily that Valentyne had been recorned. Orson went through the hail pyteously
trying and beting his breast, for the which thing the king and all the other
beheld him sore. And when Or son saw the knights set at table he beheld
their much horriblye in making hydeous signs. Than he advised and knew Grigar
amongst the other that he^^ his heed inclyned down to ward the tabell, for
fear that he should be espied. when Orson saw him he ran thederwarde and gave
him so great a stroke that he smote one of his ^res away. And after he smote
him again upon the vysage so mightily that he broke his teth and put out one
of his eyes, wherefore Grygar began for to cry so hye that all they in the hal
ap^^^ceyueo the noise and debate. And Orson returned again and gave him so
sore a struck that he felled him, and cast down the table and all that was
vpon^^, whereat all the company me^ualled, and were much stronglye troubled. And
Grigar had been slain thereby orson the savage if* a valiant prince had not
taken him from him, and said al on hye. Alas sir king se and consider the
pyteous case in which orson the savage has put this good knight, for god sir
make that his life be taken from him, for it is to peryllous a thing to keep
such a man, Lords said the king we must taste auisemente on this matter. Make
him come heather and we shall know what is his entencyon and wherefore he did it
and ye cause of his debate. Orson was brought before the king. Than the king
demanded him wherefore he had done so great outrage before his majesty. And
Orson made him sign that he had slain and murdered Valentyne in the forest.
And after he went showing meruaylous signs that he would fight with Grigar for
that thing by the law of champion, and make him confess his cursed
enterprise and dampnable treason After he took his hode and kest it by great
fyernes unto Grigar in manner of wage and dyffyaunce* And when king Pepyn saw
that he called his lords and the other barons of the court and said to them
al on hie, Lords now have you seen how this wild man has casten his gage of
battle before us al unto Grigar, and how he will fight with him. Wherefore tell
me all your oppinions upon this matter, and what is for to be done in this case,
for much I marvel me in my heart of this that Orson the savage amongst all the knights else of my court has* smyten Grygar so furiouslye Lords say
on your oppynyons, for I doubt me to much of some fall shede, what part
someuer it comes on. And as for my part without your counsayl or delyberacyon
I shall be of the oppynyon that the bataile were judged between them both. When
the king had spoken in this manner the barons were of one accord and oppynyon
that Grygar and Orson should fight for this quarrel. Than the battle was
ordained. And king Pepyn made Grygar to be brought before him and said to him
that behooves him to fight with Orson. When Grygar knew and understood that it
behoned him to fight with Orson, he was right sorrowful and not without a
cause, for the time is come that the treason that has been hid so long,
shall be known manifestly before eueri body. Grigar beheld Haufray withan
unsteadfast semblaunce and a frayde heart* than Henry called him and said*
Grygar have no fere of nothing, for I promise you and let you wit that we
shall make your peace toward the king our father, in such wise that your
person shall have no damage nor vyllany in no manner of the world, by this
condycyon that you shall swear never to confess this deed what someuer come
unto you. Alas said Grygar to evil goth my cause, for I se well that I must
suffer death for your sakes. And wha^ he had said this he went toward the king
saying. Sir I require you of a gift that is yt of your grace I fight not with
the wild man. For sir you know well enough that it is not man against man that
a knight may win honor of, and also he is no natural man, but is
unreasonable and without on^ spyce of mercy. Grygar said the king there is
none excusacyon, for the battayl is judged by the counsel of all the court,
treason condampneth you, and right will that it be so. Of this answer was Grigar
right pensi^ and dysconforted. Than Haufray said unto him* have no doubt, for
if you have good right god shall healpe you and be your shield and defense in
this quarrel. And as for my part I shall make you to be armed well and
sufficiently as it apperteyneth unto such a case. And when Orson understood
that he should fight he made great Joye. Many great signs made Orson unto the
king that Ualentine was deed and destroyed. Of the which signs king Pepin
meruayled sore. Ever was Orson ready for to smite Grygar the false traitor, but
the king Pepin made him to be taken, and to be kept in his presence, in
making him signs that he should smite him no more until the time that he were
in the field. After he said unto Grigar, go and arm you, and think for to
defend your quarrel well. Ha sir said Grigar I have served you long time, and
withal my puissaunce have enforced me for to obey you in all things as well in
batayl as without, but evil reward you yield me, when that you will make me
fight against this wild man that has neither wit nor reason. Grygar said
king Pepyn if you have good right you ought not to be dysmayed of nothing, for
I promise you that you shall be well armed, and Orson shall be put into the field
al naked and without armor. You shall be on horsback, and he shall be on foot
without bering any wepen, whereby you shall have no cause for recule a back from
defendyng of your right. I can not tell how it shall befall you, but you show
well the se^blaunt that there is somewhat to say in you, do your deuoyre and
defend your right, for you shall have none other thing of me, the cause is
consumed, and the conclusy on made and taken of my counsayll.

How Orson and Grigar fought together before king Pepyn and how Orson
vaynquyshed him, and made him confess the treason openly and after was hanged
And how Valentine was delivered. Ca. xix.
AFter that Grygar had made diverse excuss cyons and apposycyons that he should
not fight with Orson and that it was delybered by the counsel to fight* the
king commau^^ed to make the feld before his palais. And when he was ready Orson
that was abidyng e^^ered in for to abide Grygar yt was armed by Haufray and
Henry, the which armed him also well as they could And when he was armed he
took his leave of them, in saying. Lords I go dye for you. Evil was the day
for me when I enterprysed such a thyug. Hold your peace said Henry and take
no thought, for I have promised you to make your peace to wathe my father the
which I will hold, so that and you be vanquished by Orson, your body shall
have no harm. And if that he would damage you in any manner, there should
rather dye an hundred thousand men then we should fail on out side, be ever
secret and knowledge never nothing of the deed that is done, nor of the
enterprise. Grygar was armed and mounted on horseback, and so he rode toward
the field that was ordained before the palais. And when the hour was come
that they should fight, the king came to the wyndowes for to behold the
battle. When all the court was assembled and the judges ordained for to judge
the bataill, it was commanded to both the parties that they should do their
deuoyre. Than Grygar entered into the field with much pride mounted at
advantage, wherefore it befell him evil at the end. He sporred his horse and
drew toward Orson saying. Rybaude thou have done me to great outrage wha^
thou put out one of min eien through thy cruel nes, but I shall show the that
with wrong and without cause thou haste assailed me. And when Orson saw him
come, he understood him well, and stratched forth his arms, and she wed his
nails and his teeth, grennyng full hugely. Then Grygar couched his spear and
ran toward Orson. When Orson saw the spear come he gave a lepe backward.
And Grygar that had failed of his stroke fixed his speere in the field. When
Orson saw that he returned to him and took the spear, and when that Orson
had the spear in his hand, he gave him so great a stroke that he lost wit
and understanding in such wise that he wist not where he was. When Grygar was
smyten he sporred horse and fled about the field, and Orson ran after
making a grymly countenance, and showing the king that he would yield him
matte anon. And when Grygar apperceyued the great danger that he was in, he
said within himself. A Haufray I must dye for you. I had well said it evil
is the thing begone and evil shall it finishe. In this manner Grygar could not
wound Orson in no wise. And when Orson saw this he ^ast the spear down and
after came against Grygar and so st^ait^he kept him that he caught his horse by
the neck and he made him turn so often about that he made him fall, but when
he felt his horse fall he would have lept out of his sadle, and at the lepe he
lost his shield, for it fell down and Orson ran to it and anon put it upon
him, and went toward the horse and mounted upon him, and in making marvelous
signs he roode after Grygar that fled about in the field. To se the
countenance of Orson every body was abashed. And the king Pepyn amongst the
other was much pensyfe for this case, and said before them all. By God
almi^hey lords I marueyle me much of this feate, and I can tell what to
think, nor to what end it will come but whatsoever it be, or what may happen
it is mine opinion that there is treason right great somwhere: The king was
pensyfe upon this enterprise. And Orson that was mounted on horseback for to
pursue Grygar descended of the horse and went unto him on foot, and he gave
such a stroke that he smote him down to the ground, and after he lepte upon
him and took his sword and his dagger from him, after he gave him so mighty a
stroke that he smote of his arm and his shoulder. And then he gave him another
marvelous stroke in the body so that he cut his reins of his back in two. And
Grygar escryed so hye that every body herd it in demaundyng a priest for to
be confessed of his sins and to have absolucion of them. And when the gardes
of the field vndrstode him a much notable knight that had the charge went to
ward him and demanded him what he would, and then Grygar said unto him. Sir
make the king Pepyn descend, for I will before all the world tell and
confess the falsnes and treason of my case. Then this thing was sygnifyed to
the king Pepyn all clearly what he had said.

How Grygar after that he was overcome and vanquyshed by Orson confessed before
the king* Pepyn the treason that Haufray and Henry had done against the noble
Ualentyne. Cap. xx.


WHen Grygar saw the king he cried him mercy. And recounted unto him how
that by the commandment of Haufray and Henry he had taken Ualentyne and put
him in prison till lie be judged to death, When king Pepyn knew the troth of
the matter, he commanded to hang Grygar. Since he mou^ ted on horsbacke for to
go unto the prison that valen tyne was in. when Orson vnberstode that the king
would go, he ran before him making great chere to him showing him the way.
And the king said often. Lords it is a great thing of this wyld man that
loves Valentine thus, and know that his manners styreth me much for to do him
some good. The king loved him much and well he ought to do so, for he was his
propre neuew but he knew it not. Nor yet he shall not know it till that by
Clerymonde sister unto the gyaunre Ferragus it be showed. For that same
Clerimonde had a castle wherein was a heed of brass composed by Nygromancye
that told her all the things that should happen her in the time to come, and
also the which was passed. And yet this same heed was composed of such art
that it should never finishe till that the most hardyest knight of the world
entered into the castle, for than it should lease the speech and all the virtue.
Now there shall come one that shall make it finish. And that shall be Ualentyne,
that the fair lady Cleremonde that take, for the which he shall endure and
suffer great peryls and dangers, as you shall here more plainly afterward. So I
will leave to speak of this matter and will return unto king Pepyn that goth
toward the forest for to save Ualentyne and preserve him from death. He has
done so much that he is entered in to the forest and gothe following Orson that
led him unto the castle. But when they were come^ unto the castle the porters
that knew the king shytte the gates incontinent, for so they were commanded
of them within the castle upon pain of their live. The^^ when the king saw
that he might not enter in to the castle but by force. He commanded his men
that the place should be assailed. So it was not long after that the dytches
were filled with wodde. And after they ap proched nere the walls and entered in
to the castle by force of arms. When they were within the castle they took
all the traitors and bound them streighly. And after they went into the deep
prysons where as Uale^tyne was and took him out and brought him unto the king
Pepyn. When Ualentyne saw the king he ^ett^ him on his knees and thanked him
for his pain that he had taken for to deliver him out of his aduersytie. Then
the barons took him making him great joy and gladness. And told him the case
how it went, and how Orson had fought with Grygar for him to the vt^taunce.
And when Ualentyne herd these tidings he embrared Orson much swetely, and he
him. So ye need not demand if the Joye was great between them twain. After
that this was done the king commanded that the traitors should be lead into
the wodde, and there to be hanged and strangled on one tree with out any
remission. Then king Pepyn spoke unto valentyne and said. Ualentyne my friend
sithe that god has given you the grace to be thus Joyously escaped from the
hands of your enemies. I counsayl you that you return again with me. Sir
said valentyne, for gods sake pardon me, for I shall never return unto the
time that I know what I am, and of what place extraught. Wherefore I take hehe
leave of you as he that would serve you to my power. At these words they
departed. Here leave I to speak of the king and ^^ll speak of Ualentine and
Orson that is going into Acquitaine for to fight with the grene knight that
fears no man, for as I have told you before he shall never be vanquysshed
but of a kings son that never had souked woman's breasts. Thus goes
Ualentine and Orson together toward the country of Acquitayne. All the world
ran for to se Orson that was all naked and rough as a beer. Every body did
laughe at him but he set not thereby. Then Uale^tine made for to make him a
^acera^ of fine stele, which was of such a fasion that it had a hode that was
fastened to it. And when Orson had it on him he thought him much wild and
would have put it of gladly, but he feared Ualentyne much, for all that he
commanded him he did without contradiction. When Orson was clothed in the
^^ceran of stele he beheld himself strongly, and kept a proud countenance.
Now it happened that as they passed upon their way Ualentine espied a right
fair squire that passed thereby, the which wept full tenderly. When Ualentyne
saw that he said unto him friend what ayled you for to weep, have you found
any evil men, or have you fear of the wild beasts, tell me for I shall help
you after my power. Alas said the squier of all this I have no doubt, but
know that the thing that causes me for to weep is my master that I have
lost, the which was the most courteous the most amiable, and the most
valiau^t that was upon the earth. Ualentyne said how have you lost him. Sir
said the squire he went into Acquitayne for to fight with the grene knight, for
to have one of the fairest ladies in the world, that is the pleasant lady
Fezonne that has her heart so gracious and noble, but there shall never none
have her if the grene knight be not overcome in clean battle. Now there is
diverse valyaunte knights dead. And when he has conquered them he makes them
to be hanged on a tree that is in the place on the which tree is hanged diverse
knights to the nombre of two and thyrty. He takes no mercy of none he is so
truell a ^elon. Holy vyrgyn Mary said Ualentyne I think he is some deuell when
he does such things but and it please Ihesus I shall go in to Acquytayne,
and shall prove my body against him, for I have heard so much speaking of the
fair lady Fezoune that if I dye not shortly I shall know the truth. Ha sir
said the squire for God goo not thither, for if you fight with him you shall
lose your pain, and you are so fair a knight that I never saw none such.
Lose not your life for to fight with that devil, for I have seen him put so
many noble men unto death that I have great doubt of you if you fight with
him. Squire said Ualentyne in to Acquytayne will I goo, and of the grene
knight I shall know the truth, and if he have evil cause against him will I
fight, but if I may I will speak first with the fair lady Fezonne, and do
after her counsel. And when Orson understood him he made signs unto
Ualentyne that he longed for to fight with the grene knight, and that he would
love the fair Fezonne. When valentyne understood him for great joy he
laughed. Thus go the two brethren walkyng through the country for to go unto
Acquytayne So they have ryden so much that they are aryued beside the tyrie.
Ualentine saw it from far for it stood onhye. Then he called an old man
that passed by and demanded him what (...) it was that he saw before him. Sir
said the goodman it is Acquitayne. Now tell me saybe valentyne where does the
grene knight hold him. Sir said he beside the city, I think you go for to
fight with him. Yea truly said Ualentine. A sir you undertake a great folly,
for you shall never have victory on him. Mount upon this little hyland be hold
where as hangs upon a tree moo then forty that he has put to death. There is
no more then fiftene days of respyte that the duke of Acquitayne shall be
constrained for to give unto him his daughter the fairest of the world, the
which shall be great dommage. Friend said Ualentine God shall help her. Thus as
vale^tine spoke unto this man an ancient man came to ward him in the habyte
of a pilgrim evil clothed the which had a great white bearde, and was of the
aege of four score year. This man was Blandymayn the squire of Bellyssant that
led herinto the castle where as the gyaunt Ferragus was as it is made
mention of before. Ualentine salued the pilgrim and demanded him from whence
he came. And he answered him. Sir I come from Constantinoble, but I might not
enter in to the city for a paynim Soudan that has assyeged it. I might not
do there my message, wherefore I return me. Pilgrim said Ualentyne telme if
the grene knight have none end. No said the pilgrym I wa^raunt you and I
counsayl you that ye coueyte not to fight with him. For and you were a hundred
he would make you all dye. To God I command you, for I must depart. The
said Ualentyne tell us whether you go. Sir said Blandimayn I goo straight to
Paris, for I must do a message to king Pepyn of France from a sister of his
named Bellyssant that of long time was banyshed out of Constantynoble, with
wrong, and without having deserved it. Now is the good lady in the house of a
gyaunt that kept her full swetely, the which will go into France for to wit
if king Pepyn be consentyng, For so well he knows the lady of good manners and
conditions that he will fight in a fyelde of battle against the Emperor of
Greece that he has falsely and euilly expulsed her: Frend^ said Ualentyne to
him. I pray the in the name of God almighty that thou return again with us
into Acquytayne. And when I shall have foughten with the grene knight, if God
my creature give me victory against him I shall return in to France with
you. And for the love of king Pepyn I undertake this battle for I am more
beholden unto him then unto any man living. It is he that has been my father,
and has nourysshed me so well, that I ought well to have the courage and will
for to do his commandment and pleasure. Sir said Blandimain I will never
consent unto this. For I will goo and do my message for the noble lady
Bellyssant, for she has given me the charge and I will serve her truly. God
be with you both the which keep you from all evil. So Blandymayne departed
and took his way toward Paris. And Ualentyne beheld him right strongly. Alas
it was not with out a cause. He had good right if his heart drew to him for it
was he that of long time had saved and kept his mother, but he knew it not.
They took their way. And went so long that they aryued beside the city of
Acquitayne. Ualentyne beheld the city sore that was right pleasant to se.
After valentyne espied a fountain and went the^her and alyght of his horse,
and after he laid him down under a tree that was beside it for to refreshe him
for he had great heat, he reposed him a little and slepte and Orson kept him.
And when he had reposed him and was awakened he rose up upon his fete for to
mount on horsback, but there came and arrived there a knight that was fyerse and
proud, and that for his great pride was called the proud knight, For he was so
fyerse that never the days of his life he had salued no man. And yet he was of
such a condition that he that salued him not should have bataill against him,
where through he had made diverse dye. He came toward the fountain and set foot
on ground, and Ualentyne beheld him and said never a word, and than he
aduysed Orson that beheld him fiersly. The proud knight had dyspyte in his
heart and approached near Orson, and gave him such a stroke that he made the
blood issue out of his mouth. And when Orson felt him self smiten he took the
knight between his arms so rudely that he three we him down under him, and
since he took a knife that hanged at the knights gyrdle and smote him in to the
body so that the blood issued out by great habundaunce. And the knight that
field him self wounded cried right hye. Than Valentyne approached and took the
knight out of Orsons hands, and said to him. Fair sir you have wrong for to
smite this poor man that can not speak a word. Than said the proud knyghts unto
Valentyne. Proud ryvaude wherefore do thou not salve me. The he drew out a
glaiue for to have smiten him and Valentyne drew his sword and gave him so
great a stroke that he smot him down deed to the earth. And sith said to him. I
shall ^^ar^e you to salve the folks. When the proud knight was ^eed his men
began for to flee to ward the eyte of Acquytayn, and entered in right
sorrowful, and told the tidings that their master was deed. Of the which
tidings was much angrye and dyspleasaunt the duke Sauary, for he was his
cousin. Ualentyne herd the sorrow that the proud knights men made, that had been put to de the beside the fountain. So he mounted on horsbacke and entered
into the cite. And when he was within he lodged him in the house of a much
rich burgeys, but when they were lodged it was not long after but that the
tidinges came unto (...) duke Sauari that they that had slain his cosyn were
lodged in the cite He commanded that they should be brought unto him, when he
had commanded it the messengers departed incontinent for to go fetch
Valentyne and Orson the which came toward him anon. Than spoke ye duke Sauary
in this manner. Friends tell me what ye be^ and if you be knights or no, of
what country you be ^ what prince you serve. Sir said Vale^tine a knight I am*
and am servant unto the good king Pepyn that holds France. Knight said
the duke you have slain my cosyn and put him unto death. It is true said the
noble knight Valentyne, I say not the contrary, and if that he had been of
my propre lignage I would have done as much, for he was proud and fyerse of
courage, he dayned not speak to great nor litel by his pride he has smyten my
fellow so that he felled him, and when I saw that I drew my swearde and
slew him. I am a stranger that are comen in to this cite for to fight with
the grene knight, and for tose the pleasant Lady Fezonne that is so much
renown you have made the ways that every knight shall come So it seems me
right and just equity that through at your land one ought to go in surete
in the hye way And when the duke Sauary herd Ualentine speak so he said unto
him Knight well haste thou answered, if my cousin be deed, it is by his Pride and
fyerse courage, of his death I am sorrowful, but there is no remedy, wherefore
I pardone the that deed, and I will be pardoned. But for the surplus of your
enterprise of the grene knight, you shall come into my palace, and shall se the
lady for whom you are come^ into these quarters And with her you shall find.
xiiii. knights of strange countrees newlye comen, that for the love of her
will right against the grene knight. Go theder and salve my daughter as the
custom is. For so it is ordained that al knights that comes hither for the
love of her, before that they do any batayl with the grene knight, they present
them to her. And in sign of love they take a ringe of goulde of her. Sir said
Ualentine I am ready to do as the ordinance bids. And of the other side I
am your little servant, as he that would obey unto all your good commandments
after my puyssaunce. Than the duke Sauarye mounted into the castle, and
Ualentine and orson accompanied him much honorably. They entered into the halle
whereas the knights were that accompanied the fair Fezonne. And when valentine
saw her, he went toward her in great reverence, and salued her saying before
them al. Lady of whom the bruyte and renown of beauty corporell is spredde
so far about God save you and defend you from all Vyllanye and evil
reproach, and preserve you from the grene knight that is not worthi for to
touch your excellent body. My right dear and honorable lady please it you for
to wit that Pepyn the right puissas^e king of France has sent us toward
you, and here I make you a present of the most valyaunte and hardy man that is
upon the earth. Lady behold him, for he doubts no man, and yet he has no
fear of no glayue be it never so sharp. If he could speak well in all the
world might not be found his make. Wherefore you may be sure and believe
steadfastly that the grene knight may not resist against him for he shall yield
him matte and overcome also soon as he shall fight with him. Sir said the
pu^el, unto the puyssaunt king of France I yield a hundred thousand thanks,
and to you that has taken so much pain for me. But tell me I pray you
wherefore you clothe not this valiant man no better that you have brought to
me. For he is marueylusly well made of his members, and well formed, straight
and hardy of countenance, and I believe that and he were bayned in a hoote
house, his flesh would be white and soft. Lady said Ualentyne, he never
ware no gown till the other day that I made him this ^aceran that is upon
him, for to se his countenance for it is the first gown that ever he ware.
And know that also naked as he was borne he came unto paris when he was borne,
and his flesh is so hard that he fears another wind nor cold. Always in
speaking these words the excellent Fezonne beheld stronly Orson and so as it
was gods pleasure, she was eu^^noured on Orson, and stryken at the heart more
ardauntly then ever she was before of any other, how well that he was not
pycked nor gorgyously clothed as diverse other were for all that it is said
commonly that there is no foul loves when the hearts gives them thereto Then
when Ualentyne had spoken so to the maiden, he said yet again unto her. Lady
as touching me I shall tell you my case, know that for the love of you I am
come into this country for to conquer you valyauntly by force of arms. And
yet I have made an oath that I shall never return into France unto the time
that I have fought and proved my body against the grene knight. For know that
for the love of you I will suffer death, or yield you the grene knight
overcome in to your hands. Alas sir said the fair Fezonne for me have not
the courage to put your life in such au^ture. For who that loves another
better then himself in a thing that his life hanged on, such love is me
think is not ^^is^e but by sordynate. Alas to many noble and valiant knights
have been stayne for me, wherefore it is a great damage that I have lived thus
long. Lady said valentyne of this you shall pardon me, for thus I have
promised it. Knight said Fezonne well may it take you. Than drew she out two
rings of gold, and gave valentyne one and Orson the other, after they sat
them down at the table with the other fortene knights, where as right nobly
the duke Sauary made them to be served. But amongst al the^ that were at the
table, Fezonne had her regard most upon Orson. And Orson beheld her by a
desire of love embraced and inspyred with an ardaunt and gracious apppetyte.
Now it happened that as ye knights were syttyng at the table, the grene
knight came smytyng at the gate for to se the fair Fezonne that he loved so
much. For the duke Sauaray and he had made such a contracte together that he
might come once a day and se her at his pleasure. And then when he was entered
he cried all on high saying. Valiant duke of Acquitain have you a champyon yt
will fight with my body for the fair lady Fezonne. Ye said the Duke, yet have
I syxtene within my halle, that for to she we their prow esse against every
body and you been comen from diverse realms into this country. Now said the
grene knight make that I may se them, and that I enter in to the hal for to se
the fair lady Fezo^ne. Enter in said the duke for you have license. The green
knight entered into the halle and behealde all the knights that were there.
And when he had beholden them he said to them thus, Lords ete and drink and
make good the re, for to moro we shall be your last day. And know that I
shall make you all to be hanged on the hygheste of all my tree. Than Valentyne
that herd him was evil content and answered him. Knight of that same vaunt
you might have hold your tongue. For to dayis comen a knight that shall fight
with you more asprely than ever did onye hear before, you have delivered many
unto death, but he is commen that shall vaynequisshe you in a field by force
of arms. Now Orso^ understood that they spoke of him, and knew that the grene
knight was he by whom the Justes were begone nen, and that it was he by whom so
mani noble knights had suffered death. So he beheld him fyetsly, and after lept
from the table, and in whettinge his tethe he took the grene knight by the
middle and charged him vpo^his neck, as a little child. And when he had him
upon his neck he espied a wall and cast the grene knight against it so
rudely, that all they that were in the pi^te wend that he had broken his
neck. For he remeued not. And wan he had done so he sat him down again
amongst his fellows, and in laughyng made them signs that he would bear upon
his neck such three as the grene knight. Then began all the knights of the
halle for to laughe strongly, and said the one to the other. Now is he come
that shall discomfite and overcome the grene knight. And Fezonne shall have to
great a loss when he can not speak. For he is well worthy to have honor
amongst the valiauntmen. When Fezonne had well beholden the manners and
countenasi^e of Orson, she was smiten to the heart with the darte of love by
the pleasure of God and of the virgin Mary, that yllumyned both their two
hearts in such a facion that she gave unto him al her courage and will, and she
had ever her regard fyxed upon Orson, and began for to love him so ardauntly
that she forgate all the other for to have him to her lover. And it was not
without a cause if she were so taken with his love. For he had taken the grene
knight up so valiauntly that at yt same hour he might have slain him if he
had would, but how well that he had puyssaunce over him yet he would do him
no harm. For it is commonly said that a noble courage can not lie.
Notwithstanding the grene knight reputed this deed for a great outrage. And
said all on high before all the company. Lords this same wild man has
deceived and betrayed me, for he came to me without saying any word. I promise
and let you wit that to morrow in the morning I shall be a man for him. And to
the end that all other take ensample by him, in dyspyte I shall make a gy^ette
to be raised up above all the other that has been vanquyshed by me, and there
shall I make him to be henged and strangled.

How Orson waged batas^ against the grene knight and how Ualentyne fought with
him and might not overcome him. Cap. xxi.


ORson apperceyued well yt the grene knight was not well content with him, and
that he menaced him. So he began for to momble a peace and making signs that
upon the morrow he would fight with him, and in token of wage the cast the
grene knight his hod Then spoke Uale^tyne unto the grene knight and said. Sir
behold the gage that the wild man casts to you, if you have any power
against him think for to take it up. Than was the grene knight so taken with
pride and dispyte that he answered never a word. And the duke Sauary that was
there present said unto him Free knight there will be a strong battle between
the wild man and you, and I fear me sore that you shall have much a do with
him. And if that you may do so much as to have victory over him, you may well
vaunt you that of all knights you are the most doughty and valiant, and that
of none you ought to have fear nor dread. And that it be true he has showed
you before all that he is hardy of heart and of courage. By my god said the
grene knight to morrow shall you all se and know what his puissaunce is, for
never in this life shall he return from the field till I make him to be
hanged above all the other. At these words he issued out of the castle and
went unto his rest in his pauilion. And the other lords and knights remained
with the fair la die Fezonne, the which made great joy and solace, and said
the one to the other that the day was come that the grene knight should find
his master. Great noise was thorough the city of Orson the savage, every body
desired for to se him, ye in such manner yt so great nombre of folk came into
the palais, that for the prese that was there the duke commanded that the
gates should be shytte. wha^ Orson hard the noise hel^pt up upon a baye
wyndowe for to behold the people that were without. Than the folks
apperceyued him and showed him one to another in speaking and deuysyng of him
in diverse manners and facions. The night was come so that it was time to go to
souper, tho was every body set and served. So when the duke was risen from the
table anon after came in plays, and after every body went into their
chambres. When Ualen tyne was in bed he made signs to Orson that he should
lie down by him, but Orson set not thereby, for he laid him down platte to
the earth as he was accustomed to do in the forest, and so he passed the night,
when the day was come. Ualentyne and Orson went into the hall where as they
found the fair lady Fezonne with the other knights. There they held
counsayll together for to fight with the grene knight. For yt same day the
duke had promised him to deliver him a champion to fight with him. So there
spoke among them a right noble knight that was extraught out of a gentle blood
and said in this manner. Lords if it please you all I am purposed for to fight
first with the grene knight. This request was a^oorded to him by the
assistentes of all chyualty, and the knight went for to arm him, the which
was called Galetam, and was come out of the realm of France. And when he was
arm^^ he came before the pleasant lady Fezonne, and took his leave of her
ioyously with great reverence, and she that was garnyshed with all honor and
good co^dicions vttred him leave in saying. Fre knight I pray to god of
paradyse, and to the blyssed and glorious virgyn Mary that they conduyte you,
and keep you and preserve you from damage, in such manner and facion that with
joy and honor ye may return unto me again. And he thanked her with all
his heart, and the^ he took leave of his fellows. When he had taken leave of
the fair Fezonne he mounted on horsbacke and went to ward the tente of the
grene knighte. O^ as ferro as he saw him he smote his horse with the sporres and
with a fyerse courage rannt to the knight Galeram, and so great a stroke he
gave him that he smote him do wne to the ground than he descended of his horse,
and took his helm of his head. Wherefore Galeram that fered the death yielded him
unto the mercy of the grene knight, but it profyted him little. For without any
pite he dispoyled him of his harneis, and hanged him on the height of the tree
so as he had done the other before. For the death of the same Galeram was
great bruyt through the cite of Acquitaine, for he was a much fair knight
and gretely praised among his fellows. Now Orson knew well that the grene
knight had put to death galeram. He made signs with his hands that he would
go fight with him at the same hour without any more delay, but Valentine made
him syne that he should withdraw him, for he would go first. As than Orson
held him still, for he fered Valentyne always.:,

Than the noble and hardy Uale^tyne armed him and after went toward the fair
Fezonne for to take love of her. So it is not to be demanded if she bewailed
him much and if she cast mani covered sighs with in her right noble heart.
Alas said the fair and pleasant lady Fezonne. My god please* it the to
defend and preserve this noble, fair, and gracyous knighte, that for the love
of me will put his life in danger. Much be waylled Fezonne the amyable knighte
Valentyne, but above all other her mind was upon Orson, and she had a good
cause, for god had put him on the earth for to be her husband. After the leave
taken of the Lady and of all the knyghts Ualentyne mounted on horsback for to go
fight with the grene knight. But even so as he put him on the way came to him a
knight that was enbraced with the love of the fair Lady Fezonne, and said to
him. Sir have a little pacyence and let me go the first. Friend said Ualentyne
I give the leave, goo in the name of Jesus why she give the puyssaunce and
vyctorye for to conquer him. That same knight had to name Tyrys, and was
borne in the country of Sauoye, but so much great pity was in his case, that
for to put him in that adventure he had spended all his, so that he had no more
left. He took leave of thee Lords, and sith mounted on horsbacke, and without
any soiour nynge he rode to the pauilion of the grene knight. And when he saw
Tyrys approach he lept'out of his tente much fyersly and proudlye. And Tyrys
escryed him, saying. Sir grene knight now mount on horsbacke and think to
defend you. For on gods behalue I defy you that has made all the world, and
for us suffered death and passion. The green knight that Tyrys understood
called for to have his horse, and one of his servants brought him anon, than
he set his foot in the styroye and lept upon his back. He took his grene sheld
and his spear, and after they wythdrewe them for to fetch their course, and
they encountered so impetuously that the grene knight smote him through the
body with his spear and so he fell down dead. And incontinent the grene
knight dyscended and took a cord and put it about his neck and hanged him up
with ye other wherefore ye Painims and Sarasins made great Joye And when
Ualentyne saw that Tyrys was deed and hanged on the tree, he was sorye for his
death and dyspleasaunt. He made the sign of the cross before him, and
recommaunded him unto god, in desiring above all things that he would do so
much that of his fader and mother he might have perfyte knowledge. And when he
had made his prayer unto god he smote his horse with the sporres and rode to the
tente of the grene knight, that for the semblaunt of Orson knew him well, and
of him he had more doubt than ever he had of any before. He called Ualentyne
and said to him. Knight understand that I shall tell the, feast thou ^onder
upon that tree a grene shield go and fetch it me and I shall deserve it. Sir
said Ualentyne you have servants enough mo than me, wherefore make that they
serve you, for by me you shall not have yt shield. By my law said the grene
knight you shall fetch me the shield, or I let you know that never against my
body shall you have battle. When valentyn saw that the grene knight would
take excusacion for fetching of the shield as a hardy and valiant knight he
rode toward the tree where as the shield hanged (but he lost his pain) for he
might not have it wherefore he was right sorrowful. Than he came unto the grene
knight and said to him fyersly. To fetch thy shield, for I can not have it
Cursed be he of god that fastened it so, and hanged may he be that sent me
theder. Friend said the grene knight I shall tell the wherefore I sent the
theder. Know for certaynte that this same shield came whylom out of y^ faree,
and by a fare it was given me. Now it has such virtue that never none be he
never so valiant nor strong may take it out of the place where as it is
fastened, save he alonely by whom I ought to be conquered and vanquysshed.
Therefore I have sent the therder ward, for of the I had doubt, but now I
am sure when that the shield thou may not bring. Wherefore return the to the
place that thou came fro, and so thou shalt save thy life. For I se the so
fair a knight that I have none envy of thy death, from the which thou can
not escape if thou take battle against me. And to the end that thou think
not that I tell the these words by fayntyse or folysshe abusyon, know that of
none I shall be vaynquysshed be he never so vyctoryous save but of a man that
shall be a kings sone and that shall have be nourysshed ^out woman's milk,
whereby thou may know if thou be such or not. Of these tidings Ualentyne
was sorrowful and dyspleasau^t at his heart and said. Alas good lord god
almighty to evil go the my feate if that of your benygne grace I have no
socoure and conforte. For I know well that I am not such one as the paynym
says. But sith that I have done so much that I am comen heder for to
encheue this enterprise, I shall never return unto the time that I have
assayed my body against him that has done so many noble knights unto death.
Than Ualentyne called the grene knight and said to him in this manner.
Favregrene knight I se and know that I am not he by whom you ought to be
conquered, but not for that what someuer I am I shall never depart from hens
till that I have foughten against you. By Mahoune said the paynyms great folly
ledeth the, and seems that thou wylll conquer me by treason, but I shall show
the a none that thyn ouerwenynge shall torn the unto great do^mage and shame.
Than he lepte on his horse and badde his servant. Gobert bring his box with
baume of our lord Ihesu christ the which baume as we find by writing is of
so great virtue and merit yt there is no mortal wound, nor so dangerous
that when it shall be enoynted with the same baume, but that it shall behole
anon. This same oyntemente had the paynym with him of long time surely kept,
the which had saved him in diverse places. After that he had done this, he
sporred his horse with the spear on his thye, and are comen the one against the
other, and so fyersly they recountred the one the other with their speres, that
the pieces flewe on every side, ye horses passed forth. And when they had
fetched their course they drew out their bryghte swerdes for to assayll the one
the other. Ualentine was dylygente and hardy in arms so much that with his
sooerde he gave the grene knight so great a stroke that he cut his harneys and
broke it so that he made the blodde run out of his body by great
haboundaunce. And when the grene knight felt himself smyten and wounded, he
lift up his arm on heyght, and with the sword that he bare he smote
Ualentyne upon ye thyghe so great a stroke, that of his flesh he smote away
a great piece, sith he said to him you may know if that I can play with the
sword, I have told you enough before that and you would undertake the field
against me that thrughe my hands it should behoue you to fynysshe your days.
In to soon a time came you toward me* and to late you shall return, for I
have hope that anon I shall take you, and hang you on the highest branch of
my tree for to prepayre the place, and to keep company with the other unhappy
that by their pride and folly have suffered death Paynym said Ualentyn of this
thou may not a^a^te the to much, for yet thou have me not, think for to
defend the And valentyn smote so great a stroke yt of his shield he smote down
a great quarter. And the grene knight smote upon Ualentyn with so great
strength yt he broke his sword upon his helm, and of the great stroke that
he had given hymhe was al astonyed, and fell downa of his horse to the ground,
but he was so valyaunte of courage that he rose up anon. And when the paynym
saw that he rose up he drew out a great pointed knyfe and keste ^tagaynste
him. But Ualentyne saw the knyfe coming and sterte a side. Than the grene
knight that found himself without wepen turned his horse for to have
recovered a wepen, but Ualeytyne was ne re him that with his sword cut one of
his horse fete of, so that paynym and horse fell unto the earth And than when he
was down he arose up quyckely, and came unto Ualentyn, and with strength of
arms they held the one the other. So it is not to be demanded if either of
them enployed his strength and puyssau^ce. And to make short speech the wa^re
between the two knights was so fyerse and so meruayllous that the one and the
other were sore wounded. But for all yt Ualentyne by his force of arms gave
the paynym diverse great wounds it profyted him nothing. For with the balm that
he bare he was heled also sound as he was before. In this wise they were
fighting so long that the day faylled them and they felt them self right
weary, and not without acause. Sorrowful and right dyspleasaunt was the grene
knight because he might not overcome valentyne. And for all that he was weary
yet he showed not the semblaunt, but said unto valentyne. Knight from hens
forth it behooves for to cea se the battle, for I se that you are much
trauaylled and weary. And on the other side the sone declineth, and ye night
approaches, so it should be little honor to me if thus I conquered the,
wherefore return into Acquytayne and rest the this night. For thou may
well auaunte the before every body that there Iusted never against me a more
valyaunter knight than thou art. But too moro we in the morning return into
this field again and thou may well bydde al thy friends fare well, for thou
shalt never escape wythouten death. Ualentyne was right glad for to leave
the greane knight, for he was weary and sore wounded. So he went toward his
horse that was entered into a greane field, he took him by the brydell and
mounted upon him for too return into Acquitaine. And when they of the city
saw that he was returned. They made great Joy. The duke sauary and the other
barons issued out of the gate and received Ualentine with great honor, among
the which was Orson that took him in his arms and made him great cheer.
And when he was in the palace the Duke Sauarye demanded him tidmges of the
Grene knight. Sir said Ualentyne he is in his repair with in his grene
Pauilion where as he reasteth him. He is so puyssaunt and so strong that I
think that there is none be he never so strong that may conqueare him, but
if that God by his grace show an euydent miracle Ualentyne said the Duke well
have you wroughte, for never none returned but that they dyed shamfully by the
hands of the grene knight, well have you showed that above al ye other you
are a knight full of prowess and hardynes. Free duke said* Ualentyne of my
prowess against him I can not yet vaunt me. For to moro we in the morning
must be a new battle between us again. Now god be mine aid and con^orde.
For with out him none may have against the grene knight bodyly vyctorye.
After that vyctorye Ualentyne was dysarmed, and than he went in to the chamber
of the fair Fezonne, it needs not to ask if she was glad and Joyous that
Ualentyne was returned safe and sound / every body made much of him for his
great prowes He was praised of little and great. And when it came unto souper
the duke would do him so much honor that he made him sytte beside him at his
own table, The souper passed in deuysynge of diverse things. After souper
valentyne with drew him after the leave taken of the duke and of the other
lords, and entered into a secret chamber for to dress his wundes, for he was
grievously wounded. And when he was dressed he entered into his bed for to
rest him. And the grene knight is in his pauylyon yt with his baume makes
his wou^^es to be noynted. For he had not so great a wound but that it was
heled anon, and clean as ever it was before. So I shall leave here to speak of
him and will speak of Ualentyne that is in his chamber making pyteous
complayntes and lamentacyons.

How valentyne by the grace of god aduysed him for to send Orson upon morrow
for to fight with the grene knight, and how Orson overcame him in cleue
battle. Capitulo. xxii.


ALL that same night the child valentyne sleep not in his bed, but wept and
syghed full pyteously without any restesaynge. Alas very god almyghtye now se
I well the I shall never come to the end of mine enterprise, but if that of
thine inestymable grace and bou^te thou have pity on me. In gyuyng me aid and
conforte against this false paynym that has sworn my death Alas mine
entencyon and purpose was stedfastlye concluded that my body should never have
reast unto the time that I might have acknowledge of ye fader that engendered
me, and of what mother I was borne, and delivered on the earth, but I know
that the thing the which a man purposes comes notal ways to effect but
remains undone. For me I may well say it, for when I enterprysed the battle
against the Greane knight, fortune was to peruers unto me sithe that he is
such that he may never be vainequished save of a knight that is a kings
son and that in such manner he should have been nourished so in his youth that
never of woman he should feel the milk. Now am I not he that may be so worthy
for to be a kings sone, and that in such manner I have been nouryshed in my
youth, so I se no confort in my fear that may preserve me from death, save
alonelye to inuoke and require the aid of my creatoure Jesus and his sweet
mother Marye, so that they preserve me from his danger, and suffer me not to
fynysshe my days here thus pyteously, In this contempla^ion abode Ualentine all the night without any reast save for to weep his fortune and his ferefull
adventure. And when he had every where thought by dyuyne operacyon he
bethought him on Orson the savage that he had conquered in the wodde, and so
he thought that by him he might be socoured, for he thought well that he had
never souked no woman's breast. And that by adventure it might have fallen that
some Queen had chylded him in the forest. And these things considering the
night took an end, and the day began to clear. Than Ualentine arose charged
with thought and melancoli and came toward Orson, and by evident signs showed
him that he should put on his harneys and take his horse for to go fight with the
grene knight. Of these tidings was Orson right Joyous and lepte and daunced
about the halle for gladness. So he made sign that the grene knight should
never escape his hands. And in making these signs he aduysed a great clubbe
of wodde, the which he took upon his neck in shaking his heed, and made
signs with his heed and his arms that he would bear none other harneys
against the false paynym, or horse nor spear at all for to fight with the
gyaunt. Friend said Ualentyn you shall not do so. But with mine armoure I will
that you be armed, in berynge ye blason that was given me by the king Pepyn,
and you shall ride on the stead that I brought out of France with me. To the
will of valentyne Orson agreed and accorded, for above all things he would
obey unto valentyne and his commandments, as his subgecte and servant,
Than valentyne commanded that they should brige him his harneys, and that
Orson should be armed in ye same manner that he was when he went for to fight
with the grene knight. The thing was done and accomplysshed for the duke
Sauary that was there present helped for to arm Orson with his propre hands
with the armoure of valentyne, with diverse barons that were there. And when
Orson was armed he was much looked on of the lords and barons that was there
present, for he seemed right well to be a man of great prowess and hardynesse*
replete with all beauty hye and well formed in all his members by right mesure
compassed. He beheld the harneys that sh^one about him, and sith he made
synes with his hands that he would strangle the grene knight or that myddaye
were paste before all the court, without having any mereye or pity on him. At
the g^astes and manners that Orson did make all they of the company began
for to laughe much heartelye. And when Orson had taken leave of the duke
Sauarye he enbraced Ualentyne and took leave of him in making him sign that he
should have no doubt of nothing. And that before his retornynge he would bring
the grene knight with him either quycke or deed. And Ualentine in weapynge and
lamenting commanded him to God in prayinge devoutly that he might have
victory against the painim And even so departed Orson, but or he mounted on
horse back he aduysed him on the fair Fezonne of the which he had not taken
leave, so he mounted into the palais and entered into the halle whereas was the
fair lady Fezonne and diverse other Ladies well accompanied, He ran toward
her and would have kyssed her, where at the Lady and diverse other began for to
laugh right strongly. For he made her sign that for to have her love he went
for to fight with the grene knight. And Fezonne that was replete wythal
graciousnes in ^^^^ling made him sign that he should bear him valyauntlye,
and than when he returned from the battle she would give him her love. Thus
departed Orson and mounted on horsbacke the which was right nobly conuayed by
the duke of Acquytayne, and diverse other barons and knights unto the gate.
When he was out of the cite euerybody returned in praying God that he would
give him vyctorye. The noise was through the city that the wild man went to
f^ght with the grene knight whereat they wondered much. Now rydeth Orson in
Ualentynes armor because he should not be known He tarried not long till that
he came unto the pauilion of the grene knight. And without saying onye wordde
he touched it with the head of his spear in signyfy^ige that he defied him, of
the which thing the grene knight had great dispyte in his courage. And swore by
his great God that he would abate his pride or it were night. He was armed
anon and after mounted on hors^ back and took his spear in his hand and
entered into the field for to run against Orson. And semblablye Orson
withdrew him from him, and than they began to couche their speres and in such
wise encountered to gyder that both men and horses fell unto the earth. And when
they were both down they arose up again lightly and drew out their swerdes
for to assayl the one the other right vigorously. The grene knight that was
much prydefull and full of Ire smote Orson first with so great might that he
cut the cercle of gold upon his helm / and smote down a great quarter of
his ^^ylde / and wounded Orson right sore* and with that struck his swerd was
heavy and fell out of his hand. When Orson saw his blood run down alonge
his harm he was more fyerser than a Leoparde, and more courageous than a lion.
He rolled his eyes and shaked his head, and with his bright swearde he gave the
Gyaunte so great a stroke upon his head that he touched his naked flesh / and
bare away a great quantyte of the flesh and here withal, and the stroke slyded
down and hit him on the arm so that the blood ran down haboundau^t ly. But
the grene knight set little by that wound, for he took of the baume that I
have made you mencyon of before, and also soon as he touched the wound / it
was also hole as it was before, of the which Orso^ was much abasssed, and he
thought well within himself that with wepen he might not have his body, when
yt so soon he had heled the wound that was so great, and so profounde. Upon
this matter was Orson subtyl and w^ll auysed, and cast both sword and harneys
from him, and then he ran to the grene knight and held him so strongly
between his arms, that he cast him to the ground underneath him. And when he
had him underneath him, he took his helm of his heed, for to have smyten it of.
There was the grene knight kept in such subgeccon that by force he was
constrained for to yield him unto Orson, and to cry him mercy but Orson that
understood nothing his crienge set not thereby in no manner. And so straytly
he held him yt at that same hour he would have taken his life from him if
that it had not ben valentyne that saw and knew the gestes of Orson, that
came riding toward (...) also fast as he might drive. And when he was comen
theder he made sign unto Orson that he should not sle him Then Orson reculed
him abake when he herd valentyne, but always he held the grene knight in
subgeccyon, to whom valentyn spoke and said Knight at this hour you may
know that you have neither force nor stre^ghte for to avenge you nor keep you
from death against this man, wherefore it is for^e yt you suffer be^^e, and to
fynysshe your days, shamefully. For even so as the other knights have been
dysconfyte by you, and hanged on yonder same hye tree, in likewise shall you be
hanged upon the mook highest branch above them al. Alas said the grene knight
you re^e^ble well to be a man of great curtesye* and garnysshed with noblenes,
for the which thing I pray you that you will have pity on me and save my
life. Paynym said valentyne that shall I not do, save that by such a
covenant, that you shall renounce the paynyms law and the false gods that
you worship, in taking ye law and believe of Jesu christ the god almighty,
and in receyuynge the holy baptym, without the which none can have the glory
pardurable. And when you shall have done that, you shall goo in to France to
the king Pepyn and shall tell him that Ualentin and Orson sendethe you toward
him as knight ouercomen by them and so have advise and aspecte on this feate in
gyuynge me an answer upon your entencion that is sure and certain. Friend said
the grieve knight I give you such an answer. From this hour I deny and
renunce all the false gods, and take for the remenaunt of my life for master
and lord the true god in which you by leave, and in that same faith will I
live and dye. And also I promise you that I shall go toward the king Pepyn and
yield me also soon as I may, as your pore subgecte and prisoner. When the
grene knight had made the oath, and promise to accomplysshe the things above
said. Ualentin made sign unto Orson that he should let him rise. And Orson
that was wise and well auysed took his armoure from him to the end yt he
might do him no dommage. And when the grene knight was upon his fete he spoke
to valentyne and said. Sir knight me think that you are he that had battle
against me yesterdaye, and that should have returned again to day. And he that
has conquered me is the same that in the palace of ye duke Sauary keste me
against the earth. It is true said valentyne, that is well known of you, the
thing is verytable I will not lie to you. Now I shall tell you one thing said
the grene knight the which I pray you to accomplysshe Send me this knight
yt has conquered me to yonder great tree, and if he may take away the
shield that hangs there, I shall know well if it be he that shall conquer
me, for of none other I may not be ouercomen in no battle. Than valentyne
made sign unto Orson that he should go toward the tree for to fetch the
shield that hanged there. Orson went theder, and also soon as he came to the
shield he stratched for the his arm and the shield lepte in to his hand, the
which he brought to the grene knight. And when he saw that Orson had brought
the shield from the tree without enforcing of him, he knew that it was he yt
was predestyned for to conquer him, he cast him self to ye earth and would
have kyssed his fete, but Orson was wise and well taught by the signs of
valentyn and would not let him, but took him by ye arms and lift him up. Alas
said the grene knight Iought well to do you honor and reverence, more than to
any man on live for I know well that of all hardy and valiant knights you
ought to bear the name and fame. And among the other I afferine you and let
you wit that he that has conquered me is the most hardyest and valyau^test
that is in the world. And you ought to bileue steadfastly that he is a kings
sone and a queen's, and is such one that he was never nourysshed of woman. And
that this is true I may prove it you by my sister Clerimonde. For she has a
heed of brass that tells and declares unto her the adventures and fortunes
that to her and al them of her generacyon may happen and befall. And y^ same
heed shall endure unto the time yt the most worthy of the world enter in to
the chamber where as it is in. And when he shall be entered at that saine hour
it shall lose his strength and virtue. And that saine knight ought to have my
sister Clerymo^de unto wife the which is so pleasant and fair. Wherefore
noble knight go thederwarde, for I have great desire that you have her unto
wife as the most hardyest knight of ye world, for so ye may well be called
and renowned.

How after that Orson had conquered the grene knight valentyne made him be
crystened and sent him unto king Pepyn and how he had knowledge of his fader
and mother through the grene knight. Ca. xxiii.


As they had spoken thus, the grene knight said unto Ualentine. Sir I shall give
you a ryng to be the better acquainted with her the which she gave me at my
departing and bear it her. And I shall go toward the king Pepyn into France
as I have promised you and yield me prisoner in acquytynge my faith, and at my
retornynge I shall come unto you to the castle of my sister. And from
hensforth if it please you we shall be perfyte friends and fellows. For I will
never depart out of your company. And when the knight (...) le^tine understood
that the greane knight had a sister that was so fair, by the will of God
almighty, and by the inclinacion of natural love, he was smitten at the heart
with her beauty right ^roauntlie. So he madea vow unto God that he would never
rest til that he had seen the lady that was so gretely commended. And after
these things the grene knight that was crowned king of the green Mountain,
and that held great Lordeshippes under him made to cry through his host that
all Painims and Sarazins that were comen at his co^ maundement for to serve him
before Acquitaine should recorne again into their Countrees without dommagynge
of the duke. Sauaries country in any manner. So departed Paynims and sarazins
making great sorrow for the taking of the grene knight. And Ua lentyne and
Orson took him and led him as prisoner toward the cyty of Acquytayne. Ye
need not to demand of the great noise and the great solace and the great Joy
that was made of little and great in the cite of Acquytayne. And the duke
Sauarye with all his baronnage received them in great tryumphe without the
cite. And when the grene knight was before the noble duke of Acquitaine and all
his baronage he said to them in this manner. Lords well ought you to bear
honor and reverence unto this Knighte that has conquered me by force of
arms. And know certainly yt this man is a kings son and a Queen's, and he
never souked no woman in his life for if it were not so he should never have
had strength nor nuyssaunce for to have vaynquysshed me, for so it was said by
the head of brass that my sister Clerymonde has in her cham bre. By my faith
said the duke of Acquitain well may ye be byleued, for he has well showed
against you the great prowess and hardynes that is in him. And sith that it
is so that I know the great valyauntnes that is in him, I will bear him honor
and reverence with all my puyssaunce. In saying these worddes the duke of
Acquitaine with all his court and the grene knighte that Orson led prisoner
been entered into the town, and mounted up into the palace. And when they were
within the duke maunded his daughter, and after said to her. My daughter se
here the grene knight the which for to conquer your body and have your love
has long time kept the most part of my land in his subgeccyon. And how well
that he is not of our believe. yet fortune was too me contrary and above my
will maystresse in such manner that strong and long abiding too have soucoure
of some other badye, had constrained my hear^e to accord unto such things
/ but god yt is true Judge has wylled remedy this deed, in such a manner
that of mine enemy I am avenged and comen to the above by this same knight
that Ualentyne has brought unto you by the license of king Pepyn for to
socour your body. Now may you know that above all other he is hardy and
valiant. And I believe that god has transmysed him for to conquer you.
Wherefore my daughter and mine only hope in whom remains all my Joy and
comfort of my life, auyse and have aspecte and consyderacyon upon this case,
for it is my will that you should have him unto husband, if your consenting
and will were according unto mine, for none ought to constrayne a body to take
one in marriage against their will. My redoubted lord said the noble maiden
that was right well endoctryned and puruayed of answer. You know that you are
my fader, and I am your daughter, it is no reason and right that I that am
after god and nature subgecte unto you do any thing after my will, but am
ready and priest for to do all your pleasure and if I would do other wise I
should not show that I were your natural daughter, for you know well that you
have promised for to give me in marriage unto him that by force of arms might
conquer the grene knight. Now is he comen by whom the thing is accomplysshed
through out. And the which has accomplysshed and performed the tenor of
your cry, and denouncynge that you have made and publysshed thorugh every
christian reg^on, so it is well reason that I take him, and that unto him I be
given And if in any wise I would not take him, I would cause your entencyon to
be aduychyled, which for ever should be reproach unto me. Daughter said the
duke of Acquytayne ye have spoked (...) the hyghlye, and your answer pleases
me right well, and all them that be he represente to my demynge. Now must it
be known of the knight if yt he will take you unto wife and spouse and if he
be content. I shall give him with the maria ge of you half Acquytayne. There
was present vale^tyne that by signs demanded Orson his will and intent. And
he made him sign that he would never have other than the Fair Fezonne, thus
were these two parties of accord, of the which thing they that knew it were
right Joyous. The duke Sauary made to come a bishop for to handfeste Orson
and the fair lady Fezonne, and to make them promise that the one should take
the other for loyal spouse the term of their ly^es. At that present time
there was none other thige made hytwene them unto the day of the spousaylles.
And it needs not to ask if the Joy and myrthe was great thorughe the cite of
Acquytaine both of litell and great, and the great nombre of dysportes and
plays that there was made, for the rehersynge would be to long. But how well
that Orson had sworn and made promise to take the fair Fezo^ne, yet shall he
not wedde her, nor never lie by hersydes till ye by the will of god he shall
speak good language. And that Ualentyne had conquered the fair Clerymonds, of
the which things I will make mencyon here after as well as I may.

How on the night that Orson was made sure to the fair Fezonne, the angel of
god appeared unto valentyne. And of the commandment that he gave him.
Capitulo. xxiiii


AFter that Orson had handfeste the fair Fezonne, on that same day was made
great solace thorughe all the country about, for all the lords of the long
were glad of that assemble. In joy and solace passed that day till the
night came that it was time to go to rest. The duke of Acquytayne did
withdraw him in to his chamber for to rest him. And every body went in to
their chambres as they were ordained. Ualentyne and Orson went in to a fair
chamber that was apparaylled of them, and went to rest in o rich bed both
Orson and he for that night. And when it came toward mydnyght by the will of
god almighty a angel appeared unto Ualentyne and said to him. Ualentyne know
that god sends the word by me that to morrow in the morning thou depart
out of this lo^d and bid with the Orson by whom the grene knight has been
conquered. And without soiournynge or delay go unto the castle of Ferragus,
and there thou shall find the fair lady Clery^onde by whom thou shall know
of what lynnage thou art extraught, and of what fader, thou was engendered, and
of what mother thou was borne and chylded. And this I command the in ye name
of god that or ever thy fellow wedde the fair fezonne thou perform this
vyage. Of this vysyon valentyne was in great thought, and in great melancoly,
and so passed the night unto the time that it was clear day without taking
any rest. And when ye day was comen he made Orson foryse, and went into the
plalays where as the grene knight was with ye other barons and knights
abiding the good duke Sauary, So it was not long after that the duke entered
in to ye halle. And also soon as he was entered ye grene knight took the words
in saluynge him with all due reverence and said to him. Free duke it is true
and certain yt within the term assygned between us two I have been
vaynquysshed, for the which thing I have none occasyon nor right to ask
your daughter any thing, but at this hour I quyte her, and will leave your
land in rest and peace as I have promised in acquytaine of mine oath. And I
pray you that ye make me have the sacrament of baptym, to the end that I may
be to god more agreeable. Knight said the duke well have you spoken, and to your
request will I obey in every thing for at this present hour you shall be
baptized The noble duke commanded yt they should make a priest to come and
baptyze the grene knight. When it came that he was at the font for to receive
baptim. Ualentyne that was there present spoke before them all and said in
this manner. Lords the which be here assembled if it please the valiant duke
for to give me a gift, that is that I pray him that this same knight be named
Pepyn, for it is the propre name of the noble and valiant king of France
that has nourysshed me right swetely, and that above all princes is the most
puyssaunt and hardy, for the which I desire that this knight may bear the
name. To the demand of Ualentyne did consent and accord al they that were
there present. And at the request of Ualentyne he was called Pepyn, the
which name he bare from that hour unto the last end of his days. And
after that he was baptized the duke of Acquytayne made Ualentyne and Orson come
for to wedde his daughter the fair Fezo^ne. But valentyne said to him in manner
of excusacion that both he and Orson had vowed and promised for to go unto
Iherusalem before they did any other thing, after that they had conquered
the grene knight. And under the vmbre of this excusacyon the duke gave them
leave by this condycon that Orson should swear and promise for to return in to
Acquytayne after yt he should have accomplyshed and performed his vyage, and
that also soon as he should be returned that he should take his daughter
Fezonne unto wife. And valentyne and Orson swore that they should do so, and
tha^ he vttred it them Ioyously. And the grene knight at y^ same hour took
leave of the duke of Acquytayne for to go in to France to the king Pepyn and
yield him in acquytayne of his promise. And valentyne before his departing
asked him ye ring yt he had promised him and he gave it hi saying. Who yt
bears it on hi may not be drowned, nor by salse Judgment condampned. Ualentyn
took the ring and put it on his finger. And than Orson and he took leave for to
acheue their vyage. And the grene knight took leave for to go in to France. So
departed the three knights out of Acquytayne and took their ways toward their
Iourneys. Ualentyne and Orson mounted upon the sea, and with strength of
saylles anon they had gone a great way, for the sea was peasyble and the
wind agreeable. They demanded the maryners the way for to draw toward the
castle of Ferragus the gyaunt. And the maryuers showed them, for they knew it
well because yt for to pass that passage it was of custom for to pay a
trybute. Now is valentyne and Orson upon the sea that desires strongly for to
find the castle of Ferragus. And the grene knight rydeth thorughte the
country toward the realm of France for to yield him unto the knyge. But or
yt he arrived before the king Pepyn Blandymayn the squire of the Empress
Bellyssant of who me I have made mencyon before, that was met by Ualentyne in
the habyte of a pilgrim, salued the good king Pepyn in great honor and
reverence. And when yt king Pepyn saw him in such habyte, and with so story
sshed a berde, hedemaunded him if he came from the holy sepulcre or of what
vyage he was pilgrim. Free king said Blandymayn a pilgrim am I not, but for to
encheue more surely mine enterprise I have put my self in the habyte of a
pilgrim. And know that I am messenger of a high and puyssaunt lady that by
treason has bendeiecte from her country, and put pyteously in exyle. Alas
sir the lady that I speak to you of is your sister, that is to wit Bellyssant
the free lady, the which has been chaced shamefully away by the Emperor
Alexander, and lives in great pouerte and calamyte for defaulte of succoure.
well have you your heart hard when that for her deliverance ye will not
employe you none other wise.

How king Pepyn had knowledge that valentine and Orson were his neuewes by
Blandimayn and the grene knight that came and yielded him to the king as he had
promised valentyne. Cap. xxv.


WHen king Pepyn heard speak of his Sister, he began for to syghe heartily,
and asked him where she was. Sir said Blandymayn, I know the truth but I have
promised her that I shall no body ensygne to the place where she is. But and ye
be in doubt of her loyalte. I shall bring you a man that will fight for her
quarrel. Alas said the king I have seen probacion enough of her loyalte by the
false Archebysshop that the marchaunce overcame. I have made her to be sought
long time, but I can have no tidings of her in no manner. And that which
greueth my heart most, is that my sister Bellyssant was great with child when
she was expulsed from the Emperor. And I wot not what child she has borne,
nor also how she escaped that great danger, for I know well that she has
not had such help at her need as unto her apperteyned. Sir said Blandimayn
for to speak of this matter. know that my lady Bellyssant your sister, felt
the pains of chylding in the forest of Orleaunce. And when the evil had taken
her, she sent me unto a vyllage there beside, for to fetch her a woman for to
help and sucoure her. Then I made the most dyligence that was possible for
me, but or ever I was returned the noble lady had delivered two fair sons,
of the which a wild beer much furiously bare away one of the children into
the wodde, in such manner that the Empress Bellyssant after her power wend
for to have saved and sucouredit, but she wiste not where it became, she had
followed so long that I found her lying upon the grass in a swowne piteously
aourned, the which seemed better dead then on live. I took her up between mine
arms and comforted her as well as I might. And when she was come to herself
and that she might speak in syghyng much pyteously she recounted unto me the
manner how she had lost her child by the wild beast, and how she had left
the other under a tree. And when I understood those words I led her unto the
tree whereas I had left her, and there doubled her sorrow, for she found not
the other child that she had left there. And thus were the two children of
your sister lost in the foreste. And other tidings know I not. And if you
doubt you of this thing for to have the more greater knowledge know sir that
I am Blandymayn that was given all alone for to conduyte your sister
Bellissant, when she was sent in exile by the Emperor Alexander. Alas
Blandymayn said the king your words gives me distress and displeasaunce
when that I may not know the place where as my Sister is, nor of her two
children have certain knowledge, but sithe that I can know none other thing
tell me if that it be long ago sithe that she was delivered within the forest
of the two children. Sir said Blandymayn it was upon the propre day that you
met me in the forest of Orleaunce, and that I told you the pyteous tidings
of the exyle and vytuperable blame of my lady Bellyssant your sister. As the
king Pepyn understood these words of Blandymayn, he was right pensyfe in his
courage. And even so as he was in that thought he be thought him of Ualentyne
that he found in the forest that same day, and on Orson that had been
conquered by him in that same wodde. For this thing he was in great melancoly.
And when he had al considered he knew by the sayings of Blandimain that they
were sons of his sister Bellissant. He sent for the queen Berth his wife and
diverse other lords and ladies of his court for to tell and declare it them.
Alas lords said he I have holden and nouryshed long time in my house as poor
children and vnpu^uayed, they that be sons to an Emperor and an Empress,
and my propre neuewes, that is vnlentine that I found in the forest of
Orleaunce, that was by my sister Bellyssant in the time of her misfor tune
chylded within the wodde. And I let you to wit that Orson the savage that has been conquered by valentyne as I may understand is his propre brother natural,
and they both are sons unto the Emperor of Greece. Of these tidinges was the
queen Berthe much joyous, and all the lords barons and knights of the court.
There was present the two enemies mortal of Ualentine, that is to wit Haufray
and Henty, that with semblaunt made tyght joyous chere, but at their hearts and
courages they were tryste and sorrowful. For above al things they desired the
death of the noble Ualentyne, for and to the end that with Charlemayn their
little brother they might do their will disordinate, to whom they were much
contrary as you shall hear afterward recounted. Now was Blandy main right
sore abashed when he hard the king speak thus of the deeds of the two
children, and demanded him. Sir know you in what land these two children may
be found that you make mention of. Friend said the king I have nouryshed one
in my house right long, in such manner that he is become great haroye and
strong, and has conquered the other that lived in the forest of Orleaunce as
a beast, and dyd^e great damage in the country about. And after that he
had conquered him, and that they had been long in my court, they departed
from me, and took leave of me for to go in to Acquytayne to fight with a hardy
and a valiant champyon that the grene knight makes hi^ to be called. And sith
their departing I might never have tidings of them. Sir said Blandymayn after
that the which you tell me I let you wit that I met the two children beside
the cite of Acquytayne, wherefore I am right dyspleasaunt that I might not know
them, for of all my dolours I should have had than alegement. Of this matter
they devised long time. And after these things the king commanded that
Blandymayn should be fested and served honorably in all things that was
necessary for him. Than was Bla^dymayn taken by the officers of the palace and
was led among the barons and knights of his court, the which received him
in great honor and reverence in festynge him. Now it happened that on that
same day the grene knight that I have made mencyon of before arrived at the
court of king Pepin that was at Paris. And soon as he was dyscended he went
into the halle ryall, in the which king Pepyn was with his batous and knyghts
much notable. He salued the king right reuerentlye. And when the king saw
him armed with gre^e armor he meruaylled much and demanded him before all
his barons and knights. Tell us whom you are and also what is the cause of
your coming hither and wherefore you ^ere such grieve armoure. Noble and
honorable king said the grene knight know that I am extraught out of
sarazyns land, and borne, and of a fader sarazyn I am engendered, and of a
mother painime I have been childed, So it is true that for to have to wife the
daughter of ye duke of Acquitaine named Fezonne I have by a whole year holden
the land of the duke in my subgeccyon. And have done so much that at the
last I did give him syx months of trewes, by such a covenant that yt he gave
me not a knight that by force of arms might conquer me during that same time
that I should have his Daughter Fezonne unto wife. And in case that I were
conquered and vainquisshed I should make mine host to depart out of his
country without ^armynge or hurtynge it. Now I have been right long before
the cite of Acquitaine in abidinge every day battle, so there came to me many
valiant knights of diverse countrees and regeons, the which I have put al to
death and hanged on a tre^* save alonely two worthy knights whereof the one is
named Ualentine and the other Orson, that same Ualentine fought wit me the
space of a hole day, and we did so many feats of arms between us twain that
the night constray ned us to leave and depart as weary and trauaylled.

And when it came on thee moro we that thee battle should have begone again
between us twain, his fellow Orson armed with his propreharneis, entered in to
the field for to fight with me, wening to me that it had been Ualentine. And
when that same Orso^ was entered into the field much fierslye he made me sign
of dyffyaunce. Than I lepte out against him, but littell auailed my strength,
for I abode not long or that I was vainquished by him. And he would have
taken my life from me if Ualentyne had not come rennynge unto us, which made
meswere to receive bap ^ym and believe in Ihesu Christ, and to submit my life
entirely unto your commandment and ordenaunce. And therefore in acquitinge my
faith and promise by the knight Ualentine I am comen to yealde me unto you,
as to him that may do with me your pleasure, and to whom after God apperteyneth
to approach my death or to prolong my life. Not for that my redoubted lord I
yield me before your majesty ryal in demanding and trusting to have grace
for the honor of that same god that I have taken the believe of, for know that
I am crystened and believe in Ihesu Christ, and from hens forth will observe
it with true mind. And when I was baptized at the holy font stoone, in the
honor of your high and puy ssaunte name I was called Pepyn, and Pepyn I am
called* when the king understood the words of the grene knight he answered
him swetely before all the barons and knights saying. Welcome be you unto us.
for of your coming we be tyghte Joyous more than of onye other thing. Make
good chere for the love of him that sent you to us, for I assure you of your
life. And yet I tell you before all that within short time I shall give you in
my realm great lands and possessions if that it plese you to abide in my
service. But tell us where the two knights is that has conquered you. Sir
said the grene knight I left them in the cite of Acquytayne with the duke
Sauary the which holds them more deater then all the other of his court. By
the tidinges of Blandimayn and by the grene knighte king Pepin had tidinges
of his sister and of his two neue was* the which she chileded in the foreste of
Orleaunce. Wherefore he promised God that he should go into greece for to tell
themperoure this tidinges, and for to make his sister to be sought in such
manner that she might be found in some place, for above all creatures he
desired right ardantly to se his sister Bellissant that was sogracious* when
he bethought him on the great injury that had been dove unto her, he wept full
bitterly with both his ^yen, and was right sorrowful at his heart.

How the good king Pepyn departed out of France for to go to wa^de the
Emperor of Greece to bear him tidinges of his sister Bell^ssa^t. And how
before his retorning he made war to the Soudan that had besyeged
Constantinoble. Cap. xxvi.


IN that same time that king Pepyn had rydynges of his sister Bellyssant, he
made ready his host without delay and departed from Paris for to go to
Constantinoble toward the Emperor of Greece for to bear him tidings of his
sister Bellyssant as you have heard. The king made such diligence that within
short time he arrived at Rome. There he was received of the Pope with great
honor, for of the christian faith he was the chief defendoure. He dyned that
day with the pope in his palace apostolyke the which told him tydinges of the
Soudan that had besyeged the city of Constantynoble. And thus as they spoke
and devised of that matter there arrived a knight of Greece the which after
that he had salued the pope and the king and all the assista^ntes in much
great reverence he said to him. Holy father that art god in earth know that
the sarazins with great puissaunce and strength of arms have assieged and put
in subjection the land and country of Consta^tinoble. So the Emperor of
Greece sends you word by me that for to keep the christen faith so as you
ought to do ye send him sucoure thither, or else you shall be cause to let the
country be lost, and the christian faith to diminishe, for without your help
and sucour at this need there is no remedy. when the pope understood these
tidings, he was much displeasaunt but the king Pepyn that was there present,
comforted him greatly saying to him. Holy father take in you coutage and
comfort for if you will give me your folks Romayne ^utyll a nombre sufficient
I shall conduite them and lead them toward Constantinoble with mine host, and
I shall do so much by the help of god for the susten^^cyon of the Christen
faith, that the Soudane and his army I shall put too vytuperable confusyon
for of none other thing I have not so great desire as to sus^ein the christen
faith against the paynims. when the pope heard the king Pepyn speak so and
knew his courage he thanked him with all his heart, and said to him. Fre king
right thristen of god be thou blyssed, for of al other kings thou art the
most puyssaunt in wordde and deed, and sith that you will undertake such a
thing, I shall make so great nombre of Romans come hither for to accompany
you, yt you may surely arryue in greece against the infydeles and enemies of
the faith. The pope in that same time of all the land Romayne assembled so
great a nombre of folk that it was meruayll, and made to ctye the croysee,
that is to know that all that would go in that battle in the honor of the
passion of Jhesu christ, and were a cross taking of the pope his blessinge,
should have pardon of al their sins. In the cite of Rome with in a little time
assembled great multitude of people, for to go over the sea with the king
Pepin. And the pope at their departing gave them his blessinge, and absolucion
of al their sins. Thus the king Pepin took leave of the pope and of the
cardinals in recommaundinge him unto the Prayers of holy church. And with
thirty thousand Romans beside his own hooste he mounted upon the sea. And
so much the time was agreeable unto him that with in few days he came and
arrived at Constantinoble. And there he saw that the soudan Moradyn had
besyeged it on al sides. And this soudan had brought with him. xx. knigs the
whithe for to distroy christen dome with two hundred thou sand paynyms had
passed the sea. And so much was this soudan fered and redoubted for his
puyssaune, yt the Emperor of Greece with diverse other christians accompanied
had withdrawn him into Constantinoble, and so well he kept the city that
it might not be taken of the paynym. Always in his courage he bewaylled his
wife Bellyssant, and he bethought of the shame that he had delivered her to
without cause, and thought well within his sorrowful heart that she was decessed
out of this world for it was twenty year past sith he hard any tydinges of
her, but anon he shall heresome by king Pepyn that toweth so much upon ye sea
that within two mile of Constantynoble he is arrived and descended. And made
his tents and pauilions to be pyght up in the field, and made his foolke to
be put in right fair ordinance. Then was the cutrouts and tyders of the
soudan. Moradyn much aghast, that in great diligence returned toward his
pauilion and said to him as men afraid and full of fere. Sir soudan be right
certain that to day there is arrived upon this ground mo then two hundred
thousand Romans all armed for to put us unto confusion. wherefore auyse you
upon this matter, for the thyngis doubtful and peryllous. Hold your peace
said the Soudan and of them have no dread, for it is not possible that out of
the Empire of Rome there be descended so many folk we be puyssaunt enough for
to abide then in battle renged. For I have hope that within short time I shall
put in my subjection both Rome and France. He commanded the capitaines to put
his host in point for to receive them. when the morrow was come, the king made
ready his host for to assail the paynims fiersly Than king Pepyn sent a
lettre secretly into the cyty to the Emperor whythe specified to him his
coming for to socourhym. And that he should make al his men be armed through
the cite in all diligence, and that they should issue out upon the painims and
sarazyns for at that day they should be socoured by the Romans and Frenshmen.
The Emperor was much Joious of the coming of king Pepin, and after the
tenor of the letter made his hooste too be assembled and armed and after
issued out of the cite of Constantynoble for to go against the paynyms and
sarazyns that aboode battle. And also sone as they were in the field they
apperceyued the standards and banners of the hooste of king Pepin that came
thederwarde with so great nombre of trumpettes and clarons making noisethat it
was meruayll. Well saw the Painimes that there came against the^ great
puyssau^ce of men. The Sowdan called two Sarasins of the most hardiest and
commanded them that they should goo secretelye and nombre the host of the
christiens that came against them. And that when they should have done so that
they should return to him again and tell him. The two sarasins that was named
Claryan and Uaudu mounted on horsbacke and ^ode toward the hooste of the noble
king Pepin. But they had not riden long when that the grene knighte espied
them upon a litell mountain. And incontinente as he had apperceiued them he
knew well that they were sarazins. Then he smote his horse with the sportes and
al alone ^ode toward them with his spear on his thighe like a hardy knight.
And when the two sarazins saw him approach to them because that he was all alone
they had shame for to flefor him, and said by Mahoune it shall be great shame to
us if this christian escape from us twain.

How the grene knight Justed against two Sarazins and how he slew the one
and the other fled, and how king Pepyn with his host was enclosed within
Constantinoble. Cap. xxvii.


WHen the two sarazing had said so their an against the grene knight, and he
hit one of them so that he never arose, and the other fled sore wounded. Well
saw king Pepyn that valiant deed. Then he made to assayll the Soudan Moradyns
host. And there Myllon dangler slew the king of Acquyle at one struck, and
three more or ever he rested. And he did so great deeds of of arms that the
soudan Moradin apperceiued him, so he cried (...) high to his folk that they
should assail Myllon Dangler that made so great slaughter of sarazins. At
the commandment of the Soudan Millon dangler was assailed on all sides by the
paynyms and sarazyns. And he was put in such subjection that they cut of one
of his horses thyes, by the which he was constrained to fall unto the earth,
and at that time had been taken or slain if the grene knight had not been
that maugte the sarazins put himself i^ the prese and slew and smote down so
many that he approached unto Myllon dangler and gave him a horse and mounted him
upon him. At that hour did the grene knight and Myllon dangler so great deeds
of arms against the paynyms that it should be to great a thing to recounte
it, for all that found themself before them never went out of that place.
Great was the battayll and endured long. King Pepyn and his men that day made
great slaughter of the paynims. But not withstanding their hardynes they should
have lost the fyelde if the Emperor of greece had not been, that with all his
host valyauntly accompanied assailed the paynims on the other side right
hardely, and put great nombre to death well knew the king that the Emperor
did great deades of arms. Then he took force and courage, and assembled his
men again* and entered into the battayll more ardauntly then before, and thus
the paynims were assayied on both sides. And as soon as the king saw the
Emperor he said unto him. Free prince now show your self valiant, for to
day by me you shall have tidings of your wife Bellyssant. At these words
the Emperor was joyous and double his courage. And cried Constantynoble to
his men, in promysyng them great gifts if they bate them valiant. At these
words he entted into the batayl with so marvelous a courage that he was to
hardy that abode him And king Pepyn and the grene knight entered in on the other
side in smytyng upon the paynyms so impetuously, that wheresoever they passed
they made a large way thorough the prowess of the grene knight. Well wend the
Soudan Moradyn to have known him that beheld his arms, for he was of a high
lynage because that he was brother unto Ferragus. But because that he knew
that the grene knight was a paynim he would never have thought that he had been
come on that side. Now was the paynyms and Saraszyns at that hour put in such
necessite that they wend never to have escaped death, and took the flight. And
then the king of S^^auayne that had the soudans regard accompanied with fifty
thousand fighting men issued out on the christen men in making so great a
shoute that it seemed that all should found. And when the Emperor and the king
Pepyn knew o^ their coming, they saweand considered that their men were
trauayled, and the men of the king of Scl^uonye fresh, wherefore it was
delivered among them not to abide them. And after the counsayll taken, they
made too sown trompettes and clarons for to withdraw the^ in to
Constantinoble. When the Soudan saw that the christen men were entered, he made
too assyege the city right nece. And there was so great nombre of paynyms
about the city upon every side that the emperor and the king* Pepyn might
not issue out of it. Thus they abode long time in the subjection of their
enemies that kept them streyghte in desiring of their death* and purchasyng
the dostruccion of the christen faith So I shall leave you to speak of this
matter and will tell you of valentine and Orson that for the love of Cleremonde
been entered in to the sea, as ye have heard before.

How Ualentyne and Orson arrived at the strong castle, where as the fair
Clerymonde was, and how by the head of brass they had knowledge of their
generation, and how Ualentyne iusted with the Seneshal of the castle for the
enter and slew him. Cap. xxviii.


AFter that valentine and Orson had long time abyden upon the hye Sea, they
aduysed an isle in the which was a castle right strong and puyssaunte, and
full of great beauty, that same Castle was all covered with laten right
clear and shynynge, and for the great beauty of it Ualentine thought well
within him self yt it was that there as the greane knight had sent him to
for to find his sister Clerymonde. He went anon thederwarde and dyscended at
one of the ports of the I Will. And when he was dyscended he inquired and
demanded who ought that castle that was so fair and so rich. And it was
answered him that the castle was in the keeping of tho fair Clerymonde sister
unto the gyaunte Ferragus, and that by a rich sarazyn it was ed^fyed, the
which Sarazyn among all the other excellent things that are in that castle,
made to make and compose a chamber right fair and rich, of the which
chamber the rychesses shall be declared to you afterward. And more over it was
said unto Ualentyne that within that same chamber there was a much rych
Pyller and excellent, upon the which was a head of brass that of old
antiquite had been composed much subtyllye by Nygromancye of a Face, the
which head was of such nature that it gave answer of al things that was
asked it. And when Ualentine understood the declar^cyon of the Castle, he was
right Joyous in his heart, for he thought well that it was the place yt the
grene knight had told him that he should find his sister in, that was so
gretely commended above all other of little and great for her great beauty. He
demanded no ferder for the for that present time, but put him upon the way
with Orson for to goo into that same castle and so much they have gone that
they are comen before the gate for to enter in, but they did find. x. knights
strong and hardye there that did keep the gate night and day. And when they
saw Ualentyne and Orson that would have entered in they said to them. Lords
with draw you abacke, for within this castle enters no body be he never of
so high a lygnage without the leave and license of a maiden to whom y^ guard
appertains, the which above all them of ye world is garnysshed with beauty.
Friend said Ualentyne go toward the maiden and demand her if it be her
pleasure to give me enter in to her castle. Than the porter mounted upon hye,
and entered in to the chamber where as the fair Clerymonde was. After he set
his knee on the ground and said to her. Lady before the gate of your castle
in two men that would enter, and they seem men of right fyers courage and full
of great pride and it seems by their manners that they are men of evil courare
and deed, and contrary to our law. Now tell your will and answer to the
gardes of the gate yt has sent me toward you, if it please you that they
shall enter or not. Friend said the maiden dyscende adowne, and I will goo unto
a wyndome for to wit what men they be, and make the gates for to be kept
well, for I will speak to them* The porter went down and said to his fellows
that the gate should be well kept, till that the lady were at the wyndowe so ^o
give them their answer. Than Clerymonde that was well taught lened upon a
quysshynge of gold a^^ wyndowe and said unto Ualentyne. What are you that by
so great hardynes will enter in to my cas^ol without demanding license. Lady
said Ualentyne that spoke hardyly. I am a knight that passes my way, So I
would gladly speak unto the heed of brass if it pleased you* that gives
answer unto every body. Knight said the lady so may ye not speak thereto* but
if yt you bring me certain signs from one of my brethren / that is from
the king* Ferragus* or from the grene knight that of Tartarye has the
lordshyp and ^o^ynaci on. And if that you bring me from onye of them both
tokenne or certificacion I shall let you enter into the castle at your own
pleasure and will. And know that by none other manner ye may enter into this
castle save alonely by one point that I shall tell you, that is that you take
leave of the Seneshall of this place the which I shall give you by such a
condition that before or you enter you shall Just with him five or six strokes
with a spear. Wherefore auyse you whether you love better to goo fetch me
certain signs of one of my brederen, or do as I have told you. Lady said
Ualentyne make do come your Seneshal, for I have leauer fight against him and
win and deserve to enter into your castle, than I goo by prayers, requests
and flaterynges. Thus spoke Ualentine unto the fair Clerimond that had his
courage so valiant and hardy / not withstondyng that he brought from the Grene
Knight certain signs by the ring of gold, that he loved better for too Just
for to prove his body than for to show the ring the which he should present
unto the fair Clerimonde. And when the Lady saw the will and hardye courage
wherewith he was repleate, from that same hour she was espyred and taken with
his love right ardauntly at the heart. Thanne in contynente she mounted in too
the chamber where as the head of brass was and said unto it, what is that
knight that has so gre^e courage for to enter in to this castle. Lady said
the head / Of the knight nor of his estate shall you k^ow nothing. until the
time that you have brought him before me for that answer was the fair
Clerymond for the love of Ualentyne in great thought.

How as Ualentyne was before the castle speaking to the gardes Clerymonde
made her complaynte all alone of Ualentyne, and how he Justed for the enter of
the castle and wanne it. Ca. xxix.


WHen she had considered by her self ye maitene and the fair speech and
hardynes of Ualentyne she was enbraced with his love more tha^ of any other
that ever she had seen and said Ueray God what may be before above al living
he is worthy to be loved, for he ^i pleasant and straight* and of beauty
corporal passing all other, and if the heed of brass do after my will. I
shall never take other than him. when the fair clerymonde had said al these
things and thought in her courage, she sent for the Seneshall and told him
the tidings of the knight that would enter into ye castle By my god said the
Seneshall he does procurea great folly, for he shall not enter without
proving of his body against mine. And if he be so hardy for to take battle
against me I shall show him clearly before al yt for to have your love he is
comen to late. Seneshall said the lady, sithe that ye will not give him license
for to enter in to the castle go and arm you anon for I let you wit that
you shall have battle of him, and I am in great doubt that you shall repent
you to late wherefore I counsayll you that ye put not your body in this
danger. Lady said the Seneshall that was tyghte proud leave in peace such
words, for or ever yt he enter his body shall abye it. At these words the
Seneshall departed* and went to arm him, and after mounted on horsbacke. And
when he was mounted be issued out of the gate with a great spear in his hand
well heded. And the lady was at the wyudowe for to behold the battle of the
two champyons. When Ualentyne saw the Seneshall come toward him with afyer se
courage, he couched his spear and smote his horse with the sporres. Than they
encountered the one the other so even that both their speres flewe in pieces.
After they took new speres incontynnente, and met sotyersly together that both
champyons and horses fell unto the earth, but anon Ualentynes horse recovered
that was fyetse and strong without setting his master on the ground. And
when the noble knight valentyne was risen up he said unto the Seneshall much
swetely* Now rise you up and mount upon your horse all^a^ your ease, sor it
tholde be ly^ell honor unto me if I ^yde fight with you thus. The Seneshall
was much Joyous and pray see gretely the curtey sye of Ualentyne, so he
mounted on his horse and after took a spear, and came against Ualentyne right
impetuously, But the noble valentine that at yt time could play well with a
spear gave him so great a stroke that he smote of his helm from his heed, and
made horse and man fall unto the earth. And when he saw him self smyten down
and in so great danger he said unto Ualentyne.

Knight I can not tell of whe^s you are nor of what country, but never the
days of my life found I a knight that was so valyau^t as you. I will yield me
unto you and shallet you enter in to the castle at your own pleasure the
which is so fair and sumptuous on such a condycyon that without my leave you
shall not speak unto the fair Clerymonde by no manner. By my faith said
valentyne you are full of great folly to say such words, for specially for
the love of her have I passed the sea, and am comen this way, and how well
that I never saw her, yet am I enamoured on her more than on any other lady.
And I let you wit yt I shall never depart from hens till that I have spoken
with her and with ye heed of brass at my pleasure. Thus as Ualentyne and the
Seneshall spoke together the fair Clerymonde that was at ye wyndowe meruaylled,
much of the graciousnes of valentyne. Alas said she unto her maidens that were
with her se how this Seneshall is folys she for to fight with so valiant a
knight which might have slain him long ago if his gentylnes had not
refrayned him. Daughters by the god almighty I marvel me much what he may be
that has so great desire for to enter in to my strong and puyssaunt
castle. In right great thought was the noble lady Clerymonde, and said that
she would have ones that knight for her love. For ever the more that she saw
him the more was her love fured upon him* When valentyn saw the great pride of
the Seneshal and his great ouerweninge he smote his horse with the sporres and
gave him so great a stroke in the mids of his body that he smote him through
the liver and the longes and felled him down deed to the earth, whereof the
gracious lady Clerymonde was right Joyous Than she commanded the porters for
to open the gates and that Ualentyne should be brought unto her in to her halle
prepayred. The porters did the commandment of the lady Clerymonde, and led
toward her the noble valentyne and Orson his brother. And when the excellent
lady Clerymonde saw Ualentyne she went against him and said to him. Knight
well be ye comen for I saw never so valiant nor so hardy a knight enter in to
my castle; well show you by your deeds that you are extraught out of a
gentle blood Lady said Ualentyne know that by my propre name I am called
Ualentyne and am a poor aduenturer that of my generacyon and lygnage had never
knowledge and yet I saw, never the fader by whom I was engendered nor the mother
that bare me, nor also did my fellow yt you se here, for he was nourysshed in
a forest like a wild be, where as I conquered him with ye sword much
valyauntly. And know for a certaynte that he never spoke no more than you se
him do at this time, Now have I gone so much for to have knowledge of my
friends that I have passed ye see for to come hither for the love of your great
beauty.

How valentyne showed the ring unto Clerymonde that her brother the grene
knight haddde given him and how he spoke unto the head of brass, which told
him all his generacyon. Capitulo. xxx


IN saying those words Ualentyne drew out the ring that the grene knight
had given him, and in smiling gave it unto the fair Clerymonde, the which
incontinent knew it well. And thanne she said unto Ualentine. Knight fair
sir if you had showed me that ring when you arrived before my Gates,
without abiding onye Iustes or putting your body in danger, at that same
hour you should have entered into my castle without contradiccion. But you
have showed the great noblenes that is in you, when that by your hardynes you
have loved better to enter in to mi castle and come toward me than to seek onye
other means. Soon after that Ualentyne and the fair Clerimonde had spoken
thus together the tables were spredde and the Maiden set. And Ualentine was
set before her that took none other solace nor pleasure save alonely to behold
her that was set before him. Alas very God said Ualentine in his courage
please it you to take my heart out of this dolorous dystresse shortly, which
and for the love of this lady so profoundlye wounded at the heart that never
the days of my life I was in such melancoly. Alas god she is so much
garnyshed with beauty, and so full of great bounte, the eyes grene in laughing
steadfast, the foreheade clear and polyshed, and the face ruddye. And all the
other members of her body by right measure naturally composed. Now am I so
ardauntly taken with her love that the death should be more agreeable unto me
than for to fayll too perform and accomplysshe, this thing. In this manner
complained the noble knight Ualentine for the love of the excellent Clerymonde.

And she upon the other side in beholding him lost both manners and
countenance. In this great melancoly the most honestly that they might keep
their countenaunces passed the knight and the lady the dynner. And when the
tables were taken up Clerymonde took Ualentyne by the hand and said to him.
Friend so much have you done that you have deserved for to enter into my
secret chamber, where as you shall see the head of brass, the which of your
lygnage shall tell you good and certain tidings. Now come your way with me
and bring your fellow with you, for I have a great desire to hear the answer
that shall be given you by the head of brass. The noble knight Ualentyne was
much Joyous when he heard the amerous lady Clerimonde speak so. They issued
out of the halle and wend toward the chamber where as the head of brass was
rychlye aourned. And anon as they were at the door for to have entered in,
they found on the one side a meruayllous, ferefull and a strong vyllayne
right great and crooked, that bare a clubbe of iron upon his neck, the which
was right heavy. The which villain seemed to be rebel and full of great
outrage. And on the other side of the door was a lion right great fierce and
proud. These twain were ordained at all ceasones for to defend and keep that
none should enter into the chamber without the ladies leave, and without
fightinge with the vyllayn and the lion. And when Ualentine apperceiued the
villa^ and the lion that dressed them against them for to defend the door. He
demanded the fair Clerymonde what such things signified and would say.
Lords said Clerymonde the set wayne that you se here are for to keep the door
and there inaye none enter without fighting with them* whereby diverse beno
dead without passing any fer^er. And to the regard of the lion he is of
such a nature that he will never do a kings son harmnor dommage. Lady said
Ualentine I can not tell what shall happen, but at adventure I shall put me in
the guard of God having confydence to over come the lion. Than he aproched him
to the proud beast and by strength of arms enbraced him about the body, but
also soon as he smelled Ualentines cloothes and flesh he let him goo and was
curteis and humble without doing him hurt or dommage. And Orson was on the
other side that assaylled the vyllayn and or ever he might lift up his clubbe
of iron he took him by the mydle so rudely that he threw him against the
wall, and than took his clubbe from him and gave him so great a stroke that he
felled him to the earth in such facyon that if it had not ben the fair
Clerymond he would have slain the villayne in the place. And thus was the
vyllayne vaynquysshed and the Lyo^ by the two knights. After the gate was
opened and they entered in to the chamber that with all richesse mondayn was
dressed. For it was painted with fine gold and azure poudred with in with
rubyes and saphyrs, and man^ other stones, it was hanged with fine clothe of
gold, set with dyamondes and great pearls. In the chamber was four pyllers
of Jasper meruaylous rich and with subtle work edefy^^ of which the first twain
were yelower thanne fine goulde. The third more grean^^ than the grass in
May. The fourth more redder than a flam binge cole. Between these pillars was
an amery more richer than I can devise or say, in the which the head of brass
was that gave answer to every body set upon a rich pillar right sumptuously
ao^r^ed and closed Ualentyne opened the amarye and beheld the heed in
conjuring it for to tell him the truth of his estate and natyuyte. Than
spoke the heed so hye and so clear that every body herd it and said to him.
Knight of great renown I tell the that thou art named valentine the inoost
hardy and valiant that ever sith the world began entered here in, and art
that same to whom the fair Clerymonde has been given, and ought to be, nor
never shall she have other than you. Thou art sone of the Emperor of Greece
and of the fair Bellyssant sister unto king Pepyn, the which with wrong
has been chased out of his Em^yre thy mother is in Portyngale in the castle of
Ferragus, ye which has kept her by the space of.xx. year, the king Pepin
is thin uncle, and this fellow that thou ledest shith the is thy propre brother
natural. You twain was chylded of the gracyous Empress Bellyssant in the
forest of Orleaunce, in great pity and dolorous dystresse. And when the
empress had put you upon the earth, thy fellow was borne away from her by a
beer, and by her has been nourysshed in the wodde without help or comfort of
any natural woman. And thou was found that same day in the forest by king
Pepin and borne away, the which with out having any knowledge of the has
swetely nourysshed and brought the up, And also I the tell that thy brother that
is hera present shall never speak unto the time that thou make a threde to be
cut that he has under his tongue. And when thou shalt have made it to be cut
he shall sp^ke also plainly as any body. Now thike to do well as thou haste
begone and all good shall happen the, for sith that thou ar^e entered in to
this chamber my time is past and than it stouped down suddenly and never sith
was there by it any word spoken. Than Ualentyne that was rauysshed for Joy
came to Orson and in weeping much tenderly kyssed his mouth And Orson on the
other side enbrased him and called him in casting onte great syghes
anguysshous. Alas said Clerymonde to Ualentine Free curteyse knight I ought to
be right Joyous of your coming, for by you I am out of great thought and
melancolye, in the which by the space of ten year I have passed my time
languysshynge in doloure, abiding him yt I ought to be given to. Now you are
he I se it clearly, for by no ne other the heed of brass should lose the
speech. And sith that it is thus that by your coming it has lost the
speech. I give me and habandone me unto you as to my parfyte love, and to him
that by right and reason I ought to be vttred and given. And from hensforthe I
promise you and swear to you with herthe, body, and gods that I shall serve you
loyally after my little puyssaunce and encheue your good pleasure. Lady said
Ualentyne of your good will I thank you hertely, it is well right and reason
that I love you above all the things of the world and hold dear, for from
before Acquytayne you were given me by the grene knight your brother, the which
by the help of me and of my brother Orson was conquered and vaynquysshed, and
when it shall be your pleasure for to take the law and the bileue that the
grene knight has taken I am content for to wedde you. That is for to wit
the law of Ihesu christ without the which none can have the Joy eternal.
Sir said the maiden such thing will I do gladly. For with all my courage I am
ready and apparaylled to fulfill your mind and obey to your commandments
more than to any other living. On that same day was demeaned great Joy
thorughe all the castle, for they knew well by the heed of brass that it was
he that should have the fair Clerymonde. So great was the renown of the
knight Ualentyn that al they of the country about made great Joy, but the
great Joy of Ualentine and the fair Clerymonde was soon turned in to sorrow
and dystresse by the false treason of her brother Ferragus* as it shall be
declared unto you here afterward.

How by an enchauntour named Pacolet the giaunt Ferragus had tidings of his
sister and of Ualentyne. And of the answer that he gave Pacolet. Ca. xxxi.


IN the castle of pleasaunce of the fair lady Clerymonde was a dwerfe that
she had nourysshed from his chyldhode and set unto the scole. That same
dwerfe was called Pacolet He was full of greece wit and understanding, the
which at the scole of tollette had learned so much of the art of Nygromancye
that above all other he was perfyte, in such manner that by enchauntemente he
had made and composed a little horse of wodde, and in the heed there was
artyfycyelly a pynne that was in such wise set, that every time that he
mounted upon the horse for to goo somwhere, he turned the pynne toward the
place that he would go to, and anon he found him in the place without harm
or danger, for the horse was of such facyon that he went thorughe the air
more faster than any bird could flee. That same Pacolet that had been
nourysshed in the castle of Clerymonde, all the day he be held and
considered the manners and facyons of ye noble Ualentyn. Than he thought that
he would go in to Portyngale and recount unto him the enterprise of Ualentyne
and the manner of his coming. He went unto his horse of wodde and mo^ted upon
him, after he turned the pynne toward Portyngale, and incontinent the horse of
wodde mounted in to the air and so much he went that that same night he
arrived in Portyngale, and to the king Ferragus told the tydinges. when
Ferragus understood the speech of Pacolet the enchauntoure he was much angrye
and sorrowful at his heart against Ualentyne ye noble knight that should have
his sister Clerymonde and also against her because she had given her heart and
her love to a christen knight for ye which he was sorry, And swore by his great
god that he would take vengeance on him, but before Pacolet he showed not his
furoure nor the will of his courage, for ye man that thinks treason holds
always his mouth secret for to come the better unto his entencyon. Right so
did Ferragus that said unto Pacolet the enchauntour. Friend return unto my
sister Clerymonde and say unto ye knight that shall have her in marriage yt I
am right glad of his coming, and that I shall se him right shortly
accompanied with my baronage to be at his wedding. Sir said Pacolet I shall do
gladly your message, and than he mounted on his horse and was there in an
instaunt. And when he was before Clerymonde he said unto her. Madame I come
from Portyngale, and have seen your brother Ferragus, the which is right
Joyous of the noble Ualentyne that shall be your husband, and know that with
in short time he will se you in great tryumphe to make your marriage. Ha
Pacolet said the lady I wo^e never what shall happen but I fere me gretely that
my brother think not some treason, for I know well that he will never love no
knight of France, nor man that holds the law of Ihesu christ. And on y^
other side I am right dysple asaunt that I knew not of thy going, for thou
should have inquired after a chysten woman that of long time has been
abydinge with my brother Ferragus wife in his castle.

How Pocolet returned in to Portyngale for to seek Bellyssant Ualentynes mother,
and how he saw her in Ferragus castle. Capitulo. xxxii.


LAdy said Pacolet I shall besone returned a gain, ^ to morrow before myddaye I
shall bring you tidings. By god said Uale^tyne that may you not do without
the art of the enemy. Ualentyne said Clerymo^delet him work and do his
craft, for he is so well faughte that he will go more than a thousand mile on
a day when Ualentyne knew that Pacolet could such and art he meruaylled
much. Than he called Orson and cut and took away the threde that was under
his tongue. And after ye it was out he began for to speak very right and
pleasau^tly, and that same hour recounted unto them all his life that he
haddeledde in the forest. So they were herkenynge him the most part of the
night. And on the moro we Pacolet found him self in the halle before Ualentine
and said to him. Sir I come from Portyngale where as I have seen your mother
that is in good he^le. Friend said Ualentine thou art welcome, for it is the
thing that I desire most to here good tidinges of her and se her. Love said
Clerymonde take comfort to you, if my brother comme not hecher we shall go into
Portyngale and se her there Lady said Pacolet know for a certainte that your
brother will be here shortiye, for so he did promise me. Alas said the
pleasaunce Lady Clerymonde I am to sore a ferde in my heart that my brother
Ferragus do not some thing whereby our joyous enterprise may be turned in to
hard discomfort, for I have drenied a dreme much meruayilous which put^eth me
in great thought and fere. The night when I should have taken my rest I dremed
that I was in a great and a marvelous water profounde, in the which I should
have be drowned if it had not been a face that drew me out of the water. And
than me thought I saw a Gryffon issue out of a cloud, the which with his
nails sharp and long took me and bare me so far that I wyste not where I
was artyued. Ha my love said Ualentine take no thought sor your dream, for
who that would believe in dremes should have to much to suffer. It is true said
the fair lady Clerymonde but I can not keep my self therfro. At these words
the lady and Ualeutine entered into a fair arbor that was garnyshed with al
manner of flowers, and therein they were a great while talkinge of their secreate
love. Now it happened that the same day Ferragus the traitor arrived there
and when the lady knew that he was comen she went to ward him for to welcome
him. And he said to her much swetely. My sister above all worldly creatures I
had desire for to se you. Now tell me I pray you which is the knight that
shall wedde you, fair brother here may you sehy^n. Than valentyne approached and
salve the one the other with great reverence. Knight said Ferragus ye be
welcome in to these quarters for to wedde my sister Clerymonde. For right so
as my brother the grene knight the which has sent you hither after that he
had been conquered by you did taken the faith of Ihesu christ, even so have
I my will and synguler desire to receive baptim and take your believe. Sir said
Ualentyne of your will be Jesus thanked, for he for your redemptyon suffered
death and passion, without the which none can be saved. Alas Ualentyne thought
well that the traytoure Ferragus had said those words by great devotion, but
under the shadow of sweet and fair words he ymagyned mortal treason. And
when the gyaunt Feragus had said so Ualentyne said to him. Sir it has been
told and recou^ted unto me that within your house sith the space of twenty year
or there about you hold a christenwoman the which I desire for to se with all
my heart which is my mother, and is named Bellyssante sister unto the king
Pepyn, and wife unto the Emperor of Greece. By mahoune said Ferragus you say
truth but to the end that you be the better enfourmed of her you shall come
in to Portyngale and se the lady. And when you shall have spoken to heryou may
know if she be such as you demand or not, grameryce said Ualentyne, than he
left him and said unto his sister, the fair Clerymonde in manner of good and
perfyte love. My sister and inyne only esperaunce, I desire above all things
your honor, and auauncemente, and am right Joyous that you have found so
valiant a knight to your husband and spouse, and for his great valiantness
I will that you and he come with me into portyngale, to the end that with the
greater triumph you may be married together.

How Ualentyne and Orson were betrayed by Ferragus, and how he put them in an
obscure prison, where as they made pyteous complayntes. Ca. xxxiii.


When Ferragus had spoken so to his sister Clerimonde, he made his ships and
his galees to be apparaylled, and his men for to mount upon the sea. After he
sent for Ualentine the which was right Joyous for to goo into portyngale with
his love Clerymonde.

For he wend well that the gyaunt Ferragus led them over for to do them
honor / for he had promised them that he would be christened and al they of
his court, where by Ualentine was betrayed and his brother Orson. For also soon
as the cursed sarazyne was mounted upon the sea, and that he had Ualentine in
his subgeccio^ with in his ship, he thought that he should never escape his
hands without death, but at the enter of the sea he made him fair semblaunte,
and by false worddes and promyses he made them come with him, but when it
came toward midnighte that the two knights were gone to reast them, the
traitor Ferragus made them to be taken secretly in their beds and be
bounden surely, and made their eyes to be bended as man that were openly
condemned to death by fault crymynell. And when the fair Clerymonde sa we her
lover Ualentine taken and bounden, she made so great sorrow that he had a
hard heart that wept not. Alas said she knight Ualentyne our Joy and solace
is soon torued into dolor and dystresse, you have boughte my love to dear,
when that for my sake you must suffer death, I would that I had never been
borne for your sake, for in pain and in trauayll you have conquered me, and in
doole and in sorrow I shall be taken from you, to sore is the love bought when
one must suffer death for loving trewlye without to have deserved it. Alas
alas now ought I well to syghe with my heart and tenderly weep with mine eyes,
when it behooves that for my love the most valiant, the most hardy, and the
most noble of the world be delivered unto shameful death, ha^ Ferragus my
fair brother to evil do you work. For of all the world you have betrayed and
deceived the most valiant knight, and if it be so that he must suffer death
for me I shall never the days of my life have Joy at my heart, but ye most
sonest that I may I shall procure my death by some way. And I do you to wit
that if you put the two knights to death, ye shall have ones a vyllaynous
reproach, and therefore let them alone. For in purchasing their death you can
have no prouffyte. And if you will put them to death, make me be cast first
in to the sea, for I would not live to se such two valiant knights dye
before me with out having deserved it. So much was the lady Clerimonde smyten
profoundly at heart with sorrow that at that same hour she would have slain
herself, or lepte in to the sea if she had not ben let. Than Ferragus her
brober made her to be kept by his barons, and commanded the kepers that they
should not let her speak one word to the prisoners, and so abode Clerymonde in
teres and pyteous syghes, and Ualentyne and Orson were bound right fast by
the sarazyns and paynyms. They reclaymed god much deuoutely praynge him that
he would deliver them out of that danger.

Alas said Ualentine now is fortune much contrary to me and at my deed
perverse and dysloyall. Now have I all my life in pain and trauayll used my
youth for to seek and find the place that I was extraughte out of, and the
fader and mother that has brought me into this world, and now when I am
almoost at the end of my doloure, in converting it into Joye, and that of my
dear mother ye I have desired so much I hoped to have had tidings shortly, and
certain knowledge, and in thinking to have been assured to perfour me mine
enterprise, but in ye places dysloyall I am unhappily comen and fallen into the
hands of mine enemies that of my life are enuyous and desires my death. Alas
my fair brother Orson well is our thought and our entencyon in a short time
changed and reuer* sed for we shall never se friends nor kynnesmen. In this
wise complained Ualentine and Orson in likewise and the sarazyns demeaned great
Joy, and so much they rowed upon the sea that they arrived in Portyngale at
the castle of Ferragus. And also soon as ye empress Bellyssant herd say
that Ferragus had brought with him two christen men prisoners she lepte out
of her chamber for to go se them. When she saw valen tyne and Orson the which
she knew not she demanded them. Children of what country be you and in what
land were you borne. Lady said valentyne we be of ye country of France and
borne beside Paris. Also sone as Ferragus saw the Empress Bellyssa^t that
spoke unto the children, he said unto her fyersly, lady leave me this language,
for I shall make them dye in my prison with great sorrow but if they believe in
mahoune, He called the gayler and commanded him to put ye two prisoners in the
most depest prison and ye most derkeste, and that they should have none other
meet nor drink but bread and water. There was ye cursed sarazins that with
great staves and with their ^ystes smote upon the two children without having
any pity more than of dogs, and in a dongeon full of fylthe and ^r^ure cast
them and let them down. When they were in prison they set them on their
knees cry^ge god mercy, and in praynge him that he would forgive the^ their
sins, for they never wend to have comen out of that place. And after that
Ferragus had thus enprysoned Uale^tyne and Orson, he mounted up into his
palais, and made to be brought before him the fair Clerymonde that wept so
pyteously that with ye teres that issued out of her eyes all her face was be
wept. My sister said Ferragus leave your wepinge and change your courage, for
by mahowne my god you have to long byleued ye head of brass when that you will
wed and take in marriage a stranger and out of our believe. To whom have you
your heart varyable and will of a woman when you will love him yt has showed
himself mortal enemy of your brother the grene knight, well appertains you
to have a man more worthy and of more higher lygnage. And if you will bileue me
and do after my will, I shall give you to husband the puyssaunt king
Tromparte* by the which you may be at all seasons of hyghelyfe and rychely
honored. And therefore forgete the two christen Fre^shmen, and have no more
trust on them, for I shall make them dye and be hanged by the neck. Brother
said Clerymonde it behooves me to obey unto your commandment for one must
for^ere and pass lightly of the thige that they may not have, the force
constrayneth, right has no virtue, for necessyte makes oftentimes a man ^ell
good chene. After these words fynysshed Ferragus did depart, and the queen
his wife entered into the hall the which in great honor and reverence has
received the fair Clerimonde in saying to her. My Sister you be right welcome
hither, for I had right great desire for to se you. Lady said Clerimonde I
thancke you a hundred times, but know that I am right sorrowful and
dyspleasaunt of two christen knights the which my brother Ferragus under the
vmbre of surenes and loyalte has made to pass the sea, and after has put
them into an obscare prysone vile and abhomynable, and in great dispite has
sworn their death if they forsake not, their law and believe. Alas my dear
sister it is true that I should have had one of the knights in marriages, the
which among all the living men is the most fairest, the most valiant, and
the most hardy, and that by force of arms has conquered my love, wherefore
lady I beseech you counsayl me, for I have great need, and also that you show
me the christen woman the which you have kept so long in this castle Fair
sister said the queen here may you se her. Than spoke Bellyssant and said.
Lady what is your will speak on hardely, for I have great desire for to here
you speak. Alas lady I bring you tidings that will make you glad and after
sorrowful and dysplesaunt. Know for a certainte that of your estate and of your
life I know the very treuth, for pebe sister unto king Pepin, and wife unto
the Emperor of greece, the which with wrong and against right has
banysshed you out of his Empire, and soon after you were delivered of two
fair sons in a forest, whereof the one was taken away from you by a wild
bear, and the other was lost you can not tell how. Now is your children yet on
live, and I know the place whereas you may find them. At these words the
queen Bellyssant fell unto the earth in a swowne for joy and pity that she
had, and Clerymonde took her up much swetely between her arms. And when she
was risen up, the demanded the maiden how she might know such things. Then
Cleremonde recounted unto her the ^^a^e and the manner how Ferragus her brother
by false and cursed treason had put them in prison. And when the Empress
Bellissant understood that her two children was in prison demand not if she
made great sorrow, for she began to weep so pyteously that Ferragus wife entered
into the hall and demanded wherefore she made so great sorrow, and the fair
lady Clerymonde told^ her from point to point the cause and ^eason* n^we
said the wife of Ferragus appease you and make not of this thing no
semblaunt, for if the king Ferragus knew it pa^auenture the king should rather
e^payre then amend.

How Pacolet comforted the two ladies. Cap. xxxiii^


Right so as the three ladies spoke of this ma ter Pacolet entered in to the
chamber, that was come on his horse of wodde. And when Clerymonde saw him she
said unto him pyteously weeping. Alas Pacolet what have I done unto the that
thou separate me from all my joy, and betraye me for thou might have
advertised me of the evil will of my brother Ferragus, well told me my heart
that I should have sorrow by the when thou went so soon into Portyngale without
my license for to bear him tidings. Lady said Pacolet be not so angry
against me, for by the God of whom I believe I knew not the treason of your
brother Ferragus. but sithe that he has wylled for to work treason, I promise
you by my law that I shall find a remedy, and avenge you tyght shortly. And
here I swear unto you that I shall serve Ualentyne and you truly also long as
I live. Friend said Bellyssant if thou may do so much as deliver my two
children out of prison. I shall never fail the whiles that I live. Lady said
Pacolet be joyous and take comfort unto you* for or that it be long I shall
work so craftily and so subtylly with mine art that of my person you shall
be right well content and pleased.

How Pacolet by his art delivered Ualentyne and Orson out of king Ferragus
prison, and conduyted them out of his country with their mother and the fair
Clerymonde. Cap. xxxv.


By the enchauntour Pacolet the fair Clery monde and the Empress Bellyssant
were recomforted of their great sorrow, and made great dyligence, whiles that
the king Ferragus and his barons daunced and made great chere, and when they
had trauayled sore they went to bed and slepte. Pacolet slepte not, but was
right dylygent about his gere for to play his craft with. And then he came to
a great tower whereof the gates were of tyne stele great and thycke and surely
locked. But also soon as he had casten his sort the gates opened, and the
locks broke, then he entered until he came to the door of the prison that the
thyldren were in, and also soon as he touched the door it opeded and brake as
the other gate did. When the two children that were in the dark pytharde the
door open, with joined hands devoutly they kneled down to the earth and cried
god mercy, for they wend well that the Gyaunt Ferragus had sent for them to
make them dye. Ualentyne began for to weep tenderly, and Orson said to him.
Take in you comfort and patience for it behooves us to die and finishe our
days I se it clearly, but sith that it is so that I se none other remedy, I
think for too venge me or I dye on him that sets first hands on me. Than
Orson took up a great bar that lay beside him. And when Pacolet aduysed
them he said unto them thus. Lords for me have no doubt, for I am come
hither for your delyueraunce. Come lightly after me for or the day be clear I
shall show you the mother that bare you. Ualentyne was much joyous when he
hard Pacoler speak so, but Orson that beheld him fyersly* would not trust
therein. And when Pacolet saw Orson behold him so fyersly he withdrewe him
abacke for great fear that he had but Ualentyne reco^for^e^ him much ^wet^ly,
and assured him of his brother Orson. Then Pacolet led them and conduyted
them unto the chamber whereas the sorrowful ladies were weeping. The doors were
locked but he could oven them well. After they entered in to the house where as
Pacolet threw so his charm that he made al them of the place to sleep so
strongly that they knew: nothing of their coming. And when they were entered in
to the chamber where as the two sorowefull ladies was, they went to ward
their mother that might not speak one word but fell unto the earth in a
swowne, and the fair Clerymonde said unto Ualentyne pyteouslye. Alas knight
it is your in other that for the love of you is fallen in a swowne. Then
valentyne embraced her and took her up, and Orson colled her between his arms
in saying to her. Sweet mother alas speak unto me, and then kissed her which
might speak never a word, and they were all ^hre so profoundly smyten to the
^arce with pity that they fell unto ye earth in a swowne and lay there a great
while. For their pity Clerymond wept full bytterly. And when the lady
Bellyssant and the children were risen their mother said unto them al weping.
Alas my children for your sakes I have suffered and enduted more greater pain
and anguy she then ever poor woman suffered. And of all my lamentacions you
were the cause, but sithe that God of his divine grace and puyssaunre has
saved you in such manner yt once in my life I may se you between mine arms, of
all my colors I am recomforted. But tell me and declare me how and by what
manner sithe the time that I chylded you you have been noutysshed and governed,
and in what country, and with what me^ you have been retained, for I have right
great desire to know ye truth. Then Ualentyne beholding his mother ^ygh
pyteously told and recounted unto her the truth of their deades and gouernyng
and how they were found in the ^orest in declaryng her the fortunes and
perpllous adventures that they had been in all the time of their lives unto that
present hour. And when Ualentine had finisshed his words the Empress
Bellissa^t that knew clearly that they were her propre children was with a
natural love so asperly taken that with greter haboundaunce of teres than
before ^he would have fallen in swowne. Than Pacolet that was in the chamber
said unto her in this manner. Lady leave this weeping and think for to depart
from this place, for it is time that we go out of Portyngale, if you will be
delivered out of the subgeccion of king Fetragus, Alas said Clerymonde my
love Ualentyne well ought you to remember the oath and promise that you have
made me. Hold your covenant and take me unto wife as you have promised me. Lady
said Valentyne of my loyalte have no doubt, for that which I have promised
you with good heart I will* truly keep, but for this present time the natural
love of my mother touches me more at the heart that I have sought so long than
all the other pleasures of the world. Not for that my love doubt you not, for
I trust never nor have un volente to have other than you to wife and spouse.
Upon these words came Orson and said unto Pacolet that he should go and open
Ferragus chamber door, and that with his hands he would ^le him. Orson said
Pacolet com with me, for I shall open it at your own pleasure, Lords said
Clerymonde leave that enterprise, for* I wyl^ never consent unto his death. And
I let you wit if you s^e him you shall lose the love of my brother the grene
knight, the which may healpe you in diverse things. By my faith said Ualentine
you say the ^era^e truth and you have spoken more wis^lyer than we have don
for of the death of your brother you ought not to be culpable. I^ that hour
they departed out of the cite, and Pacolet went before that opened them the
gates. So they followed him till that they came too a port of the sea and there
entered into a galee that Pacolecte had made ready for them. They had wind at
wyland saylled so long that they arrived at Clerymondes castle whereas they
took land for to refreshe them.

How Valentine and Orson concluded for to depart out of the castle for fere of
Ferragus, and how they and the Ladies sailed into Acquitaine. Ca. xxxvi.


ALso soon as they had taken land, they went unto the strong Castle, but
Ualentyne that ever had fear of Ferragus soiourned not long there, but
returned unto the port and badde the Maryners too stuff their galee with
vytaylles and artyllerye, and that they should be ready to depart when he called
upon them. And than he returned unto the castle without making onye semblau^t.
After he said unto his mother Bellissant and to the lady Clerimonde that he
would goo into Greece toward Constantinoble, for to se his father Themperoure
Alexander that with wrong and against right had expulsed his mother from him.
To his wylobeyed the ladies and also Orson and Pacolet. Than they mounted on
the sea for too perform their vyage. The day was clear, and the hour
approached that the Gayler of king Ferragus was accustomed for to go se his
prisoners. He went toward the great toure and bare bread and water with him
for to give them to eat. When he was at the gates of the prysone that were all
open, he saw well that the prisoners were gone. Than he returned hastily toward
king Ferragus and said to him in great fear. Sir I ask you mercy, for this
night I have lost the two christen knights prisoners that you had given me to
keep. In saying these words there aryued an other messenger that said all on
hye before all the assistentes. Puyssaunt king Ferragus to great a mischefe is
happened tonight in this place, for you have lost the christen woman that you
have kept so long, and holden so dear. And that wors is she leads with her
your fair sister Clerymonde that you loved so. When Ferragus understood these
tidings as all enraged he began for to cry and rent his cloothes furyously,
and in great Ire made his men to arm them and issue out of the gates. Than he
took a clubbe that was great and heavy, and before them all issued out of the
gates without a horse, for he was so great and so heavy that with pain might he
find any horse that would bear him. He had a great head and black hear,
styffe as wild hogs br^st^lles and his arms great and boned, and the
shoulders large, of legs and of body he bare the stature of thyrten fore of
length. When he was out of the town he called his men for to accompanye him,
and put him on the way for to find them that led away his sister, and he
demanded tidings of all them that he met by the way / but none could not
tell him nothing, for Pacolet could play so well with his art when he would,
that where someuer he passed he made his folks to sleep. And when Ferra^us
saw that he might have no tidinges, he swore mahoune that he would assiege
Clerimond^s Castle for he wend well to have found them there. Than he made
such dylygence that on the morrow he was at the strong castle but there he
found them not for they were departed or he came. When he understood that
they were departed fro that place, he swore by all his gods that he would
^^nde Clerymonde and al her company, or christendom should have much to suffer.

How the king Ferragus for to have vengeance on Ualentyne and on his s^ster
Clerimonde made assemble his host* and how he dyscended in Acquytayne.
Capitulo. xxxvii.


When Ferragus the gyaunte saw that he might not find Ualentine and Orson the
which had taken his sister and their mother from him, and led out of his
land, he swore and promised his gods that he would take vengeance on the
christen men. And for this cause he sent through all his realm that all they
that were holden to do him obe^saunce without soiour nynge or delay should
come unto him and appear before him for to mount upon the sea and goo
against the christen men for to take vengeance upon Uale^tine The cry was
made a^^^e thrughe all the land of Fer ragus, and by his heraudes and
messengers were assembled great multitude of men of arms, which made a huge
host. They mounted upon ye see and set the failles in the wind that was right
good to them. And as they were mounted upon the sea, the king Ferragus
commanded the marryners yt they should draw toward the cite of Acquytayne,
for he thought well to find in that place them that he was departed for. And so
the patrons did, and they exployted so much that they aryued in the country
of Acquytayne. Ualentyne and Orson that were upon the sea as you have herd
entered in to the cite of Acquytayne* and without making o^ ny mencyon of they
estate unto any person as strange men lodged them with a burgeys, and
Ualentyne would have gone gladly in to the duke Sauaryes palace, but Orson that
aduysed him of a great subtylyte said unto his brother Ualentyne in this manner
of wise Brother I have aduysed me in thinking by my self, that the nature and
will of women is varyable and lightely changed, and for this cause I am
delibered that no mencyon shall be made of our coming unto the time that I
may know by some euydente sign of the fair Fezonne that reclamed me so
much her dear lover if she have changed her courage. Brother said valentyne it
shall be but well done, and if you can do it, it shall be subtylly wrought.
Than Orson clothed him in the habyte of a knight that sought auentures, and
took the little Pacolet for his squire. Than he went toward the palace and
entered in to the halle of the duke of Acquytayne by the license of the gardes.
When he was before him he salued him and made him reverence such as
appertayned unto him, for to do such a thing he was wise and well learned. And
when he had salued him the duke beheld him much, and well him thought he was
Orson, but because he spoke he knew him not, and studied no more, but said to
him knight tell me what brings you hither. Free duke said Orson I am a knight
aduenturous that gladly would fide manner to adventure me for to do good and
loyal service with my body, knight said the duke you be great and fair, and
me thinks you should be valyau^te and hardy in arms. And therefore if you
will serve me. I shall give you such wages that you shall be content / and
you may do so much to my will and pleasure that or you depart from me I shall
make you the rychest of your kynne. Gramercy said Orson I shall deserve it, an
shall do so much that you may know the laya^te of me and my poor
puyssaunce. Knight said the duke I reteyne you of my court, and for the great
trust that I have in your service a hundred pound Parysii or ye serve me any
ferder I shall make to deliver you. So much was Orson wise and well taught in
manners and countenance, that for his prudence and mayntene he retained him in
his palace and made him dyne with his knights. And when he was at ye table his
manners and countenance was so pleasant and agreeable to every body, that of
the barons and knights he was much beholden. And above all things of ladies
and damoy selles he was aduysed. There was the fair Fezonne that was his
sworn wife, ye which was in great melancolye for his great beauty, but she
would never have wenue that it had been Orson for his habyte and language. In
this manner dyned Orson in ye dukes court And when it came after dinner the duke
called his tresorer and made to be delivered unto him a hundred pound parisu
as he had promised him. And Orson took leave of him for that time in thanking
him for his noble largess, in promy singe him his faith that he would serve
him truly in his necessyte. And than he returned unto the lodging where as
the noble ladies were that abode him. And when he was comen unto them he told
them and recountred unto them how the duke in great honor had retained him
for a soudyoure, at his wages, whereat they laughed much and made great Joy.
Now it happened that same weke that the duke of Acquytayne had certain
fydinges of y^ king Ferragus that was dyscended for to make him war He sent
for all his subgectes, barons and knights bidding they in come to socoure him
in ready harneys for to abide battle if need were. Sith he made the cite to be
vytaylled haboundauntly both with flesh and whete for to defend his
country and keep the cite of Acquytayne against the king Ferragus, the
which in that same weke set his syege before Acquytayne, in the propre place
where as his brother the grene knight had pyght his pauylyon wha^ he was
vaynquysshed by orson. Orete and large meruaylously was the siege of the
paynyms and sarazyas and they did right great dommage in the country of
Acquytayne at their arryuay* And kept the country in great subgec^yon where
as they had domynacy on, and they thought well for to ha ue conquered all the
country, and to have dystroyed all the christen men. But ye noble duke of
Acquytayne that was much hardy and valiant made anon to arm his men, and in
great and notable company of barons and knights issued out of the cite of
Acquytaine for to fight against the paynyms and reyse up their syege, and
amongst ye other Ualentyn and Orson and the little Pacolet without making
great noise or knowledge to any body put themself amongst the host of
Acquitayne, Now there was that same day of the cite of acquytaine diverse noble
knights on the field in arms for to fight against the king Ferragus.

Haw the duke of Acquytayne was taken in the battle by Feragus, and How Orson
delpuered him by the aid of Pacolet. Capitulo. xxxviii.


When the good duke of Acquitayne saw ye host of the sarazins that was much
great and large he reco^maunded him unto god with all his heart, praynge him to
be his defender that day, After he made to ordeyne his bataylles and blow
trompettes and Clarons, and ran upon the sarazyns couragyously, the which
stalked against them in great pride. On that day was before Acquytayne a
much pyteous battle, and there dyed valiant knights and men of each estate,
so many that the blood ran in the field like a little river. The gyaunt
Ferragus entered in to ye battle also nere his neue we Dromadyan that bare his
bancre as he might, about him was great puyssaunce of sarazyns for to defend
him that smote upon the christen men so impetuously that at that same hour
they slew six valiant knights, that is to wit. B^udumayn, Bondry. Wyllyam.
Galeram. Anthony the good marshall, and the hardy Gloryam the which were all
next the good duke of Acquytain. The christen men were so asprely assaylled of
the cursed sarazyns that they were constrained to recole abacke. And the good
duke of Acquytayne was enclosed with his enemies that abode all alone without
any help or socoure, the which did such feats of arms that none durst
abide before hi^ he cried Acquytayne against the cursed and false sarazyns,
but nothing auaylled his prowess, for also so^e as king Ferragus aspyed him
and knew him he went toward him and took him and led him away And when he
had bound him surely he made him be led to his pauylyon, the which was
much rich and pleasant. Than Ferragus returned in to the battle, upon the
christians, but the Iournay was so evil for the christen men that for the loss
of their good master they would all have taken the flight. Than Ualentine and
Orson came before them in cryinge to them right high. Ualyaunte knights of
Acquytayne show your chyualry, for and you faylled at this need it should be a
great reproach to you, have a hardy courage and a good heart and God shall
healpe you. Thus recomforted the two knights the people of Acquitaine that for
fete had almoost fled, in such manner that they returned upon the sarasins
again, and began the batayl more stronger than befoore. The tidinges was
befoore Acquytayne of the duke that was taken prisoner, and both litel and
great wept for his taking, but above all other dolorus was incomparable and
piteous the complaynt of the fair Fezonne that in wryngyng her hands, and
pulling her here more bryghter tha^ gold wyre saying in syghinge with heart,
and weeping tenderly with her eyes. Alas poor sorrowful what is happened the,
now thou art the most vnfortuned that is upon the earth. Alas my dear fader
now must you dye, for from the hands of the false sarazyns you can never
depart nor escape. I bydde you fare well my right sweet fader, for I shall never
se you. I shall abide here vnpu^uayed as a poor Orphelin far from all
plesaunce, nere dyscomfort bitter and dolorous. Alas Orson my good lover your
long abiding ought well to noye me at the heart, for if you were here present,
ye would deliver my father that is so sorrowful. And in this manner weapte and
lamented the fair and pleasant Fezonne. And the christen me^ and sarazius
fought upon the feld much impetuously one against another The battle endured
so long that with deed and with wounded all the earth was covered. There was
the noble and valyaunte Knight Ualentyne that with his sharp swerd made so
great occysyon of sarazyns that there was none so hardy that durst bide before
him. And Orson was on the other side that swore by god and his Saints that he
should finish his days in the batrayll or he would go fetch the duke of
Acquytayne within the tent of the gyaunt Ferragus. Pacolet was beside him that
gave him good comfort and promised him socour in sweryng by his God that he
would not fayll him at his need. Than Orson smote his horse with the sporres and
entered in to the battle so fyersly that or ever here sted he brook the
battle and passed for the. And when Orson and pacolet were passed the battle
they hurled their shieldes dobone, and hanged at their necks sarazyns sheldes
wherein the image of mahoune was painted, and after they went unto the pauylyon
of the Gyaunt Ferragus without that any said the contrari, for pacolet could
speak their language right well. Than entered in to the tents for to have the
good duke again But when Pacolet saw that there was too many sarazyns that
kept him, he went and played with his charms so well and so subtyllye that he
made them all lie dawne and sleep. And when they were all on sleap^ Orson came
unto the duke of Acquytayne and said un to him. Fre duke come with me and mount
upon this horse without any taryinge for from the hands of Ferragus I shall
delyuer^ou. I am the knight that in your halle asked you wages the day that
you gave me a. * pound haven ^ere of the painims for without danger I shall
lead you into your host. Knight said the duke you ^e right welcome that
casts me out of seruage, and delyuereth me from my mortal enemies, and for
the good service yt you have done me to day, for reward and guerdon I shall
give you my daughter the fair Fezonne in marriage. I had given her not louge
a go unto a knight that was much wild and could speak no language, but sith
that he is not comen again toward me, his long abiding shall bear him
dommage. I give you my daughter for you have well won her, and you shall have
with her in marriage half the country of Acquytayne. Gramercy said the knight
such a gift is not to be refused, but think we for to make dylygence for to
escape out of this place, and return unto your host. Than the three champyons,
both the duke of Acquytayne, Orson, and Pacolet took the arms of sarazyns and
passed on their way without contradyccion of any body, for to goo unto the
christen host. During this same time that Orson went toward the duke of
Acquitayne Ualentyne that was in the battle demanded diverse where his brother
Orson was. But none could tell tidings nor knowledge of him, wherefore
Ualentyne was right sorrowful and angrye at his heart, for he wend that he had been slain in the battle, wherefore he made many pyteous cries saying. Alas now
am I usurped by bitter fortune on all sides, and all my Joys are well changed
in to sorrow and dystresse when I have lost my pryncipall friend the flower of
all my comfort, and the hope of all my life. Alas my fair brother Orson now
have I lost you by the false sarazyns, for I know well that your valyauntes
and hardynes is cause of your death shorting. For I know so much by you that
you will ra there dye valyauntly, than live in reproach and shame, Alas valiant
brother Orson in pain and in trauayl I conquered you in the wodde and sith I
have kept you in peril and in danger. And now when I purposed and thought
to have solace and myrthe of you ye be separed and gone from me but sith that
it is so that I can have no tidings of you in no manner of wise. I swear and
promise to god that I shall know shortly where you are, and find you quycke
or deed, or your love shall because of my death anon. At these dolorous words
entered the noble knight valentyn in to the battle, and as a man dyscomforted
and charged with melancoly, held his sword of fine stele in his hand, and
showed such knight hode with his body that or ever he rested any where slew
six or seven paynyms deed to the earth, and in doing this prowess the
gyaunte Ferragus knew him, and went to ward Ualentyne and kept him so nere
that he constrained him in such wise that he bare him away before every body,
for his horse was deed under him. Ferragus the gyaunte made to bind Ualentyne
straytly, and swore all his gods that he would take vengeance, but he did
not al his will, for right so as he bare him thorughe the field Orson Pacolet
and the duke Sauary recountred him Than said the valyaunte duke, for god se
yonder false paynym that would put our law and our men to dystructyon he
bears with hi one of our knights straytly bounden. By god said Orson if we be
valyaunte he ought not to escape us. Than he smote his horse with ye sporres and
ran toward the paynym, to whom he gave so great a stroke with his spear
that he and valentyne fell to the earth. The gyaunte arose upon his fete and
left valentyne that for great fere began for to ^^e And Orson cried unto him
brother return again and have no doubt. Thanne Ualentine returned toward him
the which conquered him ahors and mounted him upon him. And Pacolet that was
amongst the host of the sarazyns cried right high, Portingale the more. And
in making that cry he passed the batayl and came unto the host of the
christen men. And so they were delivered all out of the hands of their
enemies. And when the christen men saw that the duke was delivered their
courages grew and their force doubled, and they were so Joyous that they cried
all with one voice live Acquytayne. And in making that noise they ran upon
the sarazyns by such a vygoure and force that they giaunt Ferragus after that
he had lost many of his men by force of arms was constrained for too flee and
with draw him, and to reyse his syege and draw abacke. They made to sown
trompettes and Clarons and the men of arms returned in to Acquytayne for to
refresshed them and rest them. On that same day that the christian men and the
sarazyns fought together there was so great slaughter that for to nombre the
bodies it should be a pyteous thing. At the retornyng from the battle
Ualentyn and Pacolet returned unto their lodges, and Orson went in to the
palace with the duke Sauary and the other barons and knights when the duke of
Acquytayne was returned in to his palace, he sent for all the lords and
knights of his con^te and his daughter ye fair Fezunne. Sith he called Orson
and asked him what was his name. And orson was subtle and said sir I am called
Richard, than the duke of Acquytayne said before them all. Lords know for a
truth that above all things I am beholden and will that honor be done unto
this same knight here in presence, for by him I am returned into Acquytayne,
and have been delivered from mine adversary and mortal enemy. And you my
daughter it is my will and desire that you have in marriage this same valyaunte
knight, for above all the other I hold him and may hold him the most
valaunt and excellent. And for the great prowess that he has showed towerde
me, I have promised him in guerdond and reward your gentle body, and that by
law of marriage you shall be wedded unto him. Well ought you for to ue him
when he has loved your fader so much that he has saved his life. To the
oppynyon of the duke was co^sentynge all the barons and noble knights of the
court, and said by a common accord that the knight was well worthy to have
the fair lady in marriage that had done so great prowess for her fade^s
sake, But Orso^ that was in presence would not declare upon that dead his
oppynyon until ye time that he had assayed the courage and the will of the
fair Fezonne even so as he had enterprysed before, and told his brother
Ualentyne.

How Orson would assaye the will and loyalte of the fair Fezonne or that he
wedded her. Capitulo. xxxix.


ORson was wise and subtyl or that he wedded the fair Fezone: for he would
know and assaye if she were for to keep her faith sted fast and loyal for
oftentimes he had herd say that women were of such a nature that for a
little thing they changed their thoughts and promyses, and broke them
falsely, but how well that diverse of them ben of such nature, for all yt the
vices of the shrewed ought not to be taken nor aleged for to corrumpe the
loyalte of the good ones, for amongst abuswe of thorns is oftentimes found a
florysshed rose. And also among a great sort of evil women may well be
founden one good one, and hap be Even so as Fezonne was the which Orson
found loyal, for he said unto the duke in this manner for to assaye her. Sir
for the honor that you do me I am bounden for to thank you, but to the
regard of your daughter I would well know her will, for it apperteyneth her
well to have a man of more higher estate than I. And therefore before that I
take her I will speak to her for to know her will and courage. For marriage
done against the will comes not lightly unto perfeccyon, Knight said the duke
of Acquytayne you have good reason, and I accord it you. Now go in to her
chaumbre and speak with her, to the end that you be the better enfourmed of
her case. At these words he entered in to the chamber of the fair Fezonne and
sat him down beside her. And sith he took her by the hand and said unto her
much swetely. Lady the great beauty of you has taken me so sore in love that
without you I can have none alegemente. Now thanked be god when it has
pleased him to do me such grace that for wife you be given me for I may well
vaunte me that of al other I have the fairest love. And sith that it pleases
the good duke your fader that you have me for husband, ye ought well by
reason to be content, for I shall serve you and hold you parfyte loyalte
during all the time of my life. Wherefore I pray you right dear lady ye for
to have more remembrance the one upon the other ye will enbrace me and kiss
me at this present tyne, and refuse not my loving request I pray you For
sith that for the time to come we must be assembled you ought not to refuse me
to do my will* Knight answered the lady that was well taught for to demau^be
such things you ought to refrain you, for you lose your pain. I love all
knights and men of good deeds in all goodness and honor, but above al other I
love one and him will I love and keep faith and loyalte as I have sworn unto
him, nor never for other will I change him nor forget him. Lady said Orson it
ought by reason to please you when it pleases your father. Sir said the
maiden. It is well reason that I obey unto my lord my father, but if it
happen that he constrayne me unto such a thing, and that he would give me unto
other then him that conquered the grene knight. I shall rather depart from him
without beryng any thing with me save my faith. By God lady said Orson I
ma^u^yll me much how you be so sore ^n amoured on that knight, for you know
that he is of a wild nature, and that he cannot speak nor say one word
whereby he might rejoice you and tell you his will. Sir said the lady true love
learneth me to love him naturally. For it is said como^ly that the thing that
pleased one is half sold. Wherefore fre knight in me have no more trust, for
never in my life will I ^ha^ge him that I have promised my faith to. Orson was
much joyous of the wisdom of Fezonne that gave him such an answer, not for
that he made semblaune that he was ill content, and departed out of the
chamber without taking leave of her, and went toward the duke and said to
him. Free duke know that I come from speaking with your daughter, but she has
given me for a ^ynall answer, that never in her life for no man that speaks
she will have other unto her husband than him that conquered the grene knight.
Knight said the duke of her answer care you not, for in her lies not to do
her will, be a little pacient and ano^e you of nothing, for to day I shall
speak with my Daughter more ferder on this matter. Gramercye said Orson I am
beholden unto you. Than Orson issued out of the palace and went unto the
lodging of his brother Ualentyne, to whom he told and recounted the answer
that had been given him by the fair Fezonne. Brother you have wrought well, and
this ought to suffice you for you may well know the great loyalte and love that
she loves you with. But I will that you and I go toward the palace togider, for
also sone as the duke shall se me I am certain that we shall be right well
received. Sir said Orson your will be done. Than Ualentyne arrayed him in
precious clothes, and Orson took the ^ace^an that he had first when he came
into Acquitaine, and so he went unto the palais with the litel Pacolet that in all things followed them, They entered in to the hal in the which the duke of
Acquitaine was spekinge to his daughter before diverse barons and noble
knights. Daughter said the Duke of Acquitaine from whens comes to you this
courage that you will not accomplysshe my will, and take my marriage this noble
knight that I would give you, in whom is so much prowess and renown, for
by the valyantnes of him I have been delivered and my life saved. Alas father
said the maiden wherefore speak you to me there of, for you know well that I
have given my faith un to him that delivered you from the grene knight. Now
there is not a greter reproach to a living creature than to falls his faith and
break his oath. And if it hapen that I be constrained to such a thing by you,
you shall be the cause to put my soul in danger, which shall be a reproach to
you before God and the world. And as the duke of Acquitaine spoke so to his
Daughter he saw Ualentine and Orson coming, which he received in great
honor and enbraced them. And when Orson had salued the duke he wend to ward
the fair Fezonne that for great ^oy began for to smyle. Alas said she you be
hertely welcome, for your long abydinge has grieved me sore. And if you had
not commen my father would have married me unto an other knight than you, that
for to have me has taken much great pain, and much well he resembles you of
nose and mouth. My love since that I was here I have learned to speak, and am
the same yt pra^ed you of love to day in your chamber. Than was the lady so
Joious that I can not recount it. and Orson entered into a chamber and chamged
that habit, and put on right precious robes that he had made the little Pacolet
bring with him, and after entered into the hall. And when the Duke aduysed him
he went and enbraced him swetel^ and said to him Fair son pardon me of that
I would have given my daughter to another than you, for I wend well that you
would never have returned. Sit said Orson with good heart I pardon you. Than
the Duke demanded them how they had done since their departinge. And orson
recounted before them all the fortune and adventure that they had been in, and
how they were sons to the Emperor of Constantinoble named Alexander, and of
king Pepins sister named Bellessant, the which they had founden in
Portyngale. When the duke of Acquitaine understood that the two valyaunte
knights were of so hye a blood extraught he had so great Joye at his heart
yt tell it I can not. Than he said knights you be woe, thy for to have great
honor and reverence when of all the cristiens you are the noblest extraught
and dyscended. But of one thing I am sorrowful and dyspleasaunte that is of
your fader the Emperor of Greece, and of your uncle the king Pepin that are
assyeged in Constatinoble by the painims and sarazyns and their war has
endured so long that if god help them not shortly with socoure they must
yealde them unto their enmies, which is a thing much pyteous when Ualentine
heard that his fader and his uncle were in danger he made such dole that none
might appease him and complained more his uncle King Pepin than his fader.
Than Pacolet said unto him. Sir leave this sorrow, for if you will believe me I
shall set you or to morrow at night with in Constanty noble, by God said
Ualentine he is folyshe that byleueth the, or the devil must bear the* Sir said
Pacolet if you will mount upon my horse and do that which I shall tell you, we
shall be in Greece or the day fayl. Pacolet said Ualentine I accord me unto thy
sayings, for I desire nothing so much as to see my father that I never
saw. At that hour the knight Ualentine was delivered for to depart on the
^noro we to go unto Constantynoble, and for the love of his departing the duke
of Acquytayne made first Orson to be wedded unto his daughter Fezonne. And made
their wedding so richely that there had been never none such seen in that
city. They made so great noise with trompettes and claryons that the painims
heard it in their pauilions. The duke of Acquitaine made Bellissant and
Clarymono to be brought in his palais with great honor. Than was there a spy
that saw all this and went and told (...) to Ferragus, how he had seen them
which the traitor Pacolet. By mahoune said the gyaunt Ferragus I ought well to
be d^lent of the traycour Pacolet that has so falsely deceived me, and led away
my sister Clerymonde that I loved so much, with the christians. But I swear my
god Mahoune that within short space I shall take vengeance on him and on al his
other accomplices and helpers, for I shall make them all dye an evil death.

How the gyaunt Ferragus for to have sucoure sent for the king Tromparte, and
the enchauntour Adramayne. Cap. x^.


FErragus the false Sarazyn was much angrye and full of Ire when he sa we that
of his sister Clerymonde and the two knights he might not take vengeance.
Then he called a heraude and took him a letter that he had made to be written,
by the which letter he sent word to^ king Tromparte that in continent and
without delay also soon as he had seen the letter that he would come
toward him well accompanied and with a great puyssaunce of men of arms as
well as he might. And if so were that he would give him sucoure he should give
him to wife his sister clerymonde. And with this he ^^aunded him that he
should bring the enchauntour. Adramayne with him that had learned so well the
^^t^ of tollecre, that for to play with Nygromancy he (...) passed master,
thus were the letters made and given to the messenger. the which put him upon
the way for to do his message. So will I leave to speak of the gyaunt
Ferragus and shall speak of valentyne that is within Acquitayne where as he
takes leave of lords and of ladies and of the fair Clerymonde, the which for
his departing was much sorrowful, and demanded him. Love when will you wedde
me, hold me loyal covenant, for in you is al my trust. Lady said valentyne
have no doubt of me* for I shall be true to you and I swear to you and promise
you that also sone as it shall please God almighty that I return from
Constantinoble, without so^ou^nyng or delacion I shall wedde you. Then he said
to the duke of Acquitayne ^ to his brother Orson. Lords I shall leave you my
love Clerymonde to keep as to my pryncypall friends that I trust my most in.
In praying you that also soon as it ma^^e possible to you that you make to be
minist^ed unto her the sacrament of baptism, and change not her name for none
other, for it is my will that she ^ere that name. Ualentyne said the duke of
Acquytayne take no thought for her, for also derely shall the fair Clerymonde
be kept as my propre daughter Fe^onne. Then valentine took leave of the duke of
Acquytayne, that for his departing had his heart sorrowful, and sith he
embraced the fair Clerymonde and in taking leave of her he kissed her swetely,
but the noble lady was so sorrowful that she might speak never a word.
Ualentine left her and began to weep. And Orson took leave of him the which
said unto him right swetely. Brother I pray to Jesus christ that he keep you
and save you* and among all other things I beseech you humbly that you will
recommaunde me unto my father the Emperor of Greece and to mine uncle the
king Pepyn, for an it pleased god I shall se them within short time. Brother
said valentyne I shall do the message for you as I would do for my self. At
these words departed the two brethren from together that for to leave each
other had their hearts sorrowful. Orson abode in the palace, and valentyne
returned toward his lodgyng for to speak with his mother Bellissant that for
his departing was much troubled at the heart. And when she saw that he was
ready to depart, she embraced him wening to have take leave of him, but the
noble lady had her heart so full of distress that she might not speak one
word to her sone. Ualentine held her between his arms in recomfortyng her
swetely, for how well that he was right sorrowful and displeasau^t yet for all
that he bare his doloure and great dystresse the best wise that he might for to
recomforte his mother and rejoice her.

Of the pytcous complayntes that the Empress Bellissant made unto her son
Valentyne or he went unto constantynoble and how he spoke unto the Emperor
his father before his uncle king Pepyn. Cap. xli.


WHen Valentyne saw his mother make such sorrow he said unto her. My mother
have no fear of my doloure nor thought, for if it please god my creatur I
shall return again shortly. Think and have ever your heart in God, and
pray for me, for in all my deeds and prayers I shall think on you. And above
all other things I recommaunde unto you the fair Clerymonde that puts all
her confydence in me, and will keep my loyalte. Alas my son said the Empress
Bellyssant I ought well to syghe with my heart and bear dolorous anguysshe, but
by the and by thy hardynes thou haste done so much that the day shall come by
the pleasure of Jhesus that mine occasion and blame I shall be found innocent
and pure. And when thou shall be within the city of Constantinoble, salve from
me thy father the Emperor Alexander, and thine uncle the valiant king Pepyn
my brother, and say to him on my behalue that I take upon the dampnacion of my
soul that never the days of my life of the great blame and vytupere that I
have been accused with, I was never culpable. And if that there be any, be he
never so hardy that will take batayl for it, or say the contrary fight you for
me and take the quarrel, for if you be overcome I offer my body to be burnt
shamefully before all the world. My mother said the noble Valentyne dyscomfort
you not, for if it please God almighty and the virgyn mary, in whom I have all
my trust I shall do so much for you that shortly you shall be yielded and
accorded to the Emperor Alexander my father, and that of the wrong that he
has done you, he shall ask you mercy and pardon. At these words they
departed in sonore making great sorrow, and weping full sore. And at their
departing the Lady inquired her son Ualentine that also sone as he might he
shol desende Pacolet again for to bring her tidings. And Ualentine promised
her that he would do so. After he entered in to the chamber where as he found
the little Pacolet, the whythe in abiding him had made tedy his horse of wodde.
Now up said Pacolet it is time to go mount up behind me, and without having
any dread hold you fast by me. Friend said Ualentyne that shall I do well. Than
he lept upon the horse and Pacolet corned the pynne so well in deed that he
horse rose up in the air, and in that same night they made so much way that
they passed over these, and over diverse wodes, roches, towns, castles and
great ^y^ees. And they went so fast that on the morrow before mydday they
apperceyued Constantinoble. He demanded Pacolet what place it was, and he
answered him that it was the cite of Constancynoble in the which he had so
great desire to be. Much Joious was the noble knight Ualentyne when he saw him
self so nere, for Pacolet had conduyted him so well that oreuen longtime he was
within the cite. And at the hour that the Emperor and the king Pepyn were
in the hall imperyall set for to soupe. Pacolet that led Valentyne entered
in to the halle, whereof Valentine was much abashed when he saw him self
before such a company. Than the grene knight that was in the hal knew
Ualentine and ran anon unto him. And the h^nge Pepin that aduysed Ualentyne
said unto the Emperor. Sir yet is not your lygnage faylled, for you may se
here a much valiant knight that is your own son. When the Emperor heard
those tidings he changed color and rose up from the table for to go kiss
his son, But the grene knight was the first at him, which took him in his
arms and welcomed him. After came king Pepyn and Embraced him. And then the
Emperor his father took him between his arms and kissed him swetely, half
joyful and half sorrow ul joyful for his coming and sorrowful for the thought
of his wife. The old Blandymayn knew Pacolet, for he had seen him in
portyngale so he came toward him and asked him tydinges of the Lady
Bellyssant, and he told him the manner how all had been done, and how
valentine had been in diverse great perfiles for to have knowledge of the
Emperor and of his mother. Great joy was made thorough all the city for the
coming of the Emperor Alexanders son valentyne. Knights and barons came
from every side for to se Ualentyne and do him reverence. And so as there
aryued diverse great lords in the Emperors halle, valentyne that was full of
great hardynes spoke in this manner before all the company. Lords, and knights
that are here present of the honor and reverence that it pleases you to do
me. I yield you graces with my puissau^ce and thank you, and above all the
other I thank mine uncle the king Pepyn, the which has nouryshed me unto
this hour, for I am more beholden unto him then unto any man on live.
Notwithstanding that it is said oftentimes that never one may be so subject
as to father and mother, but I may name myself poor orphelyn as for my father
that is here present, for I had been dead dolorously had not mine uncle been
that found me when my mother was banyshed falsely from the Emperor by the deed
of the false Archebysshop wherefore to show that she is innocente and replete
with truth I as her natural son legytyme off^eth my body for to fight against
the false tray^our Archebysshop that has accused her falsely* and also against
all them that will present them for to accuse my mother in any manner of wise.

How Ualentyne and the grene knight were taken prisoners in the battayll
before Constantynoble by the Soudan Moradyn and his men. Cap. xlii.


WHen the Emperor understood his sone Ualentyne speak so for the great
^ishonoure of his dolorous mother, he began for to weep right piteously, and
said with piteous words unto his son walentine Alas my dear son I know
clearly that thou art my son legytime, and that with good right thou will
fight for thy mother, the which by a false and an evil report and light
believe* I have put and sent thy mother in exile* but as for to undertake too
fight for her dead in a field it is no need. For the false ^ coursed
Archebisshop that had accused her has been foughten with, and shamefully
vanquyshed and put unto villaynous death by a valiant merchant, the which in
the presen^t o^ the king Pepyn thine uncle, and of me, and before all the
congregation of diverse princes, barons and knights has ^olde and confessed
how with wrong and evil cause by envy and dyabolyke temptacion he had accused
the good lady toward me. When I understood his confession I was wounded so
bitterly at the heart that of my dolor it should be to great a thing to
recounte And sith that same time I have sent diverse messengers into diverse
countries and regyons, in trustyng to have had of my wife some cer^ayne
^ydynges, but I might not do so much as to have some knowledge of her. And
therefore my child and mine only hope if thou know any thing of thy mother
hyde it not from me, for above all my desires I have a syngul^^ desire for to
here some ^ydinges. Sir said valentyne for to speak of my mother know for all
certain that yestemyght about mydnyght I saw her and spoke to her within
acquytaine, and told him yt Pacole^ brought him so sone of the which thing
the Emperor his father was much ameruayled. For the coming of valentine was
made great joy through all the city of Constancynoble. And so much was the
emperor Alexander reioysed that he commanded to ring all the b^lles of the
city. And when the paynyens and sarazyns heard the great joy that they of the
city made, they ranue unto arms and in great dylygence were armed ^ (...)
point. And when they were all ready and armed the soudan ^oradyn accompanied
with. xxx. kings strong and puyssaunt made to assail the city of
Constantinoble, the which was so full of people that many horses were dead
for hongre. And also diverse men and women and little chyloren from day to day
by fault of natural substance fyn^^^ed their days piteously in the streets.
And when the noble Dalentine advised and knew the great multitude of paynims
and sarazins, and the necessite of the city of Constantynoble, he spoke before
all the lords and captains saying in this manner. Lord^s and knights you
know and se that within this city you are in great necessity of vitayles,
and yet you may recover none but by your valiauntnes upon your enemies.
Wherefore I am of the opinion that there should yss^e out a certain nombre of
men for too conquer some vitaylles. And I all the first am ready and
apparaylled to conduy^e with my litell power and as well as I may all them of
the city that will yssut out with me. To that cou^sayll was consentyng all the
capitaines of the army. So there issued out of the city with the valiant
knight Ualentyne. xx. thousand men of arms, and there issued out also a great
multitude of small people that for the indygence and the great necessite that
they were in followed him gladly. When they were out of the gates they ran upon
the sarazins so fiersly and so valiauntly that within a short space they took
and won three hundred charyottes with vytaylles, but as they led them toward
the city of Constantynoble the soudan that for this loss was sorowefull with
a great company of sarazyns and painims put himself between them and the city
of Constantinoble for to recover the vytaylles again that they had lost. And
when the king Pepyn saw that they had stopped the passage he smote his horse
with the sporres and set his spete in the rest and did so valiant that he
smote dead unto the earth the proud Maragon, the which was king of
Lapharna^. Then he drew out his sword and smote Arcillon that was tyght strong
and paussaunt* in such wise that he smote him out of his sadle unto the earth.
And when valentine and the grene knight saw the great deades of arms that
king Pepyn did they entered in to the battle. and without ceasyng they did so
much by force of arms that before the Soudan they hewe^ down the chief
standarde of the false paynims and sarazyns. And when the standarde was down,
Ualentyne passed forth against the false soudan, and gave him so great a stroke
with his spe^e that he s^ote him of the Olyphaunt that he was mounted on, much
rudely and valiauntly. At that hour was done so many feats of arms by
Ualentyne and the grene knight that Moraldos was dead and the admyrall taken by
the grene knight, And valentine maugre all the pain^^^s and sarazins did cast
unto the ground four kings sarazyns* and smote of both the arms of the
Admyrall of Ombrye. But the two good knights that same day for to win
honor and fame were to ardaunt, and entered to far within the host of the
painims and sarasins, for when they thought to hau returned they were enclosed
with Painims and taken and after bound straytly as prisoners and led before
the Soudan, the which also soon as he saw them he swore his great God
mahoun that they should never return unto the christen men again, but should
make a gy^et to be raised up before the cite of Constantynoble, and make them
be hanged so hye that al their friends might se them. Thus was Ualentine and
the grieve knight in greece fere of their lives, thynckynge never to escape from
their cursed hands. And the christian me^ did return maugre painims and
sarazins, for there was with them vytaylles in great haboundance so that all the
people of the cite wee^ refreshed and comforted.

But or they arrived with in the cite they had a pyteous recountre of paynyms
and Sarazyns, and led a pyteous recountre and strong batayl, so that the
christen men wend never to have returned into the city of Constantynoble. Than
they of the cite that saw well the necessite of their men made to cry through
the cite that upon pain of death all manner of men, prestes clerks, Chanons,
monks, Freers, and women, should bear the cross before them in the honor of
the passion of our Lord Ihesu Christ and issue out against the painims. Than
was the nombre so great of the people that issued out of the city of
Constantynoble that the estimac^on was forty thousand. And when the painims and
sarazins saw the great no^bre of people that came out against the^, they
reculed a back in to their ^en^s, and ^et the christen men bear a way the
vitailles. But or the paynims was in their tents the battle was to great that
four thousand christen men were slain, which was a pyteous thing to them of
the city. Right sorrowful and displeasaunt was the Emperor of Greece for many
noble barons and knights that he had loss ^n the battle but above all the
other he was sorrowful in his heart, and bitterly displeasaunt for his valyau^t
son valentine and the grene knight that had done so great deeds of arms, and
in like wise was the king Pepyn of France. Those twain made great dole and
lamentacio^ casting out great cries and syghes for the child Ualentyne that
they had lost so soon. But the little Pacolet recomforted them much saying.
Lords leave your weeping and discomforte, for of Ualentyne you shall be joyous,
and of him have good tidings sooner then you wenefore. Friend said he God
here the and give the such puyssaunce, for an thou may do so much as to
bring him unto me, and deliver him from the hands of the souda^ that has
sworen his death, thou may say surely that above the other ^ shall mount the
in honor and richesse. Sir said Pacolet put your trust in me, for shortly you
shall know with what love I love you and your son valentine. Then Pacolet
took his horse of wodde, and without any mo words departed for to go in to the
sondans host. And the soudan is in his pauyl^on that for to judge Ualentyne
and the grene knight had assembled all the great lords of his host. But his
enterprise was all turned contrary as it shall be showed you more plainly here
afterward.

How the enchauntoure Pacolet delivered Valentyne and the grene knight out of
the prison of the soudan Morady^. Ca. xliiii.


When the Soudan Moradin was wythdrawn in to his pauilo^, he made to be brought
before him the child Vale^tine and the grene knight in the pres^ce of all the
most greatest barons and knights of his court and said in this manner. Lords at
this hour you may well se and know the twain of the world that does most
^^spleasure and outrage unto the king Ferragus. And among the other things
this knight has left out law and made him to be christened to here us the
more damage, wherefore me thyncketh it were well none to send them unto king
Ferragus, for I wot^e well that he will take vengeance on them, and that he shall
make them dye a shameful death as they have well deserved. Sir said the sarazyns
and paynims that of their deaths had great envy. It is no need to so^ouru so
much but make forkes to be reyse^ (...) in the field for to hang the two
false caitifes on tomorow in the umornyug that has borne us so great dommage,
and harm. Lords said the soudan ^oradyn your counsayll is fair and good,
and so will I use it, for by the god mahowne I swear you and promise you that
tomorowe in the morning I shall make them to be hanged so hye that all they
of the cite of Constantinoble may se them, and take ensample at their death.
After these words said as the Soudan entered into his ^ent for to go to souper
the litel Pacolet found himself before him the which salued him by mahoune
highly Pacolet said the paynym thou art welcome. Now tell me lightly how does
the feate of the king Ferragus that above all the other is my parfyte friend.
Sir said Pacolet he fares right well, and above al reco^maundeth him unto you,
and by me ^e sends you tidings good that are much secret the which I shall
tell you if it please you to here me. Fr^ede said the souden right voluntaryly
and with good heart I will here your message. Than he drew him apa^^e for to
tell him his secret. And Pacolet said to him all softly. Sir wy^e that I come
from Portyngale and am sent hither by my redoubted lady the wife of Ferragus,
the which with all her heart reco^maundeth her unto you, much more hardely
than I can recounte, and that it be true I do you to wit that above all the
men of the world she loves you best, for she is so esprised and taken with
your love that she may neither sleep nor reaste in no place. Now it is true
that she the which in all trusts her in me has sent me toward you, and
sends you word by me expressly upon the love that may be between two true
lovers that without soiourning or deferring you come and se her. For the king
Ferragus is at this present time gone toward Acquytayne, so may you at your
own pleasure and will of the pleasant lady that above all the other shines in
beauty do your pleasure and will. And therefore sir come your way with me, for
upon my horse I shall co^duy^ you so well and in such manner that tomorowe in
the morning, I shall set you in Portyngale before the noble and fair lady by
the pleasure of my God mahoun. Ha Pacolet said the soudan Moradyn thou gynest
me at my heart more greater Joy and comfort than any other person did ever
before this. For above all the women of the world I am and have been long
time of the wife of king ferragus enamoured but so much there is that never no
day I might find my self before her in no manner that I might accomplysshe my
will, or cell my secret, but at this time I shall accomplysh the desire of my
heart, that so much and so louge I have abyden For I promise the that tomorowe
in the morning I shall goo with the and accomply me my well and my desire. It
that hour that I recount unto you the soudan Moradyn satte him down at the
table and made the enchauntoure Pacolet too be served also honestlye as he
might, for he was so right* Joyous of the ^^oinges that the enchauntour Pacolet
had brought him, that the heart lept in his belly for Joy, and made great
cheer. And Pacolet that sa we well that the Sowdan was in great joy said all
softelye to him self. I am feasted and kept well at ease, but or that it be to
morrow at night such gives me of his bread to eat that shall curse the time
that ever I was boorne. Now Ualentine and the grene knight was in the tente and
pauilyon of the soudan Moradin that were well and straytly bounden, well knew
they Pacolet whereof they were right Joyous in their courages in saying and
thynking in their hertes that for their deliverance he was comen theder, but
they made no semblaunt. And Pacolet in she wynge great chere and fair
semblaunt unto the soudan Moradin in beholdynge the prisoners said all on
heyght. Sir how be you so curteis for to keep ye grene knight in your prisons
without making him dye, for above all living men he has borne dommage unto
his brother Ferragus. And for to grieve him yt mohe has renounced Mahounde,
and found the ways and manner to take from him his sister. Clerymonde for to
give her unto a christen knight. Wherefore me seems you are to simple when him
and all the other of his sort and company you make not dye without having on
them any mercy or pity. Friend said the soudan Moradin it is well my will and
intencyon, for I am entyerly delybered to make them be hanged by the necks
tomorowe in the morning. Pacolet was so wise and so well taught that until the
hour to sl^p^he kept the soudan with sportes and plays. And when the hour was
comen that they should go to reaste, the soudan commanded that the prisoners
should be kep^ ^o wel^nd so straytly that upon the pain of their lives they
might yield him acountes. And so he wythdrew him into his chamber, and left
Ualentyne and the grene knight in keeping of a great sort of sarazyns and
paynyms that above all things were covetous of their deaths.

How pacolet deceived the soudan Moradin, and made him mount upon his horse of
wodde, and brought him in to the cite of Constantynoble, wenynge to him that
he had brought him into portyngale. Ca. xliiii.


Now the hour was comen that every body was withdrawn save pacolet that made
all the watch sleep. Than he came unto valentyne and the grene knight and un
bound them, and led them out of the hooste so that none knew of it. Than when
it came toward the dawning of the day he entered into the tente of the soudan
and escryed unto him on hye saying. Ha sit to evil gothe our feate, and evil
show you that you love the wife of Ferragus when you make no more dyligence to
accomplish he will. When the soudan herd Pacolet cry so he wakened suddenly
and said unto Pacolet. Friend by Mahoune almyghtye thou haste done well to
have wakened me, for thou have taken me out of a great pain, for I dremed a
meruaylous dreme. And in dreminge me thought that a Crow did bear me far
away in the air, and in flyenge in the air there came unto me a great byrd
that with his bil stroke me so sore that the blood ran out in great
haboundaunce so I wot never what this will say, and am in dread that the
king Ferragus knows this de de. Sir said Pacolet you have a slothful
courage when for a dreme you will leave the Joyous enterprise of her that
desires you so much, by mahoune said he thou say truth. Than he called
her chamberlain to make him ready, and after said to him. Friend be secre^e, and
if mine uncle Bruyant demand for me, tell him that I am gone to sport me a
little with pacolet, Sir said he it shall be done. Than pacolet made the soudan
to mounce up behind him and turned the pynne and the horse rose up in the air
so impetuously that also sone they were in the cite of Constantinoble in the
Emperors palais. And when the souda^ moradin saw that pacolet was abiden, he
said unto him, friend must we lodge here. Ye said pacolet have no fere nor
doubt of nothing, for we are will, in portyngale in the rich palace of the
puyssaunt and mighty king Ferragus By mahoune in whom I believe said the
soudan Moradyn I am much ameruayled how the devil has borne the so soon.
Now hye you said Pacolet and enter in to this halle, and I will go in to the
chamber of the pleasant lady the wife of Ferragus, and as this same hour I
shall make the chamber to be opened too you and to lie with her. Friend said
the Soudan of great joy thou make me to laughe. No we go in the name of
Mahoune the which conduyte the.

How the soudan Moradyn was taken and bound and after was hanged. Cap. xlv.


PAcolet the enchauntour left* the soudan Moradyn within the halle, the which
was well loocked on every side, so that he might not issue out. Then he went
toward the chamber of the Emperor and gave so great a stroke against the
door that the chamberlayne hard is and cried on high in demanding what are
you that at this hour in the chamber imperyal comes smiting and making such
noise. Friend said Pacolet doubt you not of nothing, for I am Pacolet that is
come from the host of the soudan Moradyn, where as I have delivered Uale^tyne
and the grene knight from the hands of the sarazins yt had iuged and
conda^^ned the^ to death. And more over say unto the emperor ye I have brought
with me in to this palace the soudan Moradyn, the which believes steadfastly to
be in Portingale. Now he must be taken without any so iourning and flayne al
quick, for he has well deserved it. when the chamberlayn understood the
tidinges, he went toward the Emperor and the king Pepyn, the which for to se
the souda^ with a great nombre of knights armed them. And the Soudan was in
the hal that cried hydeously saying. Ha false traytoure Pacolet mahoune curse
the. For I have well hard the and understand the speak, thou haste betrayed me
by thy false deceit cursedly and shamefully, but by ye faith that I hold yet
shall I make the repent it. Than he drew out his swearde and as a mad than
that were out of his wit began for to run about the halle in smiting the
walls and the stoones so rudely that he made the fire to spring out of the
marbyl stones* And so as he fought alone in the halle, the Emperor and king
Pepyn with torches and tresettes came toward him well accompanied. And when he
apperceiued the^ he pat himself in defense much outragyously, and slew a
squire before king Pepyn that would have taken him, and the king that was
right displeasaunt auaunced him and gave him so great a stroke that he felled
him unto the earth. Then he was taken a bound much streyghtly by that it was
daylight. Ualentyne and the grieve knight entered in to the palace which was
come from the host of the soudan, and when they found him there is they were
much joyous. Then the Emperor and king Pepyn made great joy for the
delyuecaunce of Uale^tine, and also of the grene knight for he was much
praised and loved. The Emperor thanked much Pacolet for the delynetaunce of
his son valentyne, and the king Pepyn said unto him. Pacolet fair sir thou
must show one gambaude with thy horse. Sir said Pacolet mount up be hynde
(...), and I shall bring you without testynge into hell, trende said the
king Pepyn, God keep me t^^me it. Then said Pacolet* lords make diligence to
put this false Soudan to death for if ever he escape you, think that evil
shall happen thereby. At that hour was assembled within the palace dyners great
lords for to se the soudan, by the counsel and deliberacion of whom he was
judged and condemned to be hanged on the great ^oure of the palace, to the
end that hemyght be seen of the paynims, and so it was don. And when the
paynyms saw the soudan hanged there they were fore amarueiled how he was
brought in to the city. Bruya^t told them how he had been deceyned by
Pacolet. Then was there great sorrow through all the host for the death of the
(...), for he was a valiant man and a great persecutour of christen people.
And after yt they had made great cries and great lamentacious they assembled
their counsayl and those for their souda^ Bru yant that was the vucle of
Moradyn. That day was sorrowful paiuims and sarasins, and the christen men
within the cite made great Joy and solace for the does of the soudan, and also
for the vytaylles that they had recovered and wanne. And than after all these
things thus dove Pacolet coke leave of the Emperor and of al his court for to
return in to Acquytain toward the fair Clerimonde as he had promised her.
Than Ualentyne came to him and said. Friend Pacolet sith that you go in to
Acquitaine salve me swetely my mother the Empress Bellyssant, and my love
clerimonde, and my fair brother Orson, and the good duke of Acquitaine with
all the other harons and knights, and give this letter unto my* Lady my mother,
by the which she may know clearly the tidings from hence Sir said pacolet I
shall do your message gladlye, than he take his horse and bare him in to a great
window of marbill, and after lepte upon his back and turned the p^^ne and
the horse rose up in the air as tempest The Emperor and the king pepin were
at the windows that beheld him strongly. By god said the king pepin for all
the gold of the world I would not be there. Now goth parolet by so great
diligence that upon the moro we in the morninge he arrived in Acquitaine, and
found there the good duke that kept the cite, and also the Empress Bellissant,
Orson, and the fair Clerimond, the which he salued on Ualentines behalue much
honorably as it appertayned to them Friend said Orson how fares the feate of
my father, Sir said pacolet he fares right well, but for to know rydynges here
is a letter that I bring unto my Lady Bellyssant from your brother Ualentine.
The Lady took the letter with great Joye, and called a secretarye for to read
it. Lady said the secretarye that beheld the lettre. Know that the valiant
knight your son Uale^tine sends you word by this letter that the mighty
Emperor the which would se you gladlye salueth you humbly with all his heart,
the which from the time of your departing in pain and in trauayll long time
has made you to be sought. And sends you word that sone after that he had
expulsed you he had clear knowledge of your loyalte, and of the false treason
and enter pryse of the false Acchebysshyp, the which has been foughten with
by a merchant and put in such subgeccyon that before his death before all the
world he confessed his false treason. For the which thing the Emperor your
husband desires from day too day for to se you, and till he have you again
he will never ^ee glad at his heart. And know that also soon as he shall
be rydded of the false sarazyns he will come nether to you with the grene
knight that your son Orson did conquer before this city. Thus your noble
son Ualentine sends you word by the tenor of this lettre when the lady
heard those tidinges for great Joye she fell in a swowne. And Orson took her
up between his arms much swetely. My child said the Empress I ought well
to thank God, and to be Joious when the Emperor of Greece has certain
tidinges that I am innocente and clean of the dissamynge and crime abhomynable
that by false treason had been conspired against me. Now God give me the grace
for to find my self before the Emperor shortly, for if I might se him ones
in my life I would desire no more of God nor for to live longer in this world
when he has done me such grace that to mine honor and to all the blood of
France he has showed the treason of the false irreguler Archebysshope the
which has knowledged his great malice and trecherye.

How the king Trompart came before Acquitaine for to socoure the gyaunt
Ferragus, and brought with him Adramayne the enchauntoure, by whom Pacolet was
deceived and betrayed falsely. Ca* xlvi.


ON that same day that Pacolette arrived within Acquytayne the king Trompart
came in to the host of Ferragus with great puyssaunce of men of arms too
socoure him against the christen men, and in great honor received him the
king Ferragus, which for his coming made great feast through al his host
Free king said the giaunt Ferragus of your coming I ought to be Joyous for I
have esperaunce that by you I shall be avenged on them that have deceived my
sister the fair Clerymonde. Now I know well that she is within Acquytaine for
she has bensene, where fore I praise littell my puyssaunce if I may not have
her again. And if that it be so that by your puyssaunce and healpe she may be
conquered from this hour I give you her to wife. Ferragus said the king
Tromparte of this doubt you nothing, for I have brought with me Adramayne the
enchauntour the which shall soon have deceived Pacolet, for he knows more of
the art of Nygromancye than all the living creatures. By mahoune said
Ferragus I am right glad of his coming, and if he may do so much as to yield
me Pacolet I shall make him of all the most rich and puyssaunt. Sir said
Adramayne have trust in me, for I shall serve you so well that shortly you shall
know it Than deparded Adramayne and made ready his chat me for to play with his
craft, and sith went toward Acquytayne. And to the end that he might enterin
to it more surely he made him to be laden with vytall so he did so much by his
engyn that he came befoore the gates, and asked enter for to selle his vytayls,
He could speak well to them of the city, wherefore they opened him the gates
and he entered in for to sell his bytaylles. Then after he had sold the^ he
went unto the palace where as he found Pacolet that knew him well, for he
had seen him other times. Adramayne said Pacolet you be welcome. Now tell me if
it please you from what place you come, and what thing dryueth you hither at
this hour. Pacolet said Adrymayn you know well that I have served long time
king Tromparte. So it happened the other day that by one of his court I was
smyten and outraged much vyllaynously because that I would not learn him and
show him the secrets of my craft and when I saw my self smyten I had
dyspyte in my heart, and with a knyfe I slew him. when I had done that deed,
for fear of death I issued out of the cource. And thus expulsed from the
service of king Tro^part I am come toward you for the trust that I think to
find in you. And from henceforth I will abide with you as loyal and true
fellow if it please you that it be so. Adramayne said Pacolet I am content,
make good cheer and ca^e not for noothynge. Than Pacolet made him to be served
and honestly received as his fellow* that of his coming was joyous. And in
making chere together Adramayne saw the fair Clerymonde pass through the
halle, so he demanded Pacolet what lady that was that was so fair and
gracious. Friend said Pacolet it is the fair Clerymond sister unto king
Ferragus the which must be right hyghly married unto a much tyche and valiant
knight. At that hour arrived Orson before the two fellows and said unto them.
Lords play a little between you both of your craft, and science for to
rejoice all the company.

How Adramayne and Pacolet played before the barons, and how Adramayne stole a
way Pacolettes horse of wodde and the fair Clerymonde. Cap. xlvii.


THan Adramayne lift up a cup a above a pillar, in such wise yt it semet unto
as them yt were there present yt through yt place ran a great river and an
horrible, and in that same river them thought they saw all manner of fysshes
hothe little and great. And when they of the palace saw the wa^e^ so great,
they began al for to lift up their gowns and to cry strongly as they that had
fere to be drowned. And Pacolet that beheld the enchauntement began for to
sing and made a charm so subtyl in his song that it seemed unto all them of
the place that through the river ran a great heart, that cast and hurled to
the earth all that he found before him. Then them thought yt they saw hunters
follow him with many greyhoundes and brachettes. Then there was diverse of the
company that lepte for the and would have taken the heart, but Pakolet made the
heart to lepe incontinent. By my faith said Orson you have played right well and
you can use right well your art. At these words rose up the two
enchauntours, and Pacolet that thought but all well led Adramayne into his
chamber for to sleep and repose him that night, whereof he was right sorrowful
and angry afterward, for when it came toward mydnyght Adramayne kest a charm
through all the palace, that both little and great slepte so strongly that for
cryenge nor brayenge they might not waken unto the morrow that the sun was
up, and made Pacolet to sleep also well as the other. After he went toward the
horse that he had seen in the chamber, but he had made no semblaunte. And when
he had the horse he went in to the chamber of Clerymonde and by his subtle
art in slepynge he made her to rise and clothe her, and set her on the horse
with him, and came unto a wyndowe and turned the pynne, for he knew well the
guyse, and did so much that without soiournynge he arrived in the pauylyon of
king Trompart with the fair Clerymonde. Then Adramayne cried. Sir king Trompart
sleep not, but rise up incontinent, for hear may you see the pleasant lady
Clerymonde, the which I have stolen within acquytayne. And I have done so
much and wroughte so subtylly that I have stolen Pacolettes horse. Adramayne
said king Trompart at this hour I know that thou art a true friend, and that
above all other I am be holden unto the. Is it not the daughter of the great
king Justamon that is sister unto king Ferragus. Yes said Adramayne I have
right subtylly stolen her away, and betrayed Pacolet the enchauntoure for of
his horse he shall never have the gouernynge. Adramayne said the king Trompate
can thou play also well as he yes said Adramayne I learned it long ago. Then
he showed him the manner and the facyon to forne the pynne and to govern the
horse. And when king Trompart had seen the subtylte, he thought within him self
that he would led the fair lady Clerymonde in to his country upon the horse of
wodde* and there take her unto wife. Then he enbraced the fair Clerymonde that
slepte yet for the charm of Adramayne, and with him set her surely upon the
horse of wodde. And Adramayne beheld him and said to him. My lord if you fail
for to play with the horse you put your self in great danger and peril, and
the lady also. No said Trompart of that have no doubt, and then he turned the
pyn right in his course and went through a cloud so far that he went more
than two hundred mile before day And at that hour awakened the fair lady
Clerimond that was so dolent and sorrowful for to se herself in that estate
that she fell in swowne, whereof the king Trompart was much abashed, and
afraid at his heart, for he wend that she had been dead* He turned the pyn and
stopped the horse in a fair grene field beside a fountain that was right fair
and clear. And when he had descended the lady upon the grass, he took of the
water and cast it in her face to make her ^^^yue again, and the lady for the
coldness of the water began for to remove a little and open her eyes, and began
for to make so pyteous cries and lamentacious that the king Trompart wend
verily that at that hour her hatte would have brosten, wherefore great sorrow
took him. And he found no manner how he might succoure her save by a shepeharde
that was there beside them, of which he demanded some bread. And the
shepeherde gave him a quarter of a lofe which he brought unto the fair
Clerymonde, and put of it in her mouth. The maiden ete a little, and with the
fountain she washed her thro^e. And when her heart was a litell come again
and her speech strengthed she began for to weep in saying. Alas unhappy and
above all dolorous what is happened me, no we have I lost all my solace and my
Joye vy unhappy fortune and cursed treason. Alas my love Uale^tine now have I
lost you* of god be he cursed that has departed us. When the king Tromparte
heard the great lamentacions that the fair Clerymonde made for her love
Ualentyne, he said unto her much rudely Lady leave such words, and of the
christen boy never speak more before me, or by my God mahoune I shall take
thy life from thy body. It is more right and reason that I wedde you, and that
you be given me that have my realm under my dominacion and lordshyp, than for
to take that same unhappy knave that has neither land nor lordshyp. In
saying these words he enclyned him toward the lady and would have kissed
her, but the noble lady that of his love was little curyous gave him upon the
mouth with her ^iste so that the blood came out for the which the king
Tromparte was much angry and set her on the horse furiously But it is said
commonly that it is evil thinking to be master of the craft that they can
nothing of. Even so did it to king Cromparte that wend well too have played
with Pacolettes horse, but he turned the pynne so evil that he faylled of his
way more than two hundred mile. And as he thought to have aryued in his land
he arrived in Ynde the great a great place where as market was kept that day.
And seeing all the people he descended on the ground with the fair lady
Clerymonde. Of the which thing they were much ameruayled that saw it. And at
that hour the lady Clerymonde knew the horse. For she might not know him the
night before for the great doloure that she was in. Alas Pacolet said the
noble lady now am falsely betrayed, and you the first of all robbed. Alas now
may I well say fare well my love Ualentyne, above all the other most curteys
and amiable. By my god mahoune said the king Crompart that wend well to have been in his country if ever you speak to me of that christen boy right shortly
you shall se and know with what love I love him, for with my cutting sword I
shall make your head to fle of your shoulders. Now is Crompart well deceived
that thinks to be in his country, and that for the fair Clerymonde has
wylled too play Nygromancy for he is arrived in the place where as it behooves
him to fynyshe his days. For after that he had been seen of diverse in the
place, some said among them that it was the great god mahoune that in flesh
and blood for to vysite his people was descended from heaven. The tidings of
this vysion came unto the king of Ynde, the which commanded that they should
be brought before him. Now in an evil hour arrived the king Crompart, for
also sone as the king of Ynde saw him he knew him.

How the king of Ynde made king Crompartes head to be smytten of, because he
had slain his brother and how he would have had the fair Clerymonde unto
his wife. Capit. xlviii.


I Rompart said the king of Ynde, ye be welcome, for now is come the time
that of the death of my brother I shall take vengeance to which by your fyerse
courage you have made war by the space of seven year, and after at the last
in tormente and mar^it you have made him dye shamefully. So will I show unto
my brother that in his life I loved him truly, and that after his death I have
avenged him on his enemies. Than the king of Ynde without any other
delyberacion at that same hour made his head to be smyten of. And after the
Justice was done he made the fair lady Clerymonde to be taken with the horse
of wodde, and for the beauty of the lady he made her to beledde in to his
palace much honorably, and well served and kept. After he entered into his
halle and made her to be brought before him by them that were the most nerest
his person. when she was come before him he beheld her gladly for her manners
and countenance, that of beauty corporal passed all the other and said unto
her much swetely. Lady I can not tell what you are* nor from whence you become,
but the prudence and beauty that is in you makes me to be so taken with your
love that never the days of my life I was so embraced with no womans love.
wherefore I am delivered for to take you unto wife and spouse, and make you
queen and maystresse of all the land of Ynde the great. Sir said the fair
Clerimonde that could answer full well. You speak graciouslye, and promyseth and
presents me more goods and ryche^^^s than I am worthy for to have, but as to
the regard for to take you unto husband and spouse for this present hour if
it please you, you shall pardon me, for within this little while I have made an
oath and auowe before the image of God mah^une for certain necessities that I
have found my self in that from this day come a tweluemoneth. I shall take
no man unto husband nor spouse. And therefore sir if it please you let me
hold and accomplysshe mine auowe unto the year be fynyshed, and when the
term shall be passed and accomplisshed, that take me unto wife and spouse, and
do with me your pleasure. By mahoune said the king you says but well, and sithe
that you have so a^cerprysed and vowed to our God mahoune, I am of accord and
content to abide unto the time that the end of your auowe become. So abode
the noble lady in the palace of the king of Ynde the great, the which
thought well to have had his desire of her or ye yer^ had been passed. And
co^masi^ed that the fare Clerymonde should be well kept and served above all
the other. And make too delyner unto her a fair chamber that was much richely
aourned, in the which the pleasant lady made to bear the horse of wodde, and
in the most secretest place put him under her warde^ope, and when the noble
lady Clerymonde saw the horse in bewaylyng Pacolet with her eyes she wept
tenderly, in praying God devoutly that he would deliver her out of that
danger. Alas said the noble lady, very god al mighty in whom is mine only
believe, resplendysshe your grace upon this poor woman or else I am and shall
remayn^a poor strayed woman separed from all my friends, and among the other
the most sorrowful. And in the hands of mine enemies it behooves me to use the
remenaunt of my life. Alas true redemproure do by thy puissau^ce so much before
ye end of my days yt I may see with both mine eyes the pleasant Ualentyne
to whom I am given. For I love better to be dead and suffer grievous torments
than to habandone my body to other than him. The lady is in Ynde the great the
which is night and day in syghes and in tears, praying God devoutly that he
would put her out of the danger and yield her safe and sound to the noble
knight Ualentyne, to which she had given her faith, and her courage before any
other man living. Now will I leave to speak of her and of the king of Ynde,
and to follow my matter I shall speak to you of Pacolet and of ye sorrow yt was
made for Clerymonde within Acquitain.

How Pacolet in a madens clothyng avenged him on the false Adramayne. Cap.
xlix.


AFter that the night was passed in the which Adramayne had betrayed pacolet:
and led away the fair Clerymonde, through the cite of Acquytayne was made
great lamentacyons for the loss of the lady, for the gardes of the palace that
myssed her made so great lamentacyons and so great noise in the morning that
through out all the cite was the tidings. And when Pacolet knew that he was
departed / he doubted him of some treason. Then he looked about the chamber and
sa we anon that his horse was lost, so he wrong his hands and drew his
here in cryenge hyghely. A falls Adramayne by the I am deceived. For falsely
thou have stolen my horse and my lady Clerymonde has borne away upon him. Well
ought I to hate my life when by the I am thus betrayed and vnpuruayed of the
thin ge that I most loved. Now death come unto me for to take me out of this
world, for I have no more hope to have comfort nor consolacyon. So pensyfe
and sorrowful was Pacolet for the fair Clerymonde that if it had not ben Orson
that came toward him he would have slain himself with a knyfe. On every side
of the palace was herd pyteous cries, and woeful complayntes. Bellyssaunt the
Empress wept and cried sore. And the fair Fezonne made such dole that she
rent her rich clothes for the love of Clerymonde that was stolen away so
falsely. And all they of the cite made innumerable complayntes and be waylynges.
And among all the other it was a pyteous thing to here the complaynt and
lamentacyon of the good Duke of Acquytayne. And when pacolet saw the great
sorrow that e^ry body made he said unto them. Lords I swear unto god that has
form all the world that I shall never have Joy of my life nor comfort unto
the time that I have taken vengeance of the traytoure Adramayne by the which
we are betrayed and deceived. At these words he departed heavy and sorrowful
and put of his gown, and took the habyte of a woman, in clothing him right
gentylly as a young maiden. And in that estate departed out of of the cite of
Acquytayne, and went in to the host of the king Ferragus. And also soon as
he was in the host of the paynyms there came out toward him that prayed him
much of love, because him thought he was so fair a maiden. For Pacolet had
washed his face with a water right subtyl made by his charm in such manner
that all they that beheld him said amongst them that they had never seen a
more fayrer woman nor a more gracyous. Of diverse paynyms and sarazyns he was
beholden and required but ever he excused him and said. My lords pardone me,
for at this time I am promised and have made covenant with the enchauntour
Adramayne, the which has retained me. Maiden said the other go on your way.
And so Pacolet took the way to go unto the enchauntour. Adramayne that was in
the tente. And when Adramayne saw him he was so enchaunted that Pacolet seemed
him the most fairest woman that ever god created. And he was so much
enamoured on him that for to sleep with him that night he retained him, and
Pacolet accorded thereto right gladly and said to him My lord know that I have
been required of many, but above all the other me think you are worthyest to
be served. Daughter said Adramayne doubt you of nothing, but make good chere,
for I have a good will for to serve you, and do you good tyght largely. Than
Adramayn commanded one of his servants that he should keep the maid, and
that she should be served at souper with all manner of meats and wine at her
plea saunce. Now is the enchauntout Pacolet in the tente of Adramayn well and
honestly served. And Adramayn is in the host of king Ferragus seruyng. Friend
said Pacolet to the varlet of Adramayne where is the king Trompart that is so
puyssaunt and well renowned. By mahoune said he my lady I think he is
returned in to his country, and leads with him the fair lady Clerymonde
upon a horse of wodde that my master has given him. When Pacolet hard those
tidinges demand not if he was sorrowful, but he made no semblaunt. Than entered
Adramayne in to the tente, and presented wine and spyces unto Pacolet, and
after said to him. My daughter it is time to go to rest, se here ye bed
that you and I shall sleep in and do our pleasures. Lord said Pacolet your
will be done. And then Adramayne the enchauntour unclothed him and entered in to
the bed, thynking that the maiden would come and lie with him. But also soon
as he was in the bed Pacolet enchaunted him in such wise, and made him sleep
so strongly that for any thing that might be done unto the morrow in the
morning he might not a wake. And when he had made him sleep so, he made all
there about to sleep. Than he put of his woman's clothyng, and put upon him the
rychest clothes of Adramayne, after he took a sword that hanged in ye ^hambre
and smote of Adramaynes head, and bare it with him. When he had done so he
went unto Fertagus p^u^^ion the which was well kept with sarazins. and so well
he could play with his art that he made all fall unto the earth and sleep.
Then he entered into the tence whereas Ferragus slepte, the which he enchau^*
teth so much that he made him lepe out of his bed, and clothe him. Then
Pacolet took his gyrdle and tied it about his neck in such wise that as a
beast he led him and made run after him unto the gates of the city of
Acquytayne. when Pacolet was at the gares of Acquytayne he found the duke
Sauary accompanied with diverse lords and barons that had much desire to
know of that enterprise. And also soon as they saw Pacolet they said unto
him. Friend where is Clerymonde that you bring not her again. Lords said
Pacolet have a litel patience for at the first stroke with an axe the tree is
not smyten down. Know that of Adramaine I am avenged, forse here his head,
and yet I have done so much by mine art that I have brought Ferragus with
me, the which all in slepynge I have made run after me through the fyeldes.
By my faith said Orson well have you wrought. Lords said Pacolet yet have I
done more maystrye, for in all the host of king Ferragus there is neither
paynym nor sarazyn but that they sleep under the trees much strongly. And
therefore if you will have victory upon them at this hour you may confound
them euery^hon^. My lords said Orson Pacolet tells us good tidings, and me
thinks it were good to issue out of the city and ten upon the paynyms that
are on sleep. Thus was the counsayll ordained, and the thing delybered. Then
they made Ferragus to be put in a dark prison unto their retournyng.

How king Ferragus host was all dyscomfited, and put all to death, and how
Ferragus was slain afterward within Acquytayne. Capit. l.


THen fiftene or sixtene thousand men issued out of the city of Acquitaine,
and they entered so pryuely into the host of the sarazyns that or the sun was
up they had vanquyshed them and put the^ al to death. At that hour was so
great slaughter of paynyms that all the earth was covered with their bodies.
After the battle they went in to their tents and took all their rychesses
and Iewelles. They returned in to acquitayne with right great ^oye. So when the
duke was in his palace with all his barons he made to be brought before him the
gyaunte Ferragus. Than the king Ferragus that was awakened was so sorrowful
that with the cries he seemed mad. Tho said the duke of Acquytayne to him.
Tho dyspayre avails you nothing. But and you will be baptized, and take the
law of Ihesu christ, I shall save your life, and make you be honored in my
palace. By mahoune said Ferragus yet had I rather be dead, and then he was
beheaded incontinent. After all these things, Orson would take leave of the
duke of acquytayne for to go in to Constantynoble to succoure his father and
the king Pepyn his uncle that were besyeged by the false sarazyns, and told
the duke all his entencion.

How Orson and the duke of Acquytayne went in to Constantynoble with a great
host, for to succoure the Emperor. And how Orson led the Empress
Bellyssant with him. Capit. li.


ORson said the duke you speak reasonably and sith that you are delybered for
to do so^ I will goo in your company, and mount upon the sea with force and
strength of men of arms, for to go and socoure your father The Emperor of
Greece, and your ^^^te the king Pepyn. Much Joyous was Orson and thanken* the
duke a thousand times. So it was not long after that the duke assembled his
men. And after that he had given the cite to keep to a noble knight they entered
upon the sea for to accompany Orson* the which led with hem his mother and
his wife Fezonne. They were much well garnysshed with men and vyttaylles, and
rowed so much upon the Grekysshe se^, that in short space they saw the cite
of Constantynoble, whereof they were right Joyous, and among the other the lady
Bellissant began for to weep much pyteouslye, in making lamentacyons when she
thought on her husband and on her fortune. Mother said Orson take comfort
unto you, for if it please god you shall se him shortly that you desire so
much, and of the treason by the which you were accused you shall have
tidings to your honor but I am pensyshow we shall enter in to
Constanstynoble. Sir said Pacolet of this have no doubt, for I shall shortly
find the manner how we shall enter into the cite. For I will go in to the cite
and tell them of your coming. Friend said Orson of that I pray you And
declare unto Ualentine the pyteous fortune of Clerymonde. By my faith said
Pacolet of that you shall pardon me for to sone comes he that brings evil
tidings After these words pacolet went into the sarazyns host for to deliver
Ualentine and the grene knight but of the prysons of the soudan that had been
taken that day by the sarazyns before Constantinoble as you shall here
afterward.

How the christen men for to have vytayles issued out of Constantynoble. And
how Ualentyne and the grene knight were taken prisoners by the false sarazyns
and paynyms. Capit. xxxiii.


King Pepyn and the Emperor of Greece that were besyeged within Constantinoble
by the false enemies of our faith, and that knew nothing of the coming of the
duke of Acquytayne that came for to succor him were in great indygence and
necessyte. For them; peroure and the king Pepyn with diverse vallaunte and
noble knights were within the city of Constantinoble in right great scarcenes
of vytaylles, and they might get none in no manner of ways but with the sword
upon their enemies. Then Ualentyne knew their great necessite, for the which
thing he that was full of hardynes accompanied with the grene knight and twenty
thousand fyghtyng men for to conquer some vytaylles issued out of
Constantinoble, and of the vytaylles of the sarazins and paynims they charged
two hundred charyottes, and slew and put unto death all them that kept the
vytaylles. But as they returned to ward the cy^le thynking to lead away the
vytaylles there came against the^ the soudan on one side, and the king of
Arabye, and the king Afficion on the other side. There was right great
destruction of the paynims, and much pyteous slaughter of the christen men. Of
the prowess and valiauntnes of the noble Valentyne it is not to be spoken of,
for at that assau^e he slew the king Pramagan, with the knight Clarian, and
diverse other of whom the names be unknown. And the grene knight with one
stroke smote of the arm of the king of Moryenne with the shield, and before
him he slew his brother Abyll^n with ten other knights right strong. But not
with standing their strenghte and hardynes they were euylly sucoured, and had
evil adventure, whereof it was great pytie, for of their mortal enemies they
were taken prisoners and sedde unto the cursed soudan, the which for their
taking made right greatioye and feast. And for to judge them unto death he
made to assemble. xv. kings paynims. And ye christian men yt returned in to ye
cite fleyng told every body that they were deed in the batayl. How was
Ualentine and the grene knight in the pauilion of the soudan straytly vounden
and rygorously detayned, wherefore Ualentyne wept saying. Alas fair
Clerymonde I shall never se you, whereof I have my heart tryst and sorrowful, By
long time you have a hyden me, and in pain and trauayll of my body I have
sought you long time as she that by the will of god was elect for to be my
spouse and wife. And when the time was comen yt of (...) euylles I should have
had alledgement, and of my dolours recomforte and consolacyou. I am of all
pleasure un wrapped and separed from my friends and am in the hands of mine
enemies. Farewell my fader noble emperor of Greece, for in me you shall have no
more a child. Fare well the noble Bellyssant my mother, for you had never for
me but a little pleasure nor comfort, and you shall never have more but sorrow
and distress. Fare well my valiant brother Orson that has loved me with so
good heart. For we had purposed to have passed and fynysshed our days with
our fader and mother, and no we by a case unfortunate it is suddenly reuersed,
when the grene knight saw that Ualentyne complained him in be waylynge his
friends, he said unto him. Sir for god forgete fader and mother friends and
kynnesmen, and make we prays unto God that he will have mercy on us, and
receive our souls into his paradise. Take we our leave of this life and in
worth the death for to sustain the faith, and have we trust in God that for
us would suffer death. How was y^ soudan set in a chair prepayred in great
pride rythly clothed, the which said Lords I have made an oath unto god
mahowne that these two christian knights the why che at this present time and
other times have enforsed them for to bear us damage shall dye vylanously
wherefore advise you among you of what death they shall dye. In saying these
words Pacolet keste himself in the prece, the which threw such a charm
that for all that they had seen him befoore in the time that the Soudan Moradyn
was taken, yet at that hour he was not known of no body. He entered into the
pauilio^ where as the judgment was given on the two christen knights, and
also soon as he apperceyued Ualentyne and the grene knight he set him on both
his knees, and in sarasyns language by mahoune he salued the soudan / and sith
said unto him thus. Right dear sir understand my message. Know that I am
messengere unto your brother Groart the puyssaunt king of Argy ere, the which
for to soucour you and for to confound the christen men comes toward you
accompanied with four kings strong and puyssaunt and a great nombre of
capptaynes that have valyaunte knights for to help you. And by me he sends
you wordde to wete on what side you syl that he set his syege. And if you have
any christen prisoners that you send him them and he will make them be led
into his contrie for to draw the ploughe as dombe beasts. So me thinks that
I see hear twain that should be much propre for to do such pain, of whom
your father shall be Joyous. In saying these words Pacolet blewe against the
Son dan and made a charm so subtle that of all that why the he said was
byleued. The Soudan was much joyous of thoose tidings, and made him too be
well served that night, for he wend that he had said truth Great joy
demeaned Ualentyne and the grene knight in their hearts when they saw Pacolet,
but they made no semblaunt. Now the night was come that every body withdraw
them unto rest save two hundred sarazyns that were in arms, the which were
committed for to keep the prisoners that night. But they made evil watch for
them. For whem it came toward mydnyght Pacolet went unto them, and in
speaking unto the sarazins by mahowne he kaste his charm by so subtle a matter
that they fell all unto the earth on sleep. Then he took two good horses and
came unto the prisoners that were bound against a pyller. And after that he
had unbound them, in continent and without any delay he made them for to
mount on horsbacke. And in this wise he did deliver them, and cast the^ out
of their enemies hands* when they were in the field out of the host Pacolet
said unto them. Lords make good there and take comfort unto you. For know that
upon this land is descended the good duke of Acquitayne, and the knight Orson
for to sucour you, and diverse capitaines with a great nonbre of fyghting men.
And there is come also in their company, the noble Empress Bellyssant, and the
fair Fezonne. Friend said Ualentyne, wherefore comes not the fair
Clerymonde. By my faith said Pacolet she would have come right gladly, but
also sone as she was mounted upon the sea, for the odoure of the water she was
so seek at her heart that it was force to lead her again in to Acquytayne.
Ualentyne believed him and for that time he questyoned him no forder, for
Ualentyne wend verily that he had said truth. Then said Pacolet lords goo in
to Constantinoble and make to morrow in the morning in such wise that you
issue out of the city with the greatest no^bre of men of arms that you can
make for to go against your mortal enemies. And I shall do so much on the
other side that all the h^est of the duke of Acquitayne that is come shall give
assault. An^^t that hour the soudan shall believe that it is sucoure that
comes to him. For I have made him to understand that the king of Argy his
brother is a tyued, accompanied with four kings, the which to morrow in the
morning ought to find them in his host, Pacolet said Valentine you speak
wisely and so it shall be done. At these wordis they took leave the one to the
other. Pacolet returned toward the duke of Acquytayne that was upon the sea
side with his host, and told^ him how he had been within the soudans host,
and how he had delivered Uale^tyne and the grene knight. And after he told him
how by his sort he had made the soudan believe yt his brother the king Gro^^
would come and sucour on him the morrow, Parcolet said Orson you are much to be
praised when you can do such things. Sir said Pacolet there is an other
thing, yt is that to morrow in the morning we go and assail the host of the
sarazins. For they of Constantynoble with great puyssaunce of men of arms
ought to assayll the^ on their side. And by this manner they shall be al
disco^fyted. For of all the army on this side the soudan shall think that we
be paynyms by the subtle language yt I have enchaunted him with. Of this
enterprise was Joyous and much ameruayled the duke and they of his court. He
made his men to be armed and appointed for to perform the deed and all the
night he made to make good watch about him. The tidings were anon through
the city of Constantinoble of the deliueringe of Ualentine and the grene
knight. The Emperor and king Pepin made great Joye for their deliverance.
And Ualentine recouted to them all the manner of his taking. And how that he
and the grene knight had been delivered by Pacolet out of the hands of the
Soudan Bruiant. And told unto them also the coming of the duke of Acquitaine
and of his brother Orson, which for to come and succor them had passed the sea with a great navy of men of arms, and finablie he told them all the
enterprise that was made for to assaill the painims and sarazins, even so as it
had been delibered by Pacolet.

How die the succoure of the duke of Acquitaine all the painims and sarazins
were slain before the city of Constantinoble. Ca. liii.


When the Emperor and king Pepyn heard those tidings dylygently and without
any soiournyng they made to arm their men all the night and put them in point.
And of their host they made to make five bataylles. The first was given unto
Ualentyne, the second to the grene knight. The third to the king Pepyn. The
fourth to Myllon dangler. The fifth was given unto Sampson of Orleau^ce that
bare in his baner a bear of silver. Thus ordained the Emperor his bataylles.
And when it came to the brekyng of this day the issued out of the cite for to
go assayll the sarazyns So when they were upon the field they made to blow up
trumpettes and clarons, whereof the nyse was so great that the sarazyns at that
hour cried alarm and lepte out of their tents. At that hour the paynyms and
sarazins were sore assaylled by the christen men. The battle was piteous for
the christens that day, and for the painims and sarazins cruel discomfiture,
for at that assaute was slain fifty thousand sarazins and paynims. There was
the king Pepin that in giuinge courage unto his men cried with a high voice
monte toye saint De^is. Than there was a sarazin that with a high voice cried
saienge unto the Sowdan. Ha six recule abacke and think for to save our
lives. For to night we have lost our two prisoners, and also we have seen
coming against us a great army. My mahoune said the Soudan I know well we
are betrayed, but for all that have good trust in our gods, and think we
for to defend us. A^ that hour the sarazins took so great courage for to
fight, that by force of annes they constreined the christian men for to go abacke
again but little auayled their pride, for there came smytyng upon them the
duke of Acquitayne and Orson, the which assailed them so asperly that without
any remission they fynysshed their days, so that of all their host there
escaped but. xxxiii. And so by the will of Jhesu christ, and by the great
prowess of the valiant princes the cursed sarazyns were dyscomfyted.

How the Emperor received his sone Orson with great joy, and his wife
Bellyssant. Cap. liiii.


ANd when the bacayll had taken an end and that the christen men were gathered
together ogayne. Ualentyne and his brother Orson that knew each other came
before the Emperor in much great reverence. Father said Uale^tyne here may
you se my brother. Orson the which you never saw, by whom you have been
sucoured in this iouruey. When the Emperor embraced his son Orson pyteouysly
weeping, and also did the king Pepyn. Fair son said the Emperor will be you
come for by you my joy is doubled and my hope fortefyed. Orson said the king
Pepyn do you not remember how ye smote me down of my horse in the wodde when
I thased you. Fair uncle or this I ought well to be remembered on and of diverse
other thing is done by me. But at this presed time we ought to think none
other thing but to thank god of the victory that he has given us against the
enemies of the faith, for with all our puyssaunce we ought to study in our
hattes how we might avenge Jesu Christ. For to hear those words all the
company was greatly resoyled, and praised much the wysoome of Orson. Then
assembled the Emperor and king Pepyn Ualentyne and Orson and the grene
knight, Blandymayn and Guydarde the marchaunte that had vanquysshed the false
Archebysihop. And in great honor and tryumphe wence for to se the tents of
the noble Empress Bellyssant and of the fair Fezonne, the which in abiding
the dyscomfyture of the sarazyns were in a fair pauylion honestly accompanied,
and there they prayed devoutly unto God that it would please him to keep the
Emperor and his men from the dannger of the paynyms, when the Empress
Bellyssant knew that the battle was won she said duty Fezonne. My dough ter
make good chere for you shall se the Emperor anon the which is Orsons father
that has taken you unto wife. Mother said Fezonne god be thanked, for to se
such a thing I have great desire. In saying these words the Emperor
arrived before the pauylyon of the ladies and all his company. And when the
ladies apperceyued him they went out against him. Than when the Emperor
apperceiued his Wife Bellyssant he lepte of his horse in weeping and syghinge
tenderly And without that he might speak any word he enbraced the lady the
which set her upon both her knees. In that place assembled the Emperor and
the good lady that by the space of twenty year and more had been separate in
sondre. Now it is not to be demanded if for to find the one the other they
were Joyous, and if that by profounde pity they had their hearts touched and
oppressed so that by natural love they fell unto the earth in arm together in
a swowne. And when valentyne and Orson saw the great pity of their father and
mother much tenderly and pyteyusly they began for to weep and hard beside
them they fell both in a swowne. The king Pepyn and diverse other barons and
knights that beheld that thing began much tenderly lor to weep. And after
that the Emperor and his wife Bellyssant had aswaged their dolours, and that
they were awakened out of their swowne y^ emperor said unto his wife. Alas my
love much ought it to displease me at the heart the doloure and pain that
your body has suffered since your exyle. But and if it please you I pray you
pardon me for my great fault, for with great pain may any keep them from
treason. My lord said the good lady of the trybulacion that I have been in,
have you no thought. For sith the hour that I saw you of all my dolours I
have had aledgemente and comfort. But of one thing I pray you that is that it
will please you to show me the good merchant by the which the treason has been known, and the false archebysshop ouercomen. My love said the Emperor
here may you se him for it is the good guydarde by the which the thing has been known and your honor saved. Friend said the lady unto the marchaunte
well are you worthy to be byloued and holden dear among all the other, for the
great prouffyte that you have done to the Emperor of Greece and to the noble
blood of France. Wherefore from hens forward I reteyne you for my chamber
layne, and with that I will that you have for your pain a thousand mark of
fine gold. Lady said the merchant I thank you and al my life I shall serve
you truly. Than spoke Ualentyne unto his mother and said. My lady mother please
it you to speak to (...)nd tell me tidings of my good love Clerymonde*
(...)ire sone said the lady take comfort unto you For (...)ymond has been
falsely stolen away in the cite of Acquytayne and delivered unto king Tromparte
that was comen for to socoure the paynyms before the cite. When Ualentine herd
those words he beheld Pacolet thinking that by him he had been deceived, and
by a dyspytefull courage would have smytten him with a glayue. And than pacolet
that knew his furour keste himself upon his knees and said that for god he
would not be hangrye with him. For I my self have been hetrayed by a false
enchauntour, and me horse stolen, but that notwithstanding I have cut of his
head. When Ual^tyne understood yt he had lost the fair Clerimond by treason.
And that Pacolet and all the other were innocents, he cast out a ^rye so
pyteous and so great that all they that beheld him were constrained for to
w^pe. At that hour both princes barons and knights took their way for to go
in to Co^stantynoble. And the priests and clerks in great devotion went in
a general procession, in the* which they made to goo wives and children
against the valiant princes that had destroyed the paynyms in syngyng hymns
and lauds, unto God till that they came unto the great church of saint
Sophye accompanyeng them, and for great joy and pytie wept tenderly. And after
that they had made their prayers in the said church, and given thanks unto
God, the Emperor and king Pepyn en^r^^ into the Palace, the which demeaned
so great Joy the six days they kept table round. So it needs not to be
demanded of it there was great triumph and noble service* for every body was
Ibcunde and made great there and feast, for the gracious vy^ (...) that God
had given them against their enemies. (...) After certain days diverse princes
and barons (...) leave of the Emperor for to return into their countries, of
whom I think not to make you any more mention, save alonely of king Pepyn.

How the king Pepyn took leave of the Emperor of Greece for to return in to
France. Cap. lv.


AFter the destruction of the enemies of the christen faith, the which for to
demynyshe the faith and destroy the christen men had besyeged Constantynoble,
the king Pepyn took leave of the Emperor for to return into France* When
Orson saw that the king did return he said unto him. Sir I have great desire
to go with you into France, and to pass and use my days in your service
without ever for to change you for to serve any other. Orson said king Pepyn
of that I am content. And sithe that you have so good courage for to serve me
loyally know that I shall lead you into France, and above al for to govern my
realm I shall make you my conestable. And if it happened that by the will of
God my litell sone Charles finished his days during my time I shall make you
king of France Sir said Orson I thank you a thousand times, for sith that it
is your will for to receye me into your service I will led with me my wife
Fezoune, and unto you be ever true and loyal, and with my sharp swear ^e
defend your good right. So they departed fro Constantynoble with much great
chiualry. For the departing of king Pepyn the Emperor and the Empress
Bellyssant wept bytterly, and also did all the other as well little as great,
Orson kyssed his brother Valentine in reco^maundynge him unto God, and weeping
bitter teres. O this mother Bellissant he might not take leave for the great
sorrow that he had to leave her save alonely that he enbraced her and kyssed
her swetely After the leave taken of little and great the king mounted upon the sea with his compani. And the Emperor and them of his court returned in to
the cite of Constantynoble wepinge haboundauntly. But with ye departinge of
king Pepin more than any other the child Ualentine was displeasaunte. And for
the love of clerimonde the which he had lost he said unto the Emperor of
Greece wepinge piteously. Dear and redouted fader please it you pardon me if I
take leave of you for I shall never in my life have Joy nor rest till that I
know certain tidinges where my love is become. For in danger of my body I
have conquered and won her, for the which I ought well for too desire her and
bewail her. When the Empress his mother understood that her child would go
her way, she fell in a swown Mother said Valentine leave your wepinge, for unto
the death I will seek her that I love so much. And if it happen that I
cannot find her, never the days of my life shall I have Joye, but shall
desire the death for to abredge my days, and my dolorous dyscomfortes. Than he
called Pacolet and said to him. Friend if it please the to serve me, in this
necessytie, and come with me thou shall never have worse than I. Sir said
Pacolet as for that it shall not stycke, for I am ready and apparaylled for to
go with you and follow you* in every place, and do your good pleasure, thus was
Pacolet delibered for to go with Valentine. And Ualentine was so taken with the
love of the fair lady Clerimond that he left father and Mother, and without
soiourninge he made him ready and so departed out of Constantinoble with three
servants alonelye, for to find her that his heart was so sor^wful fore. Of
the sorrow of the Emperor and of the Empress Bellissant it cannot be
recounted. For they were in such pain that with out spekinge any word they
entered in to their chamber piteously discomforted. And Ualentyne that had his
courage constau^t for to acheue his enterprise mounted on horsbacke for to go
toward the haven, and there entered into a ship and his company. Now I shall
leave to speak of him and will speak of king Pepin, that which arrived in Paris
and was received honorably. For out of every church issued processyons, and
prestes and clerks and men of every estate went a great way out of the
city against him. And among the other there was the queen Berthe the which
kissed him much sweteli. Charles his litel son that was wise and well taught
salued his fader ye which took him in his Arms and kissed him, and after
entered in to the palace with great honor much richlye accompanied. And for
the love of his cominge there was made a great fe^st, and diverse great offices
was given that day but above all the other the valiau^t knight Orson was
mounted in honor, so much and in such manner that all that the which he
would say and command it was done and holden. He was so prudent and so wise
that by him was all the court governed, the male factours punysshed, and the
good eleuate in honor.

How Haufray and Henry ymagined great treason against Orson by the aid and
consenting of twain of their neuewes. Ca. lvi.


THere was none that had to do with the king that sought other mean tha^
Orson, for the which thing Haufray and Henrye that I have made mencyon of to
fore had so great envy against the good Orson, so great that they
ymagyned mortal treason against him with all their puyssaunce. And said the
one to the other it was to great a reproach unto them and to greaous when yt
Orson was eleuate more in honor then they. By god said Haufray unto his
brother Henry, well ought we to praise our puyssaunce litell when we can not
take vengeance of Orson for if he reygne long we shall se the time that by him
we shall be casten out of the realm of France, brother said Henry you have said
truth. Now we be but two brethren germaynes and now to comfort the one the
other and help against our enemies, but upon this matter I can not tell what to
think Henry said Haufray understand my reason, we have two nenewes that are
the sons of our eldest sister, that is for to wit Florente and Garniere, the
which are much hardye and fyerse. And me thinks that by them twain a
treason should be sone conspyred and made sooner then by us, for they knew well
for a truth that the king loved them not, and that he would give sooner
crede^ce unto other then them. On the other part the one is botyller of the
king, and the other is vssher of the chamber that he slepeth in. And by the
means of them twain we may enter in to the chamber of king Pepyn our father
and slay him in his bed, and every body will say that it has been Orson,
for above all the other he is the chief guard of his body, and trusts most
in him. And by this mean the said Orson shall be condampned to death, and the
realm shall be holly in our hands, for our brother Charles is not yet
puyssaunt enough for to govern us. Haufray said Henry you have right well
devised* but for to accomplysshe this thing it is expedient to make great
dylygence, in this wise ymagyned the two false traitors the death of the noble
and puyssaunte king Pepyn, the which was their natural father. And in so
evil an hour he had engendered them that for the saving of their souls they
cared full little. They sent for there two cursed traitors, that is for to
wit Florent and Garnyere the which were right valiant and hardy. And when
they were come^ before them Haufray took the words and said in this manner.
Lords understand our ente^^yon for we are delivered my brother and I for to
do a thing that we may have all prouffyte by, and shall reyse you and mou^te
you in honor more than ever you were, the which thing I desire because that
you are my propre neuewes and of my propre blood, and owe more to desire your
good tha^ any other, da^ for to come to an end I will tell you mine ente^cyo^.
You know that the king Pepyn how well that he is our father never loved us in
his life with good heart. Ever with his puyssaunce he has raised up the
strangers and exalted them in honor and in all offices and dignyties, more
than us, wherefore all these things considered my brother Henry and I that are
youres uncle legyty mes (will and consent) and are delybered for to make king
Pepyn dye. And after his death we foh^e shall govern and hold his land at our
own will. But it be houed that the thing be accomplysshed by one of you
twain. And me thinks that you Garnyete are the most proprest for to
undertake this thing for you have a couenable office for to do it more than any
other seeing that you are master vssher and pryncipall guard of the king is
chamber. And may know both night and day who enters in to the said
chamber, for the which thing you may hyde you in some secret place, and
when the king shall be in his bed on sleep you shall slay him without making
any noise. And on the moro we in the morning when the tidinges shall be that the
king is dead, the charge and the blame shall be given unto Orson, because that
every night he slepeth and rests most nerest his body, and so he shall be
judged and condemned unto death. And after these things we shall take the
life sone from the little Charles. And by this mean the realm shall abide unto
us for to depart it after our pleasures. Uncle said Garnyere of this feate
doubt you nothing, for king Pepyn your father shall lose his life. Now was
the treason ordained against king Pepyn that thought none ill, by the two
cursed children that had no pite to make their father dye. In an evil hour is
the child borne that would purchase such a death against his father. And in
an evil hour was ever engendered Haufray and Henry when by them treason was
done, and many countries marred. By them was their neuewe Garnyete full of so
evil will that sone after that the treason was made he espied a night as the
king souped and took a sharp poynted knyfe and subtylly entered in to the
chamber tyall, and behind the hangyng he hid him so secretly that he might
not be apperceyued of no body. And when the hour was come that the king
should go unto rest, by the gardes and chaberlaynes he was brought unto bed
as the custom was. The king entered into the bed, the which recommaunded him
unto God much devoutly, and all issued out of the chamber save Orson that
devised with the king to slepyng time. And when Orson saw that the king would
sleep without making any more noise he left him, and the nerest him that he
might he laid him down upon a couche bed.

How Garnyere entered in to king Pepyns chamber for to accomplysshe his cursed
enterprise, and how he left the knyfe within the kings bedstrawe. Capitulo.
lvii.


WHen it came to watdemydnyght the traytoure Garniereyssued out of this place,
and in bering the knyfe in his hand he went unto the bed of king Pepyn for
to acheue his enterprise, but when he was beside him, and that helyfte by his
arm for too have put him to death, him thought that the king would have
wakened, wherefore so great fear took him that he let himself slide down by
the bed side, where as he was a great while and durst not remeue him. After
he would have sinytten secondly, but so great fere took him as he would have
smyten him, that all his body failed, and began for too tremble in such wise
that he might not acheue his enterprise, and put the knyfe within the bed.
After he tetourned in to his place all tremblyng for to hyde him in abiding
the day, so strongly afraid that he would have been a thou sand mile beyond the
sea. And Orson was in his bed that of that deed doubted nothing, and dreamed
a mar ueilous dream. For it seems him in sleping that they would have taken
away the honor of his wife Feronue. And that beside her was two thieves that
conspyred treason against him. After him thought that be side a ponde he saw
two great herons that fought with a hawke, and with all their puyssaunce
enforced them for to slay him. But the hawke defended him so valiauntly that he
trauayled the two herons in such wise that they had been both dead if it had
not been a great multitude of little birds that descended upon ye hawke, and
would have slain him anon if there had not come an. Egle that succored him.
In this dream Orsou awakened that of this dream was much amat ueyled and
began for too say. Ha very God keep me from treason, and comforce my brother
Ualentyne in such manner that of ye noble lady Clerymonde he may have certain
tydinges. At that hour the day appeted and Orson issued softly out of the
chamber for was kenynge of the king. When Garnyere saw that Orson was gone
out of the chamber, also sone as he might he issued out and went unto his
lodging rennynge full taste. And there he found the two brethren Haufray and
Henry and with them Florent the which had great desire and lust to know some
tidings of their cursed and dysloyall treason. Beware Garnyete that you tell
us the truth how our enterprise gothe. Lords said Garnyere by the god
almighty that has created all the world for all the richesse of France I
would not do so much again as I have done. And as to the regard of king
Pepyn know that he is yet on live, for even so as I thought for to have slain
him I was so afraid that my heart faylled me, and would not have had the
courage for to have dommaged his body for all the gold in the world. But of
another treason I aduy sed me, for I have left the knyfe yt I bare in the
kings bed. So I have thought that we shall accuse Orson of treason and shall
tell the king that they are. iiii. of one appointment that are delibered for
to sle the king, of whom Orson is the pryncypall, and shall say also that
they will make the little Charles to dyefor to have between them four the realm
of France with the apperrenauntes. And for to preue our feate the better and
be byleued of this thing we shall tell how Orson has made ready his gear,
and left the knyfe with in the bed. And if any body demand us how we do
know it, we shall say that they were in the chamber spe king of this matter,
and how one of us was beside the d^^e and understood there secrets. Garnyere
said Hausray you are much subtle and speaks wisely. And if it happened that
Orson would say the contrary, you and your brother shall take battle against
him, and I know well for a certainte that he has not the power for too
vanquyshed you. And if that it happened by a benture that the worst turned upon
you my brother Henry and I shall be well garntshed of men for to succor you.
Lords said Garnyere and Florent your delyberacion is right good, and we have
well the courage for to acheue the enterprise. Thus was the treason the second
time conspired against the noble knight Orson, the which of all this deed was
pure and innocent. The day was clear and the hour was come after that the king
had herd mass that he entered in to the halle tyal and was set at dinner.
There was Haufray and Henry that ser ued at the cable, the which she wed good
semblaunt un to Orson, but with their hearts they purchaced himmortall treason
with all their puyssaunce. And when Garniere saw that it was time for to
speak, he entered in to the halle and came before the king, the which he
salued with great reverence and said to him. Redoubted sit it is true that of
your benign grace you have made me knight and given me office in your court
more honester than unto me appertayueth. And because that you have done me so
much honor to uphold me in your service I ought not to be in place by
treason where as your damage is purchased or mortal treason conspired.
Wherefore I am come to ward your noble grace as a true setuaunt ought for to
do for to declare unto you a treason that of late has been conspyred against
your ryall majesty. And to the end that you may keep your person out of the
danger Iaduertyse you, and that you may punyshe the male factours as reason is
Garuyere said the king tell on your courage; for with a good will I shall here
you.

How Garnyere accused Orson fas^y of treason un to king Pepyn, and how the
knyfe was found in the kings bed. Cap. ^viii.


Sir said Garuyere make Orson to be holden least that he re^ne away, for upon
him shall turn the loss and dommage. He is the trai toure by whom the thing
is begone and ought to be brought unto an end. And i^ that you will know the
manner, wit that they are four of the most greatest of your court* that are
delyb^red for to make you dye, of the which Orson is the pryncypall that ought
to make you dye in your bed, and smite you to the heart with a knyfe when you
shall be on sleep, and to the end that you believe me the better to day as
they made their accord together I was in a certain place where as they knew
me not, and have understood how Orson said unto the other that the knyfe that
you shall be slain withal is hid within your bed, and if it please you
for to go^, or for to send any body you shall find the thing veritable. Sir
said Florent that was on the other side, my brother says troth whereof I am
right sorrowful that they to whom you have done so much good will purchase
your death. The king was much ama^ueyled of those words, and in diverse manners
and cou^tenaunces he beheld Orson in ^ayeng. False and dysloyall man have you
had such a thought for to desire my death* I that all the time of my live
have holden you more derer than the children that I have engendered. Ha sir
said Orson believe not so lightly against me, for I thought never treason in
my days, but am accused of this deed by their false envy. Now speak no more
said the king, for and the knife be found in the bed I hold you culpable of
the deed and demand none other proof. Then he called barons and said to
them. Lords by Ihesus christ I was never so much amatue^led as I am of this
treason. Sir said My^^on dangler I can not tell how it goes but with pain
may I believe that Orson would enterprise such a thing against your royal
mayestie, seeing that he is your neuewe. Yea said the king but and we find a
knyfe within the bed it is an evident sign that the thing ought to be
believed. Now for god said Mylion dang^er let us go and se this experience*
Then the king went in to the chamber with diverse of his barons and knights.
And as they were before the bed they found* the knyfe as the traytoure
Garnyere had told the. Alas said the king in whom may one have trust, when
my propre neuewe that I have holde^ so dear is covetous of my death, and of my
life enuyous. But sith that the deeds is such I swear and promise unto God
that there shall never be a day of respyte till that he be hanged and
strangled. Than a valiant knight the which was called Simon, ran toward
Orson for he loved him much and said to him Alas fair sir fly anon from
hence and think for to escape, for the king has found the knyfe within the
^edde* as Garnyere had told him, wherefore the king has sworn that he shall
make you be hanged and strangled also soon as he shall become. Care you not
said Orson for I have good trust, in God that he will kep^ my good right. Then
the king entered in to the halle where as Orson was kept strayghtly with
fyftene strong knights, sith he made to cal^ lords and advocates for to judge
Orson. But God that forgets not his good friends, saved him from the false
traitors and gave him the victory against them.

How Orson when they would have judged him, put opposycion and demanded
battle against his accusers, the which was vttred him by the twelve peers of
Fraunces. Capit. lix.


WHen Orson was before the king and before the Judges of his palace* he said
before them al thus. Right redoubted sir, and you my lords and batons that be
here assembled, you know that no man can keep him from treason nor fliethe
fortune when i^ comes. And sith that it is so that I am accused of crime
against the maiestieryall* yt is of the kings death, and that you be here
assembled for to judge me and my words may not be hard nor believed against
mine enemies I demand right before every body, and the law of your land that
is such that when a knight is accused of murdre and treason, and he will
defend him in battle he ought to be received. Now I am a knight that holds
my self without reproach and innocent of the deed, so I will by the ordenaunce
above said be received in my defenses, if by the assystens of your court it be
ordained and judged me. And for to make my self crele lo here my glove that I
present before you all to abide battle. And if I he ouercomen in battle do
Justyce with my body even as much a case requires. Orson said Garnyere of
such a thing you may well hold your peace, for never pleases it god that for
a thing proved I take battle against you. Ha traytoure said Orson it is
nothing proved, if it ^e not some man that doubts not his dampnynge / and
loves his honor that for such a case may not Judge to death when I will
have the field in deniyng the case without confessinge it, he ought not to be
conda^pued. Upon these words the twelve peers of France made to have Orson
out of the place with histwo adversaries for to dispute the reasons of both
parties. So it was Judged by them that the demanded of Orson was reasonable,
and that he ought to be herd and received in his reasons, And than they made
Garnyere and his brother to come before the kings presence. And the duke
Myllon dangler demanded Garnyere which were the four persons that were
consenting to the kings death. Lords said Garnyere of that inquire no more,
For I will not t^l it you for all the gold of France. Garnyere said the Judge
that was ordained, therefore I condampne you and your brother to receive Orsons
glove, and fight against him, for sithe that you will not declare them that are
culpable of the thing, it is lightly to be believed that in your feate is
malice. Joyous was Orson of that appoyntement, and keste his glove unto the
two traitors saying. Lords se here my glove that I deliver unto the two
traitors Garnyere and Florente in such a coucnaunt that i^ I may not conquer
them. I offer my body to be hanged shamefully. Now auaunte said the king the
thing is accorded and the Jugement is given. But for to bring unto an end the
enterprise it behooves you too give hostage and surete, for to be forth coming
at the day assigned. Then Haufray and Henry abode and offered their bodies for
Florente and Garnyere. And the duke Myllon, and the duke Sampson Galeram and
Geruays offered their bodies and abode for Orso^. And promised to yield him
again at the months end that was assygned. So when the end of the monethe
was come, and the day that they should fight, the duke Myllon dangler. Sampson
Galeram, and Geruays brought forth Orson, for he was well beloved of them. And
when he was armed and mounted on horseback, he rode thoroughe the city much
noblye accompanied toward the place ordained. So he had not long been there
when Haufray and Henry entered in to the field with their two neuewes rychely
armed. Much redoubted Garnyere and Florent their adversary Orson. But Haufray
and Henry ever comforted them, and promised them succor. And even so as they
were entered into the field for to do their devour, the bishop of Paris went
toward them and made them al three for to swear upon a book as the custom is.
And after the bishop went out of the field After came the heraudes and the
kepers of the field that made all to issue out that were within save the. iii.
cha^pions. Now Haufray had appointed three hundred me^ that he had put within a
great place the nerest the field that he might. and said and commanded unto
them that also sone as they should here him blow his horn that they should
come to ward him. well thought the traitors to have been succored and
defended in their necessitte, but little auayled all their enterprise, for also
sone as the gardes commanded the champeons to do their devour, Orson couched
his spear and smote his horse with the sporres and came against his enemies by
much great courage and he gave garniere so great a stroke that he persed his
shield and his harneis through out. And Florent was on the other side that gave
Orson a much matueylous stroke, but he set as much by it as it he had smytten
against a toure. False cursed traytout and disloyal thou have accused me with
wrong, but to day I shall show the where loyalte does rest. At these words
with his bright swoorde he gave Garniere so great a stroke that he smote him
out of his sadle unto the earth, and subtylly there withal he pulled his helm
of his head, and after would have cut of his head if it had not ben his brother
Florent yt smote Orson much rudely. Then Orson returned and smote Garnyere in
such wise that he cut of his left ear, and sith said unto him, fair master
that purchaceth trea son you ought not to lose by the bergayne. There began a
strong battle between the three champions. Garnyere conquered his helm again
and put it on his head and came to ward Orson for to damage him with all his
might. But he had been discomfited anon if it had not been Florent that
oftentimes socoured him.

How Orson slew Florent in the field, and banquyshed Gatnyere, and how
Haufray cut of his head as he would have confessed the treason. Cap. lx.


ORson had much pain and trauayll for to confound the two traitors for they
were strongly armed and also took courage, for Haufray and Henry that had
promised them succoure and help, and Orson did so about Garniere that he
wounded him right sore. So when he felt himself wounded he descended to the
earth and habandoned his horse. After he came against Orson and smote his horse
in such manner that he cut of one of his legs and felled him unto the earth.
But Orson was dyligent and strong, for when he felt the horse fall he avoided
the styropes and lept upon the earth. And sith came unto Garnyere and took him
between his arms so mightily that he took his shield from him and threw him
to the earth, but as he would have given him a ^oyne in the belly. Florente
sported his horse for to surour his brother, and gave Orson so great a stroke
upon the helm that he made him for too rele. Orson ran unto him that had
dispyte and smote him with so great a courage that he ouerthrewe the horse dead
too the earth, and took of Florentes helm from his head, of the which he was
sore abasihed, and found none other remedy save for to flee and run about
the field in coueryng his head with his shield. And Orson ran after him with a
fyerse courage that for to se him flee had great pleasure. Ha Florent said
Garnyere wherefore flee you so much, return you again and think for to
defend you, for if you have good courage to day he shall be vanquyshed. At
these words the two traitors assailed the valiant Orson much asperly, and
with their trenchyng swords gave him so many strokes that through his harneys
the strokes entered, and made the blood to issue out by great haboundaunce.
Then Orson that felt himself wounded reclaymed God and the virgyn Mary much
deuoutely, and gave Florent so great a stroke that he smote of his arm with the
sword. During this batail Fezone was in a church in prayinge god devoutly that
it would please him for to keep her good love Orson and defend him in gyuyng
him victory against his enemies. The people was much abashed of ye great
deeds of arms that Orson did. Dolente and sorrowful was Florent wha^ he had
lost his arm, and not for that he left not for to assayl Orson with all his
puyssaunce. And when Orson saw him come he made semblaunte for to smite
Garnyere and after drew his stroke again suddenly and smote Flore^t in such
manner that he smote him down deed to the earth, after he said unto Garnyere.
Traytoure thou must go after or else knowledge before every body ye treason
that you have braced. Orson said Garnyere it shall go other wise, for if you
have slain my brother, to day I shall take vengeance. Haufray said Henry our
feate goes evil for Orson has already slain and undone our neuewe Florent,
and you shall se anon yt he will vaynquysshe Garnyere and make him confess
the treason, by the which we shall be for ever dishonored and in danger of
death if we find not manner for to fle and escape. Brother said Haufray that
was full of treason. I shall tell you what we shall do Also so one as we shall se
that Garnyere is ouercomen or that he confess the treason we shall enter into
the field and in sign for to maynteine Orson we shall cut of our neuewes head.
And so the treason may never be known. By God said Henry none can say nor
deuyse better. Thus thought the two cursed and dysloyall traitors new
treasons for to hyde the old. And the two champions are within the field yt
assaylleth each other much asprely. Garnyere said Orson you se well that you
may not defend you against me. And therefore think for to yield you and
confess your cursed treason, and I promise you for to save your life and make
your peace toward king Pepyn, and shall send you unto the Emperor of Greece
my father that for the love of me shall reteyne you of his court and give you
great wages. Boy said Garnyere thy promise serves me of nothing, for sith
that I have lost one of mine eres I shall never be praised nor honored in no
place. So Had I rather dye valyauntly against the, or conquer thy body and
delivered the unto shameful death than for to defylemyne honor. By my faith
said Orson right gladly I accords you. And sith that you have envy for to
dye, you shall have found in me a good master Think for to defend you, for
here is your last day, At these words he went toward Garnyere and with
strength of arms throw him under him, and pulled his helm from his head.
And Haufray which saw that there was no more remedy, cried right hye Orson
slay him not for we know right well yt with great wrong he has accused you,
so we will do the Justyce as to the traitor apperteyneth, we will never let him
live nor hold him of our parentage. He entered into the field and said unto
Garnyere. Fair master confess your deed and the manner of the treason, and we
shall do so much to the king that of your fautes ye shall have pardon. Lords
said the traitor Garnyere I have done the treason and put the knyfe in the
kings bed In saying these words Haufray that was subtle and cautelous drew
his sword, and to the end that he should speak no ferther forth of that thing
he slew him in the same place and after said. Lords now let this traitor be
taken and hanged on the galowes, for he has well deserved it. Then he said
unto Orson. Losyn I am tyght Joyous of the vyctory that you have had, for God
has well showed that you are true and loyal. And for all that Garnyer was my
neue we, yet shall I never claim him for my blood sith he has wylled to meddle
with treason. Anoue came thither the fair lady Fezonne that colled and kyssed
Orson right swetely. And than king Pepyn demand him. Fair neue we have you
any dangerous wound upon your body. Uncle said Orson no thanked be God. I have
vanquyshed the two traitors and Haufray as a good man has made Garnyere
confess the treason and taken his life from him. Ha fair neuewe believe it not
to lightly for what semblau^t that ever he make you he is partysypyng of the
treason, but for this present time I will hold my peace. The king and the
barons returned in to the city of Paris and made great joy for the victory
that Orson had won and the honor. And Haufray and Henry that same day said
much good of him with their mouths, and with their hearts desired his death.
But anon after came the time that their cursed treason was known, and that
they were punished for their euylles as they had well deserved. So I shall leave
to speak of this matter and will tell you of the knight Ualentyne that rode
through the country right sorrowful for his love the fair Llery monde, the
which was in Jnde the more where the king made her to be kept for to wedde her
and took her unto wife by the way of marriage as I have made mention unto you
here before.

How Ualentyne in sekyng the fair Clerymonde a tyued in Antioche and how he
fought with a marvelous dragon. Cap. lxi.


UAlentine that was mounted upon the sea for to seek the fair Clerymonde his
love did so much by the grace of god that he arrived in the city of Antioche.
So when he was within Pacolet that spoke their language took lodges in a great
and a rich house. But the host of the house was right ca^tellous, for when
they were in their chamber he went and herkened them, so he understood by their
language that they were christen men wherefore he went to the king of Antyoche
and said. Dear sir, know that there is in my house foute christen men that are
entered into your land without payinge any trybute, wherefore I am come to you
for to aduertyse you thereof. Friend said the king thou haste done well. Now
goo said the king and fetch them unto me. Then departed diverse officers with
the host for to go and fetch Ualentine the which they brought with his
servants before the king of Antioche. And when Ualentine saw the king he
salued him highly saying. Sir king mahoune in whom you believe keep you with
such power as he has. And that same God that dyed for us on the cross
succout and help me in mine aduersyte. Christian said the king thou show
thy self well hardy, when before my presence thou make memory of thy Jhesus
that I never loved nor never shall. So I let the Wy^e that of two things it
behooves the to chose one or else suffer death. King said Ualentyne say on your
will, for I would do diverse things or I suffer death, notwithstanding that I
have heard say that the christen men should be safe in your realm for paying
of their trybute. By my faith said the king the contrary is true. For you are
entered without my license, wherefore if you will escape death it be houeth you
to renounce your God Jhesus, and if that you will not do it you must fight with
an horrible serpente, that by the espace of seven year has been before the
city and deuouted so many men that the nombre is in e^ymable and unknown,
advise you of the two things which you will do, for you can not save your life
by none other way, and valentyne said to him. When I must do it by force the
play is evil for me at departing. Not for that tell me if it please you if
you have seen the beast, and of what form and stature she is of, and what is
her manners and facyons. Chrystyen said the king of Antyoche I tell the that I
have seen the beast, and wit that she is much hedyous and more gretter of
body than a horse, and she has also wings right great, and fethered like a
Gryffon, and has the head of a serpent, with a maruaylous look, the skyn
covered with scales much hard and thycke as fysshe that swymme in the sea.
And she has also the fete of a lion much great and sharper than any kynfe of
stele. By my god said valentyne by this that you tell me the best is much
ferefull and horrible, but not wythstandyng all her force and strength if you
will bylene in Jhesu christ that for us suffered death upon the cross, and
promise me for to receive baptym in such case that I conquer the beast and
put her unto death I shall goo and assaye me against her, and put my body in
danger with out ledynge any erthely creature with me by the grace of Jhesu
christ, Christen said the king I swear the by my law that if thou may
dystroye her I and all my men shall renounce mahoune and do all thy pleasure,
but so much dare I say that thou shall have no puyssaunce thereto, for there
went never none thither yet yt escaped devouring. Sir said valentyne let me
dele with her. For I trust me so much in the sweet Jesus that he shall be my
sword and defense against the false be, upon such a touenaunt that you
shall hold me promise. Yes said the king think for to work well, for and
thou may deliver us from the beast I swear to the by my God mahoune that we
shall take thy law and lene our. Well said Ualentyne I shall do my besy pain.
Then he demanded the work men of the city and made them make a shield right
subtylly composed. And in that same shield he made to fasten a great sort of
long pryckes of fine stele more sharped then nedles, strong and surely put in,
and they were of a foot length. And when the shield was thus made valentyne put
on his harneis and his helm also bokeled to his head, after he took his sword
and in the honor of Jhesu christ kyssed the hylces many times. And he took
his leave of his men and mounted on horseback, and for to go fight with the
beast issued of the city. Little and great mounted upon the walls toures and
garettes for to behold valentyne. And when he was out of the city, the
portets shytte the gates after him, for they wend well for a truth that he
should never have returned. Now the beast is of such a condycion that it
behooves them to deliver to her every day for her pray a beast or a man, and
if they failed for to give it her, there dutst no body issue out of the city.
And also sone as they had delivered him his pray out of the city she
returned into her place and there kept her without doing any harm to any
body. And therefore it was of custom through all the country there about that
thieves and murderers and all evil folks that by sentence and judgment were
condemned to death, they were yielded and brought into the city of Antyoche,
for to be geu^h and delivered unto the cursed and vengeable beast to be
devoured as the custom of the said city was And with this there was certain
men that rode and went unto the ports and havens of the sea for to get and
seek good christian men, and brought them unto the foresaid rytie of Antyoche for
to make them be deuouted of the serpente. And when the serpent apperceyued
Ualentyne coming toward him he closed his wings much fyerlly in castyng out
of his mouth by great haboundaunce smoke and fire. Ha God said Valentyne help
me and preserve me from entering in to that foul passage, and give me strength
and puyssaunce for too exalte and increase your law. Then he descended of his
horse and left his sharp axe at his sadle bow: and went toward the serpent
that was much proud, and also soon as he approached nere him for to smite him
the serpent lift up his pawe that was great and large and marvelously sharp
for to smite Ualentyne, but he cast his shield before it, in such manner that
the beast smote upon the broches that were sharp, and did her self great
hurt, in castyng out a hydeous cry and drawyng himself abacke. And Ualentyne
pursued her yt had a hardy courage, but when the beast saw him approach she
rose straight up upon her hinder free, and with her fore fete wend for to have
beten down Valentyne under her, the which was covered with the shield, and
for the doubt of the shield she withdrewe her abacke. By mahowne and termagaut
said the king of An ^^^che that was within his palace upon a great and a hie
toure, se yonder a knight that is much valiant and hardy, the which ought
well to be praised and honored. And upon the other side was the queen that
had to name Rozemonde that for the love of Ualentyne and his hardynes was
profoundly smyten to the heart with an ardaunt desire of love.

How the serpente took of Ualentynes helm, and how Pacolet armed him and
brought him another helm and of the complayntes that the Queen Rozemonde made
for Ualentyne. Cap. lxii.


THe battle was right tyers without the city between Ualentyne and the
serpente, for if it had not ben y^ prycked sheld y^ the beast doubted he would
have casten Ualentyne unto the earth much quickly, but he held his shield
with the which he could well help him self. And in the other hand he held
his sword wherewith he gave the serpente a marvelous stroke under the ear,
but the stroke was so hard that he brake his sword. Ueray God said
Ualentine help me and succoure me against this fend that is so hortyble and
fyerse. Ualentyne was in great danger when his sword was broken, for the
beast began for to chaufe her, and smote Uale^tine in such manner with one of
her paws that she all to rent his harneis with her nails. Then Ualentyne
drew out a sharp glayue and haste it so even at the beast that it entted
half a foot in to her throat but she set not thereby. Ualentyne seeing that,
ran unto his horse and took the axe that hanged at his sadle bow, and
returned unto the beast in making the sign of the cross before him, and
demaundyng comfort of God, so he approached nere the beast that watched him
strongly and with his cuttyng axe smote her upon the tail so rudely that he
cut the skin unto the bone, and made the blood to issue out by the great
stremes. The sarazyns and paynims were much abashed that were upon the walls
of the great prowess of Ualentyne. And the queen Rozemonde that beheld him
much gladly said unto herself all alone. Ha knight fair sir mahoune held
the and bring the again with Joye, for by mahoune in whom I believe, of all
the knights that ever I saw my heart is most taken with thy love. Thus said
the queen Rozemonde that loved him ardauntly. And Valentyne fyghteth with the
dragon that cast her heavy tail oftentimes at him and trauayled him so sore
that she had all mo ost smyten him down, but he held his axe surely, with the
which he could well play, and he gave the serpent such a stroke that he cut
of a quarter of her tail, and then she made so great a cry that all the city
sowned thereof, after she flewe over Valentins head and pulled of his helm and
smote him too the ground, but by his diligence he rose up quickly sorrow full
and displeasaunt that his head was bare. He began for to reclayme God and the
virgyn Marye in bewayllyng oftentimes the tayre Clerymonde. When they of the
city saw that he had lost his helm they thought well that he should never
escape. By my God said the King now may we well say that the christen knight
shall never come hither again. Than was Pacolet much sorrowful and pyteously
began for to weep for the love of Valentyne. Halas said he make the gates to be
opened to me, and deliver me a harneys, for I will this day live and dye with
my master, and also make me to be delivered a helm, for I will bear it him
for to cover his head, Pacolet was armed anon and a helm given him, and also
the gates opened. He reco^mau^ded him unto God and went rennyng unto the
field. Ualentyne saw him come well but he knew him not, and Pacolet cried
unto him saying, sir. I am your seruau^^ that by long time has served you, and
that for to succoure your body against the false enemy am come hither. Alas
friend said valentyne, here it behaueth me for to dye, for of all my fortunes
and adventures I have to day the most dangerous, for God salve my father and
my mother, with my brother Orson that I have loved so derely, and the fair
Clerymonde also if ever thou may se her. And for Gods sake my friend go thy
way hence and come no more again. For when you should dye with me I should
have never more pfite Even so as Pacolet approached to Uale^tine for to giu^
him his helm the serpente apperceyued well that he bare not the shield as he
other did / the came to Pacolet and took him by the lift leg and pulled him
under him gyuynge him so great a stroke with his sharp pawe that he wounded
him through his harneys much rudely. And there would have slain him if it had
not been Ualentyne that with his axe smote her so much that he smote of her
nose and put out one of her eyes. The serpente cried and brayed like a mad
be, he opened his wings and arose up in the air and flewe up unto a high
roche. Than Ualentine came unto his helm for to have put it upon his head, but
as he thought for to have taken it he saw the beast coming, so he took his
shield for to cover his head, and the dragon returned again unto the ro^he.
Than Pacolet put the helm upon Ualentynes head. Sir said Pacolet I am right
sore wounded on my body, wherefore I must return into the cite for to hele my
wound, for I have lost so much blood that my heart faylleth me. Thus they
took leave, but also soon as the serpente saw him a good way of she opened her
greare wings and flewe to ward him. And Pacolet that apperceyued her coming
returned anon unto his ma^ster* and the dragon went and assaylled Ualentyne,
and in fleyng over him wend for to have cat^hed him by the head. But Ualentyne
threw his axe so well in point that he cut of one of her Wings, for the
which the beast cast ou^ so horrible a cry that all they that herd ^t were
sore abashed Sor^wful was the serpent when ^^e had lost her wynge for she
might not tha^ flee Ualentyne smote of the other wynge also, ^ the batayl was
so great be^^enc^^. that Ualentyne mygh not turn him about the beast nor lift
up his axe he was so weary and so trauaylled. He did so much that he mounted
upon a tree for to rest him. And the beast that might not flee no more, beheld
him much cruelly* in casting out at his mouche the horrible stynkyng venym
and great smoke.

How Ualentine slew the dragon through the grace of God almighty. And how the
king of Antioche re ceyued him with great honor. Cap. lxiii.


Sir said Pacolet lenne me your shield and I shall go toward the beast and
adventure me. Friend said Ualentine recorne in to the city and hele your
wounds. For if it please God the beast shall not be overcome by none other but
by me so I require God by his grace that he will give me the puyssaunce
shortly for to conquer her. And that I may do so much that the king of
Antioche and all the people incredule leave the law dampnable of mahowne, and
take the law catholyke of Ihesu christ. After that he h^d said these words
he descended of the tree in making the sign of the cross, and went to ward
the serpente that ran against him in castyng fire and flambe much
dyspy^eouslye. Ualentyne put the shield before him that the serp^nce doubted
and with the axe of stele smote her in such wise that he cut of her left
thygh and felled it to the earth. The serpent cried more hydeously than before
and valentyne that was hardy to pursue his stroke came too her, and thryste his
axe so farforth within her throat yt at that hour he smote her down dead, in
castyng out such a smoke that all they that beheld it were much ama^ueyled.
And at the hour yt the serpente was dead fell down within Antioche a great
squated toure, and the turret^es a bow shot about it fell down also. The
paynyms were abashed of that great adventure and said the one to the other
that it was the soul of the de uyl that was passed that way. when the king
was beside him he colled him m^che swetely in saying unto him. Free knight of
all the other most valiant and hardy well has your God showed that he will
love you when by your great prowess you have deliue red us from the enemy that
dommaged our land so much. At these words they entered in to the city, and
mounted in to the palace ryall where as all the night and all the day following
they made great feast and there both paynyms and sarazyns for the victory of
the serpente. The king made Ualentyne to be kept right derely and heal his
wounds little and great* and the queen Rozemonde bare him great honor and
reverence, and had right great affection for to speak unto him, for she was so
enamoured on him from the first hour that she saw him that he had her heart
entyerly. And for the breunyng of her love would purchase the death of the king
of Antyoche her husband, as you shall hear afterward.

How Ualentyne after that he had dyscomfyted he dragon, made the king of
Antyoche to be baptized, und all they of his land, and of the queen Roezmonde
that was enamoured on him. Capitulo. lxiiii.
WHen y^ good knight Ualentine had rested him a litel within the city of
Antioche, and healed his waundes, he went toward the king and said to him. Sir
you kn^we that you have promised me to believe in Jesu christ and your people
also if it happened so that I might deliver you from the serpente. Now God
has given me the grace that I have slain him, and therefore sir keep me your
promise, for the miracle is great and euydent that my God had showed before
every body, for you know that by corporal strength I conquered her not, but
has been by the virtue of Jesu christ. Free knight said the king know that
I will hold that which I have promised you, and my will is to renounce mahoune
and to believe in Jhesu Christ. Than he made to cry through all his ^ond that
little and great should believe in Jesu christ, and leave the law of mahommet
upon pain of death. Than was paynyms and sarazyns baptized and co^uer^er
through the noble Ual^ntyne. And also so one as the queen might she sent for
Uale^tyne into her secret chamber, the which went toward her in contynent.
Lady said Ualentyne that was well taught you have sent for me, and I am comen
toward you as he that is ready and apparaylled for to accomplysshe your
goodwyll. H^ said the lady ye honor, the wisdom, the strength, the
valyau^tnes ^he beauty, and the hardines that is in you makes your great
noblenes to be praised and honored above all the living creatures, and for the
virtues that are in you tho lady that should be byloued of you might well say
that of all the knights she had the most valyaunte the most noble, and ^he
most fairest. Now pleased it god that I might do my will, and that I were not
subi^ete to no body, for I take it upon my soul that my heart should never
love other than you, if it pleased you to do me so much grace as to accept my
love. Lady said U^lentyne of as much. I thanko you / for you have wedded a
king much valyaunte and hardy, the which above al other you ought to love,
and hold dear. Knight said the lady I have loved him long time, but sithe the
day that I saw you my hea^^ departed not f^ome you* when Ualentyne
apperceyued that the lady had^e such a courage, the most swe^est that he
might he excused him toward the ^u^ne of his love. Lady said Ualentyne if the
king knew it he would never rest a day till that he had put me unto death,
now he is old and aun^yen^ and you are a ^ayre young lady mo^he I^cun^e, so
you must abide a little unto the ^^^turne of my vyage that I have enterprysed
to go unto the holy cite of Jherusalem for to vysyte the ^^pul^^^ of our^ lord
Jhesu christ that was put upon the the of the t^^fse for us. And at my
retorny^ge if it happen that the kyng^ be deed than shall I accomplysshe all
your will The Qu^ne Rozemonde ansewred never a word, but was smytten a^ the
heart so proudely with the love of valentyne that she was covetous of ye death
of the king* and of his life enemy, as it happens oftentimes tha^ ^y
folysshe love one man murdreth another, and diverse wives purchases the death of
their husbands for to acheue their will. And therefore there is a great
danger to love a thing so folysshly by the which so many euylles may
proceed, as the Queen Rozemonde did which for to have valentyne at her
pleasure, the night when the king should go to bed and that the wine was
brought by a^, the lady took the cup and put such venym within it that who
someuer did drink of it should not escape death, after in sign of love she
presented it unto the king that was much ^euoute* and in making a ^xosse upon
the wine he ap^erc^yued the poison. By my faith said the king lady you have
faylled but I promise to god that has fourmed all the world that such drink
as you have brewed I shall make you drink at this hour, or you shall tell me
the reason wherefore you have enterprysed such a thing. Alas sir said the lady
that kneled down upon her kn^es. I require you of pardon, know that valentyne
for to have my love has made me to enterprise this thing. By god lady said the
king I believe you well, but by my cepter ryall sith that you have done this
thing by evil counsel I pardon you. That night the king slepte with
Rozemonde, the which in kyssyng and collynge him all the night said unto him.
Sir I require you that you will put valentyne unto death that thus would have
betrayed me. Doubt you not said ye king for I have well thought it. When the
queen herd that she was much sorrowful and did so much that night that she
spoke to a secret maiden, and sent her unto valentyne for to tell him her will,
and the courage that ye king had against him for her deed. And when valentine
herd the tidings that he was accused ^f y^ thing that he was innocent of, he
blyssed him diverse times saying. Sweet lady what is it of the courage of
women, now must I for the love of the Queen depart from hence like a
traitor if I will not die sooner her honor before every body, yet love I
better to depart out of this country and leave all than her die shonoure should
be known by me. At that hour he made his men to make them ready, and before
the day made to open the gates. So inco^tynent he issued out of the cite and
rode so much that he arrived at a port of the sea, and found there a
merchants ship that would pass over the sea. He entered in to it and put him
among the other, in prayenge god devoutly that he would send him some
tidings of the fair Clerymonde either by water or by land. upon the morrow
be times when the king of Antyoche was risen up he entered into his palace and
myde his barons to be assembled and knights, and said unto them in this manner.
Lords I am much dyspleasaunt in my heart when by the man that I most trusted
in of all the world / and that I held the derest I find me betrayed and
deceived, that is the false Ualentyne the which by his molyce and dysordynate
will has required the queen my wife of dyshonoure And has put her in
courage for to poison me vyllaynously and make me dye. Wherefore I pray you to
counsayll me in this matter, and what Justyce I shall do on him, and also what
death I shall make him dye. Sy^ said amuche wise baron yt was there for to
condemn him in his absence it is no reason nor true Justyce. Nor there is no
manner of man be he never so evil nor ^y^ydus but that he ought to be herd
in his reasons, who that would do good and true Justyce to every boby. Then the
king of Antyoche commanded that valentyne should be brought before him. Then
his host came in to the palace the which told him that valentyne was
departed before the breakyng of the day from his house whereof the king was
right sorrowful and made his men to be armed for too putsue him, but of as much
they lost their pain, for he was mounted upon the sea as you have heard.

How the king of Antyoche was put unto death for the renouncing of mahowne
by Brandyffer his wives father. And how the Emperor of Greece and the Greece
knight were taken prisoners by Brandyffer before the cycie of Cretophe.
Capitulo. lxv.


SOne after that the king of Anticche was co^ uerted too the holy faith, the
father of his wife Rozemonde a paynym that was called Brandyffer, and among
the other princes of turkye the most expert in watre, and was also tyght
hardye. So he had great dispite of the king that had left their law. And sent
him word that he should send him his daughter Rozemonde. Ot the which thing
the king of Antioche gaynesayed him utterly. And for that same refuse
Brandyster that was lord of falyzee with a hundred thousand paynyms came and
assyeged the king of Antioche within his city. And he did so much by his
arms that within four months the city was delivered unto him by a false
traytout, and there was the king taken of his enemies the which made him to be
put unto death in the mids of the city because that he would not renounce
the faith of Thesu christ after he sent his daughter Rozemonde into his
country, and of the realm of Antyoche made himself too be crowned king.
After these things done he put himself upon the sea for to return into his
realm, but by orage and tempest he descended in the land of Greece beside a
tytie named Cretophe the which was a great and a large city. Now it happened
that for certain things the Emperor of Greece was newely atryued there, and
fortune was so peruers that he which knew nothing of the coming of the
paynyms issued out of the city accompanied of the grene knight and diverse
other lords strong and valiant for to take their disporde, but in an cuill
hour issued they without guard and watch, for by the men of bran dyffer that
no body knew of the emperor and the grene knight were taken, and all they of
their company were taken and discomfyted. And at that same hour the pay nyms
run unto the gates of Cretophe, where as they lost their pain, for the
city was strong and gatny shed with such men that it behooved them to return
suddenly again. Angrye and sorrowful were they of Cretophe for the loss of
the Emperor and the grene knight, for the which they made a letter and sent
it by a heraude to the Empress Bellyssant, in maundyng her tidings of the
taking of the Emperor and demaundyng succor against their enemies, to the end
that the paynyms should not led the Emperor in to their country. Sorrowful
was the lady for the taking of her husband and wept without ceasyng. She sent
for her captains and made to assemble men of arms through all the Empire of
Greece in great dylygence. And on the other side she sent heraudes to ward the
realm of France, for to have succoure of her brother king Pepyn and of her
son Orson, and comfort in her aduetsite. Within a short time issued out of
the city of Constantinoble a great host of them of the country of Greece for
to go unto Cretophe to succoure ye emperor against Brandiffer. But that same
Brandiffer that was subtle and malicious, had put tyders in the country
about, by the which he knew the enterprise of the Greeks. And for sear of
their puyssaunce and to lose his prisoners, with all his host entered in to ye
sea, and they rowed and sailed so much that they arrived within a little while
in Lize, and in that place they took ground and went unto a strong castle
that was called so, in the which he made to be kept prceyouslye his two
daughters Rozemonde and Galyze, that passed al other creatures in beauty. And
for the great beau te of her she had been demanded of her father Brandiefer
that same year by fourtene kings strong and puissaunt. And because that
Brandyffer would not mary her yet he made her to be kept sumptuously in that
castle, because that it was the strongest of all his land. That same castle
was high, and had many great thycke squate coutes, and well fortefyed, in the
mids of the castle was a dongeon of latin which had a double gate of iron
strong and thycke. The castle was enuyroned with deye dytches full of rennyng
water, and in the mids of the castle and of the dyche there was a bridge
composed so subtylly that there might pass but one man at ones. For and it
twain would have passed they should fall both in to the rennyng water and
there be drowned. And at the end of that same bridge, there was two horrible
lions and strong that kept the enter of the castle. In the dongeon was the
maiden ga lazye kept. And under the said dongeon was a cave right profounde
and deep, in the which the Emperor and the grene knight was put with ten
other christen men the which remained there in captyuyte by the espace of many
years in great anguyshe. So I shall leave you to speak of this matter and
shall tell you hereafter ensewyng of the fair lady Clerymonde the which the
king of ynde the great held in his house as I have made you mention of before.

How the fair Clerimonde after that the year was complete did counterfeit the
seek woman too the end that the king of Ynde should not wedde her. And of the
king Lucar that would avenge the death of Tromparte his father against the
king of ynde Capitulo. lxvi*


Now you have well hard recyted ^ told how the king of Inde after that he
had put king Trompat^e unto death that on the horse of Pacolet had led away
the fair Clerymonde. the same king of Inde would take unto wife the foresaid
Clerymonde the which ^s subtle and wise and well ^aught made him believe that
she had made an oath and auowe unto the gods that she should never have
habitacion with man till a year were ^inished. And that same term the king gave
her, during the which time the king made her to be sumptuously kept in great
honor. Now the lady had purpensed this thing by dyssymulacion for to
prolonge the time, tau^tyng that she shoul^e have succoure in that time of her
dolorous fortune and my saue^ture. But of her hope she was right far and
deceived for during that time she had no comfort of no body. And so the term
was failed and the year fynyshed. I shall tell you whereon she aduysed her for
too keep her faith and her promise unto the noble knight Ualentyne* When the
fair lady Clerymonde saw and ap perceived that the term was passed, and that
she could lynde no more excusacion to the king of Ynde, she was ^yght
sorrowful and displeasaunt in her^e. Euet ^^e de syred Ualentyne in bewaylyng
him with pyteous syghes, and bitter teates. And when she had thought and
considered her pyteous fortune, for to maynteyne her honor the more
honestlyet, and flee and ^lshe we shame and blame one morning she abode in her
bed and rose not, and said that she was syke in complaynyng her head much
pyteously. The tidinges came unto the king of ynde anon that the fair
Clerymonde was syke, whereof he was right displeasaunt, and inc^ntynent came in
to the chamber for to vysyte her. But so as he would have set his hand upon
her head for to have comforted her, she took his arm and lift up her head a
hie making signs that she would hyte him, of the which he was much
ameruayled, after the lady turned her eyes in her head, in frouncynge her face
demeanynge a foul life in such wise that the king of ynde was to much
abas^^^ for to behold her, and issued out of the chamber for great fere, and
made the ladies to goo and vysyte the fair lady Clerymonde saying unto them.
For god keep well my love Clerymonde for by mahoune I doubt me sore that she
will be mad and out of her wit. In this wise did the lady abide long time,
and she made it so well that within fyftene days she seemed morel^kely a veest
tha^ a reasonable woman. She was of so cruel and folysshe manners that all the
servants lytie and great, ladies and dameyselles habandoned her, and abode
without company. With her teth and nails she bote and scratched all the^ that
would approach nere her. And by her great crudelyte she was locked all alone
in her chamber, and by a wynd^we they gave her meat and drink as to a be.
On the day the made the semblaunt that her maladye ^ncreased, and al to rent
her clothes, she put her smoch upon her gown sometime and another time that
above bynethe, ^^e rubbed her hands in a chymneye and after stryked her face
wythall in such manner that her pleasant face well colored was becomen
black and smoked. In that estate the king came and saw her / the which was
right sorrowful at his heart for her demeanor. Halas lady said he it gothe to
evil with me when I se you in this case, for now was comen the time that I
should have had all sola^e and al pleasure of you. Lady take unto you some
comfort and be not so impatient in your aduersyte. when the fair Clery monde
understood his language she made to semblau^te for to here him, but, more than
before counterfeit the mad woman, in lepynge against the chymney, and with her
hands made her face black, one time she laughed gracyously, and another time
made pyteous syghes Thus with laughing, weeping, and syghynge her countenance
was meddled, for to keep her en^e^pryse most secretly and her honor. By
mahoune said the king of ynde of all the things that ever I saw this passes
Now I shall tell you what you shall do. I will that the lady be ^edde into the
maho^merye before our gods and that we make all prayers for her that they
will help her and socoure her of her malady. Even so as the king had said the
thing was done, and the lady led unto the temple, but the more nerer that
they set her to they ^age of mahoune and of his auter, so much the more she
made semblaunt that her maladye increased. And when the king saw that there
was no remedy for to aswage her maladye, he made her to be led in to her
chamber again as she was before, where as she continued her enterprise upon a
steadfast hope to find valentyne of the which I will speak to you. That same
knight valentyne with an ardaunt desire rode in the country with Pacolet for to
seek the fair lady clerymonde, the which would not habandone him no day now
they rode so much that they arrived in Escla^* dye, which was the land of
king Tromparte, yt had carried away the fair Clerymonde upon the horse of
wodde that was Pacolettes as said is. They demanded in that same cite tidings
of king Trompart, and they recounted unto them the manner how he was slain
before ynde the great. And how his sone Lucar wold^ aueuge his death upon the
king of ynde the greter and how that for to accomplysi^e it he had assembled
fyftene kings* with many knights and soudy^urs that would serve him for money
and go in the war. Than spoke Pacolet that could well the language of the
country and demanded his host moore plainly tidings of the estate of that
same king Lucar. And his host recounted unto him how he had handfast and
promised and take unto wife the daughter of Bra^dyffer that had been wedded
before to the king of Antyoche, the which had been dyscomfyted by the said
Bra^dyffer because that he did renounce the law of mahoune. For to here such
tidings Ualentyne was much abas^hed. And upon the fortunes of the world he
began strongly to think by him self / considering the great inconuenyentes
and debates that had befallen, and contynually do from day to day. When he had
studied a little upon that thing he said unto his host. Host tell me what
is becomen of a lady right fair yt king Tromparde brought with him. By
mahoune said the host we have had no tidings therofhere. Now tell me said
Ualentyne where is king Lucar at this present time, for I have great courage
for to go and take wages under him, because that my money is faylled, and on
the other side I have great desire for to follow the war. Lord said the
host the king Lucar is in Esclardye and there you shall find him accompanied
with a hundred thousadd sarazyns. For he abides Brandiffer that should bring
his daughter into that same place for to wedde her to him. When Ualentyne
understood all these things that he told him, he had right great trust
for to here some tidings of the fair Clerymonde. Than he departed from the
cite and roode to ward Esclardye faynynge for to have great desire to serve
king Lucar, but more greatly touched him the manner at the heart how he might
have the fair Clerymonde unto wife.

How the king Lucar in the fair and great city of Esclardie wedded and took
unto wife the fair and gracious Rozemonde. Capit. lxvii.


Right so as the king Lucar highly and puyssauntly accompanied in great and
sumptuous estate in the city of Esclardy, Blandiffer arrived that brought his
daughter with him. And when king Lucar knew the tidings he issued out of the
city with a tryumphaunt company against him. For to se Rozemonde king Lucar
was much joyous, but of as much as he* was joyous the Lady was dyspleasaunt,
for of all the other she would his most evil, and loved him not, but ever
bewailed Ualentyne. The lady was led in to the halle ryall conveyed with
diverse great kings. And before the image of mahoune she was wedded unto the
king Lucar. Now it needs not to demand of the feast nor of the estates
that was there, nor of the rich gifts that was given. Ualentyne to^de in the
fields ardaun^ for to come unto his entencion. It happened so as he arrived
at the enter of a wodde that was right grene and plesaunt, he hard and
understood the voice of a pleasant lady right fair and gracious, the which
^ sarazyn held by force under a tree* and would have done his pleasure. And
when Ualentyne understood it, he said unto Pacolet. Friend ride we ^aste and
make dilygence, for I have hear a woman in this wodde that cried right high
and demeaneth great sorrow* so we shall do great alms for to succor her.
Sir said Pacolet leave the lady and meddle not so much of her feate* for you
wo^e not what it is, parauen^ure she does it for a gyle, and it may turn you
sooner unto evil than good Pacolet said Ualeytyne* you speak folyshely, for
the man is not noble that helps not the ladies in their necessities, and
puts his body in adventure for to save their honor* Than he sporred his
horse and entered in to the wodde, so he apperceyued the lady that the sarazyn
held under him. Sir said Ualentyne leave your enterprise, for if you will have
the lady at your will, it behooves you to prove your body against mine, you may
well know that she sets not by your love, so it behooves you to leave her or
else to have war against me. By mahoune said the paynym I utter you the war
at your own will. But I tell ye hyghly and let the wit that in an evil hour
art thou arrived here for to come and let me of my pleasure without having any
occasyon. At these words he left the lady and mounted upon his horse that was
beside him tied unto a tree, and with his shield covered him, and took his
spear, after they fetched their course, but the noble and valiant knight
valentyne came with so great a courage against the paynym and sarazyn that he
passed him clean throughout halue a yerde, so that he fell down dead to the
earth. And when he had done so he went unto the maiden and said unto her.
Damoysell now are you avenged of your enemy at this present hour, so I
pray you that you will tell me how and in what manner this coursed man has
brought you into this wodde. Alas sir said she I shall tell you all the truth.
Know that yesternight late he came into my fathers house for to lodge him, and
for to have my body the better at his will and lead me at his pleasure, this
night he went into the chamber of my father and there slew him and murdered
him falsely. After he has brought me hither by force for to deflore me of mine
honor vytuperablye from the which thing by your valiauntnes and prowes I am
delivered and kept to day, and saved mine honor. ^o may you at this time do
and accomplysshe your good pleasure, for as a hardy champion in the danger of
your body you have conquered me and won the Dam^ysell said the valyaun^e
knight Valentyne by me your gentyl body shall have no dommage nor vylany.
Return into your house and think to dwell and keep well your honor. Than
Ualentine left the maiden and took his way toward Esclardye, and the men of
the sarazin came towerde their master, but also soon as they found him deed
upon the grass, without any so^ouminge they smote their horses with the
sportes for to go unto Esclardye to tell the tydinges. They en^red into the
^yce and went unto king Lucat much discomforted, and said unto him.
Redoubted s^^ right evil gothe our fe^te, for our good master the Marshall
that you have loved so much has been presently slain in a wodde by thieves.
The king was right sorrowful therefore and with a great quanty^e of men issued
out of the cite. And when they were without they saw valentyne coming and
said to the king. Sir se him here that has slain and murdered your Marshall.
Than v^lentyne was taken and all they of his company by the sarazyns, and were
straytely bounden in betynge and strykynge them by the commandment of the
king. Now Ro^emonde was in the same castle the which knew valentyne
incontinent, for the which thing she was right sore taken at the heart, and for
the great love that we loved him she went anon toward the king and said to
him. Alas sir keep you well from making this valiant knight dye that for your
prisoner has been brought he^her for I swear and promise you that of all the
valiant courages he is the most hardy, he is the sovereign and ought to bear
away the excellence. Sir it is the same knight Ualentyne of the country of
France that by his valyau^tnes before the city of Antyoche slew the horrible
dragon, keep him derely and retain him in your wages, for in the world there
is not so vyctorious a man, if you keep him and have some great batall against
your enemies by him you may have vyctory. Lady said the king diverse times I
have heard speak of his great prowess* and I have desired much to se him in
my court. Sith he called Ualentyne and said to him. Knight have no fear for to
dye, for know that above all other I will love you and hold you dear, and all
your men receive unto my wages, but there is so much that you must do a
message for me that is that you shall goo in to Yndy the great and say unto
the king that I defye him, and that I am ready and apparayled with my puyssaunce
for to go and avenge the death of my father the king Trompart, the which he
has made to dye cruelly. And tell him that I somone him to come toward me
within my palace before all the baronnye with ye cord about his neck, ready
and apparayled for to receive such death as by the assystentes of my court
ryall shall be Judged and condampned. And if he will not come you shall tell
him that within short time I shall go and se him and vysyte with so great a
company yt there shall not be left him castle to wne nor city but yt I shall
destroy them. And I shall neither leave man woman nor child on live. Sir said
Ualentyne I shall do the message well and sufficiently so that you shall be
content. I know well said Valentyne that you will send me in a dangerous
place, but I have ^^^^te in Jhesu christ and in the blessed vyrgynmary the
which have kept me from diverse great perils to speed right well.

How the noble knight Ualentyne departed from Esclardye for to go in to the
mighty and puyssaunte city of Ynde the great for to bear the defyaunce of the
king Lucar. Ca. lxviii.


AS the queen Rozemonde saw that Ualentyne was ready for to go in to ynde the
more for to defye the king / she entered into her chamber, and by adamoysell
she sent for Ualentyne secretly, the which came gladly toward her, and
salued her in great reverence. Knight said the lady you are welcome, for above
all other I had great d^syre unto you* Lady said Ualentyne if you had great
acyffecon for to se me, so had I to se you, Since that I saw you the thing
is well changed, for I have understood that your husband the king of
Antyoche is dead sith my departing, and of late you are married unto another.
Now ye might well know that for the love of you within Antyoche I was charged
with dyshonoure in peril and danger to lose my life. It is true said the lady
of that I knowledge my self gyltye for the great love that I had unto you
made me to do that thing, but know that to day I shall recomp^nce you of the
fault that I did to you than. For how well that my father and my mother have
given me unto the king Lucar the which is pleasant and rich above all
other yet shall my heart never love him (and not with out a cause) for not
wythstandynge his richesse and great parentage, know that of all the other he
is the most false traytoure. And yet I tell you that sithe you have been in
this palace, he is entered into so great a I(...)usy that he may not endure it,
nor with good heart behold you. And to the end that he may be the more
honestlye rydded of you he sends you into ynde trusting that you shall never
return, for he had never tidings of none yet that he has sent thither, for
the king of yn^^ has put them all to death. But of his ent^ncyon by me he
shall be deceived and begyled, for from that same danger and great peril I
shall keep you and save you and I shall tell you by what manerof wise. Free
knight know that it is not long ago sithe that this same king of ynde made
me to be demanded for wife* And that it is true I loved him much more dere^
then the king Lucar that is a traitor, and of ugly facyon and dyspleasaunt for
to behold and in speking vngra cious and little curtesy. But with the will of
my father that was unto mine contrary I was refused unto the king ynde, and
given unto the king Lucar. Now it is true that the same king of ynde for
acquayntaunce of love send me a ringe right rich that which I have derely
kept with all my heart for the love of him, and know that I never told it to
no man living save too you. But for as much as I have seen the falsnes and ma
ladiccion of Lucar the which sends you in to ynde for to be delivered of you
I shall give you comfort with all my puyssaunce that shall keep you from peril,
and shall acheue your message and return hither again as a hardy and a
valiant knight. And how well that I wot and know for certain that of my love
you have no need, and that you are promised unto another la die more high more
fayrer, and more excellenter then I am, yet will I not forget the love that my
heart was taken with for you when I saw you within the city of Antyoche as
you conquered and vanquished the hor ryble dragon. And for the things above
said for to increase your honor I shall tell you what you shall do when you
shall be before the king of ynde arrived after the reverence made and the salute
given fro the king Lucar that sends you to ward him, without long abydyng
great him from meas my love and secret friend and say unto him that how be
it that my father gave me unto king Lucar yet have I not put his love out of
mind, but have steadfast purpose and good will that once in my life I shall
draw me toward him, and of me he may do his will and good pleasure. And tell
him also that I shall find the means to go with the king Lucar when he ledeth
his host into ynde, and then may he have me if he have any prowess in him
and lead me a way. And to the end that the king of ynde think not that your
words is feigned you shall bear him this ring. Lady said Ualentyne of the
good will that you have for to succoure me and give aledgemente I thank you
humbly, and have you no doubt of the remnaunte, for I shall do your message
so well by the grace of God to the king of ynde, that in short space you shall
have tidings. At these words Ualentyne took leave of the lady Rozemonde and
went toward king Lucar that for too conduyte him, gave him ten maryners, the
which passed him over a great arm of the sea that is between Esclardye and
ynde, and also they mounted upon the sea and had wind agreeable, so good that
they departed from Esclardye at none and upon the moro we they arrived at a
port that is but two mile from the city of ynde the great. In that same place
descended Ualentyne and drew his horse out of the ship, after he mounted
upon him and said unto the maryners. Lords abide me here til that I come
again and my message be accomplysshed, for if it please God I shall not make
long soiournyng or I return again. By mahoune said a maryner to the other
all allow, you shall never return but if the devil bring you for of fyfty
messengers that the king of Esclardy has sent thither, there is not one
returned again. Ualentyne hard him right well but he made no semblaunt but
he said unto himself, such speaks of the affairs that can not tell how
they go. So he took his way and it was not long but that he arrived within
ynde, for he was nere the gate. And when he was pas sed a bridge he wend for
to have been within the city, but or ever that he entered it behooved him for to
pass five gates, whereof he was much amarueylled. And by himself he began
for to consider the fortification of that same place, iudgyng by estymacion in
his understanding that the same city was the most strongest place that ever
he had seen. And when he was in the market place he saw a great toure much
hye and fair upon the which stood a cross, so Valentyne marueyled much what
it might sygnifie, for he knew well yt the paynims used not such sign nor
suffered none. In that place the noble Ualentyne found a Sarazyn too whom he
demanded the cause and the reason wherefore that cross stood upon that hye
toure. Friend said the sarazyn know that the same toure that you se yonder is
named the toure of saint Thomas, and is the tour that he was stoned and put to
death in. Now it is true that the christen men in the honor of the same that
they name to be a saint in this same place did found a church by the license of
the king, in the which church is a patriarch and a hundred christen men, that
in the manner of their law sing their service every day, and celebre mass.
And in this wise they are suffered to do such things; for they pay great
trybute every year unto the king of ynde. When Valentyne understood that in
that toure there was mynister and habytacion of christen men, he descended of
his horse for to go in to it and say his prayers. So Ualentyne demanded after
the Patryarke the which came too him incontynente and demanded him of whence
he was, and on whom he believe. Sir said Ualentyne I believe in Jesus christ Alas
sir said the patriarch how have you taken y^ hardynes for to come hither, for
and the king of ynde had knowledge of you he would make you dye shamefully.
Father said Ualentine of that have you no doubt, for I bring him such
tydinges and signs that he will not do nor think me no harm, but of one
thing I pray you, that is that you declare unto me how and in what manner you
abide in this place and be founded. Certes said the patriarch we are founded in
the honor of god and of the holy saint Thomas the martyr, of whom the body is
in this church. And there may no christen men come hither but if they be
pilgrims, but such folk may come surely* because that the offrynges and
oblacions that they give are the kings. And more over it behooves each of us
to pay a great trybute. And then Ualentyne demanded and required to se the
holy body glorious, and it was showed him in great reverence and solempnite.
Ualentyne kneled down upon his knees and made his prayers much devoutly unto
god and unto the holy ma^tir saint Thomas after ye which thing done he mounted
on horse back and went toward the palace, in the which the king of ynde
kept resydence for to accomplish his message, in taking leave of the good
patryarke, and demanded him if he had heard any tydinges of a christen woman
that was come thither of late. By my faith said the patriarch I have heard no
tydinges of none. Then Ualentyne departed and inquired no more for without
making any noise he would find some manner to hear tidings of the fair
Clerymonde. Now it was not long after that the noble Ualentyne descended, and
came before the gate of the Palace and did his message in the manner that you
shall here recoun^ed.

How Ualentyne did his message to the king of Ynde from the king Lucar, and
of the answer that was given him. Capit. lxix.


AFter that the noble Ualentyne was aryued before that palace of the king of
Ynde, and that he was descended of his horse, with a hardy heart and without
any fere he went^ toward the king, the which was in a hall much rich
hanged and apparaylled* accompanied with three kings strong and ^uyssaunt, and
also of diverse knights and barons. And even so as valentyne entered in to the
hall^ the king of Ynde beheld him much fyersly, and he thought well that he
was of king Lucars, and said to him all on high. By mahowne the devil has
well made you for to come hither so sone, art thou not servant of the king
of Ynde hyde it not from me. Sir said Ualentyne the truth shall not be hid
for me. And wit from him I bring you tidings, whereof you shall be right
angry at the heart. And on the other side I bring you certain signs from the
fair Rozemonde whereof you shall be right Joyous and content with me.
Messenger said the king I let the for to wit that in despyte of king Lucar
that is so fyerse and proud. I was delybered for to have put you unto death,
but for the love of the lady that you have spoken to me of, you shall have no
hurt nor vyllanye no more then my propre body, if it be so that you can
show me some token or sign from her. Sir said Valentyne that shall I do well
and shall tell you my message in such manner that I shall not lie one word for
to dye for it. It is true certain that I belong unto king Lucar, the which
has sent me to ward you and by me sends you word that for recribu^ion and
vengeance of the death of his father king Tromparte you go and yield you in
his palace of Esclardye all naked with a rope abou^e your neck, as an untrue
these and traitor, and open murderer. And in this estate he will that you come
before his tyal ma^estie and all baronage of his court, and as a man cul pable
yield you to suffer such death as shall be given and Judged by his counsel.
And if that you be not co^tente with such thing and will refuse me, as a
messenger thereto cominised and sent by him I defy you and let you were that
within short time he will come and waste your land. Such is his e^ten^ion
and has vowed and sworn unto god Jupin and ^ahoune that in all your land
shall notabyde city, town, nor castle boroughe nor vyllage, but that they
shall be all set on fire and destroyed men women and children shall be put unto
death so that you shall know right well that in an evil hour you put the
king Tromparte to death, the which was his propre father natural. Messenger
said the king of Ynde I have right well understand and herd you, and know
that I set litell store by the menares of the king Lucar, nor by his proud
diffiau^ce, for it is said commonly that such menaceth that have great dread.
And for to give an answer upon this matter I shall make a letter to be made
that you shall bear to him, and in the le^ter shall be contained how I hauebene
desyed by him. To the regard^ of you messenger your message is accomplysshed.
And also I shall maunde him what good will I have for to receive him and al his
puissaunce also often as he will destroy my land. But as for the surplus of
thine enterprise that is of the fair Rozemonde declare me all (...) which she
maundeth me. For among the other things I have an ardaunt desire to here
tydinges from her. Sir said the knight Ualentyne upon the feate of the lady I
salve you from her as her perfi^e and secret love. And she sends you word
that she is married of late unto the king Lucar, but know that it is against
her will and against her courage. For she never loved the king Lucar nor never
will. And the free lady that has so beauteous a body is so smyten to the heart
with your love, that she will never have other than you, if it be so that you
will receive her for lady. For to come unto the end of this enterprise she has
told me that she will come hither in the company of King Lucar her husband
when he departs from Esclardye for to come hither in arms against you. And
by this means you may soon find the manner for to have the fair lady
Rozemonde and led her away at your own will and pleasure. By mahowue said the
king of Ynde these tidings pleases me right well and am much Joyous if the
thing be such as you have made relacyon of. Sir said Ualentine if the thing
be true or falls I cannot say, but for ^etayne signs and tokens verytable here
is the ring that was given unto her by you, the which she sends you. And
not withstandyng that women be of right light courage, and abide little in one
purpose, yet me thinks well that she above all other desires your love and
that her enterprise is not feigned, Friend said the king of Ynde that knew the
ring, of thy coming I am right Joyous. Now go eat and drink and take thy
repaste, and the mean while I shall make a letter to be written that you shall
bear unto king Lucar for the answe^^ of your dyfyaunce. Ualentyne by the
commandment of the king of Ynde was at that hour hyghly feested of diverse
knights that kept him company. He demanded diverse secretly for the fair
lady Clerymonde in ^nquyrynge if their were any tidings of any christen woman
that were in y^ country. And it was answered him nay so he held him
content. Now the king of Ynde came anon and gave him the lettre. And
Ualentyne received it in taking leave of him. He knew not yt his love was
there, the which lady lived right poorly in the city for the love of him, in
praying God devoutly that it would please him to deliver her out of that
place, and to send her tydinges shortly of her love Ualentyne. Now approaches
the time that she shall find him, but the noble knight Ualentyne shall first
suffer and endure much pyteous adventures, the which shall be recounted unto
you here afterward.

How Ualentyne returned into the city of Esclar dye. And of the answer that
he had of the king of Ynde to bear to king Lutar. Cap. lxx.


Great Joye and great solace made the free knight Ualentyne for too depart
out of ynde, and to be out of the hands of the fello^ king of ynde that had
slain so many messengers. He mounted on horsbacke and anon arrived at the
haven where as the mariners abode him, the which were much abashed of his
coming and thought between them self that he had not done his message. Lords
said Ualentyne return we into Esclardy for I have accomplysshed mine
enterprise, whereof I ought well to thank god. By my f^^th said one of the
maryners we are much ameruaylled, for never the days of our lives we saw
none return again. Friend said Ualentyne who that god will help none can
hurt them. At these words Ualentyne mounted upon the sea and they rowed so
much that anon they aryued at Esclardye. Ualentyne made no soiournyng but
also soon as he was dyscended of his horse he mounted up into the palace and
found there the king Lucar accompanied of king Brandyffer and of fourtene
strong and puyssaunt kings, that were all comen in to Esclardy for to so
coure the king Lucar against the king of ynde. Of the returning of Ualentyne
they were much al (...)head, and among the other the traitor king Lucar, for
wend that he should never have returned again. He made Ualentyne to come
before all the barons and said to him. Friend tell me tidings, and say unto
me if the king of ynde will come unto me or not in the estate that I have
sent him word. Sir said valentyne in that have you no trust, for he sets
not astrawe by you nor yours. He is fyers and proud, and know if you have will
for to goo thither, yet has he more gretter desire for to receive you and to
the end that you make no doubt that there is falsnes in my message I present
unto you this letter, the which he sends you, by the which you may know his
courage and his will. The king Lucar rceyued it and made it to be read before
all the assystenctes on high, And than they found that the thing was true as
valentyne had said. And when king Brandiffer understood the answer of the king
of ynde, and that he knew and apperceyued his fyers courage, he swore by ma
hown and Appolyn that he would never return in to his country till that
quycke or dead he had conquered the king of ynde.

How king Lucar with fyftene kings went and assyeged the king of ynde. Ca.
lxxi.


UPon the morrow he mo^unted upon the sea with two hundred thousand sarazyns.
As the queen Rozemonde understood that they went in to ynde she prayed her
husband so much that she went with him. So they had good wind and arrived
there anon. Than they dyscended and pyght their tents in a pleasant field
before ynde. They of the cite shytte the gates fast, and the king mounted upon
a high toure for to se his enmyes. So he advised upon the river side three
rich pauylyons hanged about with stremes tryumphauntly and for to have
knowledge when they were he called a heraute of arms to him and asked him
whose tents they were. Sir said he the first is Brandyffers, the second is
Lucar your enemies, and the third is Rozemondes with her ladies. When the king
understood that Rozemonde was there his heart lepte in his belly for Joye, and
took hardynes unto him saying to him self. It is no time for to sleep who
will have a fair lady must put him in adventure body and goods. And he is not
worthy for to have a fair lady that will not take pain for to conquer her.
For this thing he made to arm his men and with a goeate puysaunce issued out
of the cite upon his enemies, ye which with pain had space for to put them in
ordinance and arm them. For they thought not that the king of ynde would have
assaylled them so soon, but love made him to do it the which makes many
things to be enterprysed so daynly. Than was the assaute much great and the
battle right aspro on both sides. And when the king of ynde saw that
Brandyffer was meddled in the battle for to set his men in ordenaunce and to
conduyte them he left his company and in much great diligence rode toward the
pauylion of the ladies. And Rozemonde saw him well come and by his armoures
knew him so she issued out of the tente all alone without any company, and
went rennyng toward him.

How the king of ynde carried away the fair Rozemonde behind him, and how
Ualentyne rescowed her and brought her again. Capitulo. lxxii.


SO as the king of ynde appecreyued her ardau^t desire he smote his horse with
the sporres and rode toward the lady, and without any so^ournyng se^ her on
his horse as she that was light and had good will to accomplish the thing.
And after that she was mounted she said unto the king of Ynde. My perfyte and
secret love you are right well founden, for you are he that I have desired so
much, and that I have abyden of long time. And how well that sith the time
that you demanded me my father has married me, notwithstanding it has been
against my will and against my courage, for I never hated man so much as I do
the king Lucar that is my husband, but now may he well say that he has had
all the pleasure of me that ever he shall have. And sithe that God has given
me the grace for to have found you I require to have none other and now is
mine amerous will accomplyshed entierly. Lady said the king of this doubt you
not for I shall never fail you, and here I swear to you that or it be three
days passed I shall make you queen of Ynde the great, and maistresse of all my
tenementes. In saying these words the king of Ynde rode for the leadyng away
the pleasant lady Rozemonde. Then the gardes and maidens of the pauylion in
great haste ran unto the king Lucar and said too him. Sir there is evil
tydinges, for too day you have lost too great a loss, for the king of Ynde
your enemy leads a way the pleasant lady Rozemonde upon his horse, and
presently has stolen and taken her away. Wherefore make your men follow him
for to save the ladies honor. Now hold your peace said the king Lucar and
tell me no more thereof, for who that has an evil wife and leseth her, he
ought to be little sorrowful. Thus answered the king Lucar that had a full sorry
heart, and not without a cause. And after went toward king Brandyffer and
said to him in this manner. Sir said he I ought to have little Joye of your
daughter when she has accorded her to follow mine enemy for to leave me and
give me a reprochable blame. Fair sone said Brandiffer be not evil content
against me, for to day I shall avenge you on the traitor that had led away my
daughter. Then the king Brandyffer smote his horse with the sporres for too
rydeafter him with a great company of men, and among the other Ualentyne was
there that would show his great promise at that need, and said unto Pacolet,
it is time for to play with thine art and show thy science. Then Pacolet made
such a charm that it was advise unto the king of Ynde that there was before
his horse a fyeld full of chycke wodde and busshes, and great ryuers. So he had
so great fear for to be taken that he made the lady for to descend for to
flee the lightlier. And when the queen was on the earth she wend for to have
found the means to have saved her with the king, but Ualentyne was nere that
escryed unto her. Lady abide for it behooves you to come with me, for of long
time you have promised me for to g^ue me your love. Ha Ualentyne I ought
little for to love you and hold you dear when I required you of love you
refused me. So it has be welforce to seek and purchase another then you, but
syche that fortune has been so contrarious to me that I hane failed of mine
enterprise I yield me unto your mercy as your poor subject and servant for
^uer if it be so that by your means I may make my peace toward the king
Lucar. Lady said Ualentyne I shall do my besy pain so well that you shall
know that I have served you truly. Then he led her toward king Lucar and
said to him. Sir see here the fair lady Rozemonde your wife that the false
traytoure king of Ynde led away against her will, the which is right
dyspleasaunt at her heart therefore. Ha sir said the lady he tells you
truth, for even so as the battle was begone I saw him come to ward me, so
I wend that it had been one of your barons that dad comen for to socoure me. So
I went against him thyn king for to save my self, and without enquiring of
any thing I mounted upon his horse, but alas, sir I knew anon his evil will,
and apperceyued well that I was vetrayed Than I pulled him by the here and
scratched his face in such wise that the blood issued out, and that it was
force to him to let me go down, and so by the help of this good knight I have
saved me and escaped from him. Lady said king Lucar you have wrought well, and
at this present time it behooves to speak no more thereof, for we have the
assaute by our enemies that gives us to much to do. So he left the lady
without any more arguing and returned into the vatayll. And at that hour
they of Ynde returned in to the cite, the which had lost diverse valiant
champions, but above all the losses the king of Ynde complained the loss of
the fair Rozemonde. Alas lady said he I have well failed at mine enterprise,
but eu^ so help me mahoune I know clearly that I was enchaunted, for me
thought that I found ryuers and wodde before me, but also soon as I had
set you down I found but fair and plain way. Ualentyne had great honor
of every body because that he had delivered the fair Rozemo^d, and recovered
her of the king of Ynde. And she made him fair semblaunte because that he had
socoured her but what so meuer sign of love that she showed him, above all
other she hated him and would him evil, for she had well would that the thing
had been otherwise but not for all that she held her not content with the
first fault, but watched and labored so much that she brought her entencion
unto an end, and her will unto execution.

How Rozemonde found the manner and the facio^ to make her self be led unto
the king of Ynde the more, the which she loved perfytely, and how he led
her in to his cytes of Ynde. Capit. lxxiii.


Now it is said comenly and it is true that if a woman do not chastise her
self of her own propre will with pain may any other chastise her. For some
would rather dye tha^ fail of their enterprise, as well showed Rozemonde the
wife of king Lucar, for it was not four days after that she issued out of her
tente, and in the leest company that she might / mounted upon a hakeney, and
said that she would go sport her a little in the feldes for to take the good
air. In this manner the queen Rozemonde went toward the cite of Ynde Now
she had done the king of Ynde to wit secretly that he should be ready and
apparaylled that same day for to come and ^ake her and led her away (and he
faylled not) for right so as he saw her and apperceyued her he issued out at
a posterne mounted at a vauntage and ran toward the lady and took the hakeney
by the reyne in saying unto her. My lady now may I at this hour led you
surely at your own will. In this manner he led her into the cite of Ynde with
great joy Now was the cry among the host of king Lucar that the king of
Ynde led away Rozemonde. Diverse mounted on horsbacke for to socoure the lady,
but they were anon entered into the cite of Ynde. By mahowne said king Lucar
who that may bring me the lady again I shall make him my great Seen shall and
above all them of my court master and gouernoure Sir said Pacolet unto
Ualentine if it be your pleasure to have the lady I shall find an
enchau^tement anon whereby you shall take the lady. Friend said Ualentyne let
her go ones I rendered her unto her husband Lucar, trusting that she would
chastyse her self of her great fault, and sith that she will not it is but
great folly to go about it. On that same day that the king of Ynde led away
Rozemonde, he wedded her and lay with her, and engendren a son on her that
was called Rabastre, the whyth posseded Jherusalem in his days To sorrowful
was king Lucar when he had lost his wife so, And Brandyffer recomforted him
saying. Fair son said he take courage unto you, for I swear you mahowne and
all my gods that I shall avenge you or I depart hence. So swore Brandyffer
but it went otherwise, for on that propre day there came a messenger unto him
which said. Sire I bring you tidings which are right displeasaunt to you.
Sir know that king Pepyn with the emperors son of greece is arrived in your
land and has dystroyed castelles and towns, and has besyeged your fair
cite of Angorye, in the which your wife is newly delivered of a fair son.
And I am comen hither for to demand you socoure, or else it behooves to
yield your fair cite of Angorye unto the unhappy christen men, when
brandyffer herd these tidings he was much sorrowful in his heart. Than he
went toward king Lucar and said unto him. Fair son here is a messenger
that has brought me evil tidings out of my land for the Frenchemen is
entered in it with a great puyssaunce and wastes and dystroyeth my country
wherefore it is force unto me that I goo and defend my country, so I shall
tell you what I shall do. You shall send some knight unto the king of Ynde
and bydde him that he send you again my daughter Rozemonde your wife upon
such a condycyon that shall pardon him the death of your father, and make your
host to depart out of his country without doing it any damage or hurt. By
mahowne said the king Lucar I had thought the same, and I can not se a better
remedy nor a wyser counsel. At these words he called Valentyne and said
unto him. Knight it behooves you to go toward the king of Ynde on my behalf
and say unto him in this manner, that he send me again the fair Rozemonde
that he has taken from me, upon such a covenant that I shall pardon him
the death of my father without ever to have any question therefore, and I shall
make also my men and al mine host to avoid out of his land without doing him
any damage. Sir said Ualentyne for you I would adventure my body more then for
any other, so I shall do your message the best wise that I may, and within a
short space you shall have tydinges again. Than he mounted on horsbacke and
went toward Ynde, and entered into the city like a messenger, and went unto
the palais where as he found the king of Ynde and the queen Rozemonde syttyng
beside him, the which knew Ualentyne right well, so she said to the king. Sir
se you him yonder, it is the same that took me from you the first time that
you would have led me away. Lady said the king of Ynde at this hour I
shall avenge me, for he shall never in his life escape me. That shall he said
the lady, for I know him of so much that yet you may have good service of
him. Then Ualentyne approached with a hardy ha^te and salued the king and the
queen right hyghely. Sir said Ualentyne, I am messenger unto king Lucar that
sends me too you. And maundeth you by me that you send him his Lady
Rozemonde again shortly that you took from him that is here And if thou will
do it he will pardon you the death of his father, and shall make his army to
go out of your land without any soiournyng, but notwithstanding that I am
charged for to do you this message, if you will believe me you shall never
consent thereto, but shall keep the lady that is so fair and that loves you
so well. And know that never the days of my life I shall be in no place
where as I shall suffer you to be blanted and dishonored for the love of the
lady. And all the term of my life I shall serve you truly. Knight said the
king of Ynde you speak as valiant, and your words pleases me much. But for
a conclusion you shall say unto king Lucar that and he have to do with wives
yt he seek other then my love Rozemande, for he shall never the days of his
life sleep by her sides, nor have pleasure of her body. Knight said the lady
salve my father and tell him that of this deed he is the cause, for I had told
himself that I would not be given unto Lucar, now my father has done against
my will, and I have done against his, so tell unto Lucar that he have no more
trust in me. Lady said Valentyne I shall do your message with good heart. Thus
he took leave right joyous to be escaped from the king of Ynde and returned unto
king Lucar and told him his answer saying. Sir purchase you another wife,
for Rozemonde is wedded unto the king of Ynde that slepeth with her every night
and doech his pleasure. When Lucar vud^^^tode those words, he wrong his hands
and pulled his here saying. Ha my love for you it behooves that Idye when I
have lost the most fairest, the most noble, and the most loving that is in
the world. Alas what had I done to you that has purchased me so great
displeasure. Falls king of Ynde I shall never love the, for thou have slain my
father fasly, and taken my wife by treason from me. Then Brandiffer said vno
him. My fair son I am right sorry for your displeasure but at this time I can
not amend it, for it ^e houeth me to go in to my land to chase away the
Frenchemen as you have heard the messenger say, or else my land shall be
destroyed. Sir said Lucar let us assail the city or you depart. By mahoune
said Brandyffer none ass^ure can take it, for it must be won by ^amyne,
wherefore abide you here unto my return.

How king Lucar did so much that king Brandyffer abode with him, and seute
Valentyne into Augorye against king Pepyn. Cap. lxxiiii.


WHen king Lucar understood that king Brandyffer would leave him he was tyght
sorrowful and said to him. Sir it is true that you have promised me to avenge
me on the king of Ynde that has done us so great an iniurye. That is true
said Bra^dyffer, but I am sorry that I may not accomplish my promise for the
going to keep my land. Now I shall tell you said king Lucar how you may
do for to save your honor and mine. I have here a knight named Valentyne
above all other the most valiant so you may give him your men, for I have
found him true in all things. And moreover you have in this host your uncle
Murgalant that of long time has followed the war and knows much. And me
think that it sheld be good that these twain made the ^iage and you abide
here. To these words Brandiffer accorded, and sent for them both saying to
them. Lords you are chosen of us twain to goo into Angorye too reyse up the
syege that king Pepyn has set. So I pray you that you do so that my land may
be defended and kept. And you fair uncle think for to do well and it shall
be rendered you. Fair neuewe take no more thought for sithe that I lead with
me the noble Ualentyne I make no doubt but that all shall be well. after these
things devised and ordained, there was given unto Ualentyne and Murgalant a
hundred thousand paynyms* and also many abode in the host of king Lucar.
Ualentyne and Murgalant mounted upon the sea and rowed so much that they
arrived at the haven of Angory. But a little while before they arrived Ualentyne
aduysed a toure covered with fine laten, so he damaunded the maryners what
place it was. Sir said they it is the strong castle, and wit that it is a
strong place and so subtylly composed at the enter that there can but one man
pass at ones, for and if twain would pass at ones they should fall in to the
sea that beteth against the walls. And in that same castle king Brandiffer
has kept his daughter Galazye long time to the end that she should not be
stolen nor taken away of no body. For in the world is not memory of a fayrer
than she, but there is so much that he will not give her to no living
creature. When Ualentyne hard those words, there took him a right great
desire for to go se the lady, and said to himself that he should never be
Joyous till that he had seen her. Now are they aryued beside Angorye and have
taken land and set forth their host in a short time. They saw right well
the tents and pauilions of king Pepyn that were much glystering and
pleasant for to behold. Great dyligence made the christen men for to assayl
the city. But within was an admyrall named Bruhans the which issued out every
day upon king Pepin and did great prowess with his men. When Murgalant advised
the host of the christian men that held a great ground he called Ualentyne and
said to him. Knight counsayll us upon this feate, for I se and know that the
christian men are strong and a great nombre. Murgalant said Ualentyne I shall
tell you mine opynion. I counsayll that you send a messenger a none in to the
city of Angorye to specyfye to our men that we are aryued, and that they fail
not to morrow in the morning to issue out upon the christen men and assail
them fyersly. And we shall assayll them upon this side toward the sea so me
thinks yt they can not escape us by no manner of wise By my god said
Murgalante you have well aduysed. Now we must find a messunger for to
accomplysshe this thing. Sir said Pacolet yt was subtyl seek none other
messanger than me for I can speak all languages friend said Murgalant thou
spekest as valyant. Now go thy way mahowne conduyte the. Pacolet departed that
was much Joyous for to do that message, a said to him self. Murgalant you
send me to do your message, but by the god almighty I shall do it in such
manner that or to morrow at night you shall know with what charm Pacolet can
play. Thus he went with out any horse toward the cy^e of Angory. wha^ the
christian men saw him come so they thought well that he was a spy, so they
came against him hastily and demanded him saying. Galant whether go you thus,
it seems by your manners that you are a spy. Lords said Pacrlet you say
truth, but I am not a spy for to bear you do^mage. Now led me anon in to
the host of king Pepyn, and make me to speak with my lord Orson and I shall
tell hem a thing whereof he shall be much abashed. Than the christian me^ took
thelytie Pacolet and leddehy into ward Orson, the which was right Joyous for
to se him and made him great chere friend said Orson how does my brother
Ualentyne. Than Pacolet told him all the adventures that was happened them
sith they had seen the one the other, and told him of the serpent yt Ualentyne
had slain before Antyoche. And of the great pain and trouayll that he had or
ever he might over come the serpente, and also how he might here no tydynge of
the same Clerymonde. And sith told him and declared unto him how that they
were aryued there for to fight against them Sir said Pacolet it is true that we
are aryued here beside a hundred thousand paynims, of whom Valentyne and
Murgalant are conductours. And are come hetherfor to chase you out of this
country by the commandment of king Lucar and king Brandiffer, but and you
will believe me, there shall not one of them return again. Friend said Orson
for God have regard thereto, for and you will do it never the days of your
life gate you so much honor, and shall acquyre merit to ward God. Sir
said Pacolet, here me speak a little if it please you.

How Pacolet by his charm and craft made all the sarazyns to be put unto
death. And how king Murgalant was slain. Cap. lxxv.


Sir said Pacolet to Orson I am and shall be all my life subtecte to your
brother Ualentyne and you. But and ever I did you service that pleased you I
shall do one now Now harken how. It behooves first that you keep you upon your
guard, and that this night you make your men to be armed and put in point. And
to the end that none think that Ualentyne has wrought the creason I shall
make him to abide in his tente, and shall make a great nombre of Satazyns to goo
unto the watch, and when this shall be thus done, I shall cast my charm in
such manner that they shall all sleep, so had that you may pass them and
enter in to the host surely in puttyng them unto death without any mercy. By
God said Orson you speak right well and subtylly, and show well that you
have a good will and devotion for to sustain and defend our law. At these
words Orson led him toward king Pepyn for to recounte him the enterprise.
Joyous and well content was king Pepyn to hear such a thing, and made
Pacolet to be right hyghly fested. Pacolet eat and drunk and after took leave
and went in to the city of Angorye to acheue his message, too the end that
none took head of his deed, and told to king Murgalant certain signs. He
entered in to the city and went in to the palace where as he found the
admyrall bruhans and salued him hyghly in great reverence. After he did his
message as he had in charge and commandment by Murgalant. Sir said Pacolet
know that of Brandyffers part we are arrived a hundred thousand paynyms. So
king Murgalant sends you word that has charge of all the paynyms, that to
morrow be times you make your men for to be armed and that you assail the
christen men on the side of the city of Angorye, and Murgalant shall assayll
them on the other side so that they shall not escape. Joyous was the admyrall
Bruhans to here such tidings, but he knew not how it should happen him. Then
Pacolet took leave of him in great reverence and returned unto Murgalant, the
which he salued from the Admall Bruhans in the manner as appertained. Friend
said Murgalant you are worthy for to be praised when you can do your message so
well. After Pacolet went to ward Ualentyne and said to him secretly. Your
brother Orson and your uncle the king Pepyn salueth you, to whom I have let
wit the enterprise of your coming, to the end that they be not taken vnwate,
for it should be great pytie and damage. Friend said Ualentyne thou have
wrought tyght well. Now Pacolet told him not the deed of his enterprise, for
he knew well that never the days of his life he would do nor consence to
creason. The night approached and behooved the watch to be set and the gardes of
the host to be chosen and establysshed, well would Ualentyne have had the
charge of the watch but Pacolet that knew well how the thing would go found
the means for to let him and made him for to abide in the ten^en. And when the
night was come and the watch set Pacolet entered among the paynyms and cast
his charm in such manner that he made them all fall unto the earth on sleep,
so strongly that the living creatures might not awake them. Now the good
king Pepyn slepte not nor his army, for when it came toward midnight he entered
into the host with three score thousand fighting men and the noble Orson and
among the tents and pauylions set the fire on every side, and all the
paynyms put unto death without sparyng little or great. They entted so far
within the host or the paynyms a wakened that they came to the tente of
Murgalant that slepte in his bed and he was so surprysed that as he lepte out
of his bed he was smyten thorough the body with a darte and so fell down dead
to the earth.

How the Satazyns were discomfyted and how king Pepyn took the city of
Angorye. Capitulo. lxxvi.


AT the hour of this assaute Pacolet came unto Ualentyne and took him by the
hand, saying. My lord think for to save you, for it goes to evil with us,
know that the christen men are passed the watch and are entered into our
host, and have also enuyroned out folks on all sides and puts all unto
fire and blood, wherefore think we for to escape. Alas Pacolet said Ualentyne,
I know well that thou have wrought here and has enchaunted the paynyms, so I
wot never what to do for to save mine honor. For at my departing from
Brandyffer I promised him and swore unto him that I shoule return to him
again if I might escape with my life, now am I sure that he will make me dye
if he have tydinges of this thing. Sir said Pacolet of that have you no
doubt, for you shall never have evil nor displeasure in no place where as I
shall be but shall deliver you and if king Brandyffer had Judged you unto
death and had the cord about your neck standing upon the ^^d^re ready for to
be hanged, yet know I the manner for too deliver you and save your life. By my
says said Valentyne such a varlet ought for to be derely loved. Thus were the
paynyms by the art of Pacolet dyscomfyted and put unto death. Upon the morrow
the admyral Bruhans issued out of Angorye with a great multitude of paynyms for
to run upon king Pepyn and his host, the which kn^we nothing of the
mysauenture. Within a short space the two parties were assembled. Tho began
the batayl right fyersly, much great was the nbyse and pyteous for to bear.
There was speres and darts broken, and many champions smyten unto the earth
with swerdes and glayues of stele many hameys broken, and bembres cut, horses
run through the field many manners and standards dyscourted, and smytten to
the ground. And when the Admyrall bruhans saw that the christen men fared so
with his men as all out of his wit he put himself in the prese. He couched
his spear and ran against a knight of Br^e in such manner that he persed him
through out, and smote him down dead to the earth. After he drew out his
sword and smote another knight that was called Gyrarde of paris, so myghrelye
that he slew him in that place. Than he came to avalyaunt knight named Roberte
of Norinandye that grieved his men much, so he gave him so great a stroke with
his swerd that he cut of his left leg. The Admyrall fought so valyauntly
that or ever he rested he made ten christen knights to dye of his hands. Now
the king Pepyn apperceyued him well and saw that he made great slaughter of
the christian men. Than the valiant king took a great spear in his hand and
smote the horse with his sporres and came against the Admyrall with so great a
might that the spear went through his liver and his longes, and he smote him
down dead so softly that he spoke never a word, nor remeued never a membre.
And when the paynyms saw that the Admyrall was dead it is not to be demanded
if they were sorrowful, and had no hardynes for to hold the field / for they
wythdrewe them in to Angorye and mounted upon the walls for to defend the
cite. Than the christen men were diligent and followed them nere, but they of
the cite defended them so valyauntly as well with stones as with s^otte that
they led the christen men to evil. Than the captains made the dytches to be
filled with fagottes and logges and by that means wan the gates and the bars.
And at y^ ^oure the assaute was right great and ^ied many men as well on the
one side as o^ the other. But notwithstanding the defense of ye painims it
profyted them but litell, for at y^ same assaute the tytie was taken and all the
sarazins put unto death without any mercy. Then the christen men entered in y^
found there much great richesse and it was on a friday. King Pepyn made his
tents for to be brought in to the city. Here will I leave to speak of king
Pepyn and shall tell you of Ualentyne.

How Ualentyne returned in to ynde after y^ batail and bare whim the body of
king Murgala^t. Ca. lxxvii


AFter that the cite of Angory was taken by the christen men, and the paynyms
dead as well without as within. Ualentyne that found the body of king
Murgalant dead upon the field called Pacolet and said to him. Friend I will yt
we bear this body with us, so may king Brandyffer sooner believe that we were in
battle together. Sir said pacolet you say well and it shall be honor to you.
Than Ualentyne made the body to be taken and put in a cofre much honorably,
and covered it with black. After they went unto the port where as their
ships lay and mounted upon thesee. But of a hundred thousand paynyms that
were comen out there returned not ten thousand, and all through the subtyle
of Pacolet. Now they are upon thesee spreding their saylles and rowing so
much that they arrived straight at the haven where as Brandyffer and Lucar had
set their host. They took land and dyscended the body and charged it upon two
horses, and in making pyteous chere bare it unto the pauylyon of king
Brandyffer, the which played at the chesse with king Lucar accompanied of
fyftene kings that beheld the play, and also soon as he saw Ualentine he
said unto him Knight well be you comen now tell me of the battle how it gothe,
and if you have slain all the christen men and taken the king Pepyn and his
neuewe Orson. Alas sir said Ualentyne it gothe well otherwise, for we have
lost the field, and all your men is slain, for the king Faryn that had the
charge of the watch let his men sleep, so the christen men passed forth and
put the fire in the pauylyons in sleynge both little and great without any
remyssyon. And when I saw that the thing went so evil I wakened also many
men as I might for to save the^. And in this battle is dead your uncle king
Murgalant, of whom I have made the body to be brought to the end that it may
be buried as it appertains. And if you will not believe me you may demand
the other that be here how the thing went. Sir said the other he tells you
truth.

Than arose the king Brandyffer, and as all in a rage hurled the chesse unto
the earth, and was so sorrowful yt with pain he might speak a word. Ha
Ualentyne I know well that thou haste made my men to dye. By god said
valentyne it is evil spoken, for I was never in my life such as you say. And
if any will maynteyne it I will fight with him for it in a field. By mahoune
said king Lucar of him it needs not to doubt, for and he had wylled for to
have done treason he would not have returned to you again. Tha^ brandyffer was
still and made the body of his uncle to be honorably buried. And anon they
of the cite knew the tidings whereof they were much Joyous. Than the king of
Ynde made his men to be armed lightly and with forty thousand men issued out
of the cite of Ynde. When Brandyffer knew that they came against him he made
his men to arm them. So it was not long but that the bataylles assembled that
was much fyerse on each said. Ualentine was amongst the prese that on every
said smote and cast down folks, so that none durst abide before him. His
hardynes was so redoubted that (...) knight would approach nere him, he entered
into the battle holding his good sword so far that he came to the king of
Ynde and gave him so great a stroke that he smote him of his horse down to the
earth, so rudely that he had no streyngth nor force for to rise up. When
Pacolet saw that he was down he went anon with diverse other and took the
king of Ynde and yielded him unto Ualentyne the which led him unto the
pauylyon of king Brandyffer. And when he knew the tidings that Ualentyne had
taken the king of Ynde, he cried upon his men saying. Now to it lords there
is but to do well, for to day we shall have vyctorye upon our enemies. So I
swear my god mahowne that never the days of my life I shall fail the knight
Ualentyne neither with body nor with goods. For these tydinges king Lucar and
all his men took great courage, and put them in the battle more fyerslye that
before, in such manner that there abode mo than thyrtye thousand upon the
field. When the Marshall of Ynde knew the loss that they had, he made anon
to blow the retrette to wythdrawe them and assemble his men, when Brandyffer
and king Lucar saw yt they with drew them they pursued them so nere that at
the enter of the cite there dyed ten thousand. Pacolet was much Joyous for to
se so many paynyms dye. For he cared not on what side the loss turned, so that
he and Ualentyne might escape out of their hands. The battle endured so long
that the night approached, and Brandyffer and king Lucar returned into their
tents and pauylyons and badde that they should bring them the king of Ynde,
the which was presented unto them anon. When king Lucar saw him he said
unto him all on hye. Ha false toaytoure now is the time comen that thou shall
render me acountes, thou may be well sure that thou shall never escape me,
for I shall make the dye shamefully. The king of Ynde understood him well but
he answered him never a word, but yet shall the time come that he shall be
delivered by Pacolet, and after his delyueraunce shall yield unto him the king
Brandyffer to be in his subjection as you shall hear afterward.

How Ualentyne hard tydinges of his father and how Pacolet delivered the
king of Ynde by his charm, and delivered him Brandyffer at his own will.
Capitulo. lxxviii.


Right so as king Lucar spoke unto the king of Ynde there arrived a messenger
the which after the saluce made, said unto king Brandyffer. Right dear sir I
bring you heavy tidings* know that king Pepyn has taken your city of Angorye
and has put all the men and women and children unto death that were in it,
with out having any pytie. By mahoune said the king Brandiffer here is evil
tydinges, for it was the fairest city of all my land. But sithe that it is
happened so that I have in my subjection the king of Ynde, I have doope that I
shall have vengeance shortly on mine enemies after he said to king Lucar.
Fair son it behooves s^th that we have the king of Ynde in our hande^s that
has done us so much da^mage^ that to morrow in the morning he be condampned
unto a vylla^^^us death. And after we shall go into Angorye against the
Frenchemen that wastes my land and shall take v^^g^^u^ce. For know that
within the strong castle I have in my prison the Emperor of Greece and the
grene knight that has left outlawe* the which shall never escape me but
shall be hanged within fyftene days. Ualentyne that was there presence
understood well the tidings and was right Joyous to hear speak of his
father, so he made sign unto Pacolet yt the time should be shortly that he
must play with his craf^e. After he said softely to himself I pray to God of
paradise that he will keep you from danger for I shall never have joy till
that I have found the means for to deliver you out of prison. The king of
Ynde beheld Ualentyne and said to himself softly. Cursed be the hour that
ever thou escaped fro my hands yt I made the not dye, for than should I not
have been in such danger as I am now in. After these things done king Lucar
made to come a hundred sarazyus all armed and said to them. Fellows I give you
this false traitor king of Ynde, so think for to keep him well upon the pain
to lose your lives. And to moro we in the morning I shall make him behanged and
strangled when you give me him again. The paynyms took anon the king of Ynde
and put him in a pauylyon, and there they bound him fast by the myddle unto a
post, and after they bends his eyes. He might well hear the plays, solace*
and disportes, but he had but sorrow and discomforte in his heart, as he that
never thought to escape the death. Then Valentyne called Pacolet and said unto
him. Friend I think not that the king Brandyffer holds my father in his
prison, for if I had known it I would not have put my body in so great
adventures for to serve him as I have done. I have been true to himim all his
works, but sith that it is so I will never serve him more but would find
gladly the man^t how I might damage him. For I am litell beholden for to do
him pleasu^e that has kept my father in so great distress in his dark
prison so long. Sir said Pacolet you have good reason to bear him damage and
if you will I shall find well the means to deliver the king of Ynde* and yet he
shall led Brandyffer with him. And me thinks that when he shall have him in
Ynde he will make him dye shamefully. And by this means you shall be avenged on
him. So may your uncle king Pepyn hold Angorye surely. By my faith said
Ualentyne such a thing would I well. And I pray the heartily that thou do some
thing at this hour whereby I may help king Pepyn, and deliver my father the
Emperor of Greece. When it came after souper the hundred sarazing that had the
king of Ynde in keeping made a great fire before the pauilio^. And Pacolet that
slepte not at that hour entered into the pauilion as one that would watch with
them. So it was not long after that he cast a charm in such manner by the
art of Nygromancye that he made them fall to the earth and sleep as dead men.
After he went to the king of Ynde and unbound his eyes, and said to him.
Noble king of Ynde take joy and comfort in ^e, for I am thy god mahowne that
is descended from heaven for to su^cour the. And because that thou haste served
and honored me long I will deliver the. Thou shall go surely in to my palace
and lead with the king Brandiffer that shall know nothing thereof. Alas my God
said the king of Ynde I have well served the when thou hast^ wylled to
descend ou^ of thy holy paradyse for to ^epe me from my mortal enemy. Now I
know well that thou art God almighty. King said Pacolet have trust in me, and
believe the counsayll of thy wife. At these words Pacolet led him toward
Brandiffer* and made all his watch to sleep and enchaunted Brandyffer in such
manner that he made him rise and clothe him saying to the king, God is come, for
I will goo with you in to your palace and accomplish all your will.

How king Lucar made all the hundred sarazyns to be drawn at horses tails.
And how Ualentyne and Pacolet departed out of his ho^st secretly for to go
unto Angorye. Capit. lxxix.


THen the king of ynde kneled down saying. Sovereign God I thank you for this
great miracle. So pacolet brought him a fair horse and made him to mou^te upon
him with the king Brandiffer, and so they rode unto Ynde, and Pacolet took his
leave. Mahoune said the king of ynde I thank you with all my heart and
reco^mau^de my soul unto you wha^ it shall depart from the body. King said
Pacolet I shall not fail you, for if it come in to my hands it shall not ^ayle
of a good master. And so Pacolet departed, and the king of ynde called the
porters that let him in with great joy. When Rozemonde apperceyued him she said
unto him. Ha right dear sir well be you come. Now tell me how you have
brought my father hither, is the pea^e made between you and him. No said the
king it has been mine God mahoune that has apper drome The which by his
divine puyssaunce has delivered me from the hands of mine enemies and hither
has brought me and given me your father. And there failed the charm, and king
Brandyffer did awaken and began to look much ferefully, and after said to the
king of Ynde. From whence may come this thing, and how am I come hither. I
think that the devil has brought me in so this place. Nay said the king of
Ynde but it has been the puyssaunt god mahoune that has appeared this night,
and brought you and me hither. So I believe that it is his will that you and I
make good peace and be friends together. By my law said Brandiffer I had
rather dye, for of your acquaintance I will none, let me goo to ward mine
host as I was before that you brought me hither. Brandyffer said the king of
Ynde that shall I not do for sithe that mahowne has brought you hither, I
trust me in his grace to perform the thing. Thus is Brandiffer within the
cy^te of Ynde in great sorrow because that he saw him self taken, and might
not return at his will in to his host. And the hundred sarazyns that should
have kept him, be yet slepyng upon the earth. Now when it was day king Lucar
came into the pauylion where as he had left the king of Ynde in keeping. And
when the paynyms saw him they cried him mercy saying that they had lost the
king of Ynde that night by enchauncement. Ha false harlottes said Lucar I
know well how it goes, you were al drunk and laid you down to sleep. But I
swear by mahowne that the wine that you have dronken shall be derely bought.
Then he made them all to be drawn at horses rayles, and after hanged, for the
which chynge Pacolet laughed And Valentine called Pacolet and said to him.
Ftende my heart will never have joy till that I have found my father the
Emperor of Greece that Brandyffer holds in his prison, so I will not abide
here but am delyvered for too leave this cursed folk that I have served so long
in trusting to have had tidinges of the fair Clerymonde, and I believe that she
is dead, wherefore I will go to ward king Papyn that is in Angorye for to tell
him how king Brandyffer holds my father and the grene b^oght in prison. It
is well said quod Pacolet* for we shall goo unto the strong castle afterward
and deliver your father. Thus was the counsa^l taken and the thing done, for
Ualentyne with his men mounted upon the sea without taking any leave.

Of the vysion of king Pepyn. And how he went in to the holy land with the
twelve pere^. Cap. l^xx.


Now you have heard say how king Pepyn took Angorye, so I will tell you and
declare unto you the manner and the facyo^ wherefore the great treason was made
by the two falls brethren Haufray and Henry. It happened one night as the king
was in Angoryelyenge in his bed, he dreamed a meruaylous dream. In this
slepynge him thought that he saw the three nails that our lord was nailed on
the cross with, and the spear that he had his side per^ed with. And him
thought that he saw a prees^ that long mass beside the holy sepulcre before
him. And this aduysyon happened to him thryes, whereof he was much ameruaylled
when it came toward the morning that king for that same dream and for that
a^ysion assembled his barons and right so as he had dreamed declared it to
them* and after said to them. Lords I wo^e never what shall be fall / but sith
that such a vysyon is happened me three times I think not that it is a dream
of abusyon, and amdelybered before that I return in to France to go and vysyte
the holy sepulcre of our savior and ^edemp^oure Jesus christ with the other
holy places as well without the cite of Jerusalem as within.

How king Pepyn put him upon the way in the habyte of a pylgr ^n wyththe
twelve peers of France, and how king the Pepyn spoke unto Haufray and Henry
before all the lorddes of his court. Ca. lxxxi.


Eresyr said Orson I will go with you if it please you and also said Myllon
dangler. Then in like wise the twelve peers of France promised him to go with
him, and the king thanked them heartily. And then he called Haufray and Henry
and said to them. Haufray you know that you are my natural son, but in such
manner you were engendered that you and your brother have not one foot of land
in France. So I will that you abide here for to keep this country and defend
it and ^hewe that you are valtaunt and true. For and you bear you well I am
delybered for to give you the realm of Angorye that I have wo^ne so truly.
And I shall conquer you Brand^ffers daughter to be your wife, and I shall win
Henry another. Sir said Haufray gramercy. Then he said allow you will dishe^yte
us there But and I should renounce God and his holy mother I shall do in such
manner that the thing shall happen contrary to your will.

How Haufray and Henry betrayed the king Pepyn their father and the twelve
peers of France.


THen he called Henry and said to him: Fair brother you have well hard and
understand the words of king Pepy^. He will give us and assygne us ourlyues
upon strange realms after his appe^yte as they that are not worthy to be his
children. Now I know well that he has (...) encyon that Charles shall be
only king of France, and that we shall have nothing. And therefore if you
will believe me Pepyn shall never return in to France till that we have made
him dye by the hands of the paynyms. Than shall we be kynge^ of France and
Emperoures of Rome without contradyccyon, for there is nothing in this world
that I desire so much. Brother said henry you speak wisely, but it must be
well aduysed how such a thing may be accomplysshed and performed. Henry said
Haufray I shall tell you how. I must go toward the king Brandyffer and
accord this thing with him, by thus that he shall give me his daughter
Galazye, and I shall tell him the tidings how king Pepyn and the twelve peers
of France go unto the holy sepulcre, and how they may be lightly taken for
they go wythouten armoure and with a small company. And I am well certain yt
the paynyms shall be right Joyous of these tidings And if that they be not
thus taken they shall never be taken. By god Haufray said Henry you say
trouthe-Nowe you must go to ward Ynde the may our and there you shall find
king Lucar and the king Brandyffer the which holds the cite assyeged, so
you may say and tell them your courage, and I shall go with the king on vyage,
to the end that our feate be the more secretly covered, and that they
apperceyue nor deem no treason. It is well said quod Haufray, so let me
accomplysshe it. For I shall never have good rest till that I have
accomplysshed this thing. And thus was the treason made and conspyred by the
two falls brethren Haufray and Henry against their propre father king Pepyn.
Alas they showed well that they were euylly begoten and engendered, and comen of
an untrue generacyon, when they would make him dye that was their father, and
that withal his puyssaunce took pain for to conquer them realms. No we the
king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France are entered in to the sea that
doubted of no treason for to accomplish their pilgrimage. Henry is entered in
with them for to hyde their treason the better. And his brother Haufray went
toward Ynde for to synde king Brandyffer that had set the syege before the
city of Ynde with king Lucat for his daughter Rozemonde.

How the Calyphe of Bendas arrived in the host of king Brandyffer, and how he
gate trewes for a month during the which trewes he made the peace between the
king of Ynde and king Lucar and Brandyffer. Cap. lxxxiii.


TRue it is that the Calyphe of Bendas arrived in ye host of king Brandyffer
and Lucar and made the^ to make trewes for a month, and he that broke it should
lose the half of his lands. During the which time the Calyphe assembled king
Brandiffer Lucar and the king of Ynde. And when they were assembled the Calyphe
spoke in this manner and said. Lords you know that the christen men have
won the realm of Angory* and that you can not go thither during this war.
wherefore if you will believe my counsayll I shall tell you what you shall do. It
is true that the king of Ynde slew your father Tromparte for sleyng of his
uncle now take it that it is death for death, and the king of Ynde shall
deliver Brandyffer. And as to the regard of your wife Rozemonde she shall
beset between you and him that she will go too shall have her without
contradyction. Unto this appointment accords both the kings, and Rozemonde
was brought before king Lucar, and before the king of Ynde, and the thing was
declared unto her by the Calyphe of Bendas. Then without taking any advise she
went unto the king of Ynde, wherefore king Lucar was right sorrowful. So I
will leave you to speak of this matter and shall tell you of Haufray that went to
ward Ynde.

How Haufray for to accomplysshe his treason artyued before Lucar and
Brandyffer, and how he him self was deceived by treason. Capitulo. lxxxiiii.


ON that same propre day yt the peace was made by the Calyphe of Bendas as you
have heard before Haufray persevering in his malice arrived in the host of
king Lucar and of Brandiffer and came anon to ward their pauylyons and
demanded the gardes which was king Lucar and which was Brandyffer. And they
^^ewed them him a none* and than he salued them hyghly, and after Brandyffer
spoke saying what deniaunde you and what dryueth you hither. Sir said Haufray
the thing that brings me hither is not to be said before so many men. Then
they drew them a side both Brandyffer, Lucar, and Hau^ray, and with them the
Caliphe of Bendas than Hau^ray said unto them. Lords harken if it please you,
for I am come for your great profit and honor. Wit that I am sone unto the
mighty king Pepyn of France, so I have heard say that you have a daughter
that surmounteth all other in beauty corporal, wherefore I let you wit that
and you will give me her unto wife. I shall show you the manner how that you
may have in your subieccion the king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France that
have done you so much damage. For know that they are departed in habyte of
pylgryms, poorly arrayed and accompanied for to go into Jerusalem to vysyte the
holy sepulcre, and there you shall find them without great company. By mahoune
said Bra^ differ you speak notably, and for your good enterprise I am content
for to gene you my daughter Galazie, the which I would never promise unto no
body, but there is one thing that I shall tell you that is that you renounce
jesus. Yes said Haufray Jesus I renounce, for I never loved him to much. When
the king knew the falsnes and the treason of Hauftay that would sell his
father, and renounce his law, he wen^e a little a side in counsayll and called
Lucar and the Calyphe of Bendas and said to them. Lords now may you know
clearly the great treason of this dys^oyll man that demands my daughter.
Well ought I to trust me litel in him when he will betraye his propre father
that begat him, with the twelve peers of France, so I love better to make my
daughter dye, than to give her unto such a traytoure not for that we must
find the means to go in to Jerusalem and too maynteyne this man, so may we
have Iyghtly the king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France.

How king Brandiffer wrote a letter unto his daughter Galazye and gave it
haufray for to here unto the strong castle. Capit. lxxxv.


AT these words he called Haufray and said to him. Fair sir I am right glad
of your coming, now understand what you shall do, you shall go toward my
daughter and here her this letter from me, and there you shall pass the time
till that we have more euydent tidings of your deed. Sir said Haufray it is
right well aduysed, so he took the lettre of the king and put him on the way
with a hundred sarazyns that Brandyffer had given him to conduyte him. And they
mounted on the sea and drew up the sayll and rowed so well that within short
time they saw the strong castle where as Galazye was in, that above all
castelles was fair strong, and pleasant for to behold, they aryued at the
haven and took land nere the castle. When they were dyscended they put them
upon the way for to go unto the castle. And also soon as they were before the
gates* the porter cried to them on high saying. Lords you shall not enter
more ferther, for here ^ay none enter with out certain signs. Porter said
Hau^tay say unto the lady that we shall tell her so good signs that she shall
know us anon. The porter mounted up in to the castle and found the lady at
table, and the Seneshal that served her. Lady said the porter yond^r without is
I can not tell what men, and will enter here in, me think they be of your
fathers. Seneshall said the lady goo anon, for I have great desire to here
tidings of my father. The Senesh all dyscended and also soon as he knew that
they came from Brandyffer he bound up the lions and opened the gate, and
Haufray entered in that wend well that it had been for his honor and profit,
but it had been better for him that he had kept the land of Angory as king
Pepyn bad him. For with his treason he found him self betrayed as it was
reason, for a thing evil begone can not have a good end.

How the fair Galazye after that she knew the falsnes and treason of
Haufray, she made him to be put in a dark prison much strayghtly. Capitulo.
lxxxvi.


AS Haufray was entered into the castle, he went and presented him an one
before the fair Galyzie. But when he saw her great beauty and her ruddy
chekes in fygures colored, her gentle body straight and compassed, her eyes
amyable and laughyng, the nose straight, and the mouth little, the breasts
while as snow the arms small and the hands white and fyngers long his heart
was so embraced with her love that he lost the speech and all countenance.
And anon after that he had taken his refeccyon he salued the lady and said to
her. My said sovereign above all the other mahoune the which made the
fyrmamentegyue you grace and strength to perform al your noble desires.
Know right honored lady that for the great renown that I have herd of your
excellent beauty. I have left the coutree that I am of, and for your love have
passed the sea Now I have spoken to the puyssaunt king Brandiffer your father
to whom I have told such tidings that he and all payennye shall be the
better. And for to have the more certaynte thereof loo here a lettre that he
sends you by me. The lady took the lettre that could read full well. And when
she had aduysed the lettre, she beheld Haufray much hardely and after said to
him hyghly. Uassayll I have seen your lettre the which says that you that are
christen men have sold to them of our law the twelve peers of France, and
that more is your father the king Pepyn so my father sends me word that I
do my will with you, and because that I know that above all other you are the
most traytoure, and that there is in you neither faith nor troth nor
gentylnesse when you will betraye your father, well ought other to have little
trust in you. So I swear to you by the law that I hold that I shall have no
pity nor mercy on you. For who that purchases treason and is comforted in his
treason they are wors than he. After these words for to save her oath she made
him be put in a dark prison. Alas lady said Haufray here is a pyteous marriage
for me. Sir said Galazye for wife you shall wedde my prison, for you shall
never have me. Now it is true that in that same prison wherein Haufray was put
with the Emperor of Greece and the grene knight, and heard that they put a
prisoner in to them. Tha^ the Emperor said what are you. Alas said Haufray
care you not what I am. I am the unhappy Haufray bastard of king Pepyn of all
dolorous the most evil fortuned. Ha said the Emperor and I am the Emperor
of Greece. I pray you tell me how my sons do and king Pepyn with all the
lords of France Sir said Haufray they are dyscended in this country and have
won the realm of Angorye. Thus devised the prisoners. So I will leave you to
speak of this matter and will tell you of Galentyne and Pacolet.

How Ualentyne and Pacolet arrived before the strong castle, and how
Pacolet raised up the devil for to know if he might take it. Ca. lxxxvii.


UAlentyne and Pacolet rowed so much on the sea that they arrived at the
strong castle Ueray god said Ualentyne how this place is strong I believe
that it is impossible for to win it by force. Sir said Pacolet I shall tell
you anon. Than he went a side and began a charm of Nygromancye, and
incontinent there came a devil unto him that said. Leave this enterprise for you
lesest thy pain this castle can never be taken with enchauntement nor
assaute, for it is made of such matter that it can never be taken but by
treason. At these words the devil vanysshed away. And there rose up so great
a smoke about the castle that Ualentyne saw not Pacolet, of the which
thing he was much abashed. After that the smoke was passed Pacolet came unto
Ualentyne and said unto him. I pray you that we depart hens for we be here to
long, for this castle may not be taken but by treason. Than they mounted on
the sea and aryued at Angory anon. So Ualentyne mounted up into the palace,
and demanded tidings of king Pepyn. And they told him that he was gone unto
Jerusalem on pilgrimage. When Ualentyne herd those tidings, he said god be
their speed. I will abide him unto his return for to lead him unto the strong
castle to help me to get my father out of prison. Alas he abode him for naught
for he was sold and betrayed by the false Haufray.

How king Brandiffer and king Lucar took king Pepyn and the twelve peers of
France within the city of Jerusalem. Capit. lxxxviii.


Now is the king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France came in to Jerusalem
for to vysyte the holy sepulcre. And for to do the more devoutly ye holy vyages
that are in ye land of promission, in the which our lord Jhesus christ
suffered death and passion, they are aryued at a good patriarchs the which
had the keeping of the holy sepulcre. And he gave them guydes for to conduyte
them unto all the holy places, in which were the indulgences and pardons. They
made a priest to sing mass before them every day, and in great devotion
vysyted the holy places. Now happened pyteous things for to recou^te whiles
that they were with in Jherusalem, for Brandyffer, the king af ynde and the
king Lucar the which had been aduertysed by the traytoure Haufray arrived in
the city of Jherusalem puyssauntly accompanied, and went unto the tower of
Dauyd toward the king of Surye that held the country and there presented
them. And when he saw the^ he was much amer^^^yled of their coming. And
after the salutacyon made demanded them. Lords what thing dryueth you
hither, for I think that you are not comen hither without a great cause Tha^
branyffer spoke and said unto him. Sir know that by a christen man we are
aduertysed and informed that with in this cite is arrived the twelve peers of
France with the king pepyn. Now they are the pryncypall enmyes of our law /
and they that of all the world may grieve us most. And have already taken the
cite of Angory, and spylled a great quantyte of my land, my men put unto death
and my country dystroyed. And therefore we are comen hetherfor to take them.
For when we shall have them we may do our will wythall France. And of all
chrystendome be lords and masters. By mahowne said the king of Surye that
held the temple of salamon you speak right wisely, and of this thing I am
much content. Now be it done after your appetyte, for we ought to be curyous
for to take and dystroye such men, and for the love of our goods we ought
to wa^e upon that deed. So I shall tell you what we shall do for to
accomplysshe this thing. I shall send word unto the patriarch that and he
have any French pylgryms that be bring them too me anon, for I will send
some letters in to France.

How the king of Surye sent a messenger unto the Patryatke of Jerusalen
byddyng him bring him king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France the which he
did. Capit. lxxxix.


SO the messenger of the king of Surye went toward the patryarke and said
unto him The king of Sury sends you word that and you have any French
pyigr^ms that you bring them unto him. Then he went unto their lodging where
as he found them ready to go unto their souper, for they had accomplysshe their
pilgrimage, and said unto them. Friends you must come presently unto the king
of Sury. Alas said king Pepyn here is pyteous tidings, for I am certain that
he will put me unto death if he know me. But I shall tell you what we shall
do. We will make Henry our master / and I shall bear his hatte and his
staff. By god sir said Henry that knew well treason that shall I not do, for
here is Orson and duke Myllon that are more worthyer to be it than I. Sir said
the duke Myllon I shall do all that it shall please you. Than they departed from
their lodges to go toward the Paynym that had sent for them. The duke Myllon
was honored as king, and Pepyn bare his staff and his hat poorly clothed.
The good patriarch led them that thought none evil, and also soon as he
had delivered them he departed thens. Come hither said the king of Surye I
am well enfourmed of your case, you are Frenshemen that come for to espy me,
and in your company is the king of France. Sir said one of the twelve peers
the king of France is not in this company* peace said the king of Sury for by
mahoune if the king of france shelve not him self anon I shall make you all
dye without remyssyon. King said anon the traitor Henry of me have no doubt
for it is not I. Tha^ the duke Myllon apperceyued well that there was treason,
So he said all on hye. Sir I am the king of France but there is one thing
that I will say unto you if it please you to hear me. We are coman unto the
holy sepulcre, and your law is such that all christen men may come and go
surely upon your land without any hurt to the said pilgrimage in paying the
trybute that is establysshed and dew unto you. Now we have al paid and
accompiysshed after the ordenaunce of his country. Whetfore me think you do
us to great wrong if you disturb us for that cause. By mahowne you may say
what you will, but there is neither time nor season to you that makes us war
for to come hither to espy ourlande. Than he called Brandiffer and Lucar and
said to them. Lords take these false christians spies and do with them your
will, for I put them entyerly in to your hands to make them dye of what
death it shall please you. At these words the pylgryms were taken and
witholden by the painims. So it is not to be demanded if they fared foul with
them, for they had no more pytie of the noble lords tha^ of dogs. They were
streyghtly holdenand bound, and after Brandyffer spoke and said. Lords I will
that these false men be led unto the strong castle, and there be put in my
depest prison. Sith we shall go in to Angorye and by force of arms win all
the country. After we shall go in to France and take the country, and put it
lightly in our obeysaunce, for there we shall neither find king lord nor
baron, that will say us the centrary. And therefore you may go each of you in
to your country til a certain day that we shall mete at Faleyze and there
depart the prisoners after reason. Lords said the king of Ynde as to the
regard of the prisoners I demand none other thing for my part but that you
will give me the least, so I shall make him my dwerf. And make him ride with me
because that he is little, and me think he is a man sure enough. And I shall
do him good if he will renounce the law of Jhesus, To this demand accorded
all the other and gave king Pepyn to the king of Ynde that led him in to Ynde
with him and loved him much afterward notwithstanding that he suffered many
trybulacions.

How the king of Ynde the great led king Pepyn away for the part of his
prisoners but he knew not that he was king of France. Cap. lxxxx.


SO the king of Ynde led with him the good king Pepyn but he knew it not.
The valiau^t. xii. beheld*peres king Pepyn pyteously, but noue durst hyd him
farewell for doubt of knowing. Thus goes the king of Ynde and king Pepyn
rydeth after him that is not without sorrow. Alas said he all allow very God
help me and succor me, for if you help me not of your grace of all poor I
am the most sorrowful and unhappy. Alas Myllon dangler Iowe well to love you
when for me you put your body in such danger. Henry henry thou have well
showed that thou loved me not, when at my need thou failed me. Well owe euel
come unto the child that at great need leueth his propre father. My love
Berthe I shall never see you more, alas Charles my little son God help the,
for I know for a truth that the false traitors shall make the suffer pain
enough and thou art young and little and may not resyste against them. Thus
complained king Pepyn and wept pyteously. Now the king of Ynde has done so
much that he is arrived within Ynde. And when the lady Rozemonde knew it she
ran against him and in making great Joy kyssed him, and after mounted up in
to the palace. The lady beheld king Pepyn the which notwithstanding that he
was little he was well fourmed and made of his members and or regard right
plesaunt, so the lady demanded the king of Ynde. My love tell me who has
given you this litel man* for he seems much honest and gracious and it may be
to se his semblaunce that he is extraught out of a high place. Lady said the
king, he has been given me, for he was come with the king of France and the
twelve peers in to Jerusalem, wherefore he has been taken, and if he will
renounce his God Jhesus, I shall do him much good. Pepyn answered nothing
which had well another entencion. So the hour was come that the king should
goo to souper* Pepyn entered in to the kechyng, and the king demanded him if
he could any thing of ^oke^ye, and that he should make him the sauce for a
pecocke that roasted. And Pepyn did it so well that after ward the king would
have no meat nor sauce but of his dressing. Whereof all the other of the kechyn
ryall had great dispyte at him and upon Pepyn had such envy that it
happened one time that the king commanded him for to make ready a pecocke, so
he went toward the coke by the com maundement of the king. And as he entered
in to the kechyn both litell and great began for to mock^ him, and some smote
him behind, and he as virtuous took all in patience. After he went toward
the fire for to have put the pecocke on the spytte. And ye master coke that
had great envy on him, aporoched uere him and cast a great brennyng cole in
his lap and brent him shrewedly. And than Pepyn swore that he would avenge
him, and came unto the sarazyn and gave him so great a stroke between the
foreheade and the^re that be smote him down, and after gave him another stroke
so great that he made his brains to flee out. When the var^ettes and scolyons
saw their master so outraged they assailed all Pepyn with slaves and knyues.
And he that was hardy and valiant reculed not abacke, but swore Jhesu christ
that he loved better to dye then to suffer iniurye of such ^ascalles. So he
went toward a boy that would have smyten him with a pestel and gave him so
great a struck that he felled him down dead to the earth. The noise and the
cry was so great that the king hard it. So he badde anon that Pepyn should
be taken and brought before him. And when he was before him he said unto him
evil boy How haste thou been so hardy to (...) my master coke within my
palace. Now tell me anon how the thing goes, or by my God mahoune thou shall
dye. Sir said king Pepyn I shall tell you the truth. It is true that I was in
the kechin for to make ready a pecocke for your super as you commanded me and
than your coke cast a hot cole upon me and brent me shrewedly without any
cause. And therefore I slew him. When the king knew the truth by the other
he pardoned him.

How the king Pepyn being with the king of Ynde had knowledge of the fair
Clerymonde. Cap. xci.


HEre will I make you mention of the fair Clerimonde the which as you have
herd before was kept in the king of Yndes palace. Now the king of Ynde had a
custom yt he would send her of the best meat that was on his table. So it
happened that at a souper he called Popyn and gave him the meat that was before
him and said unto him. Go in to the chamber where as is a wyndowne, and there
you shall find a folysshe woman pyteously arrayed, bear her this from me. Pepyn
took the meat and bare it, unto the lady. But when he saw her so poorly
arrayed he had great pity and said unto her. Love Jhesus that suffered for us
death and passion help you. Alas have trust in him and serve him with good
heart, and if you do so know for a certaynte that you, shall have aledgement
of your doloure / and therefore believe steadfastly in him and receive the holy
sacrament of baptym. When the lady understood that he spoke of god she
approached nere him and said. Friend have no doubt of me. But tell me if thou
be a christen man or if you say these words by gyle Lady said pepyn for a
truth I am a christen man, and am comen out of the realm of France. Tha^
the lady said al smiling you ought well to know the good king Pepyn and his
neuewe Ualentyne. It is true said Pepyn and I know well his brother Orson and
his father the Emperor of Greece also when the lady herd that she began for
to weep and said unto him. Alas friend may I have trust in you. Ye said Pepyn
as much as in your propre father of all that it shall please you for to say*
for never shall you be accused by me. Friend said the lady know for a
certaynte that I counterfee the fool, and the seek woman, but I am also wise
and hole as I was ever, for I am a christen woman and had the fair Ualentyne
unto love, and unto him I was given for wife, but by the false traitor king
Trompart I was taken from him. Than the lady told him all the manner of her
estate, and how she had been stolen, and wherefore she made her self syke. When
king pypyn herd the pyteous adventure of the lady he began for to weep much
tenderly. After in consyderyng the fortunes and great adventures that comes
upon the creature in casting out great tears he said softly to himself. Ha
very god almighty what is it of the tenebres of this world nowse I this poor
sorrowful for to keep her truth myserably aourned, and in great pacyence
using her days. Alas Ualentyne my fair neuewe at this time it needs not to
demand if for this fair lady you are and have been sith in languysshynge
pacyence and in great thought. Now pleased it god that you knew at this hour
how I find her that for your heart languyssheth. And after these words he
beheld the lady saying. Lady I know certainly what you are and you wot not
what I am, but sith that you have had so much trust in me that you have
told me your secret I will tell you what I am. Know that such as you se me
I am Pepyn the king of France to whom fortune has been so contraryous that
she has made me to fall into such pouerte and servitude as you see. Now I
know well that my neuewe Ualentyne in great trauayll of his body without
rest sercheth you continually. But and it please god he shall have tidings of
you shortly, and in joy and solace you shall assemble again together. At these
words the lady ^^owned, and king Pepyn left her for too return to ward the
king of Ynde the which was aesouper. Now will I leave this matter and shall
tell you of king Brandyffer and Lucar that led the twelve peers of France
and Henry and Orson prisoners.

How Brandyffer brought unto the strong castle the twelve peers of France
and put them in prison. Capitulo. xcii.


VOu have heard of king Brandyffer that had the twelve peers of France
prisoners, and Haufray and Henry, so he did so much that he came unto the
strong castle. Brandyffer found there his daughter Galazye, that he loved so
much. And recounted unto her the enterprise and manner, and after put them all
in a depec^u^. where as the Emperor of Greece was and the Grene knight, so the
traitor Haufray had been put in unto them. Much sorrowful was Henry when
hemight not tell his courage unto Brandiffer, but he was the first that was
letten down in to the prison, and after him the duke Myllon that fell upon
Haufray, whereof Haufray complained sore because that he was hurt. Hold your
peace said the duke Myllon and draw you more lower, for there is many moo to
whom it behooves to make place* Haufray understood the duke Millon well and
demanded him what brought him thither, but you said the duke Myllon, for I had
left you within Angorye. Ha said the traitor I was taken at a stoure ye other
day and brought hither. So the lords be in prison making much sorrow the
which knew each other when Haufray knew that king Pepyn was not there he made
the semblaunt to be right Joyous, but he had well would that he had been
hanged by the neck. It is not to be demanded of the tetes and lamentacions
that they made, for there was none but that they trusted better to dye then to
live, save Orson that comforted them and said. Lords take weit in patience
for it pleases God that it shall be thus. And that in this manner we do our
penance. But that notwithstanding disco^forte you not al out, but have trust
in god and in our good friends, that is my brother Ualentyne and the noble
Pacolet that can play so well with his art. Thus spoke Orson, but he knew not
that the castle was so strong that it might not be taken by enchauntemente.
After that Brandyffer had put the lords in prison, he called his daughter
Galazye and said unto her. It is true that I will go in to Falezye for to
assemble mine host And there I ought to find the king of Ynde and Lucar, the
which come with me in to Angorye, that the Frenchemen hold. wherefore govern
you well, and above all take keep unto the prisoners. Father said the maiden of
me have no doubt nor of the prisoners, for you shall here but good tidings.
So Brandyffer departed from the strong castle and went unto Faleyze where as
he assembled his host. Theder came king Lucar with a great puyssaunce but the
king of Ynde seen his men alonely, for his wife Rozemonde was sick and dyed
within nine days after, wherefore the king took such soro we that he lay
twelve days in his bed without speech, whereof king Lucar was right glad.

How Brandyffer after that he had assembled his host mounted on the sea and
went and besyeged the city of Angorye. Capit. xciii.


AFter that Bra^differ and Lucar had assembled their host ac Faleyze,
without soiournyng they mounted upon the sea, and had so good wind that they
arrived anon at the port. And when they were arrived, they that saw them
take land ran toward Angotye and told it to Ualentyne that kept the city
in abydyng the coming of king Pepyn and of the twelve prres of France. Alas he
knew not how the game went. when he saw the tents and pauylions raised up
about Angorye, he bewaylled king Pepyn much pyteously and called Pacolet
saying to him. Friend to evil goes our feate when I can have no tidings of
king Pepyn. Now let me alone said Pacolet for we shall have tidings anon.
without saying any other thing upon the moro we in the morning he departed
from Angorye and went thoroughe the host of the paynyms till that he came unto
the tente of king Lucar. And when king Lucar saw him he demanded him. Friend
where is your master that served me other times. Ha sir said Pacolet he is
dead long a goo, and I am left alone. I would gladly find a master. Uarlet
said king Lucar I will well retain you and guerdone you if you serve me
well. Yes said Pacolet I demand none other thing. Pacolet abode in the
service of Lucar, but he served him evil, and evil was he rewarded. Anon
after that it was night he made an enchauntement that caused Lucar to sleep,
and mounted him upon a horse, and without wakening led him in to the city of
Angorye in to the palayd. Ualentyne was much joyous when he saw Lucar. Now he
was brought in to the palace before a fair fire, and at that hour the charm
failed. So Lucar did awaken all afraid for to find him there, and Pacoiet
that was evil auy sed put him before him and said. Fair master I am your
servant pleases it you to command me any thing. Than he knew that he was
betrayed and took a poynted knyfe and smote Pacolet in such wise that he fell
down dead. So it neth not ^o ask the great sorrow that Ualentyne made than.
And said srende now are you fynysshed. I may well say that I shall never have
such a friend. Now am I at al points sorrowful and left alone in dystresse,
far from my friends and nere mine enemies. Alas fre king Pepyn wherefore come
you not, your long abiding shall bear you great dommage. Ha false Lucar thou
have slain him that was my hope, by Jhesus thou shall abyedere. By mahowne
said Lucar I care not for no more sith that I am avenged on him that has
betray me falsely. Than Ualentyne went toward Pacolet and took his tables
that were in his bosom, in which was written all the secrets of his art. And
Pacolet had told him long before that he should take the tables when that he
was dead if that he lived after him and that all his science was written therein
that he played with and so did Ualentyne, and put them up, the which did him
good seruyse afterward. At that hour would Ualentyne that Lucar had been
Judged unto death. But it was auysed by the lords that was with him that he
should be put in a toure and kept surely to the end that and any noble man of
their party were taken prisoner by the paynyms, that he might be yielded again
for the change of king Lucar. Thus counsayll pleased every body and so it
was accorded entyerly. And when Lucar was in prison Ualentyne made the body of
Pacolet to be buried right honorably that of little and great was much be
wayled.

How Brandiffer knew that Lucar was in Angory. And sent unto Ualentyne for to
make the appoyntement to bye him again. Capit. xciiii.
ON the morning by times there was great noise and cry in the host of the
paynyms for the king Lucar that they had lost, and above all the other.
Brandiffer made great sorrow, and even so as he asked for him there aryued a
spy that told him how he was in Angorye and that he had slain Pacolet,
Brandiffer was joyous for the death of Pacolet, and sorrowful at his heart for
the taking of Lucar. So he called a messenger and badde him go unto Ualentyne
and ask him if he would give him king Lucar for king Pepyn* or the Emperor
of Greece or his sone Orson* or some of the other twelve petes of France,
which he loves best. Sir said the messenger I shall do your message well.
So he went toward Angorye and entered in saying that he would speak with
Ualentine. And he was brought unto him anon. When he was before him he salued
him highly, and after told him his message as Brandiffer had bydden him all
alonge. When Ualentyne hard that he was much amarueyled and said unto the
messenger of Brandiffer. God almighty how may that be that king Brandiffer
holds in prison so many valiant men, and how may he have taken them
prisoners.

How Ualentyne demanded the king of France for change of king Lucar by the
consence of the lords and barous. Capit. xcv.


Sir said the messenger it is true that the king Pepyn not long ago
accompanied of the twelve peers of France, of Orson and of Henry went unto
Jerusalem, so the tidings by a traitor came unto the king Brandyffer of
which he was much Joyous. And he led such a puyssaunce thither that they
were taken within Iherusalem, and has sent them into the strong castle
that is the strongest place of all the world. Sy give me an answer shortly if
you will change king Lucar for one of your good trendes. Messenger said
Ualentine you shall have an answer anon And than he entered into a halle and
assembled all the lords and said unto them. Friends it is true that for the
rendrynge of Lucar I may deliver of the prisoners of Brandiffer my father or my
brother Orson, or mine uncle the king pepyn that are my three pryncypall
friends, so counsel me which I ought to demand. Sir answered the barons
here avails nothing the dreamynge, frr you know that none may be more
beholden than unto father and mother, and by right reason and natural love you
ought to demannde pout father. Lords said Ualentyne you speak wisely, but
saving your reuerences I am delybered for to do otherwise. For to speak of
this thing Justly and after the true equity you know all that my mother
Bellyssant by my father with great wrong was banysshed shamefully out of his
country. And in suchenecessyte and peril childed me in the forest of
Orleaunce, and there I should have been devoured by wild beasts if mine uncle
king pepyn had ^^t ben, by whom I was founden, and have been nourysshed and
brought up without knowyn ge me in such manner that he has made me knight,
And all the goods that I have are comen by him, not never of my father I had
one only comfort nor socoure in my trybulacyon. And therefore I will that mine
uncle king Pepyn be delivered for the change of king Lucar the which has
brought me up as his own child without any knowlodge of any of my frondes, and
my father abide there. And right wortly by the grace of almighty God we shall
do so much that my father shall be delivered and all the other. When the
varons hard the wys^ome and the great understanding of Ualentyne they
marueyled much all of his great proudence, and said with a common accord that
he had spoken noblye, so they consented to his will because that it was
reasonable. Than Ualentyne said unto the messenger Friend thou shall return
toward the king Brandiffer thy master, and tell him the answer that I shall
give the, that is that I shall yield him the king Lucar upon such a condition
that he shall deliver me king Pepyn of France, for I will have none other for
the change of king Lucar. Than departed the messenger and told his answer
unto king Brandiffer as Ualentyne had bydden him. By mahoune said king
Brandiffer evermore the most puyssaunt is the first honored but sith that
he demands that same that same shall he have.

How Myllon danglet that was named the king of France for to save king Pepyn,
was delivered out of the prison of Brandyffer in change of king Lucar. Cap.
xcvi.


Right so as the king Brandyffer knew that Ualentyne would have the king of
France for king Lucar, he sent messengers anon unto the strong castle
toward his daughter Galazye, bidding that she should give them the king of
France all alone. The messengers mounted upon the sea, and rowed so much that
within a short space they arrived at the strong castle, and recounted unto the
fair Galyzye their message. When the maiden knew it she was ready anon to
fulfill the will of her father. So she called the gayler and sent him too the
prison to demand the king of France. And when he came to the door of the
prison he cried on hye Now come hither the king of France for ^ it behooves
me to delpuer him. And when the duke Myllon understood the gayler, he answered
swetely. Alas friend I am here, wherefore call you me. If I must dye the first I
pray to God that he will have mercy on me, for I will offer my body unto
death with a good heart for to sustain the holy faith. Sir said the gayler
have no doubt, for you shall be delivered in the change of a paynem king that
they of your law holds. When Henry understood those words he repented him
that he had gainsayde the king his father, and that he made him not the king of
France when he was required. But the untrue child that knew the treason
thought not that his father should have escaped, but he knew well his unhappy
will when he saw the duke Myllon delivered by such means, the which in
weeping took leave of the other barons. Alas said the emperor of Greece salve
me above all my child Valentyne, and me also said Orson and recommaunde me
unto him and tell him how we are here in mysetable dystresse, and in great
pouerte, and if by him we have not succor shortly, it behooves us to fynyshe
our days. Lords said Myllon take comfort unto you, for if it please Jhesus I
shall never return in to France til that you be delivered. Than he departed
from the prison, and all the other abode weeping full tenderly. when he was out
as wise and well taught he went toward the fair Galazye and took leave of her
in much great reverence, the lady was curteyse and amiable and recommaunded
him unto her god mahoune. So departed the duke Myllon and the messengers that
were come for him led him to the haven. After they mounted upon the sea, and
in short time arrived in the host of Brandyffer. Than when Brandiffer saw
him he said unto him. Freking well may you be come you know well enough
wherefore I have sent for you. Go with my men that have brought you hetherin to
the city of Angory and say unto Ualentyne that in change of you he give me
Lucar as we have appointed. Sir said the ouke Millon so will I do and hold
you such loyalte that and for me he will not give you Lucar I shall come and
yield me unto you to do with me as you did before. By mahoune said Brandyffer
you speak rially, and I demand no more of you. Now go unto mahoune the
which conduyte you. Thus departed Myllon dangler and they that led him. So
they arrived at Angorye and entered in without any refuse and went in to the
palace where as they found Valentyne. Then he and the duke Myllon embraced
swetely each other. And the duke Myllon took him aside and recounted to him
how they were taken wichin Jerusalem, and how the king of ynde had led
king Pepyn away without knowing him, and also how he had changed his name at
the request of king Pepyn, and told him how the other were in prison in the
strong castle. When Valentyne understood him he said unto him swetely. Will
have you wrought for I know that you did it for good, and good is happened
you, for too day you are delivered from your enemies by the true saruyce yt
you did unto king Pepyn. You showed you a good friend when you did change your
name for to save king Pepyn. And also so one might you have had damage as
proffyte for of nature the false paynims desired the death of king Pepyn,
because that he susteyneth the faith of Jhesu christ against them, and
destroys that of maboune. when Ualentyne had spoken so he made to bring forth
the king Lucar and said to him. Lucar for this time you are delivered, but
keep you from me the time to come, and think upon my friend Pacolet that you
have slain. For by God if ever I recountre you in batail or else where we
shall se which of us twain shall be the more valiaunter. At these words
departed the king Lucar that was right joyous for to escape. And when he was
without the gates sarazins came against him with a great puyssaunce making
great joy for his delyueraunce. Thus was the king Lucar delivered, and the
duke Myllon yielded unto Ualentyne. A^ none as the duke Myllon was within with
Uale^tyne, they made no great so iournyng, but ordained their bataylles, and
with fyftye thousand men issued out in displaying their baners and standards.
And when Brandiffer understood those tidinges he made to blow his trompettes
and clarons, and ordained his batailes too the nombre of four and twenty. And
when they were ordained he yede for the accompanied with four and twenty
kings all holding of him, and the christen men approached nere for too smite
upon them, but they were so thick that they might not enter.

How Ualentyne and the duke Myllon issued out of Angorye upon the satazyns,
and how the sarazins lost the battle and were dyscomfyted. Capitulo. xcvii.


THan Ualentyne took his spear in his hand and cried hyghly christians take
courage, and than began a hard battle beside the standarde of Bra^differ,
that nere him had king Lucar puyssauntly acco^panyed. Christians assaylled and
sarazyns defended them. About their standarde was fyfty thousand men that
held before them great targes, wherefore the christen men might not grieve them.
Than an admyrall lord of cassydoyne saw a Frencheman that put diverse paynyms
unto death, he went thederwarde and with an axe he gave him such a stroke that
he smote his head in two, but before his return a squire of Normandye aryued
upon the Admyrall and before Myllon dangler smote him down dead And for that
valiauntnes Myllon made him knight And said now think for to do well, for
there shall not be so poor a man yt he bear him valiant but that he shall be
made knight to day. He made so many that day that euerybody took pain for to
be made one. And in this manner the battle endured so long that the sun
began for to derken. But for as much as the christian men saw that the paynyms
would wythdrawe them. Ualentyne would not wythdrawe him. Well wend the
sarazyns to have returned in to their pauylyons, but ye christen men were
before them, whereof Brandyffer and king Lucar were much ameruayled. All the
night dured the battle right mortal, there was great fyres on every side.
And the day was clear the stoure began more stronger than before. There was
so many slain that the bloodran like chanelles It needs not to demand of
the prowess that Ualentyne did, for in the thyckest of the prese he put him
maugre the sarazyns, and the duke Myllon after. Ualentyne on every side smote
down horses and men, so many that there was no paynym that durst abide before
him. And he entered in so ferr that he came nere the standarde of Brandyffer,
and there he saw the admyrall of Ynde the which came against him so rudely
that he slew his horse under him. But Valentyne that was light rose upon his
feet anon and took his sword and slew sarazyns on every side in cryenge
hyghly saint George, and reclaymynge God. But he had never escaped if it had
not ben the Duke Myllon that departed paynyms as the wo^ffe does the sheep,
and smote all down that he found before him, and so socoured him and gave
him a horse. When Valentyne was remounted he wythdrewe him out of the battayll
for to take air and drank ones and after returned into the stoure more
strouger than before. And when the Marshall of Ynde saw that they had the
worse, the most secretly that he might he made his men to withdraw them into
a little valeye for to stele away the better. Ualentyne saw it well and
showed it unto duke Myllon. That it was appointed that Ualentyne and his men
should go upon the said Marshall without making any noise, and too it was
done. Ualentyne and his man went thederwarde and smote upon the Yndyans in
such manner that at their first entering they broke their battle. Then
Ualentyne espied the Marshall that thought for to have saved himself; and gave
him so great a stroke with his spear that he smote both horse and man to the
earth, and the christen men smote upon him, but he was so well armed they
slew him not at the first brunte. And than Ualentyne took him and gave him to
keep to foute knights, and the Yndians were discomfyted at that hour by
Valentyne. And it waas the first battle that was discomfyted that day. There
was many rich prisoners taken the which Vale^tine sent in to Angory
commau^ding that they should be well kept. Now Brandiffer and Lucar knew that
they had the worse. By mahoune said Brandiffer I can not auyse how we may
resist so I fere me sore that we must all dye here, wherefore I am of the
opinion that we hold us content for this time, and recourne in to our
countries, and we may return an other time with greater strength. By
mahoune said Lucar you say truth, for we have lost already the most part of
our men return we without abiding any longer here. For it is better to fle
betymes than to abide to long and dye. Thus was the cou^sail taken by them,
and made the standarde and the baner to be wound up, and said unto their men
save you and you may. The paynims took their flighte toward the haven of the
sea. And the christen men went after sleing and kylling without any remission,
for men that are in flight are half discomfyted. And there abode so many
paynims upon the field, that there mounted with Brandiffer and Lucat but a
hundred at their recourning And after the discomfiture of the paynims and
sarazyns the christen men entered in to their tents where as they found great
rychesses, and after they went into Angory for to rest them, for they were
were and trauayled. Upon the morrow they made the dead bodies to be buried.

How king Pepyn was delivered in change of the king of Yndies Marshall. Cap.
xcviii.


AFter that the christen men that had won the batrayll before Angorye, had
buried the dead bodies. Ualentyne mounted up in to the palace and commanded
that the prisoners should be brought before him. Than was brought before him
the Marshall of the king of Ynde to whom he demanded if he would believe in
Jhesu. By mahoune said the Marshall I had lever dye. Than Myllon dangler
demanded him of what country he was. Lords said the paynim I am the
Marshall of the king of Ynde that loves me well. When the duke Myllon
understood hin he drew the noble us lentyne aside and said unto him. Well
have we wrought sithe that we have taken this paynim, for by him we may have
the king Pepyn that the king of Ynde led away for ad werfe when we were
taken within Jerusalem. Myllon said Ualentyne you say troth. Then he
demanded the paynim if the king of Ynde held not in his prysons a christen
man of little stature. By mahowne said the Marshall in the prison of the king
of Ynde is no christen man, but in his court there is a little one that rydeth
with him and is not in prison. And he brought him from Jerusalem when the
twelve peers was taken. Marshall said Ualentine it is the same that we
demand, and if you may do so much that he be brought unto me, you shall be
delivered for him without ransom, for he is my page, and has served me long
time. Ha said the paynim I am agreed, and was right joyous of those tidings.
So he wrote a lettre anon and sent it unto the king of Ynde. When the king
of Ynde had seen the lettre he was much joyous for to yield king Pepin for
his marshal For he knew not what man was king Pepyn, he made him be brought
before him and said unto him. Good friend it behooves you too depart hence,
for my marshall shall be delivered for you the which I would not leave for such
a hundredth as you. Sir said king Pepyn of this I am content, and if I have
served you evil please it you to pardone me. Friend said the king to mahoune I
command the.

How king Pepyn took his leave of the fair Clerymonde, and how he told
Ualentyne tidings where she was. Capit. xcix.


THen Pepyn ran unto Clerymonde and said unto her. Lady take comfort unto
you for I am delivered, and I shall shortly send you your love Valentyne, and
I shall never cease till that you be delivered. Thanne he departed from the
lady that fell in swowne for Joye. Pepyn went with the messenger and arrived
in Angorye within a short space. Now it is not to be demanded the great joy
that than was made Fren^shemen went against him blowynge tro^pets and clarons
and made great Joye. Uncle said Valentyne in a good hour was he taken by
whom you are delivered for above all the gooddes of the world I desired your
body. Neuewe said Pepyn take unto you to^ for I bring you tidings of the
thing in the world that you love most that is the fair lady Clerymonde that
you have sought so long, now I have found her and she recommaundeth her unto
you. Than he told him how she had been taken, and how she had governed her
subtylly. And when Valentyne heard these tidings he had so great Joye that with
pain might he speak Ha lady said Ualentyne now ought I to love you with
all my heart, when you have kept you so well for my love so I promise god that
I shall never fail you, and I shall lose my life but if I deliver you. Than
Valentyne delivered the marshall of Ynde. After he entered in to his secret
chamber for to preue the tables of Pacolet and found that all was true. When
Valentyne had seen all those things he took paper and ynke and wrote them all
in a byll for fear to lose the tables, and sewed it in his doblet, so it stood
him in good stead after ward for to save his life as you shall here.

How king Pepyn departed from Angory and returned into France for to socoure
his wife. Ca. C.
Now at that saine time that I tell you of king Pepyn was in Angory for to
fight with the paynims. So there came a message unto him from his wife Berthe,
the which after his salute said unto him. Sir understand the rydynges that I
bring unto you fro my right dear lady Berthe queen of France. Know that all
they of those quarters believe steadfastly that you and all the twelve peers be
dead, because that they had tydinges that you were taken within Jerasalem of
the paynyms. So it is true that Arthur king of Brytayne trustyng in your
death* and that the tidings was true is entered into your land with a great
puyssaunce of men of arms, and will be king of France by force, and wedde
the queen Berthe against her will. Now I am comen hither for to tell you the
tidings, wherefore think upon this feate for the case touches you to much.
And at this hour the war is so great in france that wallyam of Mountglyue
has made Geryn to be slain. And also the king of Brytayne has undertaken to
^ut my lord Charles your son in exyle. So rowfull was king Pepyn to here
such words, and made to assemble his barons for to hold counsayl. So they
accorded that he should go and defend his propre country, the which he did
and took his l^ue of Ualentyne that said unto him. Frayre uncle it behooves me
to abide here for to put all my strength to deliver my father and my brother
and the twelve peers of France. Ualentyne said King Pepyn you speak wisely,
and if it please God that I have vyctorye of mine enemies I shall send you
help and socoure against the false paynyms, in such wise that you may deliver
your father lightly The king Pepyn mounted upon the Sea with six thousand
fyghtyng men.

How Ualentyne went in to Ynde the great, and counterfeit the physycion for to
se the fair Clerymonde and how he spoke with her. Capit. C. i.


UAlentyne that by the king Pepyn had herd tidings of the fair Clerymonde
put her not out of mind, but departed from Angorye accompanied only of a
squire, and did clothe him in the habyte of a physicion. He mounted upon the
sea with merchants that went in to Ynde. And they rowed so much that they
artyued in Ynde. But or Ualentine entered in to the city he made to make a
physicians gown* and after made a futred hoode, and as a great dortour entered
in to the city, and lodged him in a rich y^ne. Also soon as the host saw
him he demanded him of what craft he was of. Host said Ualentyne I am a
medecyn, and can hele all manner of sycknesses. The host believed him and his
squire served well as the clerk of a doctor. In this wise was Ualentyne three
days, and then he said Mine host do me a pleasure if it please you, that is
yt you find me a man to go about the city and cry my ^cyence, that and there
be any seek men that I vaunte me for to hele them. For I have need to win
for too pay you the expenses that I have made here in, but not for that and
you have doubt of me I shall give you a gage. By mahoune said the host a gage
will I take gladly, for it is evil trusting in strangers. Than valentyne gave
him a fine mantell furted, and said too him* Hold host and of me have no
doubt, and make the varlet come to me that I spabe to you fore. The host
brought him one that had neither shone, gown nor bonet, and was almoost naked.
Ualentyne for the love of God clothed him all new and said to him. My friend
go thorough the city and cry hyghly, there is come a mederyne that can hele
all maladyes, and also they that have lost their wit be it man or woman I
shall make the^ have their understanding again. Than departed the varlet that
was right joyous to be clothed and cried all the day thorough the city as
Ualentyne had bydden him. Now the tidinges came unto ye king of Ynde of that
master. And because that he vaunted to hele mad foles, for the love of
Clerymonde the king of Ynde sent for him, not wythstandyng that there was
already, crepylles, blind / lame, and crooked before his lodging, but he left
them all for to go to the king of Ynde, for he knew well the end where as
his heart drew to. He salued the king of Ynde by the great god Jupiter. And
the king said to him, master you be welcome into my court, you shall dyne
and than I shall tell you wherefore I sent for you. The king set him at the and
table made Ualentyne to be served rychely, and than after dynner he said unto
him. Master I have a lady in this palace that is garnysshed with beauty above
all other. So it is true that when I had her first and would have taken her
unto wife, but she made me to understand that she had made auowe unto mahowne
that she should take no man unto husband till a year be passed, now I have her
the term that she asked but at the end of the year there took her a pyteous
maladye, so that no body durst find them before her. She whiste leth and
cries pyteously, one time she lagheth and another time she wepeth, so that in
her deed there is none ordinance, for the which my heart is sorrowful for and
she were whole I would take her unto wife for my wife Rozemonde is dead. And
therefore and you can help her I shall give you more than you will demand.
Ualentyne said I shall do it well, but the malady is evil for to heal sith
that she has had it so long. I must be in her chamber all night for to se
her condycyons. Master said the king one shall bring you thither, but keep
you from her that she byte you not. Than one that scrued her led valentyne to
her, and when he was at the wyndow he said unto him. Behold there and play
with your craft, the devil shall make you well hele her. Go thy way said
Ualentyne and let me alone. Then the sarazyn went his way and Ualentine
beheld her piteously. Alas very God said he how you have bought me dear, and
I you. By god my sweet love I shall never return in to France till I have
you with me, or I shall lose my life. The lady beheld him much ferefully, and
did cast at him all that she found in the chamber, of the which Ualentyne
was much amarueyle^. Alas my God said he is it feigned or a thing true of the
evil that I se you suffer. Dear love alas without doing any more be a little
still and here my speech. I am your love Uale^tine for whom you have suffered so
much pain. Do you not think no more of the head of brass that gave you to
me, and of my brother Orson that had the stryng cut, and how you were stolen
from me by the enchau^^out Adramain in the city of Acquitaine. when the lady
heard those words for pure loye she swowned. And when she was reuyued she
said with and feeble voice much pyteously. Alas my love Ualentyne how you have
suffered for me many dolours and tribulacious, and I for you* behold in what
pouerte I have byden without giving my love unto any man. Lady said Ualentyne
one loves gladly the thing that is dear bought. At these words Uale^tine
understood that the trompettes and clarons blewe for to set the king at souper.
So he said unto the fair lady Clerymonde, my love I goo in to the palace but
after souper I shall return unto you again, for I have made the king to
understand that I am a physician and a good surgian, so the king has sent
for me for to come and hele you of your grievous maladye The lady said my right
dear love go in gods name the which give you grace to perform your
enterpry se. Thus departed Ualentyne and went into the palace. And also sone
as the king saw him be demaundeo him. Master may you hele the lady, yes said
Ualentyne be joyous for by the will of Mahoune you shall here her speak to
morrow also wisely as ever she did. The king was so ^oyous that he gave him a
mauntel of beten gold set with precious stones, and after made him be served
at the table like his persoue. And after souper Ualentyne said unto the king.
Sir it behooves me to have a good fire all the night in the chamber of the
pacyente and also defend that none show them be fore her, for she was never
so seek as she shall be too night. Master said the king all shall be done*
do but ask and you shall be served. Now goes Ualentyne to ward the fair
Clerymo^de with a great serge in his hand, and put it in the chamber, and made
to make a great fire in commaundyng every body to avoid save his squire. Than
Ualentyne shytte the doors and the wyndowes and said unto Clerymonde. My
sweet lady now may you embrace meat your own pleasute, and than Ualentine
espied the horse of wodde, and asked her if it was Pacolettes horse, and she
said yes. Then Ualentyne was right joyous thereof. Alas said she let us go
hence if it may be. By God said Dalentyne I had well thought it.

How Ualentine rode a way with Clerymonde, and how the king of Brytayne was
yeldd unto king Pepyn by treason. L^pit. C. ii.


UAlentyne open(...)e at midnyght and mounted (...) great wyndowe where as the moon shone. After he mounted upon the horse and set the lady before him and his
squier behind him, and turned the pynne and the horse w^t over the sea
roches, towns and castelles, till that he was before Angory. And there was not
one that ourste say a word and even there failed the charm. Ualentyne made
the gates to be opened, for it was day. Great joy was made through Angory for
the coming of Cicrymonde. Ualentyne made her to be rychely clothed and on, the
moro we wet d^d her with great solemphite. when the king of ynde knew that he
had lost the lady, he despy^^d his gods saying. Ha false enchauntour thou
have well deceived me, but I shall make the be hanged by the neck. He ina^e
Ualentyne to be pursued ynought, but none could tell him tidings. So will I
tell you of king Pepyn that returned into France for to socoure his wife and
his land against the king of Bryt^yne.

FOor because that the king of Brytayne herd say that the kyngo Pepyn and the
twelft peers had been taken u^ Iherualem he thought vetayly that they had been
all dead and said that he would be king of France and wedde Berthe. So he
made alyannce with the earl of Mount fort with the duke of Berry With the duke
of Denemours, and with the earl of Armyngnae. So he made to cry through all
Brytayne that all that might bear wepen should god wythhyln into France. When
the queen Berthe knew of that tidings she was much sorrowful, but she might
not remedy it, so she took her son That les and fled unto Lion* In that
same time there was an Earl of Aniou true and of good faith that for to socoure
the queen Berthe made his ^y^e and his castelles to be well garnysshed with
men and vyttaylles as gaynst the Brytons. When the queen knew his good will
she sent him four thousand horsemen to keep the passage. The king of Brytaync
had the earl give him passage into France, and he answered that he would not.
So it was not long that seven Earls and three dukes came before the cite of
Angyers and assyeged it And the Earl issued not out but kept the c^^ie
myghtely. Now the king Pepyn made so great dylygeuce that during that syege
he arrived at Pa^^s, and was received worshypfully of all the burgey ses, and
for his coming made right great Joy. All the relyques were borne thorough the
city in procession. When the queen knew that he was at Paris she went unto
him, and said to him all weyyng. My dear lord I besethe you to avenge me on
the king of Brytayne. Lady said the king take you no thought for by the
plersute of God you shall be avenged. Than he made to assemble his men and his
host in great haste, and sent for pyckardes, henies, brabansons and normans.
Great was the assemble of king Pepin against the king of Brytayne Now had the
enemies tydinges of his coming where of they were much abashed, and doubted
him much and not without a cause. So all the alyes of king Arthur took a
counsel together that they should take the for said Arthure and deliver him
unto king Pepyn for to make their peace the better, and cover the^^ defautes,
and so they did. For upon a night they took him in his host in bed and
led him unto king Pepyn, the which made his head to be smyten of within
Chatelet of Paris. Well thought the alyes yt the war had been ceased, but king
Pepyn took from the ^andes and possessions as it appears more plainly in the
^^o^ycles upon those things composed.

Now Ualentyne took the strong castle, and delivered his father the Emperor
of trece, and all the prisoners that were with him. Cap. C. iii.


Much was Ualentyne in great thought^ night and day how he might deliver
his father. For he knew well that the castle might not be taken by force of
arms; nor by enchauntement, but it might well be taken by treason. So he
aduysed a thing that was much subtly composed. He put in twelve ships two
thousand men armed, and laded them with all ^yche marchaundyse as perles,
precious stones and sylkes, and mounted upon the sea, and as merchants arrived
be fore the strong castle, and take land. Ualentyne clothed him in
merchants wede and set a rich crown upon his head, and said unto his men
arm you all and take your glayues and hyd^ you pryuely within ye ships so
that you be not seen, and if sarazyns come toward you put them all unto death,
and let none escape. When he had said this he put him on his way and went to
the gate of the castle the crown upon his head. When the porter saw him he
said to him, who brings you hither. Friend said Ualentyne I am a merchant
that goes in to spain, so I have diverse rich marchaundyses in my ship, and
I have heard says that no merchant may pass here by without paying trybute
upon pain of their lives, so I will not pas without paying it. Sir said the
porter aby^e me. I go unto my lady for to give you answer. So he went
toward Galazye and told it unto her.

How the Seneshall went unto Ualentyne ships and how he was put to death with
all his men. Cap. C. iiii


When she understood that there was so many Jewelles, she called the Seneshall
and said unto him. Go toward the port and receive the trybute of the
merchants that pass / and led with you so many of my men so that they may
take nothing fro you. The Seneshall thought well to have won and led them
toward the port unto their evil adventure, for anon as they saw the
richesse that was within the ships they were ardaunt to behold them, and
Ualentyne said. Lords enter in and take of the Jewelles unto the nombre of the
trybute. The paynyms entered in that wend to have b^n rich and the christian men
that were hid issued out and stewe them all anon. Now up said Ualentyne it
behooves us to do more for to have the castle Than he made his men to put on
fyfty gowns of the sarazyns upon their harne^s, and laded them with stones and
rich ^^lkes, so they went toward the castle And the porter yt wend that
they had been his fellows, bound up the lions and auayled the bridge and
thinking for to have had some rich Jewel issued out of the bars, and
Ualentyne took him and led him toward the ships. Than he showed him the
dead men and said to him. Fair sir you shall be such as these be but if you
swear me by your God to make me enter this day into the strong castle and
ke^e me body. Sir said the porter I shall do your will / and here I swear unto
you by the great God that I shall deliver unto you the castle at your own
pleasure. Porter said Ualentyne I shall reward the well, but keep the that
thou betray me not. No said the porter come with me, and make your men that are
in habyte of sarazyns enter in one after a another for the danger of the
bridge, for they resemble them of the castle. So it was done, and the fyfty
christen men entered in and Ualentyne. And when they were in the porter showed
them a falls posterne. Ualentyne made it to be opened anon, and than he blewe
his horn. So they that were in the ships came thither quickly, and Ualentyne
went into Galazyes chamber the which of his coming was ^ore abashed. Lady
said Ualentyne of me have no doubt for I have passed the sea for your gentle
body. Than the lady beheld his countenance and of him was touched at the
heart, and made him great chere. Now are the christian men within the castle the
which made great noise and cry so that the lady went unto the wyndowes and
saw well that she was betrayed. And returned her toward Ualentine and said
unto him all weeping. Free curteyse knight save me my mayd^nhed^, for I se well
that I am betrayed. Lady said Ualentyne have no fere, for by me nor by other
you shall have no vyllanye, but as for the surples of the castle it shall be
mine. All the paynyms were put unto death. Than Ualentyne went toward the
prisoners and brake the prison door saying on hye. You that are within speak
and you be on live. Orson understood well his brother Ualentyne and cried unto
him. My brother well be you comen / what dryueth you hither in to this place.
Lords said Ualentyne make good chere and be Joyous and glad, for at this
present time I shall deliver you all out of the prysons of Brandyffer. When
the Emperor of Greece his father heard that for pure Joye he sowned, and
Orson took him up between both his arms. Thanne came all out of the prison
the which were porely clothed and right euylly colored. So it is not to be
demanded the joy that they made. They passed the night and drunk good wine
that recomforted them much. The christen men were seven days within the
strong castle leading a good life, and at that same time Orson acquainted him
with the fair Galazye, for he knew not whether Fezon was dead or not, not
withstandyng it happened that he wedded her after the death of Fezonne, and
had a son of her that was called Orsayre that held the Empire of
Constantynoble.

How the Emperor Orson and the grene knight abode in garnyson in the strong
castle. And how Haufray and Henry made their father to dye. Capitulo. C. v.


AFter that the strong castle was taken and that the prisoners were a little
refresshed, they took counsayll together that it should be good to leave so^^e
to keep the castle, for that place might grene the paynims. So there was some
that said under color that it should be good that Haufray and Henry abode in
that place. Lords said Haufray speak no more, for we are delybered for to
return in to France to serve our father. By my faith said Orso^ we ought not
to weep for your departing, for you were never yet good, who that leseth evil
company he ought to thank god, and I know by experience that you are men that
by nature demau^deth not but treason. Haufray and Henry had grea dispite of
those words, but force constrained them to have patience, for they were not
men to say the contrary. It was appointed at the last that the Emperor that
was already ancient and had need of rest with his sone Orson and the grene
knight should abide in garnyson in the strong castle, and Ualentine with all
the other should return in to Angorye. Here will I tell you of the two
traitors Haufray and Henry that returned into France, the which have
conspired the death of their father with that of little Charles and the queen
Berthes. Now they have ryden so much that they are arrived at Paris and
mounted up in to the palace where as they saluted the king and all the barons.
The king made them chere and after demanded them tydinges of the Emperor of
Greece, of Ualentyne and of Orson, and of the twelve peers and the other lords.
Sir said the traitors pray for them, for they have been slain in a great
battle before Angory. when the king understood these tydinges he wept
tenderly in bewayling the lords that he wend had been dead. But the traitors
did it for to anger the king, the which purchased his death at the last and
that of the queen Berthes first of all. And because that they might not well
poison her they acquainted them with a damosel that was night and day with the
queen, and they gave her such a gift that the false woman consented to the
death of the queen that had done her so much good, so that with in fyftene
days she dyed, whereof the king Pepyn was so sorowefull that he abode in his
bed. And the traitors did so much by poisons that he dyed, for the which
both little and great wept and not without a cause. The traitors showed
semblaunt to be sorrowful but they were right ^oyus and said. Now may we
well do our pleasure with France, for there is neither dukes e^les nor barons
that may resyste against us.

How after the death of king Pepyn the duke Myllon Dangler would have made the
little Charles to be crowned king of France. Capitulo. C. vi.
AFter the death of the good king Pepyn the duke Mylion dangler that was
valiant and wise assembled the counsayll and would have made young Charles to
be crowned king. But Haufray and Henry by gifts and ^romesses corrumped the
lords, and it was said that Charles was to young. And because that the duke
Myllon sustained the contrary. Haufray and Henry made him to be taken and put
in prison in Chatelet at Paris, and sithe held Charles as a boy of ye kechyn.
It happened one day that Haufray commanded him to turn a spi^ but Charles
that was displesaunt lift up the spyt and felled him to the earth. Henry stepte
forth for to have smiten Charles, but Charles that espied him gave him on the
ear so that the blood issued out, wherefore Haufray ^ad his men take him. Than
came a knight named Dauyd of Elloys and took Charles by the hand. for
othertymes he had endoctryned him, so he set him on a horse and led him out
of Paris. when the traitors knew that Charles went his way they made him to
be pursued, but they that followed would not find him, and so returned. Than
Myllo^ dangler sent the truth of it to his wife Charles sister. when she had
seen the letter she wept for the love of Charles* so she swore Jhesus that
they should abye it dear. Than she made a letter to be written and sent it unto
Ualentine and to the twelve peers of France that were in Angorye. When
Ualentyne had read it he began for to weep, and the lords demanded him
wherefore he did weep. Alas my friends there is a good cause why, for king Pepyn
is dead, and the good queen Berthe also. So Haufray and Henry have chased the
little Charles out of the country, and put the duke Millon in prison because
that he sustain him. So the lady sends us word that we succoute her and I
wot never how for you know well that we abide from day to day our mortal enemy
Brandiffer. By our faithes said the barons we must find some manner for to
succout him well said the noble Ualentine or to morrow at night I shall yield
you the duke Myllon. Of these words they began for to laughe, and Ualentyne
departed with out making any more delay^ / and with his horse played so well
that he was at Paris before mydnyght, and was in Chatelet, and by subtle art
opened the gates, And gave leave to all the prisoners, after he demanded them
where the dake Myllon was, and they showed him the chamber the which was
opened anon. The good duke that slepte wakened and said what are you that
enter so rudely. Now up said Ualentyne and think for to take your clothes
for I am Ualentyne that am comen from Angory for to deliver you. The good duke
m^s much Joyous and made him ready anon. So Ualentyne made him mount upon the
horse with him and said to him, keep you from speaking for we shall flee in the
air. Sith that we shall go so fast I pray you pass by the castle of Angler,
and there we shall se and comfort my wife a little, that for me and for her
brother Charles is much sorrowful. They knocked at the gates and the watch
answered that knew their lord, and told it unto the lady that ran unto the
gate in a syngle gown and kyssed and colled him, after she demanded him
tidings. Lady said he you know all but know that I go in to Angorye where
as we abide the battle of the false paynyms* and at my return I shall bring
with me the twelve pe^es of France with a great puyssaunce for to confound
Haufray and Henry and socoure Charles. When the lady understood that they would
make no leyger soiournynge* she made meat to be brought and there they took
their repaste, for they had great lust to eat and drink. After they took
leave of the lady and were in Angorye upon the morrow before all the barons,
whereof the lords were much abashed, and prayed Ualentine much to learn
them that art, but he refused them. Now it happened in those days that
Brandyffer that was upon the sea arrived a mile from Angory. And there he made
his syege to be set accompanied with fyftene kings all his subjects They of
the cite that herd the tydinges went and shytte the gates and drew up the
brydges, and after mounted up on the walls for to behold the paynyms that
dressed up great nombre of tents and pauylyons. The sarazyns were in their
syege the space of a month without gyuynge assaute, and without that any
christian me^ yssaed out on them.

How the Emperor of greece, Orson and the grene knight departed from the
strong castle for to goo socoure Ualentyne in Angorye. Ca. Cvii.


THe Emperor of Gre^e that was in the strong castle herd say that brandyffer
with a great puyssaunce had besyeged Angory, so he was moved in devotion for to
go help the Aysten men. They took counsayll together and accorded that a
valiant knight should keep the strong castle with two men. After they
departed for to go into Angory. The Emperor of Greece, Orson, and the grene
knight accompanied with a thousand fighting men entered into the sea, and
pulled up the saylles, but they had not gone but a little way when they saw a
great flote of ships coming toward them. It was an Admyrall paynym that
went for to socour the king Brandyffer with ten thousand men. Well knew the
christen men that they were of their enemies, son they put them in arms, and
renged them in ba^^yl on their ships side. The saraznus saw well that they
were christian men, wherefore they approached and smote upon them fyersly. And the
christian me^ that reclaymed god and our lady defended them valyauntly. Thaune
was there a cruel battle, the Emperor of greece, Or son and the grene knight
showed their prowesses, and cried hyghly. Jhesus sucoure us. At these words
the christian men took such courages that the le^st at that hour had the
strength of ten, and for the love of Jhesu christ were content for to suffer
death. And the sarazins that were ten against one enclosed the tristen me^
(...) it needs not to demand the prowess of Orson and of the grene knight,
for they did such ded^s of arms that there was no paynym that abode on live
before the^. When the Admitall paynym saw their prowesses he approached n^re
them and smote a valyaunte knight in to the sea beside Orson of the which he
was much angrye for he loved him, so he took an axe and gave the Admyrall
such a stroke that he ouerthrewe him dead in his ship. And when the paynyms
saw that, they were all discomforted, and lost their strength, and wichdre we
them in fleyng all that night. But they lost fyftene of their ships, and
four thousands of their men that was slain. And after the Emperor of Greece
spoke unto his men and said. Lords I counsayll that we take the arms of these
cursed paynims and armed us with, and array us like sarazins, for I doubt me
sore that we shall be meet on the sea by the Paynyms. The counsel pleased
every body because that they should not be known of the sarazins. The Gowns,
the arms, and the harneys of the dead folk they took and cast the bodies in
to the sea. In an evil hour did the Emperor of greece advise him thereof, for
by the arms that he bears he shall be put unto death by his son Uale^tine
as you shall here afterward. Now the christen men ^te upon the s^a that rolled
^y al their baners, and set forth in the wind the^ of the sarazyns and to wed
so well that they aryued within a little while at the haven of Angorye.

How the christen men issued out of the city of Angorye, and of the
ordenaunce, and of their marvelous batayles. Capit. C. viii.


THe king Brandyffer and the king Lucar a month after had assyeged the cite
of Angorye with all their puyssaunce. Valentyne and the other barons had taken
counsayl for to issue out upon their enemies, so they sent the defyaunce unto
Bra^dyffer against the morning / and Brandyffer that was fyerse accorded it.
Than the Christen men that were within the cite of Angory ordained their
bataylles in ten parties, whereof the duke Myllon had the first. The second
Sampson of orleaunce. The third had his son Geruays earl of Vandosme. The
fourth the earl of champaygne. The. v. quin tyn of Norma^dye. The. vi. the duke
of Burgoyne. The vii. the earl of Dampmartyn. The eight the earl of Asserue.
The. ix, the Marshall of Constantynoble. And Valentyne the tenthe, that gave
all the oaths oftentimes courage to do well. Than the christen men issued out
of Angorye for to assail Brandiffer that had made fiftene strong batayles, and
there was in the leest a king. Now it is not too be demanded the great
rychesses that shyned on the fyelde as well on one side as other. One might
have heard than trumpettes and clarons, and the great battle begin. About
the standarde of the paynyms was Brandiffer, king Lucar, the king of Ynde the
king of salute, the admyrall of cords, the admyrall of Orbye, the king
Damene, the king Dubyas, Josue of Pa^erne, the earl Draymant, the duke
Cor^hyllant, and Croste of Or^^nye. When it came to the approchynge of the
bataylles, a paynym of Surye that had never been in war, the which for to
assaye his body passes forth and came to ward the christen men with his spear
cou^^^d much fyersly. Ualentyne saw him well the which smote his horse with
the spores and ran against the paynim, and with one stroke smote him down
dead. At that same hour the battle began much fyersly. But the valyauntnes
of the paynyms is not to be compared to that of the christen men, and specially
of Ualentyne, of the duke Myllon, and of the. xi^ peers. The king of Ynde
entered in to the barayl, and grieved the christen men sore. When Ualentyne saw
that he ro^e toward him and gave him so great a stroke that he smote him down.
Than the christen men made the sarazyns to recule a back a great way, for
they were dyscomfyte. But a sarazyn captain of the re^egard, came and
succored them with thyrty thousand paynyms. And there began the battle more
stronger than before. The king Lucat found the king of yn^e that fought much
strongly and gave him succor. The christen men were so much charged with the
paynyms at that hour that it was force to the^ to withdraw them toward a
poude that was nere a field, and they should have had to much to do if it had
not been two valiau^t knights that arrived that day in Angorye accompanied
with seven hundred men of arms. The. ii. knights that I tell you of, came
from the holy sepulcre the which had suffered great aduersyties, as well in
prison as otherwise for to do their vyage. The one of the^ brought in to
France the daughter of a rich admyrall named Claradine, and made her to be
baptized. The least of the two knights was Reynarde of Prouaunce and the other
Myllon of Dyion, and they were fair and hardy knights. So they had tidings
of the battle that was there beside, and made their men to be armed, and gave
them signs and standards for to make the paynyms the more af^rde. And so they
came out of the city for to succoure the christen men, and smote in to the
bataill much fyersly. At the approchyng the paynims was much abashed of this
new coming and not without a cause, for Myllon of Dyion at his enter smote
down dead the king Lucar, and the king Rubres, whereof Brandiffer was much
abashed. And after en^red Reynarde that slew diverse of the most valyauntest.
Ualentyne was much amarueiled wha^ he saw those two knights do such deeds
of arms, so he rode toward them and said to them. Lords well be you come,
tell me if it please you what you are. and What dryueth you hither. Friend
said Reynarde we are lords of France that come from the holy sepulcre, so we
have heard speak of this enterprise, and in the honor son by the God in whom
I believe ever my heart tells me that this poor man does some penance that
he has promised to god. In this wise was Ualentyne a great while within his
palace without being known of any body, so long that every body said that
he was dead, wherefore the king Hugon made the fair Clerymonde to be demanded
for wife. And after enter prysed and did a great treason.

How the king Hugon made Clerymonde to be demanded for wife, and how he
betrayed Orson and the grene knight. Capit. C. xiii.


IN that same time there was a king in Ho^grye that was named Hugon. That same
king herd speak of Ualentine that had left the Empire of greece, and the land
of ^uerpe So he went in to Constantinoble and was received of Orson much
honorably. On a morning Hugon called the fair Clerymonde and said to her in
fair language. Lady know that I am king of Hongrye, and hold under me
diverse* grease lords, but of one thing I am evil that is that I have no wife
and an^ to mary, for the which thing I am come to ward you. For I have
understand that the knight Ualentyne will never return, wherefore I require
you yt you have me for your husband, so shall you be crowned queen of Hongrye,
and be greatly honored, for above all other you are she that my heart
desires so a^dauntlye. Sir sayn the lady of the good and the honor that you
present me I thank you humbly, but for to answer you well seek you another
wife for my love Ualentine lives yet so I am delybreed for too abide him
seven year. And when that it should be so that I would take a husband it
behooved not to speak unto me but to the Emperor Orson and to my brother the
grene knight for without their counsayll I will never con^ente thereto for any
thing that may be said unto me. Lady said Hugon you speak right honestly,
and your answer pleases me. Than he came toward Orson and demanded him if
he had any tidings o^ Ualentyne. Free king said the Emperor Orson that of
him had no doubt* I know none other thing save that ^y a ^^eter that he left
me with his wife, the which tells that he is gone in exyle for to weep his
sins, ^ (...) upon him he bears half of the ring that he wedded his wife
with, and the other he has left her* and charged her to believe nothing of
him but if she saw the other half of the ryng. Sir said Hugon that noted well
the sewordes* god be his speed, for he is a knight to be much praised. Now I
will tell you one thing that I have in my courage. I am delivered for to go
unto The rusalem sor to vysyte the holy sepulcre so I would gladly that you
would bear me company. Sir said Orson I am content, and we will go into
Angorye and take the grene knight with us that is king thereof. It pleases me
well said king Hugon let us go where you will. Than Orson took leave of the
fair Galazye* and of his mother and mounted upon thesee, and came into Angory
where as they were received much honorably* and in great joy. They made
great chere and after all three went into Jherusalem, and took up their
lodging for to rest them. And upon the morrow they went toward the good
patriarch that song mass be fore them, and made them be guyded through the
cite for to vy^^^e the holy sepulcre and other holy places in great devotion.
They gate the pardons and did their pylgrimage devoutly, save the king Hugon
that bare the treason in his heart, by the which he made the noble princes be
taken and enprysoned that trusted in him. For right so as they visited the holy
places yt traitor king Hugon stole out of their company and yede unto the
king of Surye that was the king of J^d^s brother that was slain before
Angorye. Hugon salued him by mahowne and said unto him. King vnderstondome and
I shall tell you a thing for your prouffyte, Know sir that there is newly
aryued here two knights that you ought to hate above al other, for they have
slain king Brandyffer, king Lucar, and the puyssaunt king of Ynde your
brother. When Rabastre understood that his brother was dead he wept much and
after said unto Hugon. Sir can you yield me the two knights. Yes said the
traitor Hugon so yt you will give me their seals af gold. Sir said the king
of Surye I should be to ingrate if I refused you so little a thing, you shall
have the seals and other things enough if you may deliver me the two
knights. Yes said Hugon and harken now. Send your messengers in to the house
of the patryarke, for he can tell you where they are. Than the king of Sury did
so and sent. viii. hundred men armed to the good patryarke, the which showed
them the lodgys at the kings commandment. The paynyms went thither anon and
found Orson and the grene knight at dynner* the which they took and bound
straytely, and in betynge them led them toward the king. Alas said Orson
we are betrayed, for right so as king Pepyn and the twelve peers of France
were ones sold unto the sarazyns in this cite so are we now. When the king
of Sury saw them he said unto them. False enemies of our law I am right
Joyous that I hold you, now tell me your names, for I will know them / and
for a cause. Sir said Orson I am called Orson, and this is the Grene knight.
By mahowne said the king I have heard much speak of you, and you have a
fellow named valentyne, the which if I held he should never escape my hands
on live. Than he made them to be dyspoyled and took their Seals from them,
the which he gave afterward to king Hugon. So Orson and the grene knight
were put in a deep dongeon with bread and water long. They thought that the
king Hugon had b^ slain of the sarazyns. Alas they knew nothing how the matter
did go, for the traytoure Hugon was in the city yt called unto him a disloyal
traytoure named Galeran which had served him long, for such master such
servant* Galeran said Hugon I have found ye manner whereby I shall come unto the
end of mine entencion, And because that you are my neuewe and have served me
long^, be secret, and I shall reward you so well that you shall be content.
Uncle said Galeran have no doubt of me, for I know where you pretend, that is
to have the fair clerimonde unto wife. It is true said king Hugon it needs
not to hyde it from you We must make a letter subtylly in the name of Orson
for I have his propre seal with the which it shall be s^ale^. And it behooves
that the letter be made thus. Orson by the grace of god Emperor of greece unto
you my right redoubted and sovereign lady and Mother, unto you my love Galazye,
and unto my sister ye fair* Clerymonde all humble salutation and recommendacyon
due. Know that there is happened us piteous tidings and displeasaunt in this
cou^trye, the which I write unto you in this present letter, so I require
Jhesus that he give you pacyence* My ladies know for certain that I have
found my brothe* Valentine in Jherusalem in his death bed, so God gave me
such grace that I spoke with him or he dyed. And at his (...) he charged me to
send you tidings, and to solue ye fair Clerymonde from him. To whom he
maundeth that for all the love that ever she loved him with that also soon as
she may she take some prince to husband And that for his death she take no
discomfort but pray god for his soul. And wit that he sends not the half
ring as he had promised, for as he was in bed it was stolen from him. And
when this lettre was made thus Hugon made another lettre for to cover his
treason from the grene knight and Orson together saying Right well beloved
sister we have done you enough to wit of your true spouse and our good
brother Salentyne, for the which thing we twain consyderyng the great beauty
that is in you, and for to accomplys^^e the desire of the dead (on whom Jhesu
have mercy) and to increase your honor, we will that you take the puyssaunt
king Hugon unto husband as you will avoid our dyspleasure. And for the more
very^y cacyon we have s^aled these letters with our propre seals. Also wit
that we can not come yet unto you, for between the christen men and the
sarazyns is a day of battle set the which we abide for to sustey^e the
^aythe of Jesu christ, which have you in his keeping. When the letters of the
treason were made by king Hugon, he closed them well and sealed them with
their propre seals and after gave them unto his propre neuewe Galeran and said
unto him that it behooved him to go in to constantynoble for to present those
letters to Bellyssant, and to the fair Clerymande. And when you shall have
done so I shall come after as he that knows not there of for to require
Clerymonde, and I ^ou^te me not but that she shall be g^uen me. Uncle said
Galeran I shall do the message well for I know well your case. Thau he took
the letters and put him self upon the way toward Constantynoble.

How Galeran did his message unto Bellyssant, and the fair Clerymonde, and of
the meruayllous complayntes that Clerymonde made. Ca. Cxiiii.


Now Galeran did so much that he arrived in Constantynoble at the hour of
dynor and salued the ladies from the Emperor Orson and the grene knight, and
after he gave them the letters. Messenger said Bellyssant what does my son.
Lady said Galeran I left him in Jherusalem safe and sound, so you may know
by this letters more certayuly of his deeds The ladies commanded that the
messenger should be feested. Now it was of custom that when they would dyne or
soupe, they made Ualentyne to be brought into the Halle for to nourysshe him
the better, and because that he knew that he eat but leuinges, they gave him
^o good that he would use no more thereof, but often took that which they cast
unto the dogs, and than they cast the dogs largely. He herd well the
ridinges of the messengers so he thought what he should do. The ladies rose up
from the tables, and when graces was said Bellyssant made a secret aye to come
that read the letters and told them the tenoure of them both. And valentyne
herd it well the which was in the halle but he made no semblaunt. So it is not
to be demanded the great sorrows and lamentacions of the ladies yt was made
for Ualentyne that they maunded was deed, for they knew the seals of the good
knights. The fair Clerimonde rent her clothes a pulled her here saying
Poor woman above all other most colorous wherefore comes not the death and
take the. Alas Ualentyne wherefore am I not gone with you for to ese your body
Brother grieve knight and you Emperor Orson you have to hard courages that will
marye me so soon. Alas how ought she ever to take a husband that of the
valyauntes has lost his excellent of good the best, of worthy the most
hardy, the rose of honor, the flower of chyualry of noble the myrroure, ye
example of curteyse, of troth the patron, and of wise the chosen. False death
what have thou thought when by yt I am out of all humayne Joye* never in my
life I require to have myrthe, but always in languysshynge be wayle him yt of
al ye humaynes is worthy honor. I shall never in my life have other husband,
but in continual sorrows shall use my days. Well saw Valentyne the great
doloure that Clerymonde bare for him, whereof he had great p^te, but for
doubt of knowing he bare it in his heart. And when Bellyssant saw that
Clerymonde dis^omforted her so, she said unto her. My daughter take to you
pa^yen^e, you know that he was my son so I ought to be sorrowful at the
heart, but when I consider that there is no remedy, it is better pray for his
soul than weep so much, so think on that which your brother and the Emperor
Orson maundeth you. Alas said Clerymonde whereof speak you to me, what marriage
may they make of her that trusts never to have Joye. Lady for god speak no
more thereof for I will never have no husband. Daughter said Bellyssant you are
evil auysed, for sith that so high a man as king Hugon will have you, you
shall be never the more praised. And I tell you well that there may such one
come ye that I shall mary me. At these words the fair Clerimonde entered in to
her chamber sore weeping. And Valentyne is under the stayres that thinks in
his heart from whens such treason may come. So it happened at the end of
four days that king Hugon arrived in Constantynoble, and was received in
grett honor, but the fair clerymonde made him no semblau^t of love. My lady
said he you have well heard how your son is dead whereof I am sorry. So it is
accorded that I shall have Clerymonde unto wife. Sir said Clerymonde I have no
will to wedde you nor none other. Ualentyne heard all this treason. So the
thing was so much pleded that we accorded at the last to have the king
Hugon, whereof he was much Joyous but it dured not long.

How Bellyssant and Clerimonde knew the treason and false enterprise of king
Hugon, and how the prduost smote of the head of Galeran. Ca. Cxv.


UAlentyne had great pite on his love yt they were about to betraye, so he
entered into a chapel of our lady where as he was accustomed for to pray to God,
and kneled down before the image of the vyrgyn Marye and said* Blessed vyrgyn
Marye* I beseech the pray thy dear son to defend my love clerymond from this
treason that is made against her. And or he had ended his prayer an asigell
said unto him. Ualentyne God has herd thy prayer, go out of the cite and
take the habytes of a pilgrim that thou shall find there, and after return
in to thy palais and recounte before all the co^ pany ye treason such as thou
know it, for thou shall not be known. Uetay God said Valentyne I thank
you. Than he departed and found the pilgrim and took his habytes, after he
returned in to the palace where as the ladies were and the traytout Hugon that
spoke diverse feigned words unto the fair Clerymonde.

He salued all the company and after said all on high to the Empress
Bellyssant. Lady I beseech you humbly that you will show me the wife of
Ualentine. Pilgrym said Hugon that changed color, go in to the kechyn and
there thou shall have thine alms. Sir said Ualentyne I will do a message
unto her. Pylgrim said the lady I am she that you demand. My lady in a good
hour said he. I have seen your love that salueth you by me, and lets you
wy^e that he will be here with in this three days. Pilgrim said the lady advise
the well what thou say, for I have had certain tydinges that he is dead. Lady
said Ualentyne you ought not to believe it, for I deliver me unto death if he
be not yet on live, and that thou shall se him within three days* Wha^ Hugon
herd the words that Ualentyne told unto ye ladies, he issued secretly out of
the palace and mounted upon the horse without retourning. The ladies were to
much amarueiled and would have feasted the pilgrim. But he would do nothing
and said to them. My ladies pardon me, for I have my fellows in the town
which I will go se. Than Clerimonde gave him much money the which he
distrybuted afterward to the poor folks. Than she was out they demanded
where the king Hugon was. By faith said a damsel I saw him run presently
unto his horse. And upon these words Galeran entered that demanded after his
uncle. By God said Bellyssant in a good hour are you come, for you shall
never escape till that you have told the treason that your uncle has made.
And when Galeran herd these words be began for to tremble. Was lady said he
for God have mercy on me and I shall tell you all, say on I pardon the. It is
true that mine uncle King Hugon has d^one this treason, and sold unto the
paynims within Jherusalem the Emperor Orson and the grene knight. After he
recounted to her* all alonge as you have herd before. There was made a
meruaylous sorrow, so when Galeran had told all, he departed thinking to have
escaped, but the provost made him to be hanged and strangled. And Valentine
left the pilgrims gown and took his clothes again and into the palace.
Poor man said Clerimonde where have you been. I believe that you are
displeasaunt because that I will mary me. Ualentine enclyned his head and left
her, and began for to pray god. Clerimond had made a quilte to be brought unto
him, but he lay upon the earth, and so he did his penance among the dogs.

How Orson and the grene knighte were delivered out of the prison of the king
of Surye, by the appoyntement of the war that they made after to king Hugon
of Hongry* Ca. Cxvi.
THe king of Surye that held Orson and the grene knight in prison made them
one day be brought before him and said to them. Lords you see yt I may hauge
or draw you, wherefore I swear by my god mahowne that you shall never escape
me, but y^ that you tender to me the Lyte of Angory, and the strong castle,
with thyrtye other strong places that you holo. Sir said Orson we will not do
it but if you yield us the king Hugon that you hold, and the king of Surye
said unto them. Speak not to me of him for he is gone and bears with him your
seals, and wit that by him you have been sold to me and betrayed. When the
Emperor Orson understood him he was much ameruaylled, and swore that he would
never rest ty^ that he had taken vengeance on the king Hugon, and the grene
knight said yt he should not fail him. Now Orson and* the grene knight
accorded the king of Su^^e his demand for to save their lives, and returned
into Constantynoble where as they ceased great sorrow After the fair Clerymonde
told him how she had her detydinges of Ualentyne, whereof Orson was Joyous for
he desired much his coming. That night Orson lay with Galazye, and engendered
a son that was called Morant the which held the realm of Angorye. It was
not long after that Orson reised his host for to go into Angorye. And when
the king Hugon knew it he sent a messenger unto him saying that and he
would accord, he would leave him the Cite of Angory* and give him four horses
laden with gold. And if that any accused him of treason* he would fight with
him except Orson. Than after the message was done the grene knight waged a
battle against him. And the king Hugon came out of Angory armed for to fight
with the grene knight as it was accorded, but the grene knighte was there
first. Tha^ they smote their horses with the spores and recou^^ted each other
and broke their speres. After they set their hands unto their swerdes, and god
wot what strokes they gave each other, so much that god helped the right, for
the grene knight gave such a stroke unto the king Hugon upon the helm, that
he cut a part of his head to his sholdres, and so he fell in a sooo^ne. Than
the grene knight was honored, after hugon spoke and demanded a confessoure,
and told him all the falsnes and treason, and dyed in that place* Orson made
the body to be taken and notably buried in an ab baye there beside. And such
honor was done to him because that he was king crowned. And in so much
Orson showed the noblenes that was in him. Every body was enfourmed of the
treason of king Hugon, and by the cou^sayll of the wise men they rendered the
cite of Angory to the Emperor Orson, and all the country the which took
possessyon and also the homages. Tho after he returned into Constantynoble and
the Grene knight. Ualentyne was much Joyous of that he saw them in good
prosperyte Clerymonde meruaylled much because that Ualentine came not, and
said. Ha false pil grym thou haste betrayed me when thou toldeme that my love
Ualentyne should come on the third day and yet I have no tidings of him.
Alas she thought not that he was so nere her, for he was under the stayres of
his palace, where as by the will of god he shall finisshe his days shortly,
and than they shall know him.

How at the end of seven year Ualentyne dyed with in his palace of
Constantynoble, and how he wrote a lettre that he was known by. Ca. Cxvii.


AT the end of seven year a grievous maladye took Ualentyne so that he felt
himself much feeble, whereof he thanked god deuoutlye. Alas said the holy man
my god my creatoure that has made me to thy semblaunce have mercy on me that
am a wretched sinner, and please it the for to pardon me the death of my
father, and all the sons that ever I did sith the time that I was borne.
Ueray rede^ptour of all the world consider not my folyshe youth the which I
have passed folyshly in pleasures mondaynes, and condampne me not but by thy
holy mercy receive my poor souls into thy blessed hands, and defend me from
the devil. And in saying these words an angel of heaven came and appeared
unto him saying. Ualentyne know for a certaynte that thou shalt depart out
of this world within this four days, for it is the will of our lord Jesu
christ which sends me unto the. Alas my lord god said Ualentyne* I owe well
for to thank the when by thy holy angel thou do me to wit ye last end
of my days. Than the holy man Ualentyne made sign that they should bring him
paper and ynke, and when he had it Ualentyne wrote how he him self in the
habyte of a pilgrim discovered the treason, and all the estate of his life.
After he put in his name and folded the half of the ring in it and held it
in his hand. And after these things Ualentyne made a pr^este to come, to
whom he confessed his sins deuoutelye and received the holy sacraments,
and at the hour he dyed. And forth with all the belles of the cite began for
to ring for him, where of the people was much abashed and amerueyled. And the
Emperor Orson and all the lords and barons descended and did find the priest
beside the holy body. Friend said the Emperor Orson wherefore is it that they
ring so fast in y^ Cyty Sir said* the priest I think that it is a miracle
that God will show for this holy man. For even so as he yielded up the ghoost
the belles began for to ring on every side. When Orson saw that the poor man
was dead in that place* he was much pensife and ameruayled. By my faith said
he I think that this same is a holy body, and that God does miracles for him.
Than he aduysed the letter that he held in his hand, and thought for to have
taken it* but he might not have it in no manner of wise. So there came the fair
clerymonde and she assayed as the other did and had it. For also soon as she
touched it the hand opened* and she took the letter at her own pleasure. So
it was opened anon, and than Clerymonde saw and knew the half of the ryng,
wherefore she said. Lords we shall have tidings a none of my love Ualentyne.
So there was a secretary that read all the deeds of the holy man. It is not to
be demanded the great dolours and complayntes of Orson of Bellyssante, and of
Clerimonde, for he had his heart to hard that wept not than. The fair
Clerimo^de as half dead keste her self upon the body in making such
complayntes that they wend she would have dyed. Alas said the lady where
may I become when I have lost my life and my comfort, and mine only hope.
Alas my love Ualentyne what have you thought when you are come to dye so nere
me in pouertye, and in so great myserye, without geuyng me any knowledge of
you. Alas I have seen you often in pouertye* cold, and travail without geuyng
you any comfort* Now am I above all the most vnfortuned when I might not
know nor advise him that I ought to serve so long in bitter trybulacyon* as
true and loyal spouse. After she kyssed his face and his hands by a
meruyllous dystresse. And after the great doole the holy body was borne to be
buried in the great church of Constantynoble* with so great a company, that
none might pass through the streets. And it was not long after but that the
body was canonysed, and put in shrine. So God showed well that he was well
worthy for to be called saint, for the day that he dyed all speak men were
healed of their maladyes that vysyted his tomb, So it was not long after the
death of Ualentyne that Clerymonde did make her anonne, and sith the story
says that she was abbess of an abbaye that was founded in the worship and
honor of say^^te Ualentyne. Thus departed out of this world the holy body
glorious. And Orson abode Emperor seven year, the which he governed well and
wisely, and no more. And in that same time he had a child of Galazye named
Morant, that same Morante in his time posseded the realm of Angory.

Of the merueylous vysion of Orson, and how hebe^a me an heremyte in a great
wodde. ca. Cxv^i


MIthin seven year Galazyedyed, for whom the Emperor Orson made great sorrow
And after the deeth of her he ete but bread and rotes, and small froytes that
he found in the wodde where as he did remain So it happened him one night in
vysyon that him seemed that he saw all the gates of heaven open, and saw the
Joys of the saved, the syeges of the saints crowned in glory, and the
aungelles that song melodyously before the savior of the world. After he saw
between two high roches in the botom of an obscure valeye the gulfre of hell,
where as was the dampened. Some in a brennynge fire the other in boylynge
caudrous, the other hanged by their tongues, the other assaylled and enuyronned
with serpents, and generally he saw all the pains of hell, which is
horrible and ferefull for to recounte. After the which vysyon he wakened all
afraid and ameruaylled of the things that he had seen. And in weeping
pyteously came unto the grene knight and said to him. Friend I know that the
world is of little valor, and of short during, and that all is but vain
glory of the pompes of this world, displeasaunt unto god and to the salute of
the soul little profitable. For the which thing I pray you that you will
take keep upon my children, and enfourme them so in deeds and condycyons that
they may govern the Empire of greece to the pleasure of god and the world,
for I leave you the charge, as unto him that above all the men of the world I
trust most. And know that the remnaunte of my life I will led solytaryly,
and habandone the world. And at this same hour I renounce all worldly honor
and take my leave if you. When the grene knight heard these wrodes, he began
for to weep tenderly, and Orson recomforted him and said. Alas weep no more for
me, but pray unto god that he give me strength and puyssaunce for to
accomplysshe my will. After Orson departed in defending the grene knight to
tell it any body. So he went into a great wodde where as he lived holyly,
and after his death god showed for him many miracles and was a saint
canonyzed. And the grene knight governed the children so that they finisshed
their days gloriouslye and went unto the bliss that never shall have end,
to the which he bring us all that suffered death for us on the cross Amen.

Thus ends the hystorye of the two valyaunte brethren Ualentine and Orson,
sons unto the Emperor of Greece.
Imprynted At London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Rose Garland by me
Wyllyam Copland for John Walley.


